IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Kambulumulla Gamaralalage

Senaratne,

Meegastenna,

Yatiyantota.

2nd Defendant-Appellant

CASE NO: CA/307/2000/F

DC AVISSAWELLA CASE NO: 551/P

Vs.

Hapuarachchige Wijeratne,

Meegastenna,

Yatiyantota.

Plaintiff-Respondent

And Several Others

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Ranjan Suwandaratne, P.C., for the 2nd

Defendant-Appellant.

Sudharshani Cooray for the Plaintiff-Respondent.

Udaya Bandara for the 3rd-6th Defendant-

Respondents.

Decided on: 01.02.2019

2

Samayawardhena, J.

The plaintiff filed this action seeking to partition the land

depicted in the Preliminary Plan according to the pedigree set

out in the plaint. After trial the learned District Judge entered

Judgment dated 22.05.2000. The 2nd defendant who has not

been given any soil rights in the corpus has filed this appeal.

The position of the 2nd defendant taken up at the trial as

crystallized in issues was that Siriwardena became the owner of

the entire land to be partitioned by prescription, and thereafter

that right devolved on the 1st and 2nd defendants and

Siriwardenas children. In other words, it is the position of the

2nd defendant that Siriwardena was the sole owner of the land.

According to the pedigree of the plaintiff, Siriwardena was one of

the three children of Dingiri Appu and the other two children

being Punchi Appuhamy and John Singho. The 2nd defendant in

cross examination has admitted that Siriwardena, Punchi

Appuhamy and John Singho were siblings.1 Punchi Appuhamy

has transferred his undivided 1/3 share by Deed marked P1

executed in 1968 to Somaratne, and Somaratne has in turn

transferred that share to the plaintiff by Deed P2. The learned

District Judge has accepted that position. That finding is

entirely in consonance with the evidence led at the trial.

Although the 2nd defendant states that Siriwardena was the

owner of the entire land by prescription, he does not know how

Siriwardena acquired prescriptive rights to the entire land.

Siriwardena could not have acquired prescriptive rights to the

entire land in the air. There should have been a true owner or

1 Vide page 118 of the Brief.

3

owners against whom Siriwardena maintained adverse

possession if he were to acquire prescriptive rights to the land.

As held in Sirajudeen v. Abbas [1994] 2 Sri LR 365 A facile story

of walking into abandoned premises after the Japanese air raid

constitutes material far too slender to found a claim based on

prescriptive title. The 2nd defendant pretends to be unaware of

any such owner or owners. The 2nd defendants evidence on the

question of prescription, as the learned District Judge has

correctly pointed out, is plainly unacceptable.

As seen from the Birth Certificate 2V3, the 2nd defendant is not a

child of Siriwardena. The 2nd defendant was born after the

death of Siriwardena as a child to the widow of Siriwardena.

This finding of the learned District Judge2 is not disputed before

this Court. The 2nd defendant does not claim any rights by

inheritance.

According to the evidence led, the conclusion of the learned

District Judge that the 2nd defendant possessed an undefined

portion of the land with the leave and licence of the co-owners of

the land is justifiable. To put differently, the 2nd defendant had

been in possession of an undivided portion of the land (vide

Preliminary Plan) without any objection from the other co-

owners.

Long permissive possession is not prescriptive possession.

Permissive possession to become adverse possession to claim

prescriptive possession, there shall be compelling cogent

evidence. In that setting, firstly, the 2nd defendant must

establish a starting point by an overt act of ouster (as opposed to

a secret intention in mind) for his acquisition of prescriptive

2 Vide page 135 of the Brief.

4

rights. As held in Chelliah v. Wijenathan (1951) 54 NLR 337 at

342 Where a party invokes the provisions of section 3 of the

Prescription Ordinance in order to defeat the ownership of an

adverse claimant to immovable property, the burden of proof rests

squarely and fairly on him to establish a starting point for his or

her acquisition of prescriptive rights. Vide also Sirajudeen v.

Abbas [1994] 2 Sri LR 365, Reginald Fernando v. Pabilinahamy

[2005] 1 Sri LR 31 at 37, Chelliah Vs. Wijenathan (1951) 54 NLR

337 at 342, Mitrapala v. Tikonis Singho [2005] 1 Sri LR 206 at

211-212, Seeman v. David [2000] 3 Sri LR 23 at 26.

When the relationship between the parties is close such as in

the instant action, the overt act manifesting the commencement

of adverse possession and strong affirmative evidence of

continuation of such adverse possession are all the more

important. Vide De Silva v. Commissioner of Inland Revenue

(1978) 80 NLR 292, Podihamy v. Elaris [1988] 2 Sri LR 129.

The defendant in this case has failed to prove any of these things

except long possession, which is not sufficient to claim

prescriptive possession against the true owners of the land.

I see no reason to interfere with the Judgment of the District

Court.

Appeal is dismissed without costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal