==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0036/2023

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal Case No. Nagendran Thevan Wijeyananda alias

CA/HCC/ 0036/2023 Nagendran Deva Wijeya Nanda

High Court of Negombo

Case No. HC/206/2018

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

Pradeep Hettiarachchi, J.

COUNSEL : Dharsana Kuruppu with Tharushi Gamage

for the Appellant.

Anoopa de Silva, DSG for the Respondent.

CA/HCC/0036/2023

2 | P a g e

ARGUED ON : 17/09/2025

DECIDED ON : 23/10/2025

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Appellant was indicted by the Attorney General under

Sections 354 and 365 B (2) (b) of the Penal Code for committing the offence

of Kidnapping from lawful guardianship and two counts of Grave Sexual

Abuse on Hettiarachchilage Sanduni Indunl Kumari on 17/11/2010.

The trial commenced on 16/01/2016. After leading all necessary witnesses,

the prosecution closed their case. The learned High Court Judge had called

for the defence and the Appellant had made statement from the dock and

closed his case.

The learned High Court Judge after considering the evidence presented by

both parties before him and his predecessor, convicted the Appellant as

charged, and sentenced the Appellant to 02 years of rigorous imprisonment

and imposed a fine of Rs.10,000/- subject to a default sentence of 03 months

simple imprisonment for the first count.

CA/HCC/0036/2023

3 | P a g e

For the second count, the Appellant was sentenced to 10 years of rigorous

imprisonment and imposed a fine of Rs.10,000/- subject to a default

sentence of 06 months simple imprisonment.

For the third count, the Appellant was sentenced to 10 years of rigorous

imprisonment and imposed a fine of Rs.10,000/- subject to a default

sentence of 06 months simple imprisonment.

In addition, a compensation of Rs.100,000/- was ordered with a default

sentence of 06 months simple imprisonment. The Learned High Court Judge

had further ordered the sentences imposed on count one, two and three to

run concurrent to each other.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the Appellant

has given consent to argue this matter in his absence. During the argument

he was connected via Zoom platform from prison.

The Facts of this case albeit briefly are as follows.

According to PW1 - the victim of this case, she had been about 08 years old

when she faced this bitter ordeal. When she gave evidence, she was 17 years

old. The victim and her other siblings had been staying with her parents at

the time of the commission of the offence. The Appellant is a well-known

person to the victim’s father as both had worked together. On the day of the

incident, in the morning the Appellant had gone to the victim’s house to

accompany victim’s father. As victim’s father was getting ready, the Appellant

under the guise of buying a pencil box to the victim, took the victim on his

bike without informing her family.

The Appellant, first took the victim to the beach and bought food for her.

Thereafter, he took the victim to an unfinished and abandoned house,

removed the under garment of the victim and kissed, licked and fingered her

vagina. After that, when both were returning home, one tyre of the

Appellant’s bicycle got puncture. Thereafter, the Appellant had taken his

bicycle to a repair shop and dropped the victim near a cometary.

CA/HCC/0036/2023

4 | P a g e

In the meantime, the family members had started to search for the victim,

even informed the police. The victim’s brother PW7 had located the victim

and the Appellant near a bicycle repair shop. He had caught the Appellant,

handed over him to police check point and took the victim back home.

Thereafter, a complaint was lodged at the Negombo Police Station.

The JMO who had examined the victim had opined that the examination

findings of genital area are consistent with alleged sexual abuse involving

genital area.

After the closure of the prosecution’s case, the defence was called, and the

Appellant had given statement from the dock and closed his case.

The following Grounds of Appeal were raised on behalf of the Appellant:

1. The Learned High Court Judge has failed to consider the significant

contradictions which goes to the root of the prosecution case.

2. The Learned High Court Judge had failed to consider that the

Appellant was denied the right to a fair trial by denying the right to

have the assistance of an interpreter in the event of any language

disparity.

3. The Learned Trial Judge has come to the conclusion that the

prosecution has proved the case before analysing the defence evidence.

4. The learned trial judge has failed to consider that the prosecutrix ‘s

evidence has not been corroborated by any independent evidence.

In a case of this nature, the testimonial trustworthiness and credibility of

PW1, mainly the probability should be assessed with utmost care and

caution by the trial judge. The learned Trial Judge must satisfy and accept

the evidence of a child witness after assessing her competence and credibility

as a witness. Hence, before analysing the grounds of appeal advanced in this

case, I consider it of utmost importance that the following authorities from

other jurisdictions on the topic be appraised.

CA/HCC/0036/2023

5 | P a g e

It was recognized in England as early as 1778 that children could be

competent witnesses in criminal trials.

R v. Brasier168 Eng. Rep.202 [1779] the court held:

“…….that an infant, though underage of seven years, may be sworn in

a criminal prosecution, provided such infant appears, on strict

examination by the Court, to possess a sufficient knowledge of the

nature and consequences of an oath… for there is no precise or fixed

rule as to the time within which infants are excluded from giving

evidence; but their admissibility depends upon the sense and reason

they entertain of the danger and impiety of falsehood, which is to be

collected from their answers to questions propounded to them by the

Court; but if they are found incompetent to take oath, their testimony

cannot be received ….”.

In Ratansinh Dalsukhbhai Nayak v. State of Gujarat [2004] 1 SCC 64 the

court held that:

“The decision on the question whether the child witness has sufficient

intelligence primarily rests with the trial Judge who notices his manners,

his apparent possession or lack of intelligence, and said Judge may

resort to any examination which will tend to disclose his capacity and

intelligence as well as his understanding of the obligation of an oath.

The decision of the trial court may, however, be disturbed by the higher

Court if from what is preserved in the records, it is clear his conclusion

was erroneous. This precaution is necessary because child witnesses

are amenable to tutoring and often live in a world of make beliefs.

Though it is an established principle that child witnesses are dangerous

witnesses as they are pliable and liable to be influenced easily, shak ed

and moulded, but it is also an accepted norm that if after careful scrutiny

of their evidence the Court comes to the conclusion that there is an

CA/HCC/0036/2023

6 | P a g e

impress of truth in it, there is no obstacle in the way of accepting the

evidence of a child witness”.

In Ranjeet Kumar Ram v. State of Bihar [2015] SCC Online SC 500 the

court held that:

“Evidence of the child witness and its credibility would depend upon the

circumstances of each case. Only precaution which the court has to bear

in mind while assessing the evidence of a child witness is that the

witness must be a reliable one”.

In R v. Baker EWCA Crim 4 [2010] Lord Chief Justice (England and Wales

of Court of Appeal) held that:

(At para 40) “….. We emphasise that in our collective experience the age

of a witness is not determinative on his or her ability to give truthful and

accurate evidence. Like adults some children will provide truthful and

accurate testimony, and some will not. However, children are not

miniature adults, but children, and to be treated and judged for what

they are, not what they will, in years ahead, grow to be. Therefore,

although due allowance must be made in the trial process for the fact

that they are children with, for example, a shorter attention span than

most adults, none of the characteristic of childhood, and none of the

special measures which apply to the evidence of children carry with

them the implicit stigma that children should be deemed in advance to

be somehow less reliable than adults. The purpose of the trial process

is to identify evidence which is reliable and that which is not, whether

it comes from an adult or a child. If competent, as defined by the

statutory criteria, in the context of credibility in the forensic process, the

child witness starts off on the basis of equality with every other witness.

In trial by jury, his or her credibility is to be assessed by the jury, taking

CA/HCC/0036/2023

7 | P a g e

into account every specific personal characteristic which may bear on

the issue of credibility, along with the rest of the available evidence”.

In R v. B. (G),1990 CanLII 7308 (SCC); [1990] 2 S.C.R. 30, at pp.54-55

the Court held that:

“...it seems to me that he was simply suggesting that the judiciary

should take a common-sense approach when dealing with the

testimony of young children and not impose the same exacting

standard on them as it does on adults. However, this is not to say

that the courts should not carefully assess the credibility of child

witnesses and I do not read his reasons as suggesting that the

standard of proof must be lowered when dealing with children as

the appellants submit. Rather, he was expressing concern that a

flaw, such as a contradiction, in a child's testimony should not be

given the same effect as a similar flaw in the testimony of an adult. I

think his concern is well founded and his comments entirely

appropriate. While children may not be able to recount precise

details and communicate the when and where of an event with

exactitude, this does not mean that they have misconceived what

happened to them and who did it. In recent years we have adopted

a much more benign attitude to children's evidence, lessening the

strict standards of oath taking and corroboration, and I believe that

this is a desirable development. The credibility of every witness

who testifies before the courts must, of course, be carefully assessed

but the standard of the "reasonable adult" is not necessarily

appropriate in assessing the credibility of young children”.

E.R.S.R Coomaraswamy in his “Law of Evidence” Volume 2 Book 2 at page

658 has stated referring to child witness;

CA/HCC/0036/2023

8 | P a g e

“There is no requirement in English law, that the sworn evidence of a

child witness needs to be corroborated as a matter of law. But the jury

should be warned, not to look for corroboration, but of the risks involved

in acting on the sole evidence of young girls and boys, though they may

do so if convinced of the truth of such evidence……. This requirement is

based on the susceptibility of children to the influence of others and to

the surrender to their imaginations”.

At page 659 it states, “As regards the sworn testimony of children, there

is no requirement as in England to warn of the risk involved in acting on

their sole testimony, though it may desirable to issue such a warning,

though the failure to do so will generally not affect the conviction”.

Barry Nurcombe, M.D., F.R.A.C.P. in his article “The Child as Witnesses:

Competency and Credibility” states:

“Before the trial, the child is expected to recount the details of the

alleged offense, again and again, to strangers. Repeated court

appearance may be required. In court, the child will eventually be

confronted by the accused who is exercising his or her constitutional

rights. In contrast to the accused, the child has no advocate. His or

her testimony is open to direct challenge on the grounds of

incompetence, confabulation, or fabrication. These considerations

deter victims from reporting offenses, lead to false restrictions, and

erode the apparent credibility of honest witnesses.”

Considering the above cited judicial decisions and the writings, as the

credibility of the evidence of a child witness would predominantly depend on

the circumstances of each case, it is the duty of the Learned Trial Judge to

assess and decide on the evidence given by the child witness.

In this case, the creditworthiness of the evidence given by the victim did not

suffer at any stage of the trial. No contradictions were highlighted in her

CA/HCC/0036/2023

9 | P a g e

evidence. But only one omission was highlighted by the defence. This with

regarding to informing the incident to her mother. The Learned DSG

highlighting this evidence of the victim rightly submitted that even if this was

to be considered as an omission, it is not forceful enough to shake the

credibility of the victim or the core issues of the case against the Appellant.

I too agree with the argument that this omission would not affect the core of

the case. The learned High Court Judge had considered the evidence given

by PW1 with caution and care and correctly held that her evidence is

convincing and cogent and sufficient on its own to prove the case against the

Appellant.

According to PW7, Jeewantha Peiris, the brother of the victim he had handed

over the Appellant to a police post immediately after he saw the Appellant.

But according to the investigating officer, the Appellant was arrested on the

following day at his resident. The learned Counsel for the Appellant,

highlighting this submitted that as the evidence given by prosecution witness

had contradicted each other and therefore, prosecution had not discharged

their function properly.

It is appropriate note that PW7 was only 13 years old when this incident

happened. He had handed over the Appellant to the police barrier. He is not

aware as to what action had taken by the police officers who were present at

the barrier. Therefore, this cannot be considered as a contradiction which

affect the root of case. Hence, the 1st ground has no merit.

In the second ground of appeal, the learned Counsel for the Appellant

contended that the learned High Court Judge had failed to consider that the

Appellant was denied the right to a fair trial by denying the right to have the

assistance of an interpreter in the event of any language disparity.

Upon perusal of the court record, the Appellant was represented by a

Counsel throughout the trial. There was no application, whatsoever, to get

an interpreter for the Appellant. This court can reasonably assume that the

CA/HCC/0036/2023

10 | P a g e

Appellant had given necessary instructions to his lawyer who appeared on

behalf of him. Though, the learned High Court had mentioned that he

explained to the evidence which is not clear to him, even at that point no

application came from the defence of requirement of an interpreter.

Therefore, I conclude that the Appellant had not denied a fair trial in this

case. As such, the second ground also has no merit.

In the third ground of appeal, the Appellant contends that the Learned Trial

Judge has come to the conclusion that the prosecution has proved the case

before analysing the defence evidence.

The learned defence Counsel highlighting following portion of the judgment,

submits that the learned High Court Judge had come to the conclusion

before considering the defence evidence. The relevant portion is re-produced

below:

Page 148 of the brief.

meñKs,sldr md¾Yjh fjkqfjka bosrsm;a ù we;s idlaIs fmr i`oyka wdldrhg jQ l, tu

idlaIsj, yrhgu n,mdk mriamrhka olakg ke;' fuu idlaIsj, yrhgu n,mdk

W!k;djhka flfrys wêlrKfha wjOdkh ,la lr ke;' idlaIs taldldrS fõ' idlaIs j,

.e,mSula we;' fuu idlaIs úhyels Ndjfha mrSlaIKh iu;a fõ' wm%udofha mrSlaIKh

iu;a fõ'

Considering the above portion of the judgement, the learned High Court

Judge has not come to the conclusion that the prosecution has proved their

case. He only considered whether, the evidence presented by the prosecution

pass the tests which needs to be considered in a criminal trial. Therefore, it

is improper to say that the learned Hogh Court has come to the conclusion

only after considering the evidence presented by the prosecution. Hence, this

ground too has no merit.

In the final ground appeal, the Appellant contended that the learned trial

judge has failed to consider that the prosecutrix ‘s evidence has not been

corroborated by any independent evidence.

CA/HCC/0036/2023

11 | P a g e

In sexual offence cases, corroboration is not a sine qua non to secure a

conviction. As long as the victim’s evidence does not suffer from ambiguity

or infirmity in a manner which affects the root of the case, there is no bar for

the court to act and rely on the said evidence to decide the case. Hence, the

argument put forward by the learned Counsel under this ground of appeal

regarding the corroboration cannot be accepted. Further, as stated above, in

this case the prosecution had adduced all necessary witnesses to prove their

case. Due to reasons given above, this ground is also not successful.

The Appellant in his dock statement admitted taking the victim out of her

house on the date of incident and taking her to the beach.

The Learned High Court Judge when writing the judgment had combined the

history given to doctor and the evidence given in court by the victim.

Although this is a misdirection, it had not caused any prejudice to the

Appellant considering the stance taken in his dock statement.

Article 138 of The Constitution of Democratic Republic of Sri Lanka

states:

“The Court of Appeal shall have and exercise subject to the

provisions of the Constitution or of any law, an appellate

jurisdiction for the correction of all errors in fact or in law which

shall be committed by the High Court, in the exercise of its

appellate or original jurisdiction or by any court of First

Instance, Tribunal or other institution and sole and exclusive

cognizance, by way of appeal, revision and restitution in

integrum, of all cases, suits, actions, prosecutions, matters and

things of which such High Court of First Instance, Tribunal or

other institution may have taken cognizance;

Provided that no judgment, decree, or order of any court

shall be revised or varied on account of any error, defect, or

irregularity, which has not prejudiced the substantial right

CA/HCC/0036/2023

12 | P a g e

of the parties or occasioned a failure of justice”. [Emphasis

added]

The above-mentioned provision of the Constitution clearly demonstrates that

any failure to adhere to the legal provisions can be considered only if such

failure prejudices the substantial rights of the parties or occasion a failure

of justice.

Considering the evidence led in this case and guided by the judgements

mentioned above, I conclude that this is not an appropriate case in which

the judgement delivered by the learned High Court Judge on 08/10/2021

against the Appellant can be interfered upon. I therefore, dismiss the appeal.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgement to the High

Court of Negombo along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Pradeep Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL