==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/PHC/0084/2020

Page 1 of 23

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal under and in

terms of the provisions of the Judicature

Act No. 02 of 1978 and of Articles 138(1)

and 154(P) of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka read with Section 11 of the High

Court of the Provinces (Special

Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990 as

amended.

Director General of Irrigation,

Department of Irrigation,

Bauddhaloka Mawatha,

Colombo 07.

Petitioner

Vs.

Ranasinghe Arachchillage Sudharma

Rathnaweera,

No: 329, Kandy Road,

Dewaragampala,

Mawanella.

Respondent

Court of Appeal Case No: CA(PHC)/0084/2020 High Court Kegalle Case No: ප්‍රති /5653/2020

CA/PHC/0084/2020

Page 2 of 23

AND BETWEEN

Ranasinghe Arachchillage Sudharma

Rathnaweera,

No. 329, Kandy Road,

Dewaragampala,

Mawanella.

Respondent-Petitioner

Vs.

1. Director General of Irrigation,

Department of Irrigation,

Bauddhaloka Mawatha,

Colombo 07.

1st Petitioner-Respondent

2. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

2nd Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

Ranasinghe Arachchillage Sudharma

Rathnaweera,

No. 329, Kandy Road,

Dewaragampala,

Mawanella.

Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant

CA/PHC/0084/2020

Page 3 of 23

Vs.

1. Director General of Irrigation,

Department of Irrigation,

Bauddhaloka Mawatha,

Colombo 07.

Petitioner-1st Respondent-Respondent

2. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

2nd Respondent-Respondent

Before : D. THOTAWATTA, J.

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Counsel : Pubudu de Silva instructed by D.

K. S. de Silva for the Respondent-

Petitioner-Appellant.

The 1st and 2nd Respondents-

Respondents are absent and

unrepresented.

Written Submissions

of the Respondent-Petitioner-

Appellant tendered on : 04.10.2024 and 30.03.2026

CA/PHC/0084/2020

Page 4 of 23

Written Submissions

of the 1st and 2nd Respondents

tendered on : 29.07.2025

Judgement on : 19.06.2026

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

The instant appeal arises from an order dated 29.04.2020 (hereinafter called

and referred to respectively, as “the HC order”), made by the learned High

Court Judge of the Sabaragamuwa Province holden at Kegalle (hereinafter

called and referred to as “the High Court Judge of the Province”) dismissing

an application in revision preferred to it by the Respondent-Petitioner-

Appellant (hereinafter called and referred to as “the Appellant”) against the

Director General of Irrigation-the Petitioner-1st Respondent-Respondent and

the Honourable Attorney General-the 2nd Respondent-Respondent to the

instant appeal (hereinafter called and referred to respectively, as “the 1st and

2nd Respondents”) seeking to revise and set aside the order of the learned

Magistrate of Kegalle dated 26.02.2020, directing the Appellant and his

dependents if any, in occupation of such land as morefully, described in the

schedule thereto (hereinafter called and referred to respectively, as “the State

Land”), to be ejected forthwith therefrom, made in an application bearing No.

69472 preferred to it by the Director General of Irrigation-1st Respondent

under and in terms of section 5 of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession)

Act No. 07. 1979 as amended (hereinafter called and referred to as “the Act”)

against the Appellant praying for the recovery of possession of such land as

described in the schedule to the application and for an order of ejectment of

the Appellant in possession or occupation and his dependents, if any, from

the State Land.

It is to be observed at the very outset that even though, appearance for the 1st

and 2nd Respondents had not been entered in the proceedings of Court dated

CA/PHC/0084/2020

Page 5 of 23

30.01.2026, on which day the instant appeal had been fixed for judgement,

however, it appears from a careful scrutiny of the proceedings of Court

pertaining thereto, that a Counsel had indeed, entered appearance for the 1st

and 2nd Respondents too; and that the Counsel on both side had thus, agreed

that the matter may be disposed of, by way of written submissions and hence,

the judgement on the strength of the written submissions as urged.

The facts and the circumstances relevant and material to the instant appeal

may be briefly, set out as follows;

The 1st Respondent had made an application dated 18.12.2018 in the form B

set out in the schedule to the Act to the Magistrate Court of Mawanalla in the

case referred to above, along with a copy of the notice of ejectment in the form

A set out in the schedule to the Act and an affidavit verifying the facts

contained in the application in the form C set out in the schedule to the Act

under and in terms of the provisions of Section 5 of the Act for the eviction of

the Appellant from the State Land. The Appellant who appeared before the

Magistrate Court of Mawanalla in pursuant to the summons issued on her by

Court had filed a statement showing cause against the application wherein,

she had raised a number of preliminary objections as to the maintainability

of the application and they are mainly, two-fold;

a) that, the 1st Respondent cannot be considered as a competent

authority within the meaning of the Act for; it was the Divisional

Secretary of Mawanalla who should be the competent authority for

the purpose of section 18 of the Act, and not the Director General of

Irrigation-the 1st Respondent and therefore, 1st Respondent has no

locus standi to make an application under section 5 of the Act and

therefore, action should be dismissed in-limine;

b) that, the Land referred to in the application is not a State Land

within the meaning of the Act but, a private land possessed by the

Appellant over 150 years;

CA/PHC/0084/2020

Page 6 of 23

However, the learned Magistrate of Mawanalla in the order had having

rejected the preliminary objections so raised by the Appellant as to the

maintainability of the application together with the entirety of the Appellant’s

showing cause, proceeded to grant the application directing the Appellant and

her dependents if any, in occupation of the State Land to be ejected forthwith

therefrom, by inter-alia, holding that the Appellant had not in any manner,

established that she had been in possession or occupation of the State Land

upon a valid permit or other written authority of the State granted in

accordance with any written law; and that such permit or authority is in force

and not revoked or otherwise rendered invalid as required by section 9(1) of

the Act.

Being aggrieved by the said order of the learned Magistrate of Mawanalla, the

Appellant had invoked the extra-ordinary revisionary jurisdiction of the High

Court of the Sabaragamuwa Province holden at Kegalle (hereinafter called and

referred to as the “High Court of the Province”) seeking to revise and set aside

it.

The learned High Court Judge of the Province had by the HC order, dismissed

the application in revision by inter-alia, holding that the only defence that may

be available under section 9(1) of the Act to a Respondent in an application

under section 5 thereof, is that the Respondent had been in possession or

occupation of the State Land upon a valid permit or other written authority of

the State granted in accordance with any written law; and that such permit

or authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered invalid as

required by section 9(1) of the Act, and hence, Court sees no reason to

interfere with the order of the learned Magistrate of Mawanalla.

It would be pertinent at this juncture to examine the preliminary legal

objections so raised by the Appellant in the Magistrate Court of Mawanalla,

and the decision thereof, and the HC order as enumerated above for the

proper determination of the instant appeal.

CA/PHC/0084/2020

Page 7 of 23

1) that, the Land referred to in the application is not a State Land within

the meaning of the Act but, a private land possessed by the Appellant

over 150 years;

It is in this context, I would think it expedient at this juncture to examine the

structure and/or the scheme embodied in the Act and the provisions

contained therein with regard to an application that may be made to a

Magistrate Court by a competent authority under section 5 thereof for the

eviction of a person who in his opinion, is in unauthorized possession or

occupation of a state land and for the recovery of the same.

Section 3 of the Act enacts thus;

“3. (1) Where a competent authority is of the opinion

(a) that any land is State land; and

(b) that any person is in unauthorized possession or

occupation of such land, the competent authority may

serve a notice on such person in possession or occupation

thereof, or where the competent authority considers such

service impracticable or inexpedient, exhibit such notice in

a conspicuous place in or upon that land requiring such

person to vacate such land with his dependants, if any, and

to deliver vacant possession of such land to such

competent authority or other authorized person as may be

specified in the notice on or before a specified date. The

date to be specified in such notice shall be a date not less

than thirty days from the date of the issue or the exhibition

of such notice.

(1A) No person shall be entitled to any hearing or to make any

representation in respect of a notice under subsection (1).

(2) Every notice under subsection (1) issued in respect of

any State land is in this Act referred to as a "quit notice ".

CA/PHC/0084/2020

Page 8 of 23

(3) A quit notice in respect of any State land shall be

deemed to have been served on the person in possession or

occupation thereof if such notice is sent by registered post.

(4) Every quit notice shall be in Form A set out in the

Schedule to this Act.”

Section 4 of the Act deals with the obligation to comply with a quit notice and

it enacts thus;

“4. Where a quit notice has been served or exhibited under section 3

(a) the person in possession or occupation of the land to whom such

notice relates or any dependants of such person shall not be entitled to

possess or occupy such land after the date specified in such notice or

to object to such notice on any ground whatsoever except as provided

for in section 9,

(b) the person in possession or occupation shall together with his

dependants, if any, duly vacate such land and deliver vacant possession

thereof to the competent authority or person to whom he is required to

do so by such notice.”

Section 5 of the Act deals with the effect of non-compliance with a quit notice

and it enacts thus;

5. (1) Where any person fails to comply with the notice provisions of

section 4 (b) in respect of any quit notice issued or exhibited or

purporting to have been issued or exhibited under this Act, any

competent authority (whether he is or not the competent authority who

issued or exhibited such notice) may make an application in writing in

the Form B set out in the Schedule to this Act to the Magistrate's Court

within whose local jurisdiction such land or any part thereof is situated

(a) setting forth the following matters

CA/PHC/0084/2020

Page 9 of 23

(i) that he is a competent authority for the purposes of this

Act.

(ii) that the land described in the schedule to the

application is in his opinion State land,

(iii) that a quit notice was issued on the person in

possession or occupation of such land or was exhibited in

a conspicuous place in or upon such land,

(iv) that such person named in the application is in his

opinion in unauthorized possession or occupation of such

land and has failed to comply with the provisions of the

aforesaid paragraph (b) of section 4 in respect of such

notice relating to such land, and

(b) praying for the recovery of possession of such land and for an

order of ejectment of such person in possession or occupation

and his dependants, if any, from such land.

(2) Every such application under subsection (1) shall be supported by

an affidavit in the Form C set out in the Schedule to this Act verifying

to the matters set forth in such application and shall be accompanied

by a copy of the quit notice.

(3) Every application supported by an affidavit and accompanied by a

copy of the quit notice under the preceding provisions of this section

shall be referred to as an " application for ejectment ".

(4) No stamp duties shall be payable for any application for ejectment.

Section 6 of the Act deals with the role of a Magistrate upon receipt of an

application made under section 5 thereof and it enacts thus;

“6. (1) Upon receipt of the application made under section 5, the

Magistrate shall forthwith issue summons on the person named in the

application to appear and show cause on the date specified in such

CA/PHC/0084/2020

Page 10 of 23

summons (being a date not later than two weeks from the date of issue

of such summons) why such person and his dependants, if any, should

not be ejected from the land as prayed for in the application for

ejectment.

(2) The provisions contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure Act

shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to the issue of summons referred to in

subsection (1) and the service thereof and other steps necessary for

securing the attendance of the person summoned.”

Section 7 of the Act, makes provisions for an order for ejectment where no

cause is shown and it reads thus;

“7. If on the date specified in the summons issued under section 6 the

person on whom such summons was issued fails to appear or informs

the Court that he has no cause to show against the order for ejectment,

the Court shall forthwith issue an order directing such person and his

dependants, if any, to be ejected forthwith from the land.”

Section 8 of the Act, makes provisions as to the inquiry if cause is shown and

it enacts thus;

“8. (1) If a person on whom summons has been served under section 6

appears on the date specified in such summons and states that he has

cause to show against the issue of an order for ejectment the

Magistrate's Court may proceed forthwith to hear and determine the

matter or may set the case for inquiry on a later date.

(2) Where any application for ejectment has been made to a Magistrate's

Court, the Magistrate shall give priority over all other business of that

Court, to the hearing and disposal of such application, except when

circumstances render it necessary for such other business to be

disposed of earlier.”

Section 9 of the Act deals with the scope of inquiry and it reads thus;

CA/PHC/0084/2020

Page 11 of 23

“9. (1) At such inquiry the person on whom summons under section 6

has been served shall not be entitled to contest any of the matters

stated in the application under section 5 except that such person

may establish that he is in possession or occupation of the land

upon a valid permit or other written authority of the State granted

in accordance with any written law and that such permit or

authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered invalid.

(2) It shall not be competent to the Magistrate's Court to call for

any evidence from the competent authority in support of the

application under section 5.” [Emphasis is mine]

Section 10 of the Act makes provisions for order of ejectment and it reads as

follows;

“10. (1) If after inquiry the Magistrate is not satisfied that the person

showing cause is entitled to the possession or occupation of the land

he shall make order directing such person and his dependants, if any,

in occupation of such land to be ejected forthwith from such land.

(2) No appeal shall lie against any order of ejectment made by a

Magistrate under subsection (1).”

Upon a careful analysis of sections 5(1) and 6(1) of the Act in conjunction with

sections 9(1) which enacts that “At such inquiry the person on whom

summons under section 6 has been served shall not be entitled to contest

any of the matters stated in the application under section 5 except that

such person may establish that he is in possession or occupation of the

land upon a valid permit or other written authority of the State granted

in accordance with any written law and that such permit or authority is

in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered invalid” and 9(2) thereof,

which enacts “It shall not be competent to the Magistrate's Court to call

for any evidence from the competent authority in support of the

application under section 5.”, it would become manifest that where the

CA/PHC/0084/2020

Page 12 of 23

competent authority is of the opinion that; a) any land is state land, and b)

that any person is in unauthorized possession or occupation of such

land, the competent authority may serve a notice by any of the modes set out

therein, on such person in possession or occupation thereof, requiring such

person to vacate such land with his dependents if any, and to deliver vacant

possession of such land to competent authority or any other authorized

person as may be specified in the notice on or before a specified date to be

specified therein; and that at such inquiry the person on whom summons

under section 6 has been served shall not be entitled to contest any of

the matters stated in the application under section 5 except that such

person may establish that he is in possession or occupation of the land

upon a valid permit or other written authority of the State granted in

accordance with any written law and that such permit or authority is in

force and not revoked or otherwise rendered invalid; and that It shall not

be competent to the Magistrate's Court to call for any evidence from the

competent authority in support of the application under section 5.

[Emphasis is mine]

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in Farook vs. Gunewardene-Government

Agent, Amparai 1980 (2) SLR 243, at pages 245 and 246 that, “Section 9(2)

is to the effect that the Magistrate cannot call for any evidence from the

competent authority in support of the application under section 5, which

means that the Magistrate cannot call upon the competent authority to prove

that the land described in the schedule to the application is a State Land

(Section 5(1)(a)(ii))......The structure of the Act would also make it appear that

where the competent authority had formed the opinion that any land is state

land, even, the Magistrate is not competent to question his opinion.

Alternative relief is given by section 12 which empowers any person claiming

to be the owner of a land to institute action against state for the vindication

of his title within 6 months from the date of the order of ejectment and section

13 is to the effect that where action is instituted by a person, if a decision is

made in favour of that person, he will be entitled to recover reasonable

CA/PHC/0084/2020

Page 13 of 23

compensation for the damage sustained by the reason of his having been

compelled to deliver possession of such land...”.

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA/PHC/41/2010 decided on

31.01.2017 that, “The party noticed is not entitled to challenge the opinion

of the competent authority on any of the matters stated in the

application....By this amendment, the opinion of the competent authority in

relation to the state land was made unquestionable....”.

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA (PHC) APN 29/2016-decided on

09.07.2018 that, “....He cannot contest any of the matters stated in the

application made under section 5 of the Act. One of the matters required to

be stated in the application is that the land described in the schedule to the

application is in the opinion of the competent authority state land. This fact

cannot be contested by the person summoned....Hence, a dispute on the

identity of the land cannot arise for consideration of the learned Magistrate.

The identity of the land can arise for consideration only to the extent of

examining whether the valid permit or other written authority produced by

the party summoned is in relation to the state land described in the

application. Where it is not, the Magistrate must issue an order of eviction in

terms of the Act...”

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA(PHC)48/2016-decided on

02.09.2025 that, “Under section 9 of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession)

Act, as amended in 1983, the competent authority’s opinion that land is a

‘state land’ is conclusive and not open to judicial challenge at the ejectment

stage and the only permissible defence available to an occupier is to prove

possession or occupation under a valid permit or written authority issued by

the state with the burden of proof resting on the occupier, whose failure to

establish such authority would necessitate an order of ejectment.”

Upon a plain reading of section 5(1) and 6(1) of the Act together with sections

9(1) and 9(2) thereof and the judicial precedents referred to above, it becomes

abundantly, clear that, where the competent authority forms an opinion that

CA/PHC/0084/2020

Page 14 of 23

any land is state land, even, the Magistrate is not competent to question his

opinion and therefore, not open to judicial challenge at the ejectment stage in

an application made to Court by a competent authority under section 5 of the

Act.

In the light of the law set out in section 5(1) and 6(1) of the Act to be read with

sections 9(1) and 9(2) thereof and in the light of the law established by the

judicial precedents as referred to above, it is my considered view that a

defence to an application made by a Competent Authority to a Magistrate

Court under section 5 of the Act, that land which is the subject matter of the

application, is not a State Land, is wholly, foreign and utterly alien to a

proceedings that may be initiated by a Competent Authority under

section 5 of the Act before a Magistrate Court for eviction of a person

who in his opinion, is in unauthorized possession or occupation of a land

which in his opinion, is State Land and therefore, such a defence to an

application made to Court by a competent authority under section 5 of the

Act is wholly, untenable in law, and therefore, not in any manner available to

such a person who in his opinion of the competent authority, is in

unauthorized possession or occupation of a State Land for; the Legislature in

enacting section 9 of the Act had never intended a defence as such to be made

available to a person as such except only, for the defence expressly, and

explicitly, made available therein.[Emphasis is mine]

A further reason for the above conclusion is manifest on a careful examination

of the said provisions of the Act and the judicial precedents referred to above.

It may now, be examined.

Upon a careful analysis of the Act, it becomes abundantly, clear that

“Urgency” appears to be “the hallmark” of this Act as observed by this Court

in Farook vs. Gunewardene-Government Agent, Amparai (Supra). Under

section 3, 30 days notice shall be given. Under section 4, the person in

possession is not entitled to object to notice on any ground whatsoever except

as provided for in section 9 and the person who is in possession is required

CA/PHC/0084/2020

Page 15 of 23

to vacate the land within the month specified by the notice. Under section 6,

the Magistrate is required to issue summons forthwith to appear and show

cause on a date not later than two weeks from the date of issue of such

summons. Under section 6A every application made under section 5 shall be

finally disposed of within a period of two calendar months from the date of

such application and where a Court makes, in pursuance of any such

application, an order under section 7 or section 10, directing that any person

be ejected from the land referred to in that order, the court shall make all

such orders as are necessary to ensure that such persons are ejected from

that land within a period of three months from the date of the application for

ejectment. section 8(2) the Magistrate is required to give priority over all other

business of that court. Under section 9, the party noticed can raise objections

only on the basis of a valid permit issued by the State. Under section 10, if

the Magistrate is not satisfied, “he shall make order directing ejectment

forthwith and no appeal shall lie against the order of ejectment. Under section

17, the provisions of this Act have effect notwithstanding anything contained

in any written law.

Besides, it was inter-alia, held by the Supreme Court in Senanayake Vs.

Damunupola-1982 (2) SLR 621 that, “The scope of the State Land (Recovery

of Possession) Act was to provide a speedy or summary mode of getting back

possession or occupation of ‘State Land’ as defined in the Act”, which was

cited by this Court in case bearing No. CA (PHC) 140/2013-decided on

10.10.2019.

Hence, it becomes abundantly, clear upon a careful analysis of sections 9(1)

and 9(2) of the Act in particular that the Legislature in enacting this special

piece of legislation, had never intended for a protracted trial to be held by a

Magistrate in an application made to it by a competent authority under

section 5 of the Act when it had enacted section 9(1) thereto in such a manner

as to expressly, and explicitly, set out in unambiguous terms the scope of

such an inquiry.

CA/PHC/0084/2020

Page 16 of 23

In the light of the above, the principal objective intended to be achieved by the

legislature in enacting the Act is to provide for a speedy or summary mode of

getting back possession or occupation of ‘State Land’ as defined in the Act as

explicitly, observed by the Supreme Court in the decision in Senanayake Vs.

Damunupola (Supra).

In view of the law set out above, the Appellant in the instant appeal, cannot

in any manner, contest any of the matters stated in the application made

under section 5 of the Act by the Respondent to the Magistrate Court of

Mawanalla. One of the matters so required to be stated in the application

under section 5 of the Act is that the land described in the schedule to the

application, is in the opinion of the Respondent being the Competent

Authority, State Land. Opinion so formed by the Respondent being the

Competent Authority, that it is in his opinion, State Land, cannot in any

manner, be contested by the Petitioner who was summoned under section 6

of the Act in view of sections 9(1) and 9(2) of the Act.

Hence, such a challenge that the land stated in the instant application is not

a State Land within the meaning of the Act but, a private land possessed by

the Appellant over 150 years as raised by the Appellant in her showing cause

before the Magistrate Court of Mawanalla, cannot in law, be raised by her for

consideration of the learned Magistrate of Mawanalla for; she has expressly,

been prevented and precluded by section 9(1) and 9(2) of the Act by raising a

contest as such inasmuch as this is an issue to be adjudicated upon in an

appropriate proceedings by a Court of competent jurisdiction for; such a

challenge as to the land in question, is utterly, foreign and alien to

proceedings as such initiated by the competent authority under section

5 of the Act. [Emphasis is mine]

Hence, I would hold that the contention advanced by the Appellant in the

Magistrate Court that that the Land referred to in the application is not a

State Land within the meaning of the Act but, a private land possessed by the

CA/PHC/0084/2020

Page 17 of 23

Appellant over 150 years, ought to fail in law as rightly, held by the learned

Magistrate of Mawanalla.

The question that would next, arise for our consideration is as to the scope of

the inquiry in proceedings that may be initiated by a competent authority

under section 5 of the Act in a Magistrate Court and section 9 of the Act sets

out the scope of the inquiry and it may be reproduced verbatim the same as

follows;

“9. (1) At such inquiry the person on whom summons under section 6

has been served shall not be entitled to contest any of the matters

stated in the application under section 5 except that such person

may establish that he is in possession or occupation of the land

upon a valid permit or other written authority of the State granted

in accordance with any written law and that such permit or

authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered invalid.

(2) It shall not be competent to the Magistrate's Court to call for

any evidence from the competent authority in support of the

application under section 5.” [Emphasis is mine]

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in Farook vs. Gunewardene-Government

Agent, Amparai (Supra) that, “At the inquiry before the Magistrate, the only

plea by way of defence that the Petitioner can put forward is that he is in

possession or occupation of the land upon a valid permit or other written

authority of the State granted in accordance with any written law and that

such permit or authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered

invalid.”

It was inter-alia, held in Muhandiram v. Chairman, No. 111, Janatha

EstateDevelopment Board 1992 (1) SLR 110 at page 112 that, “Under

section 9(1) of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act No. 7 of 1979, the

person on whom summons has been served (in this instance, the Respondent-

Petitioner) shall not be entitled to contest any of the matters stated in the

CA/PHC/0084/2020

Page 18 of 23

application under section 5 except that such person may establish that he is

in possession or occupation of the land upon a valid permit or other written

authority of the State granted in accordance with any written law and that

such permit or written authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise

rendered invalid...... The said section clearly reveals that at an inquiry of this

nature, the person on whom the summons has been served has to establish

that his possession or occupation is upon a valid permit or other written

authority of the State granted according to the written law. The burden of

proof of that fact lies on that particular person on whom the summons has

been served and appears before the relevant Court.”.

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA/PHC/41/2010(Supra) that, “Under

section 9 of the State Land (Recovery of Possession) Act, the scope of the

inquiry is limited to the person noticed to establish he is not in unauthorized

occupation or possession by establishing that;

1. Occupying the land on a permit or a written authority.

2. It must be a valid permit or a written authority.

3. It must be in force at the time of presenting it to Court.

4. It must have been issued in accordance with any written law.”

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA (PHC) APN 29/2016(Supra) that,

“A person who has been summoned in terms of section 6 of the Act can only

establish that, he is in possession or occupation of the land upon a valid

permit or other written authority of the State granted in accordance with any

written law and that such permit or authority is in force and not revoked or

otherwise rendered invalid. He cannot contest any of the matters stated in the

application under section 5 of the Act.”

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA(PHC)48/2016 (Supra) that, “.... the

only defence available is to prove possession is upon a valid permit or written

authority, issued in accordance with law, and which should be in force....”.

CA/PHC/0084/2020

Page 19 of 23

In the light of the law set out in section 9 of the Act and the judicial precedent

referred to above, at an inquiry of this nature, the person on whom the

summons has been served (in this instance the Petitioner) has to establish

that his possession or occupation is upon a valid permit or other written

authority of the State granted according to the written law and that such

permit or written authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered

invalid.

It is significant to observe that, it had never been the position of the Appellant

taken up in the Magistrate Court that her possession or occupation of the

land in dispute which in the opinion of the Respondent being the Competent

Authority is State Land, is upon a valid permit or other written authority of

the State granted according to the written law and that such permit or written

authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered invalid, but,

instead her position had been that, the Land referred to in the application is

not a State Land within the meaning of the Act but, a private land possessed

by the Appellant over 150 years.

Hence, the Appellant’s argument that, the Land referred to in the application

is not a State Land within the meaning of the Act but, a private land possessed

by the Appellant over 150 years, cannot sustain both in fact and law, for; she

is precluded by section 9(1) and 9(2) of the Act from raising such a contest on

the land-the subject matter of the application made to Court by the

Respondent being the Competent Authority.

On the other hand, the 1st Respondent being the Competent Authority had

already, formed an opinion that the land-the subject matter of the application,

is a State Land and that the Appellant is in unauthorized possession or

occupation therein. However, as observed by me elsewhere in this judgment,

it is significant to note that, not an iota of evidence had been adduced by the

Appellant to establish that she is in possession or occupation of the State

Land upon a valid permit or other written authority of the State, granted in

accordance with any written law and that such permit or authority is in force

CA/PHC/0084/2020

Page 20 of 23

and not revoked or otherwise rendered invalid as required by section 9 of the

Act. Hence, the Appellant did not have semblance of such a permit or

authority as envisaged by section 9 of the Act.

In view of the above, it clearly, appears to me that the Appellant had adduced

not even an iota of evidence to satisfy the learned Magistrate of Mawanalla

that she was entitled to the possession or occupation of the State Land as

rightly, held by the learned Magistrate of Mawanalla.

Hence, I would hold that, the contention so advanced by the learned Counsel

for the Appellant that, the Land referred to in the application is not a State

Land within the meaning of the Act but, a private land possessed by the

Appellant over 150 years, is not entitled to succeed, both in fact and law and

as such, it should be rejected in-limine, as rightly, done by both the learned

Magistrate and the learned High Court Judge of the Province.

b) that, the 1st Respondent cannot be considered as a competent

authority within the meaning of the Act for; it was the Divisional

Secretary of Mawanalla who should be the competent authority for

the purpose of section 18 of the Act, and not the Director General of

Irrigation-the 1st Respondent and therefore, 1st Respondent has no

locus standi to make an application under section 5 of the Act and

therefore, action should be dismissed in-limine;

It may now, be examined.

As observed by me elsewhere in this judgement, in view of sections 9 (1) and

9(2) of the Act, the person who has been summoned, is not entitled to contest

any of the matters stated in the application under section 5 of the Act and

one of such matters to be stated in the application made under Section 5 of

the Act is that the person making the application is a Competent Authority

for the purposes of the Act.

Besides, the 1st Respondent had in his affidavit filed along with his application

under section 5 of the Act before the Magistrate Court of Mawanalla clearly,

CA/PHC/0084/2020

Page 21 of 23

and unequivocally, affirmed to the fact he is the competent authority within

the meaning of the Act which fact cannot in any manner, be contested by the

Appellant in view of sections 9(1) and 9(2) of the Act.

Furthermore, it was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA(PHC)APN

29/2016(supra) that “The Petitioner submitted that the Respondent was not

the competent authority in respect of the lands vested with the SLSPC. Such

an objection is not a matter that can be taken up before the learned Magistrate

or in these proceedings. One of the factors to be stated in the application

made under section 5 of the Act is that the person making the application is

a competent authority for the purposes of the Act. In view of section 6 of the

Act, a person who has been summoned cannot contest that the claimant is

not a competent authority. That is an issue to be tested in appropriate

proceedings.”

Hence, I would hold that, the further preliminary objection so raised by the

Appellant in the proceedings initiated before the learned Magistrate of

Mawanalla under section 5(1) of the Act by the Respondent, namely; the 1st

Respondent is not a Competent Authority within the meaning of the “Act”,

cannot in any manner, sustain both in fact and law and therefore, it too,

should be rejected in-limine.

Hence, I would hold that the learned Magistrate of Mawanalla was entirely,

justified both in fact and law in making an order directing the Appellant and

her dependents, if any, in occupation of the State Land as morefully,

described in the schedule to the application made to Court by the 1st

Respondent being the Competent Authority, to be ejected forthwith therefrom.

In the circumstances, I would see no error both in fact and law in the order

of the learned Magistrate of Mawanalla and therefore, it can sustain both in

fact and law as rightly, held by the learned High Court Judge of the province.

Hence, I would see no error both in fact and law in the order of the learned

High Court Judge of the Province too, when he had proceeded to dismiss the

CA/PHC/0084/2020

Page 22 of 23

application in revision filed by the Appellant before the High Court Province

inviting it to invoke its extra-ordinary revisionary jurisdiction to revise and set

aside the order of the learned Magistrate of Mawanalla by so holding as

enumerated above.

With regard to the further defence raised by the Appellant on the premise that

the affidavit filed along with the application made to Court by the Respondent

under section 5(1) of the Act, is not valid in law for; the affidavit does not state

the religion of the affirmant, namely; the 1st Respondent, even though, the

Appellant is not in any manner, permitted by section 9(1) and (2) of the Act to

raise such a challenge on the validity of the affidavit filed along with the

application made to Court by the Respondent under section 5(1) of the Act,

as a matter of law, it should be emphasized that the fact that an affidavit does

not state the religion of the affirmant, does not make the affidavit invalid as

held by the Supreme Court in the decision in SC/HC/LA02/2014-Decided

on 04.09.2014 and therefore, the further defence raised by the Appellant on

the premise that the affidavit filed along with the application made to Court

by the Respondent under section 5(1) of the Act, is not valid in law for; the

affidavit does not state the religion of the affirmant, too, is not entitled to

succeed both in fact and law and as such it too, should be rejected as rightly,

done by both the learned Magistrate as well as the learned High Court Judge

of the Province.

In regard to the further defence raised by the Appellant on the premise that

the affidavit filed along with the application made to Court by the Respondent

under section 5(1) of the Act, is not valid in law for; the alteration of the date

in the affidavit filed by the 1st Respondent along with his application, has not

been certified and/or subscribed by the Justice of Peace, even though, the

Appellant is not in any manner, permitted by section 9(1) and (2) of the Act to

raise such a challenge on the validity of the affidavit filed along with the

application made to Court by the Respondent under section 5(1) of the Act on

that basis too, as a matter of fact, it should be observed that the so, called

alteration of the date in the affidavit filed by the 1st Respondent along with his

CA/PHC/0084/2020

Page 23 of 23

application, had not only, been certified and/or subscribed by the Justice of

Peace but also the rubber stamp too, had also been affixed thereto, in proof

thereof, and hence, it too, is not entitled to succeed both in fact and law and

as such it too, should be rejected as rightly, done by both the learned

Magistrate as well as the learned High Court Judge of the Province.

In view of the foregoing, I would hold that, the instant Appeal is not entitled

to succeed both in fact and law.

Hence, I would proceed to dismiss the instant appeal with costs fixed at Rs.

50,000/-.

In the result, I would affirm the orders of both the learned High Court Judge

of the Province and the learned Magistrate of Mawanalla.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL