f 1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRAIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

In the matter of an application for Revision in

terms of Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Court of Appeal case no. CAfPHC/APN/69/2015

H.C. Colombo case no. HC 98/2005

Democretic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Complainant

Vs.

1. Kimbulapitiyage Gamini Mendis

2. Kimbulapitiyage Sudath Shantha Mendis

3. Kottehewage Sunil Priyantha

4. Ranadewa Kumaranayake

5. Sam Henry Premil Ihalagam

Accused

AND NOW

1. Kimbulapitiyage Gamini Mendis

2. Kimbulapitiyage Sudath Shantha Mendis

3. Kottehewage Sunil Priyantha

4. Ranadewa Kumaranayake

Accused Petitioners.

Vs.

lIII

J I I J i

1 , ! r I I I

Before

Counsel

The Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12

: H.C.J.Madawala J.

: L.T.B. Dehideniya J.

: Amila Palliyage with Eranda Sinharage and Upul

Dissanayake for the 4th Accused Petitioner.

: Lakmali Karunanayake SSC for the Respondent.

Argued on : 03.10.2016

Written : 18.11.2016 and 21.11.2016 submissions

Decided on : 26.01.2017

L.T.B. Dehideniya J.

2

The Accused Petitioners were indicted before the High Court of

Chilaw for the offences punishable under sections 140, 296, 315 read

with section 146 of the Penal Code. After concluding the prosecution case

and leading half way of defence evidence, the defence indicated to Court

that the accused were prepared to plead guilty to a lessor count. The

second count was reduced to a charge of culpable homicide not

amounting to murder on the basis of sudden fight punishable under

section 297 and all accused tendered a plea of guilty on all counts. After

hearing the submissions of both parties, the learned High Court Judge

other than the sentences imposed on 1 st and 3 rd counts, imposed a

sentence of 12 years RI for the 1 st and 2nd Accused, 18 months RI for the

3rd Accused and 4 years RI for the 4th and 5th Accused. Being aggrieved I

3

by the sentence, 1 to 4 Accused moved in revision. At the argument, only

the 4th Accused Petitioner contested the sentence and his argument

restricted to the disparity of sentences on the 2nd count among the 3rd and

4 th accused.

The 3rd Accused was imposed a term of 18 months RI while the 4th

Accused was given 4 years RI. The Counsel for the 4th Accused Petitioner

(the Petitioner) argues that it is a disparity of sentencing. He argues that

the 3rd and 4th Accused were not involved in the incident directly and they

were charged only on the basis of common object.

The learned SSC argues that there is no law that nowhere in the

law as it is today is stated that in a case where there are number of

accused, the accused should be sentence in the same manner.

In the present case it is evident that the 1 st and 2nd Accused were

directly involved in the incident. There were 14 injuries in the deceased's

body, and 3 other persons were also injured in the incident. The house of

the deceased was also damaged. The accused have gone to the house of

the deceased and created the incident. These factors were brought to the

notice of the learned High Court Judge in making the order of sentencing.

The evidence revels that the Petitioner had gone to the scene with a

firearm in hand. The way that the Petitioner participated in the incident,

i.e., going to the scene where a fight is going on having a firearm in hand

does not establish that he is an innocent by stander, but he has gone there

with a criminal motive.

Chitrasiri J. in the case of Asan Mohamed Rizwan v. Attorney

General CA [PHC] APN 141113 CA Minutes dated 25.03.2015 expressed

I

t 4

several guide lines in sentencing policies. His Lordship after a

comprehensive analysis of authorities held that;

Having referred to the importance of looking at the available

statutory provisions, I will now advert to the other aspects that are

necessary to consider before a sentence is determined. Those can

be categorized as follows:

(a) The maximum and the minimum (if any) penalty

prescribed for the offence;

(b) The nature and gravity/seriousness of the particular

offence.

(c) The offender's culpability and degree of his/her

responsibility for the offence

(d) mental state of the accused at the time the offence was

committed;

(e) Evidence as to pre-arrangement for the commission of

the offence;

(f) The impact of the offence on any victim and the injury,

loss or damage caused as a result of the offence

committed;

(g) Whether the offender pleaded guilty to the offence and if

so, the stage in the proceedings at which the offender did

so or the stage at which it was indicated;

(h) The conduct of the offender during the trial as an

indication of remorse or the lack of remorse;

(i) Any action taken by the offender to make restitution of the

injury, loss or damage arising from the offence, including

his or her willingness to comply with any order for

restitution that a court may consider.

5

0) The offender's previous character, good or bad;

(k) Imprisonment should be used when no other sentence IS

adequate;

(I) Proportionality between the crime and the sentence;

(m) Possibility of reforming the offender;

(n) To ensure consistency in deciding sentences;

(0) Presence of any aggravating or mitigating factors

concerning the offender or any other circumstance

relevant to the commission of the offence; and

In the present case the Petitioner's culpability is very high. He has

gone to the scene with a firearm in hand. Even though he claims that he

has not directly participated in the incident, going to the crime scene with

a firearm in hand cannot be considered lightly and it is obviously an

aggravating factor. On the other hand the 3rd Accused was a 15 year old

boy at the time of the incident and has not directly involved in the

incident. It is a mitigating factor that has to be considered in his favour.

It has been held in the case of Thilakaratne v. Attorney-General

[1989] 2 Sri L R 191 at page 198 that;

I have considered the sentences imposed on the 1st accused in the

light of the sentences passed on the 2nd and 3rd accused. There is

a disparity in the sentences passed on the 1st accused and those

passed on the 2nd and 3rd accused. Generally speaking, uniformity

in sentencing is desirable, but not where the facts and

circumstances against each accused are different. The evidence in

this case revealed that the 1st accused was armed with a pistol,

fired a shot with it, and then proceeded to cause extensive injuries

with a knife on Semasinghe during the course of this robbery.

1 I

1

j J I I I

6

Further, the 1st accused has previous convictions. Therefore, I see

no reason to interfere with the sentences passed on the 1st

accused-appellant.

In the present case also there is a disparity in the sentence passed

on the 3rd Accused and the 4th Accused Petitioner. The 4th Accused

Petitioner involved in incident with a firearm in hand and the 3 rd Accused

was a 15 year old young boy at the time of the incident. It is obvious that

the learned High Court Judge has considered the aggravating and

mitigating factors in passing the sentence on 4th and 3 rd Accused.

I see no reason to interfere with the sentence passed on the 4th

Accused Petitioner.

F or the reasons stated herein, the revision application is dismissed

and the sentences are affirmed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

H.C.J.Madawala J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal