IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal filed in

terms of Section 331 of the Code

of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15

of 1979.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Court of Appeal Case No. Colombo 12.

HCC/425/19 Complainant

High Court of Colombo

Case No. 2136/04 Vs.

Usgoda Arachchige Rohan Janaka

Sampath Alias Sagara

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Usgoda Arachchige Rohan Janaka

Sampath Alias Sagara

Accused-Appellant

Vs.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12. Complainant-Respondent

2

BEFORE : K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J (P/CA)

WICKUM A. KALUARACHCHI, J

COUNSEL : Anil Silva, PC with Mark Anton for the

Accused-Appellant

R. Bary, SSC for the Respondent

WRITTEN SUBMISSION

TENDERED ON : 11.10.2021 (On behalf of the Accused-Appellant)

15.07.2021 (On behalf of the Respondent)

ARGUED ON : 23.03.2022

DECIDED ON : 26.05.2022

WICKUM A. KALUARACHCHI, J.

The accused-appellant was convicted of committing the murder of

Cottaduwa Gamage Jayathissa on or about 29.05.2000 at Kinsey Road

Borella, along with an unknown person, an offence punishable under

Section 296 of the Penal Code. This appeal has been preferred against

the said conviction and the death sentence imposed on the appellant.

Prosecution witness No.01, Tharaka Samanmali Kumari is the

daughter of the deceased. The deceased father had come to the

Samanmalis school around 11.30 a.m. in his three-wheeler to pick her

up. When Samanmali was getting into the three-wheeler, she stated in

her evidence that the appellant had pulled the deceased out of the

three-wheeler and there was a quarrel between the appellant and the

deceased. PW1 has observed that there was blood on the deceaseds

shirt.

The police officer, PW5 has described how he witnessed the appellant

fleeing the scene of the crime and the pool of blood that was there at

3

the place of the incident. The Judicial Medical Officer testified that there

were 12 stab injuries and 4 cut injuries on the body of the deceased.

He expressed his expert opinion that the death of the deceased was

caused as a result of the said injuries.

Although 5 grounds of appeal have been stated in the written

submissions tendered on behalf of the appellant, the learned

Presidents Counsel for the appellant advanced his arguments on the

issues of identification of the appellant and the motive of implicating

the appellant.

At this stage, it is pertinent to consider the defence taken by the

appellant. The accused-appellant made a dock statement and no other

witness was called on his behalf. The appellants position was that he

was never there in the vicinity at the time of the incident and he was

arrested after 4 months when he was in a boutique near the

Dematagoda Police Station.

Now, I consider the issue of motive to implicate the appellant. The

learned Presidents Counsel contended that her mother had coached

PW1 to tell this story because of the animosity they had with the

appellant. The learned Senior State Counsel submitted that if there was

any animosity between the two parties, the said animosity might be the

motive for the appellant to commit the murder. In addition, the learned

Senior State Counsel pointed out that there was no time to coach the

PW1, even if somebody wanted to do so because her statement had been

recorded within a short period after the incident. Now, I have to consider

whether the said motive that purported to be led to fabricate a story

could be believed.

Firstly, it is vital to be mentioned that the appellant has not stated

about any such animosity in his dock statement. Secondly, the

allegation that the mother has coached the PW1 to tell this story could

4

not be believed because this has not been even suggested to the PW1

on behalf of the appellant. The only suggestion put to the PW1 was that

the appellant was not there at the time of the incident. In addition, a

question has been asked whether Gamini mama told her that the

father was assaulted by Sagara mama which she denied. (page 124 of

the appeal brief). The motive that has not been suggested to PW1 and

that has not been stated by the appellant in his dock statement could

not be believed and has to be rejected. Hence, the argument that the

prosecution had fabricated a story because of the said animosity,

necessarily fails.

The other issue is the identification of the appellant. The learned

Presidents Counsel for the appellant pointed out that the only witness

who speaks about the incident is the daughter of the deceased. The

learned Presidents Counsel submitted that PW1 has said that there

were many people at the time of assaulting her father. However, it was

not the position of the learned Presidents Counsel that PW1 could not

properly identify the appellant, since there were a number of people.

The contention of the learned Presidents Counsel was that PW1 should

not be believed and thus there is no satisfactory identity of the appellant

to prove the charge against him.

It is to be noted that if the evidence of PW1 could be believed, the

identification of the appellant is not an issue because undisputedly, the

appellant was a known person to PW1. Even the learned Presidents

Counsel for the appellant admitted the said fact. PW1 has stated that

the appellant was residing close to her residence and he was a known

person. The said item of evidence has not been challenged.

It has been stated in the written submission tendered on behalf of the

appellant about the Turnbull Principle regarding the identification.

Turnbull rules or guidelines were set out in the case of Regina V.

Turnbull (1976) 3 WLR 445. It is to be noted that the Turnbull

5

principle applies to mistaken identity. According to the Turnbull rules,

it has to be examined closely the circumstances in which the

identification by each witness had been made. How long did the witness

have the accused under observation? At what distance? In what light?

are material factors to be considered.

It is apparent that the aforesaid Turnbull Rules do not apply to instant

action because there is no question about mistaken identity. The

position taken up by the learned Presidents Counsel for the appellant

was that PW1 had not seen the incident that she described. As stated

previously, the appellant was a known person to PW1. If her evidence

could be believed, there was no difficulty for her to identify the appellant

because when she was getting into the three-wheeler, the appellant

pulled the deceased out of the three-wheeler. So, she could have very

well seen the appellant and identified the appellant without any

difficulty.

Now, I proceed to consider whether there is any doubt in the evidence

that PW1 had seen the incident. It has to be mentioned specifically that

the defence did not challenge in any manner the fact that this incident

happened when the deceased had gone to Samanmalis school in his

three-wheeler to pick her up. The police witness, PW7 who carried out

investigations immediately after the incident testified that the incident

took place in front of Yashodara Balika Vidyala. Therefore, it is obvious

that the incident happened when the deceased had gone to pick up his

daughter PW1. The deceased came to pick up PW1 from the school and

the incident occurred when she was getting into the three-wheeler.

Therefore, there is no reason whatsoever to disbelieve that PW1 saw her

father being pulled out of the three-wheeler by the appellant when she

was getting into the three-wheeler. It is precisely clear that PW1 had

seen this incident and identified the accused-appellant because the

deceased had gone to that place, not for any other purpose but to pick

up PW1 from her school.

6

Although the learned Presidents Counsel submitted that there were a

number of people at the time of assaulting her father, it is evident from

the following items of evidence of the PW1 that the presence of other

people was not an obstacle in identifying the appellant. The relevant

items of evidence are as follows:

: ?

: . ( .)

: ?

: .

: ?

: .

: ,

, ?

: .

: ?

: .

(Page 102 of the appeal brief)

: ?

: .

:

: ?

: . .

(Page 122 and 123 of the appeal brief)

The charge against the appellant was framed on the basis that the

appellant committed this murder with an unknown person. Therefore,

even though the stab injuries and cut injuries were caused by the other

person, the appellant is liable under common intention for committing

the murder because he pulled out the deceased to cause this fatal stab

and cut injuries. Even the learned Presidents Counsel for the appellant

7

conceded that if the evidence of the PW1 could be believed, the appellant

is liable for the offence of murder under the common intention.

The police officer who testified as prosecution witness No. 5, identified

the appellant in the identification parade held in the Magistrate Court

as the person who ran away from the place of the incident soon after

the incident. The learned Presidents Counsel for the appellant

contended that PW5 had chased after a person, having heard the crowd

gathered at the school gate saying the man on the run is the assailant.

Therefore, the learned Presidents Counsel contended that PW5 having

traveled in the police motorcycle and seeing a man on the ground in the

midst of a crowd gathered around the scene, did not have sufficient

time, opportunity or space to identify the assailant as the accused-

appellant because the assailant was fleeing away from the crime scene.

However, after two and a half months when the appellant was arrested,

PW5 identified the appellant in the identification parade as the person

who ran away from the crime scene. What is important is that the

aforesaid chain of events perfectly corroborates each other. PW1 saw

the appellant pull out the deceased from the three-wheeler. Then, there

was a quarrel between the appellant and the deceased. The deceased

was stabbed. At that moment, a person ran away from the crime scene.

The crowd gathered there shouted the man who was running is the

assailant. The police officer PW5 who chased that person later on

identified that person as the accused-appellant. These items of evidence

clearly established that the appellant is the person who committed the

murder. It is to be noted that even the evidence of PW1 alone is

sufficient to conclude that the appellant committed the offence.

In addition, it is to be considered that the appellant could have been

arrested only after 2 month of the incident. The incident took place

on 29.05.2000. The appellant was arrested by PW8 on 18.08.2000.

There was no explanation from the appellant about his subsequent

conduct when he was making the dock statement.

8

The learned Presidents Counsel for the appellant advanced another

argument regarding the item of evidence, the shouting of the crowd that

the man who was running is the assailant. He contended that it is

inadmissible hearsay evidence. Evidence of a statement made to a

witness by a person who is not called as a witness may or may not be

hearsay. It is hearsay and inadmissible when the object of the evidence

is to establish the truth of what is contained in the statement. It is not

hearsay and is admissible when it is proposed to establish by the

evidence, not the truth of the statement but the fact that it was made.

Such evidence is admissible and becomes direct evidence under Section

60(ii) of the Evidence Ordinance as to the fact that the statement was

made. Section 60(ii) of the Evidence Ordinance states that oral

evidence must, in all cases whatever, be direct; that is to say, if it refers

to a fact which could be heard, it must be the evidence of a witness who

says he heard that fact. So, the aforesaid evidence of shouting of the

crowd had been led to explain why PW5 had chased after the person

who was running. Since it is not the evidence led to prove the truth of

what the crowd said, it is direct, admissible evidence.

In addition, in terms of section 6 of the Evidence Ordinance, facts

forming part of the same transaction are relevant. Illustration (a) of

section 6 reads as follows:

A is accused of the murder of B by beating him. Whatever was

said or done by A or B or the by-standers at the beating, or so

shortly before or after it as to form part of the transaction is a

relevant fact. (Emphasis added)

Hence, in terms of section 6 of the Evidence Ordinance also, what was

said by the crowd at the scene the moment after the incident is relevant

and admissible evidence.

For the reasons stated above, there is no issue regarding the

identification of the appellant. Therefore, the defence version that the

appellant was never there in the vicinity at the time of the incident could

9

not be believed and has to be rejected as correctly done by the learned

High Court Judge. The other ground that the motive to fabricate a story

is also failed for the reasons stated above.

Accordingly, I hold that there is no reason to interfere with the judgment

of the learned High Court Judge. Hence, the conviction and the

sentence imposed on the appellant are affirmed.

Appeal is dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K. Priyantha Fernando, J (P/CA)

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL