IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

1. S. T. M. Nihal Pushpakumara,

2. L. Gnanalatha de Silva,

both of Wellawaya Road,

Ella.

Defendant-Appellants

CASE NO: CA/DCF/550/2000

DC BANDARAWELA CASE NO: 806/L

Vs.

K. Nimalasena,

of Gannilewatte,

Kitalellagama,

Wellawaya Road,

Ella.

Plaintiff-Respondent

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Rohan Sahabandu, P.C., with Hasitha

Amarasinghe for the Defendant-Appellants.

H. Withanachchi with Shantha Karunadhara

for the Plaintiff-Respondent.

Argued on: 23.07.2020

Decided on: 15.09.2020

2

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The Plaintiff filed this action in the District Court of

Bandarawela seeking a declaration of title to the land described

in the first schedule to the plaint, ejectment of the two

Defendants from the land described in the second schedule to

the plaint (which seems to be a portion of the land described in

the first schedule to the plaint), recovery of damages until the

Plaintiff is restored to possession, and costs of the action. The

Defendants filed the answer seeking dismissal of the Plaintiffs

action with costs. After the trial, the learned District Judge

entered Judgment for the Plaintiff. Hence this appeal by the

Defendants.

I must begin by stating that in a rei vindicatio action such as

this, the burden lies fairly and squarely on the Plaintiff to prove

his title to the land in the manner pleaded in the plaint. The

Defendant has no burden to prove on what right he is in

possession until the Plaintiff successfully discharges the initial

burden cast upon him. Has the Plaintiff in the instant case

done his part? In my judgment, he has not.

Let me consider on what basis the Plaintiff claims title to the

land in the plaint.

(a) Ukku Menika was the original owner of the land

described in the first schedule to the plaint, containing

in extent 1 acre and 2 roods.

(b) Upon her death, her only son, Peris Silva, became the

owner of the said land by inheritance.

3

(c) Peris Silva, by Deed marked P1, transferred the land to

William Silva (who is the father of the 2nd Defendant

and father-in-law of the 1st Defendant).

(d) William Silva transferred acre to Jamis Appu by

Deed marked P2.

(e) Jamis Appu transferred the said portion to Dayawathie

by Deed marked P3.

(f) Dayawathie transferred her acre to the Plaintiff by

P4.

(g) The said William Silva then transferred an undivided 1

acre to Chandrasena by Deed marked P6 in 1970.

(h) The Defendants came into occupation of the house

standing on the above 1 acre described in the second

schedule to the plaint with the leave and license of

Chandrasena on 10.11.1982.

(i) Chandrasena transferred the said 1 acre to the Plaintiff

by Deed marked P8 in 1988.

(j) The balance acre was acquired by the State in 1973

to broaden the Ella-Wellawaya road.

(k) The Defendants are disputing the rights of the Plaintiff

to the land from the date of execution of Deed marked

P8.

At the trial, the issues raised were also on the same lines.

Although the Plaintiff says the larger land which belonged to

Ukku Manika is described in the first schedule as 1 acres,

according to Deed marked P1 executed in 1956, it is in fact 2

acres in extent. Accordingly, Peris Silva had inherited 2 acres

which was transferred to the 2nd Defendants father, William

Silva, by Deed marked P1. Of the said 2 acres, William Silva

4

first transferred acre to Jamis Appu, and the Plaintiff later

became entitled to this acre by P4. That is not disputed in

this case.

The Plaintiff then says William Silva transferred 1 acre to

Chandrasena by P6 in 1970 and Chandrasena transferred the

said 1 acre to the Plaintiff by P8 in 1988. The Plaintiff also says

the balance acre of land was acquired by the State in 1973.

If acre was acquired by the State in 1973, Chandrasena could

not have transferred to the Plaintiff by P8 in 1988 the 1 acre he

received by P6 in 1970. Chandrasena could have only

transferred acre.

On the other hand, P6 does not say William Silva transferred 1

acre to Chandrasena. What is transferred by P6 is an undivided

half share of the 2 acre land.

However, when P6 was executed in 1970, it may be recalled,

William Silva had already transferred acre of the 2 acres to

Jamis Appu by P2.

Also, according to the Plaintiff himself, acre was acquired by

the State in 1973 to broaden the road.

Then, according to the Plaintiffs own pedigree, of the 1 acre

land, 1 acre was no longer available when P8 was executed in

1988 in favour of the Plaintiff, and therefore the Plaintiff is only

entitled to acre by P8.

If the entire land is considered to be 2 acres (which is not the

Plaintiffs case as pleaded in the plaint and in the issues raised),

William Silva by P2 transferred acre in 1969 and another

acre was acquired by the State in 1973, and what was in fact

5

transferred to the Plaintiff by P8 in 1988 was an undivided half

of the (remaining portion of) land, i.e. acre of the land, thereby

leaving another acre intact, which, in my view, belongs to

William Silva.

According to the Plan marked P6, the Defendants are in

possession of Lot 1 and they live in the old house standing

thereon. The surveyor in his report prepared in 1990 says the

house is about 30 years old. This is the house William Silva had

been living in with his family. The 1st and 2nd Defendants have

been living in this house after marriage.

There is no evidence to say the Defendants came to the said

house on 10.11.1982 with the leave and license of Chandrasena.

P14 dated 02.03.1988 sent by the 1st Defendant to Chandrasena

the day after the execution of Deed marked P8 dated 01.03.1988

is not irreconcilable with the above position because what was

sought to be transferred by P8 was not the entire land but part

of it, which is different from the portion of land where the

Defendants were and still are residing.

The learned District Judge in his Judgment has not, in my view,

analysed the facts of the case from the proper perspective. I set

aside the said Judgment and allow the appeal with costs. The

Plaintiffs action in the District Court shall stand dismissed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal