==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 8

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

In the matter of an application for mandamus

in the nature of Writs of Mandamus, Certiorari

and Prohibition under and in terms of Article

140 of the Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

CA-WRT-113/2024

Kalutota Financial Services (Private) Limited

No. 49, Hudson road, Colombo 03.

Petitioner

Vs.

1. Parakramasinghe Nishanthi Udayanganee

2. Ilandari dewage Lochana Kavindi

3. Ilandari Dewage Malisha nethmina

Kumarasiri

4. Ilandari Dewage Amarasha Induwari

All of the 1st 4th Respondents at:

Priyanjana Hotel, Hingurana

No. 89/1, ‘ Pudgalika Niwasa’, Higurana

5. Hon. W. Iranganie Perra

Chairperson Debt Conciliation Board

6. Hon. W.C. Pushpamalee

Member

Debt Conciliation Board

Page 2 of 8

7. Hon. Kusum Pathirna

Member

Debt Conciliation Board

8. Hon. K.H. Premadasa

Member

Debt Conciliation Board

9. Hon. Bandula Ranjith

Member

Debt Conciliation Board

10. Hon. Piyasena Ranasinghe

Member

Debt Conciliation Board

11. Hon. Padma palihakkarara

Member

Debt Conciliation Board

12. Hon. Milton Marasinghe

Member

Debt Conciliation Board

13. Hon. Sarath Chandrasiri withana

Member

Debt Conciliation Board

14. Hon. Somapala Karunathilaka

Member

Debt Conciliation Board

15. Hon. N.G. D.S. Dayananda

Member

Debt Conciliation Board

Page 3 of 8

05th to 15th Respondents at

Department of Debt Conciliation Board

No. 35A, Dr. N. M. Perera Mawatha

Colombo 08

16. Hon. (Dr) Wijedasa Rajapakshe

Minister of Justice, Prison Affairs and

Constitutional reforms

19, Sri Sangaraja Mawatha

Colombo 10.

17. M.N. Ranasinghe

Secretary

Minister of Justice, Prison Affairs and

Constitutional Reforms

19, Sri Sangaraja Mawatha

Colombo 10.

Respondents

Before : N. Bandula Karunarathna, P/CA, J.

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

Counsel: Hejaaz Hizbullah with Chalana Perera for the Petitioner

Nisala Seniya Fernando for the 1st and 2nd Respondents.

Yothini Selvananthan, SC or the 16th and 17th Respondents

Page 4 of 8

Argued On: 06.12.2024

Written

Submissions: 15.01.2025 (by the Petitioner)

On 03.01.2025 (by the 1st and 2nd Respondents)

Decided On: 28.01.2025

JUDGMENT

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

The Petitioner instituted this application by petition dated 15.02.2024 seeking inter alia

a writ of Certiorari to quash the proceedings before the Debt Conciliation Board

application bearing No. 46470.

The relevant facts of this case are as follows:

The Petitioner states that the Petitioner is a company duly incorporated in terms of the

laws of Sri Lanka which is engaged in the business of providing financing facilities for the

purchase of motor vehicles.

According to the Petitioner, the Petitioner granted finance leasing facility to the 1st

Respondent by Memorandum of Agreement dated 25.05.2011 for a sum of Rs. 1,100,000/-

for the hire purchase of the motor vehicle bearing registration No. EP HG-7472. The

Petitioner states that the said motor vehicle was seized by the Petitioner on or about

12.10.2012 due to the 1st Respondent defaulting on the payment of her installments.

The Petitioner further states that at this point, one Ilandari Dewage Sarath Kumarasiri

who is the husband of the 1st Respondent approached the Petitioner and offered to transfer

a property owned by him in terms of Deed of Gift bearing No. 13 dated 07th June 2000

Page 5 of 8

attested by M.G.A. Kumara, Notary Public to the Petitioner as additional security subject

to the Petitioner returning the motor vehicle back to the 1st Respondent. Thereafter, the

said property was transferred to the Petitioner Company by Deed of Transfer bearing No.

269 dated 30th October 2012 attested by W.D.C. Premajayantha, Notary Public.

The Petitioner states that furthermore, a sum of Rs. 1,000,000/- was advanced to him to

effect repairs to the said motor vehicle after such Deed of Transfer. However, the said

motor vehicle was seized by the Petitioner due to the non-payment of the lease rentals.

Thereafter, the said Ilandari Dewage Sarath Kumarasiri engaged in discussions with the

Petitioner after which the possession of the property was handed over to the Petitioner

subject to the payment of Rs. 4,000,000/- on 15th May 2023 and a receipt was issued by

the said Ilandari Dewage Sarath Kumarasiri.

The Petitioner further states that the said Ilandari Dewage Sarath Kumarasiri passed

away in or around November 2023 and the funeral was held at the property in question

as requested by the 1st Respondent.

The Petitioner states that on 8th January 2024, when several workers of the Petitioner

Company visited the said property to clean it, several officers of the Damana Police

Station visited the said property along with one Ilandari Dewage Pathma Kumarasiri, the

brother-in-law of the 1st Respondent. The Petitioner further states that when the workers

were requested to come to the Damana Police Station, they were arrested without any

inquiry or informing them of the complaint against them. Thereafter, they were produced

before the Learned Magistrate of Ampara in the case bearing No. B/5038/24 and later

they were enlarged on bail.

The Petitioner avers that being aggrieved by the said Magistrate Court of Ampara Case

bearing No. B/5038/24, the Petitioner and several other workers instituted an application

bearing No. CA/WRIT/28/2024 by petition dated 12.01.2024. The Petitioner further states

Page 6 of 8

that the Court granted an interim order dated 16.01.2024 staying the further proceedings

of the Magistrate Court of Ampara Case bearing No. B/5038/24.

The Petitioner states that due to the interference and unlawful conduct of Certain Police

Officers in the application bearing No. CA/WRIT/28/2024, the employees of the Petitioner

had to leave the property in question and the Petitioner became aware that the 1st

Respondent and several others have moved into the said property.

The Petitioner states that, on 9th February 2024 the Petitioner received a Notice on

Creditor dated 1st February 2024 under Section 19A (2) of the Debt Conciliation Board

Ordinance.

The Petitioner further states that the said Debt Conciliation Board application inter alia

purports that, the 1st to 4th Respondents who are the heirs of the said Ilandari Dewage

Sarath Kumarasiri has obtained a secured debt of Rs. 1,000,000/- from the Petitioner and

that it is the Deed marked as P4 that is relevant to the said transaction.

The Petitioner contends that the Deed marked P4 is prescribed and that such deed is not

conditional.

In this context, the Petitioner has invoked the writ jurisdiction of this Court seeking inter

alia a writ of Certiorari to quash the proceedings before the Debt Conciliation Board on

the basis that they have no jurisdiction to hear the matter.

On the other hand, the Respondents raise the preliminary objections that the Petitioner

has failed to exhaust all the alternative remedies.

It is true that the said Deed of Transfer was executed 12 years ago. The 1st Respondent

has gone to the Debt Conciliation Board on the footing that they are in the continuous

possession of the property which was admitted by the Petitioner in paragraph 4 (i) of the

Page 7 of 8

petition. According to the Petitioner, the possession of the property was handed over to

them only on 15th May 2023.

According to Section 19 A of the Debt Conciliation Board Ordinance, states that the debtor

who is in possession of the property which was transferred could make an application

before the Debt Conciliation Board. The fact who is in possession should be decided based

on the evidence. Time and time again, it has often been held that the writ jurisdiction is

not the appropriate forum when matters of fact are in dispute. This is buttressed by the

following authorities.

In Thajudeen v. Sri Lanka Tea Board and Another 1981 (2) SLR 471, His Lordship

Ranasinghe J (as he then was) held;

“That the remedy by way of an application for a Writ is not a proper substitute for

a remedy by way of a suit, specially where facts are in dispute and in order to get

at the truth, it is necessary that the questions should be canvassed in a suit where

the parties would have ample opportunity of examining their witnesses and the

Court would be better able to judge which version is correct, has been laid down in

the Indian cases of: Ghosh v. Damodar Valley Corporation, Parraju v. General

Manager B. N. Rly.”

This judgment was referred to with approval in the case of Dr. Puvanendran v. Premasiri

[2009] 2 SLR 107 by Her Ladyship Shiranee Tilakawardane J (with Their Lordships

Amaratunga J and Marsoof J agreeing).

Further, in Public Interest Law Foundation v. Central Environmental Authority CA

WRIT, 527/2015 decided on 24.02.2020 His Lordship Mahinda Samayawardhena J. held,

“This Court in the exercise of writ jurisdiction cannot decide on administrative

decisions where the facts involved are in dispute. Simply stated, when major facts

are in dispute writ will not lie……This Court cannot decide whether the Petitioner

Page 8 of 8

or the Respondents are correct on this issue. That is outside the purview of this

Court. When this main ground upon which the Petitioner’s whole case is based is

in dispute, can this case be maintained? I think not.”

In the instant application, it is disputed as to who is in possession of the property in

dispute. Therefore, as established above, a writ cannot be issued by this Court in this

instant.

On the other hand, if the Board is satisfied that they are in continuous possession, the

Board should entertain the application of the debtor.

Therefore, we hold that the Petitioner has an alternative remedy available to canvass the

matter before the Board and establish that they are in possession of the property to defeat

the application of the debtor.

For the above-said reasons, we dismiss the application.

No order for cost.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

N. Bandula Karunarathna,J (P/CA)

I AGREE

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL