1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C A (PHC) / 174 / 2012

In the matter of an Appeal under Article

154 P (6) read with Article 138 of the

Constitution against judgment of

Provincial High Court exercising its writ

jurisdiction.

Provincial High Court of

Sabaragamuwa Province (Rathnapura)

Case No. HCR/WA 41/ 2012

Kuruwita Pradeshiya Sabha,

Kuruwita.

PETITIONER - APPELLANT

-Vs-

1. Divisional Secretary,

Before:

2

Divisional Secretariat,

Kuruwita.

RESPONDENT - RESPONDENT

K K Wickremasinghe 1.

P. Padman Surasena 1

Counsel; T weragoda with Chinthaka Sugathapala for the Petitioner -

Appellant.

A Samarasinghe ASA for the Respondent - Respondent.

Decided on: 2017 - 09 - 25

JUDGMENT

P Padman Surasena 1

Learned counsel for all the Parties when this case came up on 2017-07-04

before us, agreed to have this case disposed of by way of written

submissions, dispensing with their necessity of making oral submissions.

They agreed that this Court could pronounce the judgment after

considering the written submissions they would file. Therefore, this

3

judgment is based on the material that has been adduced by parties in

their pleadings and the written submissions.

The Petitioner- Appellant (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the

Appellant) had filed an application in the Provincial High Court of

Sabaragamuwa Province holden at Rathnapura praying for a writ of

certiorari to quash a quit notice issued by the Respondent-Respondent

(hereinafter sometimes referred to as the Respondent) under section 3 of

the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act.

It is the conclusion of the learned Provincial High Court Judge that the

Appellant has failed to satisfy Court that the Provincial High Court has

jurisdiction to issue writs sought.

It is to be observed at the outset that the Supreme Court in the case of

The Superintendent, Stafford Estate and two others Vs. Solaimuthu Rasu1

had clearly held that the jurisdiction conferred on the Provincial High

Courts under Article 154 P 4(b) does not extend to matters in respect of

powers relating to recovery/dispossession encroachment or alienation of

State lands since they are not found in the Provincial Council List (List 1) in

1 2013 (1) Sri. L. R. 25.

4

the 9th Schedule to the 13th amendment to the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Thus, it is now settled law that the Provincial High Court does not possess

jurisdiction to issue under Article 154 P 4(b) writs of this nature in respect

of matters relating to alienation of state lands since such a subject is not

found in the Provincial Council List (List 1) in the 9th Schedule to the 13th

amendment to the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

The judgment pronounced by the Provincial High Court in this case is also

on the same line. Therefore, this Court proceeds to dismiss this appeal with

costs as the point of law sought to be canvassed in this case has been

decided by the Supreme Court.

Appeal is dismissed with costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K K Wickremasinghe J

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL