Page 1 of 14

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for

Revision under and in terms of Article 138 of

the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

The Officer-in-Charge, Unit 5,

Criminal Investigations Department,

Colombo 01.

Court of Appeal COMPLAINANT

Revision Application No:

CA/PHC/APN/0159/2019

Vs.

High Court of Colombo

Revision Application No: Shanthi Kanagasingam

HC RA 37/2019 No.34, Anula Road, Wellawatte.

1ST SUSPECT

Magistrates Court

Colombo Fort Case No:

B/8438/2018 AND BETWEEN

Page 2 of 14

Mercantile Investments and Finance PLC,

No.236, Galle Road, Colombo 03.

ABSOLUTE OWNER-CLAIMANT

Vs.

Shanthi Kanagasingam,

No.34, Anula Road, Wellawatte.

REGISTERED OWNER-SUSPECT-

CLAIMANT

David Pradeepan Saundaranayagam,

75/5/5B, Crescat Residencies,

Galle Road, Colombo 03.

1ST COMPLAINANT-CLAIMANT

AND BETWEEN

Mercantile Investments and Finance PLC,

No.236, Galle Road, Colombo 03.

ABSOLUTE OWNER-CLAIMANT-

PETITIONER

Vs.

Page 3 of 14

01.The Officer-in-Charge, Unit 5,

Criminal Investigations Department,

Colombo 01.

COMPLAINANT-1ST RESPONDENT

02.Shanthi Kanagasingam,

No.34, Anula Road, Wellawatte.

SUSPECT-CLAIMANT-2ND RESPONDENT

03.David Pradeepan Saundaranayagam,

75/5/5B, Crescat Residencies,

Galle Road, Colombo 03.

COMPLAINANT-CLAIMANT-3RD

RESPONDENT

04.The Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

4TH RESPONDENT

AND NOW BETWEEN

Page 4 of 14

David Pradeepan Saundaranayagam,

75/5/5B, Crescat Residencies,

Galle Road, Colombo 03.

COMPLAINANT-CLAIMANT-3RD

RESPONDENT-PETITIONER

Vs.

01.The Officer-in-Charge, Unit 5

Criminal Investigations Department,

Colombo 01.

COMPLAINANT-1ST RESPONDENT-

RESPONDENT

02.Shanthi Kanagasingam,

No.34, Anula Road, Wellawatte.

1ST SUSPECT-CLAIMANT-2ND

RESPONDENT- RESPONDENT

03.Mercantile Investments and Finance

PLC, No.236, Galle Road, Colombo 03.

ABSOLUTE OWNER-CLAIMANT-

PETITIONER-RESPONDENT

Page 5 of 14

04.The Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

4TH RESPONDENT-RESPONDENT

Before : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

: P. Kumararatnam, J.

Counsel : M.M. Zuhair, P.C. with Anjana Ratnasiri and Rizwan

Uwaiz for the Petitioner instructed by Shirin Miskin.

: Harsha Amarasekara, P.C. with Shehan

Gunawardena and Akalanka Ukwatta, Ransith

Gunawardena for the 3rd Respondent.

: Damithri De Silva, S.S.C., for the 1st and 4th

Respondents.

Argued on : 06-02-2024

Written Submissions : 15-02-2024 (By the Absolute owner-Claimant-

Petitioner-Respondent)

: 13-01-2023 (By the Complainant-Claimant-

3rd Respondent-Petitioner)

Decided on : 17-05-2024

Page 6 of 14

Sampath B Abayakoon, J.

This is an application by the complainant-claimant-3rd respondent-petitioner

(hereinafter referred to as the petitioner) seeking to invoke the revisionary

jurisdiction of this Court granted in terms of Article 138 of the Constitution.

When this matter was supported for notice, after having considered the facts and

the circumstances, this Court decided to grant notice to the respondents

mentioned in the application. Although there are several respondents named in

the application, the relevant necessary party in relation to this revision

application is the Mercantile Investments and Finance PLC, the absolute owner-

claimant-petitioner-respondent (hereinafter referred to as the respondent).

The petitioner is seeking to challenge and set aside the judgment pronounced by

the learned High Court Judge of Colombo in exercising the revisionary

jurisdiction granted to the relevant High Court in terms of Article 154P of the

Constitution.

From the impugned judgment dated 18-10-2019, the learned High Court Judge

has set aside the order dated 20-02-2019, pronounced by the learned Magistrate

of Colombo Fort, wherein, the learned Magistrate has ordered that the

possession of the three vehicles produced before the Court, as productions in

Magistrates Court of Colombo Fort Case No. B8438/18, should be released to

the petitioner on a bond, pending the conclusion of the matter. The relevant

vehicles are, vehicle numbers CBA-2325, CBA-5545 and CBC-2325.

After setting aside the above-mentioned order by the impugned judgment, the

learned High Court Judge has directed that, said vehicles should be handed over

to the respondent who is the absolute owner of the vehicles, without any

conditions.

At the hearing of this matter, this Court heard the submissions of the learned

Presidents Counsel on behalf of the petitioner, as well as the submissions of the

learned Presidents Counsel on behalf of the respondent.

Page 7 of 14

Before considering the relevant legal provisions that need to be considered in a

matter of this nature, I find it relevant to briefly summarize matters that led to

the seizure of the earlier mentioned three vehicles from the possession of the

respondent.

The petitioner has made a complaint to the Criminal Investigations Department

(CID) on 16-02-2018 on the basis that the person named in the complaint,

namely, Shanthi Kanagasingam (1st suspect-claiment-2nd respondent-

respondent named in this application) obtained Rs.130 million/- from him and

another person with the promise that she would supply 25 kilograms of gold to

them, and did not honour the agreement. The complaint had been on the basis

that when she failed to honour the agreement to supply gold, she agreed to

return the money and gave several cheques in settlement and the said cheques

were dishonored by the bank and therefore, she committed cheating on them.

It appears from the copy of the Magistrates Court proceedings tendered to this

Court along with this application, the CID has reported facts to the Court on 28-

02-2018 naming the earlier mentioned Shanthi Kanagasingam and one Don

Sujeewa Pradeep Nanayakkara as the suspects in the case. In the initial B report,

the CID has requested the Court to facilitate the calling of relevant bank

statements from several banks in relation to their investigations.

On 11-05-2018, the CID has arrested and produced the earlier mentioned

Shanthi Kanagasingam on the basis that she committed the offence of cheating.

She has been remanded accordingly, and had been granted bail on 26-06-2018.

She has also appeared to have stated to the Court that, she is willing to pay Rs.

130 million/- and she has also given 10 cheques in that regard, which has not

been tendered to the bank for payment as yet, and she is willing to pay the

amount in two weeks time.

Page 8 of 14

On a subsequent date, the 2nd suspect mentioned in the B report has

surrendered to the Court by himself and he has also been released on bail.

It is interesting to note that the CID at no stage of the inquiry up to that date,

has stated about the vehicles that were taken over at a later stage of this case or

has mentioned them as vehicles obtained by using the money obtained through

this transaction between the petitioner and the 1st suspect named in the case.

However, when the matter was mentioned before the learned Magistrate of

Colombo Fort on 7-11-2018, the CID has filed a further report and the learned

Magistrate has allowed them to file their final report as to the investigations in

terms of section 120(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act. Having made the

above order, the learned Magistrate has directed the CID to inquire as to what

happened to the amount cheated, and if there are any properties obtained using

the cheated amount, to take over the properties to the custody of the police.

This appears to have led to the taking into custody of the earlier mentioned three

vehicles from the possession of the respondent company, which is the subject

matter of the application before the Court.

Once the said vehicles were produced before the learned Magistrate of Colombo

Fort, the petitioner, the respondent company, as well as the 1st suspect in the

case has claimed the vehicles.

Accordingly, the learned Magistrate has decided to hold an inquiry in terms of

section 431 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act which stipulates the procedure

that should be followed upon seizure of property taken under section 29 of the

Code or stolen or alleged or suspected to have been stolen or found under

circumstances which create suspicion of the commission of any offence.

After the relevant inquiry, the learned Magistrate of Colombo Fort by his order

dated 20-02-2019 has ordered that all three vehicles should be released to the

petitioner in terms of section 431(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act,

Page 9 of 14

subjected to a bond as stated in the order and under other mentioned conditions.

It has also been ordered that the registered ownership of the vehicle shall also

be transferred to the petitioner.

Against the above-mentioned order, the respondent company has filed an

application in revision before the Provincial High Court of the Western Province

holden in Colombo seeking to challenge the order in terms of Article 154P of the

Constitution.

After having considered the said application and the submissions of the parties

in that regard, the learned High Court Judge of Colombo of his judgment dated

18-10-2019, has set aside the order of the learned Magistrate and had ordered

the release of the vehicles to the respondent company, It has been determined

that the respondent company should be the person to whom the vehicles should

be handed over. However, the learned High Court Judge has not ordered any

security that needs to be furnished by the respondent company.

It is against the said judgment; the petitioner has now come before this Court.

It appears that the learned Magistrate has decided to initiate an inquiry as to the

mentioned vehicles on the basis that the vehicles had been acquired by the 1st

suspect in the case using the money obtained by her from the petitioner, with

the promise of providing 25 kilograms of gold.

Since, this was a situation where the case before the Magistrates Court has not

come to an end, it appears that the purpose of the inquiry had been to determine

in whose custody the said three vehicles which have been produced as

productions, should be kept until the conclusion of the case before the

Magistrates Court.

There had been no dispute that all three vehicles had been taken into custody

by the CID while they were in the possession of the respondent company and

also of the fact that the respondent company was the absolute owner of the said

vehicles.

Page 10 of 14

The respondent company being a company that engages in providing finance

leasing facilities and other related financial services, it was not unusual for the

respondent company to have absolute ownership of such vehicles. The learned

Magistrate has considered the circumstances under which the respondent

company has come to hold the absolute ownership of the vehicles and has

concluded that the 1st suspect has used the money obtained from the petitioner

and another person to purchase the vehicles from two separate companies. It

has been determined that after obtaining the vehicles, she has kept two of the

vehicles as security for a loan obtained from the respondent and had used the

rest of the money obtained from the petitioner to purchase the 3rd vehicle and to

obtain a leasing facility in that regard from the respondent company.

Having drawn his attention to section 425(4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure

Act, the learned Magistrate has determined that the said three vehicles are

properties in relation to the case pending before the Magistrates Court.

The relevant section 425 is the provision, where an inquiry or a trial in any

criminal Court is concluded, the procedure that can be adopted for the disposal

of any document or other property produced before it regarding which any

offence appears to have been committed or which has been used for the

commission of any offence has been stipulated.

Section 425(4) is the subsection where the term property mentioned in section

425(1) has been defined.

For matters of clarity, I will now reproduce the section 425(4), which read as

follows,

425(4) In this section the term property includes in the case of

property regarding which an offence appears have to been committed

not only such property as has been originally in the possession or

under the control of any party but also any property into or for which

Page 11 of 14

the same may have been converted or exchanged and anything

acquired by such conversion or exchange whether immediately or

otherwise.

Although the learned Magistrate has used the interpretation given to the term

property to conclude that the three vehicles produced before the Court falls

under the said interpretation, it clearly appears that the learned Magistrate was

aware that the section 425 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, could only be

invoked once the case before the Court is concluded.

After having considered the facts and the circumstances as reported to the Court

up to that point, the learned Magistrate has concluded that, the fit person to

hold the three vehicles in terms of section 431 of the Code of Criminal Procedure

Act until the final determination of the action would be the petitioner. It has been

so determined on the basis that the 1st suspect mentioned in the B report has

used the money obtained from the petitioner, to purchase these vehicles and

therefore, the vehicles deemed to be the property obtained by using the cheated

sums of money.

When this matter was argued before the learned High Court Judge of Colombo

in the revision application filed by the respondent company challenging the said

determination of the learned Magistrate, the learned High Court Judge has

determined otherwise. It has been determined that there had been no evidence

before the Court to show that the two mentioned vehicles had been purchased

using the money obtained from the petitioner, and the third vehicle has been

obtained after entering into a finance leasing agreement with Mercantile

Investment and Finance PLC, who is the respondent before this Court.

Accordingly, the learned High Court Judge has ordered that, said vehicles

should be handed over to the respondent company.

It is clear from the documents tendered to the Magistrates Court and the

relevant High Court in this regard and the B reports filed before the Magistrates

Court, that the 1st suspect named in the B report namely, Shanthi

Page 12 of 14

Kanagasingam has obtained two vehicles from a vehicle trading company called

Manapperuma Traders by paying cash for those two vehicles.

The said transaction had been done in January 2018, and thereafter the said

vehicles had been registered in the name of the said Shanthi Kanagasingam.

The complaint of cheating has been made to the CID on February 2018, which

has resulted in the CID reporting facts to the Court. It is clear from the facts

reported to the Court that, the dispute was in relation to issuing of cheques by

the 1st suspect in settlement of the relevant transaction between her and the

complainant, which has resulted in the relevant banks dishonouring the

payment for the cheques. The said Shanthi Kanagasingam has obtained a loan

from the respondent company by keeping the said vehicles as security in the

month of April 2018.

As I have stated before, the respondent company being a company duly

registered to engage in such transactions, there is nothing unusual or sinister of

the transactions entered into by the respondent with the said Shanthi

Kanagasingam. It appears that at the same time, the respondent company has

provided finance leasing facility for the said person to obtain the 3rd vehicle

involved in this action which was also within the permitted business activities of

the respondent company.

Therefore, it can be safely determined that the respondent company has entered

into a legally valid transactions with the 1st suspect in the Magistrates Court

case. It appears that since the said 1st suspect in the Magistrates Court case

has failed to pay the amounts due to the respondent company, it has terminated

the agreements they had with the said Shanthi Kanagasingam and had taken

over the vehicles to their custody. This was the reason why the vehicles

mentioned were in the custody of the respondent company, when the CID

informed the said fact to the Court.

Page 13 of 14

It is the view of this Court that, the learned Magistrate should have looked into

the above-mentioned aspects as well, when determining as to who should have

the possession of the vehicles until the final determination of the case.

I am of the view that, if considered in the correct perspective, the vehicles should

have been handed over to the respondent company until the final determination

of the action, rather than to the petitioner of this matter, since the initial

complaint of the petitioner had been one of cheating by issuing cheques without

sufficient funds in the bank.

Accordingly, I find no reason to disagree with the determinations of the learned

High Court Judge in that regard, and the decision to set aside the order of the

learned Magistrate.

However, I am not in agreement with the learned High Court Judges decision to

hand over the vehicles to the respondent company without any conditions, since

the said vehicles should be considered as productions of the Magistrates Court

case until the conclusion of the said case before the Magistrates Court of

Colombo Fort.

Therefore, I hold that, the respondent company shall enter into 3 separate bonds

of Rs. 15 million/-, each in relation to the relevant 3 vehicles, agreeing to produce

them before the Magistrates Court when necessary. The respondent company is

also prevented from handing over the possession of the vehicles or transfer the

ownership without the permission of the learned Magistrate of Colombo Fort.

Subjected to the above variance to the judgment pronounced by the learned High

Court Judge of Colombo, the revision application is dismissed.

The Registrar of the Court is directed to communicate this judgment to the High

Court of Colombo for information.

Page 14 of 14

The Registrar is also directed to forward a copy of this judgment to the

Magistrates Court of Colombo Fort for necessary compliance in relation to

getting the respondent company to enter into the relevant bonds as directed by

this Court.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P Kumararatnam, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal