IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

CA (Writ) Application No. 231/2009

In the matter of an application for

mandates in the nature of Writs of

Certiorari and Prohibition in terms of

Article 140 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Standard Chartered Bank,

No. 37, York Street,

Colombo 1.

PETITIONER

Vs.

1. The Minister of Labour Relations and

Manpower,

Ministry of Labour Relations and

Manpower,

2

nd Floor, Labour Secretariat,

Narahenpita, Colombo 5.

2. The Commissioner General of Labour,

Labour Secretariat,

Narahenpita, Colombo 5.

3. The Secretary,

Ministry of Labour Relations and

Manpower,

2

nd Floor, Labour Secretariat,

Narahenpita, Colombo 5.

1

4. V. Vimalarajah,

No. 153/1, Kirulapone Avenue,

Colombo 5.

5. L.A.S.G.Samarawickrama,

No. 264/2, Dalugama, Kelaniya.

6. A.L. Fernando.

(nee A.L. Kellayar)

7. H.W.N. Weerasekera.

(nee W. Fernando).

8. G.S de Silva.

(nee S.D. Silva).

9. M.S.S. Fernando.

(now deceased)

9A. Nilmini Kumari Fernando.

(nee Nilmini Kumari Batuwitage)

10.R.K.B. Barnabas.

(nee B.R.K. Theogarajah).

11.L.A. Perera.

(nee A.L. Perera).

12.L.L.S de Silva.

All C/o. L.A.S.G. Samarawickrama

No. 264/2, Dalugama, Kelaniya.

RESPONDENTS

2

..

Before:

Counsel:

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J

Sanjeeva Jayawardena, P.C, with Senani Dayaratne for

the Petitioner

Sobitha Rajakaruna, Senior Deputy Solicitor General

for the 1st and 2nd Respondents

Jacob Joseph for the 5th -9th, 11th and 12th

Respondents

Argued on: 3rd September 2018 and 13th September 2018

Written Submissions: Tendered on behalf of the Petitioner on 8th May 2019

Decided on:

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J

Tendered on behalf of the 1st and 2nd Respondents on

5th February 2019

Tendered on behalf of the 5th -9th, 11th and 12th

Respondents on 8th February 2019

1 th July 2019

The Petitioner has filed this application, seeking inter alia a Writ of Certiorari to

quash the decision of the 1st Respondent, Minister of Labour Relations and

Manpower contained in the documents annexed to the petition marked

'X18(a)-(c)' to refer the following dispute for arbitration:

"Whether the 5th - 12th Respondents "whose services were terminated by

the Standard Chartered Bank having treated them as excess staff, are

entitled to receive pension rights from the said bank."

3

The facts of this matter very briefly are as follows.

The Petitioner is a commercial bank licensed by the Monetary Board of Sri

Lanka under the provisions of the Banking Act No. 30 of 1988, as amended, to

carry out banking business in Sri Lanka. The Petitioner states that in September

2000, the Standard Chartered Group had acquired the banking operations of a

bank known as the Grindlays Bank resulting in a global merger of the two

banks. The Petitioner states further that the merger of the banking operations

carried out in Sri Lanka by each of the said banks had been approved by the

Monetary Board. Consequent to the said merger and in order to streamline its

operations, the necessity had arisen for the Petitioner to terminate the

services of certain staff members whose services had become redundant.

Accordingly, the Petitioner had made three applications to the Commissioner

General of Labour in terms of Section 2(1) of the Termination of Employment

of Workmen (Special Provisions) Act No. 45 of 1971, as amended, (TEW Act),

seeking his approval to terminate the services of employees who were working

either at the Petitioner Bank or with the Grindlays Bank. A summary of the said

applications are as follows:

Date of Application Category Number of Employees

9th November 2001 Support Staff 55

19th December 2001 Clerical 26

19th December 2001 Managerial 18

After a lengthy and comprehensive inquiry with the participation of the

employees that lasted for a period of over one year in respect of each

4

application, the Commissioner General of Labour, acting on the

recommendations of Mr. M.N.S.Fernando, Acting Deputy Commissioner of

Labour who had functioned as the Inquiry Officer in all three inquiries, had

granted approval to terminate the services of the said employees, subject to

the payment of compensation as set out in the following table:

Category Approval granted on Compensation

Support Staff 1ih December 2002 6 months' salary for each year of service

Clerical 19th March 2003 4 months' salary for each year of service

Managerial 19th March 2003 4 months' salary for each year of service

While some employees had accepted the compensation that was duly

deposited by the Petitioner with the Commissioner General of Labour, some

other employees including the 5th -1ih Respondents (the Employee

Respondents) had filed Writ Application Nos. 2282/2002/ 1070/20032 and

1080/20033 in this Court seeking to quash the aforementioned decisions of the

Commissioner General of Labour.

With the consent of the parties, the aforementioned three applications had

been taken up for argument together and this Court, by its judgment dated 9th

May 2007, annexed to the petition marked 'X4' had dismissed the three

applications. Although 42 employees had sought Special Leave to Appeal from

the Supreme Court against the said judgment 'X4',4 by an order delivered on

11th February 2008 annexed to the petition marked 'XS', the Supreme Court

1 This application had been filed by S4 Support Staff Grade employees. The 1'", 8'", 11'" and the 12'" Respondents in this application were the 3", 6'", 26'" and 51" Petitioners respectively, in CA 2282/2002.

2 This application had been filed by 19 Clerical Grade employees. The 5'", 6'" and 9'" Respondents in this application were the 13'", 1" and the 2" Petitioners respectively in CA 1070/2003.

3 This application had been filed by 12 Managerial Grade employees. The 10'" Respondent in this application was the 2" Petitioner in CA 1080/2003.

4 SC Special Leave Application Nos. 152 -154/2007.

5

had refused to grant Special Leave to Appeal and all three applications had

been dismissed.

The Petitioner states that it thereafter came to know that the Employee

Respondents had made an application to the Commissioner General of Labour

seeking the following:

(a) pension rights in terms of the Collective Agreement annexed to the

petition marked 'X7';

(b) concessionary rights in respect ofthe housing loans; and

(c) a re-consideration of the modality adopted for the purpose of computing

compensation.

A copy of the said application dated 10th December 2007 has been annexed to

the petition marked 'X9'. The response of the Petitioner has been annexed to

the petition marked 'X10' - 'X12'. The Petitioner states that consequent to an

inquiry, the Commissioner of Labour (Industrial Relations) had arrived at a

decision that there was no merit in the application made by the said

Respondents. The said decision dated 24th July 2008, sent by the said

Commissioner of Labour on behalf of the Commissioner General of Labour has

been annexed to the petition marked 'X14'.

The Petitioner states that even though the Department of Labour had by its

letter 'X14' decided that there is no merit in the application of the Employee

Respondents for a pension, the Minister of Labour had proceeded to make a

6

reference to arbitration, in terms of Section 4(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act

in respect of the aforementioned dispute, namely, "Whether the Employee

Respondents whose services were terminated by the Standard Chartered Bank

having treated them as excess staff are entitled to receive pension rights from

the said bank." The said decision to refer the dispute for arbitration is reflected

in 'X18(aHc)'.

Aggrieved by the decision of the Minister of Labour to refer the said dispute for

arbitration, the Petitioner filed this application seeking a Writ of Certiorari to

quash the said reference and a Writ of Prohibition preventing the Minister of

Labour from invoking the provisions of Section 4(1) of the Industrial Disputes

Act.

The learned President's Counsel for the Petitioner has challenged the said

decision of the Minister on three grounds.

The first ground of challenge is that the entitlement of Employee Respondents

to a pension has already been agitated by the Employee Respondents before

the Commissioner General of Labour when the application was made under

the TEW Act, as well as in the aforementioned three Writ Applications and, as

a determination has been made with regard to all matters agitated in those

applications including the pension rights of the Employee Respondents, the

Minister could not have made a reference in respect of a matter that had

already been considered and decided by this Court as well as by the Supreme

Court.

7

It is the view of this Court that considerations of public policl would prevent

an issue, once determined, from being re-agitated by the parties before

different fora, at different times. An individual has the right to be protected

from vexatious multiplication of suits and prosecutions at the instance of an

opponent6, and there must be a finality to litigation, whatever the status may

be of the parties involved. To continue to re-agitate an issue, once determined

by a Court of law would also be an abuse of process.

A consideration of the first argument of the learned President's Counsel

requires this Court to examine the proceedings before the Inquiry Officer, this

Court and the Supreme Court.

As noted earlier, there were three inquiries that were conducted by the

Commissioner General of Labour. This Court has examined the proceedings

conducted before Mr. M.N.5.Fernando, Acting Deputy Commissioner of Labour

in respect of the Support Staff/ and finds that the following references

demonstrate that the issue of pension had been agitated by the Employee

Respondents at the inquiry:

1. Page 123 - Submission of the learned President's Counsel who appeared

for the employees that, "The pension is a terminal benefit. That is a relief

we are claiming in this proceedings. I am instructed that the Audited

Statement of Accounts would show the financial pOSition of the Bank and

that they have the necessary resources to pay pensions to these poor

people."

5 Expressed in the maxim interest (or expeditj reipublicae ut sit/inislitium.

6 Expressed in the maxim nemo debet bis vexari pro una et eadem causa.

7 The case record in CA (Writ) Application No. 2282/2002 has been annexed to the petition marked 'Zl(a)'.

8

2. Pages 203 - 205 - Cross examination of the Bank witness by Counsel for

the employee respondents:

Q -An important financial benefit that Bank employees have at the

Standard Chartered Bank and Standard Chartered Grindlays Bank is

the payment of a pension?

A-Yes.

Q -A pension in this country is normally paid to the Government

employees only?

A-Yes.

Q -The payment of pension in the private sector is an unusual feature in

this country?

A -In the banking sector, most banks pay pension.

Q -And persons would have joined the Standard Chartered Bank and the

Standard Chartered Grindlays Bank because they were attracted by a

pension scheme?

A -I don't know.

Q - This pension scheme is payable to the employees concerned?

9

A -Employees are eligible to a pension when they reach the required age.

Q -And that pension is a life time payment?

A -Yes.

Q - There is a provision in that to commute the payment of a monthly

pension to payment of a commuted amount?

A -Yes.

Q -In your VRS,8 that benefit is just written off?

A -It is not."

3. Pages 230 - 232 - Cross examination of the Bank witness by Counsel for

the employee respondents:

"Q - Will you agree with me that if you take the case of Mr. Kahaduwa if

he is allowed to stay in service till his retirement age, he would have

earned not only the amount that you have mentioned as Rs.

2,176,229 he would also acquire a right to get a pension?

A -If he stayed (till) 55 years yes.

'The Petitioner had initially offered a Voluntary Retirement Scheme (VRS) to the employees. The application under Section 2(1) of the TEW Act was made only with regard to those employees who did not accept the VRS.

10

Q -Can you please assist the Tribunal by saying in the Banking sector

what portion of his terminal salary is generally paid as pension?

A -According to the formula 60%.

Q -As a result of your attempt to terminate their services you are trying

to deprive them of that benefit also?

A -I cannot comment on that.

Q - You will agree that people joined the banking sector purely because of

the attraction of the pension?

A -Some may do.

Q - If you look at your audit statements of accounts you will find that

every year the Banks, Standard Chartered Bank as well as Standard

Chartered Grindlays Bank have contributed a certain sum of money

to what is known as a Pension Fund?

A -Yes.

Q -That is to pay a pension to these people?

A -That is to pay pension when they reached age of 55 years."

11

The above evidence demonstrates that the employees have quite rightly raised

all issues that have a bearing on the compensation payable to them, at the

inquiry.

It is therefore clear to this Court that the issue of pension has been raised by

the Support Staff at the inquiry before the Commissioner of Labour, and to

that extent, the position taken up the learned President's Counsel for the

Petitioner is correct.

The crucial factor is whether the Inquiry Officer considered the question of

pension when he arrived at his determination that each employee in the

Support Staff must be paid 6 months' salary as compensation for each year of

service.

It is an admitted fact that the Employee Respondents rejected the Voluntary

Retirement Scheme (VRS) offered to them. Thus, when the Petitioner made its

application on 9th November 2001 to the Commissioner General of Labour

under Section 2(1) of the TEW Act, it sought approval for the payment of the

following compensation package, which had been offered to the employees

under the VRS:

Age Number of months' salary for Number of months' salary for

group each completed year of each year of future service upto

service the age of 55

Below 30 1 0

yea rs

30 -40 2 0.5

years

12

40 to SO 3 0.5

years

SO and 2 2

above

In order to consider whether the Inquiry Officer has considered the issue of

pension in arriving at his decision, this Court has examined the

recommendation of Mr. M.N.S.Fernando, Acting Deputy Commissioner of

Labour which had been filed by the Commissioner General of Labour in CA

(Writ) Application No. 2282/2002, marked 'lRl,9 and observes that the Inquiry

Officer has in fact done so, as borne out by the following excerpts from the

said Report:

Sc:l@ ~~ ~e)~~e)esS @c.'mll~ Cl~e5&l) ~ lf~6\ Q)e)ol, 00 lf~1IWl

e)~ge5 Clei) ~eD1:llol ~eD) ~Gle)eD Q)e)ol, ~&l) e)~gea IfOlOe) 8&:DJCJlO ~eD>e)

Q)~01:lle) E)SesS ~~lSOl e)~ 1!lJ c:X)~ol GlioesS ~= lf~6\ Q)e)ol &) lf~Ol . Clll&

@elgo lf~e) E)elW ~eD~ ~de)tllClesS e5&l) ~oio Q)e)ol ~ lfOlO e@ ~)c:lD

8\e))Q ~,lf~) ~, e)JeOO) ~ ~~@ @Q ~eD Q)e)ol lf~Olt~~ GlesS ~

e)~8\ Clei)eD ol&~&110 e5&ll lf~6\ Q)e)ol, ~ ClGl ElQQ 10 tD Clei) ~Cl lf~~~ 50

@tDe)eD ~ ~~~1:llO ~dio ~ e)~Slo&110 eil&ll lf~6\ Q)e)ol &) 00. "

Q)~0l:ll ~~&l) ~e)~~ ~~~ Clei)6\~ @~aool &l)0 ClClS~esS ~&ll Cl)ClStllO~

~e)6\esS @Ol) ~f, ~@Cl ~eD 10 oilXl &l)@OO ~c:!el&ll o~ E)SesS C5lOd QciilXl

elCl~ @~Q)e). @esS ~f, &l)@~tD ~~~ Cleil6\&llOO e)@oCl;!eil~ SQ)~e) ~esS

~~esSo e5 ~eD) lf~q)@ol e)~Sld 1!lJ~, ~ e)~ge5 1!lJ~ Clei) Q)~01:lle)@ @leil

'The Statement of Objections has been annexed to the petition marked 'Zl(c)'.

13

(f@Jeil Ci)~ {f~t1l@oI l@15 elclolo Clltil~ QG$ilv 6B t:l@Q roo QG$ilv (f~

CllJ@c.:l t:l~c.:l elc.:l.

l @@@ OQ)c.:l ClQles!e;:)@oo lc:!e)Cl) O~c.:l oa~e!lc.:l ~J <;,00) C6l~t:ld

<;'~e!l @~l~ I!lO~ <;'~e!lC) ltll6i ~e!l t:lOQClJ<;' It:lJ <;,~ClSelC)oI ~ {f00

(j)~es!C) l5l&ll (f~6i ~J t:l~gcl 8lCll Q!5) ~J mes!e!lJ I!lm~ <;'~J

C=Jmm13)l;6 @eXM1 S@Ql(.t:l OO~~ @~aool tSlB Ci)es! l!lelrnCld mes!e!lJ ~. ~

ClQl~lOO milvellc.:l tSlB 00 oa~ilvc.:l Q(.e!lJ @~aooI tSlB SItOOl ll<;'~ ~ o~l!lcd @@@ m Cl)C)r.it1l 6BC) Q)~0tll <SlJClSoo~ ~Cl)(M)Je) OSI!lCll)C) ~

elQOO ~aool OOe!l @~. oa~ilvl~ @~ool ~ <SlJClS {f~ ~J t:l~gcl 8lel

Q(.C5)J tSlSc.:l lCllJeD~S ~J@ {ft:l<sl15 lt:le!l (fmO 1!l0000JeDm 8l&ll m~

6BI!l~ tSlSc.:l I!lOe>t:llcotll ~J mes!e!lJ @~C5 ~e!lOO O<;,ell I!lCll)C) ~6 ~J@c.:lO

8lelc.:l (5)~6 8lCll Cl(5) t:lOQClJ<;' W@@ ~@t$@@C) I!lme!l l@I5c.:l (fJCllJC~

~Jeil tSlB ClJWJCilv Cl(5) ~6i Q!5)mm ~l!lel<;,OO 1!le!lJlel.

~ l!lellt1lI!lCllJC) (j)~es!lcs5 8elm oC)Je)<;, (5)~IDm~Qel {f~oII!lol ~ {fl,;!lt:l Q)t:l ~

t$(3 t:l~O~ 1!le!lJlel. ~ lt:le!lol ~m@Cll (fo<Sll!lcd l!lot:lJ ~6ic.:lCl)C) ClJJellI5I!lOO

l5l 1!le!lJe)e!l ~ t:l~goCl)C) <;, 8lc.:lm I!lCllJeDl~S ~J@I!les! (fe!l~t:l ~es!C)

l5l&ll {f~m . l I!l~ (ft1lC5es! t:l~6) l!lot:lJ CllJ@c.:l t:lClO 22 t:le!l {f00 (f~

1!l0000J CllJ@c.:l t:lClC 06 ~ I!lel. ~Q el~ El~goe 8l&ll @~mC) l l~

55 1!l<;'e!lJ (ft1lC5es! l5lCll @~I!lQ)I,;!llcd 03 l<;,le!ltll El~81 @mJ Sm CloQll5Je:JCl)C) oill.

l0t:lc.:l (f8lel t1l@es! t:l~6) SC5ClCllC) ~6 t:lOQClJ<;,c.:l<;, (f8l el ~@6@@C) mm r.it1l

Q)t:l mt:lol oo~ilvtSl .

I!l w@ OO~~ ~@6@@C) m81es! w@ I!l~ ClJWJCiloI Q!5) ~6i

Q!5)mm~oI t:l~ l<;,@ ~Jilvc.:l~ I!lmt:lJ Q)~0tll elSes! {f6iC5~m l~ I!l@Cl

~e!lJlme!l I!l @@@ OQ)c.:l mes! @~C5ool 00 1!l~lcs5 1!l0Ele.:l (ft:lCles!

tSlC5C) {f1,;!l~6ic.:l @Q)J~ 8lOO~<Sl OOe!l {fmo ~ {fl,;!lt:l ~ I!l~ ~ilv 00

(f~6i Qt ~ilv l!lot:lJ t:lClO~ I!lt:ll,;!ll!lt:les! JCl =tD (6) t:l~go Q@Jell ~ l<;,@~

1!lcsX)oI 1!l0000J l!lc.:lldCll Q)~0tll l<;'CllC) 8llc.:llde!lc.:l tSlBC)oI ~I!lO I!lCSleJ tSlC51!les! og)

~es!I!lcs5 1!l0Ele.:l {ft:lCles! 6O Cl<;,(5)J {f1,;!l~6ic.:l @Q)J~C)oI 8lOO~<Sl OO."

14

In the above circumstances, this Court is satisfied that the Acting

Commissioner of Labour who conducted the inquiry has taken into

consideration the entitlement of a pension, when he arrived at his decision

that an employee in the Support Staff must be paid 6 months' salary as

compensation for each year of service, as opposed to the 1-4 months that was

proposed by the Petitioner.

This Court has examined the petition filed by the th, 8th, 11th and 12th

Respondents, who were employees of the Support Staff, in Writ Application

No. 2282/2002 challenging the decision of the Commissioner General of

Labour, and observes that the said Respondents had specifically adverted to

their entitlement to a pension in paragraph 27 thereof. One can only assume

that an argument relating to the non-consideration of the right to a pension

was in fact advanced by the Employee Respondents, since it was pleaded in the

said application.

Be t hat as it may, it appears that this Court did not see any merit in the

arguments advanced on behalf of the Employee Respondents as all three

applications were dismissed by this Court. It is the view of this Court that the

issue relating to pension and all issues arising from and relating to the

termination of the services of the Employee Respondents came to a close after

the refusal of Special Leave to Appeal by the Supreme Court.

This Court will now consider if the position with regard to the Managerial Staff

is identical to the Support Staff. This Court has examined the proceedings

before the Inquiry Officer, particularly pages 70 and 77-81, and observes that

the issue of pension had been extensively agitated by the said employees. This

15

Court has examined the decision of the Inquiry Officer annexed to the

Statement of Objections of the Commissioner General of Labour in CA(Writ)

Application No. 1080/2003 marked '2R3' and observes that the Inquiry Officer

has referred to the fact that the bank employee had been extensively cross

examined for more than 10 days by the Counsel for the workers and the Bank

Unions on "factors which could be treated as information of vital importance

to arrive at a reasonable and justifiable decision on this application" and that in

testifying at the inquiry, the said witness had disclosed the fact that

employees, once entitled, receive a pension for life. The Inquiry Officer had

also observed that the witness, under re-examination stated that in order to

become eligible for pension rights, workers will have to satisfy two

requirements, namely that they should reach the retirement age, and have 10

yea rs of service.

At pages 18 and 19 of '2R3', the Inquiry Officer has observed as follows:

"It is also very important to bear in mind that however much the reasons

attributed for the restructuring process are justifiable, the workers who

would lose their jobs in the process cannot be held responsible since it is

of no fault of theirs. It is a situation exclUSively created by an act of their

employers for their own betterment which would lead to deprive the

workers and their families, the lifestyle they would have enjoyed with

high emoluments they received in the past. At the same time, some of

these workers would have to forego their pension rights at this juncture,

consequent to the termination of employment prematurely.

16

In terms of the primary objectives of the Termination of Employment Act,

the Commissioner with an open, impartial, unbiased mind should take

into consideration all the relevant facts that had been highlighted in the

course of the inquiry by both parties in making a reasonable and

justifiable order adhering to the fundamentals of fair play.

Taking all the aforementioned factors and the findings at the inquiry held

in regard to this application, it is recommended that an order may be

made to pay 4 months' salary for each completed year of service with an

upper limit of 90 months' salary to each workman remaining in service

and grant approval to the banks to retrench them."

In these circumstances, it is the view of this Court that the Deputy

Commissioner of Labour who conducted the inquiry was mindful of the

repercussions that the employees would have to suffer by an order approving

the termination of their services and their loss of pension, and that it had a

bearing on his decision with regard to the award of compensation.

Similarly, this Court observes that in the petition in CA (Writ) Application No.

1080/2003, filed by the Managerial Staff, the loss of pension rights has been

pleaded in paragraph 16(c).

In CA (Writ) Application No. 1070/2003, filed by the Clerical Staff, this Court

observes that even though the Statement of Objections of the Commissioner

General of Labour has been annexed to the petition marked 'Z2!c)', the said

objections do not contain a copy of the report of the Inquiry Officer. However,

in paragraph 14(g) thereof, the 2nd Respondent has specifically pleaded that

17

the compensation awarded adequately compensates the said workmen,

having regard to the circumstances relevant to them. What is significant

however is that the averment of the employees in paragraph 2S(c) of the

petition in CA (Writ) Application No. 1070/2003 that the Commissioner

General of Labour failed to take into account the pension rights of the

employees has been specifically denied in the aforementioned Statement of

Objections and the affidavit of the Commissioner General of Labour. In these

circumstances, this Court is at a loss to understand how the Commissioner

General of Labour can affirm an affidavit in this application subscribing to a

cont rary position than that taken in the previous three applications. It is

perhaps worth ment ioning at this stage that in attempting to justify the

reference to arbit rat ion, the Commissioner General of Labour has completely

ignored the findings of his own Deputy Commissioner of Labour who

conducted t he inquiry under the TEW Act, and his own affidavit filed before

this Court in CA (Writ) Application Nos. 2282/02, 1070/03 and 1080/03.

In t he above circumstances, this Court is in agreement with the first ground

urged by the learned President's Counsel for the Petitioner that the issue of

the eligibility of the Employee Respondents to a pension did form the subject

matter of the inquiry that was conducted by the Department of Labour under

the TEW Act and that it has in fact been considered in the determination of

compensation payable to the Employee Respondents. Hence, it is the view of

this Court that t he Employee Respondents cannot have a second bite at the

'pension pie' through a reference to arbitration.

18

The second ground that was raised by the learned President's Counsel for the

Petitioner, is that the Minister's decision to refer the said dispute, in the above

circumstances, is irrational and arbitrary.

In order to consider the said ground, it would be important for this Court to

examine the relevant provisions of the law which empower the Minister to

make a reference to arbit ration under Section 4(1).

Sect ion 4(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act reads as follows:

"The Minister may, if he is of the opinion that an industrial dispute is a

minor dispute, refer it, by an order in writing, for settlement by

arbitration to an arbitrator appointed by the Minister or to a labour

tribunal, notwithstanding that the parties t o such dispute or their

representatives do not consent to such reference."

It is the view of this Court that in terms of Section 4(1}, the Minister must form

the opinion that t here exists an industrial dispute, prior to making any

reference of such dispute for resolution by arbitration. This Court is further of

the view that where such a reference is challenged, as in this application, the

Minister must explain the matters that were considered by him in forming such

an opinion, or, as submitted by the learned President's Counsel for the

Petitioner, that the "Minister had applied a judicial mind or even an objective

mind, or with all due deference a sensible mind to the matter".

This Court has already discussed in detail the manner in which the issue of

pension arose during the inquiry and the manner in which the Inquiry Officer

19

considered the said issue. When the Employee Respondents raised the issue of

a pension once again through 'X9', the Commissioner of Labour, having

conducted an inquiry, communicated through the letter 'X14' dated 24th July

2008, the following decision:

"~cS.~.e>c:S.8. Cl~ eila)) c:xs> c:lDtoSc:lEl ElJ6C)6) !:i),o~ CfQ)O

oe>05em 1Illld@1Ill CfJ~@

~~O~ e&S @~0005 !IllC (f~51 !IllC~1fJl 8~!:i)~El Cll~ooal5S Cf{;)~ ~. ~ (fI!!)El

~ er~@ ~~!IllCi'Xlc.Xl @C)~ 6<.3a t1)c:l@Q)) ~6)J~51 00 1IllJ~~ ~e!le)"

The reference to arbitration was made thereafter by 'X1S(a)-(c)'1O. It is the

position of the Petitioner that it has not been informed as to what transpired

between the issuance of 'X14' and 'X1S(a)'. This Court must therefore look at

the Statement of Objections filed on behalf of the Minister of Labour and the

Commissioner General of Labour in order to ascertain the reasons that

prompted the Minister to make the said reference to arbitration by 'X1S(c)'.

In paragraph 11 of the Statement of Objections, the Respondents have stated

as follows:

"(i) The 1st Respondent together with the 2nd Respondent were satisfied

that the appeal marked as X9 contained reasonable grounds to refer

the dispute mentioned therein to an arbitrator under Clause 4(1) of

the Industrial Disputes Act.

10 'X18(aj' is dated 3" February 2009, while 'X18(b) and (cj' are dated 13" February 2009.

20

(ii) In referring the dispute mentioned in the appeal marked as X9, the

following grounds, inter alia that submitted by the relevant

employees were taken into consideration:

a) In terms of clause 17 of the said collective agreement those

employees were entitled for a pension after reaching the age of

55.

b) Those employees were compulsorily terminated by the

Petitioner bank on the issue of excess staff while they were

ready to be in service until their retirement age.

c) The termination of the services of the respective employees

was not due to any request made by them and it was fair and

reasonable to consider their capability of serving the Petitioner

until their age of retirement.

d) Several clerical and minor staff who were eligible in terms of the

Thalagodapitiya award have been given the pension rights.

(iii) The subject dispute has been referred to the Arbitrator merely for

the interest of justice and also for the purpose of enabling the

arbitrator to ascertain all the facts and material in view of making a

just and equitable order."

21

Several issues arise from the above explanation. The first is, the 1st and 2nd

Respondents have only considered 'X9' and have not considered 'X10', 'XU'

and 'X12', inspite of admitting the receipt of 'X10', 'XU' and 'X12' and inspite

of the said documents being available to the 1st and 2nd Respondents. This

Court is of the view that in terms of Section 4(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act,

the Minister is not obliged to refer for arbitration, each and every dispute that

he or she is presented with. The Minister must look at each request objectively

and exercise his discretion judiciously. The fact that the Minister has a

discretion is clearly established when one considers that the Minister may

refer for arbitration only if, "he is of the opinion that an industrial dispute is a

minor dispute". How does he form an opinion that there exists an industrial

dispute and that such dispute is a minor dispute? Is it only by considering the

argument advanced by the employee or should the Minister also consider the

position of the employer, as well as any other matters that the Minister may

consider relevant? This Court, whilst not subscribing to the view that it is

mandatory for the Minister to obtain the views of all parties prior to making a

reference under Section 4(1), takes the view that in this application, given the

background circumstances such as the inquiry under the TEW Act, and the

litigation challenging the findings of the Inquiry Officer, the Minister was under

a duty to consider the documents 'X10', 'XU' and 'X12' prior to forming an

opinion that there exists an industrial dispute. Unfortunately, the Minister has

not done so, and therefore it is the view of this Court that the Minister has

failed to take into consideration relevant matters, prior to arriving at a

decision.

The learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General for the 1st and 2nd Respondents

had submitted that in terms of Section 4(1), the consent of the parties is not

22

required for a reference and that this is an indication that the Minister does

not have to consult the other party, prior to making the reference to

arbitration. Whilst agreeing that the consent of the parties is not required, this

Court is of the view that this is not an indication that the Minister is not

required to address his mind in a judicial manner. If this Court may borrow the

language used by the Supreme Court in Municipal Council Colombo vs

Munasinghell with reference to the power of an arbitrator appointed under

the Industrial Disputes Act, the Minister or for that matter, no public official

'has the freedom of the wild horse' to do whatever he or she wants to. All

exercise of statutory duties and functions must be within the four corners of

the statute that confers such duties and functions, and any transgression will

be dealt with in terms of the law.

There is one other matter that this Court would like to advert to, which is the

submission of the learned Counsel for the Employee Respondents that the

Minister is only exercising a ministerial function when he makes a reference to

arbitration, and that his decision cannot therefore be questioned by this

Court.12

This issue was considered by this Court in Frewin and Company Limited vs Dr.

Ranjith Atapattu and others13 where it was held as follows:

"Finally, I have to consider the submission of learned Senior State Counsel

that the order of reference to arbitration made by the Minister is not in

11 71 NLR 223 at page 225. Referred to with approval in Standard Chartered Grindlays Bank Limited vs The Minister of Labour [SC Appeal No. 22/2003; SC Minutes of 4'h April 2008J.

12 See the judgment of this Court in Chas P. Hayley and Company Limited vs Commercial and Industrial Workers and others ((1995) 2 Sri LR 42J.

13 (1993) 2 Sri LR 53.

23

any event subject to review in an application for a Writ of Certiorari.

Learned Senior State Counsel sought to support this submission on the

judgment of Pathirana, J. in the case of Aislaby Estate Ltd. vs

Weerasekera.

14 In that case a reference to arbitration was sought to be

quashed on the basis inter alia, that the Minister had previously decided

that the dispute should not be referred to arbitration.

Pathirana, J. characterised the act of the Minister in making an order of

reference under section 4 (1) of the Industrial Disputes Act as an

administrative act and observed that "the court cannot objectively review

that decision". (p250). At a later stage in the judgment (p254) the finding

in the case is stated as follows:

"I, therefore, hold that the Minister's decision under Section 4 (1) in the

circumstances of this case and his reference dated 15th April 1968 to the

Labour Tribunal (V) for settlement by arbitration cannot be questioned by

the Court, and is a valid decision."

It is seen from this finding that the judgment in the case does not go so

far as to hold that a reference made by the Minister under section 4 (1) is

not subject to review even in a situation where the Minister has acted

ultra vires. Furthermore, the finding is specifically that in the

circumstances of that case the Minister's decision is valid. On the other

hand, in the case of Nadaraja Ltd. vs N.Krishnadasana 15 bench of three

judges of the Supreme Court issued a Writ of Certiorari quashing a second

reference made by the Minister to another arbitrator, at a time when

14 77 NlR 241.

15 78 NlR 255.

24

earlier reference made in respect of the same dispute was pending.

Sharvananda, J. (as he then was) held that the second reference was

"invalid in law as being in excess of the powers of the Minister." (p264).

The description of the order of reference by the Minister as an

administrative act by Pathirana. J. in the Aislaby Estate case (supra), does

not have the effect of removing it altogether from the pale of judicial

review. As noted by Sharvananda, J. in Krishnadasan's case "though the

order of reference under section 4 (1) may be administrative in

motivation, yet the order, according to the scheme of the Act, is designed

to eventuate by a quasi-judicial process, in an award potent with

consequences to the parties". (p261). The decision in that case is

authority for the proposition that an order of the Minister referring a

dispute to arbitration, made under section 4 (1), is subject to judicial

review on the ground that it is ultra vires."

The view already taken by this Court that the decision of the Minister under

Section 4(1) is subject to judicial review is fortified by the above judgment of

this Court.

The second issue that arises from the explanation offered in the Statement of

Objections is that the 1st and 2nd Respondents seem to be completely oblivious

to the fact that the Commissioner General of Labour himself had conducted an

inter partes inquiry into the application filed by the Petitioner under the TEW

Act seeking approval to terminate the services of the Employee Respondents,

and that such approval was granted only because the Commissioner General of

Labour himself was satisfied that the Employee Respondents were excess staff.

This fact is evident when one considers the Statement of Objections filed by

25

the Commissioner General of Labour in the previous three Writ applications

where he justified the decision to terminate the services of the employees

under the TEW Act.

The third and most crucial issue that arises from the said explanation is that it

is none other than a Commissioner of Labour himself that considered the

question of whether approval for the termination of the services of the

Employee Respondents should be granted and that the issues relating to the

entitlement to a pension was infact considered extensively by the said

Commissioner. It is perhaps worth reiterating that the approval to terminate

the services of the Employee Respondents was granted on the condition that

compensation at the rate of 4-6 months' salary for each year of completed

service must be paid and that in doing so, the Commissioner of Labour has

infact taken into consideration the very matters that have now been offered as

the reasons that led to the issuance of 'X18(a)-(c):

This Court also observes that the 1st and 2nd Respondents while admitting 'X14'

have stated that they "were satisfied that there were reasonable grounds to

refer the subject dispute to an arbitrator on the subsequent appeal made by

the relevant Respondents." The Respondents have however not produced this

subsequent appeal to this Court and the explanation offered in paragraph 11

of the Statement of Objections does not contain any reference to any

subsequent appeal but is limited to 'X9'. The Employee Respondents have

submitted with their Statement of Objections, three letters marked 'SR7(A)' -

'SR7(C)' said to have been sent by them to the Minister of Labour and the

Secretary, Ministry of Labour, after the issuance of 'X14'. This Court has

examined the said three letters and observes that the Employee Respondents

26

have specifically submitted that their right to a pension was not considered

during the inquiry, which is not correct, as illustrated above. In the absence of

any explanation from the Minister to this Court, this Court cannot conclude

that the Minister was influenced by these letters, but if he was, then it is clear

that he had acted under a misapprehension of the factual circumstances.

What is most significant however, is the failure on the part of the Minister to

have affirmed by way of an affidavit to the matters that prompted the

reference. When the decision of the Minister to make a reference to

arbitration is challenged and the law requires the Minister to form an opinion

prior to making such a reference, shouldn't the Minister have filed an affidavit

explaining the basis for his opinion? Is an affidavit from the Commissioner

General of Labour sufficient? Or is the filing of a Statement of Objections on

behalf of the Minister sufficient? It is the view of this Court that the Minister

ought to have filed an affidavit disclosing the basis on which he formed his

opinion. An affidavit from the Minister, supported by cogent reasons for the

reference, would have satisfied this Court that the Minister in fact did give his

mind to the issue, as opposed to merely placing his signature on one among

several documents that are routinely submitted to a minister for his signature.

Furthermore, this Court must observe that the 1st and 2nd Respondents have

not filed any contemporaneous documents that would demonstrate the

decision making process that eventually led to 'X18(aHc)'.

Taking into consideration all of the above matters, can it be said that the

Minister has acted reasonably? Or, as articulated by Lord Diplock in Council of

Civil Service Unions v Minister for the Civil Service16 is the said decision "so

" [198SJ AC 374.

27

outrageous in its defiance of logic or of accepted moral standards that no

sensible person who had applied his mind to the question to be decided could

have arrived at it?" For the reasons set out earlier in this judgment, this Court

must state that any reasonable person who had applied his mind to the facts of

this application and especially the evidence led before the inquiry conducted

under the TEW Act could not have formed an opinion that there now existed

an industrial dispute17 between the parties relating to the payment of a

pension that required a reference to arbitration. In these circumstances, this

Court is of the view that the decision contained in 'X18(a}-(c)' is unreasonable

and irrational and is liable to be quashed by a Writ of Certiorari.

The third ground urged by the learned President's Counsel for the Petitioner

was that in any event, the Petitioners are not entitled to a pension and that the

Minister has failed to consider this fact, at the time he issued 'X18(c)'. It is the

view of this Court that Section 4(1) would require the Minister to be satisfied

at least on a prima facie basis that the Employee Respondents were entitled to

a pension at the time he formed an opinion on the existence of an industrial

dispute.

The eligibility of the Employee Respondents to a pension arises in terms of the

Collective Agreement dated 15th May 2000 annexed to the petition marked

'X7' that nine licensed commercial banks including the Petitioner have entered

into with the Ceylon Bank Employees Union.

17 Industrial Dispute has been defined in Section 48 of the Industrial Disputes Act as "any dispute or difference between an employer and a workman or between employers and workmen or between workmen and workmen connected with the employment or non-employment, or the terms of employment, or with the conditions of labour, or the termination of the services, or the reinstatement in service, of any person, and for the purpose ofthis definition "workmen" includes a trade union consisting of workmen";

28

Clause 17(a) of 'X7' reads as follows:

"An employee shall, upon reaching the retirement age of the Bank and

who is in the permanent employment of the Bank at such time, and shall

have completed not less than 10 years of actual continuous service

(excluding absence/leave without pay), be entitled to a monthly pension

It is not in dispute that the Employee Respondents were 48, 42, 46, 42, 46, 41,

39 and 41 years of age respectively, at the time the Commissioner General of

Labour granted approval to terminate their services under the provisions of

the TEW Act. Thus, it is clear that the Employee Respondents did not serve the

Petitioner until they reached the age of 55 years and that they have failed to

satisfy two of the criteria laid down in Clause 17(a) of 'X7'. Thus, on the face of

it, the Employee Respondents were not entitled to a pension.

The 1st and 2nd Respondents have stated in their Statement of Objections that

in terms of clause 17 of the Collective Agreement, the employees were entitled

for a pension after reaching the age of 55. While this is true, what the 1st and

2nd Respondents have failed to consider is that an employee must be in service

at the time he reaches the age of retirement in order to be entitled to a

pension. While it is also true that the premature termination of services

deprived the Employee Respondents of their entitlement to a pension, the

Minister has failed to consider (a) that the issue of the pension was in fact

raised by the Employee Respondents before the Inquiry Officer; (b) that the

Commissioner of Labour did in fact take into consideration the pension that

the Employee Respondents would have been entitled to, if not for the

premature termination of their services, in deciding the quantum of

29

compensation; (c) that the entitlement to a pension has been considered in

the computation of the compensation payable; and (d) that the said premature

termination was approved by the Commissioner General of Labour.

In the said circumstances, this Court is of the view that the reasons adduced in

paragraph 11 of the Statement of Objections as being the grounds that

prompted a reference to arbitration has not addressed the factual situation

that prevailed at the time the reference was made. This Court is of the view

that the failure by the Minister to take into consideration the above matters

renders the decision of the Minister ultra vires and illegal. The following

passage from Administrative law by Wade and Forsyth 18 illustrates the above

position clearly:

"There are many cases in which a public authority has been held to have

acted from improper motives or upon irrelevant considerations, or to

have failed to take account of relevant considerations, so that its action is

ultra vires and void ....

Lord Esher MR stated the 'irrelevant considerations' doctrine in a case

where a vestry had mistakenly fixed the pension of a retiring officer on

the erroneous assumption that they had no discretion as to the amount19:

"But they must fairly consider the application and not take into account

any reason for their decision which is not a legal one. If people who

have to exercise a public duty by exercising their discretion take into

account matters which the courts consider not to be proper for the

18 11" Edition, page 323.

19 R v. St. Paneras Vestry (1890) 24 QBD 371 at 375.

30

...

exercise of their discretion, then in the eye of the law they have not

exercised their discretion."

The doctrine applies equally to failure to take account of some

consideration which is necessarily relevant..."

This Court is therefore in agreement with the submission of the learned

President's Counsel that the Minister failed to take into consideration relevant

matters when he made the reference to arbitration and that this failure

renders his decision liable to be quashed by a Writ of Certiorari.

In the above circumstances this Court is of the view that the decision of the

Minister of Labour to make a reference to arbitration of the issues set out in

'X1Sla) -Ie)' is irrational and unreasonable and is therefore liable to be

quashed by a Writ of Certiorari. Accordingly, this Court proceeds to issue the

Writs of Certiorari sought in paragraphs (c) and (d) of the prayer to the petition

to quash the reference to arbitration in 'X1Sla) -Ie)' and the Writ of

Prohibition sought in paragraph (e) of the prayer to the petition. This Court

makes no order with regard to costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

31