Page 1 of 11

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of

section 331 (1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No- 15 of 1979, read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Court of Appeal No: Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

CA/HCC/0392/19 COMPLAINANT

Vs.

High Court of Colombo 1. Dilan Dewinda Kolambage

Case No: HC/8090/2015 2. Mapitigamage Don Hasitha Sidantha

Mapitigama

ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

1. Dilan Dewinda Kolambage

2. Mapitigamage Don Hasitha Sidantha

Mapitigama

ACCUSED-APPELLANTS

Vs.

Page 2 of 11

The Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12

RESPONDENT

Before : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

: P. Kumararatnam, J.

Counsel : Saliya Pieris, P.C. with Geeth Karunarathne for the 1st

Accused Appellant

: Upul Kumarapperuma with Shalini Weeraratne and

Radha Kuruwitabandara for the 2nd Accused

Appellant

: Dilan Ratnayaka, SDSG for the Respondent

Argued on : 09-09-2022

Written Submissions : 02-10-2020 (By the 1st Accused-Appellant)

: 23-09-2020 (By the 2nd Accused-Appellant)

: 12-02-2021 (By the Respondent)

Decided on : 31-10-2022

Sampath B Abayakoon, J.

This is an appeal preferred by the 1st and the 2nd accused appellants (hereinafter

sometimes referred to as the appellants) on being aggrieved of conviction and the

sentence imposed by the learned High Court Judge of Colombo.

Page 3 of 11

The accused appellants were incited before the High Court of Colombo on

following counts.

1. That between the period of 1st January 2014 and 13th November 2014,

the appellants conspired to commit grave sexual abuse on a minor and

as a result, the first accused appellant committed the grave sexual

abuse and the second accused appellant aided and abetted in the

crime, and thereby, committed an offence punishable in terms of

section 365 B 2 (b) of the Penal Code read with section 113 (b) and 102

of the Code.

2. At the same time and at the same transaction, the 1st accused appellant

committed grave sexual abuse on a minor and thereby committed an

offence punishable in terms of section 365 B 2 (b).

3. At the same time and at the same transaction, the 2nd accused

appellant aided and abetted the 1st accused appellant in committing

the above-mentioned offence and thereby committed an offence

punishable in terms of section 365 B 2 (b) read with section 102 of the

Penal Code.

4. That on or about 13th November 2014, the 1st and 2nd accused

appellants conspired to commit the offence of grave sexual abuse and

the 1st accused appellant committed the said offence while the 2nd

accused appellant aided and abetted the 1st accused in the said

process, and thereby, committed the offence of grave sexual abuse

punishable in terms of section 365 B 2 (b) read with section 113 (b) and

102 of the Penal Code.

5. That the 1st accused appellant committed the offence of grave sexual

abuse on a minor in the process of the 4th count mentioned above and

thereby committed an offence punishable in terms of section 365 B 2

(b).

6. At the same time and at the same transaction mentioned in count 5,

the 2nd accused appellant aided and abetted the 1st accused appellant

Page 4 of 11

in committing the offence of grave sexual abuse and thereby committed

an offence punishable in terms of section 365 B 2 (b) read with section

102 of the Penal Code.

After trial, learned High Court Judge of Colombo by his judgement dated 19-09-

2019, found the appellants not guilty on the 1st, 2nd and 3rd counts preferred

against them and accordingly, they were acquitted of the said charges. However,

the 1st appellant was convicted for the 4th and the 5th counts preferred against

him, while the 2nd appellant was convicted for the 4th and the 6th counts preferred

against him.

Upon the conviction, the 1st accused was sentenced to 10 years each rigorous

imprisonment on the 4th and the 5th counts while he was also fined Rs.25,000/-

each on the said counts. In default of paying the fine, he was sentenced to a

further period of 15 months each simple imprisonment.

The 2nd appellant was sentenced to 9 years each rigorous imprisonment on the

4th and the 6th counts while he was ordered to pay a fine of Rs.25,000/- each on

the said counts. In default, he was sentenced to 15 months simple imprisonment

on each of the two counts.

In addition to the above sentence, the two appellants were ordered to pay

Rs.100,000/- each as compensation to the victim child and in default, they were

sentenced to 28 months each of simple imprisonment.

It is clear from the evidence led before the High Court, and the stand taken by

the appellants, the main challenge to the evidence was on the basis of

identification of the appellants as the perpetrators of the crime by the victim

child.

At the hearing of this appeal, the learned Presidents Counsel representing the

1st appellant formulated the following grounds of appeal for the consideration of

the Court.

Page 5 of 11

1. There is a grave doubt as to the identification of the first accused and

matters favourable to the first accused available in the evidence in that

regard was not adequately considered by the learned High Court Judge

in his judgement.

2. The learned High Court Judge has failed to adequately consider the

material contradictions and omissions in the evidence.

3. The learned High Court Judge failed to consider the evidence given by

the 1st appellant and the witnesses called on behalf of him in its correct

perspective.

On behalf of the 2nd appellant, the learned Counsel raised the following grounds

of appeal.

1. The learned High Court Judge failed to give due consideration to the

fact that the identification of the 2nd appellant by the victim child was

tainted with irregularities which has not been adequately considered in

the judgement.

2. The learned High Court Judge has failed to consider matters favourable

to the 2nd appellant.

Facts in brief: -

The victim child was a 6-and-a-half-year-old, grade 02 student in a leading

school in a Colombo when he was subjected to the alleged grave sexual abuse by

two members of the schools rugger team. It was in evidence that on the

mentioned day, the child has attended gymnastic practice and he was forcibly

taken by two members of the rugger team to the rugger room and one person

abused him sexually, while the other person aided and abetted him.

After this incident came to light, the parents of the child have complained to the

principal of the school and also to the National Child Protection Authority. Before

the official complaint was made, the father of the child has shown a photograph

downloaded from the internet to the child, where the child has pinpointed two

rugger team members who was on the photograph as the persons who committed

Page 6 of 11

the crime on him. It appears from the evidence that the parents have complained

to the principal as well as the National Child Protection Authority based on the

said identification by the victim child. It has also transpired during the evidence

that the principal of the school has determined that one of the students

pinpointed by the victim in the picture cannot be one of the perpetrators as the

said student has given up rugger practices some time ago. It is also in evidence

that the principal has also used number of other photographs obtained from

various sources to narrow down the possible perpetrators before the victim child

could identify them.

Later, an informal identification parade has been held at the school where six

members of the school rugger team was shown to the victim child and the child

has identified the 1st and the 2nd accused appellants as the persons who

committed the crime on him. The victim child has identified the 1st appellant as

who committed the grave sexual abuse on him, and the 2nd accused

appellant as who assisted the 1st accused appellant in committing the

crime.

Consideration of The Grounds of Appeal

In his submission before this Court, the learned Presidents Counsel on behalf

of the 1st accused appellant submitted that there exists no doubt that a grave

sexual abuse has been committed on the victim child which is a crime that

cannot be condoned under any circumstances. He agreed that as a result, the

victim child has undergone tremendous amount of physical and mental trauma.

He agreed that as a result of this incident, the parents of the victim child have

also undergone untold mental trauma in relation to what their only child had to

face. It was his contention, despite that, the case presented against the

appellants should be fairly considered in order to find whether there was

evidence beyond reasonable doubt against the appellants. It was his view that

the possibility of an innocent being convicted for a crime of this nature should

be eliminated in order to serve justice. It was his position that in the instant

Page 7 of 11

case, that has not happened. Making his submissions mainly on the procedure

followed by the relevant authorities in identifying the two appellants as the

members of the rugger team who committed this crime, it was his position that

it was faulty, which has resulted in a grave prejudice towards the appellants. He

went on to pinpoint the alleged irregularities before the Court.

It has transpired in evidence that when this matter came to light, the father of

the child with all the good intentions has attempted to identify the students

concerned by showing a photograph downloaded from the internet to the victim

child. He has identified two boys in the picture as the perpetrators. At the

National Child Protection Authority, the same picture has been used in order to

identify the offenders. the two students pointed out by the victim child has been

highlighted as A and B. when this picture was shown to the principal, he has

ruled out the boy in picture A on the basis that the said boy was no longer a

member of the rugger team who has given up rugger some time ago. The principal

has identified the said boy before he ruled out his culpability for the offence.

Thereafter, principal has shown several photographs of the members of the

school rugger team available in his personal computer to the child in order to

narrow down the search.

Although the principal has stated in his evidence that he did not show the

pictures to the victim child, the evidence led in this action shows that the said

pictures have been repeatedly shown to the child before a selected number of six

students have been called for an informal identification parade, where the victim

child has identified the 1st and the 2nd appellants.

It was the contention of the learned Presidents Counsel that the principals

action of excluding one of the boys identified by the victim child in the picture

shown to him without calling that boy for an identification by the victim child

was highly irregular, which has caused prejudice to the appellants. He pointed

out that when this process of identification took place, the officers of the National

Child Protection Authority and several police officers were also present, yet they

Page 8 of 11

have not taken any positive steps to ensure, although it was not an official

identification parade, it was in compliance with the basic standards of a parade

of this nature.

The learned Presidents Counsel pointed out that the learned High Court Judge

has failed to consider identification of a student who was not produced even for

an informal identification parade in his judgement. It was his view that non-

consideration of this factor which was a matter in favour of the 1st accused

appellant has caused prejudice to his client. It was his position that under the

circumstances, the contradiction in the evidence of the victim child where he has

stated when he made his statement to the National Child Protection Authority

that it was , meaning the 1st accused appellant that held him, and the

one who sexually abused him was , meaning the 2nd accused appellant,

as a matter very much relevant in this action. It was his position that such a

vital contradiction is a contradiction that cannot be attributed as a mere

contradiction that has not dented the credibility of the evidence as considered

by the learned High Court Judge.

Citing the judgement pronounced in James Silva Vs. The Republic of Sri Lanka

(1980) 2 SLR 167, it was the argument of the learned Presidents Counsel that

the learned High Court Judge was wrong in considering the evidence adduced

on behalf of the appellants in the light of the prosecution evidence. It was his

position that the learned High Court Judge has failed to properly evaluate the

evidence led in this action and failed to consider the matters favourable to the

appellants in the judgement. He was also of the view that the evidence whether

a conspiracy charged can be maintained has also not been considered in the

judgement.

The learned Counsel for the 2nd accused appellant agreeing with the submissions

made by the learned Presidents Counsel contended that the identification of

both the accused appellants were not proper and convicting the appellants based

on such identification has caused prejudice to the appellants.

Page 9 of 11

Accordingly, both the Counsel moved that their respective appeals be allowed as

it was not safe to allow the conviction to stand due to the matters urged by them.

After having considered the submissions made by the learned Counsel on behalf

of the appellants, the learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General (SDSG) submitted

that he is no longer in a position to argue against the contention that the

procedure adopted by relevant authorities in order to identify the perpetrators of

the crime, was not proper. He submitted further that because of the showing of

several photographs over and over to the victim child, identification based on

such action cannot be considered as acceptable, given the fact that no proper

identification parade has been held. Accordingly, he informed Court that he is

conceding that the appeal of the appellants should be allowed.

After having considered the submissions of the learned Counsel for the appellant

as well as the submissions of the learned SDSG, this Court would like to express

our appreciation to the learned SDSG for his views expressed in this matter.

As agreed by the Counsel on behalf of both the parties, there is no doubt that

the victim child has been subjected to an inhumane sexual abuse while

attending his school, which is a matter that cannot be condoned under any

circumstances. However, it is necessary that a conviction based on evidence

presented before a trial Court in that regard to be convincing enough to establish

a charge beyond reasonable doubt against an accused. As agreed by the learned

SDSG, although, the evidence of the victim was that he was able to identify the

two members of the rugger team of the school who sexually abused him, the

procedure that has been adopted by the relevant authorities in order to identify

the two students concerned are not at all satisfactory.

The action of the father who showed a photograph of the school rugger team

downloaded from the internet can be termed a justifiable action under the

circumstances faced by the parents. However, this Court cannot justify the

actions of the school principal where he has attempted to exclude a suspect and

to determine whom should be produced for an informal identification parade.

Page 10 of 11

The actions of the officers of the National Child Protection Authority are also not

satisfactory for allowing such a procedure to be followed. It appears that the

school principal has acted with the best interest of the school in mind in order

to minimize the damage that may be caused to the reputation of the school while

attempting to identify the wrongdoers.

However, the procedure adopted in that regard has resulted in a situation where

the identification of the appellants was tainted and not proper, as argued

correctly and agreed by the Counsel.

At this juncture, I would like to cite the judgement of Regina Vs. Turnbul and

Another (1997) QB 224, where it was held:

Where the case against an accused depends wholly on the correctness of

the identity of the accused, the judge should warn the jury of the special

need to for caution before relying on the correctness of the identification by

the witness.

The Judge should tell the jury that;

Caution is required to avoid the risk of injustice.

A witness who is honest may be wrong even if they are convinced,

they are right.

A witness who is convincing may still be wrong.

More than one witness may be wrong.

A witness who recognizes the defendant, even when the witness

knows the defendant well, may be wrong.

Some of the circumstances a judge should direct the jury to examine in

order to find out whether a correct identification has been made include;

The length of time the accused was observed by the witness;

The distance the witness was from the accused;

The state of the light;

Page 11 of 11

The length of time elapsed between the original observation and the

subsequent identification to the police.

E.R.S.R. Coomaraswamy in his book The Law of Evidence Volume 1 at page

663 discusses the question of identity in the following manner.

A fundamental requisite in a criminal case is to establish the identity of the

accused as the guilty party. The text-books abound with instances of what

were supposed to be clear identifications which proved to be fallacious and

defective. These include the case where an honest witness was deceived by

the broad glare of sunlight, (R Vs. Wood and Brown [Ann-Reg. 1784])

Much of the value of direct evidence of identification will depend on the

personal appearance of the subject of identification. Many persons cannot

be easily distinguished from others. The liability mistake is greater where

the questionable identity is a matter of deduction and inference and the

expression of an opinion than where it is the subject of direct evidence.

(Wills, op. cit., 7th edition., pp 197-200)

For the reasons set out as above, this Court has no option but to allow the appeal

by the appellants as it is the view of this Court that allowing the conviction and

the sentence to stand is not safe.

Accordingly, I allow the appeal, and acquit the appellants from the charges for

which they were found guilty.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P. Kumararatnam, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal