IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

C.A.No.02l2013

H.C. Panadura No.1903N2004

***********

In the matter of an Appeal in terms

of Section 331(1) of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act No.15/1979

read with Article 138(1) of the

Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Leonard Christie Perera

Accused-Appellant

Vs.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12

Complainant-Respondent

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

DECIDED ON

DEEP ALI WIJESUNDERA, J.

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

Amila Palliyage with Nihara Randeniya, Sandeepani Wijesuriya and Duminda de Alwis for the Accused-Appellant.

Ayesha Jinasena (P.C.), A.s.G .. for the respondent

05th March, 2019

24th May, 2019

****************

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

This is an appeal by the appellant against his conviction by the High

Court of Panadura on a charge of grave sexual abuse, committed on one

Mahawaduge Suresh Perera, a 12 year old student, during 1st January to 11th

June 2003 at Sri Chandrasekara College of Keselwatta. He was sentenced to 3

years RI. by the trial Court with a fine of Rs.l0,OOO.00. He was also

ordered to pay Rs. 25,000.00 as compensation. In default of fine and

compensation the appellant was to serve an additional 6 months of

imprisonment.

In his evidence before the trial Court, Suresh stated that he was in

Grade 8 when the appellant, who was his English teacher, has had

2

intercrural sex with him near a Kota Kimbula tree, after the school was

closed for the day.

Having invoked appellate jurisdiction of this Court to challenge the

validity of the said judgment of the trial Court with his petition of appeal,

the appellant sought to set aside his conviction and sentence on the ground

that the trial Court had fallen into error in convicting him upon its failure

to evaluate the evidence presented before it properly. Learned Counsel for

the appellant contended that the trial Court had failed to apply the tests

on evaluation of credibility on the evidence of Suresh and also had totally

failed to consider the evidence placed before it by the appellant through

his witnesses, although it found him guilty to the charge.

Learned Counsel for the appellant submitted that Suresh made this

fabricated allegation against the appellant due to the animosity he had

harboured against the appellant over several instances of punishment on

discipline issues. Learned Counsel for the appellant relied on the admitted

prior sexual experiences of Suresh with several others to impress upon this

Court, that the said familiarity, considered in the light of the animosity

against the appellant over punishment provides credence to the

proposition that it had prompted him to level this allegation against the

appellant.

3

Learned Counsel also submitted that the verSIOn of events as

narrated by Suresh is an improbable one because there were afternoon

classes that had been regularly conducted by other teachers to catch up

with the arrears of work on syllabus before the scheduled exams and

therefore the place where this incident claimed to have taken place is a

place regularly frequented by others. It was also highlighted that the trial

Court had failed to consider the important contradictions and omissions

that are highlighted against Suresh's evidence, during his cross

examination.

Referring to the defence case, learned Counsel submitted that the

appellant, having made a statement from the dock, called two witnesses on

his behalf and the trial Court had not even made a passing reference to

their evidence in its impugned judgment.

Learned Additional Solicitor Generat in her submissions in reply

submitted the past sexual history of Suresh does not vitiate the reliability of

his claim. She conceded that Suresh did not attribute a specific time period

to the incident but was examined by the medical officer on 16.06.2013,

upon being produced by the Police. She also highlighted that there was

reference to the appellant in the short history, although recorded in

summary form by the said medical officer, and moved this Court to apply

proviso to Section 334(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of

1979 to retain the conviction of the appellant.

4

I' This Court, having considered the evidence of the prosecution as a

whole and in particular Suresh's, is of the opinion that the evidence of

Suresh is unreliable owing to its inherent inconsistencies and

improbabilities.

It appears that Suresh gave evidence after only two years since his

complaint to Police. It is revealed from the cross examination that the past

incidents of sexual abuse came to light only when the school authorities

traced the origin of the pen, which Suresh had gifted to one of his friends.

Only then his involvement with a foreigner (g~Q) who had sexually

abused him came to light. Upon further questioning, Suresh also

implicated a monk of a nearby temple, another youth of the same area and

also the appellant for having had sexual relations with him in addition to

the foreigner. According to history given by Suresh all this happened

within a space of two month period preceding his medical examination,

which was conducted on 16.06.2003. He referred to the incident with the

foreigner and also mentioned that he was abused by "three others" in the

short history. However, no names were mentioned.

Suresh in his examination in chief claimed that the appellant, who

saw him getting ready to leave after the school, told him to stay back

because his English was poor. Only Suresh was asked to stay back after

school. He complied. Then the appellant asked him to go near the Kota

Kimbula tree and then the appellant had abused him. Suresh is emphatic

that he was sexually abused four times by different individuals and

5

described three of them, including this incident and thereby leaving out

the episode with the foreigner.

Suresh added more and more details to the incident, as he was being

questioned by the appellant, during his cross examination. Suresh said that

on his way home after school, the appellant asked him to stay back. He

then came out with another version that when he went past the class room

where the appellant was teaching English to senior students, he was asked

to stay afterschool for extra lessons. He then had some water from the

nearby tap and returned to the appellant's class waiting for him. At

another point Suresh said when he went to drink water only the appellant

called him. Then, after the school was over, the appellant wanted Suresh to

pick a stick from the Kota Kimbula tree to be used as a cane to punish him.

An omission was marked on this item of evidence, indicating that it was

said for the first time in the High Court.

The contradiction VI was marked off his statement that he told

police that the appellant sent message that he would give something

("Q'@ocl") and for Suresh to stay back to receive it. Contradiction V3 was

marked upon the statement where Suresh stated to police that he was told

by the appellant to stay afterschool during school time.

These inconsistencies are important because it connotes two

different scenarios. One inconsistency indicates that the appellant made

6

pnor arrangement with Suresh to stay after school luring him with a

promise of a gift. The other refers to a spontaneous reaction by the

appellant, who upon seeing Suresh going past his class room, asking him to

stay afterschool for lessons. Adding to these inconsistencies, the

probability factor also weighs against Suresh. He admitted that the

appellant taught him English in his lower grades but at the time of the

incident it was his class teacher who taught him English and not the

appellant. He also knew that the appellant who was expecting a transfer

and therefore mostly confined to office, except when he was asked to do

relief work in a class where the regular teacher was not available.

If this is the background in which the alleged incident occurred, the

conduct attributed to appellant by Suresh is clearly improbable. There is no

logical reason for the appellant to pick Suresh all of a sudden and out of

the entire student population after a gap of few years to teach English after

school. There was no evidence that Suresh was seen regularly by the

appellant to help out in his English lessons prior to this incident. There is

no explanation forthcoming as to why the appellant had shown a sudden

interest in him. If Suresh was asked to stay after school only when he went

past the appellant's class, then without any prior acquaintance it is

improbable for a paedophile to pick his victim so randomly, especially

after an incident where Suresh's aunt made a verbal complaint against him.

Only during his cross examination that Suresh did mention about the

abuse by a foreigner, although he admitted that he used to visit his

7

'. Moratuwa house whenever the foreigner sent message for him. Suresh was

suggested that he implicated several others in order to shield the foreigner

from prosecution on the instructions of his aunt, who had a continuing

relationship with the said foreigner. Adding to this, Suresh only did

mention his abuse by the monk, the appellant and the youth in his

evidence but strangely not the foreigner who allegedly and repeatedly

abused him. This evidence is also relevant, since the appellant suggested

that having had familiarity over sexual conduct with others, which the

child admitted, it was easy for Suresh to make out a false allegation against

the appellant who was hated by him for punishing him.

Having allowed a considerable margm of error for the memory

lapses and limited power of expression to the 14 year old witness, who

gave evidence only after two years since the alleged incident, we are not

convinced that his evidence depicts a reliable account of the incident, on

which the indictment was presented by the prosecution.

As submitted by learned Counsel there is no evaluation undertaken

by the trial Court as to the testimonial trustworthiness of Suresh. The trial

Court has considered his demeanour that he gave evidence before Court

without any reluctance. However, the record bears that during his cross

examination he remained silent on many occasions, especially when

confronted with the allegation of fabrication. He did not offer any answer

when did he inform his parents about this incident or whether he told

police that the appellant wanted him to stay after school. He remained

8

" silent when suggested that he visited the foreigner for months, in addition

to the suggestion that his aunt wanted him to shield the foreigner. He was

also silent when suggested that he did not go to school after falsely

implicating the appellant.

The principal of the school was called by the appellant as a witness.

She stated in her evidence that there were complaints by the teachers who

taught the child that he displayed some abnormal behaviour as he used to

urinate in public and expose his genitalia publicly. This strange behaviour

was noted for some time, but was ignored by the teachers due to his young

age.

In the judgment of the Supreme Court in Gallage v Addaraarachchi

and another (2002) 1 Sri L.R. 307, Silva CJ held that;

" ... if the evidence of the victim does not suffer from

basic infirmity and the probability factor does not

render it unworthy of credence, as a general rule there

is no reason to insist on corroboration."

Almost identical words are found in Mahalakotuwa v The Attorney

General - CA Appeal No. 176/2007 - decided on 22.06.2010. A similar

approach was adopted by this Court in Tikiribanda v Hon Attorney

General 2010 [B.L.R.] 92 when it stated that;

" ... there is no impediment on the part of the Court in

acting solely on the evidence of the victim and it is

only when the evidence of the victim suffers from some

9

'. infirmity or where the Courts believe that it would not

be prudent to base a conviction, solely on that

evidence, the Court should look for corroboration."

There is no corroboration of Suresh's evidence by any other item of

evidence that had been adduced by the prosecution. The trial Court had

held that there was corroboration of Suresh's evidence by medical

evidence. This is clearly a wrong conclusion reached by the trial Court

since there were no physical signs of abuse noted by the medical witness at

the time of his examination. The history provided by Suresh to the medical

officer, could only be utilised to evaluate his consistency, and could not be

utilised to support his allegation against the appellant. The trial Court had

erroneously accepted the short history as corroboration.

In view of these considerations, we are of the view that the appeal of

the appellant is entitled to succeed. The trial Court had relied on clearly an

unreliable account of Suresh in finding the appellant guilty to the charge of

grave sexual abuse. This is not a situation where this Court should

consider applying proviso to Section 334(1) since there is no reliable

evidence before the trial Court to sustain a valid conviction despite the

infirmities. The contention that the evidence of the defence witnesses were

not considered by the trial Court need not be considered in view of these

circumstances.

10

The conviction and sentence imposed on the appellant is thereby set

aside. The appeal of the appellant is allowed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

DEEP ALI WITESUNDERA, T.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

11