Page 1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the mater of an application for writ of Mandamus under Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

R.S.D. Perera No. 12/142, Nelum Mawatha, Gorakana Petitioner 1. Land Reform Commission,

No. 475, Kaduwela Road, Battaramulla. 2. W.M.N. Wijesinghe.

The Chairman, The Land Reform Commission, No. 475, Kaduwela Road, Battaramulla. 3. D.K.D. Disanayake

The Executive Director, The Land Reform Commission, No. 475, Kaduwela Road, Battaramulla. 4. Director

District Land Reform Authority, Kalutara, No. 220, Old Road, Kalutara South. 5. Attorney General,

Attorney General Department, Colombo 12.

Respondents Before: M. T. MOHAMMED LAFFAR, J. and

S. U. B. KARALLIYADDE, J. Counsel: N. Jayasinghe for the Petitioner

Court of Appeal Case No. CA/WRT/290/20

Page 2

A. D. H. Gunawardhana for the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th Respondents Argued on: 02.09.2022 Written Submissions on: 07.09.2022 by the Petitioner 07.10.2022 by the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th

Respondents Decided on: 03.11.2022 MOHAMMED LAFFAR, J. The Petitioner in this application is seeking an order in the nature of a writ of

Mandamus compelling 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th Respondents to issue a plan and

the title document for the identified land, to the Petitioner under Section

22(1)(a) of the Land Reform Law.

The 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th Respondents, having filed their objections dated

18.05.2022, moved for a dismissal of the writ application of the Petitioner.

The 5th Respondent did not file a Statement of Objections and of consent,

was released from the proceedings of this case.

The subject matter of this case is a land identified as Tunhaul Kongahawatta

situated in a village called Gorakana of the Gorakana Grama Niladari

Division belonging to Kehelwatta Town Council as a Minor Division within

the Panadura Divisional Secretary's Division of Kalutara District, containing

an extent of 37.6 Perches depicted as Lot No. 06 with its boundaries in Plan

No. 646 dated 18.02.1960, drawn by Mr. W. R. De Silva, Licensed Surveyor

marked as P4 to the Petition. Particulars are also detailed in the statutory

declaration of the Land Reform Commission marked as 1R1 to the Statement

of Objections of the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th Respondents.

The Petitioner submits that his deceased mother cultivated the said land as

a tenant cultivator and after her death, he continued cultivation in the land

as a tenant cultivator.

Page 3

This court observes that the 1st Respondent, the Land Reform Commission

had decided to grant the said land to the Petitioner under Section 22(1)(a) of

the Land Reform Law on payment of its assessed value of Rs. 192,191 and

such decision was clearly communicated to the Petitioner by the letters dated

26.06.2013 and 03.07.2013 marked as P5 and P5A to the Petition

respectively. The Petitioner thereafter paid the assessed value of the land on

04.07.2013. These facts are not denied by the Respondents.

The Respondents have drawn the attention of the court to a dispute between

the Petitioner and an owner of an adjacent land, which acts as an impediment

to the issue of the relevant documents.

In these respects, the central questions to be considered in this application

are as follows:

1. Whether the Petitioner is entitled to the relief as prayed for on the basis

of legitimate expectation.

2. Whether there any legal impediments preventing the Land Reform

Commission from alienating the land to the Petitioner?

What is legitimate expectation? This concept is focused upon the idea of

fairness and the enforcement of promises or representations. This principle

creates the idea that it is unlawful for a public authority to fail to abide by a

promise or representation that it has made without good reason, provided that

the promise is lawful and that whoever made the promise was entitled to bind

the authority.

Page 4

In Junaideen Mohamed Iqbal vs. The Divisional Secretary, Kundasale1

the Court of Appeal simply described the principle of legitimate expectation

as follows:

...When a public authority represents that it will or will not do something

within its authority and later attempts to rescind the said representation,

a person who has reasonably relied on it should be entitled to enforce it

by law. This concept is based on the principles of natural justice and

fairness, and seeks to prevent the abuse of power by public

authorities...

Wade discusses the principle of legitimate expectations2 as follows:

...A further and more satisfactory reason for the protection of legitimate

expectations lie in the trust that has been reposed by the citizen in what

he has been told or led to believe by the official. Good government

depends upon trust between the governed and the governor. Unless that

trust is sustained and protected officials will not be believed and

government becomes a choice between chaos and coercion.

...It is not enough that an expectation should exist: it must in addition

be legitimate. But how is it to be determined whether a particular

expectation is worthy of protection? This is a difficult area since an

expectation reasonably entertained by a person may not be found to be

legitimate because of some countervailing consideration of policy or law.

A crucial requirement is that the assurance must itself be clear,

unequivocal and unambiguous. Many claimant fail at this hurdle after

close analysis of the assurance. The test is how on a fair reading of the

promise it would have been reasonably understood by those to whom it

was made....

1 CA/WRIT/328/215, CA Minutes of 19.02.2020.

2 H.W.R. Wade and C.F. Forsyth, Administrative Law, 11th Edition, p.451.

Page 5

In Kurukulasooriya vs. Edirisinghe and Six Others3 it was held that:

It would be necessary for the party which claims the benefit of

legitimate expectation to show that such expectation arises from a

promise or hope given by the authority in question

When applying the above-stated principles to the instant application, the

question that begs an answer is whether a promise or an assurance was given

by the Respondents to the Petitioner, to transfer the said land in favour of

the Petitioner. Having scrutinized the documents tendered and submissions

made by the parties, it is abundantly clear that the Petitioner was promised

the transfer of the land in his favour upon payment of the assessed value.

This court is of the view that the Petitioner had a legitimate expectation that

he would be issued the relevant documentation upon payment of the

stipulated sum as communicated to him by documents marked P5 and

P5A.

This court also observes that the final decree of the partition action No. 45

filed in the District Court Panadura, had allotted the said land to R. S. Perera,

the 4th Defendant of that case. It had thereafter vested onto the Land Reform

Commission. This is evident based on the final decree marked P1, an extract

relevant to the registration of the said lot obtained from the land registry

marked P2 and a letter 04.06.2004 issued by the Land Reform Commission

marked P8. Thus, as this court sees no encumbrances to the said land and

the 1st Respondents ability to transfer it to the Petitioner; I observe that the

Respondents position that the interference and/or dispute by the owner of

the adjoining land affects the Petitioners right to the land, holds no merit

whatsoever. It appears as an evasive and unreasonable defence to not act on

the promise made by the commission.

3 S.C. Application (FR) No. 577/2009, SC. Minute of 01.11.2011.

Page 6

In the above pretext, this court also observes that the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th

Respondents have failed to duly exercise their public duty entrusted upon

them as an organ of the state and being public officials.

Accordingly, a writ of Mandamus mandating the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th

Respondents to issue a plan and the title document for the said land to the

Petitioner, under Section 22(1)(a) of the Land Reform Law as prayed for in

prayer (b) of the Petition dated 27.08.2020.

I make no order as to costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

S. U. B. Karalliyadde, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL