IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

Mathugamage Aruna Shantha

Accused-Appellant

C.A.N 0.133/2005 H.C. Vavuniya No. HCV1232/2001

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

DECIDED ON

Vs.

Hon. Attorney General Attorney General's Department

Colombo 12 .

Respondent

***********

DEEP ALI WIJESUNDERA, J ...

ACHALA WENGAPPULI J.

Sunil Premadasa for the Accused-Appellant.

P. Kumararatnam D.s.G for the respondent

12.09.2018

09th November, 2018

****************

1

ACHALA WENGAPPULI J.

This is an appeal by the Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to

as the "Appellant"), seeking to set aside his conviction and sentence

imposed by the High Court of Vavuniya in case No. HCV 1232/2001 on

06.12.2005. The Appellant was indicted by the Hon. Attorney General for

committing murders of Dunusinghe Arachchige Upul Priyantha Bandara

(hereinafter referred to as the "1st deceased") and Wagpedigedara Kapila

Karunaratne on 9th November 1997 at Kankasanthurai.

Upon the election of the Appellant, he was tried without a jury by

the High Court and at the end of the trial, he was found guilty of culpable

homicide not amounting to murder in respect of the death of Dunusinghe

Arachchige Upul Priyantha Bandara on the basis of cumulative provocation.

The Appellant was acquitted on the other count of murder due to

insufficiency of evidence.

In challenging the validity of his conviction, the Appellant relied on

the ground of appeal that the prosecution has failed to discharge its

burden of proof in proving the allegations against him. Learned Counsel

for the Appellant submitted that the evidence of the prosecution witnesses

is improbable, inconsistent and therefore unreliable to act upon.

Since the ground of appeal revolves around the issue of credibility

of the prosecution case, it is incumbent upon this Court to refer to the

evidence presented before the trial Court for its consideration.

2

The 1st deceased Dunusinghe Arachchige Upul Priyantha Bandara was a

2nd lieutenant of Sri Lanka Army and at the time of the incident was

serving as the Commanding Officer of the army detachment located at the

Kankasanthurai cement' factory premises. The other deceased Kapila

Karunaratne was a soldier attached to the same camp and was assigned to

assist the Commanding Officer.

The Appellant was also a 2nd lieutenant and had served as the

deputy to the Commanding Officer in the same camp. On 9th November

1997, the 1st deceased wanted the Appellant to report to him upon his

return to camp and to give reasons for leaving the camp without his prior

approval. The Appellant had returned to the camp only in the afternoon

and was conveyed this message by PW 3 Bandara. At that time the

Appellant had a T 56 rifle with him. The Appellant indicated that he

would meet his C.O. in his room and PW 3 returned to his guard room

duty.

A little later, the witness has heard about 5 to 6 shots being fired

from the direction where the Appellant was. After about another 15

minutes, the witness heard gun shots from the direction of the 1st

deceased's room. The witness did not investigate the firing until he was

ordered to do so over the radio set and later sa'",' the two deceased being

removed to hospital.

Witness Patirana PWl, is an eye witness to the shooting of the 1st

deceased. According to this witness, there was a message sent by Corporal

Chandana where the Appellant was. The 1st deceased directed the witness

to investigate and to report back. After about 15 minutes, when the witness

3

---

went to inform his e.O., the 1st deceased, he saw the Appellant also

coming there with a T 56 rifle. When the 1st deceased opened his room

door to speak, the Appellant opened fire at him. Then the 1st deceased fell

down with injuries to his neck. The witness ran away from that.place when

the Appellant trained his gun at the witness. He radioed the incident to

his superi ors.

PW2, Wickramaratne, was serving as the acting Commanding Officer

at the Keerimalai Army Camp at that point of time and had received the

radio message of the incident at 4.15 p.m. at the adjoining camp. Upon

reaching the place of the incident, he learnt that the Appellant had shot the

1st deceased. He also learnt that Appellant had dropped the weapon after

the incident and had surrendered to Military Police. He inspected the place

of the incident which was in front of the 1st decease's room and observed

casings of several spent bullets.

Medical evidence in relation to the post mortem examination of the

body of the 1st deceased reveals that his death was due' to cranio-cerebral'

injuries caused by high velocity rifled weapon and it had suffered 12 entry

wounds.

The Appellant offered evidence under oath. He denied any

involvement with the shooting incident and claimed that he was merely

arrested on suspicion. He denied having any animosity with the 1st

deceased. He also claimed that he suffered from a certain psychiatric

illness.

During his cross examination, a contradiction was marked on his

statement to police where he stated that he had harboured a grudge

4

against the 1st deceased for taking disciplinary action against him several

times prior to this incident.

It is in the light of the above evidence that the ground of appeal of

the Appellant should be considered.

Learned Counsel for the Appellant submitted the following

considerations in support of the said ground of appeal in his written

submissions;

a. the number of the spent casings recovered from the scene

totalling 23 raises a doubt,

b. according to medical evidence there was a burst of firing

whereas the evidence of PWI contradicted this evidence as

he heard 7 to 8 shots being fired,

c. whether the claim by PWI that the Appellant who had

_already fired 7 to. 8 shots, trained his gun. ?t him

compelling him run for cover is a probable one,

d. whether it was the PWI who shot the 1st deceased dead as

he too was" arrested",

e. whether the 1st deceased would come out of his room

without a weapon whilst being in a high security zone,

f. whether the 1st deceased was killed by a bullet fired from a

sniper gun,

g. whether it is probable for the 1st deceased to return to his

room after giving instructions to a soldier to investigate the

noise of gun fire to continue his study.

5

.-

In addition, learned Counsel for the Appellant also relied on the fact

that the T 56 rifle that was marked during the trial as a production was not

proved to be the weapon issued to the Appellant and therefore the claim of

the prosecution that he shot the 1st deceased with it could not be relied

upon.

It appears that the Appellant had misdirected himself with certain

items of evidence when he relied on these considerations. The prosecution

never presented its case on the basis of the Appellant had fired the T 56

rifle with a fully loaded magazine attached to it. Therefore, the number of

spent bullets has no significance on the evidence of the prosecution. The

evidence of 7 to 8 shots being fired was led in relation to the shooting

during which the 1st deceased received fatal injuries. PWI stated that

about 7 to 8 shots were fired at the 1st deceased. The medical evidence

reveals that the deceased had 12 entry wounds. Thus the number of shots

firedfiom the T 56 riffle 'could not be ascertained accurately. --,

Similarly, the claim of contradiction in relation to a burst of gun fire

and individual firing is a result of the Appellant misdirecting himself on

evidence. The medical evidence does not support a claim that there was

burst of gun fire aimed at the 1st deceased. The medical officer only

observed 12 individual circular shape entry wounds on the body of the 1st

deceased.

Whether the evidence of the PWI in relation to his conduct and that

of the 1st deceased is credible or not had been considered by the learned

High Court Judge who has had the advantage of observing the demeanour

6

and deportment of the witness when giving evidence. The trial Court had

accepted evidence of PW1 as credible and reliable. Having found his

evidence credible, the trial Court then considered whether there was

evidence in relation to the count of murder of the 2nd deceased. Having

found none, the trial Court correctly decided to acquit the Appellant from

that count.

Credibility of a witness is a question of fact. It was held by the

Supreme Court in Attorney General v Mary Theresa (2011) 2 Sri L.R. 292

that;

"Appellate courts are generally slow to interfere with the

decisions of inferior courts on questions of fact or oral testimony.

The Privy Council has stated that appellate court should not

ordinarily interfere with the trial courts opinion as to the

credibility of a witness as the trial judge alone knows the

demeanour of the witness; he alone can appreciate the manner in

which the questions are answered, whether with honest candour

or with doubtful plausibility and whether after careful thought or

with reckless glibness and he alone can form a reliable opinion as

to whether the witness has emerged with credit from cross

examination. "

Upon consideration of the evidence of PW1 and the judgment of the

trial Court in determining the issue of his credibility, we are of the view

7

..

that the trial Court's decision to accept his evidence and to act upon it is

justified.

However, it appears that the trial Court has very compassionately

considered the applicability of the general exception of grave and sudden

provocation in section 294 of the Penal Code by applying the principle of

cumulative provocation, although the Appellant had totally denied any

involvement with the incident of shooting. The prosecution evidence is

that the 1st deceased wanted the Appellant to report to him for leaving the

camp without prior permission, the Appellant had walked up to the 1st

deceased's room and without a word opened fire and thereby instantly

killed him were considered by the trial Court in applying the general

exception. The contents of the contradiction marked off the evidence of

the appellant cannot be utilised as evidence in support of cumulative

provocation in view of Section 110(3) of the Code Criminal Procedure Act

No.15 of 1979. Strangely, the trial Court also utilised its own knowledge as

to the mentally traumatic life of a soldier stationed in a war zone who is in

constant fear of an enemy attack. This Court reluctantly agrees with the

decision of the trial Court that there is material to justify the reduction of

criminal lia bili ty .

Acting on the principle laid down by the apex Court in the said

judgment that "There is simply no jurisdiction in an appellate court to upset

trial findings of fact that have evidentiary support" we affirm the conviction of

the Appellant. The trial Court extended its compassion once again m

8

.~

1 ! 1 ~ , I I

~

:

I J

~ i

A ,

~ j I 'j j I 1

~ l j

~ t

~ ! i 1

~ j 1 I j

~ i

~

.~

.~ I

$ i i

~ J

~ " 1 :, ; i

~

~ ~ J

~

.~

~ I 'I i ~ ! I 2 I 1

~

~ I

~ j 4 ,

~ ,i ,

j

'1 ,

~ ~

~ .!

~

j

~ !

~~ 1 i

sentencing the Appellant by imposing only 8 years of imprisonment and a

fine of Rs. 50,000/= with a default term of further six months. The

Appellant was since enlarged on bail pending appeal by the High Court.

At this late stage this Court would not interfere with the sentence already

imposed on the Appellant.

In the circumstances, we dismiss the appeal of the Appellant.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

DEEP ALI WIJESUNDERA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

9