.

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

Case No. CA (Writ) 276/2015

In the matter of an application for a mandate

in the nature of Writ of Mandamus under

Article 140 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

l. Hemantha Abeyssekara

No. 12A, Official Quarters,

Agricu Itu re Resea rch

Bandarawela.

2. Thusitha Pradeep Kumara

Centre,

"Sathuta", Temple Rd., Ibulgoda,

Badulla.

3. Prasanna Amal

No. 29, Gajabapura,

Mahagasthota, Nuwara Eliya.

4. Chinthaka Prabath

Welagaththewala, Dikwella.

5. Ganganath Wijewickrama

No. 52, Jayantha Mawatha, Kekirawa.

6. Prabath Nalinda

No. 781/0/5, Egoda, Kiridigala,

Weliharanawa Road, Balangoda.

7. Asanka Chinthaka

Kurunduwatta, Mirissa North, Matara.

Page 1 of 12

Website Copy

Website Copy

8. Nihal Suranga

No. 1S9/1A, Higgollawatta,

Baduragoda Road, Weyangoda.

9. Ananda Kumara

Thittala Pitigoda, Yakkala.

10. Kapila Dharmasiri

Sirimadura, Thai

Kaburugamuwa.

11. Ajith Weerakkodi

Araba,

Forest Reservation Department, Head

Office, Battaramulla.

12. Priyantha Hettige

"Kala Sarana", Thalahitiyagoda,

Ratmale, Matara.

13. Wasantha Abeysiriwardana

No. 76, Ranthisa, Godakubura, Beliatta.

14. Prasad Ranaweera

No. lOS/A, Damayanthi,

Witharandeniya.

1S. Sanjaya Indrajith

No. 43, Sinhapitiya, Gampola.

16. Jayamal Dissanayaka

Helawatta

Dewinuwara.

Koratuwa, Pelawatta,

Page 2 of 12

Website Copy

Website Copy

17. Susantha Kaminda

3rd Mile Post, Sorabora Janapadaya,

Mahiyanganaya.

Petitioners

Vs.

1. Conservator General of Forests

Forest Depa rtment,

"Sampathpaya", P. O. Box 3,

Battaramulla.

2. The Secreta ry

Ministry of Environment,

No. 82, "Sampathpaya", Rajamalwatte

Road,

Battaramulla.

3. Justice Sathya Hettige, PC

Chairman,

Public Service Commission,

No. 177, Nawala Rd.,

Narahenpita, Colombo 5.

4. S. C. Mannapperuma

5. Ananda Seneviratne

6. N. H. Pathirana

7. S. Thilinadarajah

8. M. Mohamed Nahiya

Page 3 of 12

Website Copy

Website Copy

9. Kanthi Wijetunga

10. Sunil S. Sirisena

11. I. M. Zoyza Gunasekara

Respondents

12. Dharmasiri Dissanayake,

Chairman,

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

Public Service Commission,

No. 177, Nawala Rd.,

Narahenpita, Colombo 5.

Mr. A.Salam Abdul Waid,

Ms. D. Shirantha Wijayatilaka,

Dr. Prathap Ramanujam,

Mrs. V. Jrgrarasasingam,

Mr. Santi Nihal Seneviratne,

Mr. S. Ranugge,

Mr. D.L. Mendis,

20. Mr. Sarath Jayathilaka,

The 13th to 20th Respondents are

members of Public Service Commission,

No. 177, Nawala Rd., Narahenpita,

Colombo 5.

Added Respondents

Page 4 of 12

Website Copy

Website Copy

Before: Janak De Silva J.

N. Bandula Karunarathna J.

Counsel:

Dharshana Kuruppu for the Petitioner

S. Balapatabendi ASG P.e. with Hashini Opatha SC for the Respondents

Argued on: 30.07.2019

Written Submissions tendered on:

Petitioner on 23.09.2019

Respondents on 25.09.2019 and 24.10.2019

Decided on: 17.01.2020

Janak De Silva J.

The Petitioners are Assistant Forest Officers of the Forest Department and in this

application seek to be promoted to the posts of Beat Forest Officers. The reliefs

they have sought are:

(a) To issue directions to the 1't Respondent and/or the 2nd to 11th Respondents

or one or more of them to promote the Petitioners to the post of Beat Forest

Officer with effect from 19.01.2014, or from such other date as this Court

shall seem fit by issue of a writ of mandamus,

(b)To issue a writ of mandamus directing the 1't to 11th Respondents or one or

more of them to conduct a fresh examination without much delay, to

promote the Filed Forests Officers to the post of Beat Forest Officer.

Page 5 of 12

Website Copy

Website Copy

The writs of mandamus sought against the 1't and 2nd Respondents cannot in law

be issued at least on three grounds.

Firstly, both the 1st and 2nd Respondents have been sued nominee officii or in other

words are not legal persons and therefore a writ of mandamus will not issue.

In Haniffa v. The Chairman, Urban Council, Nawalapitiya (66 N.L.R. 48) Thambiah J.

stated that mandamus can only issue against a natural person, who holds a public

office. In Samarasinghe v. De Mel and Another [(1982) 1 SrLL.R. 123 at 128] this

Court quoted with approval Haniffa's judgment as follows:

"The petitioner's application is beset with other difficulties as well. The

petitioner has made W. L. P. de Mel, Commissioner of Labour, the

respondent to his application. It is common ground that he has now ceased

to hold this post and is presently the Secretary, Ministry of Trade. The

petitioner has not sought to substitute the present holder of the office. A

Mandamus can only issue against a natural person, who holds a public office.

If such a person fails to perform a duty after he has been ordered by Court,

he can be punished for contempt of Court. (See, Haniffa v. The Chairman, U.

C. Nawalapitiya, 66 NLR 48). Before this Court issues a Mandamus, it must

be satisfied that the respondent will in fact be able to comply with the

order and that in the event of non-compliance, the Court is in a position to

enforce obedience to its order. Mandamus will not, in general, issue to

compel a respondent to do what is impossible in law or in fact. Thus, it will

not issue ............... to require one who is functus officio to do what he was

formally obliged to do." (de Smith, 2nd Edn. 581). So it seems to me, that even

Page 6 of 12

Website Copy

Website Copy

if the petitioner's application succeeded, the issue of a Mandamus would be

futile." (emphasis added)

Haniffa's judgment was again quoted with approval by this Court in Abayadeera

and 162 Others v. Dr. Stanely Wijesundera, Vice Chancellor, University of Colombo

and Another [(1983) 2 SrLL.R. 267]. In Dayaratne v. Rajitha Senaratne, Minister of

Lands and Others [(2006) 1 SrLL.R. 7] the Petitioner sought to rely on the Court of

Appeal (Appellate Procedure) Rules 1990 to support his argument that an

application for writ of mandamus can be maintained against a public office without

naming the holder of the office. Marsoof J. (at page 17) disagreed with this

contention and said that "".this being an application for mandamus, relief can only

be obtained against a natural person who holds a public office as was decided by

the Supreme Court in Haniffa v. Chairman, Urban Council, Nawalapitiya"

(emphasis added).

It is also to be noted that the Court of Appeal (Appellate Procedure) Rules 1990

applies to .!!l.! applications under Articles 140 and 141 of the Constitution and

therefore is general in nature. The rule that in an application for a writ of

mandamus the Respondent should be either a natural or a legal person is specific

in nature. The difference between the remedies of certiorari and mandamus was

adverted to in Shums v. People's Bank and others [(1985) 1 SrLL.R. 197 at 204] by

this Court as follows :

"The other cases relied on by learned State Counsel were all cases where

writs of Mandamus had been applied for. In A. C. M. Haniffa v. Chairman,

Urban Council, Nawalapitiya (8), it was held that "A Mandamus can only issue

Page 7 of 12

Website Copy

Website Copy

against a natural person who holds a public office: Accordingly in an

application for a writ of Mandamus against the Chairman, Urban Council, the

petitioner must name the individual person against whom the writ can

issue". The judgment in that case gives a reason why a Mandamus can only

issue against a natural person, who holds a public office when it says that "If

such a person fails to perform a duty after he has been ordered by Court, he

can be punished for contempt of Court". On, the other hand in the case of a

writ of Certiorari, what this court does is to bring up a decision or

determination of a statutory Tribunal or a functionary and quash it. Once

such a decision or determination is quashed, it ceases to exist and a fresh

decision or determination would have to be made if the matter is again

proceeded with. The tribunal or functionary is not enjoined to do anything

or desist from doing anything, the question of non-compliance with such

Orders resulting in contempt of court does not arise. Therefore, it would be

seen that the remedy by way of writ of Certiorari could not be equated to

one of Mandamus as far as the effect on the parties is concerned."

In Chandana v. Commissioner General oj Examinations and Others [CA. (Writ)

Application No. 1/2008, C.A.M. 06.06.2014] Nalin Perera J. (as he was then) held

that a writ of mandamus will not issue against a person sued nominee officii.

Page 8 of 12

Website Copy

Website Copy

The Supreme Court in Gnanasambanthan v. Rear Admiral Perera and Others

[(1998) 3 SrLL.R. 169] was called upon to consider the necessary parties to an

application for writs of certiorari and mandamus and Amerasinghe J. held (at page

171):

"In any event the question before us is not whether the Chairman of REPIA

could be cited nominee officii, which perhaps was possible in respect of the

application for Certiorari but not in respect of the application of

Mandamus ... " (emphasis added)

A Writ of Mandamus could only issue against a natural person, who holds public

office [Mahanayake v. Chairman, Ceylon Petroleum Corporation ond Others (2005)

2 SrLL.R. 193].

Secondly, a writ of mandamus will be issued only if there is a public or statutory

duty. [De Alwis v. De Silvo (71 N.L.R. 108); Weligama Multi Purpose Cooperative

Society Ltd. v. Chandradasa Daluwatta (1984) 1 SrLL.R. 195; Hokmana Multi

Purpose Cooperative Society Ltd. v. Ferdinando (1985) 2 SrLL.R. 272; Piyasiri v.

People's Bank (1989) 2 SrLL.R. 47; Sannasgala v. University of Kelaniya (1991) 2

SrLL.R. 193 and Samaraweera v. Minister of Public Administration (2003) 3 SrLL.R.

64].

In terms of Article 55(1) of the Constitution, the appointment, promotion, transfer,

disciplinary control and dismissal of public officers are vested in the Public Service

Commission (PSC). Although section 56(1) of the Constitution allows the PSC to

delegate to a Committee consisting of three persons (not being members of the

PSC) appointed by the PSC, the powers of appointment, promotion, transfer,

Page 9 of 12

Website Copy

Website Copy

disciplinary control and dismissal of such categories of public officers as are

specified by the PSC, the Petitioners have failed to establish that the 1't and 2nd

Respondents have been delegated such powers that will allow them to promote

the Petitioners to the post of Beat Forest Officer. In the absence of proof of such

delegation this Court cannot direct the 1't and 2nd Respondents to promote the

Petitioners as they do not have the power to do so. [Credit In/ormation Bureau 0/

Sri Lanka v. Messrs. Ja//eriee and Ja//erjees {Pvt.} Ltd. (2005) 1 SrLL.R. 89].

Thirdly, Article 61A of the Constitution prohibits this Court exercising writ

jurisdiction against the 1st and 2nd Respondents. The reason is that assuming that

the PSC has delegated powers to the 1st and 2nd Respondents which enable them

to promote the Petitioners to the post of Beat Forest Officer, Article 61A of the

Constitution prevents this Court from exercising any writ jurisdiction over the

failure by the 1't and 2nd Respondents to do so. In Ratnasiri and Others v. Ellawala

and Others (2004) 2 SrLL.R. 180 this Court held that the decision or determination

made by the 4th Respondent Secretary, being the decision or determination of a

public officer exercising authority delegated by the PSC are precluded from judicial

review by Article 61 A of the Constitution.

This will be discussed in detail now as the same prohibition applies to the writs of

mandamus sought against the members of the PSc.

Article 61A of the Constitution enacted by the 17th Amendment is wider than its

predecessor Article 55(5) since Article 55(5) restricted the application to orders or

decisions concerning "appointment, transfer, dismissal or disciplinary control of a

public officer" while Article 61A of the Constitution on the other hand concerned

any type of decision so long as it was made pursuant to a power conferred or

imposed on such body.

Page 10 of 12

Website Copy

Website Copy

It may be contended that Article 61A of the Constitution only prevents this Court

from exercising writ jurisdiction in relation to orders or decisions made by the PSC

or its delegates whereas in this case the Petitioners are seeking only a writ of

mandamus directing that a statutory duty be performed. Such a narrow application

of the constitutional ouster in Article 61A of the Constitution overlooks the purpose

of the ouster.

In applying the provisions of Article 61A this Court must bear in mind the scheme

formulated in the 17th Amendment in regard to the public service. Unlike previously

the appointment, promotion, transfer, disciplinary control and dismissal of public

officers are vested with the PSC and not the Cabinet of Ministers [Article 55(1)].

The members of the PSC are appointed by the President on the recommendation

of the Constitutional Council [Article 54(1)]. The PSC can delegate to a Committee

or a public officer its powers of appointment, promotion, transfer, disciplinary

control and dismissal of specified categories of public officers [Articles 56(1) and

57(1)]. Any public officer aggrieved by an order made by any such Committee or

public officer may appeal to the PSC [Article 58(l)] .. A further appeal against any

order or decision made by the PSC is provided to the Administrative Appeals

Tribunal which is appointed by the Judicial Service Commission [Article 59]. This is

in addition to the jurisdiction created by Article 126 of the Constitution which is

retained in terms of Article 61A.

Thus, it is seen that the 17th Amendment has put in place an elaborate scheme to

resolve disputes relating to the appointment, promotion, transfer, disciplinary

control and dismissal of public officers. In the circumstances, in applying the

provisions of Article 61A of the Constitution, the Court must apply it in the widest

Page 11 of 12

Website Copy

Website Copy

form to ensure that the scheme created by the 17th Amendment is given effect.

This appears to be thinking of the legislature in retaining the preclusive clause in

Article 61A despite removing the "pleasure principle" embodied in Article 55(1) of

the Constitution as in Chandrasiri v. The Attorney-General (1989) 1 SrLL.R. 115

Mark Fernando J. commented at page 121 that "The ouster clause was intended to

give effect to the "pleasure principle", and not to whittle it down. The application

of the "pleasure principle" prevents the ground of dismissal being questioned: the

ouster clause complements that principle by taking away the jurisdiction of the

Courts to inquire into dismissals - on other grounds, such as that rules and

procedures had not been complied with."

Therefore, all actions or inactions of the PSC are caught up within the constitutional

prohibition contained in Article 61A of the Constitution.

For all the foregoing reasons, the application is dismissed with costs.

it'~~ J~ the Court of Appeal

N. Bandula Karunarathna J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Page 12 of 12

Website Copy

Website Copy