IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Maheshwary Thambirajah,

Ward No. 12,

Pungudutivu.

And 4 Others

Petitioners

CASE NO: CA/WRIT/376/2014

Vs.

W. Waragoda,

Land Acquiring Officer-Jaffna

District,

District Office,

District Secretariat,

Jaffna.

And 6 Others

Respondents

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: M.A. Sumanthiran, P.C., with Luwie

Ganeshathasan for the Petitioner.

Vikum De Abrew, Senior D.S.G., for the

Respondents.

Decided on: 17.05.2019

2

Samayawardhena, J.

The petitioners filed this application seeking to quash by way of

writ of certiorari Section 2 Notice marked P21 issued under the

Land Acquisition Act, No.9 of 1950, as amended, and to prohibit

by way of writ of prohibition the implementation of P21.

Section 2 of the Land Acquisition Act deals with Investigations

for selecting land for public purpose. According to this section,

when the Minister of Lands decides that land in any area is

needed for any public purpose, he may direct the acquiring

officer of the district in which that area lies to cause a notice in

accordance with subsection (2) to be exhibited in some

conspicuous places in that area stating that land in the area

specified in the notice is required for a public purpose and that

all or any of the acts authorized by subsection (3) may be done

on any land in that area in order to investigate the suitability of

that land for that public purpose.

This is a general Notice to be exhibited and not to be served to

the alleged owner or owners of the land. Further, this Notice

under section 2 is even not intended to be exhibited in some

conspicuous places on or near that land but in some

conspicuous places in that area.

It is abundantly clear that Section 2 Notice does not involve any

decision on the part of the Minister, which could be enforced

proprio vigore1, to quash by certiorari. That is the investigational

stage for selecting a land for a public purpose, which may or

may not end up with acquisition upon several subsequent steps

1 Meaning of or by its own force-independently.

3

mandated by Law being taken. At that stage an application to

quash the Section 2 Notice by certiorari is premature and not

ripe for review.

In Ranawickrema v. Minister of Agriculture and Lands2,

Sriskandarajah J. elaborated this point in the following manner:

The Petitioner in this application is seeking to quash the

order P4B made by the 1st Respondent. The said order is in

fact is not an order but a notice under Section 2 of the Land

Acquisition Act. This notice is to investigate for selecting a

land for public purpose.

In D. L. Jayawardana vs. V.P. Silva (72 NLR 25) the court

held that certiorari does not lie against a person unless he

has legal authority to determine a question affecting the

rights of subjects and, at the same time, has the duty to act

judicially when he determines such questions.

Administrative Law by H.W.R. Wade & C.F. Forsyth, Ninth

Edition the authors in pages 611,612 & 613 states:

As the law has developed, certiorari and prohibition have

become general remedies which may be granted in respect

of any decisive exercise of discretion by an authority having

public functions, individual or collective. The matter in

question may be an act rather than a legal decision or

determination, such as the grant or refusal of a license, the

making of a rating list on wrong principles, taking over of a

school, the dismissal of employees who have statutory

protection, or the issue of a search warrant. They will lie

2 [2006] 1 Sri LR 42 at 46-47.

4

where there is some preliminary decision, as opposed to a

mere recommendation, which is a prescribed step in a

statutory process which leads to a decision affecting rights

even though the preliminary decision does not immediately

affect rights itself.

If confusion and complication are to be avoided judicial

review must be accurately focused upon the actual

existence of power and not upon the mere preliminaries.

The House of Lords perhaps appreciated this point in

refusing to review letters in which a Minister refused to

accept that legislation about unfair dismissal and

redundancy pay was sexually discriminate or contrary to

European community law. That was a case of prematurity,

where the issue was not ripe for review.

In this instant case on an application of the Ministry of

Provincial Councils dated 10th March 2000 to the Ministry

of Lands, the Minister of Lands, the 1st Respondent

decided under section 2 of the Land Acquisition Act that a

land in an area specified in the request is needed for a

public purpose. A notice was published under section 2(2) of

the said Act to investigate a land for selecting a land for the

said public purpose. In this instant the decision of the 1st

Respondent under section 2 is that a land in a specific area

is needed for public purpose. To identify a land in that area

for the said public purpose is the function of the requesting

Ministry. The Minister of Lands under section 2 directs the

acquiring officer to investigate by causing a notice under

section 2 whether the land identified is suitable for the said

public purpose. The direction of the Minister under section 2

5

or the act of the acquiring officer under this section is not a

decision affecting the rights of a person but an investigation

which leads to a recommendation to the Minister that the

said land is either suitable or not suitable for the said

purpose. The Minister after considering the suitability of the

said land as provided in section 4(1) of the said Act makes

a preliminary decision to acquire.

The decision that is challenged in this application is P4B, a

notice under section 2 of the Land Acquisition Act to

investigate a land and this investigation will not necessarily

result in a subsequent acquisition of that land. Therefore,

this is not a decisive exercise of discretion by the Minister.

The first decisive exercise of discretion by the Minister

under the Land Acquisition Act affecting the rights of a

person is made at the stage of section 4(1) of the said Act.

At this stage the person who has an interest in the land

could object to the acquisition of the land as provided by

that section. Therefore, seeking a writ of certiorari to quash

a notice under section 2 of the Land Acquisition Act marked

P4B or for a writ of prohibition at this stage from taking any

steps to acquire any part of the Petitioner's land is

premature and not ripe for review. Therefore the court

dismisses this application without costs.

In Dayaratne v. Rajitha Senaratne, Minister of Lands3, the

counsel for the respondents took up two preliminary objections.

The second one was: Is the (section 2) notice marked P15, a

decision or determination amenable to writ of certiorari?

3 [2006] 1 Sri LR 7.

6

This Court upheld that objection and dismissed the application

in limine. Marsoof J.4 held:

In the instant case, the order sought to be quashed by

certiorari is the notice exhibited under Section 2 of the Land

Acquisition Act marked P15. It is clearly not a decision or

order which has force proprio vigore. In the scheme of the

Land Acquisition Act, a Section 2 notice only facilitates an

authorized officer to enter into a land and determine

whether such a land is suitable for the public purpose for

which the land is required. Thus the Section 2 notice by

itself does not affect the right of any person to his land

except to the limited extent of permitting the authorised

officer to enter upon the said land and consider its

suitability for acquisition, which is a very preliminary stage

of the entire process. Therefore, if the Minister considers

that a particular land is suitable for a public purpose, he

directs the acquiring officer in terms of Section 4(1) of the

Act to publish a notice calling for written objections to the

intended acquisition, and after considering such objections,

if any, and the relevant Minister's observations on such

objections, the Minister has to decide in terms of Section

4(5) of the Act whether such land should be acquired or not.

It is thereafter that a written declaration that such land is

needed for a public purpose is made by the Minister and

published in the Gazette as required by Section 5 of the Act.

It is for this reason that this Court in Gunasekara v. The

Principal, MR/Godagama Anagarkika Dharmapala

Kanishta Vidyalaya and Others (CA 388/2000-CAM

4 At 19-20.

7

17.07.2002) held that an application for a writ of certiorari

to quash a Section 2 notice under the Land Acquisition Act

was premature and thereby upheld the preliminary

objections to that effect. As Shiranee Tilakawardena J.

observed at page 7 and 8 of her judgment-

Another matter that is relevant to this application is that at

the time of filing of this application the acquisition

proceedings were at an initial stage, and only notice under

Section 2 of the Land Acquisition Act had been issued. A

notice in terms of Section 2 of the Land Acquisition Act is

issued when the Minister decides that the land in any area

is needed for any public purpose. The Section 2(1) notice is

issued with the objective of making a survey of a land and

making boundaries thereon and to determine whether a

land would be found within its parameters that would be

suitable for the public purpose of the said Act.

Justice Tilakawardene went on to hold in this case that the

application for writ of certiorari was premature in the

circumstances of that case, and should be dismissed in

limine. Similarly, in Lucian de Silva v. Minister of Lands (CA

233/81-CAM 22.07.1982) and Wickremasinghe v. Minister

of Lands (CA 235/81-CAM 22.07.1982), it was held that

steps taken under Section 2 of the Land Acquisition Act are

only investigative in character, and that it is premature to

invoke the writ jurisdiction of our courts with a view of

quashing a Section 2 notice.

8

The public purpose stated in Section 2 Notice relevant to the

present case is To establish a training school under 52nd Brigade

Headquarters of Sri Lanka Army.

Although this Notice marked P21 issued in terms of section 2

has also been served on the 1st petitioner, that is redundant,

and is not a legal requirement. Service of Notice on the owner or

owners becomes necessary in law, if and only if the Minister

considers that a particular land is suitable for a public purpose.

That is the second stage. That Notice is not under section 2, but

under section 4. It is in Section 4 Notice (not in Section 2

Notice) a period shall be specified within which objections must

be made by the owner or owners, such period being not less

than fourteen days from the date on which such Notice is given.

The land in issue in this action, admittedly, used by the LTTE

during the 30-year long war. According to the Gramaseva

Officer of that area, this land had been used by the LTTE to

establish their military camp until the Sri Lanka Army

recaptured the Jaffna peninsula.5

I am not impressed by the argument of the learned Presidents

Counsel for the petitioners that Section 2 Notice dated

23.06.2014 is a pretext as the Army in or about the 8th January

2014 declared open the Headquarters 52 Division Camp on part

of the subject land.6

According to the schedule to the petition, the land claimed by

the petitioners is 51 Acres 2 Roods and 10 Perches in extent,

5 Vide 6R2. 6 Vide paragraph 23 of the petition.

9

and according to Section 2 Notice (P21), the land identified for

the consideration to be acquired to establish a Training School

under 52nd Brigade Headquarters of Sri Lanka Army is about 40

Acres in extent.

The petitioners do not, in these proceedings, canvass the

decision to establish The new headquarters of the Sri Lanka

Armys 52nd division in Mirusuvil7 on part of the subject land8.

Their complaint is against Section 2 Notice, which is in relation

to the acquisition of (the balance portion of) about 40 Acres To

establish a training school under 52nd Brigade Headquarters of

Sri Lanka Army.

Establishment of the Brigade Headquarters of the 52nd Division

of the Sri Lanka Army and establishment of a Training School

under 52nd Brigade Headquarters of Sri Lanka Army may be

interconnected but not the same.

I must also add that these are matters in relation to National

Security, which need not and should not be discussed and

probed openly. National Security shall be the top priority. That

is for the common benefit of all Sri Lankans, whether he be

Sinhalese, Tamil, Muslim or any other.

In the Privy Council case of The Zamora9, Lord Parker of

Waddington observed:

7 Vide P18(a). 8 Vide paragraph 23 of the petition. 9 [1916] 2 AC 77 at 107

10

Those who are responsible for the national security must be

the sole judges of what the national security requires. It

would be obviously undesirable that such matters should

be made the subject of evidence in a Court of Law or

otherwise discussed in public.

This was cited by Sriskandarajah J. in Major Dhammi

Gonadeniya Hewage v. Commander Sri Lanka Army.10 In the

same case Sriskandarajah J. cited Council of Civil Service Unions

v. Minister for the Civil Service11 to express that The right to a

fair hearing may have to yield to overriding considerations of

national security.

When it comes to National Security, Section 2 Notice may not

even state the public purpose.12

I reject with dismay the argument of the petitioners that a

military installation on the premises of a valuable agricultural

land which was used to cultivate coconuts and palmyra which

would have provided jobs for residents of the area and

contributed the national economy is irritational and cannot be

categorized as a public purpose.13 Planting coconuts cannot be

more important than national security.

Section 2 Notice in the Land Acquisition Act cannot be quashed

by certiorari.

10 CA/Writ/114/2005 decided on 22.10.2007. 11 [1985] 1 AC 374 12 In Manel Fernando v. D.M. Jayaratne, Minister of Agriculture and Lands [2000] 1 Sri LR 112 at 126, Mark Fernando J. stated: A section 2 notice must state the public purpose-although exceptions may perhaps be implied in regard to purposes involving national security and the like. 13 Vide paragraph 32 of the petition.

11

I dismiss the application with costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal