1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRAIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

In the matter of an application for mandate in the

nature of a writ of Prohibition writ of Certiorari

and a writ of Mandamus under and in terms of

Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Court of Appeal case no. CA 213/2017

Before

Counsel

Rev. Battaramille Seelarathana,

No. 4251 A, Robert Gunawardana Mawatha,

Battaramulla.

Petitioner

Vs.

1. Ceylon Electricity Board,

P.O. Box 540,

N.50,

Sir Chittamapalam A. Gardiner Mawatha

Colombo 02

And 33 others

Respondents

: L. T.B. Dehideniya J. (PICA)

: Pradeep Kumarasinghe for the Petitioner.

: Rumesh de Silva PC with Harith de Mel and S.V. Niles

instructed by D. Vidanapathirana for the 30th Respondent.

Supported on : 17.07.2017

Decided on : 19.07.2017

L.T.B. Dehideniya J. (PICA)

2

The learned President's Counsel for the 30th Respondent raised a

preliminary objection that the application cannot be maintained on the

basis that the prayers to the petition are not maintainable. The learned

Counsel for the Petitioner submitted that he is not proceeding with the

prayers (h), (i) and G) where the Petitioner was seeking for injunctions

and enjoining order, but he will be proceeding with the other prayers.

Therefore I need not to consider the maintainability of the said prayers

(h), (i) and G). I will consider the maintainability of the rest of the

prayers.

In prayers (d) and (e) the Petitioner is seeking for a mandate in the

nature of writ of mandamus to prevent the Respondents from taking

further steps. A writ of mandamus cannot be issued to prevent a person

from doing things; it is to compel a person in authority to perform his

duty that he is legally bound to do. Therefore the Petitioner cannot

maintain the said prayers (d) and (e).

Administrative Law by Wade and Forsyth Ninth Edition at page at

page 615 it says that;

The prerogative remedy of mandamus has long provided the

normal means of enforcing the performance of public duties by

public authorities of all kinds. Like the other prerogative remedies,

it is normally granted on the application of a private litigant,

though it may equally be used by one public authority against

another. The commonest employment of mandamus is as a weapon

i

f

ti!I

tj

3

in the hands of the ordinary citizen, when a public authority fails to

do its duty by him. Certiorari and prohibition deal with wrongful

action, mandamus deals with wrongful inaction.

Prayer (f) is for a mandate in the nature of a writ of mandamus

directing the 3rd to i h Respondents to perform its duties with regard to the

Procurement Process in this action as stipulated in Articles 156C(1), 156

C(2) (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e) of the Constitution. This is a vague

application. The duty that he is directed to perform must be clearly

indicated because the writ of mandamus is always followed with a threat

of punishing the person for not obeying the Court order if he fails to

perform the duty that he is directed to perform. Therefore the Court

cannot direct a person to "perform its duties with regard to the

Procurement Process" unless the duty is correctly specified.

Prayer (g) of the petition is for a mandate in the nature of a writ of

prohibition to prevent the Respondents from doing certain things until "a

Court order is entered by this Court relating to the Procurement Process".

Courts do not issue writs until the conclusion of cases. Therefore this

prayer is also not maintainable.

The prayer (b) is for a mandate in the nature of a writ of certiorari

to quash the appointment 12th to 16th Respondents and prayer (c) is to

quash the appointment of 17th to 25th Respondents. Unless the appointing

authority is given an opportunity to present his case, the Court cannot

make an order to quash the appointment. The appointing authority for the

12th to 16th Respondent is the Cabinet of Ministers. They are the members

of the "Standing Cabinet Appointed Procurement Committee". The name

of the Committee itself shows that they were appointed by the Cabinet of

Ministers. The petitioner has not made the appointing authority a party.

17th to 25th Respondents are members of the "Technical Evah.iation

I 1 I

, 4

Committee". According to paragraph 2.8.2 of Procurement Guidelines

marked P4; it is the NPA that shall appoint the TEC for the Cabinet

Appointed Procurement Committee. But the paragraph 2.8.3 permits the

Secretary to the Line Ministry to appoint TEC for the Ministry

Procurement Committee. As per P8 the 17th to 25th Respondents were

appointed by the Secretary to Finance Ministry. The secretary to the

Finance Ministry is a party to the application. Therefore, though the

maintainability of the prayer (b) is in doubt, on the face of it, the prayer

(c) of the petition can be maintained.

Under these circumstances, I hold that this case cannot be

dismissed in limine. I fix the matter for support for notice.

President, Court of Appeal