==== BLOCKS ==== 

Judgment CA Tax No. 42/2023

IN THE COURT OSOCIALIST REPUBL

CA Case No.: CA/TAX/042/2023 Tax Appeals Commission NTAC/IT/122/2018

OF APPEAL OF THE DEM

LIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal byCase on a question of law forthe Court of Appeal under anSection 11A of the TCommission Act, No. 23 amended).

WALKERS TOURS LIMINo. 117, Sir ChittampalaGardiner Mawatha, World Trade Center, Colombo 2.

-Vs-

THE COMMISSIONER GOF INLAND REVENUE,Department of Inland ReInland Revenue BuildingSir Chittampalam A. GarMawatha, Colombo 2.

No:

APP

RESP

Page 1|24

MOCRATIC

y way of Stated

r the opinion of

nd in terms of Tax Appeals of 2011 (as

ITED,

am A.

GENERAL

evenue, g,

rdiner

PELLANT

PONDENT

Judgment CA Tax No. 42/2023 Page 2|24

Before : JUSTICE M.CHAMATH.B.S. MORAIS

JUSTICE ANNALINGAM PREMASHANKER

Counsel: Dr. Shivaji Felix, President’s Counsel with

Nivantha Satharasinghe, Attorney at Law, with

Sajith Nawaratne, Attorney at Law instructed by

N.W Tambiah and others, Attorneys at Law for

the APPELLANT.

Manohara Jayasinghe, Deputy Solicitor General,

with Abigail Jayakody, State Counsel, for the

RESPONDENT.

Written Submissions 11.01.2024

of the Appellant 27.01.2026

Written Submissions 22.07.2024

of the Respondent 30.01.2026

Argued on :- 22.09.2025

Judgement on :- 14.05.2026

ANNALINGAM PREMASHANKER, J.

A.

A1.

This is an appeal by Walkers Tours Ltd (Hereinafter sometimes

referred to as The Appellant/Tax Payer) from the determination

of the Tax Appeals Commission dated 21.03.2023 made in TAC

INTRODUCTION

JUDGEMENT

APPEAL

Judgment CA Tax No. 42/2023 Page 3|24

appeal no. TAC/IT/122/2018. The Respondent is the

Commissioner General of Inland Revenue (Hereinafter

sometimes referred to as The Respondent/CGIR).

A2.

The Appellant being dissatisfied with the determination of Tax

Appeals Commission (Hereinafter sometimes referred to as TAC)

requested for an appeal by a case stated for the opinion of the Court

of Appeal by their communication dated 28.04.2023.

B.

On 22nd September 2025, both parties concluded the argument. The

Appellant has furnished written submissions on 11.01.2024 and

27.01.2026. The Respondent has furnished the written submissions

on 22.07.2024 and 30.01.2026.

C.

C1.

There were four questions of law presented for the opinion of the

Court of Appeal, in the case stated dated 14. 05. 2024. They are:

I. “Is the assessment time barred and therefore of no

force or avail in law?”

ANALYSIS

ARGUMENT

CASE STATED

QUESTIONS OF LAW

Judgment CA Tax No. 42/2023 Page 4|24

II. “Is the assessment of income tax payable and the

penalty imposed thereon is arbitrary and grossly

excessive?”

III. “Has the Commissioner General of Inland Revenue

erred in fact and in law when coming to the conclusion

that section 13 (ddd) of the Inland Revenue Act No.10

of 2006 (as amended), was inapplicable to the

Appellant?”

IV. “In view of the facts and circumstances relating to the

case has the Commissioner General of Inland Revenue

erred in law in coming to the conclusion that he did?

C2.

The tax payer submits its return for the year of 2013/2014,

claiming an income tax exemption on profit and income under

section 13 (ddd) of Inland Revenue Act No. 10 of 2006 (Hereinafter

referred to as IRA). This claim was rejected by the Assessor and the

return is not accepted and issued an assessment.

C3.

Having aggrieved by the said Assessment, the tax payer made an

appeal to the CGIR. The Tax Payer made the same agitation before

the CGIR. CGIR by his determination dated 21.06.2018 determined

the appeal by confirming the assessment.

TAX RETURN

FIRST APPEAL

Judgment CA Tax No. 42/2023 Page 5|24

C4.

The tax payer having not satisfied with the determination of the

CGIR, made an appeal to the TAC. In the appeal before the TAC the

tax payer raised the same issues. TAC by its determination dated

21.03.2023, confirmed the determination made by the Respondent

and dismissed the appeal.

C5.

Is the assessment time barred and therefore of no force or

avail in law?

The Appellant filed its return of income for the year of assessment

2013/2014 on 27 November 2014. The notice of assessment was

dated 30 May 2016. It was received by the Appellant registered post

on June 3 2016. The date of receiving notice of assessment on 3

June 2016 has not been disputed by the Commissioner General of

Inland Revenue in his Reasons for making the Determination. The

time bar was engaged by operation of law on 30 May 2016 and the

notice of assessment has been posted after the expiry of the time

bar for making an assessment.

C6.

The notice of assessment particularises the assessment. Therefore,

it is a mandatory precondition for making a valid assessment. The

time bar imposed for the making of an assessment is also

SECOND APPEAL

QUESTION OF LAW NO. I

ASSESSMENT

Judgment CA Tax No. 42/2023 Page 6|24

applicable to sending the notice of assessment. There cannot be a

valid assessment without sending a notice of assessment.

Therefore, there is no question of making a valid assessment if the

relevant notice of assessment has not been sent to taxpayer.

Section 163(1) of the IRA, makes it imperative that the power to

make the assessment is coupled with the duty to send a notice of

assessment. Therefore,, the power to make an assessment is devoid

of legal effect if the prescribed duty of assessment has not been

performed.

It is common ground that the notice of assessment is dated 30 May

2016 and was received by the Appellant on June 3 2016. It is the

Appellant’s position that no lawfully valid assessment can be made

without serving a valid notice of assessment. Serving a notice of

assessment is necessary condition that must be satisfied to confer

validity on the assessment. The notice of assessment must be

served on the taxpayer prior to the expiry of the time bar.

C7.

The Supreme Court in the case of Fonterra Brands Lanka

(Pvt) v. Commissioner General of Inland Revenue (SC Appeal

No. 187/2014) has held that:

“….as assessment is not complete, nor binding, until it is notified to the taxpayer within the statutory period….”

FONTERRA JUDGEMENT 1

Judgment CA Tax No. 42/2023 Page 7|24

“It is fundamental precept of a just legal system that a public authority must act not only within its statutory mandate but also with transparency and accountability. To allow the state to held taxpaying entities in a state of perpetual uncertainty….would be to subvert the purpose of the law.” (p11)

C8.

The Supreme Court has also rejected the argument that a letter

of intimation could constitute an assessment.

"...I find that although styled as an "intimation, the said letter cannot by any measure be equated with a Notice of Assessment within the meaning of Section 134 of the Act. While it contains certain preliminary calculations, these workings cannot be framed as a final and binding determination of liability." (p 21)

"..the letter before us is no more than a preliminary communication-a step antecedent to assessment-and cannot be given the legal effect of a Notice of Assessment."

C9.

The Respondent's position is contradictory to Fonterra case,

where the Supreme Court held the following:

"These authorities read together, I hold that an 'assessment' is not complete until it is communicated

FONTERRA JUDGMENT 2

FONTERRA JUDGMENT 3

Judgment CA Tax No. 42/2023 Page 8|24

to the taxpayer by a notice of assessment served within the time limit... A letter of intimation is not an assessment, nor is it an internal departmental calculation." (p21)

C10.

The section 135(5) of the IRA states the following:

"(5) Where the Assistant Commissioner has made an

amended or additional assessment under this section, he

shall serve the taxpayer with notice, in writing, of the

amended assessment specifying the following:-

a) the original assessment to which the amended

assessment relates;

b) the amount of tax assessed and the basis upon which

the amended or additional assessment has been made;

c) the amount assessed as penalty (if any) in respect of

the tax assessed;

d) the amount of late payment interest (if any) payable

in respect of the tax assessed;

e) the tax period to which the assessment relates;

f) the due date for payment of any tax, penalty, and

interest being a date that is not less than thirty days

from the date of service of the notice; and

g) the manner of objecting to the assessment

STEPS UNDER SECTION 135 (5) OF IRA

Judgment CA Tax No. 42/2023 Page 9|24

In this instance, the above actions were not followed. The

notice of assessment not served in time.

C11.

Section 164 of the Inland Revenue Act as follows:

“An Assessor or Assistant Commissioner shall give notice of assessment to each person and each partnership who or which has been assessed, stating the amount of income assessed and the amount of tax charged….”

The contention of the Respondent is that the section 164

makes it clear that a notice of assessment is required to be

given only when income tax is been charged. In fact, by its very

definition, a notice of assessment is a document by which the

taxpayer is informed of the amount of income assessed and

“the amount of tax charged”.

C12.

Section 163 (1) of the IRA requires that when an assessment is

made by an Assessor (Assistant Commissioner) he shall “ assess the

amount which in the judgment of the Assessor/ Assisstant

Commissioner ought to have been paid by such person, and shall

by notice in writing require such person to pay forthwith”. This

statutory duty of sending a notice of assessment forthwith is further

confirmed by section 164 of the IRA, which provides as follows:

PURPOSE OF NOTICE OF ASSESSMENT

SECTION 163 OF IRA

Judgment CA Tax No. 42/2023 Page 10|24

“An Assessor or Assistant Commissioner shall give notice

of assessment to each person and each partnership who

or which has been assessed. Stating the amount of

income assessed and the amount of tax charged”

C13.

Is the assessment of income tax payable and the penalty

imposed thereon is arbitrary and grossly excessive?

It is the Appellant’s position that, for the reasons more fully set out

in their submissions, the income tax payable imposed thereon is

arbitrary and grossly excessive.

C14.

Has the Commissioner General of Inland Revenue erred in fact

and in law when coming to the conclusion that section 13

(ddd) of the Inland Revenue Act No.10 of 2006 (as amended),

was inapplicable to the Appellant?

In view of the facts and circumstances relating to the case has

the Commissioner General of Inland Revenue erred in law in

coming to the conclusion that he did?

There is no dispute that the Appellant has to fulfill the statutory

requirements specified under Section 13 (ddd) of the IRA. There is

QUESTION OF LAW No. II

QUESTIONS OF LAW No. III AND IV

Judgment CA Tax No. 42/2023 Page 11|24

also no dispute that the Appellant has fulfilled the requirements

relating to earning the income and profit in foreign currency, by a

resident company, resident individual or partnership in Sri Lanka

from any services rendered in or outside Sri Lanka, and also that

Appellant has fulfilled the requirements to remit such profit and

income to Sri Lanka through a bank.

The question remains as to whether the services were provided by

the Appellant to a person or partnership outside Sri Lanka and also

whether any commission, discount or similar receipt for any such

service rendered in Sri Lanka were included in the payments the

Appellant had so received. The Appellant’s argument is that his

contracting party is the Foreign Tour Operator who is outside Sri

Lanka and he received payments in foreign currency through a

bank. However, he also admits in his submission that his services

are provided and consumed in Sri Lanka by the tourists.

The TAC also observes that the said Section 13 (ddd) specifically

excludes any commission, discount or similar receipt for any such

service rendered in Sri Lanka and the Appellant had not produced

any supporting documents such as the agreements he has entered

into with Foreign Tour Operators either to the IRD or to this

Commission to prove that he had not performed any agency

function to the Foreign Tour Operator where his payment would

have included a commission, discount or similar receipt.

The contention of the Respondent is that the Commission also

observes that the responsibility to prove his eligibility under this

section entirely lies with the Appellant and he should have

Judgment CA Tax No. 42/2023 Page 12|24

submitted all necessary supporting documents for perusal of the

relevant authorities, in claiming such eligibility.

Furthermore, in the case of A.M. Ismail Vs. Commissioner of

Inland Revenue C.A 1390/79, which is often quoted by the tax

payers to state that the Notice of assessment is what is subject to

the time bar, the fact that the assessment and Notice of assessment

are distinct and separate is accepted. The court has held that the

primary duty of the assessor is to assess the income and then to

notify the same, and the Notice of Assessment is to calculate the

date for appeal (within 30 days of the notice). Thus, the

“assessment” made under this subsection (96) c is only the

assessment of tax.

C15.

There is an agreement between the Walking Tours Limited and the

Foreign Tour Operator (Hereinafter sometimes referred to as

FTO), who is domiciled in a foreign country.

C16.

“Section 13 – There shall be exempt from Income Tax –

13 (ddd) - the profits and income earned in foreign

currency by any resident company, any resident

individual or any partnership in Sri Lanka, from any

AGREEMENT

SECTION 13 (ddd) OF IRA

Judgment CA Tax No. 42/2023 Page 13|24

service rendered in or outside Sri Lanka to any person or

partnership outside Sri Lanka, other than any

commission, discount or similar receipt for any such

service rendered in Sri Lanka, if such profits and income

(less such amount, if any, expended outside Sri Lanka as

is considered by the Commissioner-General to be

reasonable expenses) are remitted to Sri Lanka through a

bank”

C17.

The requirements for eligibility for tax exemption under Section 13

(ddd):

(a) Income should be in foreign currency.

(b) Tax Payer should be a resident company.

(c) Service should be rendered in or outside Sri Lanka.

(d) Service receiver should be a person or partnership outside

Sri Lanka.

(e) Other than any commission, discount or similar receipts for

any such services rendered in Sri Lanka;

(f) Should be remitted to Sri Lanka through a bank.

C18.

In the case in hand, the income received by the Appellant is in

foreign currency through a bank – Requirement (a) and (f).

The Appellant is a Resident Company – Requirement (b).

FULFILLMENT OF REQUIREMENTS

REQUIREMENTS

Judgment CA Tax No. 42/2023 Page 14|24

Render services in or outside Sri Lanka – Requirement (c).

Services rendered to a person or partnership who is operating

from outside Sri Lanka – Requirement (d).

The Income earned by the Appellant does not include any

commission, discount or similar receipt – Requirement (e).

Income should be remitted to Sri Lanka through a Bank –

Requirement (f).

C19.

The Foreign Tour Operator enters into an agreement with the

foreign tourist for providing vacation packages in Sri Lanka, for

which consideration is paid by the tourist to the Foreign Tour

Operator. The FTO obtains the services of the Appellant (local

company) to provide the services undertaken by them to the tourist.

The Appellant receives the payment directly in foreign currency

through a bank from the Foreign Tour Operator.

For example, as per the request of the FTO, the Appellant would

arrange the package with hotels, transport services and other

excursions, etc, which will be sold by the FTO to the tourist arriving

in Sri Lanka. In return, the Appellant receives a payment from

the Foreign Tour Operator according to the terms of the

agreement between FTO and the Appellant. The payment is received

in foreign currency and is received via the banking channels.

This is the Appellant’s income.

SCOPE OF AGREEMENT

Judgment CA Tax No. 42/2023 Page 15|24

C20.

The Foreign Tourist, the customer of FTO pays the consideration to

the Foreign Tour Operator and not to the Appellant. This payment

by the Foreign Tourist to the Foreign Tour Operator is made in the

home country of the tourist. This shows that the Foreign Tour

Operator is the supplier of the service and the tourist is the

recipient of the service. The Appellant receives payment according

to the agreement between the Appellant and the Foreign Tour

Operator not from the foreign tourist. The Appellant provides its

services to the Foreign Tour Operator. The income is remitted to the

Appellant only by the FTO and not by the tourist. Thereby, the

services enjoyed by the tourist are immaterial within the ambit of

the Section 13 (ddd) of the IRA.

The Foreign Tourist does not make any payments or provide any

commission to the Appellant. They directly deal with the Foreign

Tour Operator only. Therefore, there is no privity of contract

between the Foreign Tourist and the Appellant.

Therefore, it is clear that the payment is received from the Foreign

Tour Operator and not from the tourist and the payment is made in

foreign currency through bank.

C21.

The contract between the Appellant and the FTO is quite apart

and distinct from the contract between the FTO and The tourist.

The Appellant has no contractual obligations whatsoever

THE INCOME OF THE APPELLANT COMPANY

REAL SERVICE

Judgment CA Tax No. 42/2023 Page 16|24

towards the tourist. Therefore it is incorrect to allege the

Appellant was providing the services to the tourist.

Entire service of that package is priced with Value Added Tax and

invoiced to our operator in abroad. In terms of Section 13 (ddd) of

IRA, the exemption is available for the “profit and income” earned

1. In foreign currency

2. By any resident company, any resident individual or

partnership in Sri Lanka

3. From any service rendered in or outside Sri Lanka

4. To any person or partnership outside Sri Lanka

5. Other than any commission, discount or similar receipt for

any such service rendered in Sri Lanka

6. Such profit and income are remitted to Sri Lanka through a

bank.

C22.

The Assistant Commissioner has conceded that the Appellant has

tendered the relevant Returns and Statement of Accounts relating

to this issue. The tour packages are sold to Foreign Tour Operators

(Hereinafter sometimes referred to as FTOs) abroad and the

Appellant provides agreed specified services for the tour packages to

such tourists when they arrive to Sri Lanka. This issue has not

been properly understood by the Tax Appeals Commission. The

Assistant Commissioner’s intimation of reasons letter indicates that

SCOPE OF AGREEMENT

Judgment CA Tax No. 42/2023 Page 17|24

the appellant provided services to the tourist on behalf of FTOs who

were physically present in Sri Lanka. However, the contract for

services was made by the Appellant with the FTO and not with the

tourists. No payment was received by the Appellant from the

tourists. The payment in foreign currency was received from the

non-resident FTO. The fact that a tourist is in Sri Lanka indicates

that the Appellant was tendering services in Sri Lanka to a FTO who

is outside Sri Lanka. No service is provided to the foreigner by the

Appellant for which a payment is received by the Appellant directly.

This issue had not been properly understood by either the

Respondent or the Tax Appeals Commission. The disputed issue

does not relate to commission received by the Appellant. What in

issue is whether services provided to FTO, for which payments are

received in foreign currency, comes within the scope of section 13

(ddd) of the IRA.

C23.

Section 13 (ddd) of the IRA, exempts from income tax, inter alia, the

profits and income of a resident company that is earned in foreign

currency by rendering any service in or outside Sri Lanka to any

person or partnership outside Sri Lanka. However, the section

excludes any commission, discount or other similar receipt earned

for any service rendered in Sri Lanka. The tax exemption is

available to qualified services rendered in or outside Sri Lanka in

the event that the profits and income (less any amount expended

SECTION 13 (ddd) of IRA

Judgment CA Tax No. 42/2023 Page 18|24

outside Sri Lanka for reasonable expenses) earned from such

activity is remitted to Sri Lanka through a bank.

C24.

It is relevant to note that the supply of a service has certain

distinctive feature. These include;

(i) Lack of ownership

(ii) Intangibility

(iii) Inseparability

(iv) Perishability

(v) Heterogeneity

These characteristics serve to distinguish a service from a physical

product. A person cannot own and store a service like you can with

a product. For example, once an air ticket is used the service

received is incapable of being retained by the receiver. A service is

intangible because one cannot hold or touch a service like a

product. A service is inseparable because you cannot separate the

service from the service provider. A service is perishable because it

lasts for a specific time and cannot be stored like a product for later

use. If there is an empty seat on an aircraft which has completed its

flight this seat cannot be sold later. In the case if a product it can

be manufactured and sold later. Services are heterogeneous (i.e.,

not homogeneous) because it very difficult to make each service

experience identical.

SUPPLY OF SERVICE

Judgment CA Tax No. 42/2023 Page 19|24

C25.

It is the Appellant’ position that section 13 (ddd) of the IRA,

exempts from income tax, inter alia, the profits and income of a

resident company that is earned in foreign currency by rendering

any service in or outside Sri Lanka to any person or partnership

outside Sri Lanka. However, the section excludes any commission,

discount or other similar receipt earned for any service rendered in

Sri Lanka. The tax exemption is available to qualified service

rendered in or outside Sri Lanka in the event that the profits and

income (less any amount expended outside Sri Lanka for reasonable

expenses) earned from such activity is remitted to Sri Lanka

through a bank.

For the purpose of enjoying the statutory tax exemption it is

imperative that, whist the service can be rendered either in Sri

Lanka or outside Sri Lanka, the person who is in receipt of the

service must be outside Sri Lanka.

Section 13 (ddd) of IRA, applies to resident individuals,

partnerships and companies. However, section 13 (ddd), which is

similar in scope, applies only to resident companies and the

Appellant in this case is a resident company. It must be noted that

any commission, discount, or similar receipt for any such service

rendered in Sri Lanka is not exempt from income tax. In the instant

case the income received by the Appellant does not come within the

scope of any commission, discount or similar receipts. Therefore,

TAX EXEMPTION

Judgment CA Tax No. 42/2023 Page 20|24

the Appellant comes within the scope of section 13 (ddd) of the IRA.

Section 13(ddd) cover income tax in respect of any commission,

discount or similar receipt in addition to any other exemption

covered by section 13 (ddd) of IRA.

C26.

His Lordship Justice Janak De Silva in Commissioner General of

Inalnd Revenue v Atiken Spence Travels Limited CA TAX

4/2014 stated as follows:

The transaction that led to the Respondent providing two

different types of service, firstly to the FTO of the right to

have the services agreed between the FTO and the

Respondent rendered to the foreign tourist in Sri Lanka

and secondly the provision of agreed services to the

foreign tourist in Sri Lanka was done when the FTO and

the foreign tourist were physically out of Sri Lanka.

Accordingly, any profits and income the Respondent

earned from the provision of both these services fall

within the scope and ambit of the exemption in section 13

(ddd) of IRA.

The FTOs/ Travel Agents that the Appellant provides

services to are incorporated outside Sri Lanka. The fact

that customers of foreign Tour Operators/ Travel Agents

CASE REFERENCE

Judgment CA Tax No. 42/2023 Page 21|24

come to Sri Lanka for the purpose of having a holiday in

Sri Lanka does not prevent the tax exemption from being

applicable provided that the Appellants contracting party

is outside Sri Lanka. Section 13 (ddd) permits the service

to be rendered in or outside Sri Lanka but the person

engaging the Appellant (who is the other contracting

party) must be outside Sri Lanka.

The Appellant charges a composite fee from its customers

(the Foreign Tour Operators/ Travel Agents) who are

outside Sri Lanka for all services provided. This includes

the cost of hotels, transport, guide fees, entrance fees plus

the profit element. This may not be the amount that the

Tour Operator/ Travel Agent charges from its customer

(the foreign tourist). Furthermore, the tourist visiting Sri

Lanka may be travelling to other countries as well based

on the package contracted with the Tour Operator/ Travel

Agent and the Appellant has no involvement in this

matter.

It is the Appellant’s position that since the service is

provided in Sri Lanka to a person outside Sri Lanka the

income tax exemption conferred by section 13 (ddd) of

IRA, can lawfully be engaged. The tourist who visits Sri

Lanka is not the Appellant’s customer. The Appellant’s

customer/ contracting party is the Tour Operator or

Judgment CA Tax No. 42/2023 Page 22|24

Travel Agent. There is no privity of contract between the

Appellant the tourist visiting Sri Lanka. The contract is

between the Appellant and the Tour Operator or Travel

Agent based on a previously agreed price.

C27.

The resulting position is that the Appellant is providing the service

(and may, in the course of supplying such a service, engage other

service providers). The composite fee charged for its service is paid

by a person or entity that is outside Sri Lanka. The service is,

however, provided and consumed in Sri Lanka but payment is made

in foreign currency and is remitted to Sri Lanka through a bank.

Therefore, all the elements of section 13 (ddd) are fully satisfied for

the purpose of qualifying for the tax exemption.

Section 13 (ddd) does not impose a statutory requirement that the

service needs to be consumed outside Sri Lanka to be eligible for

the tax exemption. What it requires is that the service must be

provide to a person outside Sri Lanka. The service is provided to the

person who makes the payment to the Appellant which is the Tour

Operator or Travel Agent – not the tourist who visits Sri Lanka. In

any event, even the tourist who visits Sri Lanka are persons outside

Sri Lanka.

QUALIFICATION

Judgment CA Tax No. 42/2023 Page 23|24

Therefore, the Appellant fully complies with the requirements

imposed by section 13 (ddd) of IRA and is lawfully entitled to the tax

emption claimed.

C28.

This court has held in CGIR Vs JETWING TRAVELS (PVT) LTD CA

TAX 83/2024, what are the eligibilities to have the exemption

under section 13 (ddd) of IRA. The said judgement is quoted by the

Appellant in his consolidated written submission to support their

argument. The considerable factors are same in both cases and in

the absence of any reasons to deviate from the said judgement, the

same should be applied for this matter as well.

C29.

For the reasons adumbrated above, the questions of law are

answered as follows:

Q.N.1. Yes.

Q.N.2. Yes.

Q.N.3. Yes.

Q.N.4. Yes.

JETWING CASE

ANSWERS TO THE QUESTIONS OF LAW

Judgment CA Tax No. 42/2023 Page 24|24

D.

As analyzed above and as the four questions raised in the case

stated are answered as above, the determination of the TAC

dated 21. 03. 2023 is set aside, the appeal is allowed. But

considering the circumstances of the case no cost is ordered.

The Registrar is directed to forward a copy of the judgment to the

Tax appeal commission.

On this 14th day of May 2026

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

M. C. B. S. MORAIS

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

CONCLUSION