==== BLOCKS ==== 

WRT/0052/24

Page 1 of 14

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Orders in

the nature of Writs of Certiorari, Prohibition

and Mandamus under and in terms of Article

140 of the Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

M.D. Themiadasa,

No. 21, Ganewatta Road,

Mampe, Piliyandala.

PETITIONER

C.A. Case No. WRT/0052/24

Vs.

1. Saman Jayasinghe,

Commissioner General of Excise,

Excise Department,

No. 353, Kotte Road,

Rajagiriya.

2. K.P. Pemadasa,

Divisional Secretary - Kesbewa,

Divisional Secretariat,

Kesbewa.

3. K.M. Mahinda Siriwardana,

Secretary to the Ministry of Finance,

Economic Stabilization & National

Policies/Treasury,

The Secretariat,

Colombo 01.

WRT/0052/24

Page 2 of 14

4. M.K.C. Senanayake,

Director General,

Department of Fiscal Policy,

Ministry of Finance, Economic Stabilization

& National Policies/Treasury,

The Secretariat,

Colombo 01.

RESPONDENTS

BEFORE : K. M. G. H. KULATUNGA, J.

COUNSEL : Sanjeewa Jayawardena, PC, with Rukshan Senadheera,

instructed by Paul Rathnayake Associates for the Petitioner.

Mihiri De Alwis, SSC, for the Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 25.09.2025

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS ON : 16.10.2025

DECIDED ON : 22.10.2025

JUDGEMENT

K. M. G. H. KULATUNGA, J.

1. The petitioner has made an application under the provisions of the

Excise Ordinance in accordance with the form prescribed by the Second

Schedule to the Gazette Notification published in the Extraordinary

Gazette bearing No. 1544/17 dated 10.04.2008. A copy of the said

application is marked and produced as P-6. The same had been

submitted on or about 19.09.2023, according to the Third Part of which

the relevant recommendation for the issue of the F.L.4 licence had been

granted on 17.10.2023. Thereafter, as there was no progress. The

WRT/0052/24

Page 3 of 14

petitioner, having made several inquiries, had not received any positive

information has, by P-11, written to the Commissioner General of

Excise demanding the issue of the licence as applied. As the licence was

not issued, this application was preferred by the petitioner.

2. This application was filed on 23.01.2024 and was supported on

06.02.2024, on which date notices had been issued on the respondents.

On 28.03.2024, State Counsel had appeared for of all the respondents,

and time had been granted to file objections. Subsequently this has

been mentioned again on 10.06.2024, on which day further time has

been granted for objections, and when mentioned on 27.06.2024,

further time has once again been granted for objections. The matter was

then scheduled for argument on 30.09.2024, on which day too the

objections had not been filed and the argument was refixed, granting

further time to file the objections, and the matter was refixed for

argument on 16.01.2025. Up until such date, no objections have been

filed, and the matter was to be mentioned again on 26.03.2025

purportedly for settlement, on which day, further time was sought to

settle the matter, and when mentioned on 07.05.2025, similarly, time

was granted until 23.06.2025. On 23.06.2025, the Senior State Counsel

had informed that no settlement is possible, and as such, the matter

was fixed for argument on 25.09.2025, and time was granted once again

for the respondents to file their objections in the interim. However,

when this matter was taken up for argument on 25.09.2025, the

respondents had not filed any objections up until then. The matter was

taken up on that day, and the arguments were concluded. The parties

were permitted to file their post-argument written submissions on or

before 14.10.2025 in the Registry, and the judgement was reserved for

22.10.2025.

3. Senior State Counsel Ms. Mihiri de Alwis, appearing for all the

respondents, submitted to Court that the only issue that prevents the

grant of the licence is the directive made by document R-1, which had

WRT/0052/24

Page 4 of 14

been tendered to Court with a motion dated 08.09.2025. Said R-1 was

so tendered along with an affidavit of the incumbent Commissioner

General of Excise. According to the said affidavit, the Commissioner

General of Excise concedes that the petitioner has applied for a new

F.L.4 licence and the same is pending before the Ministry of Finance

pending approval under Section 28(a)(1) of the Excise Ordinance. It is

also averred that the process of issuance of liquor licences had been

suspended from 21.10.2024 in view of R-1, a directive by the

Presidential Secretariat imposing a total suspension on the issuance of

all new licences of all categories. It is also averred that subsequent

thereto, by letter dated 12.12.2024, a variation was effected to the

earlier directive, and the suspension now operates only in respect of

new F.L.4 category licenses, and that the application of the petitioner

falls within this category. The said two letters are tendered as R-1 and

R-2, respectively.

4. That being so, the learned Senior State Counsel, Ms. Mihiri de Alwis,

stated that the said directives had been conveyed to the Ministry of

Finance, Economic Stabilisation and National Policies, in view of which

the respondents are unable to issue the licence. The learned Senior

State Counsel also concedes that all other requirements have been

satisfied for the issue of the said licence; the necessary approvals were

granted, and compliance had taken place before 01.10.2024, and also

the necessary payments have been made. The only submission made,

and the position taken by and on behalf of the respondents, is that the

petitioner has complied with all requirements and obtained the

necessary approvals; however, the approval of the 3rd respondent is yet

pending, and they are unable to process and issue the licence on

account of the directive made by R-1 and R-2.

5. Mr. Sanjeewa Jayawardene, President’s Counsel, for the petitioner, at

this juncture submitted that on the face of it the purported directive R-

1 and R-2, the said directive/advice given, appears to have been made

WRT/0052/24

Page 5 of 14

by the President in his capacity qua President. It is thus argued that

the President is not statutorily empowered to make such a directive or

give such advice qua President. He has not acted as the Minister of

Finance either. Accordingly, this directive is not binding, and it is

submitted that now it is settled law and it is recognised by the Supreme

Court that “the dictation by any functionary who is not recognised by the

governing law is not binding.”

6. The application P-6 submitted by the petitioner is in respect of a new

F.L.4 licence. However, the said application includes certain

recommendations and observations by certain Excise Officers who have

recommended the issuance of the same. This F.L.4 licence is sought for

the premises bearing No. 468/2/1/C, Arawwala, Pannipitiya. However,

the petitioner had been a holder of a previous F.L.4 licence from 1995

to the end of 2001. Since December 2021 this licence had not been

renewed, and it was in respect of the premises bearing No. 87, School

Mawatha, Piliyandala; it had been issued to the petitioner under the

business name “New Piliyandala Wine Stores”. The present application

is also made under the same business name registration; however, it is

in respect of a different address within the same locality.

7. The relief sought are for writs of mandamus for the issuance of a new

licence as well as for the transfer of the location of the F.L.4 licence from

No. 87, School Mawatha, Piliyandala, to 468/2/1/C, Arawwala,

Pannipitiya. However, application P-6 appears to be for a new licence.

It is in that circumstance the respondents claim that they are prevented

from issuing the same in view of R-1 directive of the President. I will

now consider if the position taken up by the respondents is tenable in

law and lawful to that extent.

8. The starting point is that, as conceded by the Senior State Counsel, the

necessary applications and approvals, except the 3rd respondent’s

approval, had been obtained and granted and the required payments

WRT/0052/24

Page 6 of 14

had been made before 01.10.2024, well before the issuance of the

directive in R-1 and R-2. That being so, this application submitted at

the end of 2023 would have been submitted and placed before the

relevant authorities for approval, at least by January 2024. This should

be so, as all recommendations and steps have been taken before

January 2024. As observed and narrated hereinabove, this writ

application was filed on 23.01.2024, and the respondents were

represented in this Court since 28.03.2024. The respondents have not

placed any material by way of objections as to why the licence could not

be issued. Therefore, up until the issuance of the said directive R-1, on

21.10.2024, there have not been any issues that prevented the

respondents from granting the final approval and issuing the licence.

In these circumstances, the subsequent advice or directive made by R-

1 cannot and could not have been the basis or the reason for the non-

issuance of the F.L.4 licence. There is no denial that all requirements

have been satisfied, and the learned Senior State Counsel conceded

that some payment has been received. That being so, there is no reason

in law or fact why the said licence ought not to have been issued in

respect of application P-6.

9. The petitioner alleges certain extraneous reasons, inter alia other

interested parties influencing, as a reason for not issuing the licence to

the petitioner. As submitted and conceded by the Senior State Counsel,

and evident by the affidavit of the incumbent 1st respondent there is no

other impediment except the directive R-1. Hence, the only inference is

that the non-issuance of the F.L.4 licence until October 2024 was for

some extraneous or irrelevant reason.

10. On a consideration of the narration of facts by the petitioner I observe

that he had once been engaged in the sale of a foreign liquor under a

similar licence issued to him which had not been renewed since 2021.

According to the petitioner, he had made several attempts, requests,

and applications for the renewal of the same but had been

WRT/0052/24

Page 7 of 14

unsuccessful. The reason, as evident from the petition, is that it was

due to political and other extraneous reasons the renewal was not

granted.

11. Considering the totality of the material placed before this Court, being

the petition and the material tendered along with the motion and

affidavit dated 08.09.2025, it is apparent and common ground that the

petitioner has preferred an application for an F.L.4 licence and has

satisfied all requirements for the issue of the same; at least there is no

reason to refuse. This appears to have been so by January 2024. For

reasons unexplained, the respondents have not issued the licence until

21.10.2024, on which day R-1 appears to have been issued. Thereafter,

in or around September 2025, the incumbent Commissioner General of

Excise tenders the directive R-1. This appears to be a policy decision

generally not to issue F.L.4 licences. It is this change of policy, either

temporary or permanent, that is now placed before this Court as being

the reason for the inability to issue the licence to the Petitioner.

12. This application for the F.L.4 licence tendered by the petitioner was

processed and was in the pipeline, so to say. Thus a change of policy

long thereafter cannot defeat or be a reason for the non-issuance of the

present licence. These circumstances, in law, create an expectation in

the petitioner that, to my mind, is legitimate. When the petitioner has

made an application which has obtained all the basic approvals and

satisfied all other conditions, then it creates in such an applicant an

expectation that the same would be so granted. This is what has

matured into a ‘legitimate expectation’ of the petitioner. Hilaire Barnett's

Constitutional and Administrative Law (10th Ed., at page 631) describes

a “legitimate expectation” as follows:

“A legitimate expectation will arise in the mind of the complainant wherever he or she has been led to understand – by the words or actions of the decision maker – that certain procedures will be followed in reaching a decision. The complainant may have been led to believe, for example, that there would be an oral hearing or

WRT/0052/24

Page 8 of 14

that he would be able to make formal representations. Where such expectations have been created, the decision maker is not free simply to ignore the procedures which have been indicated.”

13. The exercise of licensing functions often involves what Professor Wade

has called “powers of commercial life or death over a person’s trade or

livelihood” (Wade & Forsyth’s Administrative Law, 11th Ed., at page 463:

Licensing and Commercial Regulation). Modern English administrative

law has demonstrated a marked inclination towards insisting that

licensing powers be exercised fairly; the older technical approach treated

the renewal of a licence as nothing more than a fresh grant of an expired

licence. The modern judicial thought on this is encapsulated by Prof. de

Smith (de Smith, Judicial Review of Administrative Action (4th Ed., at

page 223)) as follows:

“Non-renewal of an existing licence is usually a more serious matter than refusal to grant a licence in the first place. Unless the licensee has already been given to understand when he was granted the licence that renewal is not to be expected, non-renewal may seriously upset his plans; cause him economic loss and perhaps cast a slur on his reputation.”

14. The crucial factor distinguishing these categories is the doctrine of

legitimate expectation. Sir Robert Megarry, V.C., formally established this

distinction in Mclnnes vs. Onslow-Fane (1978) 1 WLR 1520 (Ch),

identifying three categories of decisions, including the intermediate

category known as the “expectation cases”, which explicitly includes

cases where “an existing licence-holder applies for a renewal of his

licence”. The doctrine of legitimate expectation provides that the

possession of an expectation can found a right to a hearing. This concept

is appropriate for licence renewal cases, for reasons articulated in by Lord

Denning MR in R vs. Liverpool Corporation; Ex parte Liverpool Taxi

Fleet Operators’ Association [1972] 2 QB 299,

“A person who has a licence has a settled expectation of having it

renewed, and that it is a thing of value.” (at page 304).

WRT/0052/24

Page 9 of 14

15. Engaging in the sale of foreign liquor is a means of living. That is the

business in which the petitioner engages, and he has a right to engage in

such economic or business activity and has a legitimate expectation to

receive a licence to so engage if he satisfies the requirements and

preconditions stipulated for the issuance of such a licence. This is

especially so when the necessary approval by excise officers has been

granted, and as admitted by the Senior State Counsel, some payments

have also been levied. Petitioner’s historical narration shows that for

reasons not assigned, his previous F.L.4 licence has not been renewed.

Notwithstanding that after a lapse of time the petitioner, whilst disclosing

the non-extended licence, had made a fresh application for an F.L.4

licence to a new location from December, 2023, up until October, 2024.

For no reason, the issuance of this licence has been wrongfully withheld

and refused. This conduct is further compounded and amounts to mala

fides, as the respondents have in the least not placed before this Court

any reasons as to why it was not so issued until October 2024. Public

officers vested with the discretion and duty to consider the issuance of

such a licence are required to act diligently and promptly, because the

power so vested and entrusted is of a public nature and should be

exercised in the public interest. This issuance or otherwise of a licence

directly affects the livelihood and engagement in a profession of such an

applicant. In these circumstances, to my mind, the conduct of the

respondents in maintaining absolute silence and being non-responsive

notwithstanding several requests for a response is most unsatisfactory

and appalling. Such conduct clearly savours of an unacceptable

lackadaisical attitude which is not in keeping with the minimum

standards expected of public officers.

16. Having so conducted themselves, and not filing objections to this

application stating or placing their position or any reason or impediment

to the grant of the licence, the respondents, on 08.09.2025, take cover

and submit the directive R-1 issued in October 2024 by the President as

a reason for the inability to issue this licence now. According to the

WRT/0052/24

Page 10 of 14

affidavit of the incumbent office-holder of the 1st respondent

Commissioner General of Excise, it is averred at paragraph 3 that “the

application made by the petitioner, applying for a new liquor license, is

before the Ministry of Finance, pending approval under S.28 (a)(1).” The

relevant provision should read as Section 28A (1). According to the

scheme of the Excise Ordinance, the approval of the Minister is required

under Section 19(1). Section 28A, which had been brought in by a

subsequent amendment, confers a general and very wide power in

respect of the issuance of licences. Accordingly, the approval required for

an F.L.4 licence by the Minister is thus provided for by Section 19(1),

which provides as follows:

(1) The Commissioner-General of Excise may with the approval of the Minister grant to any person on such conditions and for such period as he may deem fit, the exclusive privilege - (a) of manufacturing, or of supplying by wholesale, or of both; or (b) of selling by wholesale or by retail; or (c) of manufacturing, or of supplying by wholesale, or of both, and of selling by retail, any country liquor within any local area; or (d) of selling any foreign liquor by retail in a tavern within any local area under a tavern licence prescribed by rule made under section 32 or by direction of the Minister issued under section 25. 17. That being so, notwithstanding the legal effect and import of the

directive purported to have been made by R-1, what is immediately

relevant is the failure to issue the licence preceding the said directive.

To my mind, the right and entitlement to the F.L.4 licence by P-6 has

accrued, and the duty to issue the same was endowed and imposed on

the respondents well before the said directive. In the circumstances of

the present application and the failure of the respondents to place before

this court any ground whatsoever and the Senior State Counsel’s

submission that there is no other impediment other than R-1, I hold that

the petitioner is entitled to the writs of mandamus prayed for.

WRT/0052/24

Page 11 of 14

18. As for the directive made by R-1, I hold that as the petitioner the

applicant was entitled to and did accrue an entitlement and right to be

issued with a licence well before the said directive was made, and for

reasons unexplained and for no reason assigned, it remained unissued.

As the application was in the pipeline and pending a subsequent policy

decision or directive on that matter, it will not and cannot defeat the right

of the petitioner to receive such a licence, as the petitioner will have a

legitimate expectation that can be enforced by the writ of this Court.

19. Mr. Sanjeewa Jayawardena, President’s Counsel, also vehemently argued

that the President does not have lawful authority or any legitimate basis

to issue a binding directive as issued by R-1. It was submitted that the

statutory functionary cannot abdicate its authority and act under the

dictation of another person. It was the argument of the learned

President’s Counsel that the President, having no specific statutory

authority, was not lawfully entitled to issue R-1. In support of which, he

cited and relied on the decision of Kandiah vs. Land Reform

Commission [1988] 2 SLR 119 at page 128, where his Lordship Justice

Sarath Silva held as follows:

“In dealing with the facts, it was found that the 1st Respondent did not implement the decision in document P8 and later purported to vary the decision acting under dictation by the Member of Parliament. The 1st Respondent is a statutory functionary, and it cannot abdicate its duty or exercise its discretionary power under dictation by the Member of Parliament or any other person.”

Further, he also relied on the decision in J. G. Mangala vs. H.J.M.C.

Amith Jayasundara, Commissioner General of Examinations

(SC/FR/286/2024, with SC/FR/287/2024, S.C. Minutes 31.12.2024),

where his Lordship Justice Yasantha Kodagoda held that not even the

Minister of Education or the Secretary can usurp the powers of the

Commissioner of Examinations.

WRT/0052/24

Page 12 of 14

20. I am mindful and conscious of the aforesaid findings and the principles.

If a public authority does some act which affects the rights of another or

denies or deprives such a right, be it to engage in a profession or

business, or which infringes upon a man’s liberty, such public authority

is required to justify its action as being authorised by law. This means

such power should be and shown to be authorised directly or indirectly

by statute, which is referable to an enabling and empowering statutory

provision. Sir William Wade and Christopher Forsyth in ‘Administrative

Law’ (Oxford University Press, 11th Ed., at page 15), propounded this with

the exposition that “every act of governmental power … must be shown to

have a strictly legal pedigree.”

21. However, in the present context, the President also happens to be the

Minister in charge of the portfolio of Finance. The Minister of Finance, by

virtue of Section 28A of the Excise Ordinance, is vested with a wide

discretion and power in the following form.

“28A. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Ordinance, if, upon representation made or otherwise, the Minister considers it necessary to do so, he may, without assigning any reason therefore direct the authority granting a licence, to grant a licence, or to renew or cancel a licence, and such authority shall give effect to such direction. (2) No action for compensation or damages shall lie in respect of the cancellation, on a direction given by the Minister under subsection (1), of any licence by the authority granting such licence.”

22. Therefore, though R-1 is issued apparently qua the President of Sri

Lanka, it is a fact that the President also happens to be the Minister of

Finance. As it appears to me, if an officer holding two portfolios or

positions exercises a certain power without specific reference to the

particular statutory provision or office, it by itself will not vitiate nor

render such an act nugatory, provided such officer did hold an office

which was conferred with the power to do what such officer so did.

Sansoni, J., in L. C. H. Peiris vs. The Commissioner of Inland Revenue

WRT/0052/24

Page 13 of 14

65 NLR 457, considered the validity of a certificate issued to a Magistrate

of an additional assessment where a wrong Section was quoted by

Commissioner in support of the proceedings for recovery. The

Commissioner, having accepted an assessee’s return and made an

assessment in terms of Section 64(2)(a) of the Income Tax Ordinance

(Cap. 188), subsequently purported to make additional assessments

under Section 64(2)(b), when the correct procedure was to make it under

Section 65. Whilst holding that a certificate issued to the Magistrate in

recovery proceedings under Section 80(1) is not invalidated by the

Commissioner's mistake, it was opined that,

“It is well-settled that an exercise of a power will be referable to a jurisdiction which confers validity upon it and not to a jurisdiction under which it will be nugatory. This principle has been applied even to cases where a Statute which confers no power has been quoted as authority for a particular act, and there was in force another Statute which conferred that power.”

23. In light of the above dicta, the directive R-1 may be referrable to the

powers conferred by Section 28A. However, at this juncture, it is not

necessary to determine and pronounce upon the validity or legitimacy of

the directive made by R-1 for the purposes of determining the present

issue. Be it valid or otherwise, it amounts to a change of policy or a policy

decision. Even if it be valid, I hold that the petitioner had a legitimate

expectation to receive and to have a licence issued as applied for, which

in this instance, cannot be denied or defeated by a subsequent change of

policy when his application was pending and in the pipeline, so to say.

This is especially so as there is no basis or impediment placed before this

Court by the respondents up until now that prevented or disentitled the

petitioner to the F.L.4 licence. The only reason, as averred by the

subsequent affidavit, is the directive R-1. Accordingly, I hold that the

petitioner is entitled to the writs of mandamus as prayed for.

24. In the above circumstances, the writs of mandamus as prayed for by

prayer (b) are hereby issued and thereby;

WRT/0052/24

Page 14 of 14

i. the 1st and the 2nd respondents, and their representatives,

nominees, agents and successors in office also named in

the affidavit dated 8th September 2025, are hereby directed

to grant and issue the F.L.4 licence to the petitioner for the

premises titled “New Piliyandala Wine Stores” located at

468/2/1/C, Arawwala, Pannipitiya, as per the application

made by P-6. For clarity and avoidance of doubt, by the

said writ of mandamus, the 1st respondent Commissioner

General of Excise, is hereby directed to grant to the

petitioner the F.L.4 licence as aforedirected in accordance

with the provisions of Section 19(1) of the Excise Ordinance

with the approval of the Minister; and

ii. the 2nd respondent is hereby directed to provide the

petitioner the said licence in accordance with the

provisions of Section 19(2) of the Excise Ordinance.

iii. It is further directed that the said licence be issued for the

current period for the year 2025 and the relevant changes

be levied on a pro-rated basis for the remainder of 2025.

Application is allowed to that extent. However no order is made as to

costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL