IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Case No: CA(PHC) APN 180/2017

HC Colombo Case No. HCWA 15/2015

In the matter of Revision in terms of Article 138 of the Constitution

1. K. Nihal Abeysiri Koralage No. 230, Habarakada Homagama.

2. H. Wasantha Indika Matarage No. 115, Pitipana North Homagama.

3. G.M. Upul Lakshman No. 273/1, Meegasmulla Road, Panagoda.

4. S. Dayantha P. Kumara No. 46/1, Ambalangoda Polgasowita.

PETITIONERS

Vs.

1. Homagama Multi Purposes Co-

operative Society, No. 57, Highlevel Road, Homagama.

2. B.N. Damminda Kumara

Commissioner of Co-operative Development and Registrar of Co-operative Societies, Department of Western Provincial Cooperative Development, P.O.Box 444, Duke Street, Colombo 01.

1

-----------

3. P.M.D.B. Hewawasan Divisional Officer of Co-operative Development Co-operative Development Assistant Commissioner's Office No. 72, Mahameghawatte,Maharagama.

4. K.D.L. Neil Headquarters Inspector

5. c.R. Abeyrathne

Co-operative Development Officer.

6. H.W.A. Rohan

Co-operative Development Officer.

4th, 5th and 6th Respondents are of Department of Western Provincial Cooperative Development, P.O. Box 444, Duke Street, Colombo 01.

7. Dharmasena K. Liyanage

"Dhananjaya", Siyambalagoda, Polgasowita.

8. Gamage Don Milton Gunarathne No. 254/1, Horagala West, Padukka.

9. Edirisinhage Wimal Edirisinghe. No. 164/3, Panaluwa, Wataraka, Padukka.

RESPONDENTS

AND NOW BETWEEN

2

1. K. Nihal Abeysiri Koralage No. 230, Habarakada Homagama.

2. H. Wasantha Indika Matarage No. 115, Pitipana North Homagama.

3. G.M. Upul Lakshman No. 273/1, Meegasmulla Road, Panagoda.

4. S. Dayantha P. Kumara No. 46/1, Ambalangoda Polgasowita.

PETITIONERS-APPELLANTS

Vs.

1. Homagama Multi Purposes Co-

operative Society No. 57, Highlevel Road, Homagama.

2. B.N. Damminda Kumara Former Commissioner of Co-operative Development and Registrar of Co-operative Societies, Department of Western Provincial Cooperative

Development, P.O. Box 444, Duke Street, Colombo 01.

2 (a)P.A.A.S. Weerasekera Commissioner of Co-operative Development and Registrar of Co-operative Societies, Department of Western Provincial Cooperative

Development, P.O. Box 444, Duke Street, Colombo 01.

3

3. P.M.D.B. Hewawasan Divisional Officer of Co-operative Development Co-operative Development Assistant Commissioner's Office No. 72, Mahamegha Watta, Maharagama.

4. KD.L. Neil Headquarters Inspector Department of Western Provincial Co-operative Development P.O. Box 444, Duke Street, Colombo 01.

4(a) K Sumith Premawansa No. 38,/1, Atygala, Hanwella.

5. c.R. Abeyrathne Co-operative Development Officer Department of Western Provincial Co-operative Development, P.O. Box 444, Duke Street, Colombo 01.

5(a)A.R.Saman Manjula

No.90/10/B, Godagamawatta, Godagama, Homagama.

6. H.W.A. Rohan Co-operative Development Officer Department of Western Provincial Co-operative Development P.O. Box 444, Duke Street, Colombo 01.

4

6(a) C.Hettiarachchi

No. 90/10/8 Godagamawatta, Godagama, Homagama.

7. Dharmasena K. Liyanage

"Dhananjaya", Siyambalagoda, Polgasowita.

8. Gamage Don Milton Gunarathne No. 254/1, Horagala West, Padukka.

9. Edirisinhage Wimal Edrisinghe No. 164/3, Panaluwa, Wataraka,

RESPONDENTS-RESPONDENTS

Before: P. Padman Surasena J/ President, Court of Appeal Arjuna Obeyesekere J

Counsel: Uditha Egalahewa, PC with Ranga Dayananda for the Petitioners

Amila Kumara for the 1st Respondent

Sobhitha Rajakaruna, Senior Deputy Solicitor General with Ms. Tashya Gajanayake, State Counsel for the 2nd - 6th Respondents

Sanjeeva Dassanayake for the 7th - 9th Respondents

Supported on: 31st May 2018

Decided on: 28th June 2018

5

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J

The Petitioners have filed this application seeking to revise the Judgment of

the learned Provincial High Court Judge of the Western Province holden at

Colombo delivered on 20th October 2017.

The facts of this matter briefly are as follows. The Petitioners and the 7th - 9th

Respondents were directors of the 1St Respondent Homagama Multi Purpose

Co-operative Society. The 2nd Respondent Commissioner of Co-operative

Development and Registrar of Co-operative Societies, acting in terms of the

powers vested in him by Section 48 of the Co-operative Societies Statute of the

Western Province had appointed two Co-operative Development Officers to

conduct an inquiry into the affairs of the 1st Respondent. Acting on the interim

report submitted by the Inquiry Officers, the 2nd Respondent had initially

suspended the membership of the Petitioners in the 1st Respondent and

served them with charge sheets. Not being satisfied by the explanations

submitted by the Petitioners to the charge sheets, the matter had been

referred to the Review Board, which had found the Petitioners guilty of the

charges leveled against them. Acting on the report of the Review Board, the

2nd Respondent had removed the Petitioners from the Board of Directors of

the 1st Respondent and prohibited the Petitioners from holding any office in

the 1st Respondent or any other co-operative society for seven years.1

The Petitioners filed Writ application No. HCW 15/2015 in the Provincial High

Court of the Western Province holden at Colombo seeking to quash '.11',

1 The letters by which the Petitioners had been removed as directors of the 1st Respondent have been annexed to the petition marked 'P1T, 'P17a', 'P17b' and 'P17c',

6

'P17a', 'P17b' and 'P17c', the letters by which the Petitioners had been

removed as directors. Pursuant to the oral and written submissions of the

Petitioners and the 2nd Respondent, the learned High Court, by his judgment

delivered on 20th October 2017 had refused to issue the writs of certiorari

prayed for and dismissed the application. The Petitioners state that they have

filed an appeal against the said judgment in this Court. In addition to the

appeal, this revision application has been filed by the Petitioners, seeking,

among others, to revise the said judgment and to obtain an interim order

staying the operation of the said judgment.

It has been consistently held by this Court that the revisionary power of this

Court is a discretionary power and its exercise cannot be demanded as of right

unlike the statutory remedy of appeal,2 In Don Chandra Maximan

Elangakoon vs Officer-In-Charge. Police Station. Eppawala3 this Court set

out the following as being some of the matters that need to be considered

when called upon to exercise its discretion:

(a) The aggrieved party should have no other remedy

(b) If there was another remedy available to the aggrieved party then

revision would be available if special circumstances could be shown

to warrant it.

(c) The aggrieved party must come to Court with clean hands and

should not have contributed to the current situation.

2 See Don Chandra Maximan Elangakoon vs Officer in Charge, Police Station, Eppawela.

CA(PHC) APN 99/2006 CA Minutes of 4th October 2007

3 Ibid 7

(d) The aggrieved party should have complied with the law at that time.

(e) The acts complained of should have prejudiced the substantial rights

of the aggrieved party.

(f) The acts or circumstances complained of should have occasioned a

failure of Justice.

(g) The aggrieved party should plead or establish exceptional

circumstances warranting the exercise of revisionary powers.

(h) The aggrieved party should demonstrate the error or illegality on

the face of the record, which would occasion a failure of Justice.

As the Petitioners have exercised their right of appeal, it is their obligation to

satisfy this Court that there exist exceptional circumstances that warrant the

intervention of this Court and that a failure of justice would occur unless the

revisionary powers of this Court are exercised.

When this matter was supported for notice, the learned President's Counsel

appearing for the Petitioners drew the attention of this Court to paragraph 10

of the petition, which sets out the exceptional circumstances relied on by the

Petitioners.

The learned President's Counsel submitted that this revision application has

been filed primarily to obtain an order staying the operation of the High Court

judgment, as the hearing of the appeal would take time. He submitted that by

8

'P17', 'P17a', 'P17b' and '~', the Petitioners have been prohibited from

being elected to any office in the 1st Respondent or any other Co-operative

SOciety for seven years and that the Petitioners would be prevented from

contesting any post, until the appeal is concluded, thereby affecting their

rights.

This Court observes that due procedure has been followed by the 2nd

Respondent with regard to the initial suspension of the Petitioners and their

subsequent removal from office. The prohibition from holding office for a

period of seven years is by operation of law and is a necessary consequence of

such removal, as set out in Section 48(1 ) (b) of the Statute4. In these

circumstances, this Court is of the view that the said prohibition preventing

the Petitioners from contesting any election to the 1st Respondent or to any

other Co-operative Society cannot be categorized as an exceptional

circumstance that merits the intervention of this Court.

This Court is also of the view that delay in an appeal being heard is not an

exceptional reason as to why this Court should exercise its revisionary

jurisdiction. In this regard, in Kulatilleke vs Attorney Generals this Court has

held as follows:

4 Section 48(1)(b) of the Co-operative Societies Statute No.3 of 1998 of the Western Province reads

as follows: "@e!OO> 48(q)(i) q~dt;.co c.X>@a5 ~t~) ~~ @ID6) tD>OtD Qei))@e) eo>)8tD~ em

~65 @~a5 tDO~ @t@ tD>OtD c:o@tDffi65() ~@c5 e)~t~) ~~ @t@ @ei)J ~a5 tDC~ @t@ ~6)

SC) ~C)Q ei)~ (7) tD tD)@col:l5 @~a5 ~6) @OO ~fl) ~1:l5 ~e ~&!d (!lei)J ~ea5 ~~o!)

Q@otD>O ~~tD ~COtD() @~ o~() ~I:l5 (6~Qk~ g~co. eDta><Bema5 ~C!lc5 @~

oa5e) ~~@ (6))e)co g~co."

5 20101 Sri LR 212 9

. .

"The delay in deciding the appeal would not amount to an exceptional

ground. The appeals filed in this Court are being heard according to a

manner that had been decided upon after due consideration. Delay in

hearing appeals, would not be a ground to take up an appeal filed

subsequently to the appeals that are being heard, unless proper papers are

filed to accelerate the same. Furthermore, such an attitude may lead to file

revision applications by aggrieved parties without pursuing the appeal

filed, causing difficulties to the due administration in the court house."

In any event, the Petitioners have not even attempted to have the hearing of

the appeal accelerated.

The other grounds urged as exceptional circumstances relate to the failure of

the High Court to consider the material placed before it and the learned High

Court Judge misdirecting himself on the facts and the law. The petition does

not specify in detail the matters on which the learned High Court Judge has

misdirected himself and if so, its impact on the final outcome. This court has

examined the judgment of the learned High Court Judge and find that the

matters addressed by the Petitioner and the 2nd Respondent have been taken

into consideration by the learned High Court Judge. The attention of this Court

has not been drawn to any finding of the learned High Court Judge which is so

illegal or so shocking that the judgment cannot be permitted to stand and

must be revised.

In Gama~e ys KODadeDiya Gedara HeeD Mahaththaya6, this Court has held

6 CA(PHC)APN 71/2017 - CA Minutes of 18th May 2018

10

...

as follows:

"Since there is an appeal, pending before this Court it is open for the parties

to have their rights adjudicated by this Court in that appeal. When there is a

right of appeal provided for by law, an applicant in a revision application

must show the existence of exceptional circumstances for any intervention

by a revisionary Court. This Court cannot accept the grounds urged in the

petition as exceptional circumstances as they are mere grounds of appeal

upon which the petition of appeal may have been lodged."

This Court is of the view that the matters urged by the Petitioners as being

errors committed by the learned High Court Judge are matters that this Court

can consider when called upon to do so in the appeal filed by the Petitioners.

In the above circumstances, this Court is of the view that the Petitioners have

failed to adduce any exceptional circumstances that warrant this Court

exercising its revisionary jurisdiction. Therefore, this Court refuses to issue

notice. The application is dismissed, without costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P. Padman Surasena II President, Court of Appeal

I agree.

President, Court of Appeal

11