==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0263-264/24

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

The Democratic Socialist Republic of

Sri Lanka

COMPLAINANT

Vs

Court of Appeal No:

CA/HCC/0263-264/2024 1. Mihelle Gedera Don Romesh Lasantha

High Court of Colombo 2. Rupasinghe Arachchilage Gayan

Case No: HC/8178/2016 Dushantha

3. Pathiranage Asiri Uchitha Perera

4. Ekanayake Mudiyanselage Duleeka

Bandara

5. Rupasinghe Arachchilage Dushantha

Priyankara alias Loku

ACCUSED

AND BETWEEN

CA/HCC/0263-264/24

2

1. Rupasinghe Arachchilage Gayan

Dushantha

2. Rupasinghe Arachchilage

Dushantha Priyankara alias Loku

APPELLANTS

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

COUNSEL : Gayal Kalatuwawa for the Appellants.

Hiranjan Peiris, PC, ASG for the

Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 16/03/2026

DECIDED ON : 30/06/2026

******************************

CA/HCC/0263-264/24

3

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellants (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellants) along with three other Accused were indicted in the High Court

of Colombo as follows:

1. Between the period of 16th February 2008 and 30th March 2008, at

Grandpass within the jurisdiction of this court, the 4th and 5th

Accused with the now deceased Ekanayake Mudiyanselage Wijisiri

Bandara, did agree to commit or abet or act together with a common

purpose for or in committing or abetting an offence to wit, the murder

of Mohideen Mohomed Jawahir alias “Jabr Nana” and thereby

committed the offence of conspiracy, in consequence of which

conspiracy the said offence was committed; and that you have thereby

committed an offence punishable under Section 113B of the Penal

Code read with Section 296 and 102 of the said Code.

2. That on or about the 30.03.2008 the accused named in the indictment

and with some others unknown to the prosecution were members of

an unlawful assembly armed with a deadly weapon with the common

object of causing hurt to Mohideen Mohamed Jawahir alias “Jabar

Nana” thereby committing an offence punishable under Section 141

of the Penal Code.

3. At the same time and same place and in the course of the same

transaction the accused with others unknown to the prosecution

committed the murder of Mohideen Mohamed Jawahir alias “Jabar

Nana” and as the member of the said unlawful assembly committed

such offence in the prosecution of the common object of the unlawful

assembly, or such as the members of that assembly knew to be likely

CA/HCC/0263-264/24

4

to be committed in prosecution of that object; and the Accused

continuing to be members of the same unlawful assembly at the time

of committing such offence, thereby committing an offence punishable

under Section 296 read with Section 146 of the Penal Code.

4. At the same time and same place and in the course of the same

transaction the accused with others unknown to the prosecution

committed the murder of Mohideen Mohamed Jawahir alias “Jabar

Nana” thereby committing an offence punishable under Section 296

read with Section 32 of the Penal Code.

The trial commenced before the Judge of the High Court of Colombo as the

Appellants and other Accused had opted for a non-jury trial. After the

conclusion of the prosecution’s case, the Learned High Court Judge had

called for the defence. The Appellants and other Accused had made dock

statements and had denied the charges. After considering the evidence

presented by both parties, the learned High Court Judge convicted the

Appellants on the 4th charge and sentenced them to death on 15.02.2023.

They were acquitted from the 1st-3rd charges.

As no sufficient evidence was led against the 1st,3th and 4th Accused, the

Learned High Court Judge had acquitted them from the case.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellants

preferred this appeal to this court. For clarity, the arraignment of the

Appellants in the High Court Trial is as follows:

1st Appellant (2nd Accused in the indictment)

2nd Appellant (5th Accused in the indictment)

The Learned Counsels for the Appellants informed this court that the

Appellants had given consent for this matter to be argued in their absence.

CA/HCC/0263-264/24

5

Further, at the time of argument the Appellants were connected via the Zoom

platform from prison.

Background of the Case.

In this case PW3, Fathima Sharmila, the daughter of the deceased and PW4,

Nimal Siri Rukshan, a friend of the deceased gave evidence as eye witnesses

to the incident.

According to PW3, on the day of the incident at about 11.30pm she was with

the deceased after serving the dinner. When she was standing near a flower

tree, the 2nd Appellant and 1st Appellant with several others had arrived, and

the 2nd Appellant had cut the deceased’s neck with a machete. She also said

that she saw the 1st Appellant cutting her father. When this incident was

happening, she was dragged to a nearby house by someone for her safety.

PW4, a friend of the deceased was there at the time of the incident. While he

was cutting bread, the Appellants with the 1st Accused and several others

had come there and the 2nd Appellant had cut the deceased with a machete

while shouting that the deceased was the person who betrayed him by giving

information to the Grandpass Police for his arrest. According to this witness,

the Appellants are brothers and both of them had engaged in cutting the

deceased. He identified a Kinfe which was marked as P1, which was said to

have been carried by the 1st Appellant at that time.

PW7 and PW6 were called to give evidence with regard to the arrest of the

Appellants and the recovery of the knife was marked as P1 under Section

27(1) of the Evidence Ordinance.

The JMO who conducted the postmortem of the deceased had noted 04

injuries on the deceased’s body. The fatal injury was the severing of the head

of the deceased which has caused the instant death of the deceased.

CA/HCC/0263-264/24

6

The 2nd Appellant was identified at the identification parade. The

identification parade notes in respect of the 3rd Accused were admitted under

Section 420 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of 1979. The

Accused was acquitted from the case.

Having been satisfied that the prosecution had made out a prima facie case

against the Appellants, the Learned Trial Judge had called for the defence

and the Appellants had made dock statements and had denied the charges.

The Appellants had separately canvassed their Appeal grounds through their

respective Counsel.

The Appellants had filed the following grounds of appeal:

1. The Learned Trial Judge erred by failing to consider contradictions

inter se made by the prosecution witnesses PW3 and PW4.

2. The Learned Trial Judge failed to consider matters favourable to the

defence.

3. The Learned Trial Judge erred in concluding that the prosecution

has proved the 4th charge beyond reasonable doubt against the 2nd

Accused.

Hence, the case against every individual accused must be considered

separately and that omnibus evidence of general character must be closely

scrutinized in order to eliminate false or mistaken implications for innocent

persons.

As the Appeal grounds raised by the defence are interconnected, all grounds

will be considered together hereinafter.

CA/HCC/0263-264/24

7

The Learned Counsel for the Appellants strenuously argued that the evidence

given by PW3 and PW4 is contradictory inter se and the benefit of doubt

should be accrued to the Appellants.

In this case as stated earlier, PW3 and PW4 are eye witnesses to the incident.

In this case no single contradictions were marked and no Single omissions

were highlighted.

The pivotal role played by eyewitness testimony in criminal proceedings has

been recognized. Such testimony acts as a fundamental element of the legal

process, and would often be considered as the foundation of evidence. With

such testimony, a number of difficulties arise; which could impact the

outcome of cases and as such, increase the risk of wrongful convictions.

There has been various research on the potential factors that could affect the

accuracy of eyewitness memory and identification. This includes factors

such as the impact of stress in critical moments, differing perceptions and

other such elements; such factors could potentially raise doubt on the

reliability of recollections. Furthermore, memory itself cannot be considered

as infallible; this is due to the fact that memory can be subject to a

reconstructive process, and would be easily susceptible to suggestion and

post event information. In other words, an individual’s memory is not the

same as a video recording. The act of remembering is contrary to popular

belief that it is like playing back a recording; in reality, it is much more

complicated. In the basic sense, memories are a collection of experiences,

preconceptions, and other mental tricks to fill in gaps.

The importance of the quality of eyewitness testimony has been examined in

relation to the subject of the identification of an accused after a delay, in the

case of Raj Kumar Bheema v. State of NCT of Delhi 2025 INSC 1322 where

it was held that:

“It is trite that the evidence of an eye-witness must be of sterling quality

and unimpeachable character. It should not only inspire the confidence of

CA/HCC/0263-264/24

8

the Court but must also be of such a nature that is acceptable at its face

value.”

In CA/HCC/417/2018 decided on 14/03/2024 this court has held that:

Eyewitness testimony is one of the most important kinds of criminal

evidence. In criminal cases, the judges regularly face the difficult but

crucial task of evaluating eyewitness testimony. This sometimes means

checking whether the witness’s story fits with other established facts of

the case. However, the veracity of such a story cannot always be

verified or falsified directly. In such cases judges will have to look at

whether the statement comes from a reliable source.

Further, an eyewitness’s testimony is probably the most persuasive

form of evidence presented in court, but in many cases, its accuracy is

dubious. There is also evidence that mistaken eyewitness evidence can

lead to wrongful conviction—sending people to prison for years or

decades, even to death row, for crimes they did not commit.

In considering the evidence of an eye witness, the Court should look at

the demeanour of the witness, the inherent probability of the account,

any internal inconsistencies in the account, whether the account is

consistent with previous statements by the witness, whether the

witness has any bias against the accused or any family or group to

which the accused belongs, whether the evidence at the crime scene

supports the account, and whether the witness’s testimony is supported

by the testimony of other witnesses. These factors are very important

as the burden of proof is on the prosecution in all criminal cases.

CA/HCC/0263-264/24

9

In the case of Kumara De Silva v Attorney General [2010] 2 Sri LR 169, in

relation to the credibility of an eyewitness, it was observed:

“Credibility is a question of fact, not of law. Appeal Court Judges

repeatedly stress the importance of the trial Judge’s observations of the

demeanour of witnesses in deciding questions of fact. The acceptance

or rejection of evidence of witnesses is therefore a question of fact for

the trial Judge, since he or she is in the best position to hear and observe

witnesses. In such a situation the Appellate courts will be slow to

interfere with the findings of the trial Judge unless such evidence could

be shown to be totally inconsistent or perverse and lacking credibility.”

In the case of Mehatar v State of Maharashtra (2025 INSC 216) it was

noted:

“No doubt that the conviction can also be based on the testimony of an

interested witness. However, for doing so, the testimony of such a

witness will have to be examined with greater caution and

circumspection. If the evidence of such a witness is found to be reliable,

then only the conviction could be maintained. Equally, even in a case of

a sole witness, the conviction could be maintained if the evidence of such

a witness is of sterling quality. However, when the evidence of a sole

witness is found to be doubtful, then the Courts would always seek for

some corroboration while maintaining the conviction.

Hence, in our opinion, it is a sound and well-established rule of law that

the court is concerned with the quality and not with the quantity of the

evidence necessary for proving or disproving a fact.”

CA/HCC/0263-264/24

10

The learned Counsel for the Appellant argued that the date of offence was

not correctly mentioned by PW3 as per the indictment. In her evidence, PW3

had stated that the incident had taken place on 31.03.2008. PW2, wife of the

deceased had stated that the incident had happened on 30.03.2008. In this

case, according to the evidence, the incident had taken place at 11.30pm,

just half an hour short of the date 31.03.2008. This cannot be considered as

a inter se contradiction as the date of offence mentioned in the indictment is

“On or around 30.03.2008” Further, it is important to note that PW3 had

given evidence after ten and half years of the incident.

Learned Counsel for the Appellants argued that although, PW4 had said that

the 2nd Appellant had uttered that the deceased was the person who betrayed

him and given information to police, PW3 had not said this in her evidence.

In her evidence, PW3 had stated that the knife was in the hands of the 2nd

Appellant, PW4 had said that the murder weapon was in the hand of the 1st

Appellant.

Although, PW3 had named several persons that were with the deceased at

the time of the incident, she had not mentioned the name of PW4 in her

evidence.

An eyewitness cannot be reasonably expected to narrate every single fact in

a criminal case, nor can be expected to recall every event to every minute

detail. This is as such due to human memory being selective, and due to the

limitations of perception. Human memory would fade and change over time,

which would result in witnesses naturally forgetting certain details. Further,

it is very rare for a witness to see the entire crime from the very beginning to

the end, including the planning or aftermath.

CA/HCC/0263-264/24

11

In the case of Balu Sudam Khalde and another Versus State of

Maharashtra AIR 2023 SC 1736 it was noted:

“When an eyewitness is examined at length it is quite possible for him

to make some discrepancies. But courts should bear in mind that it is

only when discrepancies in the evidence of a witness are so

incompatible with the credibility of his version that the court is justified

in jettisoning his evidence.

By and large a witness cannot be expected to possess a photographic

memory and to recall the details of an incident. It is not as if a video

tape is replayed on the mental screen.

The powers of observation differ from person to person. What one may

notice, another may not. An object or movement might emboss its image

on one person's mind whereas it might go unnoticed on the part of

another.

By and large people cannot accurately recall a conversation and

reproduce the very words used by them or heard by them. They can only

recall the main purport of the conversation. It is unrealistic to expect a

witness to be a human tape recorder.”

In the case of Bharwada Bhoginbhai Hirji Bhai versus State of Gujarat

1983 (3) SCC 217 it was held that:

“Ordinarily, a witness cannot be expected to recall accurately the

sequence of events, which take place in rapid succession or in a short

time span. A witness is liable to get confused, or mixed up when

interrogated later on.”

CA/HCC/0263-264/24

12

As long as the inter se contradictions do not attack the core of the case, they

should be disregarded by the court. In this case, the Learned High Court

Judge had very correctly considered and dealt with those inter se

contradictions in his judgment and given reasons as to why he disregards

the so called inter se contradictions.

In the case of The State Of Tamil Nadu vs Ponnusamy (2026 INSC 507) it

was held:

“No doubt, there are certain contradictions and omissions in their

testimonies, however, mere presence of contradictions and omissions

does not demolish the credibility of public witnesses, as long as they

appear to be natural and are duly explained. The High Court appears to

have proceeded on a presumption of falsehood and the findings in the

impugned judgment are not based on concrete doubts; rather, the

findings are based on suppositions and the Court’s own subjective

assessment of how a public witness is supposed to depose before the

Court.

When we say that every contradiction is not fatal, we essentially mean

that every contradiction carries different weight and the weight is to be

adjudged in light of the surrounding evidence and the peculiar facts

associated with a witness, including the fact that a public witness is

almost invariably out of his comfort zone while deposing before a Court

of law, that too in a murder trial.”

In the case of Joy Devaraj vs The State of Kerala (2024) INSC 473 it was

held:

“The appellant was required to demonstrate that the incongruities in the

statements of the several eye witnesses shook the roots of their

credibility. The threshold for disbelieving a witness is not mere

discrepancy or inconsistency but material discrepancy and

CA/HCC/0263-264/24

13

inconsistency, which renders the account narrated by the witnesses so

highly improbable that the same may safely be discarded altogether

from consideration.”

In the case of Gangadhar Behera v. State of Orissa: (2002) 8 SCC 381 it

was noted:

“Normal discrepancies in evidence are those which are due to normal

errors of observation, normal errors of memory due to lapse of time, due

to mental disposition such as shock and horror at the time of occurrence

and those are always there however honest and truthful a witness may

be. Material discrepancies are those which are not normal, and not

expected of a normal person. Courts have to label the category to which

a discrepancy may be categorized. While normal discrepancies do not

corrode the credibility of a party's case, material discrepancies do so.”

The Learned Counsel for the Appellants contend that when a person is facing

a serious criminal charge it is essential that every point in favour of the

Accused placed before the trial judge should be considered, and if any of

those create a reasonable doubt, the benefit of such should be accrued to

the Accused.

In this case the Learned High Court Judge considered all the evidence placed

before him impartially. Therefore, it is incorrect to say that the evidence

favourable to the Appellants was not considered by the Court.

Finally, the Learned Counsel for the Appellants contends that the murder

charge against the 2nd Accused was not proved beyond a reasonable doubt.

The evidence given by PW3 and PW4 very clearly revealed that the 2nd

Appellant is the person who cut the deceased’s neck. The evidence also

transpired that the 1st Appellant also armed with a knife cut the deceased.

The Learned High Court Judge discussing the law of common intention had

very correctly convicted the Appellants in this case.

CA/HCC/0263-264/24

14

In this case the Learned High Court Judge had very well considered and

analysed all the evidence placed before him to arrive at his decision.

The appeal grounds raised by all the Appellants are, therefore, not

successful.

Due to the aforesaid reasons, I affirm the conviction and the sentence dated

15/02/2023 imposed on the Appellants by the Learned High Court Judge of

Colombo.

Therefore, the Appeal is dismissed.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgement to the High

Court of Colombo along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL