==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0049/2022

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal No: Konara Mudiyanselage Rambanda CA/HCC/ 0049/2022 High Court of Monaragala Case No. HC/ 311/2019 ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

CA/HCC/0049/2022

2 | P a g e

COUNSEL : Rashmini Indatissa for the Appellant.

Dishna Warnakula, DSG for the

Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 12/12/2025 DECIDED ON : 26/02/2026

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) was indicted by the Attorney General for committing the offence

as mentioned below.

On or about the 13th July 2018 in Siyabalanduwa the accused-Appellant

committed the murder of Konara Mudiyanselage Chandrapala which is an

offence punishable under Section 296 of the Penal Code.

As the Appellant opted for a non-jury trial, the trial commenced before a

judge and the prosecution had led nine witnesses and marked productions

P1- P24 and closed the case. As the evidence presented by the prosecution

warranted a case to answer, the learned High Court Judge had called for the

defence and explained the rights of the Appellant. Having selected the right

to make a statement from the dock, the Appellant had proceeded to deny the

charge by way of his dock statement. He had called his wife as a defence

witness and closed his case.

CA/HCC/0049/2022

3 | P a g e

After considering the evidence presented by both the prosecution and the

defence, the Learned High Court Judge had convicted the Appellant as

charged and sentenced him to death on 03/02/2022.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the Appellant

has given consent to argue this matter in his absence. At the hearing the

Appellant was connected via the Zoom platform from prison.

The following Grounds of Appeal were raised on behalf of the Appellant.

1. The prosecution has failed to prove the case beyond reasonable doubt.

2. The learned Trial Judge has not considered the principles of

circumstantial evidence correctly.

3. The cumulative effect of the circumstantial evidence led by the

prosecution does not rebut the presumption of innocence.

The background of the case albeit briefly is as follows:

According to PW1, Karunaratna, he was involved in cultivation and makes

bricks for his living. The deceased, a relation of PW1, stayed in his house

and helped PW1 in making bricks. The Appellant is his brother-in-law and

was married to Padmawathi, the sister of PW1. Padmawathi was called as a

defence witness by the Appellant.

PW1 went on to say that his sister Padmawathi had come to his house with

her three children due to a family dispute she had with the Appellant. On

the day of the incident, Padmawathie was also present at the house of PW1.

PW3 is the wife of PW1. As usual, everyone had worked till 10.55pm in

preparing bricks. PW3 and Padmawathie were in the kitchen preparing

dinner for everybody. PW1, after taking a wash, when he was at home, had

heard a report of a gun from the place where the deceased was having a

CA/HCC/0049/2022

4 | P a g e

wash. As it was dark PW1 had taken his high-powered torch and had flashed

it towards the place where the gun sound came from. At that time, he had

seen the Appellant holding a gun and walking away from the scene, while

looking at his house. With the aid of the torch light, he had identified the

Appellant very correctly. PW1 had not seen the Appellant firing at the

deceased, but had clearly seen the Appellant going away with a gun looking

at his house. When the other inmates of the house came out after hearing

the gun fire, PW1 had directed all the people to go into the house, and the

deceased had died instantly. The gun had been recovered from the Appellant

upon his statement, but PW1 could not identify the gun.

PW3, Chandani, wife of PW1 also corroborated the evidence given by PW1.

Hearing the gun fire, when she came out of the house, she had seen the

Appellant walking about 60-70 feet away carrying an object similar to a long

stick-like thing. She had identified the Appellant with the aid of a torch light

flashed by her husband. Immediately, her husband PW1 had pushed

everybody into the house and closed the door.

Officers from the Govindupura Police Station had conducted investigations,

arrested the accused on the following day and recovered a gun based on his

statement under Section 27(1) of the Evidence Ordinance.

As the appeal grounds raised by the Appellants are interconnected, all

grounds will be considered together hereinafter.

The learned Counsel for the Appellant strenuously argued that the learned

High Court Judge had not adequately dealt with circumstantial evidence in

her judgement.

Circumstantial evidence is a form of indirectly proving that a fact is true by

way of proving other related facts, and would thereby require logical

interference to reach a conclusion. This is distinct from direct evidence (eg;

an eyewitness) which would prove a fact outright. Fingerprints at a crime

scene, any possible motive or opportunity are some examples of

CA/HCC/0049/2022

5 | P a g e

circumstantial evidence, where a case could be built by bringing together a

chain of circumstances. Such evidence would be used where direct proof is

not available. However, it is important to note that the jury must be

convinced beyond a reasonable doubt that the guilt of the accused is the only

reasonable conclusion, considering such evidence.

In King v. Appuhamy 46 NLR 128 the court held that:

"In order to justify the inference of guilt from purely circumstantial

evidence, the inculpatory facts must be incompatible with the innocence

of the accused and incapable of explanation upon any other reasonable

hypothesis than that of his guilt."

In Podisingho v. King 53 NLR 49 the court held that:

"in a case of circumstantial evidence, it is the duty of the trial Judge to

tell the Jury that such evidence must be totally inconsistent with the

innocence of the accused and must only be consistent with his guilt."

In Don Sunny Vs Attorney General [1998] 2 Sri.L.R. 1 it was held that:

“When a charge is sought to be proved by circumstantial evidence the

proved items of circumstantial evidence when taken together must

irresistibly point towards the only inference that the accused committed

the offence. On a consideration of all the evidence the only inference that

can be arrived at should be consistent with the guilt of the accused

only”.

CA/HCC/0049/2022

6 | P a g e

In the case of Nandasena v The Republic of Sri Lanka (1994) 3 SLR 175 it

was held:

“In a case which turns on circumstantial evidence it is essential that the

trial judge should explain clearly to the jury that circumstantial

evidence, if it is to support a conviction, must be altogether inconsistent

with the accused's innocence and explicable solely on the hypothesis of

his guilt.

It is a sufficient direction where the trial judge directed the jury that they

should find the accused guilty of the charge of murder only if they were

satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the fatal injuries were caused

by the accused having regard to the circumstantial evidence in the case.

The jury had been sufficiently directed where they were told that the

circumstantial evidence should unmistakenly point to the conclusion

that the accused and no other, inflicted the fatal stab injuries.”

In this case the learned High Court Judge was very much mindful about the

circumstantial evidence. At pages 475-477 she had extensively considered

the circumstances under which she had come to her conclusion.

The Learned High Court Judge in her judgment at pages 461-477 of the brief

very extensively analysed the evidence of the witnesses and had come to

correct finding. She had given plausible reasons as to why she believes the

evidence of PW1 and PW3 who had seen the Appellant leaving the scene of

the crime immediately after the report of the gun. PW1 had seen a gun being

carried by the Appellant while PW3 had seen the Appellant carrying an object

like a long stick.

Following the arrest of the Appellant in this case, a gun was recovered based

on his statement to the police. Although PW1 had stated that he saw the

Appellant carrying a gun when he walked away from his land, he could not

confirm the same when the gun was shown to him.

CA/HCC/0049/2022

7 | P a g e

The incident happened on 13/07/2018 and PW1 gave evidence regarding the

gun on 18/03/2021, about 03 years after the incident. As the memory of a

person fades with the lapse of time, recalling each and every minute detail of

a gruesome incident which happened suddenly and unexpectedly is

humanely impossible.

Although, PW1 had failed to identify the gun shown to him, the evidence

given by the JMO and the Government Analyst correctly concluded that the

death was caused due to firearm injuries.

Evidence of the Government Analyst confirms that waddings of gun linked

with what the police had recovered from the hut where the Appellant was

living, which further strengthen the circumstantial evidence in the

prosecution case.

In the case of Bhoginbhai Hirjibhai v. State of Gujarat [1983] AIR SC 753

the court held that:

“Ordinarily, it so happens that a witness is overtaken by events. The

witness could not have anticipated the occurrence which so often has

an element of surprise. The mental faculties therefore cannot be

expected to be attuned to absorb the details.

In the case of State of U.P. v. M.K. Anthony AIR 1985 SC 48 it was held:

“Even honest and truthful witnesses may differ in some details

unrelated to the main incident because power of observation, retention

and reproduction differ with individuals.”

In the case of Leela Ram v. State of Haryana (1999) 9 SCC 525 it was held:

“…the discrepancies found in the ocular account of two witnesses

unless they are so vital, cannot affect the credibility of the evidence of

the witnesses. There is bound to be some discrepancies between the

narrations of different witnesses when they speak on details, and

unless the contradictions are of a material dimension, the same should

CA/HCC/0049/2022

8 | P a g e

not be used to jettison the evidence in its entirety. Incidentally,

corroboration of evidence with mathematical niceties cannot be expected

in criminal cases. Minor embellishment, there may be, but variations by

reason therefor should not render the evidence of eye witnesses

unbelievable. Trivial discrepancies ought not to obliterate otherwise

acceptable evidence.”

Therefore, it is incorrect to say that the prosecution had failed to prove the

recovery evidence under Section 27(1) of Evidence Ordinance. PW7 who had

recovered the gun upon the statement of the Appellant correctly identified

the gun at the trial. In the absence of the information provided by the

Appellant, according to PW7, the gun could not have been recovered.

The identification and physical production of the actual murder weapon is

not a legal requirement in order to convict in a criminal trial. The defendant’s

guilt must be proved beyond a reasonable doubt by the prosecution, with

any available evidence. Such evidence can be a combination of direct and

circumstantial evidence. While appreciating that the presence of a murder

weapon is indeed powerful physical evidence, it is important to note that the

absence of such does not automatically result in the charges being

dismissed. In such circumstances, prosecutors would usually rely on other

forms of evidence in order to build their case.

Next, the learned Counsel for the Appellant contended that the identification

of the Appellant is doubtful under the circumstances in which PW1 and PW3

had identified the Appellant. It is the contention of PW1 that he had taken

his torch immediately after he heard the gun sound. As he does cultivation,

he is used to having a torch with him. According to PW3, the torch that they

had with them was a high powered one as in certain instances they

encounter elephant invasion. Therefore, the prosecution had placed

plausible evidence that the torch carried by PW1 was a powerful one. Hence,

the light condition was not disputed in this case.

CA/HCC/0049/2022

9 | P a g e

Most of the time, the proper identification of an accused person is the most

fundamental and important issue that needs to be determined in a criminal

trial. In this case it is very important to discuss whether the prosecution has

established the identity of the Appellant beyond reasonable doubt.

Phipson, in his book titled Phipson on Evidence (Sweet & Maxwell

Thomson Reuters,17th Edn.2015) states that:

“it is often important to establish the identity of a person who a witness

testifies that he saw on a relevant occasion. Sometimes, the witness will

testify that he had seen the person before, or even know the person well,

and therefore recognised the person observed on the relevant occasion”.

Many crimes are committed under poor light conditions when no-one is able

to identify the accused person properly. In such circumstances, the case will

entirely rest on the proper identification of the accused person. If the

identification is compromised, the net result would be the acquittal of the

accused person from the case. Hence, identification evidence should be

considered very seriously due to its delicate nature.

In Alexander v. R (1981) 145 CLR 395 at 426, Mason,J stated that:

“Identification is notoriously uncertain. It depends upon so many variables.

They include the difficulty one has in recognising on a subsequent occasion

a person observed, perhaps fleetingly, on a former occasion; the extent of

the opportunity for observation on a variety of circumstances; the vagaries

of human perception and recollection; and the tendency of the mind to

respond to suggestions, notably the tendency to substitute a photographic

image once seen for a hazy recollection of the person initially observed”.

In Visveswaran v State (2003) 6 SCC 73 the court held that:

“Before we notice the circumstances proving the case against the appellant

and establishing his identity beyond reasonable doubt, it has to be borne

in mind that the approach required to be adopted by courts in such cases

CA/HCC/0049/2022

10 | P a g e

has to be different. The cases are required to be dealt with utmost

sensitivity. (…..) Further, the evidence is required to be appreciated having

regard to the background of the entire case and not in isolation”.

In Turnbull [1977] QB 224 the Court of Appeal laid down the following

guidelines for judges in trials that involve disputed identification evidence.

“Where the case against an accused depends wholly or substantially on

the correctness of one or more identifications of the accused, which the

defence alleges to be mistaken, the judge should warn the jury of the

special need for caution before convicting the accused in reliance on the

correctness of the identification(s)”.

The judge should tell the jury that:

(i) caution is required to avoid the risk of injustice;

(ii) a witness who is honest may be wrong even if they are convinced,

they are right;

(iii) a witness who is convincing may still be wrong;

(iv) more than one witness may be wrong;

(v) a witness who recognises the defendant, even when the witness

knows the defendant very well, may be wrong.

“The Judge should direct the jury to examine closely the circumstances in

which the identification by each witness came to be made”.

Some of these circumstances may include:

(i) the length of time the accused was observed by the witness;

(ii) the distance the witness was from the accused;

(iii) the state of the light;

(iv) the length of time elapsed between the original observation and

the subsequent identification to the police.

CA/HCC/0049/2022

11 | P a g e

Guided by the above-mentioned judgments and writings now I consider

whether the identity of the Appellant was established beyond reasonable

doubt by the prosecution in this case.

In this case, the Appellant is not a stranger to PW1 and PW3. The Appellant

is a close relative of the witnesses PW1 and PW3. Further, the torch used by

PW1 was a high powered one and the light condition was not disputed in this

case. Additionally, both PW1 and PW3 had described the dress of the

Appellant. Hence, I conclude that the identification of the Appellant has been

established beyond a reasonable doubt.

Further, the Learned High Court Judge had very correctly disregarded the

contradictions marked on the evidence given by PW1 and PW3, stating that

the said contradictions are not material enough to create a doubt about the

core of the prosecution case.

In the case of The Attorney General v. Sandanam Pitchi Mary Theresa

(2011) 2 Sri L.R. 292 held that,

“Witnesses should not be disbelieved on account of trifling discrepancies

and omissions. When contradictions are marked, the Judge should direct

his attention to whether they are material or not and the witness should

be given an opportunity of explaining that matter.”

In this case the Appellant made a very short dock statement and submitted

that the deceased had lots of enemies as he had a cannabis cultivation. He

denied the charge. A mere denial and mere surmise would not be sufficient

in the circumstances of this case.

Additionally, the Appellant had called his wife, who is the sister of PW1 to

give evidence on his behalf. In her evidence she did not disclose any of the

matters stated by the Appellant in his dock statement. She further said, that

the Appellant was very suspicious about her when she goes for work with

men. Due to this suspicious attitude, he had suspected that she was having

an affair with the deceased, who was an unmarried man at the time of his

CA/HCC/0049/2022

12 | P a g e

demise. Further she admitted that the deceased used to provide her with

certain amenities and had also come to see her.

Although the prosecution is not required to elicit motive of the crime, if the

evidence transpires motive, it certainly strengthens the prosecution case.

In this case, the learned High Court had the exclusive opportunity of

observing the demeanour and deportment of all the witnesses, including the

defence witness Padmawathi.

In this case, the learned High Court Judge had very extensively considered

both the prosecution and the defence witnesses and properly evaluated the

evidence given by them. I agree with her conclusion that the evidence given

by PW1 and PW3 is not tainted with uncertainty or ambiguity and that it

certainly passes the tests of probability, consistency and spontaneity.

In the case of Wickremasuriya v. Dedoleena and others 1996 [2] SLR 95

Jayasuriya J held that;

“A judge, in applying the Test of Probability and Improbability relies

heavily on his knowledge of men and matters and the patterns of

conduct observed by human beings both ingenious as well as those who

are less talented and fortunate”

In the case of Singharam Thiyagarajah v. Attorney General C.A.

216/2010 (H.C. Colombo B 1645/2006), in the judgment dated 10 October

2014, it was noted that:

“I wish to observe that the realities of life and the testimony of a witness

cannot always be co-related. Nothing is perfect in life and the truth does

not surface so easily as a man so bias could attempt to hide the truth or

distort it. The test of probability needs to be applied and recognized to

grapple with normal human behaviour and problems and pave the way

for likelihood of occurrence.”

CA/HCC/0049/2022

13 | P a g e

When the evidence presented against the Appellant is considered, I conclude

that the prosecution had succeeded in adducing highly incriminating

evidence against the Appellant and thereby has established the charge

beyond reasonable doubt.

As such, I conclude, that this is not an appropriate case in which to interfere

with the findings of the Learned High Court Judge of Monaragala dated

03/02/2022. Hence, I dismiss the Appeal.

The Registrar is directed to send this judgment to the High Court of

Monaragala along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL