IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of the application for a writ in thenature of a writ of certiorari and mandamusunder article 140 of the Constitution of theRepublic of Sri Lanka

Agampodi Rohini Mendis

No.08 B, Temple Road,

Wanduruppa,

Ambalantota.

Complainant

Vs.

1. G. H. Premadasa

72, D 13, Elayaya 02,Colombagera,Embilipitiya

2. Keedaman Mendis

Jayasinghe alias EamanWanduruooa,Ambalantota

RESPONDENTS

1

Court of Appeal Case No:CA/WRIT/168/2018

And Now Between

Keedaman MendisJayasinghe alias EamanWanduruppa,Ambalantota

2 nd Respondent/Petitioner

Vs

1. Agampodi Rohini Mendis

No 08. B, Temple Road,Wanduruppa,Ambalantota.Complainant/ Respondent

2. G. H. Premadasa

72, D 13, Elayaya 02,Colombagedara,Embilipitiya

1 st Respondent / Respondent

3. Chaminda Ekanayaka

Assistant Commissioner of AgrarianDevelopmentAgrarian Development Office,Hambantota.

4. D. V. Bandulasena

Commissioner General of AgrarianDevelopmentNo. 42, Sir Marcus Fernando Mawatha,P O Box 537, Colombo 07

Respondents

2

Before:C.P Kirtisinghe, JMayadunne Corea, J

Counsel:W. Dayarathne P.C. with R Jayawardena for the 2nd Respondent /PetitionerSC Sabrina Ahamed for 3rd & 4th Respondent/RespondentSaanranath Palliyaguruge for Complainant Respondent

Argued on:02/08/2022

WrittenSubmissions:

Tendered by 2nd Respondent/Petitioner on 01/03/2021 and 09/08/20223rd & 4th Respondents 24/07/2022 and 03/08/2022

Decided on:29/09/2022

Mayadunne Corea J

The facts of the case briefly are as follows, the 2nd Respondent Petitioner who will be called thePetitioner hereinafter, alleges that he is the subtenant cultivator of the paddy field calledLiyanamahattayagama Kumbura. He further alleges that the said paddy field belonged to twobrothers who had later transferred it to the Complainant-Respondent. The 1st Respondent hadbeen the tenant cultivator of the said paddy filed since 1986. As the 1st Respondent had seriouslyfallen ill, it is alleged that he had gone with the Petitioner to one Somapala, whom he believedwas the owner, and had sought his consent for the Petitioner to cultivate the paddy field. It is theposition of the Petitioner that the said Somapala had given consent on the basis that the Petitionerpays him the rent. However, the ownership of the paddy field had changed and the new owner,the Complainant Respondent subsequently complained in terms of section 7(10) of the AgrarianDevelopment Act No 46 of 2000, alleging that the 1st Respondent had without consent sublet thepaddy field to the Petitioner, thereby in violations of the provisions of the Agrarian DevelopmentAct and had requested to cancel the tenancy rights of the 1st Respondent-Respondent and toobtain the vacant position. Thereafter the Assistant Commissioner fixed the matter for inquiry.The Petitioner as well as the Complainant Respondents agent had taken part in the inquiry. Afterthe conclusion of the inquiry, both parties had been given the opportunity to file their writtensubmissions and subsequently, the 3rd Respondent delivered his order. Being aggrieved by thesaid order, the Petitioner has filed this application seeking a writ of certiorari and a writ ofMandamus.

The complaint of the Petitioner

The Petitioner complains that he was the tenant cultivator of the paddy field in question and the3rd Respondents order is contrary to law and that he has failed to consider the material submitted

3

by him and has only considered the material of the complainant Respondent and thereby hasviolated the rule of Audi Altrem Partem.

At the argument stage, the Petitioner complained that the 3rd Respondents order violates section7(10) of the Act.

The Petitioner has prayed for the following relief.

(b) issue a mandate in the nature of a writ of certiorari to quash the decision of the 3 rd

Respondent on 08/03/2018

(c) issue a mandate in the nature of a writ of mandamus against the 3rd and 4th Respondents toaccept the 2nd Respondent/ Petitioner as the Tenant Cultivator.

All parties made extensive submissions to this Court and have filed their respective writtensubmissions.

The Complainant-Respondent, as well as the 3rd and 4th Respondents, took several objectionspertaining to the Petitioners application and at the argument stage, all the Respondents arguedinteralia that there is misrepresentation and willful suppression of material facts and thereforethe Petitioners application has to fail.

Both the Claimant-Respondent and the Petitioner are not at variance on the fact that the originalowners of half a share of the paddy field were Somapala Mendis and Sugathadas Mendis. Thesaid Somapala Mendis is the father of the Complainant-Respondent. In the year 1996, SomapalaMendis had given his undivided share to the daughter, the Complainant-Respondent.Thereafter the said Sugathadasa Mendis too had transferred his undivided share to theComplainant-Respondent in the year 2005. Thus, the Claimant-Respondent had become theowner of the paddy field in question. Her name has been registered in the paddy land register.1

However, it is the contention of the Petitioner that despite the ownership being transferred, thesaid Somapala and Sugathadasa had remained the landlords of the paddy field. At the argumentstage, the Learned Presidents Counsel appearing for the Petitioner, submitted that they are notcontesting the ownership of the Claimant-Respondents. It is pertinent to note that the Petitionerhimself has averred in his petition that the said Somapala had gifted his share to theComplainant-Respondent in 1996 by way of a deed of gift, leaving the life interest to them.However, the said life interest too had been transferred to the daughter on 21.12.2004. It is notdisputed that the co-owner Sugathadasa Mendis too had gifted his undivided share to theComplainant-Respondent on 15.09.2005 making the Complainant-Respondent the absoluteowner of the paddy field. It is also common ground that the 1st Respondent-Respondent is theregistered tenant cultivator. The parties are not in dispute that the applicable law is the AgrarianDevelopment Act No 46 of 2000. The parties are also not in dispute that the Petitioner iscultivating the land but is not registered as the tenant cultivator in the agrarian lands register.While the Petitioner claims that he is cultivating in the capacity of the tenant cultivator, theClaimant-Respondent contends that he is a sublessee of the 1st Respondent and the 1st

1 Paddy land register marked P1

4

Respondent had sublet his rights of tenant cultivator without the consent or the approval of theClaimant-owner and thereby contravened the provisions of the Agrarian Development Act2.

The question before the inquiring officer was whether the 1st Respondent sublet his tenancyrights in contravention of the provisions of the Agrarian Development Act.

The Petitioner contends that the 1st Respondent-Respondent the tenant cultivator had fallen ill inthe year 1998 and that on the request of the tenant cultivator, he had taken over and commencedcultivating. It is his position that he had gone with the 1st Respondent-Respondent to meet theowner Sompala Mendis and with his consent had commenced cultivating. This position wasvehemently denied by the Claimant-Respondent. In the face of this denial, the Petitioner failed tosubstantiate his contention with any documentary evidence and failed to explain why he wasunable to call the said Somapala Mendis as a witness. It is pertinent to note that as per the statute,for the Petitioner to succeed as the subtenant cultivator, he should have established that he was inpossession of the written consent of the owner of the paddy field, which the Petitioner has failedto demonstrate. The Petitioners contention of him being the tenant cultivator still becomes weakin view of document 1X2 which will be dealt with elsewhere in this judgment. Thus, whether thePetitioner is cultivating this paddy field with the consent of the owner, becomes a disputed fact.

As submitted, the Complainant-Respondents complaint to the Commissioner was two folds,namely, the Petitioner is not the tenant cultivator but a sublessee of the tenant cultivator, who hadsublet the tenancy without the consent of the owner, thereby violating the provisions of the Actand for eviction.

In response, it was the contention of the Petitioner that even at the time of the inquiry, thePetitioner was cultivating the paddy field and thereby he becomes the tenant cultivator and thathe had at all times given the rent to the owner, firstly to Somapala and thereafter to theComplainant-Respondent. This contention too was denied by the Complainant-Respondent

This Court observes that the Petitioner has failed to submit before the Commissioner or to thisCourt any receipts pertaining to the payment of the rent by him. The Petitioner had submittedbefore the Commissioner that the inability to tender the receipts for rent was due to his housebeing affected by the tsunami in the year 2004. However, as submitted by the Complainant-Respondent, this Court observes that the Petitioner has failed to adduce any independentevidence or material to substantiate this contention. Nevertheless, it is pertinent to note that thePetitioner had failed to submit any receipts for payment of rent by him even after the year 2004till the commencement of the inquiry before the Commissioner.

It is also pertinent to note that as reflected in the documents marked 1R1 to 1R5 before theCommissioner, the Respondents had issued rental receipts for the period 2005/2006 and2007/2008. The said receipts had been issued in the name of the registered tenant cultivatorPremadasa. This refutes the contention of the Petitioner that he had been the tenant cultivatorsince 1998 and that it was he who had paid the rent. The learned Presidents Counsel for thePetitioner submitted that even though the receipts had been issued in the name of the 1st

Respondent Premadasa, the rent was paid by the Petitioner. It was further submitted by the

2 Section 7(10) of Act no 46 of 2000

5

learned Counsel for the Petitioner, that 1st Respondent-Respondent Premadasa, in his evidencebefore the Commissioner, had denied the said receipts being issued to him. However, thePetitioner was unable to explain to this Court why he had not objected to the receipts beingissued in the name of the 1st Respondent- Respondent when the Petitioner was paying the rentand also as alleged by the Petitioner if the Petitioner was the tenant cultivator. This absence ofexplanation in our view supports the contention of the complainant Respondent, that as far asthey were concerned, the tenant cultivator was the 1st Respondent Premadasa and negates thePetitioners argument that he was the tenant cultivator and was cultivating with the consent ofthe owner.

The Petitioners main contention before this Court was that the order given by the Commissioner(marked Y by the Petitioner and 3R2 by the Respondents) is in violation of section 7(10) of theAct and thereby should be quashed by way of a writ of certiorari. At this stage, it will bepertinent to consider the provisions of the relevant law namely section 7(10) of the AgrarianDevelopment Act No 46 of 2000. The said section reads as follows;

Where a person (hereafter in this subsection referred to as the lessor) lets any extent of paddyland to any other person (hereafter in this subsection referred to as the lessee)and the lesseedoes not become the tenant cultivator of such extent by reason of the fact that he is not thecultivator of such extent by reason of the fact that he is not the cultivator thereof, then if thelessee lets such extent to any person (hereafter in this subsection referred to as the sub-tenantcultivator) and extent by reason of his being the cultivator thereof, the sub tenants right as thetenant cultivator of such extent shall not be affected in any manner by the termination of thelease granted by the lessor to the lessee:

Provided that the lessee shall not let such extent of paddy land to a sub-tenant cultivatorunless he-

(a) Obtains the consent in writing of the owner of such extent of paddy land; and(b) Thereafter notifies the Agrarian Development Council within whose area of authority

such extent of paddy land wholly or mainly lies:

Provided further that where any extent of paddy land is let by a lessee to a sub-tenantcultivator without obtaining the consent in writing of the owner of such extent of paddy landsuch sub-tenant cultivator shall not be entitled to any of the rights of a tenant cultivator inrespect of such extent of paddy land. The Commissioner-General, after inquiry, shall inwriting order that the subtenant cultivator shall vacate such extent of paddy land on or beforesuch date as shall be specified in that order and if such sub tenant cultivator fails to complywith such order, he shall be evicted from such extent in accordance with the provisions ofsection 8 and the landlord shall be entitled to cultivate such extent of paddy land.

The attention of this Court was drawn to the paddy land register that had been marked in theproceedings before the Commissioner. As per the said registry extracts which had been issued inthe years 2008 and 2013, the tenant cultivators name is reflected as of the 1st Respondent-Respondent Premadasa. As per section 53(6) of Act no 46 of 2000 the said register is prima faciaproof of the facts stated therein. Nevertheless, we do agree with the learned presidents

6

Counsels submission that the prima facia proof offered by the extracts of the paddy landregistry can be rebutted. However, this should be done with credible and cogent evidence. Theburden is on the Petitioner to submit independent oral and documentary evidence in rebuttal. Inour view, the Petitioner has failed to rebut this presumption and has failed to adduce any reasonfor his failure to effect an amendment and insert his name on the register, especially as alleged, ifhe had been the tenant cultivator from 1998 till the complaint was made. As per document 3R2the complaint had been made in the year 2011. Even at the argument stage, the Petitioner failedto give an explanation as to why he failed to take any steps pertaining to amending and insertinghis name in the register. Thus, in our view, the Petitioner has failed to avail himself of the bestevidence to establish his tenancy. Accordingly, this Court respectfully disagrees with thePetitioners argument that there is sufficient evidence adduced by him to rebut the presumption.With his failure to sufficiently rebut with cogent evidence, the presumption defeats hiscontention that he was the legally accepted tenant.

It is also pertinent to note that if a tenant wants to relinquish his tenancy rights it is provided forin the Act itself3. The Petitioner has failed to establish before the Commissioner or this Court thatthe 2nd Respondent had ceded his rights for tenancy under the Act. He has failed to produce anydocument or independent evidence to establish his contention that subsequent to the 2nd

Respondent ceding his rights as the tenant cultivator, he had the consent and the recognition ofthe owner to be the tenant cultivator as per the provisions of the Act.

This Court has considered the Petitioners contention that he had assumed the tenancy rights andshould be considered the tenant cultivator when the 1st Respondent ceded his tenancy rights asopposed to the Claimant Respondents argument that the Petitioner is only a sublessee of the 1st

Respondent and was cultivating in the said capacity of a sublessee. In this regard, it is alsopertinent to consider the evidence of 1st Respondent-Respondent Premadasa that had been placedbefore this court (page 66 of the brief) which states as follows.

Q -: ...........

A-:

This clearly establishes that the 1st Respondent, the tenant cultivator had sublet the tenancy to thePetitioner.

Impugned order

The Petitioner submitted the impugned order marked as Y however the Respondentscontended that the said purported order tendered by the Petitioner is only a part of the order andtendered the complete order marked as 3R2 to which the learned presidents Counsel appearingfor the Petitioner did not object.

The Petitioners main contention was that he has established that he had cultivated the saidpaddy field from 1998 and that he had cultivated the said land in the capacity of a tenantcultivator on the basis that the original tenant cultivator had relinquished his tenancy rights. Hefurther argued that he cultivated with the consent of the owner who was one Somapala. It was

3 Section 3

7

the contention of the Petitioner that the Commissioner has failed to consider the evidence placedbefore him which rebuts the entry in the paddy lands register and the Respondents argument thatthe tenant cultivator is the 1st Respondent Premadasa. The Learned Presidents counsel hassubmitted a plethora of judgments on rebuttal of prima face evidence and submitted that theCommissioners failure to consider the Petitioner as the tenant cultivator in arriving at his ordershould be quashed as the Commissioner had come to an erroneous conclusion in violation ofsection 7 (10) of Act No 46 of 2000.

At this stage, keeping in mind that this is a writ application and not an appeal, the court willconsider the complaint made to the Commissioner General by the Complainant-Respondent andthe relief prayed. Especially prayers I and II which reads as follows;

I. 02 , , 2000 . 46 07 (10) , , 01

II. , 2000 46 08. 08.(1) (2) 01.02. , ,

In view of the complaint of the Complainant Respondent which is marked as 3R1 the complaintbefore the Commissioner was to determine whether the 1st Respondent G H Premadasa had inviolation of Section 7(10) of the act had sublet the tenancy rights. If so, to cancel the tenancyrights of the 1st Respondent Premadasa and to obtain procession of the paddy field. As submittedthe relevant provision that will resolve this issue is the proviso to section 7(10) of the Act. Thesaid section reads as follows;

Where a person (hereafter in this subsection referred to as the lessor) lets any extent of paddyland to any other person (hereafter in this subsection referred to as the lessee)and the lesseedoes not become the tenant cultivator of such extent by reason of the fact that he is not thecultivator of such extent by reason of the fact that he is not the cultivator thereof, then if thelessee lets such extent to any person (hereafter in this subsection referred to as the sub-tenantcultivator) and extent by reason of his being the cultivator thereof, the sub tenants right as thetenant cultivator of such extent shall not be affected in any manner by the termination of thelease granted by the lessor to the lessee:

Provided that the lessee shall not let such extent of paddy land to a sub-tenant cultivatorunless he-

III.Obtains the consent in writing of the owner of such extent of paddy land; and

8

IV.Thereafter notifies the Agrarian Development Council within whose area ofauthority such extent of paddy land wholly or mainly lies:

Provided further that where any extent of paddy land is let by a lessee to a sub-tenantcultivator without obtaining the consent in writing of the owner of such extent of paddy landsuch sub-tenant cultivator shall not be entitled to any of the rights of a tenant cultivator inrespect of such extent of paddy land. The Commissioner-General, after inquiry, shall inwriting order that the subtenant cultivator shall vacate such extent of paddy land on or beforesuch date as shall be specified in that order and if such sub tenant cultivator fails to complywith such order he shall be evicted from such extent in accordance with the provisions ofsection 8 and the landlord shall be entitled to cultivate such extent of paddy land.

The relief prayed by the Complainant-Respondent is actually to terminate the 1st Respondent GM Premadasas tenancy and for subsequent eviction of 1st and 2nd Respondents to the applicationbefore the commissioner, for the violations of the provisions of the act. As stated elsewhere inthis judgment and after considering the proceedings before the Commissioner that has beensubmitted to this Court, it is pertinent to note that Premadasa, the 1st Respondent-Respondenthimself has conceded that he is no longer cultivating the said land. He himself has conceded thathe has sublet to the Petitioner. (Page 66 of the brief). No documentary proof has been submittedto demonstrate that the owners consent had been obtained prior to the Petitioner commencingcultivating the paddy field. The issue before the Commissioner had been not to determinewhether the Petitioner was the tenant cultivator, but to determine, whether there had been aviolation of the provision and the proviso to section 7(10) of the Agrarian Development Act. Inthis context and in view of the material placed before this Court, we find the Petitioner has failedto demonstrate any substantial ground to obtain the relief in the nature of a writ of certiorari.

Has the Petitioner been given a fair hearing?

The Petitioner at the argument stage did not pursue the contention that the order subsequent tothe inquiry had been arrived at violating the doctrine of audiultrempartem. However, this Courtobserves that the parties were not at variance on the fact that there had been an inquiry. ThePetitioner had been afforded the opportunity to cross-examine the complainant and also theparties had filed their respective written submissions. The Petitioner himself had submitted to theCourt the copy of the proceedings. The inquiring officer had come to a decision subsequent tothe proceedings, none of these facts were contested by the Petitioner. Though the Petitionercontended that the inquiring officer had failed to consider the submission made by the Petitionerbut had arrived at the decision based only on the Complainant-Respondents evidence, for thereasons stated above, this Court cannot agree with the said submission.

Suppression of material facts and lack of uberima fides

Respondents took several preliminary objections pertaining to the maintainability of thisapplication. Mainly on suppression of material facts and lack of uberima fides. They submittedthat there had been an inquiry against the 1st Respondent for non-payment of rent to the

9

Complainant Respondent in the year 2000. The proceedings of the said inquiry had been markedas 1X1. The said proceedings have been instituted by Somapala Mendis and the Complainant-Respondent against the 1st Respondent-Respondent Premadasa. At the said inquiry the 1st

Respondent-Respondent had admitted that he has not paid the rent for the 1999 Yala season andhe had promised to pay the rent and the arrears rent from the 1999/2000 harvest. This clearlyestablishes that even in the year 2000, the tenant cultivator had been Premadasa, the 1st

Respondent-Respondent. Further, as per document 1X2 the 1st Respondent-RespondentPremadasa had paid the arrears rental on 17.10.2000. These two documents establish thatPremadasa had been the tenant cultivator in the year 2000 and contradicts the Petitionersposition that he had been the tenant cultivator since 1998. The Petitioner has failed to give anyexplanation pertaining to this contradiction. This Court observes that the Petitioner has failed todisclose these documents to the court.

The Petitioner is seeking a remedy by way of a writ from this Court. It is trite law that a partywho seeks an equitable remedy should come with clean hands. In exercising the saiddiscretionary remedy, the court expects the party who invokes the jurisdiction of the court tomake full and fair disclosure of all material facts before this Court. Even after 1X1 and 1X2 hadbeen tendered to this Court by the Respondents, the Petitioner has failed to explain his failure todisclose these two documents. The Petitioner failed to give any explanation even at a time ofargument on this contradiction, mainly the 1st Respondents representation in the year 2000, thathe was the tenant cultivator. The said two documents do not demonstrate the Petitioners versionthat by the year 2000 the 1st Respondent had ceded his tenancy rights and the Petitioner hadbecome the tenant cultivator. This becomes a material suppression and a misrepresentationgiven the circumstances that one of the complainants as reflected in 1X1 is Somapala, who isalleged to have given consent to the 1st Respondent to cede his rights as the tenant cultivator andgiven the consent to the Petitioner to cultivate.

Collettes Ltd. V. Commissioner of Labour And Others (1989) 2 SLR 16 It has beenrepeatedly pointed out by our courts that a full and fair disclosure of all material facts shouldbe placed before the Court when an application for a Writ of Injunction is made and thediscretionary powers of the courts are invoked in that regard.Thus it is essential that,when a party invokes the Writ jurisdiction or applies for an Injunction to this Court* all factsmust be clearly, fairly and fully pleaded before the Court, so that Court would be made awareof all the relevant matters. It is necessary that this procedure must be followed by all litigantswho come before this Court in order to ensure that justice and fairplay would prevail.

Alphonsu Appuhamy v Hettiarachchi (1973) 77 NLR 131 when an application for aprerogative writ or an injunction is made, it is the duty of the petitioner to place before theCourt, before it issues notice in the first instance, a full and truthful disclosure of all thematerial facts; the petitioner must act with uberrima fides.

10

In Biso Menika Vs Cyril De Alwis & others 1982 (1) SLR 368 it was held A person whoapplies for the extra-ordinary remedy of writ must come with clean hands and must notsuppress any relevant facts from Court. He must refrain from making any misleadingstatements to Court. The importance of coming to court with clean hands was recently stressedin Orient Pearl Hotels vs Cey Nor-Foundation Limited & others CA Writ 226/2018 decidedon 02.08.2021 where it was held It is settled law that a party seeking prerogative relief shouldcome to court with clean hands. The expression is derived from one of equitys maxims Hewho comes to Equity must come with clean hands.

In our view, we find that the Petitioner by his own acts has disentitled himself to the relivesprayed. Namely, he has failed to demonstrate that he has taken any meaningful steps to amendthe paddy land register and get himself registered as the tenant cultivator thus, depriving him ofany legal right. We also find that in view of documents 1X1 and 1X2 and also of documents1R1 1R5 marked before the Commissioner, and to which the Courts attention was drawn, thePetitioners inability to submit any receipts issued to him for payment of rent up to theproceedings being filed before the Commissioner, defeats the Petitioners argument that he is thetenant cultivator and had been cultivating since 1998. Further in view of the above-mentionedmarked documents and in view of the Complainant-Respondents denial of the Petitioner beingthe tenant cultivator, the Petitioners contention of him cultivating the land since 1998 as thetenant cultivator becomes a disputed fact.

Another instance the Petitioner has failed to explain is, as submitted by the learned state Counsel,the document 1X2 is an acknowledgment issued by the Complainant-Respondent. In the saiddocument the 1st Respondent-Respondent had signed when he was handing over the rent in hiscapacity as the tenant cultivator. One of the witnesses in this transaction of handing over the rentis the Petitioner. This clearly establishes that in the year 2000 the tenant cultivator had been the1st Respondent-Respondent. The Petitioner has failed to explain how he attested as a witness forhanding over of the rent by the 1st Respondent-Respondent if the Petitioner was the tenantcultivator as alleged by himself. The Petitioner has failed to explain his failure to disclose thisdocument. Thus, the objection on suppression and misrepresentation succeeds.

We also find that the Petitioner has failed to demonstrate any illegality, irrationality orprocedural impropriety of the proceedings before the Commissioner General or in the impugnedorder.

This Court also observes that the Petitioner has failed to demonstrate that he had requested thathe be determined as the tenant cultivator and accordingly to amend the Register and that requesthad been refused. In light of the above observation, and in the absence of a refusal, this Court isof the view that prayer (C) of the petition has to fail. In the case of Ratnayake and Others vC.D Perera and others (1982) 2 SLR 451 at 456, it was held, that The general rule ofmandamus is that its function is to compel a public authority to do its duty. The essence ofmandamus is that it is a command issued by the Superior Court for the performance of publiclegal duty. Where officials have a public duty to perform and have refused to perform,

11

mandamus will lie to secure the performance of the public duty, in the performance of whichthe applicant has a sufficient legal interest.

Accordingly, in the absence of a refusal, this Court will be reluctant to grant a writ of mandamus.

In any event prayer (C) of the petition has to fail, as this Court observes that in the absence of thePetitioner taking any steps to amend the entries in the register and to insert his name as the tenantcultivator and considering the contradictory evidence that has been demonstrated by 1X1 and1X2, in our view, the Petitioner has also failed to demonstrate that he has a sufficient legal rightto be the tenant cultivator as opposed to being a sublessee of the 1st Respondent-Respondent.When the Petitioner has failed to demonstrate his legal right to be considered as the tenantcultivator, the court will be reluctant to issue a writ of mandamus. In this instance, we do take theguidance of Credit Information Bureau of Sri Lanka Vs Messrs Jafferiee & Jafferjee (Pvt)Ltd (2005) 2 SLR 89 where it was held, There is rich and profuse case law on Mandamus onthe conditions to be satisfied by the Applicant. Some of the conditions precedents the issue ofMandamus appear to be:

(a) The Applicant must have a legal right to the performance of a legal duty by the partiesagainst whom the Mandamus is sought (R v Barnstaples Justices)

(b) The right to be enforced must be a Public Right and the duty sought to be enforced mustbe of a public nature.

(c) The legal right to compel must reside in the Applicant himself (R v Lewisham Union)

(d) The application must be made in good faith and not for an indirect purpose

(e) The application must be preceded by a distinct demand for the performance of the duty

(f) The person or body to whom the writ is directed must be subject to the jurisdiction of thecourt issuing the writ.

(g) The Court will as a general rule and in the exercise of its discretion refuse writ ofMandamus when there is another special remedy available which is not less convenient,beneficial, and effective

The counsel appearing for the Respondents raised another objection on a want of necessaryparties and contended that the 4th Respondent had ceased to hold office and the Petitioner hadfailed to take any meaningful steps to effect substitution before the matter was taken up forargument. It is the contention of the Complainant Respondent that in prayer (C) the writ ofmandamus is sought against the 4th Respondent and in the absence of the named 4th Respondent,this relief has to fail. The Petitioner has failed to give any response to this objection.

In Martin and another Vs. Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Services and 2 others [2011(2SLR)] it was held, The 2nd and the 3rd respondents are Assistant Commissioner of AgrarianServices. They are not natural persons. In Haniffa vs Chairman Urban Council,Nawalapitiya Thmabiah J held: A mandamus can only issue against a natural person whoholds a public office. Accordingly in an application for a writ of mandamus against the

12

Chairman of an Urban Council, the petitioner must name the individual person against whomthe writ can be issued.

The Petitioner has sought the relief of a writ of mandamus against the 3rd and 4th Respondents. Inour view, the Petitioner should be vigilant to take steps to make the necessary amendments andsubstitute the correct party against whom he can have an effective judgment. Specifically, whenseeking the relief of a writ of mandamus. However even after it was brought to the notice of thecourt and to all parties, there was no application to amend the caption and for substitution. Thus,the Respondents submission that the said relief even if granted would be futile, also succeeds.

Accordingly, for the aforesaid reasons set out above in this judgment, this Court refuses to grantthe reliefs prayed in the petition and we dismiss this application without cost.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

C.P Kirtisinghe, J

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

13