WRT/0487/21

Page 1 of 12

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Orders in

the nature of Writs of Certiorari, Prohibition

and Mandamus under and in terms of Article

140 of the Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Chief Petty Officer Heeni Pellage

Harischandra (XC33823)

234/A, Alakanda, Palolpitiya,

Thihagoda, Matara.

PETITIONER

C.A. Case No. WRT/0487/21

Vs.

1. Vice Admiral Nishantha Ulugetenne,

Commander – Sri Lanka Navy,

Navy Headquarters,

Colombo.

1A. Vice Admiral Priyantha Perera,

Commander – Sri Lanka Navy,

Navy Headquarters,

Colombo.

2. Cdr. S. C. Annathugoda,

Commanding Officer,

Naval and Maritime Academy,

Sri Lanka Navy Dockyard,

Trincomalee.

WRT/0487/21

Page 2 of 12

3. Captain C.T. Gunarathne,

SLNS Suranimala,

Colombo Port, Malwatta Road,

Colombo 01.

4. Lieutenant S. P. Y. D. A. Subasinghe,

Naval and Maritime Academy,

Sri Lanka Navy Dockyard,

Trincomalee.

5. Major General (Rtd.) Kamal Gunaratne,

The Secretary,

Ministry of Defence,

15/5, Baladaksha Mawatha,

Colombo 03.

RESPONDENTS

BEFORE : K. M. G. H. KULATUNGA, J.

COUNSEL : Shantha Jayawardena with Nayantha Wijesundera, instructed

by Dinesh De Silva, for the Petitioner.

Shemanthi Dunuwille, S.C., for the Respondents.

ARGUED ON : 26.09.2025

DECIDED ON : 02.10.2025

JUDGEMENT

K. M. G. H. KULATUNGA, J.

1. The petitioner is a sailor attached to the Sri Lanka Navy holding the

rank of Chief Petty Officer as at now. The petitioner had been charged

at a Summary Trial under the Navy Act, No. 34 of 1950, and had been

found guilty. The Presiding Officer has recommended dismissal from

the Navy without disgrace. This application is against the said finding

WRT/0487/21

Page 3 of 12

and the recommendation marked P-17. The petitioner is assailing the

validity of the said inquiry and seeking a writ of certiorari to quash the

said finding on the following grounds:

i. the failure to give reasons for the finding of guilt and

convictions; and

ii. the Summary Trial was conducted in violation of the

principles of natural justice and contrary to the procedure

prescribed by the Sri Lanka Navy Order 0501 on “Boards

of Inquiry and Summary Trials” (marked P-15).

Facts.

2. The petitioner has not annexed and produced the Inquiry Proceedings

and/or the findings of the Summary Trial and has only produced

document P-17, which is a message communicated within the Sri

Lanka Navy in which certain information has been transmitted that a

warrant of punishment against the petitioner had been read over to the

him and also that the punishment indicated is “dismissal from SLN

without disgrace.” The petitioner prayed for the calling of the entire

record of the summary trial. The respondents, along with the

objections, tendered a true copy of the entire proceedings, marked R-2.

These proceedings contain the charge preferred, the procedure followed,

and the evidence led in its totality, and upon concluding the evidence

of the respective parties, the submissions made by the Prosecuting

Officer and the Defending Officer are also included therein.

3. Upon the conclusion of the Prosecuting Officer’s address, the decision

and opinion of the Presiding Officer of the Summary Trial is recorded.

This is followed by the warrant of sentence. According to R-2, the

Presiding Officer’s determination and opinion merely contains three

lines and is to the effect that he had considered the preliminary

investigation report and the evidence and found that these have

established that the accused (the petitioner) is guilty and he had been

convicted thereon.

WRT/0487/21

Page 4 of 12

4. The sentence, according to the warrant, is “dismissal from SLN without

disgrace.” Accordingly, R-2 thus contains, in its totality, the

proceedings of the Summary Trial held on 10.06.2021, which is referred

to and reflected in P-17. The petitioner, by prayer (c), is seeking a writ

of certiorari to quash the entirety of the proceedings of the Summary

Trial held on 10.06.2021. Then, by prayer (d), he is seeking the

quashing of the finding of guilt as reflected in P-17, and then, by prayer

(e), he is seeking a writ of certiorari to quash the punishment imposed

to dismiss the petitioner from the Sri Lanka Navy without disgrace as

reflected in P-17. There are several other consequential remedies by way

of writs of prohibition and mandamus sought by the petitioner.

5. At the outset, the learned State Counsel on behalf of the respondents

did raise the preliminary objection that the punishment has already

been approved by the President, and as such, this Court now has no

jurisdiction in the sense that this matter is now futile. It is correct and

stands to reason that when the process has moved and the

recommended punishment is approved, this Court does not have

jurisdiction to make any pronouncement or issue a writ in respect of

the approval and the carrying out of the recommended punishment. To

that extent, the petitioners, in the normal course, ought to have sought

and obtained interim relief preventing the Commander of the Navy from

transmitting the same to the President. However, in this instance, the

matter had been forwarded to the President and been approved. I find

that Superior Courts have entertained and proceeded to consider such

applications even when the matter has been approved on the basis that

if there be a finding in favour of the petitioner, there is a possibility of

the President reconsidering his approval if some form of request is

made. This was so held in Flying Officer Ratnayake vs. Commander

of the Air Force and others [2008] 2 Sri L.R. 162, where his Lordship

Sisira De Abrew, J. held as follows:

“Since Her Excellency the President has approved the withdrawal

of the commission, it is futile to issue a writ of mandamus directing

WRT/0487/21

Page 5 of 12

the respondents to hold a Court Martial afresh. This order does not

prevent Her Excellency the President from reconsidering the

withdrawal of the petitioner's commission, which was based on

the reconsideration of the 1st respondent.”

I observe that this line of thinking has been followed by Mahinda

Samayawardhena, J., in S. A. R. S. P. Kumara vs. Vice Admiral J. S.

K. Colombage, Commander of the Sri Lanka Navy and others

(CA/Writ/178/2014, decided on 13.03.2020) and by S. U. B.

Karalliyadde, J., in C. J. Ranasinghe vs. Commander of the Sri

Lanka Navy and four others (CA/Writ/313/2021, decided on

06.12.2023). In these circumstances, notwithstanding the said

preliminary objection, I would proceed to consider this application on

its merits.

6. Before considering the legal issues, it is prudent and necessary to

briefly appraise the facts that led to this Summary Trial. In June 2020,

the petitioner, returning from leave, had been checked at the entrance

to the Navy Camp in Trincomalee at about 8:30 – 9:00 PM. When his

bag was searched, it is alleged that a tiny piece of paper was seen or

found fallen out of his bag. This when examined, was found to be

containing cannabis wrapped in a small piece of paper, the amount

being 180 milligrammes. The charges preferred against him at the

Summary Trial was the possession of this quantity of cannabis. Upon

leading of evidence, especially that of the sentry and another sailor who

happened to be present and that of the petitioner’s evidence, the

Presiding Officer had found the petitioner guilty as charged.

7. The proceedings and the findings are tendered along with the objections

marked R-2, according to which the inquiry had been conducted on a

charge under Section 104 (1) of the Navy Act for bringing 180

milligrammes of cannabis to the Navy Camp. Upon leading the evidence

of the prosecution, the rights of the accused officer had been explained,

and the petitioner had opted to place his position by way of an unsworn

WRT/0487/21

Page 6 of 12

written statement. Upon hearing the submissions of both parties, the

Presiding Officer has pronounced his decision, which is recorded in four

lines as follows (vide P-17):

“උසාවියේ මතය හා විනිශ්චය

2020 අග ෝස්තු මස් 26 වන දිනැති අංක ඒපීඑම් (ඊ) / අයිඑන්වී / 32 /2020

දරණ මූලික විමර්ෂණ වාර්ථාව ස්හ ලැබී ඇති ස්ාක්ෂි ස්ැලකිල්ලට නිමින්ව ගමාහු

වරදකරු බවට ඔප්පු කර ඇති බැවින්ව විත්තතිකරු වරදකරු බවට රු උස්ාවිය විසින්ව

තීරණය කරන ලදි.

Thereafter, the aforesaid sentence and punishment had been imposed.

8. The primary ground on which this decision is assailed is based on the

procedural irregularities. The established procedure to conduct a

Summary Trial, as provided for by the Sri Lanka Navy Order 0504 (R-

3), is of significance and is important. It is clear that rules of natural

justice is required to be followed as provided for by Order 05, which

reads as follows:

“05. All officers exercising judicial powers are required to draw their

attention to the following facts, including rules of natural justice, when

exercising their powers.

a. Every accused person is presumed to be innocent until the

contrary is proved. Therefore the burden of proving the guilt of

any accused is vested on the prosecution.

b. The prosecution shall prove the case beyond reasonable doubt.

c. The charge shall be framed under the appropriate penal section

of the Navy Act.

d. If there is a specific section in the Navy Act making provisions

to punish for an offence, a charge shall not be framed regarding

such offence under section 104 (1) of the Navy Act. Resorting to

section 104 (1) shall only be in cases where there is no specific

section for such offence.

e. Two or more charges shall not be framed based on the same

facts. If two or more charges were to be framed on the same

WRT/0487/21

Page 7 of 12

facts such charges shall be alternative and if convicted

conviction shall only be for one charge.

f. The charge sheet shall be served on the accused giving

sufficient time for him to prepare for his defence.

g. Every accused shall have the right to be defended by a

defending office. Every possible step to be taken by the

Commanding Officers to provide the services of a defending

officer at the will of the accused, subject to service exigencies.”

9. For all purposes, it is clear that the procedure required to be followed

and prescribed is akin to that of a normal criminal trial under the Code

of Criminal Procedure Act. The accused is presumed to be innocent,

and proof beyond a reasonable doubt is required. Further procedural

steps are provided for by Order 06. The relevant procedural step in this

context is item (n), which specifically provides as follows:

“Finding of the Court. The Court shall, arrive at the finding,

indicating reasons, based only upon the evidence led before the

court to warrant the finding.”

It is clearly required that the upon the Summary Trial, the Court is

required to arrive at a finding indicating reasons. This requires and

contemplates the findings, which contain reasons for the same. Then,

it is also provided that such findings should be based only upon the

evidence led before the Court. However, on a perusal of R-2, it is

apparent and clear that the said requirements have been followed in

the breach. I would emphasise and elaborate that though there is a

specific requirement of indicating reasons, the finding and the

conclusion is just three lines. It merely says that upon considering the

evidence, as the accused is proved to have committed the offence, he is

found guilty. There is an absolute absence of any reasons to start with.

These proceedings require that the allegations be proved beyond

reasonable doubt.

WRT/0487/21

Page 8 of 12

10. In such circumstances, the Presiding Officer, in the least, is statutorily

required to indicate and give reasons as to why he finds the charges to

be proved. In the current application, the prosecution has led evidence

to establish that the substance was found in the possession of the

accused. As opposed to that, the accused has denied being in possession

and also suggested that this may be an introduction. What is important

is that a person entrusted with the trying of the accused, both on facts

and law, should advert and consider the evidence and formulate his

opinion. In the present context, these also entailed the evaluation of the

position put forward by the accused person. According to item 06(n) of

the Sri Lanka Navy Order 0501, reasons should be indicated. Indicating

the reasons will mean the manifesting of such reasons, which should be

available along with the finding, and therefore, the reasons for the

finding should be provided. The Presiding Officer had clearly failed and

not provided any reasons, even in basic summary form. Therefore, the

failure to give reasons does amount to the violation of the rules of natural

justice.

11. In this regard, I advert to the duty to give reasons as provided for in the

common law. Although it may be argued that a ‘duty’ to give reasons did

not exist originally in the common law, this status quo has now changed.

As S. A. de Smith in “De Smith’s Judicial Review” (6th Ed., page 413)

observes:

“. . . . it is certainly now the case that a decision-maker subject to the requirements of fairness should consider carefully whether, in the particular circumstances of the case, reasons should be given. Indeed, so fast is the case law on the duty to give reasons developing, that it can now be added that fairness or procedural fairness usually will require a decision-maker to give reasons for its decision. Overall the trend of the law has been towards an increased recognition of the duty to give reasons . . . .”

Lord Pearce, in the landmark decision of R vs. Minister of Agriculture

and Fisheries ex p. Padfield [1968] UKHL 1, in agreement with Lord

WRT/0487/21

Page 9 of 12

Reid, Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest, Lord Hodson, and Lord Upjohn,

noted as follows:

“If all the prima facie reasons seem to point in favour of his taking a certain course to carry out the intentions of Parliament in respect of a power which it has given him in that regard, and he gives no reason whatever for taking a contrary course, the Court may infer that he has no good reason and that he is not using the power given by Parliament to carry out its intentions.”

In considering this position on the duty to give reasons in the Sri

Lankan context, Dr. Shirani Bandaranayake, J. (as her Ladyship then

was), in Sirimasiri Hapuarachchi vs. Commissioner of Elections

(2009) 1 SLR 1, cited with approval the decision of Wijepala vs.

Jayawardene (S.C. Application No. 89/1995, SCM 30.06.1995) as

follows:

“In Wijepala v. Jayawardene (supra), considering the necessity to give reasons, at least to this Court, Fernando, J., was of the view that, ‘The petitioner insisted, throughout, that established practice unquestionably entitled him at least to his first extension and that there was no relevant reason for the refusal of an extension...

Although openness in administration makes it desirable that reasons be given for decisions of this kind, in the case I do not have to decide whether the failure to do so vitiated the decision. However, when this Court is requested to review such a decision, if the petitioner succeeds in making out a prima facie case, then the failure to give reasons becomes crucial. If reasons are not disclosed, the inference may have to be drawn that this is because in fact there were no reasons - and so also, if reasons are suggested, they were in fact not the reasons, which actually influenced the decision in the first place” (emphasis added).

More recently, Samayawardhena, J., in Sierra Construction Ltd vs.

Road Development Authority and Others (SC/FR/135/2023, SC

Minutes of 10.02.2025 at page 20) held as follows:

“A decision devoid of reasons is fundamentally flawed and amounts to no decision. The requirement to provide reasons serves

WRT/0487/21

Page 10 of 12

as a safeguard against arbitrariness and upholds the principles of justice, fairness and transparency in decision-making.”

Such is the position of the common law in administering natural justice.

In any event, this is a statutory duty onerous upon the Presiding Officer

in the present matter as per item 06(n) of Sri Lanka Navy Order 0501

(P-15), which sets out the regulations in relation to Boards of Inquiry

and Summary Trials. No reasons being provided is therefore a direct

failure to comply with the basic procedural requirement prescribed by

item 06(n) in Order 0501 (P-15).

12. Then, at the closure of the prosecution submissions, the Prosecuting

Officer had called upon the Presiding Officer to consider the preliminary

investigating report dated 26.08.2020 and the evidence of the witnesses

to consider this matter. It is thereafter that the Presiding Officer made

the three-line pronouncement, and the Presiding Officer specifically and

expressly stated that he had considered the evidence and the

preliminary investigation report dated 26.08.2020. 06(n) of Order 0501

specifically prohibits the consideration of any other material other than

the evidence led before the court. Therefore, the finding should be based

only upon the evidence led before the Summary Trial. The expressed

declaration that the preliminary investigation report was submitted and

it was considered is in direct violation of 06(n) of Order 0501. This is

beyond a mere procedural irregularity, and it amounts to the

consideration of irrelevant reasons in making the impugned decision.

13. When this matter was taken up for argument, the learned State Counsel

was not able to explain or justify this glaring irregularity. Her response

was that the evidence available on the record is sufficient to establish

the offence as charged. In the exercise of writ jurisdiction in judicial

review, the legality, procedural propriety, and reasonableness are the

primary considerations. Even if there be material evidence, what is

important is that such material and its relevance or irrelevance,

credibility, and sufficiency should be consciously considered by the

WRT/0487/21

Page 11 of 12

decision-maker, following the correct procedure. In this regard, I find the

following passage from Wade & Forsyth’s “Administrative Law” (11th Ed.,

at pg. 323) pertinent:

“There are many cases in which a public authority has been held to have acted from improper motives or upon irrelevant considerations, or to have failed to take account of relevant considerations, so that its action is ultra vires and void. It is impossible to separate these cleanly from other cases of unreasonableness and abuse of power, since the court may use a variety of interchangeable explanations, as was pointed out by Lord Greene. Regarded collectively, these cases show the great importance of strictly correct motives and purposes. They show also how fallacious it is to suppose that powers conferred in unrestricted language confer unrestricted power.”

Further, A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J. (P/CA, as his Lordship then was), with

Shiran Gooneratne, J. and Arjuna Obeyesekere, J. agreeing, in

Tennakoon Mudiyanselage Janaka Bandara Tennakoon vs. Hon.

Attorney General and Others (CA/WRT/335/2016, decided on 15th

November 2020), held as follows:

“In administrative justice, failure to take into account relevant considerations and taking into account irrelevant considerations would taint and nullify the decision as illegality which is an aspect of Wednesbury unreasonableness. Our attention has not been drawn to any analysis or consideration of these matters before a decision was made to indict the Petitioner.” 14. In judicial review, this Court is not concerned with the merits of the

case, but as to whether the decision made is lawful or unlawful in the

sense of legality. The decision-maker should manifest that he had

adverted to and considered the merits and demerits of the relevant facts

and there should be no consideration of any irrelevant facts. That being

so, the Presiding Officer had clearly taken into consideration irrelevant

facts. There is no demonstration or manifestation of any reasons either.

15. This decision of the Presiding Officer is bad in law, illegal, and

fundamentally flawed for the reasons as adduced above. Thus, the

petitioner is entitled to the writ of certiorari as prayed for by prayer (c),

WRT/0487/21

Page 12 of 12

to the extent of quashing the finding of guilt and the imposition of the

punishment contained in document R-2. Accordingly, writ of certiorari

is hereby issued, quashing the determination and the opinion (“උස්ාවිගේ

මතය හා විනිශතචය”) being “2020 අග ෝස්තු මස් 26 වන දිනැති අංක ඒපීඑම් (ඊ) /

අයිඑන්වී/32/2020 දරණ මූලික විමර්ෂණ වාර්ථාව ස්හ ලැබී ඇති ස්ාක්ෂි ස්ැලකිල්ලට

නිමින්ව ගමාහු වරදකරු බවට ඔප්පු කර ඇති බැවින්ව විත්තතිකරු වරදකරු බවට රු උස්ාවිය

විසින්ව තීරණය කරන ලදි.” Further, writ of certiorari is also issued quashing

the warrant of punishment annexed to document R-2, and referred to

in P-17.

16. The granting of the aforesaid writs of certiorari will, in effect, encompass

the relief prayed for by prayers (d), (e), and (f). Accordingly, the

consideration of prayers (d), (e), and (f) are not necessary. It is now

common ground that the recommendation has been forwarded to the

President, who has now acted upon the same and confirmed the said

punishment. In these circumstances, relief prayed for by prayers (g) and

(h) cannot be granted. As for relief prayed for by prayers (i) and (j), upon

the President confirming and approving the recommended sanction,

there is no statutory duty or authority vested with the respondents to

submit further recommendations as prayed for by prayer (i).

Accordingly, the relief sought by prayers (i) and (j) cannot be granted by

this Court.

17. Accordingly, the application is allowed, subject to the above limitations.

Application is allowed to that extent.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL