1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for mandates in

the nature of Writs of Certiorari and

Prohibition under and in terms of Article 140

of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

Abedeera Parabendige Ruwan Pushpa Kumara

Thala Bogahawatta,

Pattiyagama South, Kottegoda,

Matara.

CA/WRIT/169/2015

PETITIONER

Vs.

1. Air Marshal Harsha Abewickrama

Commander of the Sri Lanka Air Force,

Air Force Headquarters,

Colombo 02.

1A. Air Marshal Gagan Pulasthi Bulathsinhala

Commander of the Sri Lanka Air Force,

Air Force Headquarters, Colombo 02.

2

1B. Air Marshal Kapila Veedhiya Bandara

Jayampathy

Commander of the Sri Lanka Air Force,

Air Force Headquarters,

Colombo 02.

1C. Air Marshal Sumangala Dias

Commander of the Sri Lanka Air Force,

Air Force Headquarters,

Colombo 02.

1D. Air Marshal Sudharshana Pathirana

Commander of the Sri Lanka Air Force,

Air Force Headquarters,

Colombo 02.

2. Wing Commander A. D. M. Koralage

Officer

Director of Administration

Air Force Headquarters

Colombo 02.

3. Group Captain M. D. J. Wasage

Commanding Officer Sri Lanka Air Force,

Weerawila.

3

And now

Sri Lanka Air Force Rathmalana

4. Hon. Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department

Colombo 02.

RESPONDENTS

4

Mayadunne Corea J

The facts of the case are briefly as follows, the Petitioner was recruited to Sri Lanka Airforce in

1993 and at the time he received the impugned document A8, the Petitioner was serving as a

Warrant Officer attached to the Weerawila Camp. The Petitioner states that he was assigned to

duties of frontline logistics at the said camp. The Petitioner further states that he was then directed

to assist in the supply section of the camp. The Petitioner states it was discovered that an airwoman

had forged internal exchange vouchers to conceal irregularities in the supply unit of the camp and

an inquiry was conducted to ascertain the personnel involved in the deficiency of stock. Following

an inquiry, the Petitioner was charged with wrongful conduct and was reprimanded in addition to

the Petitioner and the other soldiers involved in the misconduct, being subject to the

recommendations issued by the inquiring committee.

The Petitioner states that on or about 22/12/2014, he received a letter from the 3rd Respondent

stating that his services were no longer required under and in terms of Regulation 126 (1), Fifth

Schedule, Table B, Section XIII, (a) of the Sri Lankan Air Force (Regular & Regular Reserve)

Before: C.P Kirtisinghe, J

Mayadunne Corea, J

Counsel: Chathura Weththasinghe for the Petitioner

A Gajadeera SC for the Respondnet

Argued on: 14.10.2022

Written Submissions:

Tendered by the Respondent on 25.10.2022

Tendered by the Petitioner on 02.11.2022

Decided on:

29.11.2022

5

Regulations, 1949. The Petitioner states that by sending the said letter the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd

Respondents have acted contrary to the provisions of the Air Force Act and the said letter is bad

in law. Hence this application.

The Petitioners complaint

The Petitioners main grounds of argument are threefold, namely;

Subsequent to the Petitioner being reprimanded, the decision of the Air Force Commander

to discharge the Petitioner on the premise that his services are no longer required is in

violation of the principle of double jeopardy.

The procedure followed especially subjecting the Petitioner to a summary trial and the

subsequent decision by the Air Force Commander to discharge the Petitioner is bad in law

as the Air Force Regulations, Table B of the Fifth Schedule , Regulation 13 does not permit

the discharge of a Warrant officer.

The Petitioner cannot be discharged under section 129 (1) read with section 42 of the Air

Force Act, as for a discharge under the said section, there should be a conviction upon a

court martial.

The Petitioner has prayed for the following reliefs among other things,

(b) Grant a mandate in the nature of a Writ of Certiorari quashing the decision of the Respondent

to discharge the Petitioner from Sri Lanka Air Force in relation to the alleged incident as contained

in the document marked as A-8.

(c) Grant a mandate in the nature of a Writ of Prohibition preventing the Respondents from

discharging the Petitioner from Sri Lanka Air Force in relation to the alleged incident as contained

in document marked as A-8.

6

(d) Order to reinstate the Petitioner with back wages and other benefits.

The Respondents took several objections pertaining to the maintainability of this application. They

are as follows;

The Petitioner is guilty of suppression and misrepresentation of material facts,

Petitioners application is misconceived in law,

Petitioner is guilty of laches and is not entitled to seek discretionary remedy by way of a

writ,

Futility,

There are no grounds to grant a writ of Certiorari or Prohibition.

This Court will consider the said objections after considering the grounds urged by the Petitioner.

As per the submissions of the learned Counsel of the Petitioner, his main contention was, for the

Petitioner to be discharged from the Air Force, the Petitioner should have been charged at a court

martial and convicted under section 129(1). The thirst of this argument was that there was no court

martial held and as there is no conviction under section 129(1) by court-martial, the decision to

discharge him is ultra vires. His second argument was that when he was found guilty of the alleged

offence at the Weerawila camp, subsequent to an inquiry, the Petitioner was reprimanded as

punishment. Thus, he argues that after he was reprimanded, the Respondents cannot utilize the

Regulations and discharge him from services for the same offence as it would amount to double

jeopardy, thereby being subjected to punishment twice for the same offence.

It is common ground that the Petitioner was a Warrant Officer at the Weerawila camp when the

fraud pertaining to raising false vouchers took place. As it was alleged that the Petitioner too was

involved in the said fraud, there was an inquiry and as per the recommendations of the inquiring

officer, the Petitioner has been reprimanded. According to the inquiring officers recommendation

(P1), the Commanding Officer had recommended to charge sheet all involved, which included the

Petitioner (R3). There is no dispute between the parties that the Petitioner has been subjected to a

7

summary trial and upon its findings, had been severely reprimanded. This incident occurred in the

year 2014. In 2014 December, the Petitioner had been issued with a letter stating that his services

are no longer required (P4) which is marked as A8, which the Petitioner is seeking to quash by

way of a writ of certiorari.

Does the Petitioner fall in to the category of an airman?

The Petitioner contended that he being a warrant officer cannot fall under the category of an

airman. However, the Petitioner did not strenuously pursue this contention at the argument stage.

Nevertheless, this Court will now consider the ground whether the Petitioner falls in the category

of an airman. Parties are not at variance on the ground that the Petitioners last held post was

Warrant Officer. At the argument stage, the Petitioner contended that a Warrant Officer does not

fall under the category of an airman. The answer to this can be found in the interpretation section

of the Airforce Act. Section 161 of the Act defines an airman as, airman" does not include an

officer as defined by this Act, but, subject to the special provisions in this Act contained in

relation to warrant officers and non-commissioned officers, does include a warrant officer and

a non-commissioned officer

Also, it is pertinent to note that the Petitioner himself in his amended petition in paragraph 16 has

acknowledged that the rank of a warrant officer is categorized as an airman.

Accordingly, the argument by the Petitioner that he does not fall under the category of an airman

has to fail.

Can the Petitioner be tried in a summary trial?

The Respondents submitted the proceedings of the summary trial marked R3. As per the said

document, the Petitioner has been charged under section 129(1) and the Respondents had

8

proceeded with a summary trial under section 40(1)(b) (II) and section 42 of the Air Force Act. It

is the contention of the Petitioner, that the Petitioner being a Warrant Officer cannot be charged

under section 42 in a summary trial and his punishment under Regulations 13B of the Fifth

Schedule, Table B is bad in law as the said Regulation applies only to an airman.

This Court observes that section 40 (1) empowers the Commanding Officer to investigate a charge

and the Commanding officer has the discretion to decide whether the person in custody should be

charged by proceeding with a court martial or whether he can be summarily tried. Section 40 (b)

(ii) reads as follows,

.. (b) if he in his discretion decides that the charge should be proceeded with, shall...

(ii) where that person is an officer of a rank below that of Wing Commander or is a warrant

officer, refer the case to be dealt with summarily by the Commander of the Air Force or by such

officer not below the rank of Group Captain as may thereto be authorized by the Commander

of the Air Force, or.

The said section in our view, clearly empowers the Commanding Officer to decide whether a

person should stand trial at a court martial or by way of a summary trial and the said section

captures the post of a Warrant Officer. Thus, referring the Petitioner to stand a summary trial is

provided for by the Air Force Act. The short title of Section 42 states as follows,

Summary trial of accused who is an officer of a rank below that of Wing Commander or is a

warrant officer.

Accordingly, we uphold the Respondents submission that the decision to hold a summary trial as

well as proceeding with the summary trial against the Petitioner has not violated the provisions of

the Air Force Act.

9

The Petitioner cannot be discharged under section 129 (1) read with section 42 of the Air

Force Act, as for a discharge under the said section, there should be a conviction consequent

to a court martial.

The Petitioner argues that if he was charged under section 42, the punishment that can be meted

out is also given in the said section. As per the said punishments, he cannot be discharged from

the service. He also contends that he has also been charged under section 129(1). The said section

broadly deals with conduct prejudicial to air force discipline. The first part of the said section

which describes the offence states as follows,

Section 129(1) subject to the provisions of subsection (2) of this section every person subject to

this act who, by any act, conduct, disorder, or neglect, prejudices good order and air force

discipline shall be guilty of an air force offence and shall

As submitted by the Respondents, this Court observes that section 42 does not describe an offence,

but section 129 (1) describes the offence. In this instance, it was submitted that the Petitioners

offence is described under section 129 (1). However, as discussed earlier, section 42 permits a

Warrant officer to be charged with any offence to be dealt with summarily. It is also pertinent to

note as submitted that section 129 (1) does not contemplate of a situation where a person charged

under the said section should be necessarily tried by a court martial. It was further submitted that

the punishment that can be meted under section 129 is stipulated under section 133.

It is the contention of the Petitioner that for the Petitioner to be convicted under section 129 (1)

and punished, he should have been found guilty by a court martial. If he was found guilty of a

court martial then under section 133 (1), depending on the severity of the offence he could have

been dismissed from the air force or meted out punishment as stipulated under section 133.

However, it is his contention that since he had not been convicted by a court-martial, he cannot be

discharged from the air force in pursuance of section 129(1).

10

However, this Court observes that the multiple disorderly acts laid down in section 129(1) broadly

entail all offences that could be prejudicial to good air force discipline and acceptable air force

conduct. Thus, personnel who are found guilty of such conduct under the said section do not

necessarily need to be tried by a court martial but can also be dealt with according to other relevant

provisions of the Act, to both reprimand the wrongdoer and inculcate good conduct within the

members of the air force, as the offences under section 129(1) are applicable to the air force as a

whole.

The petitioner further contends that as per Regulation 126 (1) Fifth Schedule, Table B section XIII

(a), the Respondents have decided to discharge him from the air force under the clause service no

longer required. He argues that this does not apply to him. It is further argued that for the

Respondents to discharge him from the air force, it should be done in accordance with the

provisions of section 133 of the Air Force Act.

It is the contention of the Petitioner that for this, the Petitioner should have committed an offence

set out in section 129 (1) and there should have been a court martial. However, since he had been

summarily tried under section 42, he cannot be discharged from the air force utilizing the

provisions contained in section 129 (1). He further contends that anyway under section 42 of the

Air Force Act there are no provisions for him to be discharged from the air force. Thus, his

contention is that his discharge under section 129 (1) is bad in law.

In response, it was submitted that the Petitioner being a warrant officer had been involved in a

wrongful act of raising false vouchers to hide a deficit that has arisen in the clothing stocks of the

equipment section at the Weerawila Air force base. Subsequent to an inquiry/summary trial, he

was charged under section 40 (1) (B) (II) and section 42 of the Act. The entire proceedings of the

summary trial are marked as R3.

11

It was the contention of the Respondents that by the said act of aiding and abetting, the Petitioners

acts fall broadly within the provisions contained in section 129 (1) of the Air Force Act namely,

conduct prejudicial to air force discipline. It was the contention of the Respondents that there

had been two previous occasions where the Petitioner has been convicted and given a strict

warning that he would be discharged from the air force in the event he commits any other offence.

It was further contended that as per the charge sheet marked (R3), a decision had been taken to

proceed under section 40 (1) (B) (II) and section 42 of the Air Force Act read with section 129 (1)

of the Air Force Act. However, it was contended that without resorting to section 133, the

Respondents acted under section 42 and subjected him to the punishment of a reprimand. The

Respondents submitted that they have taken this decision to mitigate the severity of section 133.

In our view, there is no bar for the Sri Lankan Ari Force to charge the petitioner under section 42

read with section 129 (1). However, if a person is subject to the scale of punishments as stipulated

under section 133, then he should have been convicted by a court martial. However, to negate this

argument the Respondents submitted that the act of the Respondents issuing the impugned letter

A8 is not a punishment but an administrative decision taken to maintain discipline therefore it is

the contention of the Respondent, that the argument of the Petitioner namely, to discharge him

under section 129 (1) without him facing a court martial is bad in law has to fail. The learned

Counsel for the Respondents further contended that the said administrative act is not a punishment

per se, therefore the need for a conviction from a court martial does not arise. This argument also

brings us to the next ground which is the main ground urged by the Petitioner at the argument

stage, namely that the decision to discharge him is bad in law under the principle of double

jeopardy.

Defense of double jeopardy

The Petitioner contends that he had been charged and reprimanded under summary trial, therefore

when the Respondents issued him with a letter stating his services were no longer required, it

amounts to him being punished twice for the same offence as he has already been punished. The

12

Petitioners main argument is that when he was tried under section 42, he was given a punishment

for his wrongdoing, that is, being reprimanded. However, it was his contention that subsequently

when he was served with A8, where he has been informed that his services are no longer required,

he has been punished twice for the same offense under section 42. At this stage, it would be

pertinent to consider document A8. It states as follows,

1. . . 1994 28

105

28 , 1997 30

174

35 .

2. 2014 15

129 (1)

.

2014 22

"

.

As per the document, it is clear that the reasons given for him being served with A8 are that, on

two previous occasions in 1994 and 1997, he had failed to report to work without obtaining prior

13

permission for 105 days and 174 days respectively and for the fraud that took place in 2014. It

refers to the punishment meted out on all occasions and states that by his conduct he has violated

section 129 (1). In this instance, we find that it was not one single incident that caused the

Respondents to issue A8. They have referred to three incidents whereby they come to the

conclusion that the cumulative effect of the behavior of the Petitioner violates section 129 (1).

In response, the Respondents submitted that issuance of a letter on the basis of service no longer

required under Air Force Regulations is merely an administrative step the Respondents take to

maintain good discipline within the air force. Thus, the imposition of a punishment prior to a

discharge does not amount to double jeopardy. They have relied on the judgment of this Court in

J. H. M. L. S. Jayaweera v Air Marshall Gagana Bulathsinhala and others (CA WRIT

88/2015 decided on 7th October 2020), Weerathilake v Commander Sri Lanka Air Force (CA

WRIT 107/2016 CA minutes of 05.03.2019) and Wasantha Kumara v Commander Sri Lanka

Air Force (CA WRIT 171/2015, CA Minutes of 01.07.2020). We find that the facts of the

referred cases especially J. H. M. L. S. Jayaweera v Air Marshall Gagana Bulathsinhala and

others (CA WRIT 88/2015 decided on 7th October 2020), are identical to the facts of the case

before us.

In the said case making a distinction between punishment meted out soon after conviction and

subsequent discharge under the clause service no longer required Samayawardhena J held as

follows, It may be relevant to note that item (xiii) (a) inter alia states: The application for

discharge will be made on special form, on which full particulars of the case will be recorded,

and to which the conduct sheets will be attached. This makes it clear that the said item is not

meant to be used as a punishment for any specific offence committed under the Air Force Act

but, rather, serves as an administrative measure to be exercised by the Commander, at his

discretion, upon taking into consideration the overall conduct and circumstances of the airman

concerned. Hence, the argument that discharge under the clause services no longer required

amounts to punishing twice over for the same offence in violation of the doctrine of double

jeopardy cannot be readily accepted. Such discharge is not a punishment per se but largely an

administrative decision for the greater benefit of the institution, which can only be challenged

14

on the same grounds any other administrative decision can be challenged under judicial review.

If the presence of any airman is inimical to maintain the discipline and good order of the Air

Force, the Commander of the Air Force, as the head of the institution, shall have the power to

discharge such airman from service. It is no secret that discretion is inherent in power as

opposed to duty. It is true in this instance as well. But there is no unfettered, untrammeled or

unreviewable administrative discretion in modern administrative law. Discretion is subject to

judicial review

It was further held by Samayawardana J that in the case of Air Marshal G. D. Perera v K. H. M.

S. Bandara (SC Appeal 104/2008, SC Minutes of 29.09.2014) which the Petitioner heavily relied

on, the intimation to the doctrine of double jeopardy in the said Supreme Court Judgement is obiter

dicta and not part of ratio decidendi. This Court is inclined to follow the reasoning of

Samayawardana J.

Samayawardhena J refereeing to the case of Dissanayake v D. C. J. Weerakoon, Air

Commodore (CA Minutes of 11.09.2017) held that the discharge is an administrative decision.

It was submitted to us that the said judgment Dissanayake v D. C. J. Weerakoon, Air

Commodore (CA Minutes of 11.09.2017) had further been appealed to the Supreme Court and

the Supreme Court had refused special leave to appeal, thus settling the law that the discharge

under Air Force Regulations is not a punishment but an administrative decision.

It is also pertinent to note that as per the Regulations, the said Regulations clearly state, that it

applies only to an airman who cannot be discharged under any other item. The plain reading of

the said column under special instructions, it is evident that the discharge is effected despite the

offender being punished. Thus, it is clear that the discharge is not considered a punishment as it is

contemplated subsequent to the wrongdoer being punished. Thus, in line with the judicial decisions

on this issue, it is our view that the Petitioners argument that the said discharge amounts to the

doctrine of double jeopardy has to fail.

15

Air Force Regulations depicted in Table B XIII of the Fifth Schedule, do not allow the

discharge of a Warrant Officer.

Petitioner contends that he being a warrant officer, cannot be subject to Table B of the Fifth

Schedule of the Regulations as it does not permit the discharge of a warrant officer but applies

only to an airman. However, this contention was not pursued by the Counsel at the argument. As

submitted by the Respondents, it is pertinent to note that item 13A of the Regulations applies to

an airman. As held above this Court elsewhere in this judgment has referred to the definition under

section 161, and held that a Warrant officer falls within the definition of an airman. It is also

pertinent to note that Regulation item 13B under Special instructions stipulates that it applies to

an airman other than a warrant officer class 1 with less than 14 years of service. The plain reading

of item 13A and 13 B clearly distinguish that even though in item 13B a warrant officer is

excluded, under 13A it is not so. It only refers to an airman as stated earlier which encompasses a

warrant officer. Thus, the Petitioners argument that he will not be captured under item 13A of

Table B has to fail.

Now we will consider the objections raised by the Respondents.

Suppression of material facts

It is pertinent to note that the Petitioner subsequent to him being punished for being absent without

official leave in the years 1994 and 1997 (R7 and R8) had been issued with a warning letter (R9).

The caption to the said letter states as follows,

and he has been warned as follows,

16

.

.

,

,

.

.

.

.

.

I.

II.

III.

Iv. .

The Petitioner after understanding the contents of the said letter, had accepted the letter. However,

the Petitioner failed to disclose that he was issued with such a letter which warned him that he

could be discharged from the Air Force if he is in violation of the advice. In our view, since the

17

impugned decision reflected in A8 refers to the two offences, that he has been warned about as per

R9, the Petitioner should have disclosed to this Court the existence of the said warning letter R9.

Even though the Petitioner under paragraph 32 of the petition has just pleaded that he was punished

for minor charges he has never mentioned that he had been issued with a final warning letter as

depicted in R9.

In our view, the Petitioner who has come to this Court seeking remedy by way of writ jurisdiction

should have disclosed the existence of R9. His disclosure in paragraph 32 refers to the charges

against him, but he does not disclose that pursuant to the punishment meted he had been issued

with a warning letter R9. Hence, this Court is of the view that his failure to disclose document R9

amounts to willful suppression.

In Collettes Ltd Vs. Commissioner of Labour and others (1989) 2 SLR it was held that it is

essential, that when a party invokes the writ jurisdiction or applies for an injunction, all facts must

be clearly, fairly and fully pleaded before the court so that the court would be made aware of all

the relevant matters.

In Moosajees Limited v Eksath Engineru Saha Samanya Kamkaru Samithiya 79 (1) NLR

1285 at 288 the court held that suppression of material facts is fatal to an application and observed:

'The pleadings in their petition and affidavit do not contain a full disclosure of the real facts of the

case and to say the least the petitioner has not observed the utmost good faith and has been guilty

of a lack of uberrima fides by suppression of material facts in the pleadings. It was neither fair by

this court nor by his counsel that there was no full disclosure of material facts."

Similarly in Blanca Diamonds (Pvt) Ltd v Wilfred Van Else and others (1997) 1 SLR 360 at

362 Jayasuriya J emphasized the duty a party owes to Court for a full disclosure when initiating

writ proceedings in the following manner- In filing the present application for discretionary

relief in the Court of Appeal Registry, the petitioner company was under a duty to disclose

uberrima fides and disclose all material facts to this Court for the purpose of this Court arriving

18

at a correct adjudication of the issues arising upon this application. In the decision in Alphonoso

Appuhamy v Hettiarachchi, Justice Pathirana in an erudite judgement, considered the

landmark decisions on this province in English law, and cited the decision which laid down the

principle that when a party seeking discretionary relief from the Court upon an application for

a writ of certiorari he enters into a contractual obligation with the Court he files an application

in the Registry and in terms of that contractual obligation he is required to disclose uberrima

fides and disclose all material facts fully and frankly to his Court.

Thus, the Respondents submission on suppression of material facts succeeds and the Petitioner

by his own conduct has disentitled himself from seeking relief he has prayed.

Laches

The learned Counsel for the Respondents also took up an objection on laches on the part of the

Petitioner. We find the impugned decision A8 bears the dates of 22/12/2014. It has been conveyed

and accepted by the Petitioner on 23rd December 2014. However, the Petitioner has waited till 31st

March 2015 to institute legal action challenging the said decision. In the said petition, the Petitioner

failed to disclose his delay of more than 3 months. Subsequently, he had amended the Petitioner

in the year 2017 whereby he had sought to obtain a writ of prohibition preventing the Respondents

from discharging the Petitioner and for reinstatement with back wages. Thus, the Respondents

contentions of laches.

Are there any grounds to grant writs of Certiorari or Prohibition?

It is pertinent to note that the decision reflected in A8, cannot be an arbitrary or unfettered decision.

When we consider the contents of A8 and subsequently when the Respondents brought the

attention of this Court to the existence of document R9, we find that the Petitioner has at all times

19

been afforded a fair trial pertaining to all offenses, which the Petitioner has not denied. Further, he

has not challenged the punishments given to him pursuant to the respective inquiries.

We do find that discipline, especially in the tri forces has to be maintained at its best. We have also

considered the long line of judgments of this court on the question that the issuance of the letter

services no longer required is not a punishment but an administrative step in order for the

Respondents to maintain strict discipline among its officers.

After considering all the facts submitted by both parties, and the circumstances that led to the final

issuance of A8, this Court is not inclined to come to the conclusion that the decision reflected in

A8 is unreasonable or bad in law.

Accordingly, for the aforesaid reasons stated in this judgment, we do not see any reason to interfere

with the decision contained in the impugned document A8. Therefore, we refuse to grant the

reliefs prayed, and this application is dismissed without costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

C.P Kirtisinghe, J

I agree

20

Judge of the Court of Appeal