IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application

under Section 331 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of

1979 read with Article 138 of the

Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Court of Appeal Case No. Colombo 12.

HCC/200/2019

Complainant High Court of Anuradhapura Case No. 45/2016 Vs.

Wasala Ariyarathnage Rohana

Herath Alias Rohana Mama

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Wasala Ariyarathnage Rohana

Herath Alias Rohana Mama

Accused Appellant

Vs.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondent

2

BEFORE : K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J (P/CA)

WICKUM A. KALUARACHCHI, J

COUNSEL : Upali Jayamanne with Wathsala

Nawinna for the Accused-Appellant

Maheshika Silva, SSC for the

Respondent

WRITTEN SUBMISSION

TENDERED ON : 21.05.2021 (On behalf of the Accused-Appellant)

30.06.2021 (On behalf of the Respondent)

ARGUED ON : 18.02.2022

DECIDED ON : 16.03.2022

WICKUM A. KALUARACHCHI, J. The accused-appellant was charged for committing the Rape and Grave

Sexual Abuse on or about 29.07.2013, offences punishable under

Sections 364(1) and 365 B(2)(a) of the Penal Code. The trial commenced

in the High Court of Anuradhpura without a Jury and after the trial,

the learned High Court Judge convicted the accused-appellant for both

counts and was sentenced to a term of 15 years rigorous imprisonment.

This appeal is from the said conviction and sentence.

At the hearing of this appeal, the learned Counsel for the appellant and

the learned Senior State Counsel for the respondent made oral

submissions. Both parties have tendered their written submissions,

prior to the hearing. The learned Counsel for the appellant advanced

his arguments on two grounds.

I. The discrepancy in the date of the offence has not been

considered.

3

II. The learned trial judge is erred in appreciating uncorroborated

evidence while admitting the prosecutrix is not a reliable witness.

In the course of the High Court trial, the date of the offence mentioned

in the indictment had been amended twice. The second amendment

refers to the date mentioned in the original indictment. Accordingly, the

trial proceeded on the basis that the offences were committed on or

about 29th July 2013.

PW 1 is the victim of this incident. When the evidence was led, the

prosecuting counsel suggested the date of the incident as 31.07.2013

to PW 1. In cross-examination, PW 1 has stated that the incident took

place on 29.07.2013. She had stated the date of the incident as

31.07.2013 to the Judicial Medical Officer. When the PW 3 gave

evidence, the prosecuting counsel suggested the date of the incident as

29.06.2013 to him. The date of the incident according to the indictment

is 29.07.2013.

In the aforesaid context, the contention of the learned counsel for the

appellant that two different dates cannot be suggested to two witnesses

as the date of the incident is correct. In addition, both dates suggested

by the prosecuting counsel are not the date mentioned in the

indictment. In the circumstances, it is apparent that there is confusion

in respect of the date of the offence. This court has to see whether the

ambiguity of the date has had an effect on proving charges.

Before dealing with the issue of ambiguity on the date of the offence, it

is necessary to consider whether the offences of rape and grave sexual

abuse took place. Judicial Medical Officer explained by going through

his medico-legal report that there were several injuries on the body of

the victim. He further explained that some of these injuries could have

been occurred due to her resistance. In addition, the doctor had

explained an injury in the rectum.

4

Therefore, PW 1s evidence and other evidence adduced in respect of

rape and grave sexual abuse have been strongly corroborated by the

medical evidence. The learned High Court Judge has evaluated the

relevant evidence and correctly found that the PW 1 has been raped and

sexually abused. What the appellant denies is his involvement in the

offences.

The issue of the date of the offence also needs to be considered in

determining whether the accused committed these offences. PW 1 says

that the appellant committed these offences. According to the

prosecution evidence, when there was a function on 29.07.2013, at the

house of PW 3, there was a fight between him and his siblings. PW 1

has escaped the fight and sought refuge at a banana plantation near

that house. At that time, the appellant pulled her by her hand, dragged

her to the garbage lake and committed acts of rape and grave sexual

abuse.

PW 1 has clearly stated to the police that this incident happened on the

day in which a function was held in PW 3s house. The victim explained

why she was hiding at a banana plantation. When she was there, she

has requested the appellant for his phone to give a call. While handing

over the phone, she testified that the appellant had pulled her by her

hand and dragged her closer to the garbage lake. In this case, the

appellant has also given evidence. He also said that PW 1 requested a

phone from him. Appellant says further, that he threw the phone at her

but denies the allegation against him. Anyhow, it is evident from the

said items of evidence, that the appellant knew very well the date the

victim and other prosecution witnesses speak about. PW 1 says, at the

time she requested the phone from the appellant, he committed these

offences. Therefore, it is clear that the accused-appellant has not been

misled because of the ambiguity regarding the date. Also, it is apparent

that the appellant had understood the prosecution version, the

5

allegation against him and that is why he gave evidence in order to

establish his defence referring the incident of requesting the phone.

In the case of R. v. Dossi - 13 Cr.App.R. 158 cited in Archbold Criminal

Pleading Evidence and Practice 2019, Paragraph 1-223 at page 83; it

was held as follows:

A date specified in an indictment is not a material matter unless

it is an essential part of the alleged offence; the defendant may be

convicted although the jury finds that the offence was committed on a

date other than that specified in the incitement. Amendment of the

indictment is unnecessary, although it will be good practice to do so

(provided that there is no prejudice below) where it is clear on the

evidence that if the offence was committed at all, it was committed on the

day other than that specified.

In the instant action, it is clear on the evidence that the offence was

committed on the day that the prosecutrix requested the mobile phone

from the appellant to give a call. In considering the decision of the

aforesaid judicial authority, the relevant facts of the case and the

aforesaid circumstances, I hold that discrepancy on the date of the

offence had no effect on proving the case beyond a reasonable doubt.

Although some other date had been suggested to the PW 1 by the

prosecuting counsel, in cross-examination, PW 1 has stated the date

mentioned in the indictment as the date of the incident. (Page 49 of the

appeal brief) She stated that the incident took place on 29.07.2013

evening. She made the complaint to the police on 02.08.2013. Since the

victim is from a farming family in a rural area, it is not unusual, a delay

of two or three days in complaining to the police by someone in such a

situation. This slight delay has no effect on the reliability of the

prosecution case.

6

The learned counsel for the appellant did not contend on any

contradiction or omission other than the evidence pertaining to the

illegal affair between PW 1 and PW 3. In addition, the learned counsel

contended that the posture in which she was allegedly held at the time

of the offence is highly impossible. The learned counsel pointed out that

she has said that vaginal penetration was done by the appellant

through her backside and the accused-appellant did not change her

position at any time. The learned counsel pointed out further that she

said that she was lying on her back facing upwards when the appellant

raped her and he contended that the offence could not be committed

when she was in that position. However, it is my view that it is only a

mistake in describing the position she was in at that time. Although she

said that she was on her face upwards, she explained that her face was

downwards by answering the very next question. The relevant questions

and answers are as follows:

: ?

: .

: ?

: .

(Page 37 of the brief)

When she was facing downwards, vaginal penetration could be

performed through her backside and there is no improbability on that.

The next matter to be considered is the contention of the learned

counsel for the appellant regarding the application of the maxim falsus

in uno falsus in omnibus. The learned counsel for the appellant

contended that the learned high court judge has erred in relying upon

the evidence of the prosecutrix and PW 3, when the learned judge

himself has admitted that the prosecutrix and PW 3 have given evidence

concealing the illegal affair they were having with each other. The

learned counsel contended further that when the court decides that a

witness is not truthful or reliable and has given false evidence, it is

7

immaterial whether the fact on which the evidence given is relevant to

the particular case or not and the witness is not reliable.

It is to be noted that the learned High Court Judge has not decided that

the witness PW 1 or PW 3 is not truthful or not reliable. What the

learned Judge decided was that they gave false evidence only with

regard to their illegal affair. The learned High Court Judge decided

further that the evidence regarding the illegal affair could be separated

from the evidence relating to the offences pertaining to this case.

In the case of State of Uttar Pradesh (Appellant) Vs. M. K. Anthony,

(Respondent) - Criminal Appeal No. 19 of 1976, Decided on- 6-11-1984

and reported in 1985 CRI. L. J. 493 - AIR 1985 Supreme Court 48; it

was held that Even honest and truthful witnesses may differ in some

details unrelated to the main incident because the power of observation,

retention and reproduction differ with individuals. It was observed

further in the said Judgment that Cross-examination is an unequal duel

between a rustic and refined lawyer.

In the instant action also, the PW 1 and PW 3 have given false evidence

to conceal their illegal affair. It is natural to conceal an illegal affair

because, in a country like Sri Lanka, many people are reluctant to

expose an illegal relationship in public.

In the case of Samaraweera V. Attorney General (1990) 1 Sri L.R 256,

it was held that falsus in uno falsus in omnibus is not an absolute rule

which has to be applied without exception. It was held as follows:

The maxim falsus in uno falsus in omnibus could not be applied

in such circumstances. Further, all falsehood is not deliberate. Errors of

memory, faulty observation or lack of skill in observation upon any point

or points, exaggeration or mere embroidery or embellishment must be

distinguished from deliberate falsehood before applying the maxim. Nor

does the maxim apply to cases of testimony on the same point between

8

different witnesses. In any event, this maxim is not an absolute rule

which has to be applied without exception in every case where a

witness is shown to have given false evidence on a material point. When

such evidence is given by a witness, the question whether other

portions of his evidence can be accepted as true may not be resolved in

his favour unless there is some compelling reason for doing so. The

credibility of witnesses can be treated as divisible and accepted against

one and rejected against another. The jury or judge must decide for

themselves whether that part of the testimony which is found to be false

taints the whole or whether the false can safely be separated from the

true. (Emphasis added)

In the instant action, it is quite clear that false evidence regarding the

illegal affair could be safely separated from the evidence regarding the

incidents relating to the charges. Thus, there is no reason to reject the

said evidence of prosecution that were corroborated by each other.

The learned counsel for the appellant also attempted to formulate an

argument that they tried to hide the illicit relationship between them

because if it came to light, the position of the appellant that she made

this false complaint due to a financial dispute between the appellant

and the PW 3 would be confirmed.

By that time, PW 3 had not married PW 1. In villages, raping a girl is a

serious matter and a girl raped would face severe hardships and

problems in the village. In such a situation, it is very difficult to believe

that due to a financial dispute between the appellant and PW 3, false

propaganda was spread that she had been raped. The other vital matter

is that if the allegation of rape is false, there can be no medical evidence

that there were injuries that could have been caused by rape. Therefore,

the learned High Court Judge is correct in not accepting the

unbelievable defence presented from the dock and deciding that the

appellant has committed the offences of Rape and Grave Sexual Abuse.

9

For the foregoing reasons, I hold that both charges leveled against the

appellant have been proved beyond a reasonable doubt. Accordingly,

the decision of the learned High Court Judge to convict the accused-

appellant for the 1st and 2nd counts is correct. I see no reason to

interfere with the sentence passed by the learned High Court Judge

because the sentence is lawful and correct in principle.

For the foregoing reasons, I uphold the conviction and the sentence

imposed on the appellant and dismiss the appeal.

Appeal dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K. Priyantha Fernando, J (P/CA)

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL