==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 15

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of a Case Stated under Section 170 of the Inland Revenue Act No. 10 of 2006 (as amended).

CA Case No: CA/TAX/47/2023 Senkadagala Finance PLC,

Tax Appeals Commission No. Of No. 267,

TAC/VAT/024/2017 Galle Road,

Colombo 03.

Appellant Vs.

The Commissioner General of Inland

Revenue,

Department of Inland Revenue,

Sir Chittampalam A. Gardiner Mawatha,

Colombo 02.

Respondent

Before: M.C.B.S. Morais J.

&

Annalingam Premashanker J.

Counsel: Riad Ameen with Rushitha Rodrigo instructed by Arime Legal for the Appellant.

N. Kahawita, SSC for the Respondent.

Page 2 of 15

Written Submissions: By the Appellant – on 09.08.2024, 28.04.2026

By the Respondent – on 27.05.2024

Argued on: 20.02.2026

Decided On: 18.06.2026

JUDGMENT

M.C.B.S. Morais J.

This is an appeal by way of case stated against the determination of the Tax Appeals

Commission (TAC) dated 24th of January 2023, in the case of TAC/VAT/024/2017.

This appeal is filed under section 170 of the Inland Revenue Act No. 10 of 2006 (hereinafter

will be referred to as ‘IRA 2006’).

The tax in dispute is against the assessment for the year of assessment 2012/2013 and the

taxable amount in issue is Rs. 19,591,670.00.

FACTUAL BACKGROUND

The Senkadagala Finance PLC (hereinafter will be referred to as the Appellant) is a listed

company in the Colombo Stock Exchange as a Finance Company under the Finance Business

Act No.22 of 2011. The Appellant being a Finance Company mainly engages in the business

of mobilizing deposits and providing them for hire purchase, leasing, and other loan facilities

for customers. The Appellant has registered for VAT on financial services as well as normal

VAT and files the respective VAT returns accordingly. The Appellant pays VAT on financial

services on the taxable value addition arising from supply of financial services as defined

Page 3 of 15

under section 25F of the Value Added Tax Act No. 14 of 2002 (VAT Act) under the required

method.

The Appellant has filed the VAT returns in respect of supply of financial services for the

periods 01.04.2012 – 30.06.2012, 01.07.2012 – 31.12.2012, and 01.01.2013 – 31.03.2013

respectively and has filed the annual adjustment report subsequently. The Assistant

Commissioner of the Inland Revenue has rejected the said assessment and has issued the

letter of intimation dated 21st of September 2015 and the Notice of Assessment dated 4th of

September 2015. The Appellant being aggrieved by the said assessment, made an appeal to

the Commissioner General of Inland Revenue (hereinafter will be referred to as the

Respondent). The Respondent after hearing the said appeal confirmed the assessment made

by the Assistant Commissioner of the Inland Revenue by the determination dated 31st of

October 2017. Being dissatisfied with the said determination, the Appellant had made an

appeal to the Tax Appeals Commission. The TAC after hearing both parties, agreed with the

determination of the Respondent, for the reasons set out in the determination dated 24th of

January 2023.

On this basis, the Appellant has requested the TAC to cause a Case Stated to the Court of

Appeal on the following Questions of Law.

I. “Has the Tax Appeals Commission erred in law in determining that the appellant

failed to submit documentary evidence to prove that the appellant has acted in

compliance with section 25C(1) of the Value Added Tax Act?

II. Has the Tax Appeals Commission erred in law when the Tax Appeals Commission

failed to determine whether the Commissioner General refusing to give effect to

his own directive is lawful?”

Page 4 of 15

ANALYSIS

It is the Appellant’s position that the Sri Lanka Financial Reporting Standards (SLFRS) was

introduced in the year 2012/2013 and it is the first year of adoption of the said standard by the

Appellant.

Due to the significant tax implication of these adjustment, the Department of Inland Revenue

has issued a directive requesting the taxpayers to make the required adjustments for the

specified year accordingly (Annexure B1 and Annexure B2). The required adjustment has

been communicated to the Appellant by way of the letter dated 28th of January 2014, which

includes the following.

 “The Net profit or loss referred to in the Section 25C (1) of the Value Added Tax Act

No 14 of 2002 (Act) is the profit from operation (before Income Tax Expenses)

ascertained as per SLFRS.

Every person registered for payment of VAT on FS is required to make the following

adjustments statements:

 Calculation of Tax

o The Net Profit or Loss

The Net Profit or loss referred to in the Section 25C(1) of the Value Added Tax

Act No 14 of (Act) is the aggregate of the Total Comprehensive Income and

Income Tax Expenses ascertained as per SLFRS.

o Emoluments paid to All Employees

Emoluments referred to in the Section 25C(1) of the Act mean the aggregate of

both benefit in money and benefits not in money.

o Adjustments for Depreciations

Page 5 of 15

For the purpose of computation of Economic Depreciation referred to in the

Section 25C(1) of the Act, the treatment of historical cost will continue.

In computing economic depreciations, on the basis of the Gazette Notification No.

1606/30 of 19.06.2009 published for that purpose, the classification of assets

should be on the basis of SLFRS. However, in relation to any asset acquired prior

to the adaptation of SLFRS, the earlier classification may be followed in

calculating economic depreciations even after the adaptation of SLFRS.

 Profit/Loss arising upon the transition

Profit or Loss arising upon the transition to the SLFRS should be treated as

such, for the period in which the transition effected. Any additional tax

arising thereon may be paid within one year. Where any refund arises, such

refund may be set off against the VAT on Financial Services within one year

from the date of such transition.”

Accordingly, the Appellant contends that the following three adjustments have been made to

their financial statements, as a result of the first time adoption of SLFRS.

“(a) The originally recognized interest income (arising from loans and leases) under

Sri Lanka Accounting Standards ("SLAS") based on Sum of Digit Method ("SDM")

was adjusted to the Effective Interest Rate method ("EIR") under SLFRS.

(b) Prior to the adoption of SLFRS, loan interest expenses on account of bank

borrowing were accounted on cash basis and with the implementation of SLFRS

interest expenses were accounted on accrual basis.

(c) Prior to the SLFRS implementation, the Appellant has recognized the investment

in associate at cost. Upon the implementation of SLFRS, investments had to be

recognized under equity method. ”

It is the Appellant’s position that they have duly complied with the said directives, and has

made adjustment to the annual adjustment which was already filed. However, the said

Page 6 of 15

assessment has been rejected by the Assessor on the basis that the expenditure incurred in

relation to the adoption of SLFRS as first adopter cannot be claimed from profit when

computing VAT on Financial Services.

According to the journal entry dated 20th of February 2026, the parties in their oral

submissions agreed that this court need not answer the question of law I. Hence, only the

question of law II needs to be answered. Therefore, I shall only deal with the question of law

II, in the following manner.

Question of Law II

Has the Tax Appeals Commission erred in law when the Tax Appeals Commission failed to

determine whether the Commissioner General refusing to give effect to his own directive is

lawful?”

The Appellant being dissatisfied with the assessment issued by the Assessor has made an

appeal to the Respondent. Accordingly, the Respondent has determined confirming the

assessment made by the Assessor. Being aggrieved by the said determination the Appellant

has appealed to the TAC, which confirmed the decision of the Respondent.

It is the contention of the Appellant that the Appellant submitted the VAT return for the tax

period 2012/2013 in accordance with SLAS (Sri Lanka Accounting Standards). However,

subsequently, a new accounting standard was introduced, namely 'Sri Lanka Financial

Reporting Standard' (SLFRS). Accordingly, following the directive issued by the

Respondent, the Appellant has adjusted the said VAT return in accordance with the new

accounting standard under SLFRS. On this basis, the Appellant contends that the Respondent,

or TAC, cannot now renounce the application of the said directive in the present

circumstances.

The TAC in its determination dated 24th of January 2023 has set out the following reasoning

to uphold the assessment issued by the Assessor.

Page 7 of 15

“According to the "Directive" issued by the Department of Inland Revenue, in regard

to the adoption of SLFRS, profit or loss arising upon the transition to the SLFRS

should be (applicable on), for the period in which the transition is effected. Any

additional tax arising thereon may be paid within one year. Where any refund arises,

such refund may be set off against the VAT on financial services within one year from

the date of such transition. The Appellant's argument is that the Assistant

Commissioner's decision to disregard the directive issued by his own department is

ultra vires and arbitrary. Hence, the adjustment is not valid in law, the Appellant

contends.

The Senior Commissioner who has given reasons for the determination on behalf of

the Respondent, states that the computation of the total value addition in terms of

Section 25, (1) of the VAT Act is the total value addition of the overall business for a

particular period. Even though the Appellant Company has mentioned that such

interest income/expenses which is already taxed in prior periods there is no

provision to eliminate such from the current year's value addition.”

According to the reasons provided by the TAC in its determination, it is apparent that the

Appellant has already paid the required VAT for the specified taxable period. The sole reason

for the TAC's failure to deduct such VAT payment is the absence of a provision permitting

the exclusion of such payment from the current valuation. I find this position untenable, since

failure to deduct such payment shall only lead the Appellant to double taxation, which

contravenes the legislature's intention in taxation matters.

Further, it is the view of the TAC that section 25C(1) of the VAT Act is subject only to

adjustments for economic depreciation and emoluments payable to employees.

“According to Section No. 25C (1) every registered specified institution shall be liable

to tax for each taxable period on its total value addition of such institution which

include the net profits or loss, as the case may be, before the payment of income tax

on such profit computed in accordance with accepted accounting standards subject to

an adjustment for economic depreciation as determined by the Minister having regard

to the interest of the economy by an Order published in the Gazette and the

emoluments payable to all the employees of such institution. Respondent's contention

Page 8 of 15

is that Sec. 25C (1) shall not allow to make any adjustment in the net profit or loss

computed in accordance with accepted accounting standards other than

depreciation and emoluments payable.”

However, it needs to be noted that section 25C(1) is not exhaustive as to the manner of

calculating tax.

The section 25C(1) of the VAT Act, which deals with the calculation of tax on financial

services, reads as follows;

“25C. (1) Every registered specified institution under this Chapter shall be liable to

tax for each taxable period on its total value addition of such institution which

includes the net profits or loss, as the case may be, before payment of income tax on

such profit computed in accordance with accepted accounting standards, subject to

an adjustment for economic depreciation ,determined by the Minister having regard

to the interest of economy and maintaining the uniformity of allowable depreciation

by Order published in the Gazette, and the emoluments payable to all the employees

of such institution:”

………………….

(8) Every specified institution or any other person shall for the purpose of the

calculation of tax, submission of returns and information to be furnished relating to

such return, payments of tax, issue of assessments, imposition of penalty for non-

submission of the returns or the information required for the purpose of this Chapter,

follow –

(a) the guidelines specified by the Commissioner-General; and

(b) the relevant guidelines specified in the Order published in the Gazette,

having considered the uniform application of the calculation of the liability and any

other matter specified in the guideline provisions of this Chapter.”

Page 9 of 15

Section 25C(1) of the VAT Act imposes VAT liability on every registered specified financial

institution for each taxable period, calculated on its total value addition. This comprises the

institution's net profit or loss (computed in accordance with accepted accounting standards,

prior to the deduction of income tax), subject to two statutory adjustments: (i) economic

depreciation, and (ii) emoluments payable to all employees.

Further, Section 25C(8) of the VAT Act expressly prescribes the guidelines that shall be

issued for the purpose of calculating taxes payable under the said section. This provision

demonstrates that the calculation of tax to be governed not solely by the terms of section

25C(1), but also by the supplementary guidelines to be issued pursuant to section 25C(8).

Accordingly, it can be reasonably construed that section 25C(1), which deals with the

calculation of tax on financial services, is not exhaustive in its scope. The very structure of

section 25C indicates that subsection (1) operates in conjunction with subsection (8), as the

former gives effect to the guidelines promulgated under the latter for the same purpose.

Furthermore, the TAC in its determination has clearly mentioned that;

“Though the Appellant repeatedly argues that the Respondent has not considered

his own directive issued by a Deputy Commissioner to clarify the way of adoption of

SLFRS, it has failed in convincing submitting any documentary evidence to

convince either the Respondent or the Commission that it has acted in compliance

with the Section 25C (1) of the VAT Act. The Commission, therefore, is of the

opinion that there is no reason to interfere with the determination of the Respondent.”

It must be observed that the Respondent has not alleged that the Appellant has failed to

produce documentary evidence in support of its position. Moreover, had the Respondent

asserted non-compliance with section 25C(1) of the Value Added Tax Act, the burden of

proving such non-compliance would lie upon the Respondent itself. On the contrary, it is the

Respondent who has failed to adduce any evidence to establish that the directives relied upon

by the Appellant was not in fact issued by the Respondent. In the absence of such proof, the

Respondent cannot seek to impugn the Appellant's position on the basis of alleged non-

compliance.

Page 10 of 15

Therefore, in the present circumstances, there is no burden on the Appellant to prove, by

documentary evidence, that it has acted in compliance with section 25C(1). Accordingly, I

find the position of the TAC is wholly untenable.

Furthermore, the TAC in the latter part of the determination has provided that;

‘As the provisions of law supersede a mere direction. As such, the Commission

affirms the determination of the Respondent, namely the Commissioner General of

Inland Revenue and dismiss the Appeal.’

It is trite law that a provision of law shall supersede a direction. However, it needs to be noted

that a directive issued by the Respondent and subsequently gazetted to provide tax calculation

guidelines by the Commissioner-General of Inland Revenue becomes part of the law. This

applies, provided the directive is not contrary to the legislature's intention in the Act.

Furthermore, the VAT Act, under section 25C(8), has clearly established that any person or

institution may follow the guidelines specified by the Commissioner-General regarding tax

calculation. Therefore, it is my view that the TAC has not considered the above provisions of

law in arriving at its determination.

It should also be noted that the required adjustment was communicated to the Appellant by

the letter dated 28th January 2014 (Annexure B1 and B2). Therefore, it is apparent that a

guideline has been issued by the Respondent to the Appellant. Further, the Deputy

Commissioner clearly states in the said communication that any person who has furnished

returns not in conformity with the said format is permitted to make the necessary adjustment

and payment on that basis and to inform the Deputy Commissioner accordingly. Therefore,

the Appellant contends that it adjusted the returns for the 2012/2013 tax period solely on this

basis.

Further, section 67(m) of the VAT Act, which contains the penal provisions relating to

returns and related matters, reads as follows:

Page 11 of 15

“67. Every person who –

(m) fails to comply with the requirements specified by order published in the Gazette

or the guidelines issued by the Commissioner General under sections 2 or 25C, as the

case may be ; or

(n) fails to furnish an annual adjustment under subsection (1) of section 25C

shall be guilty of an offence under this Act, and shall be liable, on conviction after

summary trail before a Magistrate, to a fine not exceeding twenty five thousand

rupees, or to imprisonment of either description for a term not exceeding six months

or both such fine and imprisonment.”

According to section 67(m) of the VAT Act, a taxpayer who fails to comply with the

guidelines issued by the Commissioner-General of Inland Revenue under sections 2 and 25C

of the Act is liable to the penalties prescribed therein. Thereby, adherence to the guidelines

issued pursuant to the aforesaid provision is not merely procedural in nature but constitutes a

statutory obligation imposed upon taxpayers.

Therefore, if the Appellant has failed to adhere to the directives issued by the Respondent,

such failure would only attract the penal consequences prescribed under section 67(m) of the

VAT Act.

The paramount issue in this appeal is that the Respondent has failed to provide the refund

claimed by the Appellant. Having submitted the VAT returns for the year 2012/2013 under

SLAS format, the Appellant also submitted the annual adjustment for the same period on 30th

of September 2013 in the required SLFRS format. Subsequently, by letter dated 21st of

November 2013, the Appellant has also submitted the amended annual adjustment claiming

the refund arising from the incorporation of the annual adjustment under SLFRS, which has

been denied by the Respondent.

Page 12 of 15

The section 58 of the VAT Act, which deals with the refund of tax, explains the procedure to

obtain the refund in the following manner;

“58. (1) Where a registered person makes an application for a refund of any tax or

any penalty paid by him in excess during a taxable period, within three years from the

end of such taxable period and satisfies the Commissioner-General that such person

has paid any tax or any penalty in excess, of any amount which he was liable to pay

for that period, such person shall be entitled to a refund of the amount paid in excess,

subject to the provisions of subsection (3):

Provided however, that any such amount paid in excess by a registered person

referred to in paragraphs (a), (b), (c), (d) or (e) of subsection (5) of section 22, shall

be refunded to such person within forty- five days from the end of the taxable period

or from the date of the receipt of the return for the taxable period in which the excess

arose, whichever is later:”

Under section 58 of the VAT Act, any person who seeks a refund of any tax or penalty paid

in excess for a specified taxable period is required to file the claim within three years from

the end of such taxable period. Furthermore, such person must satisfy the Commissioner-

General of Inland Revenue that they are entitled to the refund. This statutory provision

establishes the time limit for filing the claim to be three years from the end of such taxable

period.

However, the directive issued by the Respondent provides a different framework, as it reads

in the following manner:

“Profit or Loss arising upon the transition to the SLFRS should be treated as such, for

the period in which the transition effected. Any additional tax arising thereon may be

paid within one year. Where any refund arises, such refund may be set off against

the VAT on Financial Services within one year from the date of such transition.”

Page 13 of 15

The directive issued by the Respondent clearly states that where a refund arises upon the

transition to SLFRS, such refund may be set off against the VAT on Financial Services

within one year from the date of such transition. This provision establishes a specific one-

year timeframe for the set-off of refunds arising from the SLFRS transition.

Consequently, the Appellant submitted a refund claim by letter dated 21st of November 2013,

which falls within the one-year timeframe specified in the directive. It therefore follows that

the refund claim was made within the timeframe stipulated by law. Furthermore, the

Respondent has not provided any reasonable justification for denying the refund to the

Appellant. Therefore, I am of the view that it is unlawful for the Commissioner-General to

reject such claim without providing any valid reason

In view of the foregoing, I find that the Tax Appeals Commission has erred in law by failing

to hold that the Commissioner-General's refusal to give effect to its own directive was

unlawful. Accordingly, I answer Question of Law II in the affirmative.

In concluding the question of law II in the above manner, I would like to discuss Section 59

of the VAT Act, which deals with interest on refunds and reads as follows:

“(1) Where any amount refundable under this Act to a registered person has not been

refunded within a period of thirty days from the due date of such refund, there shall

be paid by the Commissioner-General to such person interest on such amount for the

period commencing on the thirtieth day from the due date up to the date of refund of

the amount, at the rate prescribed by the Minister from time to time:

Provided, however, that no such interest shall be payable where there was a delay on

the part of the registered person in complying with any requirement made by the

Assessor in respect of any records of the registered person.”

Page 14 of 15

According to Section 59 of the VAT Act, where a refund is not paid to a taxpayer within the

period prescribed by law, the Commissioner-General is liable to pay interest on the

refundable amount for the period of delay. In the present case, the Assessor has rejected the

refund claim made by the Appellant without providing a valid reason. Furthermore, the

proviso to section 59(1) shall not be applicable in the present matter, since the Respondent

has not challenged any delay on the part of the Appellant. Accordingly, it is my view that the

Appellant is entitled to interest on the refund amount in terms of Section 59(1) of the VAT

Act.

Therefore, this Court finds that the Appellant is entitled to the refund claimed, together with

interest on that amount for the period commencing on the thirtieth day after the due date of

the refund and continuing until the date on which the refund is paid, at the rate prescribed by

the Minister in accordance with Section 59(1) of the VAT Act.

CONCLUSION

When considering the facts and the circumstances of the case, in line with the materials

presented before this court, I am of the view that the question of law II raised by the

Appellant should be answered in the Affirmative.

Accordingly, the appeal is allowed.

The determination of the TAC dated 24th of January 2023 and the determination of the

Respondent dated 31st of October 2017 is overturned. Further, the Notice of assessment dated

4th of September 2015, issued by the Assistant Commissioner of the Department of Inland

Revenue is hereby annulled.

The Appellant is entitled to the refund claimed, with the interest on that amount for the period

commencing on the thirtieth day after the due date of the refund and continuing until the date

on which the refund is paid in full.

Page 15 of 15

The Registrar is directed to serve a copy of this judgment to the Secretary of the Tax Appeals

Commission for necessary action.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Annalingam Premashanker J.

I agree

Judge of the Court of Appeal