==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA(PHC)0137/18

Page 1 of 21

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

1. Padma Warnalatha Thennakoon,

N0.400, Ballapana, Galigamuwa Town.

2. Don Joseph Michael Munaweera,

No.400, Ballapana, Galigamuwa Town.

Petitioners

Vs

1. N.A.S. Weerasinghe,

Commissioner General of Agrarian

Development, No.56, Marcus Fernando

Mawatha, Colombo 07.

2. Anusha Dewapriya,

Assistant Commissioner of

Agrarian Development, District Office of

Agrarian Development, Gatabe,

Peradeniya.

3. K.A. Sumith Chandana, Assistant

Commissioner of Agrarian Development,

District Office of Agrarian Development,

Kegalle.

4. Kuruppu Arachchilage Abeyrathna

Siyambalapitiya, Yattogoda.

5. Kuruppu Arachchilage

Wijerathna, Siyambalapitiya, Yattogoda.

Court of Appeal Case No. CA (PHC)/0137/2018 PHC Kegalle Case No. Writ/4933/2015

CA(PHC)0137/18

Page 2 of 21

6. The Hon. Attorney General, Attorney

General's Department, Colombo 12.

Respondents.

AND NOW

1. Padma Warnalatha Thennakoon,

No.400, Ballapana, Galigamuwa Town.

2. Don Joseph Michael Munaweera,

No.400, Ballapana, Galigamuwa Town.

2(A). Don Milinda Joseph Munaweera.

No.400, Ballapana, Galigamuwa Town.

Petitioners- Appellants

Vs.

1. N.A.S. Weerasinghe, Commissioner

General of Agrarian Development.

No.56, Marcus Fernando Mawatha,

Colombo 07.

2. Anusha Dewapriya,

Assistant Commissioner of

Agrarian Development, District Office of

Agrarian Development, Gatabe,

Peradeniya.

3. K. A. Sumith Chandana, Assistant

Commissioner of Agrarian Development,

CA(PHC)0137/18

Page 3 of 21

District Office of Agrarian Development.

Kegalle.

4. Kuruppu Arachchilage Abeyrathna.

Siyambalapitiya, Yattogoda.

5. Kuruppu Arachchilage Wijerathna,

Siyambalapitiya, Yattogoda.

5(A). Thanuja Prasad Wijegunaratne.

Siyambalapitiya, Yattogoda.

6. The Hon. Attorney General, Attorney

General's Department, Colombo 12.

Respondent- Respondents.

Before : D. THOTAWATTA, J.

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Counsel : S. K. Chaminda Senavirathne for the

Petitioners-Appellants.

Subashini Cooray for the 4th and 5th

Respondent-Respondents.

Rajika Aluwihare, SC for the 1st to 3rd and

6th Respondent-Respondents.

Argued on : 26.03.2026

Written Submissions

of the Petitioners- Appellants

CA(PHC)0137/18

Page 4 of 21

tendered on : 16.10.2020

Written Submissions

of the 1st, 2nd ,3rd, and 6th

Respondent- : 11.12.2024

Respondents tendered on

Written submission of 4th and

5th Respondent-Respondents

tendered on : 13.01.2021

Decided on : 25.08.2026

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Instant Appeal arises from an Order dated 30.07.2018 (hereinafter called and

referred to as “the HC Order”) made by the learned High Court Judge of the

Sabaragamuwa Province holden at Kegalle (hereinafter called and referred to as

“the High Court Judge of the Province”) dismissing the above styled action

instituted thereat by the Petitioners-Appellants(hereinafter called and referred to

as “the Appellants”) against the 1st to 6th Respondents (hereinafter called and

referred to as “the 1st to 6th Respondents”) seeking a Mandate in the nature of

writ of certiorari to quash the decision made by the 3rd Respondent in his capacity

as the Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Development attached to District

Office, Kegalle (hereinafter called and referred to as “the Assistant Commissioner

of Agrarian Development”), a certified copy of which was annexed to the Petition

marked as ‘පෙ12’ and a writ of mandamus directing the 1st, 2nd and 3rd

Respondents to restore the water channel-the subject matter of the action, to its

former position, by upholding the jurisdictional objection raised separately, by

CA(PHC)0137/18

Page 5 of 21

the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 6th Respondents on the one hand, and 4th and 5th Respondent

on the other hand, but, on the same premise as to the maintainability of the

action that High Court of the Sabaragamuwa Province holden at Kegalle

(hereinafter called and referred to as “the High Court of the Province”) has no

jurisdiction to entertain, hear and determine a writ application preferred thereto

by a party aggrieved by an Order made by the Commissioner General of Agrarian

Development under the provisions of the Agrarian Development Act No. 46 of

2000 as amended (hereinafter called and referred to as “the Act”).

As is discernible from a careful perusal of the Petition of Appeal, the Petitioners

seek to impugn the HC Order mainly, on three grounds, namely;

a) that, the learned High Court Judge of the Province had not directed his

judicial mind to Section 16 of the Agrarian Development (Amendment) Act

No. 46 of 2011 in the HC Order; (Vide-paragraph 2 of the Petition of Appeal)

b) that, the binding judicial precedents relied on by the learned High Court

Judge of the Province in the HC Order are those decided before 22.11.2011

(apparently, the day on which Agrarian Development (Amendment) Act No.

46 of 2011 had been certified by the Honourable Speaker of the Parliament

of Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka); (Vide-paragraph 3 of the

Petition of Appeal)

c) that HC Order is bad in law. (Vide-paragraph 4 of the Petition of Appeal)

The facts relevant to the instant Appeal as is discernible from a careful perusal

of the Petion of Appeal may be briefly, set out as follows;

CA(PHC)0137/18

Page 6 of 21

Petitioners had lodged a complaint to the Agrarian Development Officer of

Kegalle against the 4th and 5th Respondents alleging that the 4th and 5th had

having unlawfully, cut down the water channel and or water course-the subject

matter of the instant application for writ from which the Petitioners had drawn

water to their paddy field for paddy cultivation, got it attached to the paddy field

of the 4th and 5th Respondents; and that in pursuant to the complaint so lodged

by the Petitioners against 4th and 5th Respondent, the Assistant Commissioner of

Agrarian Development had having held an inquiry in to the complaint under

section 83 of the Act, made Order contained in පෙ12 dismissing the complaint so

made by the Petitioners against the 4th and 5th Respondents; and that the

Petitioners being aggrieved by the Order (පෙ12), had preferred an application to

the High Court of the Province seeking a mandate in the nature of a writ of

certiorari to quash the Order(පෙ12) and a further mandate in the nature of

mandamus directing the 1st, 2nd and 3rd Respondents to restore the water channel

to its former position; and that the learned High Court Judge of the Province had

having upheld the jurisdictional objection so raised by the Respondents as

enumerated above, dismissed it on the premise as enumerated above. Hence, the

instant Appeal therefrom.

The pivotal basis of the jurisdictional objection so raised by the Respondents

separately, but, on the same premise before the High Court of the Province as

enumerated above, is that the High Court of the Province has no jurisdiction to

hear and determine the writ application filed by the Appellants against the

Respondents before it against the Order (පෙ12), made by the Assistant

Commissioner of Agrarian Development under the provisions of the Act in the

CA(PHC)0137/18

Page 7 of 21

view of the Thirteenth amendment to the Constitution, and in view of the section

3 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990 and

in view of the decision of the Supreme Court in Wijesuriya vs Wanigasinghe and

Others 2011 [2] SLR 231 as well as the unreported decisions of this Court in

CA(PHC)65/2010-Decided 29.04.2016 and CA(PHC)122/2011-Decided

25.05.2016. The Appellants on the other hand, sought to resist the jurisdictional

objection raised before it on the premise that the learned High Court Judge of the

Province had not directed his judicial mind to section 16 of the Act as amended

by Act No. 26 of 2011 which confers jurisdiction on the High Court of the Province

from the decisions of the Commissioner General of Agrarian Development made

under the Act; and that in view of section 38(3) and (4) of the Act, the powers of

the Commissioner General of Agrarian Development can be delegated to an

Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Development and/or a Deputy

Commissioner of Agrarian Development and therefore, a decision of the Assistant

Commissioner of Agrarian Development and/or a Deputy Commissioner of

Agrarian Development is amendable to the writ jurisdiction of the High Court of

the Province and as such the High Court of the Province has jurisdiction to hear

and determine the instant application made to it by the Appellants for a mandate

in the nature of a writ of certiorari and mandamus.

Hence, the pivotal question of law that would now, arise before us for our

determination in the instant Appeal is whether an Order made by the Assistant

Commissioner of Agrarian Development under the provisions of the Act is

amenable to the writ jurisdiction of a High Court established under Article

154P(1) of the Constitution.

CA(PHC)0137/18

Page 8 of 21

It may now, be examined.

Article 154 P (4) (b) of the Constitution would be relevant in this regard and it

reads thus;

“Every such High Court shall have jurisdiction to issue, according to law-

b) Order in the nature of Writ of Certiorari, Prohibition, Procedendo,

Mandamus and quo warranto against any person exercising within

the province any power under-

1. any law; or

11. any statute made by the Provincial Council established for that

Province,

In respect of any matter set out in the Provincial Council List.”

Out of the 37 subjects enumerated in the Provincial Council List, item 9 of the

Provincial Council list reads thus;

“9. Agriculture and Agrarian Services:-

9.1. Agriculture, including agricultural extension, promotion and

education for provincial purposes and agricultural services (other

than interprovincial irrigation and land settlement schemes, state

land and plantation agriculture)

9.2. Rehabilitation and maintenance of minor irrigation works

9.3 Agricultural research, save and except institutions designated as

national agricultural research institutions. [Emphasis is mine]

CA(PHC)0137/18

Page 9 of 21

In the light of the above, it becomes manifestly, clear that with the enactment of

the 13th amendment to the Constitution and with the introduction of Provincial

Councils in furtherance of the 13th amendment, Writ Jurisdiction with regard to

certain matters had been conferred upon the High Court established under Article

154 P(1) of the Constitution enacted by the 13th amendment to the Constitution

when certain conditions are met and satisfied and they may be summarised as

follows;

I. The Writ must be sought against a person exercising power within the

Province;

II. The power so exercised must be under either a law or a Provincial

Council Statute; and

III. The said law or statute must relate to a matter set out in the

Provincial Council List.

It is significant to observe at this juncture that the Agrarian Services Act had been

repealed in the year 2000 with the introduction of the Agrarian Development Act

and the long title to the Agrarian Development Act describes the ambit and or the

scope of the of the Act as follows;

“An Act to provide for matters relating to landlords and tenant cultivators

of paddy lands; For the utilization of agricultural lands in accordance with

agricultural policies; For the establishment of Agrarian Development

Councils; To provide for the establishment of a Land Bank; To provide the

establishment of Agrarian Tribunals; To provide for the repeal of the

Agrarian Services Act, No. 58 of 1979; and For matters connected therewith

or incidental thereto.”

CA(PHC)0137/18

Page 10 of 21

Upon a careful reading of the long title to the Act, it becomes manifestly, clear

that the Act had been enacted by the Legislature with a view to giving full effect

to the provision enumerated in item 9 of the 9th Schedule of the Provincial Council

list to the Constitution, namely; “Agriculture and Agrarian Services”, if a

purposive interpretation is given as in the Case of Madduma Banda V. Assistant

Commissioner of Agrarian Services and Another 2003 [2] Sri LR 80 wherein

it was held that “The word ‘Agrarian’ in item 9 of the 9th Schedule of the Provincial

Council list relates to landed property and such property could no doubt, attract

paddy lands and tenement cultivators of such land and hence, the impugned

order would be covered by the item 9 of the 9th Schedule in the Provincial Councils

List. In the case of ambiguity, the enactment should be interpreted so as to give

effect to its purpose. The purpose of the 13th Amendment is to give a right to an

aggrieved party to have recourse to the Provincial High Court instead of having to

seek relief from the Court of Appeal in Colombo. As such the High Court is deemed

to have jurisdiction to grant writ sought under Article 154P(4).”.

However, if the particular Act or Statue does not fall or falls outside the subjects

enumerated in the Provincial Council list in such a situation the Provincial High

Court would not have jurisdiction to entertain writ applications.

It is in this context, let me now, closely, and carefully, examine and analyse

section 38 of the Act in its correct perspective.

Section 38 of the Act reads thus;

“ (1) There shall be appointed for the purposes of this Act a Commissioner-

General of Agrarian Development. (hereinafter referred to in this Act as

CA(PHC)0137/18

Page 11 of 21

the Commissioner General), and every reference in any other law to the

Commissioner of Agrarian Services shall be deemed to be a reference to

the Commissioner General.

(2) There may be appointed an Additional Commissioner General,

Commissioners, Deputy Commissioners, Assistant Commissioners,

Agrarian Development Officers and other officers as may be necessary

for the purposes of this Act.

(3) The Additional Commissioner-General and Commissioners of Agrarian

Development may exercise all or any of the powers of the Commissioner-

General under this Act.

(4) Every Deputy Commissioner may exercise all or any of the powers of the

Commissioner-General under this Act, within the area to which such

Deputy Commissioner is appointed.

(5) Every Assistant Commissioner may exercise all or any of the powers of

the Commissioner-General under this Act, within the area to which

such Assistant Commissioner is appointed.

(6) Every Agrarian Development Officer expressly authorized to do so by the

Additional Commissioner, the Deputy Commissioner or the Assistant

Commissioner within whose area, the area of authority of such Agrarian

Development Officer falls, may exercise all or any of the powers of the

Commissioner General under this Act, within the area to which such

Agrarian Development Officer is appointed.

(7) The Additional Commissioner General, The Commissioners, the Deputy

Commissioner General, every Assistant Commissioner and every

Agrarian Development Officer shall in the exercise of his powers and the

CA(PHC)0137/18

Page 12 of 21

performance of his duties under this Act, be subject to the direction and

control of the Commissioner-General.” [Emphasis is mine]

Upon a careful analysis of section 38 of the Act in its totality, it becomes

abundantly, clear that the Legislature in its wisdom had in enacting it in such a

manner, explicitly, made a clear distinction between the exercise of the powers

by the Commissioner General of Agrarian Development so conferred upon

himself by the Act as well as the exercise of the powers by the Additional

Commissioner General of Agrarian Development, and Commissioners of

Agrarian Development so conferred upon the Commissioner General of

Agrarian Development by the Act on the one hand, and the exercise of the

powers by the Deputy Commissioner of Agrarian Development and the

Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Development so conferred upon the

Commissioner General of Agrarian Development by the Act on the other

hand, in that while, the Commissioner General of Agrarian Development,

Additional Deputy Commissioner General of Agrarian Development, and

Commissioners of Agrarian Development will exercise the powers so

conferred upon the Commissioner General of Agrarian Development by the

Act on an “island-wide” basis in terms of section 38 (1),(2) and (3) of the Act,

the Deputy Commissioner of Agrarian Development and the Assistant

Commissioner of Agrarian Development will exercise the powers of the

Commissioner General of Agrarian Development so conferred upon him by

the Act, “only” within the area to which such Deputy Commissioner of

Agrarian Development and the Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian

CA(PHC)0137/18

Page 13 of 21

Development has been appointed as enacted in section 38(4) and (5) of the Act.

[Emphasis is mine]

Hence, it becomes manifest upon a careful reading of section 38 of the Act that

there are two categories of persons thereunder, insofar as it only, relates to the

exercise of the powers conferred upon the Commissioner General of Agrarian

Development under the Act, in that;

a) the Commissioner General of Agrarian Development as well as the

Additional Commissioner General of Agrarian Development, and

Commissioners of Agrarian Development will exercise the powers

conferred upon the Commissioner General of Agrarian Development by

the Act on an “island-wide” basis;

b) whereas, the Deputy Commissioner of Agrarian Development and the

Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Development will exercise the powers

conferred upon the Commissioner General of Agrarian Development by

the Act, “only within the area” to which such Deputy Commissioner of

Agrarian Development and/or the Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian

Development has been appointed in terms of section 38(4) and (5) of the

Act. [Emphasis is mine]

In view of the aforesaid analysis of section 38 of the Act, it becomes manifest that

the exercise of powers conferred upon the Commissioner General of Agrarian

Development by the Act, is “two-fold” in that the powers conferred upon the

Commissioner General of Agrarian Development by the Act are on the one hand,

exercised by the Commissioner General of Agrarian Development as well as

CA(PHC)0137/18

Page 14 of 21

the Additional Commissioner General of Agrarian Development, and

Commissioners of Agrarian Development on an “island-wide” basis, whereas,

the Deputy Commissioner of Agrarian Development and the Assistant

Commissioner of Agrarian Development will on the other hand, exercise the same

powers so conferred upon the Commissioner General of Agrarian Development

by the Act, “only within the area” to which such Deputy Commissioner of

Agrarian Development and/or the Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian

Development has been appointed in terms of section 38(4) and (5) of the Act.

[Emphasis is mine]

Therefore, the resultant position is that the Deputy Commissioner of Agrarian

Development and the Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Development will

exercise their powers only within the area to which such Deputy

Commissioner of Agrarian Development and the Assistant Commissioner of

Agrarian Development has been appointed in terms of section 38(4) and (5) of

the Act, and thus, the exercise of power by the Deputy Commissioner of

Agrarian Development and the Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian

Development is circumscribed by the area to which such Deputy

Commissioner of Agrarian Development and the Assistant Commissioner of

Agrarian Development has been appointed. [Emphasis is mine]

Hence, it becomes manifest that section 38(4) and (5), had deliberately, been

enacted to the Act by the Legislature in such a manner as enumerated above,

solely, in furtherance of the Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution thus,

making the decisions of either the Deputy Commissioner of Agrarian

Development or the Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Development made

CA(PHC)0137/18

Page 15 of 21

by them in the exercise of the powers of the Commissioner General of Agrarian

Development “only within the area” to which such Deputy Commissioner of

Agrarian Development or the Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian

Development has been appointed, “amenable” to the writ jurisdiction of the

High Court of the Province established by Article 154P(1) of the Constitution

and conferred upon it by Article 154P(4) of the Constitution enacted by the

Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution. [Emphasis is mine]

In the circumstances, it clearly, appears that the requirement No. 1 as

enumerated above, namely; Writ must be sought against a person exercising

power within the Province; has been clearly, fulfilled by the Appellants which

is in my opinion, a condition precedent to invoke the writ jurisdiction of the High

Court of the Province for; the Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Development

had arrived at the decision sought to be quashed by the Appellants (පෙ12), in the

exercise of the powers of the Commissioner General of Agrarian Development

“only within the area” to which such Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian

Development had been appointed, namely; District of Kegalle which comes

directly, within the jurisdiction of the High Court of the Sabaragamuwa Province

where the instant application for writ had been properly, instituted by the

Appellants seeking a kind of relief as enumerated above, against the

Respondents. [Emphasis is mine]

Furthermore, in view of the reasons set out above, the requirement No. 2 as

enumerated above, namely; the power so exercised must be under either a law

or a Provincial Council Statute; too, has been clearly, fulfilled by the Appellants

which too, is in my opinion, a condition precedent to invoke the writ jurisdiction

CA(PHC)0137/18

Page 16 of 21

of the High Court of the Province for; the power so exercised by the Assistant

Commissioner of Agrarian Development had derived from section 83 of the

Agrarian Development Act read in conjunction with item 9.2 of the 9th Schedule

of the Provincial Council list in particular. [Emphasis is mine]

Moreover, in the light of the reasons enumerated above, the requirement No. 3 as

enumerated above, namely; The said law or statute must relate to a matter

set out in the Provincial Council List; also, has been clearly, fulfilled by the

Appellants which is in my opinion, also a condition precedent to invoke the writ

jurisdiction of the High Court of the Province for; the matters stated in section 83

of the Agrarian Development Act are matters coming within the ambit of item 9.2

of the 9th Schedule of the Provincial Council list, namely; Rehabilitation and

maintenance of minor irrigation works. [Emphasis is mine]

I would, therefore, hold that all the requirements necessary to invoke the writ

jurisdiction of the High Court of the Province established under Article 154P(1) of

the Constitution as enumerated above, had been fulfilled by the Appellant before

the High Court of the Province.

As stated above, however, the Respondents had placed heavy reliance on the

decision in Wijesuriya vs Wanigasinghe and Others (Supra) in support of the

jurisdictional objection so raised by them.

It appears however, that the Supreme Court in the decision in Wijesuriya vs

Wanigasinghe and Others (Supra) had no occasion to consider the distinction

between the powers exercisable by the Commissioner General of Agrarian

Development by himself and the Additional Commissioner General of Agrarian

CA(PHC)0137/18

Page 17 of 21

Development and the Commissioners of Agrarian Development “on an island-

wide basis” as enacted by section 38 (1), (2) and (3) of the Act, on the one hand

and the powers exercisable by the Deputy Commissioner of Agrarian Development

and the Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Development “only within the area

to which they have been appointed” as enacted by section 38(4) and (5) of the

Act, on the other hand. [Emphasis is mine]

On the other hand, the decision-the subject matter of the Appeal in the Supreme

Court in the decision in Wijesuriya vs Wanigasinghe and Others (Supra) was

one directly, made by the Commissioner General of Agrarian Development by

himself sitting in appeal, whereas, the decision sought to be quashed by the

Appellants in the instant application was not one made by the Commissioner

General of Agrarian Development exercising the powers conferred upon him on

an island wide basis but, by the Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Development

appointed to exercise the powers of the Commissioner General of Agrarian

Development only within the area to which the Assistant Commissioner of

Agrarian Development has been appointed, namely; District of Kegalle.

Hence, the facts pertaining to the Supreme Court decision in Wijesuriya vs

Wanigasinghe and Others (Supra) can clearly, be distinguishable from the facts

of the instant appeal and therefore, the Supreme Court decision in Wijesuriya vs

Wanigasinghe and Others (Supra) has if I may say so with all due respect, no

bearing on the resolution of the instant appeal before us.

Furthermore, this Court too, had in its decisions in CA(PHC)65/2010 (Supra)

and CA(PHC)122/2011(Supra) upon which heavy reliance had been placed by

the Respondents in support of the jurisdictional objection so raised by them in

CA(PHC)0137/18

Page 18 of 21

the Court below, no occasion to consider the clear distinction between the powers

exercisable by the Commissioner General of Agrarian Development by himself

and the Additional Commissioner General of Agrarian Development and the

Commissioners of Agrarian Development “on an island-wide basis” as enacted

by section 38 (1), (2) and (3) of the Act, on the one hand and the powers

exercisable by the Deputy Commissioner of Agrarian Development and the

Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Development “only within the area to

which they have been appointed” as enacted by section 38(4) and (5) of the Act,

on the other hand.

Hence, I would if I may say so with all due respect, find myself unable to agree

with the view so expressed by this Court in those two decisions as enumerated

above.

On the other hand, the view so expressed by me as aforesaid, is well, supported

and fortified by the decision of the Supreme Court in Madduma Banda V.

Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Services and Another (Supra) as well as

by the decisions of this Court in CA/Writ 23/2013-Decided on 10.06.2016 and

CA Writ Application No. 371/2014(Supra).

Before I part with the judgement, I would think it pertinent and relevant to deal

with a further point which I think, has a bearing on the resolution of the question

of law that has arisen before us for our consideration in the instant appeal and it

relates to the contradictory and different positions so adverted to by the learned

Attorney General in the instant appeal before us as well as in the High Court of

the Province on the one hand, and in the case in CA Writ Application No.

371/2014 (Supra) on the other hand on the same question of law.

CA(PHC)0137/18

Page 19 of 21

It may now, be examined.

Similar question of law that has arisen for our consideration in the instant appeal,

had also, arisen before this Court for its consideration in the case bearing CA

Writ Application No. 371/2014(Supra) wherein, it was contended by the

learned Attorney General before this Court that the impugned order-the subject

matter of that case, was made under section 90(1) of the Agrarian Development

Ordinance and that matter comes under the Provincial Council List and hence,

the High Court of the province has jurisdiction to hear and determine an

application for writ filed against a decision of the Assistant Commissioner of

Agrarian Development of the District of Kegalle made by him under the provisions

of the Act.

However, it is regretful to observe that the learned Attorney General now, seeks

in this appeal as well as before the High Court of the Province, to advert to an

entirely, contradictory and different position to that of the one so adverted to by

him before us in the case in CA Writ Application No. 371/2014(Supra) that the

High Court of the Province has no jurisdiction to hear and determine the writ

application filed by the Appellants against the Respondents before it against the

Order (පෙ12), made by the Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Development

under the provisions of the Act in the view of the Thirteenth amendment to the

Constitution, and in view of the section 3 of the High Court of the Provinces

(Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990 and in view of the decision of the Supreme

Court in Wijesuriya vs Wanigasinghe and Others (Supra) as well as the

unreported decisions of this Court in CA(PHC)65/2010(Supra) and

CA(PHC)122/2011(Supra) which clearly, and unambiguously, shows that the

CA(PHC)0137/18

Page 20 of 21

learned Attorney General has thus, endeavoured to approbate and reprobate on

the same matter so arisen before this Court for its consideration in two different

instances and it is well settled law that a party cannot in law, be permitted to

approbate and reprobate on a similar and identical matter as laid down by the

Supreme Court in the decision in Ranasinghe vs. Premadharma and Others

1985 [1] SLR 63.

This clearly, and unequivocally, shows that there has been no consistency with

regard to the position so adverted to by the learned Attorney General on this same

question of law which would by itself, entitle this Court to reject the contradictory

and different positions so adverted to by him on the same question of law in the

instant appeal.

In view of all the above circumstances, I would hold that the jurisdictional

objection so raised by the Respondents before the High Court of the Province as

to the maintainability of the writ application filed before it by the Appellants as

enumerated above, is not entitled to succeed both in fact and law and as such it

ought to have been overruled by the learned High Court Judge of the Province in-

limine as rightly, contended by the learned Counsel for the Appellants.

I would therefore, hold that the High Court of the Province has jurisdiction to

hear and determine the application for writ instituted thereat, by the Appellants

seeking to quash by way of a writ of certiorari, the impugned decision of the

Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Development (පෙ12).

Hence, I would hold that the Appeal is entitled to succeed both in fact and law.

In the result, I would set aside the HC order.

CA(PHC)0137/18

Page 21 of 21

I would thus, allow the appeal however, without costs.

Hence, I would direct the learned High Court Judge of the Province to hear and

determine the instant application for writ on its merits as expeditiously, as

possible in accordance with the law.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL