IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

CA Case No. WT 02/2014

Wakfs Tribunal Appeal No.

WT / 205 / 2012

Wakfs Board Case No.

WB / 5420 / 2011

1.

2.

3.

A.C.M. Rasheed,

Person-in-Charge of Ratmalana,

Jumma Mosque,

No.4, 1st Lane,

Ratmalana.

Appellant - Appellant

-Vs-

M.M. Isfahan,

No, 35,

Athula Mawatha,

Mt-Lavinia.

Mohamed Mohamed Ariff,

No. 48/B,

Hotel Road,

Mt-Lavinia.

M.H.M. Farouk,

No. 25,

Dharmarama Road,

Ratmalana.

1

II

f i !!

t

t I

!,

t-I I ! I, iI

iIIff!!If,II ! !!I! !

f ,

\fI!\

BEFORE

4. Mohamed Saleem Zain Fazil,

No. 62/9,

Dharmarama Road,

Ratmalana.

5. Tuan Fareed,

No. F/14,

Flat Kalldemulla Road,

Moratuwa.

6. A.F.M. Navavi,

No. 51,

Hena Road,

Mt-Lavinia.

7. Mohamed Hussain Mohamed,

No. 5/10, 1st La ne,

Ratmalana.

8. A.F. Ahmed Ramly,

9. M.R. Gouse,

lO.A. Usama Mansoor,

11.lrshad Basheer

All persons purporting to act as Trustees of

the Rathmalana Jumma Mosque.

Respondents - Respondents

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J.

2

I

!I

I

t!!

I,

I

COUNSEL

Argued on

Written Submissions

Decided on

AoHoMoDo NAWAZ, J,

A.R. Surendran, PC with Safana Gul Begum, M.

Jude Dinesh and Maithreyi Rajasingam for the

Appellant.

N.M. Shaheid with Nusky lathiff for the

Respondents.

29.07.2015, 23.09.2015 and 26.10.2015

03.11.2015

18.12.2015

By the petition of appeal dated 22nd October 2014, the Appellant-Appellant

(hereinafter referred to as 'the Appellant') seeks to have, the antecedent

appointment of trustees made by the Wakfs Board by its order dated 16th December

2012 and the subsequent order of the Wakfs Tribunal dated 23rd August 2014

affirming the said appointments, set aside. Besides the annulment of these two

orders made by the Wakfs Board and Wakfs Tribunal respectively, the Appellant also

seeks a direction from this Court to the Wakfs Board to appoint special trustees in

terms of Section 14(1)(c) of the Muslim Mosques and Charitable Trusts or Wakfs Act

No.51 of 1956 as amended (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the Act). In a

nutshell the appeal to the Court of Appeal in this matter impugns two orders

namely;

i. the order made by the Wakfs Board dated 16th December 2012 appointing 11

trustees to the Ratmalana Jumma Mosque.

3

i l

i

tt

i

~!rttI

~

I I I

~ i I ! I I I 1 1 I

I I I

ii. the order of the Wakfs Tribunal dated 23rd August 2014 affirming the

aforesaid order of the Wakfs Board to appoint the 11 trustees.

Before I proceed to determine the rival contentions for and against the reliefs that

have been articulated before me, I deem it necessary to set out the backdrop in

which the instant appeal impugning these two orders has arisen.

Surrounding Matrix for the Instant Appeal

The genesis of the instant appeal before this Court could be said to be the

appointment of nine special trustees made by the Wakfs Board to the Jumma

mosque as far back as 1ih July 2011. The appointment of special trustees is a power

which the Waksf Board enjoys by virtue of Section 14(1)(C) of the Act. Aggrieved by

the appointment of these nine special trustees, the Appellant along with the

persons-in-charge at that time had preferred an appeal to the Wakfs Tribunal in

case no. WT /197/11 whereupon the Wakfs Tribunal set aside the order of the Wakfs

Board to appoint the aforesaid special trustees but directed the Wakfs Board to

make arrangements to ensure that fresh election be held within four months from

the date of the said order by the persons-in-charge to elect or select new trustees

according to past practice and the law.

In addition to annulling the appointment of the special trustees and ordering

instead a fresh election to the Ratmalana Jumma Masjid, the Wakfs Tribunal in its

order dated 23rd June 2012 also made another pertinent direction to the Wakfs

Board namely;

h'ln the event the persons-in-charge failed to hold election on or before 24th

October 2012~ then the Wakfs Board could appoint Trustees from members of

the Jama~ ath."

4

1i I I,

I

rft,

f

IiIt

1

~

The interpretation section of the Act ,- Section 58 defines )ama'ath in relation to a

mosque to mean-

"The persons who ordinarily worship at, or participate in the religious or

customary rites and ceremonies ot that mosque and whose names appear on

the register of members of the mosque for the time being. "

It is worthy of note that the task of ensuring the election or selection of trustees was

entrusted with the persons-in-charge who included the appellant and as is usually

the case, once the trustees are selected or nominated according to the practices,

rules, regulations or other arrangements in force for the administration of the

mosque, the Wakfs Board will proceed to confirm and appoint the persons so

selected or nominated as trustees-see Section 14(1)(a) of the Act.

In fact since this case turns on section 14(1) of the Act which provides for three

situations catering to three modes of appointment of trustees by the Wakfs Board,

Section 14(1) of the Act could be more fully set out-

As soon as may be, after a mosque has been registered under section 13, the

board-

a. shall confirm and appoint a person or persons to be a trustees who is or

have been selected or nominated according to the practices, rules,

regulation or other arrangements in force for the administration of the

mosque;

b. if no trustee or trustees is or are appointed under paragraph (a), the board

may appoint a person or persons to be a trustee or trustee's from among

registered members of the Jama'ath of the mosque;

5

i

I

; (

c. may appoint a special trustee or trustees for a particular period if the

board considers necessary for the proper administration of the mosque;

It has to be observed that when the Wakfs Tribunal by its order dated 23rd June

2012 enjoined a fresh selection of trustees it is Section 14(1)(a) of the Act that was

contemplated by the Tribunal but the corollary too namely Section 14(1)(b) of the

Act was also to kick in if fresh selections became incapable of being effected-that is

to say in the event of a non selection of trustees according to the practices, rules,

regulations or other arrangements in force the Wakfs Board would appoint persons

as trustees from among registered members of the lama'ath-so ordered the Wakfs

Tribunal by its order dated 23rd June 2012. In other words a frustration of efforts to

bring about a selection of trustees in terms of Section 14(1)(a) of the Act would

result in the Wakfs Board setting about to appoint the trustees from among the

registered members of the lama'ath in terms of Section 14(1)(b) of the Act.

A perusal of both Paragraphs (a) and (b) of Section 14(1) of the Act indicates that

the act of appointment of trustees by the Wakfs Board via Section 14 (1) (b) of the

Act is contingent upon a failure to select or nominate trustees according to the

prevailing practices, rules, regulations or other arrangements as enjoined by Section

14(1)(a) of the Act. When the Wakfs Tribunal made its order dated 23rd June 2012 it

embodied both modes of appointment to be followed and directed the Wakfs Board

to ensure the selection and appointment of trustees on these lines.

Subsequent events before the Wakfs Board

Upon a perusal of the proceedings before the Wakfs Board it is manifest that the

Wakfs Board took on the order of the Wakfs Tribunal quite earnestly and set in

motion its own efforts to implement the order of the Tribunal by noticing the

parties inclusive of the Appellant who was one of the persons in charge

6

mosque for the nonce. The proceedings of the Board held on 29th July 2012, 26th

August 2012, 16th September 2012, 23rd September 2012, i h October 2012 and 18th

November 2012 all indicate that the Wakfs Board had made its best endeavors to

give effect to the order of the Wakfs Tribunal. This court observes that In the course

of its endeavors to implement the order of the Tribunal dated 23rd June 2012, the

Wakfs Board has concentrated its time and effort on securing a finalized Jama'ath

register.

Jama'ath Register before the Board

Since the practice in regard to selection or nomination of trustees for the Ratmalana

Jumma Masjid is to effect the appointments from among the members in the

Jama'ath Register, the proceedings before the Wakfs Board indicate strenuous

efforts being made by the Board to secure a definitive register from which the .

selection/election could take place but this Court observes that the Appellant

though he has admittedly submitted registers has been faulted on a number of

occasions for having submitted imperfect registers containing among other things

names of dead persons, females and even business establishments which cannot in

any event form component parts of a Jama'ath register. It was brought home to the

Wakfs Board that the register submitted by the Appellant also contained names of

members of the Jama'ath of other mosques and a number of names of members so

called had no corresponding addresses. This evidence reflected in the proceedings

dated 23rd September 2012 remains uncontradicted.

A fortiori one could not be sanguine about the prospect of an election of trustees for

the mosque given the kind of defective and fictional registers that were being

submitted. But the Wakfs Board appears to have soldiered on with their

exhortations on both the Appellant and the respondents to accomplish a definitive

7

Ii I I I i

I!

\

~ I I

I

~ t!II III !

register for the purpose of implementing the order of the Wakfs Tribunal dated 23rd

June 2012. The proceedings dated 7th October 2012 reflect the repetition of the

selfsame allegation being made against the Appellant namely he along with another

was responsible for including in the latest register tendered to the Board a large

number of names which do not belong to the Jama'ath of the Ratmalana Jumma

Masjid and on top of it the Board was notified that the Register contained names of

institutions which belonged to persons of other faiths. This evidence that transpired

against the Appellant before the Board remains unchallenged and uncontroverted.

In fact on the next date i.e 18th November 2012 the board has observed that the

whole process of holding the elections was being deliberately delayed owing to foul

play and another date was given to finalize all steps in regard to the appointment of

trustees. On the following date namely 9th December 2012 one cannot fault the

board for arriving at the finding that the persons in charge were not at all interested

in having a fair and transparent selection/election of trustees.

It was in those circumstances that the Board came to make its order dated 16th

December 2012 by virtue of powers vested in it by Section 14(1)(b) of the Act. In a

detailed order narrating the concatenation of events that virtually frustrated the

operation of Section 14(1)(a) of the Act, the board took the correct view that they

should set in motion the implementation of the alternative order suggested by the

Tribunal namely;

"In the event the persons-in-charge failed to hold election on or before 24th

October 2012, then the Wakfs Board could appoint Trustees from members of

the Jama' ath. II

It was in this backdrop that the Board proceeded to make the 11 appointments of

trustees which were later challenged before the Wakfs Tribunal. Before making

8

I! t Jf I i I

~ , ,

I must observe at this stage that this register as at 31st March 2012 has found its way

into the record without any permission being sought from court to furnish it to court

and it has to be observed that no document should be filed before this Court

without seeking leave of court especially in a matter when this Court exercises

appellate jurisdiction. No doubt it was a document, as the Wakfs Board states, that

was already in esse before the Board. There were several other documents, both

genuine and fabricated as the Wakfs Board calls it, that were placed before the

Wakfs Board. But that fact alone does not absolve the Appellant from seeking

permission of court to produce a document in order to buttress an argument which

as I would presently show needed to be taken in the first instance before the Wakfs

Board itself.

If there is an error on a question of fact which the primary fact finder such as th,e,

Board may have made as to a particular document such as this register, that error

must have been brought home to the Wakfs Tribunal and an appellate order

obtained on that document. If the statute imposes a requirement to go before the

same primary fact finder such as the Wakfs Board as far as its power under Section

14(1)(b) of the Act is concerned and make representation that it has made a mistake

on the document, then that argument must be addressed before the primary fact

finder. It is only then it becomes competent for this court to rule on any error that

the appellate body at the first tier namely the Wakfs Tribunal may have made on a

question of fact latently lurking in that document. Parties cannot slip in a document

at the appellate stage and plead that the Court of Appeal which exercises an

appellate power at the second tier in these types of cases should make a primary

finding of fact on a document. For several reasons which I would presently

adumbrate in this judgment having regard to the statutory scheme in the Act, I hold

10

that this Court cannot now make a primary fact finding on a document which is

produced for the first time only before this Court to make such finding. Neither the

Board nor the tribunal was ever made aware that it was this document and

document alone that vitiates the appointment of trustees because for the first time

this Court is told the Board made a mistake of fact on this document. The tool that

was contended to be material to vitiate the appointments was described by counsel

for the Appellant as that error made by the board pertaining to this document which

led to a patent want of jurisdiction in the board.

Before I turn to the argument on patent want of jurisdiction let me observe that this

document along with several other material submitted before the Wakfs Board

could not have gone begging in the consideration of criteria necessary for an

appointment under Section 14(1)(b) of the Act.

The proceedings before the Board no doubt disclose a ding dong battle between the

Appellant and the Respondents in which no finality could be arrived at as regards a

definitive register and the events betray an odious and unholy deadlock which

should at all times be avoided in the administration and management of a holy place

of the Almighty.

The prime reason why I recited the above evidence before the Board is because I

have to satisfy myself whether the Wakfs Board had before them unchallenged

members of the Jama'ath from which pool they could appoint trustees as they did

when they proceeded to appoint the 11 trustees on 16th December 2012.

Section 14(1)(b) of the Act

One cannot but ignore the terms of authority of appointment in section 14 (1) (b).

11

"The board, if no trusteeor trustees is or are appointed under paragraph (a),

the board may appoint a person or persons to be a trustee or trustees from

among registered members of the Jama' ath of the mosque."

As alluded to previously the interpretation section of the Act - Section 58 defines

Jama'ath in relation to a mosque to mean-

"The persons who ordinarily worship at, or participate in the religious or

customary rites and ceremonies of, that mosque and whose names appear on

the register of members of the mosque for the time being".l

There is evidence that the Wakfs Board was cognizant of the requirements

stipulated for the exercise of their power to appoint trustees, because the Board has

alluded to this in their order dated 16th December 2012 namely they were making

the appointments as per the order of the Tribunal and in terms of Section 14 (1) (b)

of the Muslim Mosques and Charitable Trusts or Wakfs Act.

Argument before the Court of Appeal - patent want of jurisdiction

But the argument put forward before me on behalf of the Appellant was that the

Wakfs Board suffered from a patent want of jurisdiction to make the appointments

of the 11 trustees. The complaint before me was that five trustees from among the

11 appointed trustees did not belong to the Mahalia or congregation of the

Ratmalana mosque. In an interesting argument quite forcefully articulated by the

Ms.Saffana Gul Begum Counsel for the Appellant she called it a patent want of

jurisdiction which could be taken up for the first time before the Court of Appeal.

Mr.N.M.Shaheid Counsel for the Respondents contended that this argument was

never advanced before the Wakfs Tribunal which affirmed the appointments made

1 Introduced as amendment to section 58 by section 33 (b) of the Muslim Mosques and Charitable Trusts or Wakfs (Amendment) Act No 33 of 1982.

12

I

Ir

r \

III l

tl

f t I&If I! I!) I

f!II

by the Board. Undoubtedly a patent want of jurisdiction renders an order or .

judgment null and void and can be raised at any time and a long line of precedents

have dealt with the distjnction between latent or contingent want of jurisdiction and

patent want of jurisdiction.

In the case of Beatrice Perera vs. The Commissioner of National Housingz where

judgment was entered by a Court without following the method of service of

summons prescribed in the Civil Procedure Code, Tennakoon C.J. at page 365 drew

a distinction between two classes of jurisdictional defects. The first class consists of

instances where there is a "patent" or "total" want of jurisdiction. In this class there

is a "defectus jurisdictionisN and the Court lacks jurisdiction Over the (cause, or

matter or over the parties'. In the second class of cases the Court has jurisdiction in

the respects referred to above but is denuded of competence or jurisdiction

(because of a failure to comply with such procedural requirements as are necessary

for the exercise of power by Court". Here the lack of competence is described as a

"latent" or "contingent" want of jurisdiction, or a "defectus tria tion is N. Tennakoon

c.J., held that both classes constitute jurisdictional defects that result in judgments

or orders that are void, and such judgment can be challenged both in the very Court

and in the same proceedings in which it was made and. also in collateral

proceedings. It was further held that a judgment entered by the Court without

jurisdiction is a nullity and can be challenged both in the very Court and in the

proceedings in which it was had and also collaterally. S.N.Silva J (as he then was)

also drew attention to these jurisdictional defects in Isabella Perera Hamine v

Emalia Perera Hamine3

277 N.L.R 361

3 (1990) (1) Sri LR 8 at 14

13

In the case of Kandy Omnibus Co. Ltd. vs. T.W. Roberts,4 Sansoni J. held that lilt is

not open .to a person to confer jurisdiction by consent and no amount of

acquiescence confers jurisdiction upon a Tribunal or Court where such jurisdiction

did not exist". In this case too the distinction between 'patent' and 'Iatent' want of

jurisdiction was analyzed.

"'Where a court has jurisdiction in particular cases which depend on the

existence of a certain state of facts a person who admits, or does not challenge

the existence of those facts can estop himself from denying their existence at a

subsequent stage of the proceedings".

Argument of how patent want of jurisdiction arises

One has to apply the above criteria to determine what type of jurisdictional error

that the Wakfs Board suffered from if at all there was such an error. According to

Counsel for the Appellant the patent want of jurisdiction arose thus. The document

put in before this Court at the appellate stage namely the Mahalia or congregation

register did not have the names of five persons who were appointed as trustees by

the Wakfs Board. The absence of these five names from this particular register as at

31st March 2011 created a want of jurisdiction in the Wakfs Board to make their

appointments. It has to be stated it was only after a question was posed by this

Court that this argument was developed. The question was posed whether the

guideline in Section 14(1)(b) of the Act was followed in making these appointments

as that provision specifically states that if no trustee or trustees is or are appointed

under paragraph (a), the board may appoint a person or persons to be a trustee or

trustees from among the registered members of the Jama'ath of the mosque. The

word Jama'ath has two components. A person must ordinarily worship at, or

4 S6 N.L.R. 294 at p.304

14

I

I

~

if !

IiI

i I I

! [ I fIt

participate in the religious or customary rites and ceremonies of the mosque and in

addition his name must appear on the register of members of the mosque which is

in esse for the time being. Merely because a person's name appears on the register

of members of a mosque it does not qualify that person to be a member of the

lama'ath of the mosque. Additionally he must ordinarily worship at, or participate in

the religious or customary rites and ceremonies of the mosque. Whether a

particular person fulfills these two components to be eligible to become a trustee is

of course a question of fact that has to be gone into by the primary fact finder -the

Wakfs Board. To that extent in the exercise of its jurisdiction to appoint a trustee in

terms of Section 14(1)(b) of the Act, the Board is competent to hold its own

inquiries.

There were over four registers that were submitted by the Appellant before the

board. In addition there was also a register as at 31st March 2011. Which of these

registers was utilized by the Wakfs Board to make these five appointments is not

clear and there is no argument on this aspect that was ever addressed before the

Tribunal. It is only in this Court that this particular register as at 31st March 2011 has

been put forward as the pivotal register from which the appointments have been

allegedly made. I find no evidence upon the proceedings before the Wakfs Board

that it was this register that was used by the Wakfs Board to make these

appointments. I hold the view that in the ambiguity surrounding as to which register

was used, patent want of jurisdiction cannot be anchored to be flowing from this

document.

Latent want of Jurisdiction

Assuming without conceding that this was the register that was used by the board

to make these appointments in my view it would not create a patent want of

15

jurisdiction. As Sansoni J stated in Kandy Omnibus Co. Ltd. vs. T. W. Roberts,S a

latent or contingent want of jurisdiction arises only when a state of facts has to exist

before assumption of jurisdiction but yet the statutory body or court assumed that

jurisdiction despite the non existence of such a state of facts. The jurisdiction of the

statutory body is contingent upon the existence of such facts. No doubt the

jurisdiction to make the appointments in terms of Section 14(1)(b) of the Act is

contingent upon the existence of the names of the intended trustees upon a

register. As the Counsel for the Appellant argued before this Court, if the names of

those five trustees appointed were absent from this register before the Board

assumed the jurisdiction to appoint them, certainly it is a jurisdictional defect but in

my view it is not a patent want of jurisdiction. Nothing is patent to this court

because it is not clear that it was this register that the Board used. The presence or

absence of a member of a mosque on its register is a question of fact that has to be

investigated. If as the Appellant alleges non members of the mosque had been

appointed as trustees no appointment would have been valid. But it should have

been brought to the notice of the primary fact finder or the Wakfs Tribunal at the

appellate stage.

In fact the statute - the Muslim Mosques and Charitable Trusts or Wakfs Act has

enacted a salutary provision namely Section 14(1)(lA) to cure this kind of latent or

contingent want of jurisdiction. In terms of this provision if the board has committed

an error on the question whether a particular member is really a person belonging

to the congregation of a particular mosque, this question has to be agitated before

the Wakfs Board in the first instance. The legislature has granted an opportunity to

an aggrieved person to go before the Wakfs Board which made the allegedly invalid

5 S6 N.L.R. 294 at p.304

16

1

maker. In the circumstances this Court has no reason to interfere with the order of

the Wakfs Tribunal dated 23rd August 2014.

Before I part with this judgment I would like to observe that in the case of Ishak vs.

Thowjeek6 the Privy Council held that the matters which a statute requires a

statutory functionary to "have regard to" do not control the validity of the exercise

of the discretion. For example the Wakfs Board was vested by statute with

discretionary power for the appointment of trustees of a mosque, in the following

terms:

"14.{1} As soon as may be, after a mosque has been registered ... the Board

shall appoint a person or persons to be a trustee or trustees of that

mosque. In selecting a person or persons for appointment as a trustee or

trustees of a mosque, the Board shall have regard to the following

matters:-

{a} the terms of any trust instrument relating to that mosque;

{b} the religious law and custom of the sect of the Muslim

community concerned;

{c} the local custom with reference to that mosque; and

{d} the practice and other arrangements in force for the

administration of the mosque."7

The Board having called for applications for appointment as trustee of the

Dawatagaha Mosque and Shrine in Colombo 7, and having heard the parties

concerned, exercised their discretion to appoint as trustee a person who was not

6(1968) 71 NLR 101

7 As the Act stood prior to its amendment by Act No 33 of 1982

18

J 1!

f