==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0079-80/2023

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal No: 1. Pelige Suranjith Kumara

CA/HCC/0079-80/2023 2. Batugahage Lewis Dinesh Kumara

High Court of Homagama

Case No: HC/138/2018

ACCUSED-APPELLANTS

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

COUNSEL : Rajinda Kandegedara for the 1st Appellant.

CA/HCC/0079-80/2023

2 | P a g e

Priyantha Nawana with Ravihansa

Wijesinghe for the 2nd Appellant.

Hiranjan Peiris, ASG for the Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 07/10/2025

DECIDED ON : 27/11/2025

******************************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellants (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellants) with another were indicted in the High Court of Homagama on

the following charges:

1. On or before 15th February 2011, the Accused for committing robbery

of cash in the amount of Rs.60,000/- in the possession of Padukkage

Don Upendra Heshan Padukka, thereby committing an offence

punishable under Section 380 read with Section 32 of the Penal Code.

2. In the course of the same transaction, the First Accused did possess a

deadly weapon, namely a firearm, which is an offence punishable

under Section 383 of the Penal Code.

3. In the course of the same transaction, the Second Accused did possess

a deadly weapon, namely a firearm, which is an offence punishable

under Section 383 of the Penal Code.

CA/HCC/0079-80/2023

3 | P a g e

At the trial, the prosecution had called six witnesses and marked exhibits

and closed their case. In the course of the trial, the prosecution had

withdrawn the 2nd count against the 1st Appellant. After the conclusion of

the prosecution’s case, the learned High Court Judge had called for the

defence and the Appellants had made dock statements denying the charge.

After considering the evidence presented by both parties, the learned High

Court Judge had convicted the Appellants as charged and sentenced them

as follows:

For the 1st count, each Appellant was imposed a term of 08 years rigorous

imprisonment. Further, the Appellants were imposed a fine of Rs.10,000/-

each with a default sentence of 03 months simple imprisonment.

For the third count, the 2nd Appellant was imposed 15 years rigorous

imprisonment with a fine of Rs.10,000/- along with a default sentence of 03

months simple imprisonment.

Further, the Appellants were ordered to pay a compensation of Rs.100,000/

to PW1. This carries a default sentence of 02 years rigorous imprisonment.

As the 3rd Accused named in the indictment had absconded the court before

the pronouncement of the judgment, evidence was presented under Section

241 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 and fixed the case

in absentia of him. He too was sentenced for the 1st count and an open

warrant against him was issued.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellants

preferred this appeal to this court. The 3rd Accused had not appealed against

the conviction and the sentence.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellants informed this court that the

Appellants have given consent to argue this matter in their absence. At the

time of argument, the Appellants were connected via the Zoom platform from

prison.

CA/HCC/0079-80/2023

4 | P a g e

Background of the Case.

According to PW1, he is a businessman by profession and runs his business

at Athurugiriya. On the day of the incident, while he was in his shop as usual

with three of his assistants, a car was stopped at his shop, and three people

alighted from the car out of which two came towards the witness, while the

other went towards the assistants. The 2nd Appellant pulled out a gun and

one of the others demanded PW1 to show where his money was kept. The

Appellant had shouted at PW1 and his assistants not to make any noise.

While the 2nd Appellant was pointing the gun at them, the 1st and the 3rd

Appellants had gone into the room where the money was kept. The 1st

Appellant got the money which was in a tulip bag and all of them had escaped

thereafter. PW1 had noted down the car number, when the false number

plate had fallen off. According to PW1, the original number plate was WP KB

5563 and the fallen number plate was KA 3334.

When the robbers escaped after the robbery, one of the employees had given

a chase in the company vehicle. In the meantime, PW1 had called the police

and informed about the robbery. The robbers had looted Rs. 60,000/- from

the shop. PW1 had identified the Appellants and the 3rd Accused at the

identification parade held after the arrest of the Appellants and the 3rd

Accused. PW1 had identified the gun which was in the possession of the 2nd

Appellant. During the robbery, no customers had come to his shop.

PW2, Aloka Bandara, a partner of PW1 who was also present at the time of

the robbery, corroborated the evidence given by PW1.

The police had uncovered that the vehicle which had been used for the

robbery was rented by the 1st Appellant. Upon further inquiry, the Appellants

and the 3rd Accused were arrested by the police and two guns were recovered

from them.

CA/HCC/0079-80/2023

5 | P a g e

At the hearing of this appeal the Counsel for the 1st Appellant had raised

the following grounds of appeal.

1. The prosecution has failed to prove the charge beyond reasonable

doubt. (1st count).

The learned President’s Counsel for the 2nd Appellant had raised the

following grounds for the Appellant.

1. Serious misdirection on the law with regard to the burden of proof.

2. ⁠Wrongful consideration of evidence i.e. Parade evidence; identity of

accused; identification of weapons etc.

3. Impropriety of charge in the 3rd count i.e. Section 383 charge

At the very outset, the learned President Counsel appearing for the 2nd

Appellant strenuously argued that the 3rd count raised against the Appellant

is not in conformity with the spirit of law as the two offences had arisen in

the course of the same transaction. Therefore, the learned President’s

Counsel contended that the conviction and the sentence imposed against the

2nd Appellant is unlawful, in view of the provisions of Section 67 of the Penal

Code.

Section 67 of the Penal Code sates;

Where anything which is an offence is made up of parts, any of which

parts is itself an offence, the offender shall not be punished with the

punishment of more than one of such his offences, unless it be so

expressly provided.

Where anything is an offence falling within two or more separate

definitions of any law in force for the time being by which offences are

defined or punished; or

Where several acts of which one, or more than one, would by itself or

themselves constitute an offence, constitute when combined a

different offence; the offender shall not be punished with a more severe

CA/HCC/0079-80/2023

6 | P a g e

punishment that the Court which tries him could award for any one of

such offences.

In King v Weerasinghe 39 NLR 270 the Court held that:

“Where an accused is convicted of robbery under section 380 and of

causing hurt under section 382, consecutive sentences should not be

imposed as hurt punishable under the section is a necessary ingredient

of the offence of robbery”.

In the case of Rex v R.P.D Hotha and Another 34 CLW 11, the two

appellants were convicted under 6 counts for offences committed in the

course of the same transaction. The sentences imposed were ordered to run

consecutively, but the total of the sentences did not exceed the total which

would have been passed for the most serious of those offences. On appeal

against the sentence, the Court expressed the view that it would be better in

such cases to make sentences run concurrently, and varied the sentence

giving effect to the opinion of the Presiding Judge that the accused merited

a sentence of at least 10 years.

In this case the 2nd Appellant had been convicted for committing robbery

under Section 380 of the Penal Code and was sentenced to 08 years rigorous

imprisonment. Additionally, he had been convicted under Section 383 of the

Penal Code, which is, of course an aggravated version of the charge of

robbery. Considering the ingredients of Section 67 of the Penal Code, the 2nd

Appellant should not have been convicted under Section 383 of the Penal

Code.

The learned ASG in keeping with the highest tradition of the Attorney

General’s Department admitted that the conviction against the 2nd Accused

under Section 383 of Penal Code is unsafe to be allowed to be in force.

CA/HCC/0079-80/2023

7 | P a g e

Considering the argument put forward by the learned President’s Counsel

and the reply submission of learned ASG, I set aside the conviction and the

sentence imposed on the 2nd Appellant in respect of the third count.

Therefore, he is acquitted from the 3rd charge.

The identity of an accused is very important in a criminal trial. Wrong

identity may cost irreparable damage to the accused. Hence the prosecution

has to prove the correct identity of an accused to secure a criminal

conviction. If the identification evidence is challenged successfully, where

there is limited or no other evidence, the outcome will be an acquittal of the

accused.

In this case, the lay witnesses called by the prosecution had identified the

Appellants at the identification parade. No doubt had been created of their

identity at the trial. Two identification parade notes had been marked in the

trial through the Court translator before the closure of the prosecution’s

case.

Considering the evidence presented in this case by the prosecution, a prima

facie case has been established against the Appellants by the prosecution.

Having considered the evidence led by the prosecution I am inclined to accept

that the prosecution has adequately established the 1st charge against the

Appellants. I am of the view that the Learned High Court Judge has rightly

convicted the Appellants for the 1st charge.

Therefore, I affirm the conviction against the Appellants and the 3rd Accused

in respect of the 1st charge.

Both the Counsel argued that in view of the Amendment No. 25 of 2024 to

the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979, the learned Trial Judge

had failed to give due consideration to the time already spent in custody

when the Appellants were sentenced. Both the Counsel, by way of a motion,

submitted the breakdown of the pre and post detention periods in prison,

CA/HCC/0079-80/2023

8 | P a g e

and moved this Court in the event the Court dismisses their appeal, to

consider the time period already spent in remand to be deducted from the

sentence passed by the Trial Judge.

The proviso to Section 333 (5) of the Code of Criminal Procedure

(Amendment) Act (Supra) states;

“Provided that, the Court of Appeal may, in appropriate cases, order that

the time spent by an appellant in custody pending the determination of

his appeal and any time spent in custody prior to the conviction, such

time not having been considered as part of his sentence passed at the

time of his conviction by the court of first instance, be considered as part

of his sentence ordered at the conclusion of his appeal’.

According to the motion filed by the Counsel for the 1st Appellant, he has

spent 4 years in remand prior to the conviction in the High Court of

Homagama. After the conviction, from the date of sentence to the date of the

Judgment of his appeal, (16.01.2016 to 27.11.2025) he would have served

another 2 years and 6 months. Hence, his total period of pre- and post-prison

custody is 6 years and six months.

According to the motion filed by the learned President’s Counsel for the 2nd

Appellant, he has spent 5 years and 06 months in remand prior to the

conviction in the High Court of Homagama. After conviction, from the date

of sentence to date of the Judgment of his appeal, (16.01.2016 to

27.11.2025) he would have served another 2 years and 6 months. Hence, his

total period of pre- and post-prison custody is 08 years and 06 months.

The first Appellant is sentenced to 8 years rigorous imprisonment for the 1st

Count. But he has already served 6 years and 6 months in prison prior to

the conviction and after the conviction. The said 6 years and 06 months is

deducted from the 8-year sentence. The 1st Appellant is only sentenced to

the remaining 18 months from the date of judgment from today.

CA/HCC/0079-80/2023

9 | P a g e

The second Appellant is sentenced to 8 years rigorous imprisonment for the

1st Count. But he has already served 08 years and 6 months in prison prior

to the conviction and after the conviction. As he has already served his

sentence, he is released from this case.

The fine imposed and the compensation ordered by the learned High Court

Judge to remain same.

The Prison Authority is hereby directed to consider the activation of the

suspended sentence imposed in case No. 83222/03 by the Magistrate Court

of Gampaha on the 2nd Appellant, considering the period he had already

served.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgement to the High

Court of Homagama along with the original case record. The learned High

Court Judge is directed to comply with this judgment.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL