IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Malwalage Piyaseeli,

Welihindahenyaya,

Lellopitiya.

Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant

CA CASE NO: CA (PHC) 155/2007

HIGH COURT RATNAPURA CASE NO: 126/2006/RA

RATNAPURA MAGISTRATES COURT CASE NO: 15117

Vs.

1. Malwalage Elbert Singho,

2. Wijesinghe Mudiyanselage

Wimalawathie Perera,

3. Malwalage Sajeewaka

Gunasinghe,

All of Welihindahenyaya,

Lellopitiya.

Defendant-Petitioner-

Respondents

Before: K.K. Wickramasinghe, J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Ranga Dayananda for the Appellant.

Shaminda Silva for the Respondents.

Decided on: 18.07.2019

2

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The Appellant has filed this appeal against the order of the High

Court Judge of Ratnapura dated 23.10.2007 whereby the order

of the learned Magistrate of Ratnapura dated 11.07.2006

delivered in case No. 15117 was set aside.

Case No. 15117 was filed by the Appellant under section 73 of

the Primary Courts Procedure Act, No. 44 of 1979, seeking to

punish the parties mentioned therein for violation of the order

made by the learned Magistrate in Case No. 17898 filed under

section 66 of the Primary Courts Procedure Act. By that order

dated 05.03.1997 the learned Magistrate has under section 68

held that the Appellant is entitled to possession of the land.

Thereafter the Appellant has filed Case No. 14579 in the District

Court seeking declaration of title to the land. The Defendants to

that case also in their answer have sought a declaration of title,

possession and ejectment of the Appellant from the land. That

case has been dismissed on 30.08.2002 on a preliminary issue

regarding the maintainability of the action in view of the

cancellation of the Permit granted to the Appellant by the State.

It is against that background, the Appellant has filed a separate

action on violation of the aforementioned section 66 order

delivered in favour of the Appellant.

The learned High Court Judge has set aside the order of the

learned Magistrate on two grounds:

(a) With the dismissal of the civil action, section 66 order

automatically ceases to operate; and

3

(b) In the manner the complaint has been presented, Case

No. 15117 cannot be maintained.

Filing or dismissal of a civil action, in my view, does not, ipso

facto, invalidate the order made under section 68 of the Primary

Courts Procedure Act. According to section 68(2), order under

section 68(1) is valid until such person or persons (in favour of

whom order was made) are evicted therefrom under an order or

decree of a competent court. Here the District Court did not

make an order evicting the Appellant from the land. The District

Court dismissed the action on the basis that the land in suit is a

State land. The District Court did not say that the Defendants

in that case were entitled to possession and ownership of the

land. Hence section 66 order still prevails. If the High Court

Judges view is accepted, breach of the peace is inevitable as the

District Court did not make an order in regard to possession and

ownership of the land in favour of either party.

The second ground relates to the manner in which section 73

has been invoked. Such an objection has not been taken either

before the Magistrates Court or before the High Court. If the

High Court Judge takes the view that the manner in which

section 73 has been invoked is wrong, he must tell how it shall

be invoked correctly.

The order of the High Court is set aside and the order of the

Magistrates Court is restored.

This does not prevent the accused to take up any other

objection/defence at the inquiry.

4

Appeal is allowed. No costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

K.K. Wickremasinghe, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal