IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Court of Appeal Case No: CA (PHC) 87/2015 (OEM) HC Colombo Case No: HC1RAI187/2012 MC Colombo Case No: 8949115

In the matter of an appeal against the order

of the High Court of Colombo under the

Provision of the Code of Criminal Procedure

ActNo.lSof1979

1. Kapila Ratne

2. P.A. Samanmali Senanayake

Accused-Respondents-Appellants

-Vs-

Public Health Inspector,

Town Council,

Peliyagoda.

Complainant-Petitioner-Respondent

Before A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

&

Mahinda Samayawardhena J.

Page 1 of 5

Counsel Dr. Ranjith Fernando for the Appellants.

Jayantha Weerasinghe, PC with Sanjith Senanayake and

Upul Disanayake for the Respondent.

Written Submissions: By the Accused-Respondents-Appellants on 30108/2019

Argued on :

Judgment on :

By the Complainant-Petitioner-Respondent on

30108/2019

02/07/2019

30/09/2019

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

The Accused-Respondents-Appellants (Appellants) were charged before

the Magistrate's Court of Colombo for deviating from a construction plan

approved by the Public Health Inspector Peliyagoda (Complainant-Appellant-

Respondent), (Respondent), without a written approval, an offence punishable

under Section 5 read with Section 13(1)(b) of the Housing and Town Improvement

Ordinance, (Ordinance). At the conclusion of a protracted inquiry, the learned

Magistrate by order dated 15/ 10/2012, found the Appellants not guilty and

accordingly, the Appellants were acquitted from the said charge. Being aggrieved

by the said order the Respondent invoked the revisionary jurisdiction of the High

Court of the Western Province Holden in Colombo, where the learned High Court

Judge by order dated 07/05/2015, set aside the said order and directed the learned

Magistrate to hold a fresh inquiry on the basis that the learned Magistrate has

Page 2 of 5

failed to evaluate the relevant evidence led in this case. The Appellants are before

this Court to have the said Order of the learned High Court Judge set aside.

According to a complaint filed by the Respondent in terms of Section

136(1)(b) to be read with Section 5 of the Ordinance and an amendment to the said

complaint in terms of Section 136(1 )(b) to be read with Section 6 of the said

Ordinance, the purported unauthorized construction is at premises bearing No.

163, Biyagama Road, Kelaniya. The officer from the Peliyagoda Urban Council in

evidence stated that the said construction was not in conformity with the approved

Plan No.63/84, marked VI, and the deviation is alleged to be in respect of Plan

No. 78/97, marked V3, which is an extension to the approved plan marked VI.

The width of the road of 10 feet from the purported building is in dispute. VI and

V3 are tendered to Court as approved plans by the Peliyagoda Urban Council.

Section 5 of the Ordinance states,

"No person shall erect or re-erect any building within the limits

administered by a local authority, except in accordance with plans,

drawings, and specifications approved in writing by the Chairman ".

Therefore, it is very clear that any building constructed deviating from any

plan or specification without the required approval is a violation of Section

13(I)(b) of the Ordinance which states,

"(/) Any person who shall-

Page 3 of 5

a) commence, continue or resume bUilding operations in contravention of any

provision of this Chapter;

b) deviate from any plan or specification approved by the Chairman without

his written permission;

c)

(2) In any case in which any person is convicted under this Section, the Magistrate

may, on the application of the Chairman, make a mandatory order requiring such

person, or the owner of the building, or both, within a time limited in the order, to

demolish the building in question, or to alter it in such a way as to bring it into

accordance with law, and in the event of such mandatory order not being

complied with may authorize the Chairman to demolish, alter or otherwise deal

with the building in such a manner as to secure compliance with the order, and to

recover the expenses thereby incurred in the same manner and by the same

process as a rate . ..

The Respondent in his evidence at page 356 of the Appeal brief states that

the purported building has been constructed at an angle intersecting the roadway

and therefore, the rear end of the building is 3 feet beyond the specifications

approved by the Council which encroaches the roadway. However, the witness

stated that since the approved plan marked V3 does not give the width of the road,

he is unable to testify to any certainty of the extent of encroachment to the road.

According to evidence led in the Magistrates Court, plan V I and V3 have

been approved by the Chairman of the Local Authority. Plan VI gives the width of

Page 4 of 5

the road as 7.6 feet. Plan V3 does not mention the width of the road. Witness

Palitha Ranaweera, Public Health Officer testifying in Court on behalf of the local

authority states that, he is unable to give an exact width of the road. It is also

observed that the said witness has given contradictory evidence in respect of this

Issue on more than one instance during his testimony. Therefore, there is no

certainty to conclude of the existence of a 10 feet wide road prior to the

construction of the building.

VI and V3 are approved plans by the Peliyagoda Urban Council. Therefore

the question to be answered is whether the Petitioners are guilty of constructing

the purported building in contravention of the said approval. The evidence led in

this case to prove such a contravention, as discussed above, is unassertive and

contradictory and if adopted would cause prejudice to the Appellants.

In the circumstances, I set aside the judgment of the learned High Court

Judge and uphold the judgment of the learned Magistrate dated 15110/2012.

Application allowed without costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Page 5 of 5