IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

1. Environmental Foundation

(Guarantee) Limited,

No.3A, 1st Lane, High Level Road,

Kirulapone,

Colombo 5.

2. Wildlife and Nature Protection

Society of Sri Lanka,

No.86, Rajamalwatte Road,

Battaramulla.

Petitioners

CASE NO: CA/WRIT/51/2018

Vs.

1. M.G. Suriyabandara,

Director General of Wildlife

Conservation,

Department of Wildlife

Conservation

No.811A, Jayanthipura,

Battaramulla.

2

2. Hon. Gamini J. Perera,

Minister of Sustainable

Development and Wildlife,

Ministry of Sustainable

Development and Wildlife,

9th Floor, Stage I, Sethsiripaya,

Battaramulla.

2a. Hon. Ravindra Samaraweera,

Minister of Sustainable

Development and Wildlife,

Ministry of Sustainable

Development and Wildlife,

9th Floor, Stage I, Sethsiripaya,

Battaramulla.

2b. Hon. Sarath Fonseka,

Minister of Sustainable

Development, Wildlife and

Regional Development,

Ministry of Sustainable

Development, Wildlife and

Regional Development,

Sino Lanka Tower, No.1090,

Sri Jayawardenapura Road,

Rajagiriya.

2c. Hon. John Amaratunga,

Minister of Wildlife,

Ministry of Wildlife,

Sino Lanka Tower, No.1090,

Sri Jayawardenapura Road,

Rajagiriya.

3

2d. Hon. S.M. Chandrasena,

Minister of Environment and

Wildlife Resources,

Ministry of Environment and

Wildlife Resources,

Sobadam Piyasa, No.416/C/1,

Robert Gunawardena Mawatha,

Battaramulla.

3. Hon. W. Milroy S. Fernando,

Minister of Christian and

Parliamentary Affairs,

Ministry of Christian and

Parliamentary Affairs,

No.98, D.S. Senanayake

Mawatha,

Colombo 08.

3a. Hon. John Amaratunga,

Minister of Tourism Development

and Christian Religious Affairs,

Ministry of Tourism Development

and Christian Religious Affairs,

No.53, Vauxhall Street,

Colombo 02.

3b. Hon. John Amaratunga,

Minister of Tourism Development

and Christian Religious Affairs,

Ministry of Tourism Development

and Christian Religious Affairs,

6th Floor, Rakshana Mandiriya,

No.21, Vauxhall Street,

Colombo 02.

4

3a. Hon. Mahinda Rajapakse,

Minister of Buddha Sasana,

Cultural and Religious Affairs,

Ministry of Buddha Sasana,

Cultural and Religious Affairs,

No.135, Srimath Anagarika

Dharmapala Mawatha,

Colombo 07.

4. Most Reverend Bishop of Chilaw,

Diocese of Chilaw,

Bishop House,

Chilaw.

Respondents

5. Rev. Fr. Anton Thavarajah,

Parish Priest,

Our Lady of Assumption Church,

Mullikulam, Marichchukatti,

Mannar.

6. Thomas Amalathasan Croos,

Mullikulam, Marichchukatti,

Mannar.

7. Sinnappu Amalan Coonghe,

Mullikulam, Marichchukatti,

Mannar.

8. Rev. Fr. Christie Perera,

Parish Priest,

St. Judes Church,

Wanathavilluwa.

5

9. A.M. Buddhika Gihan,

Serakkuliya, Karaithiv,

Batticaloa.

10. A.M. Janaka Abeysinghe,

Wanathavilluwa,

Batticaloa.

11. W.N.M. Fernando,

Serakkuliya, Karaithiv,

Batticaloa.

12. W.N. Lasantha,

Mangalapura,

Batticaloa.

Added-Respondents

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J.

Counsel: Dr. K. Kanag-Iswaran, P.C., with Wardani

Karunaratne, Bhagya Wickramasinghe and C.

Liyanage for the Petitioners.

Sumathi Dharmawardena, A.S.G., P.C., with

Thilanka Peiris, S.S.C., for the 1st Respondent.

Rienzie Arasecularatne, P.C., with Riad Ameen

for the 4th Respondent.

Shammil Perera, P.C., with Duthika Perera for

the 5th-7th Respondents.

Sanjeewa Jayawardena, P.C., with Lakmini

Warusawithana for the 8th-12th Added-

Respondents.

Argued on: 02.07.2020

Decided on: 25.09.2020

6

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The two Petitioners filed this application as public interest

litigation seeking certain reliefs mainly against the 1st and 2nd

Respondents, the Director General of Wildlife Conservation and

the Minister of Sustainable Development and Wildlife,

respectively, on the basis that the (religious) festivities of the

Pallekandal St. Anthonys (Roman Catholic) Church located

inside the Wilpattu National Park are in violation of the Fauna

and Flora Protection Ordinance, No.2 of 1937, as amended.

The Petitioners seek the following reliefs in the prayer to the

petition:

(i) A writ of mandamus directing the 1st and 2nd Respondents

and/or officers of the 1st Respondent Department to act in

terms of the law and accurately determine and/or

demarcate the lawful location and physical existence of

the Pallekandal church inside Wilpattu National Park in

view of the gazette and established boundaries of the said

Wilpattu National Park;

(ii) A writ of mandamus directing the 1st and 2nd Respondents

and/or officers of the 1st Respondent Department to

formulate a set of rules and regulations providing for a

comprehensive and transparent system of

identifying/recognising/prescribing traditional

practices/customs/usages in terms of section 3(3)b of the

FFPO that can be allowed in respect of festivities of the

Pallekandal church that can be permitted within the

boundaries of the Wilpattu National park;

(iii) A writ of mandamus directing the 1st and 2nd Respondents

and/or officers of the 1st Respondent Department to cause

7

the cessation of any festival activities inside the Wilpattu

National Park contrary to the FFPO and rules and

regulations on National Park Management made under the

FFPO;

(iv) A writ of prohibition preventing the 1st and/or 2nd or any

one or more Respondents from permitting the 4th

Respondent / his agents/servants/representatives

and/or any other person whether connected/related to the

4th Respondent or any other person from entering the said

Wilpattu National Park for festivities, religious purposes or

otherwise, other than by the due procedure prescribed for

entry of park visitors under the FFPO;

(v) A writ of prohibition refraining the 1st and 2nd

Respondents permitting or carrying out any further

construction and/or development and/or clearing and/or

church feast and/or any other festival activities within the

Wilpattu National Park and/or within a distance of one

(01) kilometre radius from the boundary of the Wilpattu

National Park by the 4th Respondent His Lordships

agents/servants/representatives and/or any other person

whether connected/related to the said church.

The 4th Respondent, the Most Reverend Bishop of Chilaw, and

the other added Respondents take up two preliminary

objections.

The first preliminary objection is that there is no proper

application before this Court, as the purported supporting

affidavit tendered by the 1st Petitioner is not valid in the eyes of

the law.

8

The second preliminary objection is that the declaration of the

area by the subject Minister as the Wilpattu National Park

Block V (in which, according to the Petitioners, the festivities of

the Church take place), by the Gazette marked P3(e) dated

07.12.1973, was not approved by Parliament as required by

section 2(5)(b) of the Fauna and Flora Protection Ordinance, and

therefore the said Gazette has no legal validity.

Let me first deal with the second preliminary objection, as it is

an important question of law on which the parties are at

variance.

By the Amendment Act No. 1 of 1970, sub-section (5) to section

2 of the principal enactment was introduced. It reads as follows:

5(a) The Minister may, by Order, declare that the limits of

any National Reserve or Sanctuary shall be altered or

varied.

(b) Any Order made by the Minister under this sub-section

shall have no effect unless it has been approved by the

Senate and the House of Representatives and notification of

such approval is published in the Gazette.

The Gazette P3(e), which contains the Ministers Order,

commences as follows:

ORDER made by the Minister of Shipping and Tourism

under sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Fauna and Flora

Protection Ordinance (Chapter 469) as amended by Act No.

44 of 1964 and Act No. 1 of 1970.

9

Order

The area of Crown land specified in the Schedule hereto is

hereby declared to be a National Reserve for the purpose of

the Fauna and Flora Protection Ordinance (Chapter 469) as

amended by Act No. 44 of 1964 and Act No. 1 of 1970.

2. The whole area of the aforesaid National Reserve is

hereby declared to be a National Park for the purpose of the

aforesaid Ordinance.

This preliminary objection is unsustainable, as the area of

Crown land was declared to be firstly a National Reserve and

secondly a National Park under section 2(1) of the Fauna and

Flora Protection Ordinance as amended by Act No. 44 of 1964

and Act No. 1 of 1970.

A careful reading of section 2(5) quoted above goes to show that

section 2(5)(b) is applicable only to section 2(5)(a), that is, when

the Minister decides to alter or vary the limits of any National

Reserve or Sanctuary.

Section 2(5)(b) has no application to section 2(1) by which the

Minister made the impugned Order declaring a specified area of

Crown land to be a National Reserve and National Park by

Gazette P3(e).

Let me reproduce how section 2(1) stood after the amendments

by Act Nos. 44 of 1964 and 1 of 1970.

2(1) The Minister may by Order published in the Gazette

declare that any specified area of State land shall for the

purposes of this Ordinance be a National Reserve and may

by that Order or by any Order subsequently published in

10

the Gazette declare that the whole or any specified part of

any such National Reserve shall be

(a) a Strict Natural Reserve; or

(b) a National Park; or

(c) a Nature Reserve; or

(d) a Jungle Corridor; or

(e) an Intermediate Zone.

It was for the first time by Act No. 22 of 2009 that approval by

Parliament was made necessary for Orders made by the Minister

under section 2(1). By this 2009 amendment, section 2A was

introduced to be inserted immediately after section 2(2). Section

2A reads as follows:

An Order made under subsection (1) and subsection (2) of

this section shall have no effect unless it has been

approved by Parliament and the notification of such

approval is published in the Gazette.

Section 2A has no retrospective effect. The 4th Respondent or

added Respondents do not make such a claim either.

I overrule the second preliminary objection.

This leads me to consider the first preliminary objection. The

first preliminary objection is that there is no valid application

before this Court, inasmuch as the supporting affidavit of the

petition was attested by an employee of the 1st Petitioner.

Rule 46 of the Supreme Court Rules 1978 states that every

application made to the Court of Appeal invoking the writ

jurisdiction of the Court shall be by way of petition and affidavit

in support of the averments set out in the petition. Rule 3(1)(a) of

11

the Court of Appeal (Appellate Procedure) Rules 1990 is also to

the same effect. It says the application shall be by way of

petition together with an affidavit in support of the averments

therein. Hence, there cannot be any dispute that an

accompanying affidavit in support of the averments contained in

the petition is a sine qua non for the constitution of a proper

application. This is a threshold requirement.

There are two Petitioners in this case. In compliance with the

said Rules, the Petitioners have tendered two affidavits along

with the petition. Are these affidavits valid in the eyes of the

law?

It is undisputed that the Commissioner for Oaths who attested

the affidavit of the 1st Petitioner was an employee of the 1st

Petitioner at the time of the attestation of the affidavit. She was

the Manager (Investigations and Legal Projects) of the 1st

Petitioner at that time.

This is contrary to the express provisions contained in the

proviso to section 12(2) of the Oaths and Affirmation Ordinance,

No. 9 of 1895, as amended, which reads as follows:

A Commissioner for Oaths appointed under this Ordinance

may administer any oath or affirmation or take any

affidavit for the purpose of any legal proceedings or

otherwise in all cases in which a Justice of the Peace is

authorized by law so to do, and in all cases in which an

oath, affirmation, or affidavit is commonly administered or

taken before a Justice of the Peace; and any oath or

affirmation or affidavit administered or taken by a

Commissioner for Oaths shall in all legal proceedings and

12

for all other purposes have the same effect as an oath,

affirmation, or affidavit administered or taken before a

Justice of the Peace; and all enactments relating to oaths,

affirmations, and affidavits administered or taken before a

Justice of the Peace shall, with the necessary modifications,

apply thereto:

Provided that a Commissioner for Oaths shall not exercise

the powers given by this section in any proceeding or

matter in which he is attorney-at-law to any of the parties,

or in which he is otherwise interested.

It is undeniable that the Commissioner for Oaths who attested

the affidavit of the 1st Petitioner, being an employee of the 1st

Petitioner at the time of attestation, was otherwise interested in

the matter affirmed to before her.

The applicability of the proviso to section 12(2) of the Oaths and

Affirmations Ordinance was considered in the Supreme Court

case of Airport and Aviation Services (Sri Lanka) Limited v.

Buildmart Lanka (Pvt) Limited1 where the facts were similar. In

the said case, when the application for leave to appeal came up

for support before the Supreme Court, the Respondent took up a

preliminary objection on the ground that the supporting affidavit

filed by the Petitioner was in violation of the proviso to section

12(2) of the Oaths and Affirmations Ordinance, in that, the

Commissioner for Oaths who attested the affidavit had been the

Attorney-at-Law for the Petitioner at the related arbitration

proceedings and the instructing Attorney in the High Court case

and was also an employee of the Petitioner in the capacity of

Assistant Legal Officer. The Respondent contended that the 1 [2010] 1 Sri LR 292.

13

Commissioner for Oaths who attested the supporting affidavit

was therefore otherwise interested in the application filed

before the Supreme Court. It is to be noted that the Attorney-at-

Law for the Petitioner before the Supreme Court was different.

The Supreme Court, having considered inter alia previous

decisions of the same Court,2 upheld the preliminary objection

and dismissed the application in limine, on the basis that the

Commissioner for Oaths who administered the affirmation in the

affidavit filed before the Supreme Court had an interest in the

application and therefore the affidavit was not in compliance

with the proviso to section 12(2) of the Oaths and Affirmations

Ordinance.

The Supreme Court considered the proviso to section 12(2) of

the Oaths and Affirmations Ordinance as a core issue which

goes to the root of the validity of the affidavit.

Section 9 of the Oaths and Affirmations Ordinance reads as

follows.

No omission to take any oath or make any affirmation, no

substitution of any one for any other of them, and no

irregularity whatever in the form in which any one of them

is administered, shall invalidate any proceeding or render

inadmissible any evidence whatever in or in respect of

which such omission, substitution, or irregularity took

place, or shall affect the obligation of a witness to state the

truth.

2 Jayatillake v. Kaleel [1994] 1 Sri LR 319, Pakir Mohideen v. Mohamadu Casim (1900) 4 NLR 299, Cardar Saibu v. Sayadu Beebi [1900] 4 NLR 130.

14

The Supreme Court did not consider that this defect is curable

under section 9 of the Oaths and Affirmation Ordinance. The

reason is obvious. When there is an express prohibition in the

statute i.e. the proviso to section 12(2) the Court cannot

override it by application of a former general provision i.e.

section 9.

In the words of Maxwell, If two sections of the same statute are

repugnant, the known rule is that the last must prevail. But, on

general principle that an author must be supposed not to have

intended to contradict himself, the court will endeavour to

construe the language of the legislature in such a way as to avoid

having to apply the rule, leges posteriores priores contrarias

abrogant [later laws abrogate earlier contrary ones].3

In the course of the Judgment, at page 306, the Supreme Court

observed:

It is common ground that the said [Attorney at Law and the

Commissioner for Oaths who attested the supporting

affidavit] is an employee of the Petitioner as she is the

Assistant Legal Officer of the Airport and Aviation Service

(Sri Lanka) Ltd. It is not disputed that employees of an

organization are stakeholders, who have an interest in the

said organization.

An affidavit is a statement given in writing made on oath or

affirmation. The administration of an oath is therefore an

essential requirement of a valid affidavit. It is also an

important requirement that such an administration of an

3 Maxwell on The Interpretation of Statutes (12th Edition), p.187.

15

oath should be carried out by a person who is permitted to

do so under our law.

None of the cases cited by the Petitioners dealt with the effect of

the proviso to section 12(2) of the Oaths and Affirmations

Ordinance. Airport and Aviation Services (Sri Lanka) Limited is

the only case, as far as I am aware, that particularly deals with

this section. The Petitioners do not cite any other authority that

has given a different interpretation to the proviso to section 12(2)

of the Oaths and Affirmations Ordinance. The dicta contained in

the said Supreme Court Judgment in relation to the proviso to

section 12(2) is the ratio decidendi of the Judgment. This Court

is bound by that Judgment.

In the Supreme Court case of Pushpadeva v. Senok Trade

Combine Ltd,4 cited by the Petitioners, the proviso to section 12

of the Oaths and Affirmations Ordinance was not considered. In

the said case, the two preliminary objections raised in respect of

the supporting affidavit were: (a) there was no affirmation at the

beginning of the affidavit, and (b) the affirmant did not specify

his religion in the affidavit. The Supreme Court rejected both

objections for obvious reasons. Although there was no

affirmation at the commencement of the affidavit, it was

observed the fact that the affirmant has affirmed before the

Commissioner for Oaths is clearly reflected in the jurat to the

affidavit. The Supreme Court further held that so long as the

deponent has affirmed to the averments of the affidavit, failure

to mention the religion does not affect the validity of the

affidavit. The religion, according to the Respondent, was

necessary to decide whether the deponent shall swear or affirm

4 [2015] BLR 40.

16

to the contents of the affidavit. However, in terms of section 9 of

the Oaths and Affirmations Ordinance, substitution of the oath

for the affirmation and vice versa does not make the affidavit

invalid.

The other Supreme Court Judgment the Petitioners refer to is

Facy v. Sanoon,5 where the supporting affidavit was held to be

defective by the Court of Appeal, as the Appellant being Muslim

and having stated at the commencement of the affidavit that he

takes the oath and swears, stated in the jurat that he affirmed to

the facts of the affidavit. The Court of Appeal took the view that

the Appellant having first opted to take the oath, cannot

thereafter affirm to the facts of the affidavit. The Supreme Court

did not find favour with this view. The Supreme Court at page

62, quoting section 9 of the Oaths and Affirmations Ordinance,

held This is a salutary provision which was intended to remedy

the very malady that has occurred in this case, and clearly covers

a situation in which there is a substitution in the jurat of an

affirmation for an oath.

The Petitioners say that when there are several parties to an

application, there is no requirement for each party to file

separate affidavits. I agree. Based on this submission, the

Petitioners say In the instant application the issue pertaining to

the defect in the affidavit has arisen with regard to the affidavit

furnished by the 1st Petitioner Organisation, and the said defect

can be cured by consideration of the affidavit furnished by the 2nd

Petitioner Organisation. This argument would be entitled to

succeed if the affidavit furnished by the 2nd Petitioner supports

the averments in the petition. But it does not. The affidavit

5 [2006] BLR 58.

17

tendered by the 2nd Petitioner is flawless in form but worthless

in substance. It has no independent existence and is dependent

upon the purported affidavit tendered by the 1st Petitioner. The

purported affidavit tendered by the 1st Petitioner is exhaustive.

It purports to support each and every averment in the petition.

The affidavit tendered by the 2nd Petitioner has only four

averments. All that is said by the affirmant therein is:

I have perused the Petition, Main Affidavit given by Dr. Eric

Devapriya Wickramanayake the Chairman of the 1st

Petitioner Organization and annexed documents submitted

with this Petition, and associate myself fully with all the

contents setout therein.

This affidavit tendered by the 2nd Petitioner does not cure the

defect of the affidavit tendered by the 1st Petitioner. The

objection that the petition is not supported by a proper affidavit

stands.

Another point the Petitioners make is that this is public interest

litigation, as opposed to private interest litigation, and therefore

the same rules and technicalities that are applicable in other

instances are not applicable in matters related to public interest

[litigation]. I cannot agree. Public interest litigation is not

governed by different laws. The Court cannot give preferential

treatment to public interest litigants. All are equal before the

law and are entitled to the equal protection of the law Article

12 of the Constitution.

As this preliminary objection was not raised at the first instance,

the Petitioners contend it is not maintainable. I accept that it is

a healthy practice to take preliminary objections at the earliest

18

possible opportunity. But this does not mean preliminary

objections can never be taken for the first time at the argument,

before going into the merits of the matter. Preliminary objections

are sometimes taken at the last moment, preventing the opposite

party from meeting those objections effectively. For instance, if

the preliminary objection on the defective affidavit was taken by

the 4th Respondent in the statement of objections, the

Petitioners could have sought the indulgence of the Court to

tender a fresh affidavit in the same tenor, sworn before another

Commissioner for Oaths or Justice of the Peace.

Rule 3(8) of the Court of Appeal (Appellate Procedure) Rules

1990 permits it:

A party may, with the prior permission of the Court, amend

his pleadings, or file additional pleadings, affidavits or

other documents, within two weeks of the grant of such

permission, unless the Court otherwise directs. After notice

has been issued, such permission shall not be granted ex

parte.

But, I must stress, the same was open to the Petitioners, had

they made such an application even when the 4th Respondent

took up the said objection for the first time at the argument.

This view is fortified by several decisions.6

In the Divisional Bench decision of this Court in Senanayake v.

Commissioner of National Housing,7 the affidavit tendered in

support of the petition in the writ application was defective, in

6 Vide Cadar Saibu v. Sayadu Beebi (1900) 4 NLR 130, Billion Bay Apparels (Pvt) Ltd v. Chief Minister, Sabaragamuwa Provincial Council, CA/WRIT/85/2013, CA minutes of 18.01.2016. 7 [2005] 1 Sri LR 182.

19

that, the Justice of the Peace before whom the affidavit of the

Petitioner was affirmed did not have territorial jurisdiction to

attest the affidavit. When this objection was raised, apparently

at the stage of the argument, the Counsel for the Petitioner in

his written submission sought the permission of the Court to file

a fresh affidavit in support of the averments contained in the

petition. The Divisional Bench, which was constituted for the

sole purpose of deciding this question of law (i.e. whether a fresh

affidavit can be allowed at that stage of the case) held in favour

of the Petitioner and granted permission to file a fresh affidavit

on identical terms. It is unfortunate that the Petitioners in the

instant case did not make an application to file a fresh affidavit

in place of the defective one, even at least in their written

submissions tendered after the argument.

Unless such an application is made by the Petitioners, the Court

cannot, in this contested matter where eminent senior

Presidents Counsel are appearing for the opposing parties,

direct the Petitioners to file a fresh affidavit instead of the

defective one. Such conduct, in my view, would give the

impression to the contesting Respondents that the Court is

biased in favour of the Petitioners, which does not auger well for

the justice system. The dicta of Lord Hewart C.J. in Rex v.

Sussex Justices, Ex parte McCarthy8 is worth repeating:

It is not merely of some importance but is of fundamental

importance that justice should not only be done, but should

manifestly and undoubtedly be seen to be done.

I am fully conscious that the Court shall, as far as possible,

endeavour to dispose of cases on merits and not on technical 8 [1924] 1 KB 256 at 259.

20

grounds. But this is not an absolute principle. If the technical

objection shatters the very foundation of a case, the Court

cannot disregard it merely on the basis that the objection is

technical. In this case, as I have explained, although the

objection was, perhaps strategically, taken belatedly, it could

have been successfully met, had the Petitioners responded in a

timely manner.

If there is no valid supporting affidavit, there is no valid

application before the Court. Hence there is no necessity to go

into the merits of the case.

The preliminary objection on the defective affidavit is upheld and

the application of the Petitioners is dismissed with costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal