==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for

orders in the nature of Writ of

Certiorari, and Prohibition under

and in terms of Article 140 of the

Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

1. Sandanam Johnson Paul,

No. 183/77, Ellakanda,

Horana.

PETITIONER

-Vs-

1. Wannakuwatta Wadugu

Kalindra Jayaweera Fernando,

Returning Officer,

Horana Urban Council,

Election Office,

Kalutara.

2. Thalatha Athukorala,

General Secretary,

United National Party,

Sirikotha Mandiraya,

No. 400, Kotte Road,

CA (Writ) Application No. 0833/25

2

Pitakotte.

3. Vajira Abeywardena,

Chairman,

United National Party,

Sirikotha Mandiraya,

No. 400, Kotte Road,

Pitakotte.

4. Ranil Wickramasinghe,

Party Leader,

United National Party,

No. 117, 5th Lane,

Colombo 03.

5. Rajeeva Wasula Gunasekara,

No. 172, Anguruwathota Road,

Horana.

6. Additional Election Commissioner

(Local Authorities)

Election Secretariat,

Rajagiriya.

7. Horana Urban Council

Horana.

8. Secretary,

Horana Urban Council

Horana.

3

RESPONDENTS

Before : Hon. Rohantha Abeysuriya PC, J.(P/CA)

: Hon. K. Priyantha Fernando, J.(CA)

Counsel : Chamara Nanayakkarawasam with Apoorwa

Nanayakkara and Ridma Uddeepani for the

Petitioner.

Medhaka Fernando, SC for the 1st and 6th

Respondents.

Yassas De Silva with Kaushali Samarathunge for

the 2nd and 3rd Respondents.

Naomal Pelpola instructed by Vidanapathirana

Associates for the 4th Respondent.

Suraj Rajapakshe for the 5th Respondent.

Written Submissions : 2nd and 3rd Respondents filed on 07.10.2025

4th Respondent filed on 07.10.2025

5th Respondent filed on 07.10.2025

7th and 8th Respondents filed on 07.10.2025

Petitioner filed on 10.10.2025

Supported on : 01.10.2025 and 03.10.2025

4

Decided on : 29.10.2025

K. Priyantha Fernando, J.(CA)

The Petitioner has filed this application on 14th August primarily seeking to

quash the document marked P16.

The Petitioner has sought following relief by the Petition:

a. Writ of Certiorari quashing the Gazette Extraordinary No. 2447/81 dated

2nd August 2025 (P16)

b. Writ of Certiorari quashing P12

c. Writ of Prohibition prohibiting the 1st, 7th and 8th respondents from taking

steps based on the declaration contained in P16.

By P16 dated 02.08.2025, the 1st respondent declared that the office of the

petitioner as a member returned to the Horana Urban Council had fallen vacant

under the provisions of the Urban Council Ordinance due to his resignation and

declared that the 5th respondent (who had been nominated by the 2nd respondent

to fill such vacant office) had been selected as a member of the Horana Urban

Council.

The primary contention of the petitioner is that the Gazette P16 had been

published declaring the 5threspondent as a member of the Horana Urban

Council, despite the petitioner having revoked his previous resignation of office

from the Horana Urban Council.

The subject matter of this application is to challenge the gazette notification P16

on the basis that the determination contained therein declaring that a vacancy

had arisen in the Horana Urban Council and that the 5th respondent to be

appointed in place of such vacancy as ultra vires.

5

FACTUAL MATRIX.

The aspects pertaining to the Petitioner’s election and subsequent resignation

followed by a revocation of the same are as follows:

i. The petitioner returned as a member for the Horana Urban Council

representing the United National Party, and the same is borne out in

terms of gazette publication no. 2438/68 dated 31.05.2025 marked as

P1;

ii. Thereafter, the Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Horana Urban

Council were elected with the participation of the members on

26.06.2025,

iii. Then, in terms of letter dated 01.07.2025, the petitioner had tendered

a letter of resignation from membership of the Horana Urban Council

addressed to the 1st respondent (Returning Officer of Election Office-

Kalutara) and copied to the 8th respondent (Secretary, Horana Urban

Council) marked as P5.

iv. Thereafter, a subsequent letter was addressed confirming his

resignation by the petitioner once again addressed to the 1st respondent

dated 12.07.2025 and copied to the 8th respondent marked as P7.

v. a letter was submitted by the petitioner addressed to the 1st respondent

and copied to the 7th respondent (Horana Urban Council) dated

23.07.2025 (6R9) to revoke the resignation on the basis that the

petitioner’s resignation was an act under coercion and pressure to

himself and his family members by his political opposition and

members of his own political party.

vi. Upon the receipt of the said letter revoking resignation, the 8th

respondent (Secretary, Horana Urban Council) notified the 1st

respondent on the revocation of the petitioner in terms of letter dated

24.07.2025 marked as P13.

vii. Thereafter, on 02.08.2025 the 1st respondent published gazette

notification P16 declaring that as vacancy had arisen in the

6

membership of the Horana Urban Council, the 5th respondent has been

selected as a member of the Horana Urban Council in place of the

petitioner.

The publication of gazette (P16) by the 1st respondent declaring (i) A vacancy had

arisen in the Horana Urban Council and (ii) That such vacancy has been filled

with the selection of the 5th respondent has been called into question in the

instant case.

The 1st and 6th respondents taken up the legal objection that the impugned

revocation of the petitioner’s resignation by letter dated 23.07.2025 (6R9) was of

no effect in law in view of Section 12 of the Urban Councils Ordinance (as

amended)

Section 12(1) of the Urban Councils Ordinance (as amended) reads as follows:

(1) Where any person who is elected as a member of an Urban Council decides

for any reason not to serve as a member thereof, he may relinquish the

office.

(a) By a written communication of his refusal of office to the election officer

of the district in which the town for which the Council is constructed is

situated at any time before the date fixed for the first meeting of the

Council to be held after his election, or

(b) By a written communication of his resignation of office to such election

officer, either direct or through the Chairman, at any time after such first

meeting.

The Section 12(1) of the Urban Councils Ordinance provides a mechanism for a

member to relinquish his/her office either prior to the date fixed for the first

meeting or after such first meeting.

The subject of this case deals with a situation where a council member has

sought to resign after the first meeting and therefore Section 12(1)(b) applies.

7

If the elements of Section 12(1)(b) are fulfilled, the Ordinance by operation of law,

decrees that such member has relinquished his office. Once a member has

relinquished his office by operation of law in terms of Section 12(1)(b), Section

12(3) mandatorily requires the election officer to take steps in terms of Section

66A of the Local Authorities Elections Ordinance (Cap. 262) to fill that vacancy

in office.

In the present case, the petitioner has made a written communication of his

resignation of office to the 1st respondent who is the election officer. (vide P5/6R3

and 6R5).

HAS THE PETITIONER DIRECTLY SUBMITTED RESIGNATION LETTER TO THE

RETURNING OFFICER OR NOT?

It was contended by the petitioner that P5 does not constitute a relinquishment

because it has not been directly submitted to the returning officer or has not

been submitted through the chairman of the UC as it required under 12 (1)(b).

However, P5 is directly addressed to the 1st respondent, and it is signed by the

petitioner himself. There is no requirement for petitioners to be present before

the returning officer and forward such relinquishment. The fact that P5 was sent

through an agent or through the power of attorney holder does not affect the

validity of the communication.

Nevertheless, when perused the covering letter 6R6 written by the Secretary of

Horana UC – the 8th respondent, on 23rd July 2025 addressing the 1st respondent

drawing the attention of the 1st respondent to the resignation submitted by the

petitioner, the 8th respondent had annexed a copy of the letter of resignation of

the petitioner dated 01.07.2025 to the Covering Letter. Annexture marked

‘amunuma 1’ to 6R6, bears day stamp dated 4th July 2025, of the office of the 1st

respondent. When compared the 6R3 with the 6R6, it is seen that the appearance

of the Day Stamp is significantly different on the two copies. There is an initial

on the Day Stamp on 6R3, but no such initial appears on Day Stamp 6R6. This

8

shows that the Letter of Resignation of the petitioner dated 01.07.2025 had been

submitted in duplicate and that the 1st respondent had returned the duplicate

after placing the Day Stamp and certification of ‘True Copy’ on the duplicate. It

proves that the 6R3 is the original and the ‘amunuma I’ is the duplicate.

As per Covering Letter 6R6, the 8th respondent had informed the 1st respondent

that the Petitioner personally came and handed over the ‘amunuma1’ annexed

to 6R6 to the 8th respondent on 22nd of July 2025. Relevant part which appears

in paragraph 1 of the Covering Letter 6R6 proves that the Petitioner himself had

appeared before her on 22nd July 2025 and handed over a copy of the duplicate

which bears the day stamp and certification made by the 1st respondent and a

copy of the Letter of Confirmation of Resignation certified by the 1st respondent.

This fact is contrary to the contention that the Petitioner had taken. The

Petitioner himself meeting the 8th respondent and handing over the documents

amply proved that even on 22nd July, he had maintained the position of

voluntarily resigning from the office.

Thus, it is the view of this Court that there is direct written communication of

such resignation as required by Section 12(1)(b).

Moreover, upon being requested by the letter dated 09.07.2025 (6R4), the

petitioner has written to the 1st respondent letter P7 dated 12.07.2025

confirming his resignation.

Thus, the requirement of direct communication has been sufficiently fulfilled by

the petitioner.

IS THE RETURNING OFFICER ONLY CASTED WITH A MINISTERIAL DUTY?

Upon receipt of confirmation P7, the 1st respondent-Returning Officer initiated

the steps under Section 66A of the Local Authorities Election Ordinance by

9

issuing the letter dated 22.07.2025 (P12/6R7) to the Secretary of UNP to

nominate a candidate to fill the vacancy.

Section 12(3) of the Urban Councils Ordinance provides that,

“If any person elected as a member of an Urban Council refuses or resigns his

office, or dies, or vacates the office under subsection (2), or if a casual vacancy

occurs in any other manner in such office, such office shall be filled in

accordance with the provisions of section 66A of the Local Authorities Election

Ordinance (Cap. 262)” (the emphasis was added)

Since the petitioner is an individual who has returned to the Horana Urban

Council as evidenced by 6R2, the procedure relevant to filling the petitioner’s

vacant post under the Local Authorities Election Ordinance is Section 66A (1)(b)

of the said Ordinance.

“(1) Where the office of a member of a local authority falls vacant under

the provisions of the Municipal Councils Ordinance (Chapter 252) Urban Councils

Ordinance (Chapter 255) or the Pradeshiya Sabha Act No. 15 of 1987, as the case

may be, the returning officer appointed for the electoral area in which such local

authority is situated, shall, where such vacancy is in respect of a member-

“(b) returned under section 65A and 65AA of this Ordinance then, depending on

whether the candidate whose office fell vacant is from a recognized political party

or an independent group, call upon the secretary of the recognized political

party or the leader of the independent group, as the case may be, to nominate

within thirty days of the occurrence of the vacancy a candidate to fill such

vacancy from candidates of the First Nomination Paper or the Additional

Nomination Paper…” (the emphasis was added)

It was 1st to 6th respondents’ contention that there is no provision in law for the

1st respondent to address his judicial mind or form an opinion regarding

resignation of the petitioner and he is compelled to comply with section 66A of

the Local Authorities Election Ordinance.

10

On the contrary, it was argued for the Petitioner along with 6th and 7th

respondents that there is a judicial duty incumbent upon the returning officer

to first ascertain whether a vacancy had in fact arisen (First Tier) and only

thereafter does the mechanical process of law come into effect.

Attention of this Court was drawn to Jain and Jain in ‘The Principles of

Administrative Law’ (4th Ed. Pg. 325) where it is stated that:

“A ministerial function is one where the relevant law prescribes the duty to be

performed by the concerned authority in certain and specific terms leaving nothing

to the discretion or judgment of the authority. It does not involve investigation into

disputed facts or making of choices. The authority concerned acts in strict

accordance with obedience to the law which imposes on it a simple and

definite duty in respect of which it has no choice”. (the emphasis was added)

The Petitioner as well as 6th and 7threspondents relied on the case CA (Writ)

52/2021 Ranjan Ramanayaka vs. Secretary General of Parliament-wherein His

Lordship Arjuna Obeysekera J. considering whether the Secretary General of

Parliament performed a purely ministerial function in notifying the Election

Commissioner of a vacancy arising from Articles 89 and 91 of the Constitution,

held that there is a Two Tier Test cast on the Secretary General (SG) in

performing his/her functions. The Court observed that in the First Tier, it is

incumbent upon the SG to first ascertain upon exercising his fine judgment

whether a vacancy had in fact arisen under Article 89 and 91 of the Constitution.

It is only upon fulfillment of the said First Tier, that the Second Tier comes into

effect which triggers Section 64(1) of the Parliamentary Elections Act, which

process according to Court then becomes a ‘Ministerial Function’.

It is important to consider the exact wording of the judgment which reads as

follows:

“It is common ground that wide publicity was given to the conviction of the

Petitioner by the Supreme Court and the subsequent imprisonment to serve the

sentence imposed by the Supreme Court. The question that I must consider is can

11

or should the Secretary General act in terms of Section 64(1) on the basis that a

vacancy has arisen, the moment he reads about the said conviction? I do not think

so, for the reason that unlike some of the other events of disqualification set

out in Articles 89 and 91, the disqualification in Article 89(d) is not

triggered by a mere conviction for any offence. I say this for the reason that

the Secretary General must form the opinion or be satisfied that each of the above

elements of Article 89(d) which are relevant to this application has been satisfied.

I must stress, however, that in doing so, the Secretary General is not assessing

the validity of the conviction”

In the instant case, the relevant section 12(3) of Urban Councils Ordinance

contains five situations which a vacancy may occur:

(i) refuses or

(ii) resigns his office, or

(iii) dies, or

(iv) vacates the office under subsection (2), or

(v) casual vacancy occurs in any other manner.

Except in case of ‘death’ of a member, other four situations can be uncertain

depending on the facts and circumstances of each case. To avoid and/or

minimize any practical difficulties, the legislature in its wisdom has provided

certain criterion to be satisfied in case of resignation, i.e. section 12(1) provides

for a written communication directly or through Chairman.

Whenever such vacancy occurs, the returning officer must act immediately as

he/she is mandatorily cast a duty to call upon the secretary of the recognized

political party to nominate within thirty days of the occurrence of the vacancy, a

candidate to fill such vacancy from candidates of the First Nomination Paper or

the Additional Nomination Paper. The question that I must consider is, can or

should the Returning Officer act in terms of Section 66A of the Local Authorities

Elections Ordinance based on a vacancy has arisen, the moment he receives the

written communication of resignation? Yes, I do think so, because the Section

12

itself states that such office shall be filled in accordance with the provisions of

section 66A of the Local Authorities Election Ordinance, and 66A provides that

the returning officer shall call for nominations from the recognized political party

to nominate within thirty days of the occurrence of the vacancy.

Thus, the duty cast on the Returning Officer in terms of Urban Councils

Ordinance is purely ministerial act and accordingly not amenable to writ

jurisdiction.

If I borrow the words from ‘Jain & Jain” the returning officer has to act in strict

accordance with obedience to the law which imposes on him/her a simple and

definite duty in respect of which he/she has no choice

However, in the present case, the 1st respondent having received Letter of

Resignation on 4th July 2025 had written the Letter P6 (6R4) 5 days after, on the

9th of July requesting the Petitioner to confirm his resignation. By P6, the 1st

respondent had also informed the Petitioner to reply within 5 days thereof and

that the 1st respondent would be taking steps to fill the vacancy thereafter.

Admittedly, the Petitioner had received P6 and had replied by his Letter dated

12th July 2025 (P7/6R5) once again confirming his resignation. As per the Day

Stamp on 6R5, the 1st respondent received it on 17th July 2025.

If the Petitioner had signed his original Letter of Resignation under duress as

claimed, he would have had an ample opportunity to inform the same to 1st

respondent in reply to letter P6 and/or to make a complaint to any other law

enforcement authority. Even after 17 days of signing and 14 days after

submitting letter of resignation, the Petitioner had not made any complaint

though he had been engaged in his usual day-to-day businesses as stated in his

affidavit.

Only after 23 days of his Letter of Resignation and for the 1st time, the Petitioner

overturned his position on 23rd of July by making a police complaint. His

withdrawal of resignation has reached the 1st respondent only on 24th July 2025.

13

By that time, by operation of law, the seat had fallen vacant and there is no room

to conduct an inquiry to ascertain reasons for withdrawal or reasons for

resignation. Moreover, the returning officer should not assess the validity of the

resignation.

In the case of H. K. Edmund V K J Felix Fernando [1961] 59 CLW 076, which is

concerned the issue of the resignation of the Deputy Mayor of the Municipal

Council of Galle, who, having tendered his resignation, later sought to withdraw

the same and wanted to continue as a member of the said Municipal Council. It

was argued that until and unless there is acceptance of the resignation, it was

open for the Petitioner (deputy mayor) to withdraw his resignation and continue

in office. The Petitioner had sought a Writ of Prohibition preventing the holding

of a meeting of the Council to appoint another person to office of Deputy Mayor.

Tambiah J. held:

“Learned Counsel contended that until the Mayor accepted the resignation, the

petitioner could not have said to have resigned from the office of Deputy Mayor.

But he was unable to refer me to any legal provisions to support the proposition

that the Deputy Mayor’s resignation should be accepted by the Mayor before it

could become valid, or the office of Deputy Mayor was not vacated until the

acceptance of the resignation by the Mayor or the Municipal Commissioner. There

was no contractual obligation between the Municipal Council and the Petitioner

when he was elected as the Deputy Mayor, and hence his resignation need not be

accepted by an officer of the council. The act of resignation is unilateral and

by sending his letter of resignation to the Commission, who was the proper

officer to whom a letter of resignation by the Deputy Mayor should be addressed,

the petitioner vacated his office. Therefore, I hold that the petitioner has no

locus standi to maintain this application”. (the emphasis was added)

The decision reported in 42 NLR 531, De silva vs De Silva also support the

position that the Petitioner has not right in law to withdraw his resignation. It

was where the Chairman of an Urban Council wrote to the secretary stating; “I

14

have to honour to inform you that I shall resign from the office of the Chairman,

Urban Council. As from February 1, 1941, and to request you to take the

necessary steps for the election of a successor as early as possible”,

Held, that the communication announced the resignation of the Chariman as

from February 1,1941, and that the office of Chariman became vacant on that

day. It was not open to the Chariman to withdraw the resignation even with the

consent of the Council.

ARE THE MATERIAL FACTS IN DISPUTE?

In order to determine whether the resignation was voluntary, this Court must

consider whether the petitioner’s letter of withdrawal of resignation dated

23.07.2025 (P8) is genuine or not and the legal effect of the same. The petitioner

himself has filed a District Court case bearing No. DSP 26/2025 in the District

Court of Colombo by the plaint dated 11.08.2025 (P15) against the 2nd,3rd, and

4th respondents praying for a declaration that the office of the Horana Urban

Council has not become vacant due to any resignation of the petitioner.

Accordingly, the question of whether the resignation was voluntary or not falls

outside the Writ jurisdiction of this Court for the reason that the major or

material fact is in dispute.

[vide Thajudeen vs. Sri Lanka Tea Board (1981-2 SLR 471), Francis Kulassoriya

vs. OIC – Police Station Kirindiwela (SC Appeal No. 52/2021-SC minutes of

14.07.2023]

S. CHOUDRY, in his book on the law of Writs and Fundamental Rights (2nd

Edition) Vol. 2 – at page 499) states that:

“Where facts are in dispute and in order to get at the truth, it is necessary that

the question should be canvassed in a suit where parties would have ample

15

opportunity of examining their witnesses and the Court would be better able to

judge which version is correct, a Writ will not issue.”(the emphasis was added)

ARE THE RELIEFS CLAIMED MISCONCIEVED?

The Petitioner has sought Writs of Certiorari quashing the Letter dated

22.07.2025 (P12) and the Gazette dated 02.08.2025 (P16)

By P12/6R7, the 1st respondent has called for nominations under Section

66A(1)(b) on 22.07.2025 which is two days before the Petitioner’s ‘revocation of

resignation’ by P8 dated 23.07.2025 but received by the 1st respondent only on

24th July 2025 as evidenced by 6R9.

The document 6R8 shows that the 2nd respondent-General Secretary of UNP had

nominated the 5th respondent to the vacant post on 23.07.2025 one day prior to

the revocation of the resignation by 6R9.

By the Extraordinary Gazette P16, the 1st respondent, acting in terms of Section

66A (1) of the Local Authorities Elections Ordinance, had published the name of

the 5th respondent as a member of Horana Urban Council. In terms of section

66A (1) of the Ordinance, the power of nominating an eligible person is vested

with the secretary to the political party which had won the vacant seat of the

Council and the Returning Officer is obliged to accept the nomination so made

by the Secretary. Therefore, P16 publication made by the 1st respondent is not

an Executive or Administrative function but a procedural step performed by the

1st respondent, as the 1st respondent has no power or discretion to appoint any

person to a vacancy of the membership of any Local Authority. The procedural

steps or ministerial actions of state officers are not subject to the writ

jurisdiction. Therefore, the Petitioner’s application to quash P16 is misconceived

in Law.

16

Moreover, this Court should not interpret the Urban Councils Ordinance and the

Local Authorities Elections Ordinance (as amended) for permitting members of

local authorities to reverse their relinquishments from office. The purpose or the

objective of both Statutes is to regulate and enable the smooth and seamless

functioning of local authorities.

The scheme in Section 12(1) of the Urban Councils Ordinance read with Section

66A of the Local Authorities Elections Ordinance (as amended) provides such a

seamless scheme to ensure that relinquishments of office by members of local

authorities do not lead to undue hampering of the functions of such local

authorities. In the said backdrop of Law, I cannot see any illegality in the 1st

respondent disregarding letter 6R9 and taking steps to issue the Gazette P16.

For the foregoing reasons, I am not inclined to issue notice and interim relief.

Accordingly, this application is dismissed without costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Hon. Rohantha Abeysuriya PC, J.(P/CA)

I agree.

President of the Court of Appeal