==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/269/2024

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979, read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

The Democratic Socialist Republic of

Sri Lanka.

COMPLAINANT

Vs.

Court of Appeal No: Subasinghe Kankanamlage Ashoka

CA/HCC/269/24 Senadeera alias Mahatung

High Court of Kurunegala

Case No. HC 283/2021 ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

Subasinghe Kankanamlage Ashoka

Senadeera alais Mahatung

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

CA/HCC/269/2024

2

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

COUNSEL : Samantha Premachandra with Naveen

Jayamanne for the Appellant.

Malik Azeez, SC for the Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 22/07/2026 DECIDED ON : 21/09/2026 *******************

CA/HCC/269/2024

3

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) was indicted by the Attorney General for committing the following

offence:

On or about the 16th of August 2019, at Hilogama, causing the death of Don

Juwan Waduge Ranbanda alias Don Juwan Waduge Wijepala, thereby

committing an offence punishable under Section 296 of the Penal Code.

The trial commenced before the High Court Judge of Kurunegala as the

Appellant opted for a non-jury trial. The prosecution had led 11 witnesses

and marked productions P1-08 and closed the case.

The Learned High Court Judge having been satisfied that the evidence

presented by the prosecution warranted a case to answer, called for the

defence and explained the rights of the accused. The Appellant had made a

short dock statement and closed his case.

After considering the evidence presented by both parties, the Learned High

Court Judge had convicted the Appellant as charged and sentenced him to

death on 04/07/2024.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and the sentence, the Appellant

had preferred this appeal to this court.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the Appellant

had given his consent to argue this matter in his absence. At the hearing,

the Appellant was connected via the Zoom platform from prison.

CA/HCC/269/2024

4

The background of the case albeit briefly is as follows:

PW1, Leelawathi, the wife of the deceased is the only eye witness to the

incident in which the deceased was allegedly killed by the Appellant. The

deceased and PW1 were employed as watchers of an estate owned by the

younger brother of the Appellant. The couple had been working there for

about 02 years at the time of the incident.

On the day of the incident, at about 8.00am the Appellant had come there

under the influence of liquor and accused them for allowing an unknown

person to remove his arrack can. During this time, the deceased had gone to

the estate to pluck coconut. The Appellant had then threatened to kill them,

and had proceeded to destroy their household items using a pole. Hearing

this, the wife of the owner of the estate had come there after the departure

of the Appellant.

At that time PW1, upon hearing the cries of the deceased, had seen the

deceased fallen down with a bleeding injury on his neck. PW1 had witnessed

the Appellant stabbing the deceased on his chest twice with a knife he had

in his possession. The Appellant had also tried to attack PW1 as well. Upon

witnessing this, PW1 had gone unconscious and she was taken to a nearby

house. The deceased was taken to the hospital, but had succumbed to his

injuries on the way.

PW2, Nisansala the wife of the owner of the estate, told the court that when

she arrived at the scene of crime after coming to know that the Appellant had

threatened PW1, she had seen the deceased fallen down while the Appellant

was standing nearby. She had passed the message to her husband and had

found a vehicle to transport the deceased to hospital.

PW3 Asanka Jayakody and PW4 Pushpakumara had arrived at the scene

and PW3 had to struggle with the Appellant to grab the knife from him.

Immediately, PW3 had called the Police Emergency Unit and helped PW6 to

recover the knife.

CA/HCC/269/2024

5

PW5, CI Jayatilaka, had gone to the place of incident immediately after

receiving the information. He had noticed blood marks at the scene. The

Appellant was arrested on the same day at 16.15 hours.

PW6, IP Wijesinghe, had recovered the knife used by the Appellant as

directed by PW3.

PW14 Nayakaratne, the JMO who held the post mortem of the deceased had

stated that two stab injuries to the neck and the chest of the deceased and

resulting haemorrhage and blood loss was the cause of death. According to

the JMO, the injuries were fatal. He had expressed an opinion that the

injuries could have been inflicted by the knife which had been marked as P3.

In the dock statement, the Appellant had said that he was attacked with a

club when he was plucking coconut, and that he does not know whether the

knife was broken into two or fallen down after it was broken.

The Appellant had raised the following grounds of appeal:

1. The evidence of PW1 contained numerous material contradictions, is

not credible, lacked truthfulness and failed to satisfy the tests of

probability and consistency.

2. The Trial Judge misdirected himself by not properly considering the

plea of sudden fight and/or grave and sudden provocation.

3. The Learned High Court Judge had failed to evaluate the dock

statement of the Appellant.

4. The Learned Trial Judge failed to appreciate that the duty of

discharging the burden of proof is on the prosecution.

This case rests on the testimonies of eye witness and circumstantial

evidence. PW1 is the key eye witness in relation to this incident. She had

witnessed the Appellant stabbing the deceased twice on his chest area. The

medical evidence is quite consistent with her evidence. Further, when PW1

shouted after seeing the incident, the Appellant had threatened to kill her as

well. The defence had marked one contradiction upon the evidence given by

CA/HCC/269/2024

6

PW1. The Learned High Court Judge had very correctly considered the said

contradiction and declared that the said contradiction is not strong enough

to create a doubt regarding the prosecution’s case. Prior to the incident, the

Appellant had come to PW1’s house, and had proceeded to threaten and

destroy their household objects before he went out.

Eyewitness testimony plays a crucial role, as it remains an important type of

criminal evidence in cases. In criminal cases such as this, judges are often

tasked with assessing eyewitness testimony, which would also include the

evaluation of whether the story of the witness supports the other established

facts of the case. However, it is important to note that the complete accuracy

and possibility of such a story cannot always be verified or falsified directly.

In such situations, the judge would have to consider the reliability of the

source of the statement.

Moreover, eyewitness testimony would be an extremely persuasive and

convincing type of evidence presented in court. However, the accuracy of

such testimony may be doubtful. Mistaken or inaccurate eyewitness

evidence can potentially result in wrong convictions; innocent individuals

could be sent to prison or death row for crimes they have not committed.

When evaluating the evidence of an eyewitness, the Court should take into

account the demeanour of the witness, the probability of the account, and

possible internal inconsistencies in the account, whether the account by the

witness is in fact consistent with their own previous statements, whether the

witness has had any bias against the accused or any group to which the

accused is a part of, whether the available evidence at the scene of the crime

supports the account, and whether the testimony of the other witnesses

supports the witness’s testimony. Such considerations would be of utmost

importance as the burden of proof would lie on the prosecution in all criminal

cases.

CA/HCC/269/2024

7

The Learned High Court Judge has very correctly and clearly discussed

PW1’s evidence in his judgment. Her evidence is further strengthened by the

evidence given by PW2 and PW3. Upon being called by PW2, PW3 had arrived

and seen the Appellant brandishing a knife. After much difficulty, he had

grabbed the knife from the Appellant.

The court must seriously and carefully consider the previous as well as

subsequent conduct of the accused before arriving at any conclusion relating

to the guilt or innocence of the accused. This is due to a justified reason;

only by extremely careful and vigilant analysis can the court arrive on its

own logical inference. As such, the significance of conduct and importance

of its evidentiary value cannot be overlooked or underestimated by the court

in the determination of the conviction or acquittal of an Accused.

In this regard, Section 8 (1) and (2) of the Evidence Ordinance is very relevant

to this case.

The Learned High Court Judge in his judgment had also considered the

utterance made by the Appellant to PW1 when he came to her house in

search of the deceased. Further, the Appellant had smashed the household

items of PW1 before going out.

As the Learned High Court Judge had very correctly considered all the

evidence presented by both parties, I conclude this ground has no merit.

In the second ground of appeal, the learned Counsel contended that the Trial

Judge has misdirected himself by not properly considering the plea of

sudden fight and/or grave and sudden provocation.

In this case, when the Appellant had first arrived at the deceased’s house

only PW1 was present. The deceased had gone to the estate. Therefore, no

clash or tension had occurred between the deceased and the Appellant.

When PW1 had seen the Appellant the second time, the deceased was lying

fallen and the Appellant had stabbed the deceased’s chest area twice. There

CA/HCC/269/2024

8

is not even an iota of evidence that transpires that there was a sudden fight

between the deceased and the Appellant. As the learned State Counsel very

correctly contended, the defence had failed to suggest this position to the

prosecution witnesses. It was only raised in his dock statement.

In Virsa Singh v State of Punjab AIR (1958) SC 465 at 467 the court held

that:

“No one has a licence to run around inflicting injuries that are sufficient to

cause death in the ordinary course of nature and claim that they are not

guilty of murder. If they inflict injuries of that kind, they must face

consequences; and they can only escape if it can be shown, or reasonably

deduced, that the injury was accidental or otherwise unintentional”

Considering the judgement cited above, the prosecution has placed cogent

and uncontradicted evidence against the Appellant. The learned High Court

Judge had considered this position in the judgement. Therefore, this ground

also has no merit.

In the third ground of appeal, the learned Counsel for the Appellant

contended that the Learned High Court Judge had failed to evaluate the dock

statement of the Appellant.

The importance of evaluation and consideration of a dock statement an

Accused had been discussed in a number of decided cases.

In the case of Sarath v. Attorney General [2006] 3 SLR 1 the court held

that:

“There is no rule that particular item/evidence should be considered first

in the judgment. There is no prescribed sequence in analysing evidence.

The judgment analysed the entire evidence at the same time. Therefore,

the fact of considering the dock statement at the beginning of the judgment

would not make any difference as the prosecution evidence was

considered at the same time.

CA/HCC/269/2024

9

One must bear in mind that when a dock statement is considered

anywhere in the judgment, the judge who heard the evidence is aware of

the prosecution case and would always consider the dock statement while

considering the prosecution story. One cannot consider the dock statement

in isolation”.

In the case of Meegastennage Prince Gunawardena v. AG (SC Appeal

No. 42/2014 decided 7 November 2019) it was noted that:

“It is mandatory for the Judge to analyse the entire evidence before the

Court and to find whether the ingredients are proved beyond reasonable

doubt.”

This ground has no merit as the Learned High Court Judge had categorically

dealt with the tenability of the defence of the Appellant in paragraph 35 of

his judgment. Hence, it is very clear that the Learned High Court Judge had

considered the dock statement of the Appellant in the correct manner in

which a dock statement should be evaluated.

Finally, the learned Counsel for the Appellant contended that the

prosecution has not proved the case beyond reasonable doubt.

In The Queen v. K.A. Santin Singho 65 NLR 447 the court held that:

“It is fundamental that the burden is on the prosecution. Whether the

evidence the prosecution relies on is direct or circumstantial, the burden

is the same. This burden is not altered by the failure of the appellant to

give evidence and explain the circumstances”.

In the case of Officer - In - Charge, Police Station Udu Dumbara Vs. U.G.

Sunil and Others (SC/APPEAL/27/2019), decided on 05.06.2024 it was

noted:

“It has been firmly established that, in a criminal case, that the charges

against the Accused should be proved beyond reasonable doubt. Proof

beyond a reasonable doubt generally means the Court must carefully

CA/HCC/269/2024

10

consider the entirety of admissible evidence to such scrutiny to see

whether the ingredients of the charges are proved. If the Court is not

satisfied the accused person must be acquitted.”

In this case PW1 is a key witness. Her evidence is clear, cogent and

unambiguous. The court considering all other evidence presented by the

prosecution, without any hesitation has relied on that evidence and

convicted the Appellant as the prosecution has proved the case beyond

reasonable doubt. Hence, this ground also has no merit.

As the prosecution had proven this case beyond a reasonable doubt, I affirm

the conviction and the sentence imposed by the Learned High Court Judge

of Kurunegala dated 04/07/2024 on the Appellant. Therefore, his appeal is

dismissed.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgment to the High

Court of Kurunegala along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL