IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA CA (PHC) 36/2011 Hambanthota HC Court Case No. HCRA 02/2011

Dona Prema Kurugama Disanayeka No.36, Suqi Niwasa, Siribopura, Hambanthota

Petitioner-Petitioner-Appellant Vs. S.J. Ranasinghe Disanayake Tharanga Niwasa, Beliatta Road, Polommatuwa, Tengalle. Mohemad Lafeer Mohemad Thawfeek Both of No. 71, Kadaweediya, Hambanthota. Dona Podinona Kurugama Disanayeka No.36, Suqi Niwasa, Siribopura, Hambanthota Dona Nonahami Kurugama Disanayeka No.3, Delkada Road, Matara.

Respondents-Respondents-Respondents

I

C. A.(PHC)No.36/2011

Before

Counsel

Argued and

Decided on

P.Padman Surasena,J.

P.H.C Hambanthota 02/2011

K.K. Wickremasinghe,J. and

P.Padman Surasena,J.

Gunasena Thenabadu with Yasith

Hirimburegama for the Petitioner

Lilanthi Kumari for the Respondent.

21.06.2017

This Court has terminated the proceedings in this case and the order

WC~J (.tJJI relevant to it ~ delivered on 2017/06/02. The Bench comprised of Hon.

~

H.C.J.Madawala J. and Hon. P.Padman Su~ena, J. The said order was " delivered pursuant to the terms of the settlement agreed upon by both

parties.

However before signing the said order Hon. Justice H.C.J.Madawala

passed away.

Today counsel for both parties before this Court agreed that they

would still abide by the said terms of settlement and the said order delivered

by this Court on 2017/6/02.

I

~ t I

I I,II

II

f

Hon. K.K.Wickremasinghe, J. who is the other Judge sits in this Court

today, agreed with the order so delivered by this Court on 2017.06.21.

Hence the said order is re pronounced by this Court ttay as requested

f\.

by Counsel for ,e both parties.

In this case both parties namely the petitioner-petitioner-appellant and 1 st -5th

respondent-respondent-respondents have filed a joint motion setting out terms of

settlement. Learned counsel who appears today for the petitioner and the learned

counsel who appears for the 1 st -5th respondents confirmed in Court that the

parties would abide by the terms of settlement that has already been filed. They

also agree that suitable directions from this Court be given to the learned

Magistrate to enforce the terms of settlement.

In view of this agreement learned Magistrate of Hambanthota is directed to enforce

the terms of settlement namely,

The first respondent above named Sumanasiri Jayalath Ranasinghe Disanayaka has

agreed to hand over the vacant possession to the petitioner-appellant above named

Dona Prema Kurugama Disanayaka by ejecting the first respondent's all agents,

servants, representatives and other persons from the land described in the schedule

hereto on or before the 12th day of April 2017.

In the event of the 1 st respondent his servants and agents failure to hand over

possession of the land described in the schedule hereto on or before the 12th day of

April 2017 the petitioner-petitioner-appellant is entitled to execute writ against the

\

I

ItI

1 st respondent's all agents servants, representatives and other persons to obtain

vacant possession of the said land.

The above named petitioner appellant Dona Prema Kurugama Disanayaka reserves

rights to eject the first respondent, first respondent's all agents, servants,

representatives and other persons from the subject matter more fully described in

the schedule hereto by obtaining a court order from the Magistrate's Court of

Hambanthota in the event of the first respondent violate the aforesaid terms and

conditions.

Subject to the terms of above settlement proceedings in this case is terminated.

Learned Magistrate of Hambantota is directed to enforce the above terms of

settlement.

Proceedings are terminated.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K.K. Wickremasinghe,J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

WCI-