==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal against a final

order of the High Court under section 331

of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act

No.15 of 1979.

The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

COMPLAINANT Court of Appeal No.CA/HCC/0090/2025 Vs. High Court of Colombo Case No. HC/171/2017 Santhosham Dharmaraj Sivabalan alias Bala Mama, No.47, J12, Samith Pura, Mattakuliya, Colombo 12.

ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

Santhosham Dharmaraj Sivabalan alias Bala Mama, No.47, J12, Samith Pura, Mattakuliya, Colombo 12.

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12.

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

2

Before: Amal Ranaraja J.

& Dr. Sumudu Premachandra J.

Counsel: Kasun Liyanage for the Accused-Appellant.

Azard Navavi, ASG for the Respondent.

Accused-Appellant is produced via zoom platform by

the Prison Authorities.

Written Submissions: By the Accused-Appellant filed on 11/09/2025.

By the Respondent filed on 12/05/2026. Argument On : 24/08/2026. Judgement On : 25/09/2026.

Dr. Sumudu Premachandra J.

1] The Accused Appellant is charged with the following offences;

 Count 01: - Statutory Rape punishable under Section 364 (2) of the Penal

Code.

 Count 02: - Grave Sexual Abuse punishable under Section 365 B (2) (b)

of the Penal Code.

2] The second count was added after the evidence of Victim, PW 01 on

19/02/2021 and dated of the 2nd count was amended 02/02/2022, and both

alterations were read over to the accused and he pleaded not guilty to the charge.

3

3] At the time of the incident, the Victim was an 8 year’ old young child and was

called into the Accused’s residence/room while playing with other children. The

Accused placed her on his lap, removed her lower garments and subjected her

to non-consensual sexual activity while instructing her not to disclose the

incident. Following the assault, the child suffered genital bleeding, which her

mother and grandmother initially misunderstood as the onset of menstruation

and consequently conducted traditional puberty rituals.

4] However, the incident was disclosed approximately two months later when

her aunt (PW 05) noticed that menstruation had not recurred and questioned

the child. The Prosecution relied principally on the Victim’s testimony (PW 01),

the evidence of her aunt and grandmother, and the investigating officers. The

Judicial Medical Officer (PW 09), supported by the JMO report and clinical notes

(P2 and P3). P1, the Birth certificate and age of the child were admitted facts.

5] At the evidence, the child could not give the exact date of the incident.

However, she narrated that it happened in 2014. In the evidence, she did not

deny anything that happened. She said that she cannot recall or remember. The

demeanor of the child was recorded by the learned trial judge. She was crying

loud at the time of giving evidence and was reluctant to recall the incident.

6] The evidence show that the incident happened in the morning and she was

playing with children. The Accused (Uncle) called her inside his house. Then she

was taken to the lap of the Accused. The evidence revealed that the Accused

removed and inserted his hand through the undergarment and fingered her

vagina. Then she ran away. After the cross examination, her evidence was

closed.

7] At that point, the Prosecution amended the charge and added a charge of

grave sexual abuse. Thereafter, other Prosecution witnesses were called and

4

Prosecution closed the case. The Accused made a dock statement denying the

incident. After a contested trial, the Accused was acquitted for the charge of rape

and convicted for the added charge of grave sexual abuse. The Accused was

sentenced to 15 years’ rigorous imprisonment. In addition, Rs.20,000/= fine (in

default 6 months’ simple imprisonment) and Rs.500,000/= Compensation (in

default 2 years’ simple imprisonment) payable to the Victim were also imposed.

8] Being aggrieved to the said conviction and sentence, the Accused-Appellant

prefers this appeal on the following grounds;

1. Joinder of charges vis. statutory rape and grave sexual abuse in one and

the same indictment amounts to Mis-Joinder which has denied the

Accused-Appellant of a fair trial.

2. Material amendments to the indictment made after the PW 01’s evidence

was concluded and also during the recall of PW 01 has caused the

Accused-Appellant denial of a fair trial.

3. The learned Trial Judge has erroneously and/or unjustifiable and/or

unreasonably rejected the inconsistencies inter se and per se in and

among the Prosecution witnesses thus causing prejudice on the

substantial rights of the Accused-Appellant i.e., right to a fair trial.

4. Alternatively, at any event, the sentence imposed on the Accused-

Appellant was excessive.

9] The grounds that joinder of charges vis. statutory rape and grave sexual abuse

in one and the same indictment amounts to mis-joinder which has denied the

Accused-Appellant of a fair trial and material amendments to the indictment

made after the PW 01’s evidence was concluded and also during the recall of PW

01 has caused the Accused-Appellant denial of a fair trial are interwoven and

considered together.

5

10] When considering the evidence, it is apparent that the offence of grave sexual

abuse had been added after the closing of the Victim, PW 01’s evidence. However,

the charge was read and explained and plea was taken. It is clear that pages

139 to 163 show that after the amendment to the indictment, arraignment was

done and PW 01 was called for cross examination. Thus, one cannot say that

fair trial was denied to the Accused-Appellant.

11] I now consider the validity of the amendment. Section 167 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 deals with the amendment of the charges.

It enacts;

“1. Any court may alter any indictment or charge at any time before

judgment is pronounced or, in the case of trials, before the High Court by a

jury, before the verdict of the jury is returned.

2. Every such alteration shall be read and explained to the accused.

3. The substitution of one charge for another in an indictment or the addition

of a new charge to an indictment and in a Magistrate’s Court the

substitution of one charge for another or the addition of a new charge shall

be deemed to be an alteration of such indictment or charge within the

meaning of this section.” [Emphasis is added]

12] In John Perera v. Weerasinghe 53 NLR 158 the court held that;

“An amendment of a charge should not be refused by the judge unless it is

likely to do substantial injustice to the accused.”

13] In Doole v. The Republic of Sri Lanka [1978-1979] 2 SLR 33 the court

held that;

“as a rule an amendment to an indictment should be allowed if it would

have the effect of convicting the guilty or securing the acquittal of the

6

innocent, but it should not be allowed if it would cause substantial injustice

or prejudice to the accused.”

14] In Hiththatcharilage Gnanaratna alias Shantha Mama vs The Hon.

Attorney General, CA/HCC/ 0170/2020, decided on 10/03/2023, His

Lordship P. Kumararatnam, J. considered amendments as;

“In a criminal trial the basic foundation is the charge. By charging, an

accused is provided information as to the nature of the allegation levelled

against him. The charge must identify the act committed by the accused,

the law alleged to have been violated by him and particulars pertaining to

the alleged offence must be specified in the charge. It is the profound duty

of a prosecutor to frame the charge/s after careful consideration of evidence

available in the case at the time of drafting the charge. The requirements of

a valid charge are set out in Sections 164 and 165 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979.”

15] Last week, this court in Mohomed Ismail Mohomed Irshad vs The Hon.

Attorney General, CA Appeal No.CA/HCC/0066/2024, decided on

18/09/2026 held;

“In plain text, it is seen that the indictment can be amended before the

judgement is pronounced or delivery of the verdict by the jury. The section

itself shows that substitution of one charge for another in an indictment or

the addition of a new charge to an indictment is permissible. The condition

is that such alteration shall be read and explained to the Accused.

…

According to section 165 of the Criminal Procedure Code, if the trial has

already started and the witnesses or evidence reveal a mismatch with the

original charge, I am of the view that the Prosecution can request an

amendment to confirm to the evidence. This can usually happen at any time

before the judge or jury renders a final verdict. It is my understanding that

the indictment or charge sheet is a living thing, and it cannot be static. Once

7

the indictment or charge sheet is amended, and if the story goes against the

first complain, it becomes unreliable. Then, the defense can elicit the

contradiction and draw omission to the court, to discredit the witness, thus,

allowing an amendment confirming the evidence would not harm the

Accused. 26] It should be noted when allowing the amendment, the fair

trial protections must be given for the Accused. To prevent the Prosecution

from blind-siding the Defense, courts can allow the witness to recall and

grant postponement (adjournment) enabling the Accused to prepare for the

new charge. It is to be remembered that while securing a fair trial to the

Accused, the justice should also equally be done to the Victims.”

16] In Nissanka Anthony v. Attorney General, Case No: CA-HCC-232/2016,

decided on 05/04/2022., His Lordship P. Kumararatnam, J. considered whether

amending the indictment to include an alternative charge of Grave Sexual Abuse

under Section 365 B (2) (b) of the Penal Code was legally proper and held;

“In a criminal trial the basic foundation is the charge. By charging, an

accused is provided information as to the nature of the allegation levelled

against him. The charge must identify the act committed by the accused,

the law alleged to have been violated by him and particulars pertaining to

the alleged offence must be specified in the charge.

It is the profound duty of a prosecutor to frame charge/s after careful

consideration of evidence available in the case at the time of drafting the

charge. The requirements of a valid charge are set out in Sections 164 and

165 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of 1979.”

17] However, in Mahalakotuwa v. The Attorney General [2011] 2 B.L.R 406

D.S.C Lecamwasam,J. held that:

“In a case of this nature when the facts clearly show that the accused

cannot brought under 365B (2) b, learned judges should not hesitate to use

their prudence in deciding whether a particular set of facts constitute the

offence contained in the indictment or not. If not, without mechanically

8

passing the sentence on the indictment already filed they must have the

audacity to act under 177 or 178 of the CPC and convict the accused

accordingly for a different offence.”

18] In Jeyarasa Sajeevan vs The Hon. Attorney General, CA HCC 189/2020,

Decided on: 26/10/2023, Her Ladyship MENAKA WIJESUNDERA J. considered

the amendment to the charge and noted;

“The provision relating to the alteration of a charge in an indictment is at

section 167 of the CPC and according to which the indictment can be

amended until the judgment is delivered. But under 167 (2) it says if the

charge has been so altered the altered charge has to be read over to the

accused which in this case has been done by the trial judge. But under

section 171 of the CPC the Court shall allow the defense and the prosecution

to recall witnesses if an application is made to that effect.

Hence according to the above section if the defense or the prosecution

makes an application to recall the witnesses after an alteration of the

charges in the indictment the Court has to allow the same, but in this instant

no such application has been made.

Hence it is the opinion of this Court that the trial judge had followed the

procedure which is incumbent on him but the Counsel for the appellant has

not played his part for reasons best known to him.

Hence, we are unable to agree that it caused any prejudice to the appellant

and even after the amendment the appellant has given evidence from the

box and he had completely denied the allegation.

The Counsel has further submitted that the prosecution has altered the

charge to suit the evidence which transpired in Court but with this

submission also we are unable to agree because according to section 167

(1) of the CPC a charge in an indictment can be altered until the judgment

is delivered.”

9

19] However in Jeyarasa Sajeevan vs The Hon. Attorney General (Supra),

with regard to the misjoinder, Her Ladyship held as follows;

“Another ground of appeal raised by the counsel for the appellant is that

when a charge of rape is framed in the same indictment a charge of grave

sexual abuse cannot be framed because the acts referred to are part of one

act.

According to section 173 of the CPC for every distinct offence a separate

charge may be drafted. Hence for each distinct offence a separate charge

has to be drafted. If that is so the word distinct appears to be the vital word

here and it means, something different and something which has its own

characteristics.

The offence of rape and grave sexual abuse has its own ingredients under

the respective definitions in the Penal Code and if we may simplify it, grave

sexual abuse can be defined as contact without consent and rape can be

defined as vaginal penetration without consent.

Hence it is very clear when considering the definition of rape and grave

sexual abuse under the Penal Code that the two are distinct and

unconnected offences.

This submission of the Presidents Counsel we do agree with for the simple

reason that if a man is charged for committing grievous hurt, he will not be

charged for simple hurt as well committed on the same victim during the

same transaction because both offences although distinct in nature it

involves acts committed during the same series of events.

At this stage we have considered the objection to the indictment (even

though it was not raised at the High Court level) in the interest of justice

because it is enshrined in our Constitution that every citizen has to be given

a fair trial.

As such we find that the indictment against the appellant filed by the

Attorney General is not in order, and there was no proper indictment for the

appellant to plead to.

10

Hence, we are compelled to set aside the conviction and the sentence

imposed by the trial judge based on that ground.

In addition to the above, upon considering the evidence adduced at the trial

we find that the evidence of the victim is wholly untrustworthy due to the

reason that the Attorney General had to amend the charges for the reason

that she had contradicted her position in the statement to the police

although the defense counsel had failed to bring it to the notice of Court.

Furthermore, the trial judge also had failed to consider the same.”

20] However, in LIONEL v. OFFICER-IN-CHARGE, MEETIYAGODA POLICE

STATION [1987] 1SLR 210, His Lordship L. H. DE ALWIS, J. held that

misjoinder of charges is curable under provisions of the Code of Criminal

Procedure if there has been no actual or possible failure of justice. It was held;

“(1) that the time at which it falls to be determined that the conditions that

the offences alleged had been committed in the course of the same

transaction had been fulfilled, is the time when the accusation is made, and

not when the trial is concluded and the result is known.

(2) that a misjoinder of charges is curable under provisions of the Code of

Criminal Procedure if there has been no actual or possible failure of justice.

(3) as the misjoinder, in the present case, has not prejudiced the appellants

and occasioned a failure of justice, it amounts to an irregularity that is

curable under section 436 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of

1979, and the appeal, therefore, fails.”

21] The learned Counsel for the Appellant contended that misjoinder cannot be

cured under section 176 of the Criminal Procedure Code. The section 176

enacts;

“176. If a single act or series of acts is of such a nature that it is

doubtful which of several offences the facts which can be proved

11

will constitute, the accused may be charged with all or any one or

more of such offences and any number of such charges may be tried

at one trial and in a trial before the High Court may be included in one

and the same indictment; or may be charged with having committed one of

the said offences without specifying which one.

Illustration

A is accused of an act which may amount to theft or receiving stolen

property or criminal breach of trust or cheating. He may be charged with

theft, receiving stolen property, criminal breach of trust, and cheating, or he

may be charged with having committed one of the following

offences, to wit, theft, receiving stolen property, criminal breach of

trust, and cheating.” [Emphasis is added]

22] It is to be noted that the first charge is rape and the amended charge was

inserted in addition to the first charge rape. It is to be noted that grave sexual

abuse cannot be held as a lesser offence of rape. Both are not cognate offences,

because the ingredients of the charges are different. In rape the actus reus is

penetration, in grave sexual abuse, the actus reus is contact. In the Indian

judgement of Supreme Court in Rafiq Ahmed Rafi vs State of U.P. 2011 (8)

SCC 300, the Court has discussed the meaning of cognate offences as follows;

"Usually, an offence of grave nature includes in itself the essentials of a

lesser but cognate offence. In other words, there are classes of offences like

offences against the human body, offences against property and offences

relating to cheating, misappropriation, forgery etc. In the normal course of

events, the question of grave and less grave offences would arise in relation

to the offences falling in the same class and normally may not be inter se

the classes. It is expected of the prosecution to collect all evidence in

accordance with law to ensure that the prosecution is able to establish the

charge with which the accused is charged, beyond reasonable doubt. It is

only in those cases, keeping in view the facts and circumstances of a given

case and if the court is of the view that the grave offence has not

been established on merits or for a default of technical nature, it

12

may still proceed to punish the accused for an offence of a less grave

nature and content. We have already noticed that a person charged with

a heinous or grave offence can be punished for a less grave offence of

cognate nature whose essentials are satisfied with the evidence on record.

Examples of this kind have already been noticed by us like a charge being

framed under Section 302 IPC and the accused being punished under

Section 304, Part I or II, as the circumstances and facts of the case may

demand. Furthermore, a person who is charged with an offence under

Section 326 IPC can be finally convicted for an offence of lesser gravity

under Section 325 or 323 IPC, if the facts of the case so establish. Alike or

similar offences can be termed as `cognate offences'”. [Emphasis is

added]

23] In the above circumstances, I do not see any bar for the stand of rape and

grave sexual offence in a single indictment, although those are not cognate

offences, however, the trial judge can only convict a single charge not both. The

section 177 makes it clear if the evidence appears that the Accused had

committed a different charge he be convicted although he has not been charged

with it. In that event, before the verdict the Accused should be informed about

the charge and read over, arraigned and witnesses should be recalled if

demanded by the Accused.

24] The section 177 of the Criminal Procedure further shows the legal position

as;

“177. If in the case mentioned in section 176 the accused is charged with

one offence and it appears in evidence that he committed a different offence

for which he might have been charged under the provisions of that section,

he may be convicted of the offence which he is shown to have committed

although he was not charged with it.

Illustration

13

A is charged with theft. It appears that he committed the offence of criminal

breach of trust or that of receiving stolen goods. He may be convicted of

criminal breach of trust or of receiving stolen goods (as the case may be)

'though he was not charged with such offence.”

25] Further, in section 178 permits to convict lesser offences. It says;

“178. (1) When a person is charged with an offence consisting of several

particulars a combination of some only of which constitutes a complete

minor offence and such combination is proved but the remaining particulars

are not proved he may be convicted of the minor offence though he was not

charged with such offence.

(2) When a person is charged with an offence and facts are proved which

reduce it to a minor offence he may be convicted of the minor offence

although he was not charged with it and although jurisdiction to try such

minor offence is exclusively vested in some other court.

(3) Anything in this section shall not be deemed to authorize a conviction for

any offence referred to in section 135 when a complaint has not been made

as required by that section.”

26] Thus, in considering the totality of sections 176, 177 and 178 of the Criminal

Procedure, it is clear, the amendment or alteration of charges must be

interpreted in a broad sense and aligned with the intention of the legislature.

Thus, same classes of offences can be joined and it will not be a misjoinder.

Rape and grave sexual offence though they are not cognate offences, they are

the same classes of offences, offences against the body, can be joined. Thus,

charging statutory rape and grave sexual abuse in one and the same indictment

does not necessarily amount to a misjoinder if they arise from the same

transaction.

27] It is seen that joinder is permissible and the impugned charges are based on

the same act or transaction (e.g., a single criminal incident where multiple illegal

14

sexual acts occurred) or they are connected together as part of a common

scheme or plan or they are of the same or similar character. Because statutory

rape and grave sexual abuse are both sexual offenses and frequently stem from

the exact same abusive encounter joining them in separate counts of a single

indictment is a standard practice and does not constitute a misjoinder.

28] The Appellant relies on Mohamed Aboobakar Ibrahim v. Hon. Attorney

General , CA 191/2002, decided on 12/08/2016, a division of this court , His

Lordship M.M.A Gaffoor, J. set aside the conviction and sentence as the

Accused-Appellant was originally indicted in the High Court for committing the

offence of rape under Section 364 (2) (e) of the Penal Code and the learned trial

judge convicted the Appellant for Grave Sexual Abuse under Section 365 B (2)

(b) of the Penal Code instead, on procedural irregularity as stated above for

failing to amend the indictment deprived the Appellant of a targeted defense,

constituting a grave legal misdirection. In this case the charge was amended, he

was informed and the Victim was recalled for cross examination. If the Victim

was going against her original statement, it is duty of the defence to pinpoint the

contradictions and the omissions as the adversarial system, the judge cannot

peruse the information books and come into a conclusion. The judge should act

on the substantive evidence which come from the witness box only. Thus, I

dismiss the 1st and 2nd grounds of appeal.

29] The Appellant contended that the learned Trial Judge has erroneously

and/or unjustifiable and/or unreasonably rejected the inconsistencies inter se

and per se in and among the Prosecution witnesses thus causing prejudice on

the substantial rights of the Accused-Appellant i.e. right to a fair trial. It is to be

noted no contradiction marked or omission was drawn at the trial. As I noted

above, it is for the defence to elicit contradictions and omissions and impeach

the witness.

30] Under section 118 of the Evidence Ordinance, the child is in tender ages, if

the child can understand the question and give rational answers, he/she can be

15

treated as a competent witness. This universal rule applies to every witness.

Section 118 says;

“All persons shall be competent to testify unless the Court considers that

they are prevented from understanding the questions put to them, or from

giving rational answers to those questions, by tender years, extreme old

age, disease, whether of body or mind, or any other cause of the same

kind.”

31] In the instant case, the child was 8 years’ when she underwent the incident

and she was 13 years’ of age when giving evidence. Evidence shows that she has

understood and had given rational answers. However, she has not remembered

some points or reluctant to recall the incident. The particular act was described

as;

“ප්‍ර. ඔය සිද්දිය කරපු කකනා උසාවිකේ ඉන්නවද දැන්?

උ. ඔව්

ප්‍ර. කවුද ඒ? අත ික්කරලා කෙන්වන්න පුළුවන් ද?

උ. ( සාක්ිකාරිය විසින් විත්ති කුඩුකව් සිටින විත්තිකරු කෙන්වා සිටියි)

ප්‍ර. කෙදරදී ඒෂාව පුටුව ඉන්දකෙන ඒෂා කේ කලිසම ෙලවලා ඒෂා කේ චූ ෙැත්තත අතෙැවා කියලා

කිව්වා කන්ද?

උ.ඔව්.

ප්‍ර. ඇතුලටත්ත දැම්මා කිව්වා.

උ.ඔව්.

ප්‍ර. ඒ මාමාකේ ඇඟිල්ල හැර කවන කමානවද දැම්මද?

උ. කවන කමානවත්ත දැම්කම් නැහැ.”

32] The said part of evidence is clear and cogent evidence has not been

impeached, can be relied upon for safe conviction. In Thimbirigolle

Sirirathana Thero v. The Officer in Charge, Police Station,

Rasnayakepura (and the Attorney General), Court of Appeal Case No:

CA/HCC/194/2015, it was held the demeanour and the deportment of child

witness as;

16

“In cases of sexual offences, Courts have found that victims of sexual

offences can react in different ways. Some may complain immediately.

Others may feel, for example, afraid, shocked, ashamed confused or even

guilty and may not speak out until some time has passed. There is no

typical reaction.

…

When it comes to a child victim, he or she may even find it difficult to explain

to court the delay in making the complaint. The Trial Judge, before whom

the witnesses testified, is the best person to decide on the credibility of the

victim and the other witnesses as he observed the demeanour and

deportment of the witnesses. In this case the learned trial judge in his

judgment has given careful consideration to the above aspects and also to

all the evidence adduced by the prosecution and defence at the trial.

…

In cases of sexual offences against children, victims very often find it

difficult to remember the exact date of the offence by the time they testify in

court after a long lapse.”

33] In Henry David Damith Jayawardana alias Hendry David Damith

Jayawardana vs Hon. Attorney General, CA/HCC/0431/2019, decided on

02/12/2022, His Lordship K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J.(P/CA) held;

“Child victims in sexual crimes of this nature, are often reluctant to inform

their parents or guardians about the abuse immediately unless they are

compelled to do so. Most importantly, one cannot expect a child of tender

age to keep a record of the exact date on which he/she was abused or

raped, unless there is some special significance on the date in which the

abuse took place.”

17

34] Thus, the court case is not an examination for a memory check from the

child Victim, it is for every witness and it must be assessed in totality and a

reasonable manner. After amending the indictment, just because the Victim had

said differently in the police statement, the court cannot act on these different

versions unless contradictions are marked and omissions are drawn and both

are proved in a lawful manner. The judge may not be a mere umpire, however

he sits as an adjudicator, in this adversarial system, he cannot be an

investigator by searching evidence. The Accused may have been represented by

an assigned counsel; however, they are full-fledged counsels to conduct a trial.

In the legal fraternity there may be President Counsels, seniors and juniors

(possibly inexperienced), however, in the court of law there cannot be deviation

as all are full-fledge to handle a case once they were enrolled as attorneys. In

the lower court sentencing, the learned counsel for the Accused had mentioned

that he was represented by an inexperienced junior, assigned counsel. In this

case, after amending the indictment an adequate time was given for the

preparation and therefore, one cannot say the Accused was denied a fair trial.

35]The learned Trial Judge held that the Victim PW 01 is a credible witness.

Although she was distressed in court and the absence of any apparent motive

to falsely implicate the Accused further strengthened her credibility. The

Accused’s unsworn dock statement denying the allegations and claiming that he

had been falsely implicated by the police was rejected by the learned Trial Judge.

In assessing the evidence, the Trial Court had considered the Victim’s

competency under Section 118 of the Evidence Ordinance and the formal

admissions made under Section 420 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.

15 of 1979. The learned Trial Judge held although the child gave evidence

several years’ after the incident and there were minor variations concerning the

precise date and description of the acts, the Court regarded such discrepancies

as natural in view of her tender age, lack of sexual awareness and the

substantial lapse of time. The Trial Court also found the approximately two-

month delay in reporting to be reasonably explained by the child’s fear,

innocence, confusion, the Accused’s instruction to remain silent, and the

family’s initial belief that the bleeding was menstruation as she has attained

18

puberty. The reasoning of the learned Trial Judge cannot be found fault with.

Thus, I affirm the conviction for the 2nd count.

36] For the last ground, the Appellant, alternatively pleaded that the sentence

imposed on the Accused-Appellant is excessive. I see the range for imprisonment

for grave sexual abuse is 7 years’ minimum to 20 years’ maximum. The learned

Trial Judge has imposed 15 years’ which is the upper margin. The Appellant is

a first offender and acted was a single act. I am of the view since considerable

compensation (Rs. 5,00,000/=) was imposed, he should be given a minimum

sentence. Therefore, I reduce 15 years’ imprisonment to 7 years’ imprisonment.

The other part of the sentence order of the lower court shall remain unchanged.

Further, the sentence shall run from the date of conviction, i.e. 18/09/2024.

37] Subject to the above variation of the sentence, the appeal is dismissed

without costs.

38] The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgement to the High

Court of Colombo along with the original case record for compliance.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

AMAL RANARAJA J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL