==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 10

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of Section

15 of the Judicature Act No 02 of 1978 and

Section 331 of the Code of Criminal Procedure

Act No.15 of 1979.

CA Case No: CA-HCC-317/16

HC of Colombo 8331/16

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo

Complainant – Appellant

Vs.

1. Hettiarachchi Mudiyansekage Prasad

Chandana Kumara alias Sampath

No. 54/1C, Bogahawaththa

Wellampitiya

2. Daliwala Gedara Gamini Senevirathna

Makelwela, Adikarige Waththa,

Mawanella

3. Kankanamlage Pradeep Chaminda alias

Vajira

No. 543/A, Wendala,

Ruwanwella

Page 2 of 10

4. Sivakanthan Vivekanandan alias Charan

(Tried in Absentia)

5. Fabian Royston Tussaint

(Tried in Absentia)

Accused-Respondents

Before: B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

Amal Ranaraja, J

Counsel : Suharshi Herath, DSG for the Accused- Appellant

Anuja Premaratna, PC with Nayana Dissanayake and Emal

Gunasekara, for the 2nd and 3rd Accused- Respondents

Sahan Kulatunga with Thilini Samarasekara for the 1st Respondent

Written

Submissions: 09.06.2023 and 23.01.2026(by the 2nd and 3rd Accused-Appellant)

On 30.01.2026 (by the Respondent)

Argued On : 21.01.2026

Judgment On: 26.03.2026

JUDGEMENT

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

The Accused-Respondents (hereinafter referred to as Respondents) were indicted before

the High Court of Colombo, along with the 1st Accused, Palanasami Suresh alias Sami

(who is dead), and were charged under the following counts,

Page 3 of 10

1. Conspiring to assassinate a specified person, i.e., Member of Parliament

Nadarajah Raviraj punishable under section 3 (b) read with section 2(1) (a) of the

Prevention of Terrorism Act.

2. Causing the death of a specified person, i.e., Member of Parliament Nadarajah

Raviraj, which is an offence punishable under section 2(2) (1) read with section

2(1) (a) of the Prevention of Terrorism Act.

3. Causing the death of a specified person, i.e., Police constable 30636

Lokuwellamurage Lakshman, which is an offence punishable under section 2(2)(1)

read with section 2(1)(a) of the Prevention of Terrorism Act.

4. Causing the death of Nadarajah Raviraj is punishable under section 296, read with

section 32 of the Penal Code.

5. Causing the death of Lokuwellamurage Lakshman is punishable under section 296

read with section 32 of the Penal Code.

The trial commenced when the Fourth and Fifth Respondents, namely Sivakanthan

Vivekanandan alias Charan and Fabian Royston Tussaint, were tried in absentia in

accordance with the provisions of Section 241 of the Criminal Procedure Code.

The Respondents opted for a trial by jury, and the Learned High Court Judge accordingly

made an order to that effect on 27.10.2016, and the application was duly allowed by the

Court. The trial before the special jury commenced on 22.11.2016 and continued until

24.12.2016.

At the trial, the prosecution presented evidence through 25 witnesses and marking

productions P1-P6 and thereafter closed its case. In their defence, the 2nd Respondent,

3rd Respondent, and 4th Respondent opted to make dock statements. The Defense also

led the evidence of one witness, Nilantha Layawardana.

Upon conclusion of the trial, the Respondents were found not guilty of all charges on a

unanimous verdict of the jury. Thereupon, the Learned High Court Judge acquitted all

the Respondents of all the charges against them.

Being aggrieved by the said conviction and the sentence, the Appellant, Honorable

Attorney General, has preferred an appeal before this Court, contending that the Learned

High Court Judge misdirected the jury, or that the directions given were inadequate.

Page 4 of 10

The facts and circumstances of this case are as follows,

The case for the prosecution rests mainly on the evidence of PW1, suspended Police

Constable Preethi Viraja. It should be noted that he was granted a conditional pardon

under Section 256 (1) of the Criminal Procedure Code.

According to the witness, while serving in the Kalutara Police College, Eastern Region,

under the Deputy Inspector General of Police, he was engaged in operations against the

LTTE. During that period, he identified the first accused and maintained a friendship

with him thereafter. Subsequently, upon being transferred to the Presidential Security

Division under a Superior Police Superintendent, he established good relations with the

4th Respondent and the 5th Respondent. On 09th November, since he is skilled as a

motorcyclist, the first accused instructed him to come near the Gangaramaya Temple. At

that location, the witness stated that the 1st Respondent, 2nd Respondent, and 3rd

Respondent were present. Where the witness observed that the 2nd Respondent was

carrying a black bag. The 1st Accused then informed the witness that they intended to

capture an LTTE leader and asked whether he was willing to participate where the

witness expressed his consent. Following this, the 1st Accused provided him with a

motorcycle and instructed him to come to the Borella Cemetery at 6:00 a.m. the next

morning.

Upon their advice, on November 10, the witness proceeded near Kitulwatta Road and

contacted the 1st Accused, who arrived in a three-wheeler. Inside the vehicle were three

to four individuals, including the 4th Respondent, the 5th Respondent, and another person

named Nishantha. Later, another three-wheeler, green and cream in color, arrived

carrying the 1st and 3rd Respondents. The 1st Respondent then advised the witness that

the LTTE leader was expected to come from Matha Road, and following this, the witness

was instructed to accompany the shooter to the intelligence unit near Gangaramaya

Temple.

Then, the witness proceeded to Matha Road, where a motorcycle had been parked on the

left side approximately 40–50 meters away. While the witness was positioned on Matha

Road, he heard a gunshot from behind. Turning around, he saw a red jeep coming from

Matha Road towards Baseline Road. The 2nd Respondent then fired at the jeep for a short

period of time, approximately two minutes. According to the witness, a burst of gunfire

was discharged from the black bag, after which the 2nd Respondent got into the witness’s

motorbike. Although the witness did not see the weapon directly, based on the sound, he

Page 5 of 10

identified it as a T-56 firearm. The 2nd Respondent then said, “Let’s go,” and they

proceeded to the office near Gangaramaya.

The witness stated that he handed over the motorcycle to the 2nd Respondent and noted

that the shooting began at around 8:00 a.m. Afterwards, he went to Temple Trees, where

he learned that Member of Parliament Nadarajah Raviraja had been shot in Narahenpita.

On the following morning, at approximately 10:30 a.m., the witness went to the

Intelligence Unit, where the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd Respondents were present. When he

inquired about the incident, they told him that it was part of their superior duties and

instructed him to mind his own business and not to tell anyone. The witness further stated

that he saw the motorcycle being cut into pieces.

Upon conclusion of the trial, the learned High Court Judge, in his charge to the jury,

invited them to consider the evidence of PW1, who is an accomplice.

The principal grievance advanced by learned counsel for the State was that the trial

Judge, in his charge to the jury, failed to emphasize the importance of the evidence of PW-

1 and to instruct the jury on the proper manner in which the testimony of an accomplice

should be considered. It is pertinent to refer to that portion of the charge to the jury, which

was specifically invited for consideration.

Page 1278 of the brief,

“ඔහුට කකොන්කේසි සහිත සමොවක් දීකමන් පසුව ඔහු පැමිණිල්කල් පළකවනි සොක්ිකරු වශකෙන් නම්

කර එම සොක්ිෙ මත පැමිණිල්ල නඩුව ඉදිරිෙට කෙනෙලො තිකෙනවො. දැන් අප සහොෙකකෙකුකේ

සොක්ිකෙන් වලංගුතොවෙ අප පරීක්ෂො කලයුතුෙ. ඔහු ස්වොධීන සොක්ිකරුකවක්ද? ඒක ඔෙ තීරණෙ

කරන්න ඕන. ඔෙලො තමයි සිේිෙ සම්ෙන්ධකෙන් සිේිමෙ කරුණු සම්ෙන්ධකෙන් අවසොන විනිශ්චෙ

ෙන්කන්. කමම සොක්ිකරුකේ සොක්ිෙ ඔෙට පිළිෙත හැකිද? ඒක ඔහු සොක්ි දුන්න විලොශෙ හරස් ප්‍රශ්ණ

වලට මුහුන දුන්න ආකොරෙ ඔහුකේ සොක්ිකේදී ලකුණු කර ඇති පරස්පර විකරෝධතො ඒවො සැලකිල්ලට

කෙන සිෙ සිෙලු කදනො තීරණෙ කල යුතුයි ඔහුකේ විශ්වොෂනීෙභොවෙ සම්ෙන්ධකෙන්. සොක්ි ආඥො

පනකේ 133 වන වෙන්තිෙ ෙටකේ අපසහෙකකෙක් සම්ෙන්ධකෙන් කමකහම කිෙලො තිකෙනවො.

අපරොධ සහොෙකකෙකු කචෝදනො ලැෙ සිටින තැනැේකතකුට විරුේධව සොක්ි දීමට සුදුසු සොක්ිකරුකවකු

විෙ යුතුයි. ෙකමකු වරදකරු ෙැව් ඔප්පු වීම අපරොධ සහොෙකෙකුකේ තහවුරු කනොකල සොක්ිකෙන් පැන

නැගී ඇති පමනින් නීති විකරෝධී කනොකව්. ඒ සොක්ි ආඥො පනකේ 133 වන වෙන්තිෙ. කචෝදනොවක් ලෙො

සිටින තැනැේකතකු සම්ෙන්ධකෙන් අප සහොෙකකෙකු සොක්ි දීකමන් එෙ එකී සොක්ිෙ කවනේ සොක්ි

වලින් වුකනොේ කවනේ සොක්ි වලින් තහවුරු කනොකර එම සොක්ි මත ක්‍රිෙො කිරීම නිති විකරෝධී කනොවන

ෙව 133 වන වෙන්තිකේ දක්වලො තිකෙනවො.”

Page 6 of 10

Page 1279 of the brief,

“114 වෙන්තිකේ ආ නිදර්ශනෙ ප්‍රකොරව සැලකිෙ යුතු කරුණු වලදී ඔහුකේ සොක්ි තහවුරු කරනු

ලැබුවකහොේ මිස කනොඑකස් නම් අපරොධ සහොෙකකෙකුකේ සොක්ි විශ්වොෂ කිරීම සුදුසු කනොවන ෙව ඒ

අනුව පැ.සො.1 කේ සොක්ිෙ සැලකිෙ යුතු කරුණු වලදී තහවුරු කරනු ලැබුවකහොේ මිස කනොඑකස් නම්

අපරොධ සහොෙකෙකුකේ සොක්ි විශ්වොෂ කිරීමට සුදුසු කනොවන ෙව ඔෙ සැලකිල්ලට ෙත යුතුයි. එෙේ

සිේදීමෙ සම්ෙන්දකෙන් කරුණක් ඔෙ එම කරුණ විශ්කල්ෂනෙ කර ඒ සම්ෙන්ධකෙන් තිරණෙක් ෙත

යුතුයි. තව ප්‍රශ්නෙක් මතු වුනො නඩුවක් ඔප්පු කරන්න සිේිෙක් ඔප්පු කරන්න සොක්ිකරුවන් කී

කදකනක් අවශයද? සොක්ිකරුවන් කමපමනක් අවශය කිෙො නීතිකේ කකොයි කව්ලොවකවේ නිෙම කරලො

නැහැ. එක් සොක්ිකරුකවක් වුනේ ඔහුකේ සොක්ිෙ අිකරණෙකට පිලි ෙන්න ුලුවන් නම් එම

සොක්ිකරු වුවද ප්‍රමොණවේ. පැමිණිල්ලට ෙල කිරීමක් නැහැ නැේනම් පැමිණිල්ලට භොරෙට නැහැ අි

කචෝදනො පත්‍රකේ නම් කරන ලද සිෙලුම සොක්ිකරුවන් සොක්ිෙට ඉදිරිපේ කිරීමට. ඒක පැමිණිල්ල

කමකහෙවන නීතිඥවරෙො අකේ ඒක තිකෙන්කන්. තවේ ප්‍රශ්ණෙක් තිකෙනවො විශ්වොෂනීෙ භොවකේ

කකොටස් කිෙන එක. විකශ්ෂකෙන් පලකවනි සොක්ිකරු සමහර කකොටස් සතය ෙවට ඔෙ පිළිෙන්න

ුලුවන්.”

It should be noted that a competent witness against an accused person, and a conviction

is not illegal merely because it proceeds upon the uncorroborated testimony of an

accomplice (vide Section 133 of the Evidence Ordinance). In the instant case, there is a

witness who saw the incident, although he was unable to identify the Respondents.

Section 114(b) provides that the Court may presume that an accomplice is unworthy of

credit unless the accomplice is corroborated in material particulars.

This concept was discussed in The Law of Evidence, Volume II (Book 2), E.R.S.R.

Coomaraswamy, at page 650;

The main rule

“ A conviction is not illegal merely because it proceeds upon the uncorroborated

testimony of an accomplice. But the court may presume that an accomplice is

unworthy of credit, unless he is corroborated in material particular. To give an

illustrative case, M was charged with murder by pouring arsenic into toddy, which

he afterwards gave the deceased to drink.

The case for the Crown rested almost entirely on the evidence of P, who testified

that he was present and watched M pouring arsenic into the bottle that contained

the toddy. The defence was that it was P who administered the poison. The

Page 7 of 10

evidence of P was found to be full of infirmities. The judge asked the jury to

consider whether P was an accomplice; but his summing-up did not contain any

detailed examination of his evidence with particular reference to the infirmities in

it. Apart from the evidence of P, the evidence against M was of a purely

circumstantial nature amounting merely to suspicion.

The conviction was quashed.” (emphasis added)

In W.M.M. Kumarihami, Chief Registrar v. Galagamage Indrawansa Kumarasiri and

others, SC.TAB appeal No. 02/2012, Decided on 02.04.2014, Shiranee Thilakawardhane J

held that:

“The definition of an accomplice in Sri Lankan law, as accepted by the Courts,

clearly indicates that an accomplice must demonstrate common intent and

knowingly unite with the principal offender to commit the crime but excludes the

mere presence of witnesses in the vicinity of the scene from coming within this

definition.

However, for the purpose of answering this question of law fully, let us assume

that the Witnesses come within the definition of an „Accomplice‟. The question

posed to us is whether evidence proceeding from an accomplice must be

corroborated and verified by an independent source.

In this regard, reference is made to Section 133 of the Evidence Ordinance which

states that ―

“An accomplice shall be a competent witness against an accused

person, and a conviction is not illegal merely because it proceeds upon

the uncorroborated testimony of an accomplice.”

While Section 133 makes it clear that the uncorroborated evidence of an accomplice is

acceptable, this section must be read in conjunction with Section 114(b) of the Evidence

Ordinance, which states as follows:

“An accomplice is unworthy of credit, unless he is corroborated in material

particulars”.

Page 8 of 10

These statutory provisions, read together, create a conundrum of sorts, leading to the

conclusion that the creditworthiness of an accomplice is dependent upon whether his

evidence, in material particulars, is corroborated by another source, whereas a conviction

based solely on the uncorroborated evidence of an accomplice is not illegal. Yet, such a

conviction would undoubtedly be a dangerous and unsafe one. Thus, it is within the

purview of the Courts to consider the creditworthiness of each accomplice, apply their

mind and search for cogent and conclusive factors that satisfy them that the accomplice

is, in fact, reliable, if they are to convict solely on his evidence.

This sentiment was encapsulated succinctly in the Queen v. Liyanage and Others (1962)

(67 NLR 193), which stated the following with regard to corroborative evidence:

“In the case of fellow conspirators or accomplices the established practice, virtually

equivalent to a rule of law, requires independent corroboration of their evidence,

in material particulars. What is required is some additional evidence, direct or

circumstantial, rendering it probable that the accomplice's story is true and

reasonably safe to act upon, and connecting or tending to connect the particular

defendant with the offence. The degree of suspicion attaching to an accomplice's

evidence varies according to the extent and nature of his complicity."

In the case of Sudu Aiya And Others Vs The Attorney- General 2005 1 SLR, Page No –

358 At Page 371: Hector Yapa,J. held that:

“If one were to accept Ratnayake's evidence as trustworthy, then his evidence alone

would be sufficient to establish the guilt of the 1st, 2nd and 3rd accused in respect

of the four counts in the indictment. However, in evaluating Ratnayake's evidence,

he being an accomplice and one who has been granted a pardon, it would be

necessary to examine his evidence in the light of the nature and extent of

corroborative evidence available in the case. In the leading case of R vs

Baskervill reference was made with regard to the nature of corroboration required

in relation to the evidence of an accomplice. The relevant passage reads as follows"

The corroboration required must be independent testimony which affects the

accused by connecting or tending to connect him with the crime. In other words, it

must be evidence which implicates him, i.e., which confirms in some material

particulars not only the evidence that the crime has been committed, but also that

Page 9 of 10

the prisoner committed it. The corroboration need not be direct evidence that he

committed the crime ; it is sufficient if it is merely circumstantial evidence of his

connection with it. Nor is it necessary that the accomplice should be confirmed in

every detail of his evidence ; if it were, his evidence would be merely confirmatory

of the independent testimony and would not be essential to the case." This position

was accepted and followed in the Case of Queen vs Liyanage. The important

consideration when looking for corroboration is that, the complete story need not

be corroborated, but what the law requires is corroboration in some material

particulars so that a court could act on that evidence as being reliable. In other

words what is necessary is some additional evidence direct or circumstantial,

rendering it probable that the accomplice's story is true and reasonably safe to act

upon, and such evidence has the effect of connecting or tending to connect the

particular accused with the crime.”

I hold that the learned High Court Judge failed, in his charge to the jury, to direct them

to properly consider the evidence of PW-1 and the sequence of events connected thereto.

It is also noted that the learned Judge commenced charging the jury at around 8.50 p.m.,

despite both counsel having moved for an adjournment. There was no necessity to address

the jury on that particular day. Nevertheless, the Judge continued his charge until 11.00

p.m. and thereafter directed the jury to retire and deliver their verdict.

The verdict was delivered at 12.50 a.m., which is highly unusual. I hold that the learned

High Court Judge did not properly direct the jury with regard to the evidence of PW-1,

who was an accomplice.

Upon analyzing the evidence of PW-1, who is an accomplice, it is evident that there is

sufficient material to establish the case against the Respondents and the Accused. In

these circumstances, I am inclined to agree with the submission of the learned Deputy

Solicitor General that there was a non-direction on the part of the learned High Court

Judge, in failing to properly guide the jury with regard to the evidentiary value of

accomplice testimony.

For the reasons set out above, the acquittal entered in favor of the Respondents is hereby

set aside. I accordingly direct the learned High Court Judge to commence a fresh trial.

Page 10 of 10

I order a retrial against the Respondents.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Amal Ranaraja J,

I AGREE

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL