IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

e.A.(PHC)Appeal No. 71/2014

P.H.e. Trincomalee Case

No. 207/2010 (Rev)

M.e. Trincomalee Case

No. 19726/209

In the matter of an ApEeal against

the judgment by the Provincial High

Court Trincomalee in terms of Article

No.138 & 139 of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist of Sri Lanka.

Jayapalan Iruthayamarie

No.12G8/1, Palaiyoothu,

Trincomalee.

Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant

Vs.

Urban Development Authority,

"Sethsiripaya" ,

Sri Jayawardenapura, Kotte,

Battaraumlla.

Petitioner-Respondent- Respondent

BEFORE

COUNSEL

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS

TENDERED ON

DECICED ON

JANAK DE SILVA,J. & ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

N. P. Ganeshwaran for the Respondent-

Petitioner-Appellant

Ishan Ratnapala 5C for the Petitioner-

Respondent-Respondent.

01-11-2018( by the respondent)

01st March, 2019

*************

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

The Applicant-Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as

the "Respondent") made an application under Section 28A(3) of the Urban

Development Authority Act No. 41 of 1978 seeking an order of demolition

and his entitlement to recover the cost of demolition against the

Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

"Appellant") upon her failure to comply with a direction under Section

28A(1).

After an inquiry by the Magistrate's Court of Trincomalee into the

said application under case No. 19726/5/2009, an order of demolition was

issued on 19.04.2010, as prayed for by the Respondent. The Appellant

2

sought to set aside the said order by invoking revisionary jurisdiction of

the Provincial High Court of the Eastern Province holden in Trincomalee

under Case No. HCT/Rev /207/2010.

At the conclusion of the inquiry before the Provincial High Court,

the Appellant's application was dismissed by the order dated 31.07.2014

after affirming the order of the Magistrate's Court.

Being aggrieved by the said order of dismissal, the Appellant now

seeks to set it aside by invoking appellate jurisdiction of this Court.

The Appellant, having obtained her copy of the appeal brief upon . noticed by this Court, was represented on the date of hearing of her

appeal. Since the order of the Magistrate's Court was made in Tamil

language, the Appellant was directed to provide an English translation,

which she did on 09.10.2018, in compliance of the said direction of Court.

When this appeal was taken up for hearing on 12.12.2018, the parties

indicated their willingness to dispose the matter on written submissions

and the Appellant was directed to tender her written submissions on or

before 31.01.2019 since the appeal was fixed for judgment today.

However, the Appellant thereafter opted not to file any written

submissions in support of her appeal.

Nevertheless this Court would consider whether there is any merit

in the appeal of the Appellant.

It appears that her position before the Provincial High Court is the

Respondent has failed to annex the Gazette by which the development

area of Trincomalee has been demarcated. Due to this failure it was

3

contended by the Appellant that the Respondent has failed to establish the

property on which the disputed development work was carried out is in

fact located within the development area of Trincomalee.

The Provincial High Court, having considered the complaint of the

Appellant, taken note of the sketch by which the Respondent has clearly

shown the illegal construction on the premises bearing assessment No.

1208/1, Palaiyuthu, Trincomalee, which was located within the development

area and thereafter proceeded to dismiss the revision application. The

Court ruled that the Magistrate's Court could take judicial notice of the

Gazette by which the development area of Trincomalee was declared. In

coming to the said conclusion, the Provincial High Court relied on the

reasoning of the judgment in Arumugam v Range Forest Office, Deniyaya

(1986) 2 Sri L.R. 398 where it was held that:-

" ... it is not necessary that notification should be

tendered as exhibits in the case for the Court has to

take judicial notice of them".

In fact, the Gazette No. 690/3 of 26.11.1991 by which the

demarcation of the development area of Trincomalee was tendered to the

Provincial High Court by the Respondent, annexed to his objections,

marked as R4.

In view of the above considerations, we are of the opinion that the

appeal of the Appellant is without any merit and therefore ought to be

dismissed.

4

We affirm the orders of the Courts below and make further order

dismissing the appeal of the Appellant with costs fixed at Rs. 25,000.00.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JANAK DE SILVA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

5