IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI , LANKA /

Sinnundu'rayalage Somawathie, ,

Pethigammana.

Claimant-Petitioner-Appellant

C.A.No.559/93 IF)

D.C.Kegalle No.658/L. Vs.

Talgaspitiye Galkaduwegedara Ranie,

Pethigammana. ( now deceased)

Plaintiff-Respondent

-Respondent

Paranadurayalage Dharmadasa,

Pethigammana,

Hemmathagama,

Kegalle.

Substituted-Plaintiff- Respondent

Before Hon. Justice A.L.Shiran Gooneratne

Hon. Justice Mahinda Samayawardhena

Counsel

Argued and

Decided on

Shantha Karunadhara for the Petitioner-Appellant. . ;

Synil Abeyratne with Lakmali Algama for the Respondent.

" 20/11/ 2019

Han. Justice Mahinda Samayawardhena

The learned Counsel for the Claimant - Petitioner - Appellant and the learned

Counsel for the Substituted- Plaintiff- Respondent were heard.

This appeal has been filed by the Appellant against the order of the District Court

dated 11/ 10/ 1993.

The Original Plaintiff has filed this action in the District Court against the

Defendant seeking declaration of title to the land described in the schedule to the

plaint, ejectment of the Defendant therefrom and damages. The Defendant has filed the

answer seeking dismissal of the Plaintiffs action. After trial, the learned District Judge

by Judgment dated 01/03/1990 held with the Plaintiff. The Defendant has not filed an

appeal against the said Judgment.

The Appellant is the wife of the Defendant. The learned Counsel for the

Appellant admits that they lived with their children as a family in the said land during

the material time to this action.

2

When the fiscal went to the land to execute th~ writ on 11/09/1990, the

Defendant being the Ju,tlgment - Debtor has given ~n undertaking to the fiscal that he

would vacate the land on or before 11/10/1990.

, Thereafter, the Appellant has made an application to the District Court dated

19/09/1990 seeking not to execute the writ.

However, writ has been executed on 23/11/1990.

The Appellant has made another application dated 26/11/1990 seeking agai/not

to execute the writ and to allow the Appellant to continue in possession of the land.

Thereafter, the Plaintiff being the Judgment - Creditor has filed an application

dated 30/11/1990 under Section 325 of the Civil Procedure Code seeking to restore the

Plaintiff in possession on the basis that the Defendant together with his family forcibly

re-entered the land soon after the execution of the writ.

Learned Counsel for both parties inform Court that both these applications were

taken up together and an inquiry was held before the District Court.

After the inquiry, the impugned order dated 11/10/1993 has been made

whereby predominantly the application of the Appellant has been dismissed.

3

It is not stated under which Section of the Civil Procedure Code, the Appellant

made the application dated 26/11/1990 to the District Court. The reliefs prayed for in

. i

that application are also misleading. The reliefs have been sought on the basis that the

/

decree had not been executed, whereas, by that time, admittedly, the writ had been

, executed and the Appellant ivad been ejected.

Upon inquiry, learned Counsel for the Appellant informs Court that the said

application was made under Section 839 of the Civil Procedure Code. That argument

cannot be accepted as that Section can be invoked provided there is no express

provision in the Civil Procedure Code to remedy the situation. In any event, there is no

at least a clue that the said application was made under Section 839 of the Civil

Procedure Code. However, the learned Counsel for the appellant now admits that the

correct Section under which the Appellant could have made that application was

Section 328 of the Civil Procedure Code. Then it is clear that Section 839 has no

application.

If that application should be considered as an application made under Section

328 of the Civil Procedure Code, there is no right of appeal in terms of Section 329 of

the Civil Procedure Code against the impugned order dated 11/10/1993. Therefore, the

final appeal filed against the impugned order is bad in law, and on that ground alone,

this appeal shall be dismissed. No final appeal can be filed against an order made after

such claim inquiry.

4

The learned District Judge has dismissed the Appellant's application on merits.

The Appellant relies on two deeds marked at the inquiry as P1 and P2. . ;

The learned COllnsel for the Respondent po,ints out that the Appellant's deed

marked P1 has been executed about 15 years after the institution of this action. , The Counsel for both parties are in agreement that the predecessor in title of the

Appellant is one Hatana ,and the predecessor in title of the Plaintiff is one Kiriukkuwa.

The learned Counsel for the Respondent draws the attention of the Court to the

evidence of the Appellant at page 154 of the original appeal brief wherein the Appellant

in her evidence has admitted that the land in suit, is the land of Kiriukkuwa, and

Hatana's land lies to the South of the land in suit.

The learned counsel for the Respondent informs Court that there appears to be

two lands by the same name, Wagolle Hena.

The learned District Judge has dismissed the application of the Appellant on the

basis that the deeds which were relied upon by the Appellant are not relevant to the

land in suit.

If the Appellant had some rights to the land in suit, she could have either

intervened in the main action or at least produced those deeds at the main trial through

her husband who was the defendant in this case.

I must stress that the findings which the learned District Judge have made in the

impugned order are not conclusive in so far as th e substantive rights of the parties are

5

WC/-

concerned. As it is stated in Section 329 of the Civil Procedure Code, the impugned

order made after the claim inquiry shall not bar the right of the Appellant to institute

an action to establish her right or title to the said land.

;'

. }

For the aforesaid reasons, the appeal is dismissed, but without costs.

, The learned Counsel for the Respondent draws the attention of this Court to the

journal entry No. 87 dated 15/ 10/ 1993 wherein the learned District Judge whilst

dismissing the Appellant's application, has ordered to eject the Appellant, and to

deliver possession of the land to the Plaintiff. The learned District Judge is directed to

comply with the said order.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Hon. Justice A.l.Shiran Gooneratne

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

6