f

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

CA Appeal No. 346/97 (F)

Wagoda Pathirage Siripala

Of No. 196,Ganegoda

Elpitiya.

PLAINTIFF

D.C. Balapitiya Case No. 785/L Vs

1

Kariyawasam Indipalage Nandisena

Of Ganegoda, Elpitiya.

DEFENDANT

NOW

Kariyawasam Indipalage Nandisena

Of Ganegoda, Elpitiya.

DEFENDANT - APPELLANT

Vs

Wagoda Pathirage Siripala

Of No. 196, Ganegoda,

Elpitiya.

PLAINTIFF - RESPONDENT

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

DECIDED ON

Deepali Wijesundera J.

: Deepali Wijesundera J.

M.M.A. Gaffoor J.

: Rohan Sahabandu PC for the

Defendant - Appellant

Dr. Sunil Cooray for the

Plaintiff - Respondent.

: 21 st May, 2015

: 11th March, 2016

The plaintiff respondent has filed a case against the defendant

appellant in the District Court Balapitiya seeking a declaration of title to

the land described in the schedule to the plaint on the basis that the

defendant was holding the said property on a trust. The plaintiff has

claimed that the land was transferred by deed no. 404 dated 08/04/1982

to the defendant to obtain a loan of Rs. 10,0001= and that the defendant

promised to retransfer the property to him. The defendant claimed the

deed was an outright transfer and that the property was not held in trust

by him. After trial the learned District Judge has delivered the judgment

in favour of the plaintiff respondent. Being aggrieved by the said

judgment the appellant has filed this appeal against it.

2

The learned counsel for the appellant argued the issues of the

plaintiff were on trust, laesio enormis and unjust enrichment and that the

District Judge after trial held that there was a trust, unjust enrichment

and that the principal of iaesio inormis too applied and that these causes

of action are not pleaded in the alternative and under the law laesio

anormis and unjust enrichment can not co-exist with a trust.

The appellant stated that in a trust, one has to accept the deed as

valid and lawful and that the title in law is with him, and in an unjust

enrichment the plaintiff has to accept that there was a valid transfer and

though it is a valid transfer he has been enriched by that transfer and in

laesio enormis to the plaintiff has to admit ownership had been

transferred but for a lesser consideration. He further stated that in the

instant case the plaintiff knew the value of the land therefore he can not

plead laesio enormis. He cited the judgment in Fernando vs Fernando

19 NLR 210 and said that trust, laisio enormis and unjust enrichment

can not be pleaded together. The appellant submitted that on this issue

the learned District Judge has failed to appreciate the legal principle

involved and a great miscarriage of justice has been caused, to the

appellant.

3

The appellant stated that in terms of Sec. 91 and 92 of the

Evidence Ordinance a person is prevented from leading evidence to

convert pleadings to a different character, therefore no evidence could

be led to prove that the plaintiffs case was a mortgage.

The appellant further stated that the plaintiff mentioned a non-

notarial document marked P12 which he claimed was an agreement

entered into by the parties which is not a valid legal document under

Sec. 2 of the Prevention of Frauds Ordinance.

Citing the judgment in Samujan vs Thanmbaiyah 1899-2-151 he

stated that there can not be a trust and after the lapse of the period in

the conditional transfer there can not be an action founded on the

conditional transfer and the plaintiff is precluded in seeking a declaration

on trust.

The learned counsel for the plaintiff respondent submitted that in

the District Court the documents produced by them were not objected to

by the appellant thereby making them admitted as evidence. He stated

at the time of the exclusion of the said deed the land in dispute was

subject to a two year lease agreement (deed no. 29686). This has not

4

been mentioned in deed no. 404 the respondent stated that if it was an

outright purchase this lease agreement would have been mentioned in

the said deed.

The respondent stated that the possession of the land transferred

was never handed over to the appellant, and that the appellant never

took up the position that when P1 was executed he took over

possession of the land.

The respondent further submitted that the consideration paid for

the land was much less than its market value in terms of the report

marked P25. The respondent stated the timber found in this land was

much more valuable than the consideration paid for the land.

On perusal of the judgment of the learned District Judge of

8alapitiya it can be said that it is a well-considered judgment. The

District Judge has carefully analysed the evidence and documents

placed before him and arrived at his findings.

When the legal issues taken up by the appellant on misjoinder of

causes of action is considered, the appellant had taken this up in the

5

District Court and the objection was refused and the appellant had not

challenged this order of the District Court in revision but merely

proceeded to trial on the same issues. On perusal of the judgment and

the submissions made one can not say there is a misjoinder of issues.

The argument of the respondent was that by taking over possession of

the said land by the appellant which was transferred for a very less

amount of the actual value the respondent has become unjustifiably

rich. The respondent claimed it was a trust that he did not intend to

transfer the land to the appellant which he has said in evidence as well.

Therefore the appellant can not say the District Judge has erred when

he said there is a trust and well as unjust enrichment. These two have

gone hand in hand in the instant case. Therefore appellant's argument

on this issue has failed.

I

The statement given to the police by Panis Singho shows that the

appellant had forcibly entered into the premises. If it was an outright

transfer he would have taken possession of the land then and there

without waiting for so long to take over possession this evidence have

been considered by the District Judge in his Judgment.

The appellant argued that the respondent had waited and for a

long time to seek a declaration on trust and he is precluded by law to do

6

so. This is not correct the respondent has filed an action against the

appellant in July 1983 soon after one year from the execution of deed

no. 404.

On considering the amount paid for the said land which is situated

by the side of a main road it is apparent the transfer has been on a trust

and not an outright sale, this has been considered in the District Court

judgment.

For the afore stated reasons I decide that the learned District

Judge has come to the correct finding after carefully analyzing the

evidence and documents placed before him.

I affirm the judgment dated 24/04/1997 of the District Court of

8alapitiya and dismiss the appeal with costs fixed at Rs. 50,0001=.

M.M.A. Gaffoor J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

7

I

ft

I

I