,

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

~ ______ SO_C __ IA_L_IS_T __ R_E_PU __ BL_I_C_O_F __ SR __ I LA __ N_KA ________ ~U

C.A. Case No.710, 711, 712/1999 (F)

D.C. Gampaha Case No. 19077/P

I. Henarath Mohottige Noris Perera (Deceased)

of Henahatta, Biyagama,

Malwana.

2. Kumarapeli Arachchige Luwisanona

of Henahatta, Biyagama,

Malwana.

PLAINTIFFS

lAo Henarath Mohottige Magilin Nona

IB. Henarath Mohottige Juliet Perera

IC. Henarath Mohottige Albert Perera

ID. Henarath Mohottige Albert Perera

All of Biayagama, Malwana.

SUBSTITUTED PLAINTIFFS

~Vs~

1. Kariyawasam Gamage Piyasena

2. Kumarapeli Arachchige Emis

and 22 others

DEFENDANTS

AND

1. Kariyawasam Gamage Piyasena

1

BEFORE

COUNSEL

Decided on

21. Panapitiyage Dona Baby Nona

1st and 2IstDEFENDANT~APPELIANTS

1. Henarath Mohottige Noris Perera (Deceased)

2. Kumarapeli Arachchige Luwisanona (Deceased)

lAo Henarath Mohottige Magilin Nona

IE. Henarath Mohottige Juliet Perera

IC. Henarath Mohottige Albert Perera

ID. Henarath Mohottige Albert Perera

All of Biayagarna, Malwana.

DEFENDANT~RESPONDENTS

A.H.M.D. Nawaz,j.

Ranjan Suwandaratne for SA and 18th Defendant ~ Appellant.

Birnal Rajapakse with Arnrit Rajapakse and Muditha Perera for the Appellant in C.A.71l/1999 and for the Respondent in C.A. 710/99.

M.U.M. Ali Sabry, P.C. with Shehani Alwis and Nuwan S. Bopage for the 10th and 13th Defendant~ Appellants.

Gamini Prernatilake with Ranjith Henrey for the 3rd and 4A Defendant~Respondents.

B. Manawadu for the 2A and 2E Defendant Respondents.

16.11.2018

2

ORDER ON THE PRELIMINARY QUESTION

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J. T

he quintessential question that demands an initial consideration in this case is

whether the non-registration of a lis pendens in respect of a larger land brought in by

the 3rd and 4th Defendant-Respondents in this case would invalidate the judgment

rendered by the learned Additional District Judge of Gampaha on 13.08.1999. The

argument of Counsel before me mainly focused on the question of failure to register the

lis pendens and Counsel for Appellants in CA 711/99 and Respondents in CA 710/99 and

CA 712/99 argued quite strenuously that it is a "fundamental vice" (an expression used by

Justice Soza in Somawathie v. Madawela (1983) 2 Sri.LR 15) if lis pendens has not been

registered.

In order to understand the rival arguments of Counsel whether the non-registration of

the larger land brought up by the 3rd and 4th Defendants would vitiate the judgment

dated 13.08.1999 and set it at naught, let me give a conspectus of the facts in the case.

The original Plaintiffs sought to partition a land called and known as "Millagahawatu",

which was in an extent of 12 bushels paddy sowing-see the plaint dated 07.12.1976 and its

schedule at pages 109 and 113 of the appeal brief.

The three Petitions of Appeal that have been filed by different parties in this case call in

question the corpus that should be partitioned and divided among the parties. The

contest among the Appellants is the identification of the corpus. What is the land that is

the subject matter of the action?

The Plaintiff-Appellant (hereinafter sometimes referred to as "the Plaintiff") instituted

this action to partition a land called "Millagahawatte" in extent 12 bushels paddy sowing

area, which is more fully described in the schedule to the plaint, among the parties in

terms of the devolution as set out in the plaint. After the action was filed, a commission

was issued to one D.A.F. Yapa, licensed Surveyor, whose Preliminary Plan No.546 dated

3

12.06.1977 and the Report have been filed of record marked 'X' and 'Xl' respectively.

According to this plan, the actual extent of the corpus is 5 Acres 1 Rood and 6 Perches,

which is almost equal to 12 bushels paddy sowing area.

Thereafter the 3rd and 4 th Defendant~ Respondents (hereinafter sometimes referred to as

"3rd and 4th Defendants") filed their amended statement of claim and moved for a

corrunission upon which a plan bearing No.1089 and dated 25.09.1979 and its

corresponding report prepared by one KG. Hubert Perera, licensed Surveyor have been

filed. According to this plan (3V2), the land is divided into 8 Lots and the full extent is 10

Acres 2 Roods and 35.4 Perches. This plan contains an extent of a land with an addition

of about 5 acres.

The 3rd and 4th Defendants claimed that the extent of the corpus which should be

partitioned must be Lots 1 to 8 as depicted in Plan No.1089. The 3rd and 4th Defendants

are the only parties who wanted the larger land to be the corpus. On a mere comparison

of both these plans and the Plan of the Survey~General bearing No. Gam/misc./83/1O, it is

markedly clear that only Lots 1 and 2 in Plan 1089 corresponds to Lots 1 and 2 in Plan No.

546.

The 18th Defendant~Appeliant (hereinafter sometimes referred to as "the 18th Defendant")

and the 19th Defendant~ Respondent (hereinafter sometimes referred to as "the 19th

Defendant") in their statement of claim state that Lot 4 in Plan No.1089 is a part of the

land called "Delgahawatta Lots A, Band e" and they claim that it devolved on the parties

as set out in the statement of claim of the deceased 5th Defendant. The deceased 5th

Defendant claimed that Lot 4 in Plan No.1089 should be excluded. This position is agreed

to by 5(a) and 18th Defendants.

Having regard to the issues raised by all the parties, it would appear that the main

contest between the parties is centered around the extent and identification of the

corpus. As stated above the main contest is whether the corpus is the land depicted in

Plan No.546 or it is the land depicted in Plan No.1089, as claimed by the 3rd and 4th

Defendants. Both Mr. Ranjan Suwandaratne for the Sa and 18th Defendant~Appellant and

4

Bimal Rajapakse with Amrit Rajapakse and Muditha Perera for the Appellant in c.A.

711/1999 and for the Respondent in c.A. 710/99 argued that the judgment dated

13.08.1999 must be set aside for non/registration of lis pendens. Mr. Nuwan Bopage for the

10th and 13th Defendant/Appellant contended to the same effect.

Contrary arguments on this issue were made by Mr. Gamini Prematilleke, Mr.

Manawadu and Mr. David Weeraratne. No argument on the merits took place.

This order is made on that preliminary question. On the question of failure to register lis

pendens, it is undeniable that the subsequent plan 3V2 bearing No.1089 shows an increase

in extent/namely about 10 acres but it has to be pointed out that the boundaries in the

2nd plan tally with the boundaries given in the plaint, whereas the boundaries given in

the preliminary plan do not tally at all with the boundaries given in the plaint. If all the

boundaries in the later plan 3V2 are the same as in the plaint, it must be taken that the

land described in the plaint has been surveyed correctly in the later plan. Ms. Shehani

Alwis who appeared for the 10th and 13th Defendant/Appellants quite strenuously argued

that though the 3rd and 4th Defendant/Respondents brought in the larger land, they had

not caused a registration of a lis pendens for the larger land and on that score the failure to

register that instrument must necessarily result in a setting aside of the interlocutory

decree. The Counsel cited Kanagasabai v. Velupillai 54 N.L.R 241 ; Uberis v. M W

Jayawardena 62 N.L.R 217; and Soyza v. Silva (2000) 2 Sri.LR 235.

Needless to say, Section 19(2)(a) of the Partition Law No.21 of 1977 also prOvides for the

following: /

a) Where a defendant seeks to have a larger land than that sought to be partitioned

by the plaintiff made the subject/matter of the action in order to obtain a decree

for the partition or sale of such larger land under the provisions of this Law, his

statement of claim shall include a statement of the particulars required by section

4 in respect of such larger land; and he shall comply with the requirements of

section 5, as if his statement of claim were a plaint under this Law in respect of

such larger land.

5

b) Where any defendant seeks to have a larger land made the subject~matter of the

action as provided in paragraph (a) of this subsection, the court shall specify the

party to the action by whom and the date on or before which an application for the

registration of the action as a lis pendens affecting such larger land shall be filed in

court, and the estimated costs of survey of such larger land as determined by court

shall be deposited in court.

c) Where the party specified under paragraph (b) of this subsection fails to comply

with the requirements of that paragraph, the court shall make order rejecting the

claim to make the larger land the subject~matter of the action, unless any other

party, in whose statement of claim a similar claim shall have been set up, shall

comply therewith on or before the date specified in paragraph (b) or within such

extended period of time that the court may, on the application of any such party,

fix for the purpose.

The object of registration of lis pendens cannot be overstated. It gives notice to intend

ting/prospective purchasers and those who would be dealing with the land and it is

crystal clear that up to the filing of the appeal in this matter no such person has come

forward complaining of injury or injustice that has been caused to him!her owing to non~

registration of lis pendens. I am cognizant of the long line of cases that have emphasized

the need to register lis pendens. The case of Kanagasabai v. Velupillai (supra) though brings

out the fact that a defendant who was not a party to the partition action contended in

that case that the decree for partition was not "good and conclusive" against him. Thus it

was a non~party who complained of non~registration of lis pendens.

Who is complaining of the non~registration of lis pendens in this case? It is the Plaintiff

who brought in the smaller land but his surveyor could not survey the land with the

same boundaries as in the plaint. It is with the subsequent plan that the plaint accorded

in term of boundaries.

6

In addition, the 10th and 13th Defendant-Appellants too have complained against the non-

registration of lis pendens.

Getting back to the case of the 10th and 13th Defendant-Appellants, it has to be

remembered that they contended in their a statement of claim that lots 5, 6 and 7 in the

later plan must be excluded from the corpus. But the learned Additional District Judge

proceeded to include these lots and ordered the partition of the entire land. Whilst Ms.

Shehani Alwis for the 10th and 13th Defendant-Appellants was contending along with Mr.

Bimal Rajapakse was that the interlocutory decree must be set aside. In the course of the

impressive submissions that this Counsel made, this Court posed the question-"what is

the prejudice that the 10th and 13th Defendants have suffered by the non-registration of lis

pendens? Is it not open to the 10th and 13th Defendants now to argue in appeal that the

learned Additional District Judge got it wrong when he proceeded to include lots 5, 6

and 7?

There is no likelihood of prejudice in their case notwithstanding the non-registration of

lis pendens and it is open to the 10th and 13th Defendants to effectively contend in appeal for

an exclusion of lots 5 to 7, provided sufficient evidence has been led at the trial to that

effect. In fact, Mr. Bimal Rajapakse quite pOignantly pointed out that if the 10th and 13th

Defendant-Appellants are successful in their bid to exclude lots 5, 6 and 7, then the

corpus would fall within the preliminary plan, for which there is already a registered lis

pendens. This submission clinches the issue. The parties who are complaining against the

non-registration of lis pendens for the larger land were parties to the case who had

acquiesced in the proceedings by a full participation at the trial. There is no possibility of

an injustice if this matter is argued on the merits and all these contentious issues could

be disposed of in appeal. It enough evidence for exclusion of lots 5 to 7 has been led, the

merit of the decision of the learned Additional District Judge is open to impugnment.

The learned Additional District judge heard evidence on exclusion but has decided

otherwise. The propriety or otherwise of this decision would be gone into in the main

appeal.

7

In fact, Ms. Shehani Alwis conceded that in the petition of appeal dated 14.10.1999, it is

exactly this relief~ namely the exclusion of lots 5, 6 and 7 that have been prayed for by the

10th and 13th Defendant~Appellants. In the circumstances this Court would be acting in

vain to set aside the judgment of the learned Additional District Judge of Gampaha dated

13.08.1999, merely on the ground of the non~registration of lis pendens of a larger land,

which process has not caused prejudice at all to the participating and contesting parties

to the case. That being so, it would be preposterous to remit this case back to District

Court for a trial de novo~see Marsoof,]'s disinclination to remand a case of partition to the

original court after long years of litigation in Sopinona v. Pitipanaarachchi (2010) 1

Sri.LR 67.

I am reminded of the maxim, non potest probari quod probatum non rdevant~law requires

nothing to be done that is to no purpose. Law does nothing in vain; and commands

nothing in vain. I recall that this principle was not considered in those cases that

remanded partition cases to the original court for want/non~registration of lis pendens.

In the circumstances, I disallow the argument that the judgment must be set aside on the

ground of non~registration of lis pendens and make order that this main matter be fixed for

argument.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

8