1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for Leave to Appeal in terms of Section 62 of the Muslim Marriage and Divorce Act.

Fathima Shafka Lahir,

Court of Appeal No. 10, Balapokuna Road,

Case No: LTA 04/2023 Kirulapone.

Board of Quazis Applicant

Case No: 05/2020/R/CMB Vs.

Quazi Court of Colombo South Fazil Mohamed Farook,

Case No: 6572/FD/2019/CS No. 137, Nawala Road,

Nugegoda.

Respondent

AND BETWEEN

Fathima Shafka Lahir,

No. 10, Balapokuna Road,

Kirulapone.

Applicant-Petitioner

Vs.

Fazil Mohamed Farook,

No. 137, Nawala Road,

Nugegoda.

Respondent-Respondent

2

AND NOW BETWEEN

Fazil Mohamed Farook,

No. 137, Nawala Road,

Nugegoda.

Respondent-Respondent-Appellant

Vs.

Fathima Shafka Lahir,

No. 10, Balapokuna Road,

Kirulapone.

Applicant-Petitioner-Respondent

Before: S. U. B. Karalliyadde, J

Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Counsel:

Shabry Haleemdeen with Muneez Mohamed instructed by Chinthani Kaushalya for the

Respondent-Respondent-Appellant

Nadvi Bahaudeen with Sameda Nizar instructed by Ahmed Imran Irfana for the

Applicant-Petitioner-Respondent

Argued on: 22.06.2025 and 01.09.2025

Delivered on: 30.09.2025

3

Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Judgement

Introduction

The Applicant-Petitioner-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the “Respondent” or the

“Applicant”) married the Respondent-Respondent-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

“Appellant”) under the Muslim Marriage and Divorce Act (hereinafter referred to as the

“MMDA”) on the 6th January 2002.

The Appellant has sired 4 children borne by the Respondent within their marriage; since then, they

lived happily until the differences started to appear in their homefront. There had been some

disputes in their matrimony due to the Appellant’s behaviour; and also, his contracting a second

marriage to a Moroccan lady. Even thereafter, the Respondent tolerated her husband and his

behaviour until it became intolerable. Consequently, she decided to file an application in terms of

Section 28(1) of the MMDA for a Fasah divorce. Having filed the said application for a divorce,

she also filed an affidavit dated 19th June 2019.

The affidavit filed on the 19th June 2019 was supported by the affidavit of her brother who also

has categorically and unequivocally supported the facts stated in the original affidavit by the

Respondent and moved for a Fasah divorce. The second affidavit filed by the Respondent dated

31st January 2020 also asked for a Fasah divorce in unequivocal terms.

Then, in replying to the said affidavits, the Appellant filed a letter and denied that any cause of

action had accrued to the Respondent for her to seek a Fasah divorce.

However, at the inquiry before the Quazi, instead of a Fasah divorce sought by the Respondent,

the learned Quazi had given a Mubarah divorce in favour of the Respondent. Being aggrieved by

4

the order granting the Mubarah divorce in favour of the wife (the Respondent), the Respondent

went to the Board of Quazi to revise the said order by way of a revision application.

By the impugned order of the Board of Quazi marked P9, dated 11th February 2023, the Board of

Quazi set aside the Mubarah divorce granted in favour of the wife (the Respondent), and sent the

case back to the Quazi to consider relevant evidence and then make an order on the application for

a Fasah divorce sought by the wife (the Respondent).

Being aggrieved by the said order, the Appellant appealed to this Court. The matter was argued

before me and my learned brother on 22nd June 2025 and resumed on 1st September 2025, during

which the following arguments were advanced.

However, in addition to the written submissions filed in terms of the rules, the counsel filed post-

argument submissions as well, wherein the counsel for the Appellant took up two points which I

will refer to in the course of my judgment. In addition, Mr. Nadvi Bahaudeen also replied to the

said two points in his submissions filed subsequent to the oral submissions made at the hearing on

the said date.

Arguments

The first contention of Mr. Shabry is that, on a perusal of the application marked as P1, along with

the Petition, the original Applicant has made the application not in terms of Section 28(1) but under

Section 28(2) of the MMDA. The divorce obtainable under Section 28(1) of the MMDA is a Fasah

divorce, whilst Section 28(2) of the MMDA provides for Khula and Mubarah divorces. Therefore,

there is no question of converting a Fasah divorce into a Mubarah divorce, as the Applicant made

a general, undifferentiated application to obtain a divorce, without expressly seeking a Fasah

divorce in terms of Section 28(1) of the MMDA.

5

To buttress his argument, he relied upon the documents marked Y5 and Y6 as those documents

have been submitted based on Mubarah divorces. Further, Mr. Shabry argued that there is no

answer to the application made before the Quazi Court, under Section 27 of the MMDA by the

husband, and Section 28 of the MMDA by the wife.

In addition to that, he contended that no formal pleadings are required to be filed in the proceedings

before the learned Quazi; and also, no evidence is taken which is subject to cross-examination by

the opposing counsel at the inquiry. The role played by the learned Quazi is of an inquisitorial

nature, and he takes down the statements made by the parties or the evidence submitted by them

in the normal course and not in the form of formal evidence as in a court of law. Therefore, the

concept of adversarial systems followed under the Civil Procedure Code or the Criminal Procedure

Code is not followed under the MMDA when parties apply for a divorce.

Further he contended that, what is reflected in Y10 or P2 is the proceedings of the inquiry on the

last date, and having inquired into the matter with the assistance of the three assessors, who formed

their opinion and expressed their view on the matter, the learned Quazi granted a Mubarah divorce

in favour of the Applicant. Therefore, she cannot be heard to complain against such.

The next contention of Mr. Shabry is that, on the application of the Applicant, directing the Quazi

to hold an inquiry again by the Board of Quazis is erroneous and not tenable in law; and therefore,

this appeal should be allowed.

Finally, he contended that the Applicant obtained the divorce against the husband with the consent

of the Respondent, and then ten individuals signed the decree of divorce granted by the learned

Quazi, as evidenced in P10. Therefore, the Applicant cannot now resile from what was mutually

agreed upon. Accordingly, the Board of Quazis should not have entertained the appeal made.

6

However, on the other hand, Mr. Bahaudeen contended that although there is no distinction in

making the application, and upon perusal of the application to the learned Quazi, P1, in clear and

unequivocal terms, she has sought a Fasah divorce which falls within the ambit of Section 28(1)

of the MMDA.

The next contention of Mr. Bahaudeen is that, although the counsel for the Appellant argued

(having referred to certain documents filed by him) that the Respondent consented to grant a

Mubarah divorce instead of a Fasah divorce, and the learned Quazi never considered that fact.

Further, the learned Quazi never embarked upon an inquiry as required by Rules 7, 11, and 12 of

the Third Schedule of the MMDA, which are the applicable rules for the application before the

Quazi; thereby, he has flouted the law.

In addition to that, Mr. Bahaudeen contended that the gravity attached to a Fasah divorce is very

serious, as the burden is totally on the wife to establish the matrimonial fault of the husband as

stipulated in Section 28(1) of the MMDA, in addition to the rules of the Sect. Therefore, at least

two witnesses have to be called by the applicant to establish her grounds for a Fasah divorce.

Thereafter, only the Respondent can give evidence in rebuttal, if any. However, the inquiry, as

reflected in P10, was not held in accordance with the rules. Therefore, the learned Quazi has

misdirected himself in law and fact.

In addition to that, he argued that the assessors were appointed on the very same day, and their

opinions and views are not reflected, except for the family counsel’s view. Therefore, acting

without evidence itself is biased, and not allowing the adducing of evidence is also biased. As such,

he contended that the Quazi is prejudiced against the applicant and biased towards the Respondent.

As such, the learned members of the Board of Quazi are justified in granting relief, as they have

7

directed a new and proper inquiry to be held according to the law; and therefore, there is no

prejudice against the Respondent.

However, Mr. Bahaudeen contended that no inquisitorial role was played by the Quazi, whereas

what is expected of the Quazi is to conduct a proper inquiry. Further, the learned Quazi cannot

exercise unrestrained discretion when he embarks upon such an inquiry, as deduced by Justice

Weerasekara in the case of Pathmawatie v. Jayasekare1.

Respondent's original application for Fasah divorce

Now I will consider the Respondent’s original application dated 19th June 2019, which is for a

Fasah divorce. In support of her application, she has filed an affidavit on the same date marked as

Y2. In the said affidavit she has referred to the fact that she conducted herself as a devoted wife

even when he faced financial difficulties due to his lavish habits, particularly his spending on the

Moroccan woman. She continued to support him despite this conduct until it became cruel and

intolerable. Even after his marriage to the Moroccan woman, though without happiness, she

remained loyal and caring towards him. However, when the Appellant’s cruelty and inhuman

treatment extended to her and the children, she decided to seek a Fasah divorce as recognized

under Muslim law, which she specifically pleaded for in her affidavit. Her affidavit was also

supported by her brother’s affidavit, who has given the said affidavit as the male guardian of the

Respondent, which is marked as Y3.

In his affidavit filed in response to the earlier affidavit filed by the Respondent, the Appellant has

stated that he is a committed husband and therefore, willing to proceed with the marriage. However,

replying to the said letter, the Respondent filed another letter dated 7th November 2019 before the

1 [1997] 1 SLR 248

8

Board of Quazi, where she categorically asked for a Fasah divorce on account of the conduct of

the husband, the Appellant. That is a part of the record of the Quazi, and it is referred to as Y7.

The reply to the letter marked as Y8 was again filed by the Appellant, where he stated that he is

not willing for a Fasah divorce. There is also a minute of the Moulavi where it mentions that the

Respondent asked for a Fasah divorce.

On the further perusal of the applications filed, I found the minutes of the Quazi’s inquiries filed

as P2 and dated 16th January 2020, stating that the Quazi suggested, instead of a Fasah divorce, a

Mubarah divorce should be granted as both parties were willing.

Types of divorce under the MMDA

It is undisputed positions of law conceded by the counsel on either side that Sri Lankan law

recognises four types of divorces governed by the Muslim Marriage and Divorce Act; namely,

Talaq, Fasah, Khula and Mubarah2.

Talaq is a form of divorce available to the husband, who may unilaterally pronounce divorce3.

Fasah is a form of divorce available to the wife, where she may apply to the Quazi for dissolution

of the marriage on the basis of fault on the part of the husband, such as cruelty, failure to maintain,

or desertion, and available under Section 28(1) of the MMDA. For clarity I will reproduce the

same;

“28. (1) Where a wife desires to effect a divorce from her husband, without his consent, on the

ground of ill-treatment or on account of any act or omission on his part which amounts to a ‘fault’

2 Jaldeen, M.S., ‘The Muslim Law of marriage divorce and maintenance in Sri Lanka’ (2nd Revised Ed. 2004). Peace, Education and Research Publishers; Colombo, Sri Lanka. 3 Section 27 of the MMDA and rules to be followed in Schedule II of the Act.

9

under the Muslim law governing the sect to which the parties belong, the procedure laid down in

the Third Schedule shall be followed,”

Khula is another form of divorce where the wife initiates the divorce and offers to return the Mahr

or the dowry that was provided to the wife by the husband in exchange for her release from the

marriage. Mubarah refers to divorce by mutual consent of both parties. These two forms of divorce

fall within the ambit of Section 28(2) of the MMDA as reproduced below;

“28. (2) Where a wife desires to effect a divorce from her husband on any ground not referred to

in subsection (1), being a divorce of any description permitted to a wife by the Muslim law

governing the sect to which the parties belong, the procedure laid down in the Third Schedule shall

be followed so far as the nature of the divorce claimed in each case renders it possible or necessary

to follow that procedure.”

The issue before the Quazi

In this case, the only question before the Quazi is whether the wife (Respondent) is entitled to

obtain a Fasah divorce, instead of a Mubarah divorce, which she has never sought from the very

inception of the proceedings that she has initiated as way back as in the year 2019. However, from

the beginning, the husband never wanted a divorce, and in fact wanted to reconcile with the wife,

which is reflected in his original letter referred to as Y6, and thereafter in the affidavit filed as Y8,

where he has consented to a Mubarah divorce instead of a Fasah divorce. Therefore, the question

arises whether the wife is entitled to a Fasah divorce, instead of a Mubarah divorce, although both

can be obtained by the wife.

I will discuss the reasons as to why Fasah divorce is important for the wife in this case. In addition

to that, I will also advert on as to why the wife is entitled to a Fasah divorce instead of a Mubarah

divorce, and the importance thereof.

10

In addition to that, I further discuss whether she is entitled to maintain an application for a Fasah

divorce. Subsequently, the next question arises whether the original Quazi who granted a Mubarah

divorce instead of a Fasah divorce has erred in fact and in law. Consequently, requiring this Court

to decide whether the Board of Quazi is right or erred in fact and in law, when they decided to set

aside the Mubarah divorce granted to the wife instead of the Fasah divorce and send the case back

to the Quazi to reconsider the evidence on the basis for a Fasah divorce.

Fasah divorce

Fasah divorce is a religious divorce which an innocent wife can obtain against a husband, who is

guilty of cruelty and negligent of his duties as a husband. The sanctity attached to a Fasah divorce

is much higher than the sanctity attached to a Mubarah divorce, since only an innocent wife can

obtain a Fasah divorce against a guilty husband. The burden proof of a Fasah divorce is solely

and entirely on the wife. In addition to that, the gravity of the Fasah divorce is further underscored

by the fact that to establish the existence of a right to have a Fasah divorce, an innocent wife has

to call at least two witnesses, apart from her own evidence; this is something that has gone beyond

the parameters of the Evidence Ordinance4, where to establish a certain fact, one witness is

sufficient.

Therefore, it is very clear that the sanctity attached to the Fasah divorce as opposed to the Mubarah

divorce is much higher, and the gravity of a Fasah divorce against the husband is also greater than

a Mubarah divorce. A Mubarah divorce can only be obtained by the wife with consent of the

husband. Therefore, the guilt of the husband need not be established vis-a-vis the innocence of the

wife need not be established in obtaining a Mubarah divorce as the mere consent of the parties is

4 Section 134 of the Evidence Ordinance

11

sufficient. Therefore, religiously, the gravity and sanctity attached to the Mubarah divorce is much

less than that of a Fasah divorce. In addition to that, in establishing a Mubarah divorce, there is no

sufficient number of witnesses required.

As such, a lady who is very much attached to the religion and believes in the essence of Islam, has

decided to go for a Fasah divorce in this case as she never expected to have such a divorce if not

for a husband’s guilty conduct. Therefore, from the beginning as I mentioned above, the

Respondent (the Applicant) as the innocent spouse, whilst making an application has moved for a

Fasah divorce in the very first affidavit, as well as subsequent affidavits filed by her within the

span of six months.

In this case by P1, the Respondent has sought a divorce for the circumstances stated therein.

However, P1 is in the model which is adopted from the Third Schedule of the MMDA to be

followed to make an application under Section 28(1); and it is not necessary to mention the type

of divorce the applicant seeks. For clarity I will reproduce the grounds upon which the Applicant

sought the divorce found in document marked as P15;

“The Respondent has been neglecting to maintain the Applicant and failing to discharge duties of

a husband towards the Applicant, biased towards the second wife of him, caused mental stress,

abused verbally and ignorance.”

However, in the affidavit filed along with the P1, marked as Y2, the Respondent as the Applicant

seeking divorce from her husband, has categorically and unequivocally stated the circumstances

in which she seeks a divorce and has sought such a divorce on the basis of a Fasah divorce as the

innocent spouse, attributing the guilt to her husband, which she can attribute religiously. Her

5 Page 100 of the Brief

12

brother, who is the male guardian of the Respondent, also has supported her version and sought a

Fasah divorce on behalf of his sister, the Respondent. Even by the subsequent letter marked as Y8,

dated 19th December 2019, the Respondent (the wife) has sought a Fasah divorce.

In fact, on the perusal of Y7 which is the proceedings on 7th November 2019, the learned Quazi of

Colombo has categorically mentioned that he would conclude this matter as a Fasah divorce matter

in unequivocal terms. However, subsequently, as reflected in Y11 the proceedings of 16th January

2021, instead of a Fasah divorce, a Mubarah divorce has been granted. The said proceedings have

also stated that there is no reason to grant a Fasah divorce.

The Quazi erred

Accordingly, the Quazi, when he granted the Mubarah divorce has not considered the application

and the supportive affidavits filed by the Respondent (the wife), well-supported by her witness,

her brother, and the stand that they had taken from the beginning right throughout the proceedings

for a Fasah divorce. When somebody specifically sought a Fasah divorce made in terms of Section

28(1) of the MMDA as mentioned above, the Quazi “shall” follow the rules in the Third Schedule.

The operative words shall follow;

“28. (1) Where a wife desires to effect a divorce ... Muslim law governing the sect to which the

parties belong, the procedure laid down in the Third Schedule shall be followed,” [Emphasis is

mine]

According to Rule 11 of the Third Schedule, the Quazi is required to conduct the proceedings.

Strict compliance is necessary thereof, which reads thus:

“11. The Quazi shall maintain a record of the proceedings in the case and shall enter therein the

statements made on oath or affirmation by the wife and her witnesses and by the husband (if he is

13

present) and his witnesses-Of the wife's witnesses the number examined shall not be less than two

in, any case. The record of every such statement shall be read over by the Quazi to the person

who has made it and, after any necessary corrections have been made therein, shall be signed by

such person. Where such person refuses to sign such statement, the fact of such refusal shall be

recorded by the Quazi.” [Emphasis is mine]

According to which, the number of witnesses necessary is also mentioned. In addition to the

Applicant, and two more witnesses are also required to establish the grounds of a Fasah divorce

sought by the Respondent, which the Quazi in this case has never allowed. Instead, he has granted

a Mubarah divorce based only on the affidavits, letters, and the report of the assessors and nothing

else. Justice Laffar in the case Ahamed Mubarak Ali Mohamed Azran vs. Fathima Nusrath Fareez6

has clearly emphasized the requirements to be followed in the proceedings of a Fasah divorce

sought under Section 28(1) of the MMDA.

In those circumstances, he is not justified in granting a Mubarah divorce since lower sanctity is

attached to it in comparison to a Fasah divorce, and on the application made by the Respondent to

revise order granting the Mubarah divorce by the Quazi, the Board of Quazi by the impugned

order has set aside the same, and sent it back to the Quazi to reconsider the evidence and consider

the application for a Fasah divorce.

Therefore, it is very clear that no prejudice is caused to the Appellant (Respondent to the original

divorce application) who was never willing to grant a Fasah divorce and contested the same,

because the guilt is attributable to him. Therefore, religiously, the blame is on him; instead, he has

6 LTA/0016/2024

14

attempted to move for a Mubarah divorce without properly adducing evidence or properly

contesting the application of the Respondent (the wife).

As such, it is my view that the Board of Quazi is justified in making the impugned order. However,

in this application at the argument stage, two new matters were raised for and on behalf of the

Appellant; the first matter was whether the proceedings before the Quazi was inquisitorial or

adversarial. In support of his argument, he relied upon certain reports prepared by Justice

Dehideniya for and on behalf of the Human Rights Commission. With all due respect to Justice

Dehideniya I hold that I am not bound by such reports or opinions, unless Justice Dehideniya has

made such observations or judicial expression.

Secondly, I do not need to go that far to decide whether the proceedings are adversarial or

inquisitorial, because the Respondent (the wife) who sought a divorce has right throughout

maintained that she seeks a Fasah divorce, and not a Mubarah divorce. It is also to be noted that

her application has been made in that behalf, in terms of Section 28(1) and the rules of the Third

Schedule in the MMDA, which the Quazi in this case has failed to follow.

The second matter the Appellant raised is whether the Respondent (the wife) is entitled to revision

before the Board of Quazi. For the reasons mentioned above, the Board of Quazi is justified in

revising the impugned order of the Quazi granting a Mubarah divorce.

15

Conclusion

For the reasons adumbrated by me, it is my view that there is no merit in this appeal, and I move

to dismiss this appeal. Since it seems to be a frivolous appeal, I order Rs. 105,000 (One Hundred

and Five Thousand Rupees) as costs of this appeal payable by the Appellant to the Respondent.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

S. U. B. Karalliyadde, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL