Page 1 of 9

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal from the final judgment in the District Court of Balapitiya in Case No. 362/L. Kalanasuriya Arachchige Henry Addarawatte, Gulankanda, Ambegama. Plaintiff CA/DCF/926/97 DC/Balapitiya Case No. 362/L

Vs. 1. Kariyawasam Kankanthirige Devide

Appuhamy, Helagedarawatte, Manampitiya, Meethiyagoda. Defendant

2. The Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12. Added Defendant AND NOW The Attorney General, Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12. Added Defendant-Appellant

Page 2 of 9

Vs. Kalanasuriya Arachchige Henry Addarawatte, Gulankanda, Ambegama. Plaintiff-Respondent (Deceased) Kalanasuriya Arachchige Chandralatha No. 6, Vishva Kala Housing Complex, Mampe, Piliyandala. Substituted Plaintiff-Respondent 1A. Weeragoda Gamage Rathu Nona 1B. Kariyawasam Kankanam Thanthrige

Lawrance 1C. Kariyawasam Kankanam Thanthrige

Thilakaratne 1D. Kariyawasam Kankanam Thanthrige

Gamini 1E. Kariyawasam Kankanam Thanthrige

Upali 1F. Kariyawasam Kankanam Thanthrige

Karunawathi 1G. Kariyawasam Kankanam Thanthrige

Gunawathi 1H. Kariyawasam Kankanam Thanthrige

Pathmawathie 1A-1H Substituted Defendant-Respondents

Before: M. T. Mohammed Laffar, J. and

S. U. B. Karalliyadde, J.

Counsel: Nayomi Kahawitta, S.C. for the Added Defendant-Appellant.

Page 3 of 9

H. Withanachchi with Shantha Karunaradhara for the

Substituted Plaintiff-Respondent. Shayamal Rathnayake and Piyumi Kumari for the 1B

Substituted Defendant-Respondent. Written Submissions on: 07.08.2012 (by the Added Defendant-

Appellant). 26.11.2019 (by the Substituted Plaintiff

Respondent). 19.08.2019 (by the 1B Substituted Defendant-

Respondent). Decided on: 07.02.2022

Mohammed Laffar, J.

This is an appeal preferred by the Added Defendant-Appellant (hereinafter

referred to as the Added Defendant) from the judgment of the learned

District Judge of Balapitiya dated 24.10.1997.

The facts, briefly, in this case are as follows. The Plaintiff-Respondent

(hereinafter referred to as the Plaintiff) instituted action against the

Defendant-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the Defendant)

seeking reliefs, inter alia, for a declaration of title to the premises morefully

described in the schedule to the plaint and the ejectment of the Defendant

therefrom.

The Defendant in his answer, moved for a dismissal of the Plaintiffs action

on the basis that the subject matter is a State land. Accordingly, the Attorney

General was added as the Added Defendant to the action. The Added

Defendant, having filed the answer, moved for a dismissal of the Plaintiffs

action and sought for an order to eject the persons those who are in

Page 4 of 9

unauthorised occupation of the purported State land which is the corpus

in this case.

After trial, the learned District Judge delivered the impugned Judgment in

favour of the Plaintiff, as prayed for in the prayers to the plaint. Being

aggrieved by the judgment, the instant appeal has been preferred by the

Added Defendant.

The Corpus

The land called ASSALAGALA UDUMULLA which is morefully described in

the schedule to the plaint is the subject matter in this case. The corpus is

properly identified as Lot-A in the title plan bearing No. 211B dated

09.07.1961 made by W.A. William Silva, Licensed Surveyor, which is

marked as Y. Accordingly, the extent of the subject matter is A1-R2-P39.

For the purpose of this case, Mr. D.G. Mendis, Licensed Surveyor has made

the plan bearing No. 980 dated 24.05.1981 which is produced as X.

It is to be noted that there is no dispute as to the identity of the subject

matter. The only question had to be determined in this case was as to

whether the subject matter is a private land owned by the Plaintiff or the

State land as claimed by the Added Defendant. The determination of the

learned District Judge was that this is a private land owned by the Plaintiff.

The title of the Plaintiff to the Corpus

It is settled law that, in rei vindicatio actions the onus of proof of title to the

subject matter is always with the plaintiff. In the event of failure on the part

of the plaintiff to establish his title, his action is liable to be dismissed.

In the case of Dharmadasa v. Jayasena [1997] 3 Sri LR 327, it was observed

that in a rei vindicatio action the burden is on the plaintiff to establish the

title pleaded and relied on by him. The defendant need not prove anything.

According to the evidence adduced by the Plaintiff, the original owner of

the subject matter was one Don Andiris De Silva Jayasekeera who conveyed

Page 5 of 9

his right to Odiris Appuhamy by deed No. 29220 dated 09.05.1923

(marked P3). The said Odiris Appuhamy by deed bearing No. 9128 dated

29.01.1950 (marked P4) transferred his right to Karalin Gurusinghe who

conveyed that right to Lokugamage Henry by deed bearing No. 1243 dated

21.07.1961 (marked P5). The said Locugamage Henry transferred his right

to the Plaintiff by deed No. 36196 dated 31.08.1978 (marked P6).

Mr. D.G. Mendis, Licensed Surveyor has superimposed his plan marked X

upon the title plan marked Y, and accordingly, the subject matter has been

identified as lots A1 and A2 in the superimposed plan. According to the

evidence given by the Surveyor, the Plaintiff is in possession of A1 and the

Defendant is in unauthorised possession of A2. At the trial, the Counsel for

the Added Defendant has opted not to cross examine this witness.

Besides, Karalin Gurusingha, predecessor in title of the Plaintiff had filed

an action in the District Court of Balapitiya in 1959 (Case No. L-834)

against the Defendant in the instant case. Later, on 17.10.1960, this action

was settled. Accordingly, the said Karalin Gurusingha had given four

perches from the land in dispute to the Defendant. It is to be noted that, in

that case the Defendant had not taken up the position that, this is a State

land (vide document marked P7).

The evidence adduced by the Plaintiff stating that he has been in possession

of the subject matter by cultivating Rubber plantation is substantiated with

the documents issued by the Office of the Rubber Controller (marked P10

and P11). The said documents have been proved by the oral evidence of

Justin Hettiarachchi, Officer of the Rubber Control Board.

Moreover, G.V. Sirisena, Grama Niladhari of the area, in his evidence

categorically stated that this is not a State land, whereas the Counsel for the

Added Defendant has opted not to cross-examine this witness as well.

Hence, in terms of the oral evidence adduced and the title deeds marked as

P3-P6, the title of the Plaintiff towards the subject matter is well established.

Page 6 of 9

The title of the Added Defendant to the Corpus

In rei vindicatio actions, once the paper title of the plaintiff is established,

the onus of proof shifts to the defendant to establish his legal entitlement to

be in possession of the subject matter. In the event of failure on the part of

the defendant to prove his legal entitlement, there is no option for the trial

Judge, but to enter a judgment in favour of the plaintiff as prayed for in the

prayers to the plaint.

In Don Namaratne v. Don David (SC/Appeal No. 54/2002, SC Minutes of

17.02.2003), S.N. Silva, C.J. (agreeing with Bandaranayake and Yapa JJ.)

held that,

The learned Presidents Counsel for the Defendant submits that the

plaint is defective since the date on which wrongful possession on

the part of the Defendant commenced is not set out. We cannot agree

with this submission. The owner is entitled to possession of his

property at all times. The rights of others are subject to the right of

ownership. Once the title of the Plaintiff is admitted or proved, the

burden shifts to the Defendant to prove his right to possess the

property. If the Defendant fails to prove the right [Tenancy, licensee

superior title] judgment to be entered in favour of the Plaintiff. In the

rei vindicatio action, if the title of the Plaintiff is admitted by the

Defendant, the Defendant should begin the case.

In Sirinivasam Prasanth v. Nadaraja Devaraja (SC Appeal No. 163/2019,

SC Minutes of 22.03.2021), recently the Supreme Court echoed the above

position as follows:

Per Mahinda Samayawardena, J.

In a vindicatory action, the initial burden is on the Plaintiff to prove

title to the property. If he fails to prove title, the Plaintiffs action shall

fail, no matter how weak the case of the Defendant is. However, once

the paper title to the property is accepted by the Defendant or proved

Page 7 of 9

by the Plaintiff, the burden shifts to the Defendant to prove on what

right he is in possession of the property.

In this case, the Added Defendant claims that the subject matter is a State

land. Hence, the burden is on the Added Defendant to establish the same

with strong and cogent evidence.

U.A. Somapala, Subject clerk of Ambalangoda Divisional Secretariat and V.

Kamalasena, Assistant Surveyor General gave evidence to buttress the

contention of the Added Defendant. On behalf of the Added Defendant, the

Surveyor General has submitted a plan marked 2V46 which has been

superimposed on the plans marked X and Y. It is to be noted that the plan

2V46 is not made in accordance with any title plan, and the same has not

been superimposed on any title plan of the Surveyor General as well.

Having considered the totality of the evidence of U.A. Somapala, it is clear

that, he has no personal knowledge as to the fact that this is a State land.

He admitted the fact that there are no documents before 05.07.1981

pertaining to the land in dispute, at the Divisional Secretariat of

Ambalangoda (vide page 244 of the Appeal brief).

Furthermore, the title plan relied by the Added Defendant is produced as

2V47. It is pertinent to be noted that 2V47 has not been superimposed on

the Surveyor Generals plan marked 2V46. It has been rightly observed by

the learned trial Judge that the land in dispute, namely ASSALAGALA

UDUMULLA is not shown in plan 2V47. V. Kamalasena, Assistant Surveyor

General, in cross-examination categorically stated that the land in suit is

not shown in plan 2V47 (vide Appeal brief Vol-I, page 286). It has been

transpired from the evidence of said V. Kamalasena that lot FSPP35/242 is

the land in dispute which has been shown as a northern boundary of the

State land which is depicted in plan 2V47. In this respect, it is abundantly

clear that the subject matter in this case is not a State land.

Page 8 of 9

It was contended on behalf of the Added Defendant that the land in dispute

was acquired by the State as per the Gazette Notification marked 2V50. It

is manifestly clear that the corpus in this case is not mentioned in 2V50.

The learned District Judge has correctly observed the fact that the subject

matter (lot-242) has not originally been depicted in the plan 2V50, and

subsequently the same has surreptitiously been interpolated into the said

plan which is shown in red in colour (vide Appeal brief Vol-II page 139).

The witness U.A. Somapala has asserted that he was unaware of that

interpolation.

It is also evident that the original owner of this land was the State and Don

Andiris De Silva Jayasekera had purchased the same from the state. This

fact is well established by the document marked P13 which was issued by

the Government Agent of Galle on 02.07.1920. It is pertinent to be noted

that the said document P13 (receipt No. P06333) has been mentioned in

the schedule of the title deed marked P3 as well. The witnesses of the Added

Defendant while giving evidence in Court have not disputed the document

marked P13. The learned trial Judge was mindful of the fact that further

proof of P13 is not necessary as the same was thirty years old (vide section

90 of the Evidence Ordinance, No. 14 of 1895).

Hence, it is well established by oral and documentary evidence that the

Plaintiff and his predecessors in title have been in exclusive possession of

the subject matter from 1920. Furthermore, it appears to this Court that

the subject matter is not shown in the title plans produced by the Added

Defendant.

In these circumstances, I am of the view that the finding of the learned

District Judge is according to law and not erroneous.

Therefore, I dismiss the appeal with costs, fixed at Rs. 30,000/- and affirm

the impugned judgment of the learned District Judge of Balapitiya.

Page 9 of 9

The learned District Judge is directed to enter a decree according to the

impugned judgment.

The Registrar is directed to dispatch this judgement along with the original

case record to the District Court of Balapitiya.

Appeal dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

S. U. B. Karalliyadde, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL