Page 1 of 9

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

In the nature of an application in the nature

of writ of Certiorari, Mandamus and

Prohibition under and in terms of Article 140

of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

CA/WRIT/425/22

Ihala Jawara Gedara Hema Malani

No 303, 1st Phase,

Medirigiriya.

PETITIONER

1. Ms. C.M Karunarathna

Divisional Secretory,

Divisional Secretariat,

Medirigiriya.

2. Mr.P.S.P.Abeywardhana

2A. Mr. W.R.A.N.S. Wijayasinghe

Registrar General

234/ A3,

Denzil Kobbekaduwa Mawatha,

Battaramulla.

3. Ms.P.M.H.Priyadarshani

3A. MS. P.C.D. Siera

Commissioner General of Title Settlement,

No. 1200/6,

Mihikatha Medura Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

4. R.M.C.M.Herath,

Page 2 of 9

4A. K.D. Bandula Jayasinghe

Land Commissioner General,

Department of Land Commissioner

General,

No. 1200/6, Mihikatha Medura

Rajamalwatta, Battaramulla.

5. Mr. Pradeep Rupasinghe

5A. Mr. S.L.M.Herath

Additional Registrar of Title,

No 54, New Court Complex,

Gamudawa, Pulathisigama,

Hingurakgoda.

6. Ihala Jawara Gedara Chandrawathi

Manike,

No 303/01, 1st Phase,Medirigiriya.

RESPONDENTS

Before : N. Bandula Karunarathna, P/CA, J.

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

Counsel: Nuwan Bopage with Chathura Weththasinghe for the Petitioner

Suren Gnanaraj with Sakuni Weeraratne for the 6th Respondent

Medhaka Fernando, SC for the 1st-5th Respondents

Argued On: 08.07.2024

Written

Submissions: 20.09.2024 ( by the Petitioner)

On 13.08.2024 (by the 6th Respondents)

07.08.2024 (by the 1st-5th Respondents)

Judgment On: 25.09.2024

Page 3 of 9

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

The Petitioner instituted this action to obtain the following reliefs prayed for in the

Petition dated 11.11.2022.

a. Issue Notice on the Respondents.

b. Grant a Writ of Certiorari quashing the 1st Respondent's decision (found in

document marked as X11) to transfer and/or certify the original ownership of the

grant bearing number o/g/11395 to the 6th Respondent and/or identifying the 6th

Respondent as the successor of the grant bearing number o/g/11395 relating to the

subject matter.

c. Grant a Writ of Certiorari quashing the 2nd Respondent's order marked as X7 (ii)

made under section 35 of the Registration of Documents Ordinance to alter the

status of the grantee as a life-holder in the document marked as "X7 (i)"

d. Grant a Writ of Certiorari quashing the 3rd Respondent's decision marked as

X10(ii) to cancel the certificate of title bearing number 0002878 issued in favor of

the Petitioner's mother.

e. Grant a Writ of Mandamus directing the 1st Respondent to name the Petitioner as

the original owner and/or name the Petitioner as the successor of the subject

matter.

f. Grant a Writ of Mandamus directing the 1st to 5th Respondents to revalidate the

certificate of title bearing number 0002878 and / or re-issue a certificate of title

relating to the subject matter in favor of the Petitioner

g. Grant an interim order preventing the 1st to 5th Respondents taking any further

steps to changing the status quo of the subject matter by way of any legal

instrument until this application is hear and determine by Your Lordships' Court.

h. Grant an interim order suspending the Is Respondent's decision found in document

marked as X11 to transfer and/or certify the original ownership of the grant

bearing number / 11395 to the 6th Respondent and/or identifying the 6th

Page 4 of 9

Respondent as the successor of the grant bearing number / 11395 relating to

the subject matter until this application is hear and determine by Your Lordships'

Court.

i. Grant an interim order preventing the 6th Respondent and/or her agent and/or

servant and/or anyone who is acting under 6th Respondent from disturbing and/or

interfering with the Petitioner's peaceful possession of the subject matter until this

application is hear and determine by Your Lordships' Court.

j. Grant cost and,

k. Grant such other and further reliefs Your Lordships shall seem meet.

The facts of this case are as follows:

According to the petition, the Petitioners father namely Ihala Jawara Gedra Appuhami

was the original permit holder of the subject matter. The Petitioner avers that Ihala

Jawara Gedra Appuhami nominated his wife namely Udaha Akiriye Gadara Punchi

Mahaththayo as his successor. The Petitioner further states that, the Petitioners mother

namely Udaha Akiriye Gadara Punchi Mahaththayo was also issued a permit by the

predecessor of the 1st Respondent relating to the same subject matter. In the meantime,

a grant bearing No. //11395 in favour of the Petitioners father on 05.06.1987 was

issued as well. Further, the Petitioner states that, the Petitioners father passed away on

23.01.1991 without changing the nomination made in the permit where 1st Respondents

predecessor has taken steps to name the Petitioners mother as the original owner of the

grant bearing No. //11395 and it was duly registered in the relevant folio No. 4/4/47(1)

in Polonnaruwa Land Registry. The Petitioner further avers that, her mother duly

nominated the Petitioner as the successor and the said nomination was also duly

registered in the relevant folio on 24.07.2009. According to the Petitioner, after the demise

of the Petitioners mother on 21.01.2012, the title certificate bearing No. 0002878 was

issued in the Petitioners favour. The Petitioner further states that, subsequently, the

Petitioner learnt that the 1st and 2nd Respondents have taken steps to alter the records by

removing the nomination of the Petitioner without giving the Petitioner any hearing,

stating that the original grant holder, the Petitioners father has not nominated the

Petitioners mother as the successor on the basis that the said nomination was not

registered according to the law and thus the Petitioners mother was not conveyed the

Page 5 of 9

title to the subject matter as the successor and accordingly named the Petitioners elder

sister as the original owner of the subject matter. Since the 1st Respondent failed to take

action to rectify this error despite several requests, the Petitioner filed the action bearing

No.172/L/17 in the District Court of Hungurakgoda seeking a declaration that the

Petitioner is entitled to the subject matter under succession. The said action was

dismissed on the basis of lack of jurisdiction and the Civil Appellate High Court of

Anuradhapura in the case NCP/HVVA/FA 28/19 affirmed the order of the District Court.

The Petitioner has invoked the writ jurisdiction of this Court inter alia seeking to quash

the decisions where her mother was named as the life holder and the 6th Respondent as

the successor of the grant bearing No. //11395, by way of writs of Certiorari.

On the other hand, the 1st to 5th Respondents have raised the objection that, there was no

evidence that the said nomination of the Petitioners mother had been registered in terms

of Section 58 of the Land Development Ordinance read with Section 60 of the said

Ordinance. Further, the Respondents took the position that, at the time the Petitioners

father passed away, there was no successor named with respect to the Grant //11395.

The question before us is whether the particular nomination of succession indicated in the

original permit needs to be registered under Section 60 of the Land Development

Ordinance which reads as follows:

60. Nomination or cancellation of nomination Invalid unless registered before

death of owner or permit-holder.

No nomination or cancellation of the nomination of a successor shall be valid

unless the document (other than a last will) effecting such nomination or

cancellation is duly registered before the date of the death of the owner of the

holding or the permit holder.

According to the above Section, no nomination or cancellation of the nomination of a

successor will be valid unless it is registered. This Court has to consider whether it is

mandated where the nomination was endorsed on a permit before it was issued.

Section 87 of the said Ordinance reads as follows:

87. Name of successor nominated by the permit holder may be endorsed on permit

before issue.

Page 6 of 9

A person to whom a Government Agent has agreed to alienate land may nominate

as his successor any person who is entitled under this Ordinance to be nominated,

and the name of such successor may be endorsed on the permit before it is issued

to the first-mentioned person, and the Government Agent may upon being

requested so to do by the permit holder cancel the name of such successor by an

endorsement on the permit and endorse on the permit the name of any other

person suggested by the permit holder as his successor.

According to the material available, there is no dispute that, there is an endorsement of

the Petitioners mother as the successor. This nomination was done by the government

agent according to the provisions of the said Ordinance. The question is whether there is

any necessity for the grantee to register such a nomination in the said land registry.

My understanding is that, if the permit holder wishes to cancel the earlier nomination, it

should be registered before his death to validate the said cancellation. It is not disputed

that, the Petitioners father; Ihala Jawara Gedra Appuhami had nominated the

Petitioners mother as his successor, before the said permit was issued. Thus, there is no

purpose of submitting another application to the government agent to nominate a

successor in accordance with Section 58 of the said Ordinance. It should be noted that the

permit holders intention is indicated to the government agent regarding the nomination.

If the permit holder wishes to cancel the said nomination of the successor, it could be made

in terms of the provisions in Chapter VII of the Land Development Ordinance. That

nomination has to be made in the prescribed form and registered in the land registry in

terms of Section 58 of the said ordinance. If it is not registered, such nomination is

considered to be invalid.

Since there is no cancellation of the nomination by the original permit holder, under

Section 49 of the Land Development Ordinance, no person can dispute the rights of such

nominator as she is lawfully entitled to succeed to the rights of the original permit holder

by virtue of the statutory provisions.

In fact, earlier, the Respondents had accepted the Petitioners mother as the successor

and issued a Grant.

Page 7 of 9

Later, the Respondents have changed the status of the Petitioners mother as a life

interest holder on the basis that, the particular nomination was not registered under

Section 60 of the Land Development Ordinance.

I am of the view that, if the particular nomination was entered into before it was issued,

there is no requirement to register the said nomination under Section 58 of the said

Ordinance as this endorsement was done by the government agent.

Thereafter, if the Permit holder wishes the nomination to be cancelled, that has to be

registered under Section 60 of the Land Development Ordinance.

In the instant case, the Respondents have failed to consider Section 87 of the said

Ordinance, and have wrongly come to the conclusion, that the said nomination has not

been registered under Section 60 of the Land Development Ordinance.

Our Courts have held that the intention of the permit holder should be considered when

dealing with permits. In the instant case, the Respondents have treated the Petitioners

mother as a life interest holder and the 6th Respondent as the successor in terms of Section

72 of the Land Development Ordinance.

Did the Respondents act illegally or unreasonably or irrationally when they decided to

consider the 6th Respondent as the successor to the said Grant?

This Court has to decide on the legality or validity of the action taken by the Respondents.

In Dayananda v. Thalwatte, (2001) 2 SLR 73 at page 80, his Lordship Jayasinghe, J. held:

An aggrieved person who is seeking to set aside an unfavourable decision made

against him by a public authority could apply for a prerogative writ of certiorari.

The principles of illegality and unreasonableness were considered by his Lordship Arjuna

Obeysekara J in Udagedara Waththe Anusha Kumari v. Jayasinghe Mudiyanselage

Chamila Indi Jayasinghe, CA/WRIT Application No. 293/17, Decided On 18.11.2019:

This brings this Court back to the issue that arises for determination - i.e. did the

Respondent act illegally or unreasonably or irrationally when he formed his

opinion that the land which is the subject matter of the said quit notice is State

land. In considering this question, it would be useful to bear in mind the

Page 8 of 9

description given by Lord Diplock in Council of Civil Service Unions vs Minister

for the Civil Service to the phrases 'illegality' and irrationality:

"By 'illegality' as a ground for judicial review I mean that the decision maker must

understand correctly the law that regulates his decision making power and must

give effect to it. Whether he has ornot is par excellence a justiciable question to be

decided in the event of dispute, by those persons, the judges, by whom the judicial

power of the state is exercisable."

"By 'irrationality' I mean what can now be succinctly referred to as 'Wednesbury

unreasonableness'll. It applies to a decision which is so outrageous in its defiance

of logic or of accepted moral standards that no sensible person who had applied his

mind to the question to be decided could have arrived at it.

In Regina v. Hull University Visitor, Ex parte Page Lord Browne-Wilkinson, after

considering the aforementioned passage of Lord Diplock, observed as follows :

"Over the last 40 years, the courts have developed general principles of judicial

review. The fundamental principle [of judicial review] is that the courts will

intervene to ensure that the powers of public decision-making bodies are exercised

lawfully. In all cases, save possibly one, this intervention by way of prohibition

or certiorari is based on the proposition that such powers have been conferred on

the decision-maker on the underlying assumption that the powers are to be

exercised only within the jurisdiction conferred, in accordance with fair procedures

and, in a Wednesbury sense reasonably. If the decision-maker exercises his powers

outside the jurisdiction conferred, in a manner which is procedurally irregular or

is Wednesbury unreasonable, he is acting ultra vires his powers and therefore

unlawfully. "

We hold that in the instant application, the Respondents have wrongly applied the

provisions of the Land Development Ordinance, where they held that the said nomination

was not registered in accordance with Section 60 of the said Ordinance. They have failed

to consider the applicability of Section 87 of the said Ordinance.

We hold that, if the particular nomination was endorsed by the government agent, before

it is issued to the permit holder, there is no requirement that it should be registered under

the Land Development Ordinance.

Page 9 of 9

The next question before this Court is, even in the absence of nomination, could the 6th

Respondent who claimed to be the eldest child of the Petitioners father, be the successor

to the Grant in question? We note that Section 51 of the Ordinance imposes restrictions

on the nomination of the successor to the holding.

Section 72 of the Ordinance provides that when there is no successor has been nominated

or the successor nominated has failed to succeed, the title to the land devolves as

prescribed in Rule 1 of the Third Schedule. The said Rule provides for the relatives from

whom the successor may be nominated. In the particular Schedule, preference is given to

the oldest child as the successor to the impugned premises.

However, through the amendment made by Act No.11 of 2022 to the Ordinance, Rule

1(d)(i)of the Third Schedule provides thus:

where any person in the order of priority in which they are respectively mentioned

in the subjoined table developed such land, the title to the holding or the land shall

not devolve on the older person referred in paragraph (b) but on the person who

developed such land; or

In the instant case, when the Respondents made the decision as to who is the successor

to the Grant, this aspect was not considered.

In view of the reasoning provided above, we hold that the Petitioner has established the

grounds to issue writs as prayed for in the petition. Therefore, this Court issues writs of

Certiorari and Mandamus as prayed in prayers (b), (c), (d), (e) and (f).

Application allowed with costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

N. Bandula Karunarathna (P/CA), J.

I AGREE

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL