WRT/0517/24

Page 1 of 20

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Orders in

the nature of Writs of Certiorari and

Mandamus under and in terms of Article

140 of the Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Elisha Industries (Pvt) Ltd,

No. 196/A1, Sangabo Mawatha,

2nd Galawilawaththa,

Homagama.

PETITIONER

C.A. Case No. WRT/0517/24

Vs.

1. Disna Jayasinghe,

Divisional Secretary,

Divisional Secretariat,

Bandaragama.

2. M.J. Gunasiri,

Commissioner General of Excise,

No. 353, Kotte Road,

Rajagiriya.

3. Kapila Senanayake,

Director General,

Department of Fiscal Policy,

The Secretariat,

Colombo 01.

WRT/0517/24

Page 2 of 20

4. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

BEFORE : K.M.G.H. KULATUNGA, J

COUNSEL : Eraj De Silva P.C., with Damindu Wijerathne and Naveed

Ahmed, instructed by Dimuthu Kuruppuarachchi, for the

Petitioner.

Zuhri Zain, DSG, for the Respondents.

ARGUED ON : 13.06.2025

DECIDED ON : 17.07.2025

JUDGEMENT

K.M.G.H. KULATUNGA, J

1. The petitioner a company incorporated under the Companies Act, is

inter alia seeking a writ of mandamus directing the 1st respondent

Divisional Secretary to issue a F.L.4 licence.

Facts

2. The petitioner desirous of engaging in the business of selling liquor,

submitted an application in March 2023 under the Excise Ordinance

for a F.L.4 licence. The said application was preferred in accordance

with Excise Notifications bearing No. 902, No. 983, and No. 20/2024

and the provisions of the Excise Ordinance. It is not in dispute that the

petitioner had submitted the necessary documentation and satisfied all

requirements and conditions. The, the application has been then

referred to the 1st respondent Divisional Secretary who has then

reported to the 2nd respondent Commissioner General of Excise,

WRT/0517/24

Page 3 of 20

informing of a public objection and protest and a possible threat to

public order. An inquiry into this had been caused to be held by the 2nd

respondent on 15.09.2023 and the 2nd respondent has also appointed

a Special Committee comprising of three Commissioners and a further

inquiry had been held. Upon the said inquiry, the 2nd respondent being

satisfied of there being no violation of any condition or other

requirement in terms of the Excise Notification No. 902 as well as No.

02/2024, including on the issue of public protest, the Commissioner

General of Excise, with the approval of the Minister of Finance, granted

the exclusive privilege of selling liquor to the petitioner under Section

19 of the Excise Ordinance. Then the 1st respondent was directed by

letter dated 22.07.2024 (P-6) to issue the licence as required by Section

18.

3. The petitioner has paid a sum of Rs. 1,000,000/= for the F.L.4 licence,

a sum of Rs. 500,000/= as security deposit, a sum of Rs. 250,000/= as

access fee and also a sum of Rs. 50,000/= as a further security deposit.

In total, the petitioner has paid a sum of 1.8 million rupees on

22.07.2024. According to the petitioner, he had met the 1st respondent

on 22.07.2024 and offered to make the payment of the relevant licence

fee and requested for the issue of the licence. The 1st respondent has

refused and not issued the licence. The petitioner has then written to

the 1st respondent through his Attorney-at-Law. It is the position of the

petitioner that the 1st respondent has decided not to accept the licence

fee, and accordingly refused and did not grant the licence to the

petitioner. This refusal is inter alia alleged to be ultra vires, arbitrary,

and unreasonable, and it is also alleged that it is in violation of the rules

of natural justice.

4. This application was then instituted and the petitioner is seeking the

following substantive relief from this Court: writs of certiorari quashing

the 1st respondents decision to not accept the licence fee in relation to

the F.L.4 licence and to not grant the petitioner the said licence; and

WRT/0517/24

Page 4 of 20

writs of mandamus directing the 1st respondent to accept the licence fee

in relation to the F.L.4 licence, and to grant the petitioner the said

licence.

5. All the respondents by way of objections have taken up the position that

as there had been public protests in the area, an inquiry was conducted

in terms of Condition 1 of P-2(1). The relevant Excise Commissioners

Report was produced marked R-3, according to which there is a strong

possibility of a breach of peace due to the objection of certain Buddhist

organizations and Buddhist clergy of that locality. It is the respondents

position that a liquor licence had not been issued in terms of Section

18 of the Excise Ordinance. It is also stated that the 1st respondent has

the power to grant the liquor licence in terms of Section 18. The

respondents also take up the position that letters marked P-6 and P-8

have expired and nothing more can be done on the side of the

respondents, unless the petitioner is willing to relocate the intended

premises. The respondents claim that an inquiry was finally held on

15.09.2023 upon which the 1st respondent has called for a Report from

the Police which once again revealed the likelihood of a threat to the

maintenance of law and order.

Power to issue the licence

6. The respondents submit that, subject to specific exceptions, the power

to grant the licence lies with the 1st respondent, by virtue of Section 18 of

the Excise Ordinance. Sections 18 and 19 primarily provides for the

issue of licences. Sections 18 and 19 reads as follows:

18. No excisable article shall be sold, or kept or exposed for sale,

without a licence from the Government Agent: Provided that

a) a person having the right to the toddy drawn from any tree

may sell the same without a licence to a person licensed to

manufacture and sell toddy under this Ordinance or to a

person licensed under this Ordinance to manufacture arrack or

vinegar from toddy;

WRT/0517/24

Page 5 of 20

b) a licence for sale in more than one administrative district shall

be granted by the Commissioner-General of Excise;

c) nothing in this section applies to the sale of any foreign liquor

legally procured by any person for his private use and sold by

him or by auction on his behalf, or on behalf of his

representatives in interest upon his quitting a station or after

his decease.

19. (1) The Commissioner-General of Excise may with the

approval of the Minister grant to any person on such conditions

and for such period as he may deem fit the exclusive privilege

a. of manufacturing, or of supplying by wholesale, or of

both; or

b. of selling by wholesale or by retail; or

c. of manufacturing, or of supplying by wholesale, or of

both, and of selling by retail, any country liquor within

any local area; or

d. of selling any foreign liquor by retail in a tavern within

any local area under a tavern licence prescribed by rule

made under section 32 or by direction of the Minister

issued under section 25.

(2) No grantee of any privilege under this section shall exercise

the same until he has received a licence in that behalf from the

Government Agent.

7. It is necessary to consider the provisions of Section 18 with Section 19

to ascertain as to who exactly is vested with the power and the

discretion to grant a F.L.4 licence. Prior to proceeding further, it is

relevant to briefly state the procedure prescribed by the Excise

Ordinance and the Regulations and followed in the issuance of licences

of this nature. Section 19 clearly confers a discretion on the

Commissioner General of Excise to grant the said privilege inter alia of

selling by wholesale or retail any liquor. The use of the words may

WRT/0517/24

Page 6 of 20

grant clearly signifies the conferring of a discretion. In contrast, Section

18, prohibits the sale of any excisable article without a licence obtained

from the Government Agent. Similarly, Section 19(2) prohibits a grantee

of a privilege under Section 19(1) from exercising the same until he

receives a licence from the Government Agent. Section 18 prohibits any

person from engaging in the sale of liquor without a licence from the

Government Agent. However, Section 18 does not expressly or otherwise

confer a discretion on the Government Agent in the issuance of a

licence. The scheme of granting a licence under the Excise Ordinance

appears to be a combined effect of the operation of Sections 18 and 19.

Thus when the Commissioner General conveys to the Government

Agent of his decision to grant the privilege, the Government Agent is

required to issue the relevant licence in the prescribed form, upon

collecting any fee that may be levied

8. The cumulative effect of these provisions is that when the grant of the

privilege by the Commissioner General of Excise acting under Section

19 is made, such grantee of the privilege or the applicant of the licence

is required to obtain the relevant licence from the Divisional Secretary.

9. Thus, it is the Commissioner General of Excise who is empowered and

conferred with the discretion to grant or refuse the privilege of a F.L.4

licence. If the Commissioner General of Excise, grants the privilege, it

then will be conveyed to the Divisional Secretary. The Divisional

Secretary is then required to make available to the grantee/applicant

the licence as provided for by Section 18. There is no discretion vested

with the Divisional Secretary by Section 18 but is required to issue the

licence in the prescribed form. In Samadasa vs. Wijeratne,

Commissioner-General of Excise and Others [1999] 2 Sri LR 85, the

Supreme Court has clearly held that the Commissioner-General of

Excise, was the person empowered by law to issue or refuse the licence.

WRT/0517/24

Page 7 of 20

10. Sections 18 and 19 makes a distinction and a critical separation of the

granting of the privilege and issuing the licence. To my mind, when a

decision is made under Section 19 to grant the privilege, such decision

ipso facto creates a right in favour of the grantee/applicant. Then, with

the relevant fees being paid and accepted, it creates a legitimate

expectation to receive from the Divisional Secretary the licence under

Section 18. This legitimate expectation will create a right to be issued

with the licence under Section 18. The said right so accrued to the

grantee/applicant will correspondingly create an obligation and impose

a duty upon the Divisional Secretary to issue the licence under Section

18.

11. As seen above, there are two concepts referred to in Sections 18 and

19. Section 18 refers to a licence and Section 19, in contrast, refers to a

privilege. In the normal legal sense, the issuing of a licence is the grant

of the privilege to engage in what is so permitted by the licence. However,

according to the scheme and form of Sections 18 and 19, the granting of

the privilege precedes the issuing of the licence. In this context, when

the privilege is granted under Section 19, there is nothing to be granted

by issuing of the licence under Section 18. To my mind the issuing of

the licence is nothing more than the issuing of a document in a

prescribed form by which the granting of the privilege under Section 19

is manifested. What is critical and significant is that the Divisional

Secretary is neither conferred with the discretion nor the power to issue

a licence conferring a privilege in the conventional sense. This is

confirmed by the language and form in which Sections 18 and 19 (2) are

couched. Therefore, I am of the view that the Divisional Secretary under

the Excise Ordinance has been merely entrusted with the duty to issue

a document in the prescribed form manifesting the grant of the privilege

by the Commissioner General of Excise.

12. As explained above, what is conferred on the Divisional Secretary by

Section 18, read with Section 19 (2), is certainly not the power to grant

WRT/0517/24

Page 8 of 20

a licence but a consequential obligation and a resulting duty to issue a

licence in the prescribed form. Accordingly, the submission that the 1st

respondent is vested with the power to grant the licence is

misconceived.

Rule 21- threat to the maintenance of law and order

13. Rule 21 of the Excise Notification 902 provides as follows:

Any objection or protest received by the Commissioner General of

Excise from a member of organization of the public either before or

after the issue of a licence on the ground that there has been a

violation or non-compliance with any requirement of the Excise

Ordinance or the Guidelines and Conditions herein contained in

regard to the issue or continuance of a licence, will be notified by

the Commissioner General of Excise to the applicant or the licensee

as the case may be and will thereafter be inquired into by the

Commissioner General of Excise as to the validity thereof and

actions taken after such inquiry on the basis of the findings thereat

in such an inquiry, if it is found that the establishment continuing

the licence at that place may threat or likely threat to the

maintenance of law and order in the area, Commissioner General

of Excise can decide to relocate the licence premises to a suitable

place. This decision will be final.

According to the above, the Commissioner General is empowered to

inquire into and determine any objection or protest, of any violation or

non-compliance with any requirement of the Excise Ordinance or the

guidelines and conditions. The rule empowers the Commissioner

General inquire into any objection or protest received from a member of

organization of the public and after such inquiry if it is found that the

establishment continuing the licence at that place may be a threat or

likely threat to the maintenance of law and order in the area, decide to

relocate the licence premises to a suitable place. Thus if there be a

finding of a threat or likely threat to the maintenance of law and order

WRT/0517/24

Page 9 of 20

the sanction provided for is to relocate the licence premises to a suitable

place. Refusal or cancellation is not expressly provided for.

14. In view of the reported protests, the Commissioner General of Excise

has, in fact, held an inquiry through a Committee appointed by him, and

the Committee has communicated the decision by R-6 to the 2nd

respondent. Then, the 2nd respondent has, in turn, by letter P-6 and P-

8, dated 22.07.2024, requested the 1st respondent to take necessary

steps to issue the licence to the petitioner. Thereupon, the petitioner

himself has on 24.07.2024 requested for the licence from the 1st

respondent who had refused and not issued the same. The 1st

respondent had then obtained a Report once again from the Officer-in-

Charge of the relevant Police Station (R-8) and by letter dated

30.07.2024 (R-7), communicated the same to the 2nd respondent

Commissioner General of Excise and sought advice.

Legitimate Expectation

15. The petitioner alleges a denial of his legitimate expectation by the said

non-issue of the licence by the 1st Respondent. The petitioner has

complied with all the conditions and requirements under the rules of the

relevant Excise Notifications. The Commissioner General of Excise,

acting under Section 19 of the Excise Ordinance, has granted the

petitioner the privilege to engage in the sale of liquor. The Minister of

Finance has granted his approval for the same. That being so, the

Commissioner General then transmits the said approval to the 1st

respondent Divisional Secretary to issue a licence as required by Section

18 of the Excise Ordinance, by letter P-6 dated 22.07.2024. The 1st

respondent does not issue the licence on the apparent basis of public

protests and threat to public order.

16. In the case of Daffodils Hotels (Private) Limited and Another vs.

L.K.G. Gunawardana, Commissioner General of Excise and Others

WRT/0517/24

Page 10 of 20

(CA Writ 364/2016, decided on 16th November 2020), it was held as

follows:

As per Rule 21 of the Extraordinary Gazette No. 1544/17 dated

10.04.2008 (cited as Excise Notification No. 902) marked P22,

upon conducting an inquiryif it is found that the establishment

continuing the licence at the place may threat or likely threat to the

maintenance of law and order in the area, the Commissioner

General of Excise can decide to relocate the licence premises to a

suitable place and this decision will be final.

17. Thus, the decision in respect of the public protests or the threats to

maintenances of law and order is once again vested with the

Commissioner General of Excise, the 2nd respondent. However, in the

exercise of the functions, the 1st respondent Divisional Secretary may

report and notify the 2nd respondent of any such circumstance. The 2nd

respondent is thus empowered under Rule 21 to consider the same and

make a determination. In the present application, the 2nd respondent

has considered and determined the same, and upon so determining has

informed the 1st respondent to issue the F.L.4 licence (P-06). Further,

the Minister as empowered by Section 28A (1) has also directed and

approved the issue of the F.L.4 licence as applied for by the petitioner

(P-05). When an intimation is made to the 1st respondent under Section

28A of the Excise Ordinance, it is incumbent upon the Divisional

Secretary to issue the licence as required by Section 18. Section 28A, in

no uncertain terms, provides that the Minister is so empowered to direct

the authority granting a licence and when a direction is made under this

Section to grant the licence, such authority is required in mandatory

terms to give effect to such a direction.

18. The 1st respondent Divisional Secretary upon being informed of both

these directives, once again, withholds the issuing of the licence on

24.07.2024 and refers to the 2nd respondent the alleged possible threat

to the maintenance of law and order. To my mind, in these

WRT/0517/24

Page 11 of 20

circumstances, the 1st respondent Divisional Secretary could not have

refused to issue the licence and did not have any discretion to do so

either. However, the 1st respondent, by letter dated 29.07.2024 (P-9A)

has admitted that she did so act and referred the matter to the 2nd

respondent based on the Report R 8 of the local Police. Letter P-9A is

written to the petitioner. The 1st respondent informs the petitioner on

29.07.2024 that she had, by then, written to the 2nd respondent and has

sought instructions. However, according to the objections, the letter

seeking advice annexed marked R-7, is dated 30.07.2024 and the Police

Report claimed to have been annexed to the said letter is marked R-8 is

dated 31.07.2024.

19. Paragraphs 12 (e) and (f) of the objections aver that the 1st respondent

has so written to the 2nd respondent by letter dated 30.07.2024 along

with a Police Report, seeking advice on how to proceed with this matter.

Thereafter, copies of the letter dated 30.07.2024 and the Police Report

are annexed marked R-7 and R-8 respectively. I observe with

astonishment that the 1st respondent has annexed to a letter written on

30.07.2024, a Police Report dated 31.07.2024. It is obvious and

apparent that as at 30.07.2024, the Police Report R-8 could not have

been in existence. If so, I wonder how in paragraph 3 of R-7, the 1st

respondent specifically refers to the said Report and it is annexed as

Annexture 01. This is further confounded by the fact that the sending of

this letter is referred to in the 1st respondents letter dated 29.07.2024,

marked P-1A. The sum total of the above stated is that, for reasons best

known to the respondent, she has refused and deliberately not issued

the licence notwithstanding the directive of the Minister as well as that

of the 2nd respondent.

20. As afore said, when the 1st respondent was called upon by the petitioner

to issue the licence, she makes out P-9A, claiming to have sought advice

from the 2nd respondent. It is in the past tense. She states that,

WRT/0517/24

Page 12 of 20

, ... but the letter

1R-7 which had been so sent is dated 30.07.2024. What is stated in P-

9A cannot be true and is impossible. To cap it all, the 1st respondent

annexes a Police Report R-8 dated 31.07.2024 to the letter 1R-7 dated

30.07.2024. I am at a loss to understand how the 1st respondent

annexed a letter which was not in existence when she wrote 1R-7. The

contents of these three documents, 1R-7. R-8, and P-9A, when

considered in conjunction with their relevant dates, it is apparent that

they cannot be true and correct. This is a clear indication that the 1st

respondent for some reason has been of one mind to avoid the issuance

of the licence to the petitioner. In the similar matter of

Warnakulasuriya Joseph Nishantha Peiris vs. The Commissioner

General of Excise (CA/WRT/34/2020, decided on 15.02.2021), Justice

Arjuna Obeyesekere expressed the view that, one should exercise

caution when considering objections of the public given the possibility that

a public protest can be instigated by an interested party, which I have

observed is something that seems to be increasingly happening with

regard to the issuance of liquor licenses.

21. Thus, one should be cautious and consider with care if they are genuine

objections, and endeavour to exclude the possibility of public protests

being instigated by interested parties. It is with great sadness that I

observe the conduct of the 1st respondent from the very inception has

been to prevent the issuing of the F.L.4 licence to the petitioner at all

cost. This is confirmed and put beyond doubt by the totally inconsistent

letters which are on the face of it so improbable that it must in all

probabilities be false. What is more serious and significant is that the

respondents, including the 1st respondent have sworn and tendered an

affidavit testifying to the above facts which may amount to tendering of

a false affidavit.

22. Getting back to the main issue, the petitioner has made payments up

to 1.8 million rupees as being the relevant levies and fees for the

WRT/0517/24

Page 13 of 20

issuance of the said licence. Mr, Eraj de Silva P.C submitted that, the

approval of the 2nd respondent and the Minister along with the paying

and accepting the due payments create a legitimate expectation on the

part of the petitioner. Legitimate expectation may be procedural or

substantive. I will now endeavour to consider the legal position and the

principle of legitimate expectation as is relevant to this application. Prof.

Craig in Administrative Law 7th ed. at p.677, defines procedural and

substantive legitimate expectation as follows:

The phrase procedural legitimate expectation denotes the

existence of some process right the applicant claims to possess as

the result of a promise or behaviour by the public body that

generates the expectation .. The phrase substantive

legitimate expectation captures the situation in which the

applicant seeks a particular benefit or commodity, such as a

welfare benefit or a license, as the result of some promise,

behaviour or representation made by the public body.

23. The ideology of substantive legitimate expectation originated in the

landmark case of R vs. Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries and Food,

ex parte Hamble (Offshore) Fisheries Ltd. [1995] 2 All ER 714 where

Sedley, J., held as follows:

Legitimacy in this sense is not an absolute. It is a function of

expectations induced by government and of policy considerations

which militate against their fulfilment. The balance must in the first

instance be for the policy maker to strike; but if the outcome is

challenged by way of judicial review, I do not consider that the

Court's criterion is the bare rationality of the policy maker's

conclusion. While policy is for the policy-maker alone, the fairness

of his or her decision not to accommodate reasonable expectations

which the policy will thwart remains the Court's concern (as of

course the lawfulness of the policy). To postulate this is not to

place the judge in the seat of the Minister...but it is equally

the courts duty to protect the interests of those individuals

WRT/0517/24

Page 14 of 20

whose expectation of different treatment has a legitimacy

which in fairness outtops the policy choice which threatens

to frustrate it. [emphasis added].

24. The abovementioned dictum has been cited with approval in

Dayaratne v. Minister of Health and Indigenous Medicine (1999) 1

SLR 393, Nimalsiri vs. Fernando (SC/FR/256/2010, decided on 17th

September 2015), and in M. R. C. C. Ariyarathne and others vs.

Inspector General of Police and others (SC/FR/444/2012, decided

on 30th July 2019). In M. R. C. C. Ariyarathne and others vs.

Inspector General of Police and others (supra), Prasanna

Jayawardena, PC, J., after an extensive and all-encompassing analysis

on the doctrine of legitimate expectation, cited with approval the

following dicta of Dehideniya, J.,s decision in Zamrath vs. Sri Lanka

Medical Council (SC/FR/119/2019, decided on 23.07.2019), as the

rationale underlying the doctrine of legitimate expectation:

The legitimate expectation of a person . further ensures legal

certainty which is imperative as the people ought to plan their lives,

secure in the knowledge of the consequences of their actions. The

perception of legal certainty deserves protection, as a basic tenet

of the rule of law which this court attempts to uphold as the apex

court of the country. The public perception of legal certainty

becomes negative when the authorities by their own undertakings

and assurances have generated legitimate expectations of people

and subsequently by their own conduct, infringe the so generated

expectations.

25. Further, in Siriwardane vs. Seneviratne and four others [2011] 2 SLR

1, Dr. Shirani Bandaranayake, J. (as she was then) held that,

A careful consideration of the doctrine of legitimate expectation,

clearly shows that, whether an expectation is legitimate or not is a

question of fact. This has to be decided not only on the basis of the

application made by the aggrieved party before court, but also

WRT/0517/24

Page 15 of 20

taking into consideration whether there had been any arbitrary

exercise of power by the administrative authority in question.

26. On an analysis of the abovementioned authorities, it is clear that the

petitioner had a legitimate expectation to be issued with the F.L.4 license

in terms of Section 18 of the Excise Ordinance. This so as the 2nd

respondent Commissioner General of Excise granted the petitioner the

exclusive privilege of engaging in the sale of liquor under Section 19 of

the Excise Ordinance. This expectation was further reinforced when the

petitioner did make payments totaling Rs. 1.8 million being the relevant

licence fees and charges.

27. In the scheme established by Sections 18 and 19 of the Excise

Ordinance, once the Commissioner General of Excise has exercised his

discretion and granted the privilege, the duty of the Divisional Secretary

under Section 18 is obligatory and purely administrative and not

discretionary. Then, with the relevant fees being made and accepted, it

creates a legitimate expectation on the part of the petitioner receive the

license under Section 18 from the Divisional Secretary.

28. This expectation is both reasonable and legitimate, having arisen from

an express decision of the 2nd respondent. The subsequent conduct of

the 1st respondent in refusing to issue the license, despite the directive

from the 2nd respondent and the Minister of Finance, constitutes a

breach of the petitioners legitimate expectation as it has been found to

be arbitrary, unreasonable, and ultra vires.

Futility

29. It was submitted on behalf of the respondent that since this application

is in respect of a licence for the calendar year 2024, with the lapse of

time, this application has now become futile. In support of this

argument, the learned DSG has relied on the decision of Justice Arjuna

Obeyesekere in Warnakulasuriya Joseph Nishantha Peiris vs. The

WRT/0517/24

Page 16 of 20

Commissioner General of Excise (CA/WRT/34/2020, decided on

15.02.2021):

The learned State Counsel submitted that this application is futile

as the period for which the licence has been sought has expired.

He submitted further that as the Writ of Mandamus is a

discretionary remedy, this Court would not exercise its discretion

where it would be futile to do so or where it would be an exercise

in vain.

During the course of the argument, it was submitted that fresh

bids have been called to issue licences for 2021. Hence, quashing

the notice P11 by which fresh bids were called, for the year 2020,

is futile. Similarly, a Writ of Mandamus directing that the licence

for 2020 be issued is also futile. Hence, I agree with the submission

of the learned State Counsel that granting of any relief would be

an exercise in vain. On this ground too, the Petitioners application

must fail.

30. A court exercising discretionary jurisdiction has the discretion to refuse

relief where the order sought is likely to be futile. This is so when the

order sought is likely to lack practical effect, have no real consequences

or cannot be enforced. Courts may refuse to make such orders. The

rationale as I see is judicial economy so to say and doing so may have

the propensity of undermining the respect for the legal system and the

administration of justice. Thus, when a court is called to exercise the

discretionary writ jurisdiction it will deny and refuse such an application

which evidently has no practical utility and is futile. This principle is

settled law and in the case of Samastha Lanka Nidahas Grama

Niladhari Sangamaya vs. Dissanayake (2013) BLR 68, it was held

that,

It is trite law that no court will issue a mandate in the nature of

writ of certiorari or mandamus where to do so would be vexatious

or futile.

WRT/0517/24

Page 17 of 20

Then Marsoof PC., J., in the case of Ratnasiri and others vs. Ellawala

(2004) SLR 180, and others held that;

This court is mindful of the fact that the prerogative remedies it is

empowered to grant in these proceedings are not available as of

right. The court has a discretion in regard to the grant of relief in

the exercise of its supervisory jurisdiction. It has been held time

and time again by our Courts that A writ... will not issue where it

would be vexatious or futile. See, P.S. Bus Co. Ltd. v Members

and Secretary of the Ceylon Transport Board. (61 NLR 491,

496).

31. No doubt, the present application is for a licence for the year 2024.

However this is not an application for a renewal but for a new licence in

the first instance. It is in the scheme of the Excise Ordinance and

Regulations, that once a new licence is obtained, it will be renewable

annually. Accordingly, since this is an application for a new licence, the

mere effluxion of time will not render this application futile. Accordingly

this submission is misconceived.

32. In the above circumstance, I find that the petitioner has complied with

all requirements and conditions to obtain an F.L.4 licence and the 2nd

respondent and the Minister have granted the necessary approval and

direction. The relevant fees have been paid and accepted. The issue of

public protests and the threat to the maintenance of law and order, has

been inquired into and considered by the 2nd respondent, and has

decided to issue the licence. In these circumstances, the 1st respondent

is not lawfully entitled to withhold or refuse the issuance of the licence

to the petitioner.

33. It is the submission of the learned DSG that the 1st respondent did not

issue the licence to the petitioner primarily due to the objections

substantiated by Police Reports. I have herein above held that the

WRT/0517/24

Page 18 of 20

Divisional Secretary is left with no discretion but to issue the licence.

That being the effect and import of the statutory provision, I would now

consider the veracity of reasons given by the 1st respondent Divisional

Secretary for not issuing the licence to the petitioner when the petitioner

requested for the same on 24.07.2024. That being so, the most critical

issue is that when the 1st respondent refused to issue the licence on

24.07.2024, there was no fresh protest or information of any threat to

the maintenance of public order. According to the Police Report annexed

to letter dated 30.07.2024, a protest is alleged to have been held on

28.07.2024. The Police Report is dated 31.07.2024. In these

circumstances, the 1st respondent does not appear to have had any

tangible material or reasonable information of any public protests or

other threat as at 24.07.2024. The 1st respondent ought to have

necessarily issued the licence under Section 18. The previous alleged

protests and the Police Reports cannot be relevant as the Commissioner

General of Excise had inquired into the same and directed the issuance

of the licence by letters P-6 and P-8 dated 22.07.2024. The 1st

respondent could not lawfully have relied on the previous events and

incidents to refuse and not issue the licence. In the above premises, it is

apparent and the only inference is that the 1st respondent Divisional

Secretary, for reasons best known to her, has been of one mind to refuse

the issuance of the licence to the petitioner. The 1st respondent has

clearly unreasonably and unlawfully refused and not issued the licence

on 24.07.2024 when requested. Having so refused, it appears that a

public protest was instigated or orchestrated on 28.07.2024 and an

adverse Police Report was then obtained on 31.07.2024. Be that as it

may, these events on which the 1st respondent relies on to justify the

refusal to issue the licence on 24.07.2024 were non-existent as at that

date. Therefore the refusal to issue or the non-issuance of the licence on

the said day is arbitrary, capricious, and clearly unreasonable. It does

not end there. It is undoubtedly apparent that the refusal was due to

some extraneous consideration which remains undisclosed, and a

WRT/0517/24

Page 19 of 20

mystery. The petitioner correspondingly had a legitimate expectation to

receive the licence and a right to obtain the same.

34. The learned DSG by way of a motion brought to the Notice of Court a

policy decision to stop the issue of F.L.4 licences and an interim order

made in SC/FR/131/2023, which is as follows:

This Court prohibits the Respondents in SC/FR Nos. 116/2023,

131/2023, and 138/2023 from deciding or acting in any manner

contrary to the provisions of the Excise Ordinance, Rules made

thereunder and other applicable law, insofar as the acceptance

and processing of applications for liquor licences and granting of

corresponding licence under the two regimes provided for in the

Excise Ordinance are concerned.

This Interim Order shall prevail and remain in force till this Court

decides on the grant or otherwise of Leave to Proceed as well as

make other interim orders as prayed for by the Petitioners and

deemed appropriate by Court.

In this application, the privilege under Section 19 has been granted and

the fees and levies have already been charged and accepted. The only

outstanding issue is the administrative act of the issuance of the

document of the licence under Section 18. Therefore, the policy decision

and the interim order, as I see, is no bar, and does not prevent this Court

from determining this application.

Conclusion

35. Accordingly, I hold that the petitioner is entitled to the relief as prayed

for by paragraph (c) of the prayer, and accordingly, writs of mandamus

are issued;

a. directing the 1st respondent to accept the licence fee (if any) and

issue the F.L.4 licence as set out by letters marked P-5 and P-6;

WRT/0517/24

Page 20 of 20

b. directing the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd respondents singularly or

collectively, to issue the F.L.4 licence to the petitioner, as set out

in letters P-5 and P-6.

The petitioner is also entitled to seek a renewal of the licence for the

year 2025.

36. I have found and concluded that the 1st respondent has acted

maliciously, and her conduct is mala fide, especially in refusing to issue

the licence on 24.07.2024. It was also found that the several letters by

the 1st respondent between 22.07.2024 and 31.07.2024 and annextures

thereto, cannot co-exist and be truthful, and to that extent are false.

These facts which are false and incorrect on the face of it, are so deposed

to in the affidavit tendered to this Court by the 1st respondent. This

amounts to civil contempt. In these circumstances, the 1st respondent

is ordered to pay exemplary costs in a sum of Rs. 50,000/= and the same

be paid to the petitioner. Application is allowed with costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL