1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of Section 331 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 and in terms of Article 138 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka Complainant Court of Appeal Case No. CA HCC 123/2013 Vs. Kegalle High Court No. HC 3052/2011

Murugaiya Chandramogan, Kiragalawatta, Pahala Kotasa, Kuruvita. Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN Murugaiya Chandramogan, Kiragalawatta, Pahala Kotasa, Kuruvita. Accused-Appellant Vs. Hon. Attorney General, Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12. Complainant-Respondent

2

Before: Sampath B. Abayakoon, J. Amal Ranaraja, J.

Counsel: Saliya Pieris, P.C. with Thanuka Nandasiri for the Accused- Appellant.

Shanil Kularatne, A. S. G. for the Complainant-Respondent. Argued on: 23.10.2024 Decided on: 12.12.2024

JUDGMENT

AMAL RANARAJA, J.

1. The Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the appellant)

was indicted in the High Court of Kegalle on the following counts:

Count 1

That on or about 8th of July 2009, the appellant

committed the murder of one Ekanayake Mudiyanselage

Deepika Subhashini Dayarathne which is an offence

punishable under Section 296 of the Penal Code.

Count 2

That in the same transaction the appellant committed

the offence of robbery by robbing a mobile phone of the

deceased Ekanayake Mudiyanselage Deepika

Subhashini Dayarathne which is an offence punishable

under Section 380 of the Penal Code.

3

Count 3

That in the same transaction the appellant committed

the offence of robbery by robbing a gold chain of the

deceased Ekanayake Mudiyanselage Deepika

Subhashini Dayarathne which is an offence punishable

under Section 380 of the Penal Code.

2. The appellant has pleaded not guilty to all three counts and the

matter has proceeded to trial without a jury.

3. At the conclusion of the trial, the Learned High Court Judge has

found the appellant guilty of all three counts, convicted and

sentenced the appellant to death in respect of the 1st count,

sentenced to 10 years imprisonment each in respect of the 2nd

and 3rd counts, also fined Rs. 10,000 each in respect of the latter

counts and imposed default terms of five years each.

4. The appellant aggrieved by the judgment and the sentencing order

has preferred the instant appeal to this Court.

5. The Learned Presidents Counsel for the appellant formulated the

following grounds of appeal in open Court when the matter was

taken up for argument;

i. Is the circumstantial evidence adduced by the

prosecution insufficient to establish the guilt of the

appellant?

4

ii. Was the evidence of PW-03 adduced under section 33 of

the Evidence Ordinance not admissible in law?

iii. Has the Learned High Court Judge failed to consider the

explanation given in the dock statement by the

appellant?

6. PW-01 and PW-02 are the parents of the deceased. The

deceased has lived with her parents on an estate in Galpatha,

Ruwanwella. The deceased, as a 21-year-old woman, had been

employed in a garment factory situated in the Yatiyanthota area.

She has left home on 08.07.2009 to engage in her vocation but

has not returned home on that day. On 09.07.2009, the

Yatiyanthota Police have received a 119 call and details regarding

a body of a female lying in an area allocated for a cemetery close

to the house in which the deceased was living, have been disclosed

by such telephone call.

7. The body of the female has subsequently been identified to be

that of the deceased. The post-mortem examination on the

deceased has been conducted by Dr. H. P. Wijewardena [PW-12]

and a post-mortem report issued. Dr. H. P. Wijewardena has

observed a total of 19 injuries on the body of the deceased. 12 of

those injuries had been cut injuries. 3 of those cut injuries have

been to the neck of the deceased. The cut injuries to the neck have

completely severed the upper cervical spine cord and they have

5

been necessarily fatal. The post-mortem report has been marked

as -2.

8. The investigating officers have obtained telephone details of the

sim card issued in the name of the deceased. Based on the

information, the appellant has been taken in for questioning.

Subsequently, have also recorded the statements of PW-03, PW-

04, PW-11 and other witnesses. The investigating officers have

taken into their custody -1, -2, -3, i.e. items of

jewellery and a mobile phone which have been taken from the

possession of the deceased at the time the necessarily fatal

injuries were caused to her. Those items of evidence have been

placed before Court as productions at the trial.

9. The prosecution through the examination of its witnesses has

established the following:

i. The necessarily fatal injuries to the deceased had

been inflicted to her on 08.07.2009.

ii. That the deceased has used a mobile phone and its

IMEI number had been 35276101835683 (-3).

iii. The sim card number 0723747706 registered in

the name of the deceased had been coupled with

such mobile phone and that the deceased had used

the said sim card number 0723747706 to obtain

and receive calls.

6

iv. That the deceased had taken a call using the sim

card number coupled with the phone bearing IMEI

number 35276101835683 on 08.07.2009 at

05.59 hrs.

v. That the appellant had bought and registered under

his name the sim card bearing number

0728520283 on 08.07.2009 (-7).

vi. The appellant had coupled such sim card bearing

number 0728520283 with the mobile phone

bearing IMEI number 35276101835683 and taken

a call utilizing such mobile phone, on 08.07.2009

at 10.28 hrs.

vii. That the appellant on a subsequent date i.e. a few

days before 25.07.2009, sold the relevant mobile

phone to PW-11.

viii. The investigating officer who took in the appellant

on suspicion had taken into his custody the sim

card bearing number 0728520283 and the relevant

documents from the possession of the appellant.

ix. Upon the admission of the statement given by PW-

03 in the course of the investigation as per the

provisions in section 33 of the Evidence Ordinance,

it had transpired that the appellant had handed

over to PW-03 a gold chain (-1) and requested

7

from PW-03 that she pawned the gold-chain and

hand over the money received to PW-03.

x. That the appellant made such a request to PW-03

on 08.07.2009 between 09.00 hrs and 10.00 hrs

at Avissawella.

10. The Learned High Court Judge has drawn her attention to the

fact that -1 and -3 were stolen property and such property

was in the exclusive and recent possession of the appellant after

they have been taken from the possession of the deceased. In

those circumstances, she had determined that the appellant being

in possession of recently stolen property establish incriminating

circumstances which caused the appellant to appear guilty of the

crimes and throws on the appellant a duty to show that he got

such property innocently, further that the appellant was also duty

bound to give an explanation which in the opinion of the Court

might reasonably be true and which is consistent with his

innocence.

11. The Learned Presidents Counsel for the appellant contended

that when the prosecution made an application before the High

Court to admit the contents of the statement read out to PW-03

(Gangodage Chandrakanthi), at the non-summary inquiry, the

appellant objected to the same as PW-03 has not been subjected

to cross-examination at such inquiry. However, the Learned High

Court Judge has overruled the objection and permitted the

contents of such statement to be admitted as evidence of PW-03

as per the provisions in Section 33 of the Evidence Ordinance

8

No. 14 of 1895 on the basis that the appellant has been

represented by a Counsel and the Counsel himself had informed

Court that he does not wish to cross-examine PW-03 at the non-

summary inquiry. It is further contended that, the Learned High

Court Judge has misdirected herself in law by permitting the

prosecution to admit the contents of the statement made by PW-

03 at the time the investigations were conducted.

12. Further, the Learned Presidents Counsel in support of his

contention has drawn the attention of this Court to the provisions

in the Code of Criminal Procedure (Special Provisions) Act No.

42 of 2007 and Section 33 of the Evidence Ordinance No. 14

of 1895.

13. Section 6 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Special

Provisions) Act No. 42 of 2007 provides,

(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Chapter XV of

the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, No.15 of 1979, in

the course of holding of an inquiry under the aforesaid

Chapter, the following provisions shall apply to the

taking of statements of persons who know the facts

and circumstances of the case.

(2) Subject to the provisions of subsection (11), the

Magistrate shall read out, or cause to be read out to

every witness produced against the accused, in the

presence and hearing of the accused, the statement

9

made by the witness in the course of the investigation

conducted in terms of Chapter XI of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act, No.15 of 1979 and shall ask

the witness whether the statement is an accurate

record of what he had stated to the police.

(3) (a) If the witness states, in response to an inquiry made

of him under subsection (1), that the statement is an

accurate record of what he had stated to the police, the

Magistrate shall record that fact. The Magistrate shall

permit the witness, if the witness so desires, to make

such additions or alterations to his original statement.

Every such addition or alternative shall be recorded.

(b) The Magistrate shall not permit any cross

examination of the witness by the accused or his

pleader, but the Magistrate may put to the witness, any

clarification required by the accused or his pleader of

any matter arising from the statement made by the

witness in the course of the investigation, or any

additions or alterations to his original statement if any,

and may put to the witness any clarification which the

Magistrate himself may require of any such manner.

Every clarification so made shall be recorded:

Provided that having considered the nature of the

material contained in the statement of a witness made

10

to the police, the prosecution may tender the witness

for cross examination by the accused or his pleader.

(4) The Magistrate shall thereafter read out or cause to be

read out to the witness, the statement made by the

witness to Court affirming the accuracy of the

statement made by him in the course of the

investigation and the clarifications if any made by him

under subsection (2), and additions or alterations to his

original statement if any, made by him under

subsection (3), and shall require the witness to swear

or affirm to the truth of the matters recorded.

(5) (a) If on the other hand, the witness states in response

to an inquiry made of him under subsection (1), that the

statement is not, in its entirety or in part, an accurate

record of what he had stated to the police, the

Magistrate shall permit the witness to give an account

of the circumstance relating to the offence, or as the

case may be, to make such additions or alterations to

his original statement as the witness may wish to

make.

(b) The Magistrate shall not permit any cross-

examination of the witness by the accused or his

pleader but the Magistrate may put to the witness, any

clarification required by the accused or his pleader of

11

any matter arising from the account given, or additions

or alterations made by the witness or may put to the

witness any clarification that the Magistrate himself

may require of any such matter:

Provided that having considered the nature of the

material contained in the statement of a witness made

to the police, the prosecution may tender the witness

for cross-examination by the accused or his pleader.

(c) The Magistrate shall record the account given, or the

additions or alterations made by the witness under

paragraph (a) and any clarification made by the

witness under paragraph (b), and read out the same or

cause the same to be read out to the witness and shall

require the witness to swear or affirm to the truth of the

matters so recorded.

14. Section 33 of the Evidence Ordinance No. 14 of 1895 provides,

Evidence given by a witness in a judicial proceeding, or

before any person authorized by law to take it, is relevant,

for the purpose of proving, in a subsequent judicial

proceeding, or in a later stage or the same judicial

proceeding, the truth of the facts which it states, when the

witness is dead or cannot be found, or is incapable of giving

evidence, or is kept out of the way by the adverse party, or

if his presence cannot be obtained without an amount or

12

delay or expense which, under the circumstances of the

case, the court considers unreasonable:

Provided

(a) that the proceeding was between the same parties or

their representatives in interest;

(b) that the adverse party in the first proceeding had the

right and opportunity to cross-examine;

(c) that the questions in issue were substantially the same

in the first as in the second proceeding.

Explanation

A criminal trial or inquiry shall be deemed to be a

proceeding between the prosecutor and the accused

within the meaning of this section.

15. When one construes the sections referred to above, it is clear that

when holding a non-summary inquiry, the Magistrate is required

to read out to a witness, the statement made by such witness in

the course of an investigation conducted in terms of Chapter XI

of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act and ask the particular

witness whether such statement is accurate. If the witness

responds in the affirmative, the magistrate is required to record

such fact. If the particular witness desires to make additions or

alterations, such additions or alterations shall be recorded.

Further, the Magistrate shall not permit the cross-examination of

the witnesses. Further, the Magistrate may put to such witness

13

any clarification required on behalf of the accused of any matter

arising from the statement made by the witness.

16. However, there is also provision for the prosecution to tender for

cross-examination a witness whose evidence (statement made in

the course of the investigation), in the opinion of the prosecution,

is material to its case.

17. At the non-summary inquiry relevant to this case, the statements

made by the prosecution witnesses in the course of the

investigation have been read out to them by the Magistrate. If the

statements were accurate, the Magistrate has recorded such fact.

If alterations or additions were suggested to be made to the

original statement, the Magistrate has also recorded the same.

The Magistrate has not permitted the appellant or its counsel to

cross-examine the prosecution witnesses. Further, the

prosecuting officer/Counsel at the non-summary inquiry has not

tendered a single prosecution witness for cross-examination by

the appellant or his pleader.

18. Chapter XV of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of

1979 as amended by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Special

Provisions) Act No. 42 of 2007 (hereinafter referred to as the

Act) has brought about changes to the procedure adopted in

conducting a non-summary inquiry. The Act, has not conferred

upon the appellant a right to cross-examine the prosecution

witnesses. Further, such Act has been in existence when the

Learned Magistrate read out to PW-03 her statement at the non-

14

summary inquiry. The appellant therefore has had no opportunity

to cross-examine PW-03 in the non-summary inquiry as required

by the provisions in proviso (b) of Section 33 of the Evidence

Ordinance.

19. In those circumstances, the Learned High Court Judge has erred

in admitting the contents of the statement of PW-03 as evidence

in the manner she has done. The admission of the contents of

such statement as evidence is illegal.

20. The Learned High Court Judge in her impugned judgment dated

04.07.2013, at page 18 (page 178 of the brief) has concluded that

there is evidence of recent and unexplained possession by the

appellant of a stolen property, i.e. the mobile phone owned by the

deceased marked -3. She has also concluded further that there

existed telling evidence of eloquent circumstances that pointed to

the guilt of the appellant which remained unexplained by the

appellant.

I draw my attention to an excerpt from the High Court judgment

in pages 19 and 20,

. .

.

15

.

.

.

21. The Learned Presidents Counsel for the appellant has drawn the

attention of the Court to the dock statement and complained that

the appellant has explained the recent possession of -3. The

appellant making a dock statement has stated that he has picked

up the mobile phone marked -3 at an undisclosed location,

used it for some time and subsequently sold it to a third party

(Vide pages 159 and 160 of the Brief).

22. I now consider the principles relevant to the evaluation of a dock

statement. When evaluating dock statement, the following

guidelines must be considered;

i. A dock statement should be considered as evidence

subject to infirmities that it was not a sworn

statement and not tested by cross-examination.

ii. If the docks statement is believed, it must be acted

upon.

16

iii. If the dock statement creates a reasonable doubt in

the prosecutions case, the defence of the accused

must succeed.

iv. The dock statement of one accused person should

not be considered against the other accused.

23. Accordingly, the Learned High Court Judge has misdirected

herself when she concluded that the appellant has not explained

the recent possession of the mobile phone marked -3, owned

by the deceased and taken from her possession on the day the

injuries that were necessarily fatal were inflicted on her.

24. The Learned High Court Judge has also misdirected herself when

she concluded that the gold chain marked -1 and taken from

the possession of the deceased was in recent possession of the

appellant by relying on the evidence of PW-03 that has been

admitted in an illegal manner.

25. The date of the offence is 08.07.2009, hence, the concerned

offences have been committed over 15 years ago. Further, the

appellant has been kept in prison for 11 years as an accused who

has preferred an appeal to this Court. Therefore, it does not seem

just to call upon the appellant to defend himself after such an

unconscionable lapse of time.

In The Queen vs. G. K. Jayasinghe 69 NLR 314 at page 328,

Sansoni J, has stated,

we have considered whether we should order a new

trial in this case. We do not take that course, because

17

there has been a lapse of three years since the

commission of the offences, and because of our own view

of the unreliable nature of the accomplices evidence on

which alone the prosecution case rests.

We accordingly direct that the judgment of acquittal be

entered.

26. Hence, having considered the above matters of fact and law, I am

of the view that this is not a fit case to order a re-trial.

I acquit the appellant of the counts in the indictment.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to communicate the

judgment to the High Court of Kegalle for compliance.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

SAMPATH B. ABAYAKOON, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal