IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A.L.A.No. 156/2004

D.C.Gampaha No.4491L.

Karunawathie Wanniarachchi

1 st Lane, Kolawatte, udammita,

Weyangoda.

Plaintiff- Appellant

Vs

, 1. Madawita Withanage Sirisena,

92143, 4th Lane, Aluthgamawatte,

Yakkala.

2. Vihangulage Lal Perera

376/280, Samagi Mawatha,

Gampaha Road,

Yakkala.

3. Batakuta Pathrennehalage

Sylvyia Pathirana,

1

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

DECIDED ON

1

"Subasiri Niwasa"

Rafel Watte, Yakkala.

4. State Mortgage and Investment

Banlc.

269, Galle Road, Colombo 3.

Defendants- Respondents

Deepali Wijesundera J., M.M.A.Gaffoor,J.

W.R.J.Peiris with A. Amaratunga for the Appellant.

Milinda Gunthilaka D,S.G. for 4th Defendant-Respondent.

24.07.2015

14/0112016

1

2

M.M.A. Gaffoor J.

This application is filed in this Court to have set aside the Order

of the learned District Judge Gampaha dated 21.04.2004 where she has

held that the action filed by the plaintiff- petitioner cannot be

maintained against the defendant 4th respondent on the simple reason

that, there is an ouster clause in SEC 50 of Act No.13 of 1975 as

amended.

Counsel for the appellant submitted that whether the plaintiff can

maintain the action in the District COlirt against the 4th respondent or not,

if yes should the Order (P-5) dated April 21,2004 of the learned District

Judge be reversed. The plaintiff by her plaint sought among other things

to invalidate Mortgage Bond Nos. 22929 (P-IE) and 24128 (P-IF)

respectively dated October 6, 1998 and September 18, 2000 and held by

the 4th Respondent over two Lots' Nos. 12 & 7. The Pleading in

paragraphs Nos. 7,8 & 15 of the plaint (P-l) read with (q) ) (~ ) did

and does support this seeking and or application. The 4th respondent was

accordingly, made a party to the action in the District Court both as a

3

11

likely party to be an affected and a necessary party to adjudicate upon

the declaratory judgment sought.

The 4th respondent among other but primarily, relies on Perera Vs

Peoples Bank (1975) 78 NLR 329 which is a three bench judgment. The

said case has no force of law anymore and has been superseded by

Ranasinghe Vs The Ceylon State Mortgage Bank 1981 SLR Vol. 1 121 a

five judge bench Ranasinge's case was an appeal form the District Court

to the Court of Appeal and then to the Supreme Court. Their Lordships

has reviewed all noteworthy judgments up to that time including Perera

V s People Bank and arrive at their decision. It was not a writ

application neither did their Lordships hold that the application should

not be by way of an appeal nor even hint anything in obiter. Their

lordships have duly held that Section 217 (d) & (g) of Civil procedure

Code has conferred adequate powers / jurisdiction to the District Court

i

to grant the declaratory relief sought surely and manifestly including

those in the nature of what is being asked in the instant case.

4

1

The counsel for the appellant further submitted that the plaint

alleges fraud. The main matter in this case relate to unraveling of a

fraud. In this connection the judgment of Lord Denning LJ & Lord

Paker LJ in Lazaru Estates Ltd. Vs. Beasley (1956) lQB 702(1956) 1

All ER 341is cited which is self-explanatory. It is urged that the

approach therein being considered as persuasive to the matter of the

instant case. Non compliance with section 76 of the CPC by the 4th

respondent is fatal: The resolution of the 4th respondent has been issued

by the time plaint was filed if the jurisdiction of the District Court has

been out stead by it the 4th respondent in compliance with Section 76 of

CPC should have in its answer averred traversing Jurisdiction of the

Court unambiguously and by a separate averment. It was no done so

and therefore the 4th respondent is barred by law to raise this issue later.

Counsel for the appellant stated that the contested order dated April 21 st

2004 is not founded on the vacation of interim relief; it was orally urged

by the counsel for the 4th respondent in the Court of Appeal that the

contested order dated April 21,2004 was made on the basis of and

connected to the vacation of the stay order granted. The reading of both

these orders well manifest that there is no such order connection. The

5

learned District Judge made no such between the order P3 and P5 . He

purely relied on an interpretation of Section 50 above referred to.

To consider this position I would like to look in to the basic facts

of this case. The plaintiff-petitioner has filed the case bearing No/4491L

seeking the plaintiff -petitioner to declare inter alia as the lawful owner

as to say the title of the allotments of lands more fully described in the

schedules to the plaint. The claim of the plaintiff- petitioner is that the

1 st defendant-respondent has registered a forged deed in respect of 4 lots

of the land. Thereafter, the 1 st respondent had two lots to the 2nd and 3rd

defendant-respondent. Moreover, the 1st and the 3rd respondents had

mortgaged two lots to the 4th defendant-respondent by a mortgage

bound.

The Plaintiff-petitioner sought, in the said District Court case an

interim injunction against all respondents including the 4th. Following

the vacation of the enjoining order and at the next stage of the

proceedings of the case, the 4th Defendant-respondent has taken a

6

preliminary objection that the plaintiff-petitioner cannot maintain this

action against the 4th Defendant-Respondent.

Their point of law is that the District Court has no jurisdiction to

proceed against the 4th Defendant-respondent in terms of Section 50 of

the State Mortgage and Investment Bank Law No.13 of 1975. It is my

duty to consider whether the learned District Judge has given her full

consideration to the basic principles of the law in construction of the

said provision and also to the ratio of the judgment Hewawasam Vs. ,

Peoples Bank.

Whether the plaint can maintain the action in the District Court

against the 4th Respondent or not, if yes should the order (P-5) dated

April 21, 2004 of the learned District Judge be reversed.

7

11

I

! !If ! ,Ii

~

fft

The 4th respondent advances two arguments ( a) the District Court

has no jurisdiction and or declaratory power over the purported

resolution. Therefore the order made is corrected. (b) The plaintiff if

aggrieved, should have come by way of a writ and not by way of an

appeal as she in effect challenges the validity of a resolution issued by

the 4th respondent exercising statutorily granted power. The 4th

respondent among other but primarily, relies on Perera Vs. People

Bank (1975) 78 NLR 329 which is a three bench judgment. The said

case has no force of law anymore and has been superseded by

Ranasinghe vs The Ceylon State Mor;tgage Bank 1981 SLR Vol.1 121 a

five judge Bench.

The main matter in this case relates to unraveling of a fraud. In this

connection the judgment of Lord Denning LJ & lord Parker LJ in lazarus

Estates Ltd. V s. Beasley (1956) I QB 702, (1956) I All ER 341. Is cited

which is self-explanatory.

I have to; though reluctantly answer the above questions in the negative. I

perused Hewawasam Vs. People Bank. I am also in full agreement with

8

11

their Lordships findings. The learned District Judge has failed to read the

Section 50 of the said Act No.13 of 1975 as mended in its true sense.

Moreover, she has failed to understand the rationale of the said judgment.

Therefore it is the duty of this Court to place it in its proper track.

This Section goes as follows ...... .

. . . .. . . .. it shall not be competent for the borrower or any person claiming

through or under any disposition whatsoever of the right, title or interest of

the borrower to and in the property made or registered subsequent to the

date of the mortgage to the bank, in ,any Court to move to invalidate the

said resolution for any cause whatsoever, and no Court shall entertain any

such application.

To apply this section it should pertains to

A. The borrower

B. Or any person claiming through or under any disposition ..... right,

title, interest of the Borrower ...

9

1t

I hold that the plaintiff-petitioner in this case does not fall into the

above categories. He is not the borrower nor claiming through or under

any disposition ........ right, title, interest of the borrower. Moreover, the

intention of the legislature is crystal clear that it has intended to prevent

endless civil litigation by a borrower after a resolution to public auction

of a mortgaged property by the Banle Therefore, I hold that this case

does not fall within the purview of Section 50 of Act No.13 of 1975 as

amended.

Therefore, the ouster clause has no application to this case, hence

, I proceed to set aside the order of the learned District Judge Gampaha

dated 21.04.2004 and hold that the plaintiff-petitioner can maintain this

case against the 4th defendant-respondent.

Having ordered that I would like to place on record the following:

I have carefully perused this case record and found that the cause of

action has arisen out of several deeds of transfer executed by one

Gamini Dissanayake.

10

l

! I I III !

i

He is not a respondent in this case. I can't perceive how the

[

plaintiff is going to succeed his case without bringing this Gamini iDissanayake into the picture, who is the best person to answer about l

!

j

I

these conflicting deeds.

Considering the above fact and circumstances of this appeal, the

appeal is allowed and the objection of the 4th respondent is refused with Il costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL.

DeepaH Wijesundrara,J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

11

tt