==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0005/20222

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal Case No. Udaya Kumar Suresh Kumar alias

CA/HCC/ 0005/2022 Nalinda

High Court of Colombo

Case No. HC/7852/2015

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

CA/HCC/0005/20222

2 | P a g e

COUNSEL : Neranjan Jayasinghe with Randunu

Heelllage and Imangsi Senerath for the

Appellant.

Wasantha Perera, DSG for the Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 30/10/2025

DECIDED ON : 15/12/2025

**************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) was indicted by the Attorney General under Sections 54(A) (b) and

54(A) (d) of the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs Ordinance as amended

by Act No. 13 of 1984 for Trafficking and Possession of 11.10 grams of Heroin

(Diacetylmorphine) on 27th August 2013 in the High Court of Colombo.

Following the trial, the Appellant was found guilty on both counts and the

learned High Court Judge of Colombo has imposed a sentence of life

imprisonment for both counts on 01.04.2021.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

The learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the Appellant

has given consent for this matter to be argued in his absence. During the

argument he has been connected via the Zoom platform from prison.

CA/HCC/0005/20222

3 | P a g e

The Appellant has raised the following grounds of appeal in this case:

1. Evidence of the prosecution witnesses fail the test of credibility.

2. Evidence of the defence was rejected by the Learned High Court Judge

on unreasonable grounds.

Background of the case

According to PW1, SI/Ruwan Kumara, the raid was conducted upon an

information received by PC 73163 Dinesh who is attached to the Police

Narcotics Bureau. Although this information was communicated to PW1, he

had not noted down such information in his note book. Instead, the

information was noted down by PC 73163 Dinesh, however, he was not

named in the list of witnesses in the indictment. As such, the Learned

Counsel who represented the Appellant at the trial court had objected to

leading the evidence pertaining to receiving the information, on the basis of

hearsay evidence. After considering the submissions of both parties, the

learned trial judge had disallowed the objection and permitted the

prosecution to lead the evidence.

According to the information, a person called Nalinda, was expected to traffic

heroin from ‘Kotahena Watta’ to Sugathadasa Stadium. The informer had

further said that he could meet the police officers at a place called

‘Galpalliya’. A police team was organised, excluding the police officer who

had initially received the information. At 8.30 hours the police team had met

the informant at the said place. After obtaining further information, PW1 and

PW2 had hired a three-wheeler and gone to inspect the place from where the

Appellant was supposed to come from. The informer had accompanied them

as well. After ascertaining the ‘Watta’ the police officers had waited close to

a temple called ‘Sumithrarama’ and the informant had gone to the ‘Watta’ to

provide further information to the police. While waiting, PW1 had received a

phone call from the informant that the Appellant is ready to come with one

of his relations. When both of them came up to the road, PW1 with the

CA/HCC/0005/20222

4 | P a g e

assistance of PW2, had recovered a parcel from the right-side pocket of the

three quarter of the Appellant. Having identified Heroin in the parcel, the

Appellant was arrested at 10.45 hours. Although no suspected substance

was found from the other person, he was also arrested, on charges of aiding

and abetting the Appellant. Upon further inquiry, PW1 had decided to check

a house at Angoda and all the police officers had gone to Angoda to inspect

a house belonging to a lady named Nalika. As nothing was recovered from

that house, the team had returned to the Police Narcotics Bureau at 16.20

hours.

At the Bureau, the production was weighed and it recorded 92.600 grams of

substances in the parcel. The production was properly sealed and entered

under PR No. 178/2013 was handed over to PW5/IP Rajakaruna.

PW1 and his team had not endeavoured to check the Appellant’s house after

his arrest.

PW2, SI/ Delgahapitiya who was a member of the raiding team, was called

to corroborate the evidence given by PW1.

The defence had admitted the Government Analyst Report and had handed

over the production PW5 by PW1 under Section 420 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

After closing the case for the prosecution, as the evidence led by the

prosecution warranted the presence of a case to be answered by the

Appellant, the learned High Court Judge called for the defence. The Appellant

gave a statement from the dock, afterwards the Deputy Registrar of the

Colombo High Court was called to produce the MC Record pertaining to this

case. In the said record, it was revealed that the Appellant was produced

along with another person and he had been discharged from this case.

In every criminal case, the burden is on the prosecution to prove the case

beyond reasonable doubt against the accused person.

CA/HCC/0005/20222

5 | P a g e

“Reasonable doubt” refers to the legal principle which establishes that

insufficient evidence would prevent the conviction of a defendant of a crime.

The prosecution bears the weight of proving to the judge the defendant’s

guilt in respect of the crime with which he has been charged, in order to

prove why the defendant should be convicted. Accordingly, in this context,

the phrase “beyond a reasonable doubt" indicates that the evidence and

arguments brought forward by the prosecution to establish the defendant’s

guilt must be done so clearly, in a manner that it is accepted as fact by any

rational person.

In the case of Mohamed Nimnaz V. Attorney General CA/95/94 held:

“A criminal case has to be proved beyond reasonable doubt. Although

we take serious view in regard to offences in relation to drugs, we are

of the view that the prosecutor should not be given a second chance to

fill the gaps of badly handled prosecutions….”

In the case of Kalinga Premathilake Vs. The Director General of the

Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption, SC Appeal

No. 99/2007 decided on 30-07-2009, it was held,

“What needs consideration now is when the evidence led for the

prosecution in this case is closely scrutinized, whether it would be satisfied

that prosecution had discharged the burden of proving the case beyond

reasonable doubt. If not, the appellant is liable to be acquitted of the

charges. The prosecution must stand or fall on its own legs and it cannot

derive any strength from the weaknesses in the defence, and when the

guilt of the accused is not established beyond reasonable doubt, he is

liable to be acquitted as a matter of right and not as a matter of grace or

favour.”

CA/HCC/0005/20222

6 | P a g e

In Girija Prasad (dead) by LRs. V. State of M.P., AIR [2007] SCW 5589

(2007) 7 SCC 625, it was observed:

“It is well-settled that credibility of witness has to be tested on the

touchstone of truthfulness and trustworthiness. It is quite possible that

in a given case, a Court of Law may not base conviction solely on the

evidence of Complainant or a Police Official but it is not the law that

police witnesses should not be relied upon and their evidence cannot be

accepted unless it is corroborated in material particulars by other

independent evidence. The presumption that every person acts honestly

applies as much in favour of a Police Official as any other person. No

infirmity attaches to the testimony of Police Officials merely because

they belong to Police Force. There is no rule of law which lays down that

no conviction can be recorded on the testimony of Police Officials even if

such evidence is otherwise reliable and trustworthy. The rule of

prudence may require more careful scrutiny of their evidence. But, if the

Court is convinced that what was stated by a witness has a ring of

truth, conviction can be based on such evidence”.

In Attorney General v. Devunderage Nihal [2011] 1 SLR 409 the court held

that:

“There is no requirement in law that a particular number of witnesses

shall in any case be required for the proof of any fact. Unlike in a case

where an accomplice or a decoy is concerned, in any other case there is

no requirement in law that the evidence of a Police Officer who

conducted an investigation or raid resulting in the arrest of an offender

need to be corroborated on material particulars.

However, caution must be exercised by a trial Judge in evaluating such

evidence and arriving at a conclusion against an offender. It cannot be

stated as a rule of thumb that the evidence of a Police witness in a drug

CA/HCC/0005/20222

7 | P a g e

related offence must be corroborated in material particulars where Police

officers are the key witnesses”.

In Vadivelu Thevar v. State of Madras AIR 1957 SC 614 it was observed on

Page 619, as under: -

" Hence, in our opinion, it is a sound and well- established rule of law

that the court is concerned with the quality and not with the quantity of

the evidence necessary for, proving or disproving a fact”.

In the first ground of appeal, the Appellant contends that the evidence of the

prosecution witnesses fails the test of credibility.

In an appeal, it is the profound duty of the Appellate Court to consider all

the evidence presented by both parties in the trial. If the evidence presented

by the prosecution is cogent and passes all the tests, the court has no

difficulty whatsoever to act on the same and affirm the conviction of the

Appellant. However, if the prosecution fails to adduce cogent and consistent

evidence, then the court has no option but to award the benefit of the doubt

to the Appellant.

In Lal Mandi v. State of West Bengal (1995) 3 SCC 603, the Court opined

that:

“In an appeal against conviction, the Appellate Court has the duty to

itself appreciate the evidence on the record and if two views are possible

on the appraisal of the evidence, the benefit of reasonable doubt has to

be given to an accused”.

CA/HCC/0005/20222

8 | P a g e

In the case of Chandrappa & Ors. v. State of Karnataka, (2007) 4 SCC 415

it was held:

“The golden thread which runs through the web of administration of

justice in criminal case is that if two views are possible on the evidence

adduced in the case, one pointing to the guilt of the accused and the

other to his innocence, the view which is favourable to the accused

should be adopted.”

In this case PW1 had received information from PC 73163 Dinesh, however,

PC 73163 Dinesh was not included in the raiding team. According to the

information received by PC Dinesh, the Appellant was supposed to come from

a place called ‘Kotahena Watta’. (Page 90 of the brief)

But according to the evidence given by PW1, nowhere did he mention that

he saw the Appellant coming from ‘Kotahene Watta’. Instead, he had only

mentioned the word ‘Watta’. Further PW2 had contradicted both PW1 and

PC Dinesh, and stated that the information was that the Appellant was

coming from the ‘Sumithrarama Watte’. (Page 161 of the brief).

The Appellant took up the position that he was not arrested as claimed by

the police. According to him, he was arrested at his residence and introduced

to the substance recovered from the second person. He further claimed that,

the sole reason for his arrest was the fact that he had given a call to the

second person, namely Sandun Niranjana alias Banda, prior to his arrest.

In this case, the information was received by a police officer called Dinesh.

He was not called to give evidence by the prosecution. He was not even

named in the witness list in the indictment. Had the prosecution called

Dinesh to give evidence, the place of arrest could have been established

correctly.

CA/HCC/0005/20222

9 | P a g e

In Kumara De Silva and 2 Others v Attorney General [2010]2 SLR 169 the

Court held that:

“Question of an adverse presumption under Section 114 (f) arises only

where a witness whose evidence is necessary to unfold the narrative is

wilfully withheld by the prosecution and the failure to call such witness

constitutes a vital missing link in the prosecution case”.

In this case, not calling PC 73163 Dinesh has caused a vital missing link

with regard to the place of arrest of the Appellant. This has further

strengthened the defence as the raiding team had not searched the house of

the Appellant.

Along with the probable cause for an arrest, the place of arrest must also be

clearly established by law enforcement. The characteristics of a location can

be a factor that is taken into consideration by officers, however, mere

presence in such an area is not sufficient to justify an arrest or search. In

this case, it is evident that the prosecution has failed to adequately prove the

place of arrest of the Appellant.

PW2 was a member of the team selected by PW1. The prosecution had called

PW1 first and then called PW2 to corroborate the evidence of PW1. Hence,

their evidence should be accurate and cannot go wrong or contradict each

other on material points.

Bradford Smith, Law Commission, WWW.smithlitigation.com 2014 states

that:

“Good police note taking is important for two reasons. First, it invariably

bolsters the credibility of the police officer giving evidence. Second, it

promotes the proper administration of criminal justice by facilitating the

proof of facts. Conversely, sloppy police note-taking can be devastating

to the credibility of the officer giving evidence and seriously, it not

fatally, undermine the successful prosecution of the case”.

CA/HCC/0005/20222

10 | P a g e

In the case of Manu Sharma Manu Sharma v. State (NCT of Delhi), (2010)

6 SCC 1 it was held:

“What is the significance of requiring an investigating officer/officer in

charge of a police station to maintain a diary? The purpose and the object

seem to be quite clear that there should be fairness in investigation,

transparency and a record should be maintained to ensure a proper

investigation.”

In cases such as this, the principal source of all information which would

become evidence in the criminal prosecution would be the police. Therefore,

as the investigative arm of the state, the police bear the primary and

mandatory responsibility to acquire such evidence as accurately as possible,

without any contradictions.

The learned Counsel for the Appellant submits that the evidence given by

PW1 and PW2 contradict each other on material points regarding the place

of arrest. According to PW1, the Appellant and the other person were arrested

near ‘Sumithrarama Temple’ when they came to a ‘Watta’. According to PW2,

the Appellant was arrested while the duo was coming from ‘Sumithrarama

Watta’. According to the original information, the Appellant was supposed to

have come from ‘Kotahena Watta’.

Next, the learned Counsel for the Appellant contended that PW1 and PW2

also contradicted each other regarding the existence of a three-way junction

near the temple. PW1 in his evidence told the Court that he has no knowledge

about the three-way junction. PW2 in his evidence stated that the road that

leads to ‘Watta’ was situated when proceeding straight, after passing the

temple.

Considering these contradictory positions taken by PW1 and PW2 regarding

the place of arrest, the outcome of the case will most definitely be affected.

Legal provisions and various judicial precedents have made it clear that

omissions and contradictions are one of the ways to shake the credibility of

CA/HCC/0005/20222

11 | P a g e

a witness. Contradictions which are significant and relevant in the context

of the case would certainly affect the core of the case. It is a question of fact

decided upon by the courts.

In The Attorney General v. Sandanam Pitchai Mary Theresa [2011] 2 SLR

292 the court held that:

“Whilst internal contradictions or discrepancies would ordinarily affect the

trustworthiness of the witness statement, it is well established that the

Court must exercise its judgment on the nature of the inconsistency or

contradiction and whether they are true material to the facts in issue”.

In the case of State of Uttar Pradesh v. M. K. Anthony [AIR 1985 SC 48]

the court held that:

“While appreciating the evidence of a witness, the approach must be

whether the evidence of the witness read as a whole appears to have a

ring of truth. Once that impression is formed, it is undoubtedly

necessary for the court to scrutinise the evidence more particularly

keeping in view the deficiencies, draw-backs and infirmities pointed out

in the evidence as a whole and evaluate them to find out whether it is

against the general tenor of the evidence given by the witness and

whether the earlier evaluation of the evidence is shaken as to render it

unworthy of belief. Minor discrepancies on trivial matters not touching

the core of the case, hyper-technical approach by taking sentences torn

out of context here or there from the evidence, attaching importance to

some technical error committed by the investigating officer not going to

the: root of the matter would not ordinarily permit rejection of the

evidence as a whole..…Even honest and truthful witnesses may differ

in some details unrelated to the main incident because power of

observation, retention and reproduction differ with individuals. Cross

examination is an unequal duel between a rustic and refined lawyer.”

CA/HCC/0005/20222

12 | P a g e

The above noted contradictory positions between PW1 and PW2 in

collaboration with the first information, raises suspicion and affects the

credibility of the prosecution witnesses. It is quite apparent, that the learned

Trial Judge acted on his own assumptions in deciding this point in the

absence of any plausible clarification by the prosecution. Hence, the

Appellant succeeds in his first ground of appeal.

In the second ground of appeal, the Appellant contends that the evidence of

the defence has been rejected on unreasonable grounds.

The Appellant in his dock statement took up the position that he was

arrested at his residence and not on the ‘Watta’ as claimed by the

prosecution. The Appellant also claimed that he was arrested after the police

had arrested Sandun with Heroin, and that, based on the information

provided by Sadun, he was arrested by the police thereafter. He had

suggested his defence to the prosecution witnesses at

pages,132,133,144,210, and 211 of the brief.

Defence witness was called to establish the arrest of Sandun in relation to

this case and which had been admitted by the prosecution.

As submitted by the prosecution, after the arrest the Appellant was taken to

Angoda to check a house belonging to one Nalika. However, rather

remarkably, the house of the Appellant was not subjected to a search by the

police team.

The learned High Court Judge had rejected the defence evidence and

proceeded to convict the Appellant in this case.

In his judgment at pages 299-300 of the brief, the Learned High Court Judge

states:

pQos; úiska i`oyka lrk wdldrhg i`ÿka keue;s whf.ka fy,s jQ f;dr;=re wkqj i`ÿka

keue;s whg u;aøjH ,nd ÿka njg fpdaokd k`.d pQos;j w;awvx.=jg .;af;a kï iy i`ÿka

<`. ;sî l=vq fidhd .;af;a kï kvq mejrSAulska f;drj i`ÿka keue;s whj uqod yerSug

CA/HCC/0005/20222

13 | P a g e

lghq;= lrkq we;s nj ta yd iïnkaOj lsisÿ ms<s.; yels idlaIshla ke;=j ms<s.ekSug

fkdyelsh'

i`ÿka keue;s whg ÿrl:k weu;=ula ÿka muKska pQos;g tfrysj kvq mejrefõ kï Bg

m%:ufhka i`ÿka keue;s iellre iïnkaOfhka kS;suh mshjr .kq ,nk nj meyeos,sh'

ú;a;s l+vqfõ isg ,nd ÿka m%ldYfha fy<s l< ia:djrh pQos; kvqfõ uq, isgu .kakd ,o

ia:djrhls' iuia: kvqfõ oS u tu ia:djrh f.k ;snqK o th yqfola m%ldYhla jQjd ñi

meñKs,af,a idlaIslrejka tlS ia:djrh ms<s.ekSula fyda pQos; úiska ;u ia:djrh ikd:

lsrSula isÿ lr ke;'

In criminal cases, the burden always rests upon the shoulder of the

prosecution to prove the case beyond reasonable doubt. The Appellant is not

required to prove his innocence, but if he decides to plead a general or special

exception of the Penal Code, then the Appellant has a duty of establishing

that his case comes within such exceptions. This burden is imposed under

Section 105 of the Evidence Ordinance.

In H.M. Mahinda Herath v. The Attorney General CA/21/2003 in

Appellate Court Judgments (Unreported) 2005 at page 35-39 the court held

that:

“Where it was held that in a criminal case burden is always on the

prosecution to prove the charge levelled against the accused beyond

reasonable doubt. The trial judge must always bear in mind that the

accused is presumed to be innocent until the charge against the accused

is proved beyond reasonable grounds”.

The learned Counsel for the Appellant, referring to the above-mentioned

portion of the judgment, submits that the learned High Court Judge has cast

an extra burden on the Appellant to prove his innocence, which is alien to

the standard of proof in criminal cases. He further submits that this is a

clear misdirection, which certainly vitiates the conviction of the Appellant.

CA/HCC/0005/20222

14 | P a g e

The wording of the above cited portion of the judgment very clearly

demonstrates, that the learned High Court Judge had reversed the burden

of proof on the Appellant, which is not in accordance with the basic rules of

criminal prosecution. Hence, this ground of appeal also has merit.

Considering the grounds of appeal advanced by the Appellant, the learned

Trial Judge should not have rejected the defence evidence in this case as I

consider the defence evidence to be more than sufficient to create a

reasonable doubt in the prosecution case. As the evidence presented by the

Appellant creates a reasonable doubt over the prosecution’s case, I set aside

the conviction and sentence imposed by the learned High Court Judge of

Colombo dated 01/04/2021 on the Appellant. Therefore, he is acquitted from

both charges.

Accordingly, the appeal is allowed.

The Registrar is directed to send this judgment to the High Court of Colombo

along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL