-----------------------------------------------------------------------,

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

C.A.No. HCC 0284/2012 H.C. Colombo No. HC 2129/2004

***********

In the matter of an Appeal under and in terms of Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.15/1979 read with Article 138(1) of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Kathaluwa Hewage Dhammika Swarnamali

Accused-Appellant

Vs.

Hon. Attorney General Attorney General's Department

Colombo 12 .

Complainant- Respondent

<

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

DECIDED ON

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

DEVIKA ABEYRATNE, J.

Rienzie Arasacularatne P.c. with T. Punchihewa, Namal Karunaratne and C. Arasacularatne for the Accused-Appellant.

Haripriya Jayasundara S.D.s.G for the respondent

06.02. 2020 and 07.02.2020

26.06., 2020

****************

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

The accused-appellant was indicted before the High Court of Colombo for

being in possession of 3.8 grams of Heroin and trafficking in of said quantity of

Heroin. After trial she was found guilty to the said two counts and was

sentenced to death in respect of her two convictions.

Being aggrieved by the said conviction and sentence, the Appellant seeks

to set aside her convictions on the following grounds of appeal;

I. the trial Court accepted the evidence of prosecution witness IP

Liyanage and of the corroborating witness SI Buddhika before

considering or analysing the defence evidence,

II. the trial Court failed to consider the inherent improbability of the

story of the prosecution,

2

\ .

Ill. the trial Court has acted in violation of Section 203 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979, in delivering its judgment,

iv. the trial Court permitted the prosecutor to elicit evidence of bad

character and considered it in the judgment,

v. the trial Court had compartrnentalised the evidence with regard to

each witness in its evaluation instead of compositely considering the

evidence presented before it,

VI. the trial Court;

a. rejected the evidence given by the Appellant before

considering the same,

b. unreasonably discredited the accused appellant's

evidence that her mother made a complaint to Human

Rights Commission on account of the failure to visit her

in remand owing to illness,

c. misled itself on facts in holding that the accused-

appellant failed to mention the name of the Buddhist

monk who treated her mother when in fact she

mentioned it in her evidence,

d. failed to consider the fact that the accused-appellant

refused to place her signature during sealing of

productions on the ground that Heroin was not

detected from her.

In view of the grounds of appeal reproduced above, it is helpful to

consider the evidence presented before the trial Court by the parties at least in

summary form before this Court makes an attempt to consider them.

3

, ,

The prosecution relied mainly on the evidence of IP Liyanage and 51

Buddhika in relation to the detection of Heroin from the possession of the

accused- appellant. The evidence of these two witnesses are to the effect that in

the morning of 8.11.2002, one of the private informants of IP Liyanage had

conveyed information about a woman dealing in narcotics. He left the Police

Narcotics Bureau with a team of officers, which included 51 Buddhika and a

woman constable, at about 11.15 a.m. IP Liyanage met his informant at a halfway

point who indicated to him that the woman he mentioned would return soon

with Heroin. IP Liyanage then walked along the road near Kettarama Stadium

with 51 Buddhika and the informant. They reached a point near a three-wheeler

park and waited for about 25 minutes. The informant had thereafter left them,

having pointed out a woman who was coming in their direction.

The two officers then questioned the accused-appellant who appeared

restless. She had a brown paper bag with her and when examined, the officers

found it contained seven packets of cellophane bags. Each of these seven

cellophane bags contained small metal foil packets containing Heroin. There

were 510 such metal foil packets in total. The gross weight of these packets was

10 grams and 200 milligrams.

When the productions were sealed at the PNB, the accused-appellant

refused to place her thumb impression and therefore the officers have sought

that the productions be endorsed by the Magistrate of Maligakanda Magistrate's

Court.

The prosecution also led the evidence of the Government Analyst and

other witnesses who were involved with the custody of productions.

4

, .

Dming cross examination it was suggested to IP Liyanage that he had

introduced Heroin that had been recovered from two other persons to the

accused-appellant. He denied the suggestion. It was elicited through the same

witness that the mother of the accused-appellant has made a complaint to

Maligawatta Police regarding the illegal arrest of her daughter on 18.11.2002

alleging that the arrest was made after releasing two other suspects.

When the trial Court ruled that the accused-appellant had a case to

answer, she opted to give evidence under oath.

The accused-appellant claimed that she was arrested in the morning at her

home when she was feeding her child. She was told that the officers needed to

record her statement and taken to the police vehicle. She saw the officers

releasing two persons who were in the vehicle and at that point of time her

mother had rushed in whilst at PNB she was asked to sign her statement and

place her thumb on the parcels. She refused to do both. When she was produced

before the Magistrate's Residence she explained the reason for her refusal to

place her thumb. Her mother had subsequently complained to the Human Right

Commission about her arrest but could not follow up the complaint due to her

illness.

During her cross-examination, the accused-appellant admitted that she

was arrested earlier on under a similar allegation where it is claimed that she

was forced to sign on the production. She admitted that the complaint to Human

Rights Commission was dismissed due to her mother's absence. It was suggested

that the circumstances averred in the affidavit by her mother annexed to her bail

application is contradictory to her evidence in Court. It was also suggested that

due to contradictory positions, the accused-appellant did not call her mother to

5

, '

give evidence on her behalf. She denied these suggestions. She was also

suggested that her refusal to place thumb impressions, and lodging complaints

were mere tactical moves adopted by her in relation to this case. She admitted

regularly attending to the other case and had given instructions to her Attorney

in that case.

It is in this backdrop, this Court ventures to consider the grounds of

appeal as urged by the learned President's Counsel.

One of the contentions advanced on behalf of the Appellant that the trial

Court accepted the evidence of prosecution witness IP Liyanage and of the

corroborating witness SI Buddhika before considering or analysing the defence

evidence, is in fact based on the repeated finding made by the trial Court at the

end of evaluation of each witness, that it had found the prosecution proved the

credibility of the witnesses beyond reasonable doubt.

The peculiar style of presentation of the judgment, adopted by the trial

Court, is the reason for this complaint. The trial Court, having summarised the

evidence of all the witnesses who gave evidence before Court in separate

segments and then considered the same for credibility by applying the time

tested methods of assessing credibility. Then at the end of each of the witnesses

summary and evaluation, the trial Court stated the impugned finding that the

prosecution had proved the credibility of that particular witness beyond

reasonable doubt. It is clear upon perusal of the judgment that the finding of

each witness is credible does not in any way mean that the prosecution has

proved its allegation beyond a reasonable doubt. This is confirmed as the trial

Court had in a separate segment considered the evidence whether it proved the

6

, .

charges. The said statement, made in respect of each of the prosecution witness

merely confirms the fact that the trial Court found that witnesses' testimony as

truthful and reliable and nothing more.

The appellant had raised another ground which revolves around the same

issue. Having relied on the judgment of James Silva v The Republic of Sri Lanka

(1980) 2 Sri L.R. 167, the Appellant complained that the trial Court had

compartmentalised the evidence with regard to each witness in its evaluation

instead of considering the evidence presented before it as a whole and thereby

acted contrary to the principles enunciated in the said judgment.

It is noted above that the trial Court had considered the evidence of each

witness individually in its presentation. However, the trial Court, in evaluating

credibility of the prosecution witness IP Liyanage (at page 21 of the judgment and

page 345 of the brief), referred to the fact that it had already decided to disbelieve

the Appellant's evidence "for the reasons stated in evaluation of her credibility".

The trial Court had dealt with the credibility of the Appellant only at the very

end of the segment (at page 37 of the judgment and page 361 of the brief) during

which it considered the credibility of all witnesses, including that of the

Appellant. By then, it had referred to evidence of all the prosecution witnesses.

This is a clear indication that the trial Court did in fact considered" .. . all

the matters before the Court adduced whether by the prosecution or by the defence in its

totality without compartmentalising" and asked itself the question whether as a

prudent man, in the circumstances of the particular case, believes the accused

guilty of the charge or not guilty as per the judgment of James Silva v The

Republic of Sri Lanka (supra).

7

, .

If one follows the sequence in the presentation as appeared in the

judgment, the trial Court could not have decided the credibility of the evidence

of the Appellant, even before it had fully dealt with the evidence of the 1st

prosecution witness, IP Liyanage, in its presentation, unless it had already

considered the material before Court in its totality and already completed the

task of determining which evidence to accept as truthful and reliable and which

evidence to reject The only way the trial Court could pronounce that it had

already decided to reject the Appellant's evidence, whilst engaged in the process

of evaluation of the evidence of IP Liyanage in its presentation, is to have them

considered as a whole and arriving at its conclusions. The presentation of the

several considerations the Court had taken in to account in the body of the

judgment is a subsequent step to the mental process of considering the evidence

in totality. These two are distinct and t separate exercises.

The contention of the Appellant that the trial Court has failed to consider

the inherent improbability of the story of the prosecution was based on the

following factors as highlighted by the learned President's Counsel;

1. IP Liyanage received information about a woman engaged in

Heroin trade from his informant on his way and only after

arriving he received definitive information,

ii. There were 11 police officers in the vehicle, but only two

proceeded to carry out the detection,

iii. IP Liyanage said they were in uniform waiting for the arrival of

the appellant with a bag containing Heroin,

8

iv. The out entry of IP Liyanage speaks of the fact that he is

leaving for a detection involving" CllClCl01C>oS" whereas he only

arrested the Appellant, but the entry supports her claim there

were others who were already arrested,

v. Disparity in productions. The Government Analyst failed to

count the metal foils, 7 cellophane bags turning 5 cellophane

bags, the alterations on the parcel creates a doubt as to the

genuineness of the productions, PR - two parcels (A and B)

not explained, GCm not explained

The probability of the prosecution case is challenged by the Appellant by

placing reliance on the conduct of the detecting officer. The fact that there was no

clear information conveyed to him in at the initial stage by the private informant

could be understood easily as the agreement was that the informant to

personally lead the officers to the woman who was involved in the Heroin trade.

The inclusion of a woman police constable in the team supports the initial

information about a woman. The number of officers who left the PNB office and

only two of them took part in the detection cannot be considered as an

improbability without that aspect being probed during cross-examination. In the

absence of an explanation by the witness, if this Court were to consider the

probability or improbability on inferred explanations, it would be a mere

conjectural exercise.

The passing reference by IP Liyanage that they were in uniform cannot

make the entire prosecution case an improbable one since 51 Buddhhika said only

9

. .

. 'r--------------------------------------------------------------,

one of the officers was in uniform. In relation to the reference of "OlCllCll61Cl~ " in

his out entry, the witness said that was his usual way of making notes. When he

was suggested that entry was due to multiple suspects to be arrested the witness

denied and the matter was not probed any further by the Appellant.

In view of these considerations, the ground of appeal based on

improbability of the prosecution fails. However, the contention in relation to

integrity of productions, being a vital aspect of the prosecution's case, needs

separate treatment.

Learned President's Counsel submitted that the evidence in relation to

integrity of productions are unreliable and casts a doubt as to the genuineness of

the productions. In elaborating the factual basis of his submission, learned

President's Counsel referred to the evidence of IP Liyanage as well as Ms

Rajapakse, the Deputy Government Analyst.

It was also highlighted that when the productions were produced to the

reservist after sealing, it was entered in the productions register under reference

P.R. No. 92/2005, whereas when the covers of the productions were examined in

trial Court, it was found that the P.R. number has been altered to read as

93/2005. During cross-examination it was elicited that there were alterations that

appeared on the parcels without any signature of the person who made the

alterations. The evidence is that at the time of detection there were 7 cellophane

parcels but when in giving evidence only five such were available. In relation to

10

510 metal foils and the number of cellophane parcels there was no confirmation

from the expert witness who merely said she did not count them. In these

circumstances, it was contended on behalf of the Appellant that the prosecution

has failed to prove the identity of productions.

In her reply, learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General refuted the

Appellant's claim and submitted the prosecution has properly explained the

difference in P.R. numbers and the number of cellophane parcels by referring to

the relevant evidence in the proceedings before the trial Court.

The difference in the P.R. numbers is due to the fact that the productions

were initially entered under P.R. 92/2005, but when the Appellant refused to

place her thumb impression, they were taken before the Magistrate who had

signed on the sealed envelopes. Then only they were handed over to the reservist

under P.R. 93/2005. Initially there were two sealed envelopes and once they

were signed by the Magistrate, they were put in another envelop and was sealed.

It was this envelop that had been entered as P.R. 93/2005. Copies of the relevant

pages of the productions register were tendered to Court and the description of

P.R. 93/2005 contains the witness's explanation and only one envelop was in fact

handed over. This claim was supported by the Government Analyst, who

labelled the two sealed envelopes as " A" and "B" which were found in the sealed

outer envelope, marked P.R. 93/2005

As to the disparity of 7 pink coloured cellophane bags, IP Liyanage's

evidence revealed that he had used one of the seven bags to collect all the Heroin

packeted in metal foils. Then he used another cellophane bag to put the 510

empty metal foils. This explains why only five empty cellophane bags. The

11

Government Analyst in the report had merely referred to these bags and metal

foils as "many" metal foils and "many" plastic bags. She admitted in her

evidence she did not count either of these items.

This Court, having examined the evidence, is inclined to hold with the

submissions of the learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General that the prosecution

had adequately explained the highlighted disparities before the trial Court to its

satisfaction.

The complaint that the trial Court has acted in violation of Section 203 of

the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979, in delivering its judgment

should be considered next.

The trial against the Appellant commenced on 24.11.2010 and the

prosecution has closed its case on 26.09.2011. The trial Court called for the

defence on the same day. The Appellant commenced her case on 29.11.2011 and

closed on the same day with her evidence. The parties have made submissions

on 24.04.2012 and the judgment was to be pronounced on 28.06.2012. On that day

judgment was re-fixed to 18.09.2012 and on that day the proceedings indicate

that the case record was forwarded to High Court No.4 from High Court No.7

only on that day and the judgment was re-fixed again on 02.10.2012 on which

day it was pronounced in open Court convicting the AppelIant.

It was contended by the AppelIant that the trial Court had acted in

violation of the provisions of Section 203 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act

12

No. 15 of 1979 and the judicial precedents which emphasised there should not be

an undue delay. In this instance there was a delay of more than five months.

In Dabare v Republic of Sri Lanka (2009) 1 Sri L.R. 92, when it was

highlighted that there was delay of almost seven months to pronounced the

judgment of the trial Court, Sisira de Abrew J emphasised that;

" ... it is the duty of the trial judge to deliver his judgment within

the time period stipulated in Section 203 of the cpe. If he can I t do

so, he must state his reasons for his inability and should deliver it

within a reasonable time. The superior Court can then examine the

reasons and decide whether his inability is justified or not. Failure

to comply with Section 203 of the CPC or postponing judgments

without reasonable grounds would lead to erosion of public

confidence in the judicial system and also would lead to laws delay.

As I pointed out earlier, noncompliance of Section 203 of the CPC

in the instant case has not occasioned a failure ofjustice."

Hence this Court is of the view that the delay of few months, has not

occasioned a failure of justice in this instance in view of the long trial roll in

Colombo High Courts.

Having considered the grounds of appeal in relation to the prosecution

case, it is time this Court considers the complaints against the rejection of the

case for the Appellant. It was contended that the trial Court;

a. rejected the evidence given by the Appellant before

considering the same,

13

, .

b. unreasonably discredited the accused-appellant's

evidence that her mother made a complaint to Human

Rights Commission on account of the failure to visit her

in remand owing to illness,

c. misled itself on facts in holding that the accused

appellant failed to mention the name of the Buddhist

monk who treated her mother when in fact she

mentioned it in her evidence,

d. failed to consider the fact that the accused-appellant

refused to place her signature during sealing of

productions on the ground that Heroin was not

detected from her.

The stage and the circumstances under which the trial Court had reached

the decision to reject the Appellant's evidence was already considered in the

light of the judgment of James Silva v The Republic of Sri Lanka (supra). The

trial Court had in fact considered the reasons attributed by the Appellant as to

her conduct in not placing her thumb impression on the productions and also the

fact that her mother complained to Human Right Commission in assessing her

credibility.

In applying the test of spontaneity and consistency, the trial Court

considered these two items of evidence and after a lengthy analysis, and arriving

at the conclusion that it accepts the prosecution claim that these were due to

14

" .

tactical reasons to ward off any imposition of criminal liability. In arriving at this

conclusion the trial Court had considered that the claim of introduction was not

consistently made. The Appellant, when she was first produced before the

Magistrate, had only said that nothing was found from her. But her claim before

the trial Court was that IP Liyanage introduced the quantity of Heroin taken from

two others on her, after releasing them in her presence.

The trial Court decided to accept the prosecution challenge on the

Appellant's evidence also on the basis that, although her mother made

complaints to the police as well as to the Human Rights Commission, neither her

mother nor the Appellant took any steps to pursue them thereafter. She was

enlarged on bail after few months and was free to pursue her claim of illegal

arrest if she was interested in it. Her husband also could have continued with the

complaints but no action was taken despite the serious allegation of possessing

Heroin. It is evident that the trial Court's decision not to treat her evidence as a

truthful account of the events that took place was based also on the demeanour

and deportment of the Appellant when she gave evidence.

The credibility of a witness is a question of fact and when the trial Court

had based its conclusion of that question of fact on its evaluation of evidence as

well as demeanour and deportment of the witness, this Court has repeatedly

indicted that it is extremely reluctant to interfere with such a finding of fact. In

view of these considerations, this Court finds no reason to interfere with this

finding of fact by the trial Court.

15

>

> .r-------------------------------------------------------------------------~

The contention that the trial Court had allowed evidence of bad character

of the Appellant to be led in evidence and acted on it needs a closer examination.

It was pointed out that during cross examination of the Appellant by the

prosecution, evidence of another pending case in relation to a similar offence was

elicited and permitted by the trial Court and the trial Court had exacerbated its

initial error in allowing that evidence to be led, by considering the same in its

judgment against the Appellant.

It is to be noted that the fact that had been elicited is that the Appellant is

only accused of a similar offence and not that she was convicted of a similar

charge. It appears that the learned prosecutor was eager to challenge the

Appellant's position that she refused to place her thumb impressions on the basis

that Heroin was not detected from her possession, by showing that she has prior

knowledge of the sealing process and raised this issue in order for her to utilise it

during the trial for tactical reasons.

In Peter Singho v Werapitiya 55 NLR 155, the appellant had relied on his

good character and as such the prosecution was entitled to challenge it by

eliciting bad character as per Section 54 of the Evidence Ordinance. Having

considered the material before Court, it was decided by Gratian J (sitting alone)

that;

"The accused had advisedly taken the risk of putting his "good

character " in issue. It was, therefore, open to the prosecution, if

they could, to prove his " bad character" under section 54 of the

Evidence Ordinance. Instead of doing so they suggested to him in

cross-examination (and he was forced to admit) that there was

16

) .

pending against him at the time a criminal case in which he was

charged with forgery.

" The mere fact that a man has been charged with an offence

is no proof that he committed the offence. Such a fact is

irrelevant; it goes neither to show that the prisoner did the

acts for which he is actually being tried nor does it go to his

credibility as a witness ". Maxwell v. D. P. P.(1935) A. C.

309. This principle was reaffirmed by Lord Simon in

Stirland v. D.P.P.(1944) A. C. 315, " It is no disproof of

good character" he said, " that a man has been suspected or

accused of a previous crime. Such questions as Were you

suspected ? ' or ' Were you accused ? ' are inadmissible

because they are irrelevant to the issue of character, and can

only be asked if the accused has expressly sworn to the

contrary ".

The pending case against the Appellant is clearly an irrelevant item of

evidence of bad character as it did not qualify to be admitted under Explanation

1 of Section 54 of the Evidence Ordinance as per Law of Evidence by E.R.S.R.

Coomaraswamy (vol. 1, p.705). Thus, this Court agrees with the learned

President's Counsel that the evidence in relation to the pending case against the

Appellant was wrongly allowed to be led by the trial Court. Then the question

arises if such evidence of bad character was admitted, whether it necessarily

vitiates the conviction?

17

, .

The judgment of Arumugam v Range Forest Officer (1986) 2 Sri L.R. 398

considered this very issue. It was an appeal where the ground of appeal was

raised upon the basis that the trial judge had permitted inadmissible evidence of

the accused's bad character, that the accused had been convicted of an offence

previously, into the record and this was prejudicial to the accused's right to

getting a fair trial.

The Court has held thus;

"In Peter Singho v. Werapitya (55 NLR 155) Gratiaen, J sat

alone while in King v. Perera (42 NLR 526) a different judicial

attitude was adopted. Howard, c.J. sat with Soertsz, J. who agreed

that in a case where evidence of bad character of the accused had

been given in a trial before a District Judge, it was not fatal to a

conviction as there was ample other evidence to convict the accused

and the Judge was not influenced by the fact of the accused's bad

character.

I do not think that any of the judges who sat in these two cases

wished the judgment to lay down an inveterate principle of law.

Their views have to be considered in the background of the cases

before them. I am prepared however to state that a mere

misreception of evidence (even of bad character) will not necessarily

vitiate the conviction especially if the rest of the evidence placed

before the court (like in this case) was of a satisfactory nature."

18

"\ .

In view of reasoning in this precedent, this Court must then consider the

question, in this particular instance, whether the trial Court had merely allowed

the irrelevant item of evidence into its record or had used it in its judgment in

finding the Appellant's guilt as she complains.

Perusal of the impugned judgment reveals that the trial Court made two

reference to the earlier incident where the Appellant was already facing a charge.

In the narration of her evidence it is mentioned that she has a pending case,

which is understandable since it's a mere reproduction of her evidence in

summary form. The other instance where this item of evidence was referred to is

at the evaluation of the trial Court of the Appellant's evidence. In that instance

the reference made by the trial Court confines to the fact that on that earlier

occasion she had placed her thumb impression in sealing the parcels due to

physical assault.

The trial was taken before a Judge of the High Court, and not before a jury

is also a relevant factor in this context. Undoubtedly the learned trial Judge was

aware of the prohibition in Section 54 of the Evidence Ordinance and the

conviction is clearly based on the large volume of evidence properly received.

Since there was not even of a hint of prejudice caused to the Appellant as a result

of the complained misreception of evidence or that the misreceived items of

evidence was utilised in finding her guilty, this Court is of the considered view

that the misreception will not vitiate the otherwise sound conviction.

19

',.

This Court is of the view that the several grounds of appeal raised by the

Appellant are without merit. Therefore, the conviction of the Appellant on both

counts are affirmed. Her appeal is accordingly dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

DEVIKA ABEYRATNE, I. I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

20