,

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A. Case No.272/1997 (F)

D.C. Colombo No.l7364/L

1. T.I.G. Suriyaarachchi

2. D.N. Suriyaarachchi

3. F.N. Suriyaarachchi

All of Halpathota, Baddegama.

PLAINTIFFS

1. LC. Liyanage alias Gunewardena

No.5/4A, Sri Naga Vihara Road,

Pagoda, Nugegoda.

2. People's Bank

Sri Chittampalam A. Gardiner Mawatha,

Colombo 2.

DEFENDANTS

AND NOW BETWEEN

1. T.I.G. SUriyaarachchi

2. D.N. Suriyaarachchi

3. F.N. Suriya arachchi

All of Halpathota, Baddegama.

PLAINTIFF, APPELLANTS

1

BEFORE

COUNSEL

Decided on

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J.

1. LC. liyanage alias Gunewardena

N 0.5/ 4 A, Sri N aga Vihara Road,

Pagoda, Nugegoda.

2. People's Bank

Sri Chittampalam A. Gardiner Mawatha,

Colombo 2.

DEFENDANT~RESPONDENTS

A.H.M.D. Nawaz,j.

Chula Bandara with Gayathri Kodagoda for the

Plaintiff~ Appellants

Mrs. P. Narendran for the rt Defendant~ Respondent

Kavinda Dias Abeysinghe for the 2nd Defendant-

08.06.20l8

This case raises the interesting question of jurisdiction of a District Court in relation to

the constituent elements of Section 9 of the Civil Procedure Code (CPC).

In a nutshell the land in respect of which the case was instituted is situate in Galle,

while the current owner of the land-the People's Bank is headquartered in Colombo. The

Plaintiff-Appellants (hereinafter sometimes referred to as "the Plaintiff") instituted this

action because the 2nd Defendant in the case the People's Bank resides within the local

jurisdiction of the District Court of Colombo. An objection was taken that the District

Court of Colombo was a wrong forum, because the land was situated in Galle. The

2

learned Additional District Judge of Colombo upheld this objection and thus one aspect

of the appeal impinges on the interpretation of Section 9 (a) and (b) of the cpc.

Another bone of contention was res judicata that was raised before the learned District

Judge in relation to a previous case~an application for a writ of certiorari in the Court of

Appeal that had ended in a dismissal for the Plaintiffs particularly the 1st Plaintiff in this

case who was the substituted Petitioner in the Court of Appeal and the objection of res

judicata was raised by the 1st Defendant in bar of the regular suit in the District Court of

Colombo and the learned District Judge of Colombo upheld that objection as well. It is

against these two orders of the learned District Judge of Colombo that the Plaintiffs have

appealed.

But in the course of the argument this Court raised another fundamental question

before all counsel who represented the parties~i.e whether the learned District Judge

had jurisdiction at all to entertain the plaint in view of the ouster clause in Section 70

(3) of the Finance Act, No. 11 of 1963. Though the question of ouster of jUrisdiction was

raised as Issue No. 14 by the Counsel for the People's Bank, this was not tried as a

preliminary question of law. The question I posed to Counsel was~if the District Court

had not engaged in this question and dealt with it, could this Court deal with it in

appeal? These are issues that surface to the fore in this case and I look upon all these

issues as three distinct jurisdictional bars that come up for determination namely 1) can

jurisdiction be conferred on the District Court of Colombo when the land is situate in

Galle? 2) will res judicata apply if the previous case was one for judicial review? 3) Does

an ouster or privative clause that is engaged in this case bar the action in the District

Court of Colombo?

It is this last question that did not engage the attention of the learned Additional

District Judge of Colombo though the issue was quite live before her. I must say that

these jurisdictional bars (Section 9(b) of the CPC, res judicata and ouster clause) would

all come within the chapeau of Section 9 of the Civil Procedure Code though some of

the principles underlying these jurisdictional objections may find their anchor either in

3

case law or any other section of the CPC or the statute pertaining to the People's Bank.

Before I deal with these questions, a fascicule of facts needs narration.

In the end by her order dated 15.05.l997 the learned Additional District Judge of

Colombo has rejected the plaint and dismissed the action of the three Plaintiff~

Appellants on the two jurisdictional issues alluded to above. The Plaintiff~Appellants

seek to set aside the judgment dated 15.05.l997 and the facts and circumstances that led

to the dismissal of the plaint could now be set down.

The 2ndDefendant~Respondent in this case (the People's Bank) had become the owner

of the land described in the schedule to the plaint in this case by virtue of a vesting

order made by the then Minister of Finance in terms of Section 71 of the Finance Act,

No. 11 of 1963 as amended. The land is situated in Galle and the vesting order had been

made on the basis of a determination reached by the bank to acquire the premises, upon

an application made by the original owner who had lost title to the property owing to a

conditional transfer he had effected.

The mother of the Plaintiffs then filed an application in the Court of Appeal for a writ

of certiorari to have the vesting order quashed, pleading, inter alia, that she had been in

occupation of the property since 1963, having been placed in possession of the land by

the transferee of the conditional transfer. Even in that application before the Court of

Appeal she took up prescription but S.N. Silva, PICA (as His Lordship then was)

dismissed the application for judicial review, as the ground on which the Petitioner had

sought the writ namely failure to afford a hearing at the inquiry conducted by the

People's Bank, was not established. Her son TI.G. Suriarachchi~the 1st Plaintiff in the

District Court action was thereafter substituted in the writ application as the original

Petitioner~his mother had passed away. S.N. Silva, PICA (as His Lordship then was)

made the observation in the writ application that the Petitioner could not plead a

breach of the principles of natural justice having failed to adduce material in support of

his case when he had had notice of the inquiry (sic). A special leave to appeal

4

application to the Supreme Court in terms of Article 128 (2) of the Constitution was

refused on 16.01.1996.

On the same day as the special leave to appeal application was refused in the Supreme

Court, the Plaintiffs (successors of Mrs. Mary Suriarachchi-the Petitioner in the

application for judicial review and mother of the Plaintiffs) instituted this regular

action in the District Court of Colombo for a declaration of title by prescription.

The 1st and 2nd Defendant-Respondents (L.c. liyanage alias Gunawardene and the

People's Bank) filed separate answers denying the claim of the Plaintiffs' claim to

prescriptive title and pleaded that the plaint did not disclose a cause of action and it

did not comply with Section 40(c) of the Civil Procedure Code (CPC). The 1st

Defendant L.c. liyanage alias Gunwardene is the daughter of the original owner of this

land, whilst the 2nd Defendant is the People's Bank which became the owner of the land

by virtue of the vesting order made by the Minister.

The 1st Defendant's answer brought to the fore an important question namely as the

land was situated in Galle, the regular action must have been filed within the local

limits of the jurisdiction of the District Court of Galle. The District Court of Colombo

would have no jurisdiction at all to hear and determine this action. The 1st Defendant

further pleaded that in view of the Writ Application in the Court of Appeal bearing No.

918/85, which was dismissed by S.N. Silva, P/CA (as His Lordship then was), a plea of

res judicata would operate. The plea would bar the regular action being filed.

The 2nd Defendant-Respondent-People's Bank stated in its answer that in view of the

application for judicial review bearing No. 918/85, which had refused the application of

the 1st Plaintiff for a writ of certiorari, the Plaintiffs were estopped from canvassing any

title in a regular action. Quite significantly the 2nd Defendant-Respondent Bank also

pleaded the ouster clause found in Section 7l(3) of the Finance Act, No. 11 of 1963. The

ouster clause was pleaded in the answer and raised as an issue but the learned District

Judge of Colombo took up for determination as preliminary issues of law only the

following: -

5

Issue No.5

Does the Court have jurisdiction to hear and determine this action for the reasons

stated in paragraph 9 of the 1st Defendant's answer?

Issue No.6

Does the Court of Appeal decision in CA No. 918/85 referred to in paragraph 10 of the 1st

Defendant's answer make the proceedings res judicata?

Issue No.7

If issues 5 and 6 are answered in the affirmative, should the action be rejected?

The learned District Judge of Colombo answered both jurisdictional questions in favour

of the Defendants.

As regards Issue No.5, the learned District Judge stated that as the land was not

situated within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the District Court of Colombo, an

action in Colombo cannot be instituted and proceeded with.

On the question of Issue No.6 which pertained to the plea of res judicata, the learned

District Judge held that the plea would be upheld. In other words, the application for a

writ of certiorari in the Court of Appeal would preclude a regular action being filed in

the District Court. The writ application barred the regular action. That was thus the

decision of the learned District Judge. Thus the door to jurisdiction of the District

Court was shut on the Plaintiffs. Hence this appeal.

Mr. Chula Bandara, Counsel for the Plaintiff-Appellants quite strenuously argued that

the learned District Judge got both answers to the two issues wrong. He contended

that even though the land was situated within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the

District Court of Galle, the owner of the land namely the People's Bank (the 2nd

Defendant) had its head office in Colombo and therefore it "resided" within the

parameters of Section 9( a) of the CPC, which would confer jurisdiction on the District

Court of Colombo. The contention of Mr. Chula Bandara is that the four constituent

6

elements of Section 9 would enable a Plaintiff to bring his case under any of them and

merely because the location of the land is within the jurisdiction of the District Court

of Galle which will have jurisdiction by virtue of Section 9(b) of the CPC, it does not

mean that Section 9(a) cannot confer jurisdiction on the District Court of Colombo, as

the head office of the People's Bank is situate in Colombo. But the learned Additional

District Judge of Colombo held otherwise.

The question of res judicata too was answered against the Plaintiffs and the action was

dismissed.

Though in my view the issue on ouster clause which was not tried as a preliminary

issue of law in the District Court would prove dispositive of this appeal, I would

venture to state that the answers given by the learned District Judge based on location

of the land and res judicata are open to impingement having regard to CPC and legal

precedents.

Issue No. 5~Jurisdiction of the District Court

As I have stated above Issue No.5 adverted to the jurisdiction of the District Court of

Colombo having regard to the locus of the land which is the subject-matter of the action.

The argument of Mr. Chula Bandara for the Plaintiff-Appellants was that as the head

office of the 2nd Defendant People's Bank was in Colombo, the action could be

instituted within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the District Court of Colombo.

Section 9 of the Civil Procedure Code provides the procedure as to which court in

which an action could be instituted.

Subject to the pecuniary or other limitations prescribed by any law, action shall be

instituted in the Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction:-

(a) a party defendant resides; or

(b) the land in respect of which the action is brought lies or is situate in whole or

part; or

( c) the cause of action arises; or 7

(d) the contract sought to be enforced was made.

Out of the two Defendants in this case, the 1st Defendant resides in Nugegoda, whilst the

head office of the 2nd Defendant People's Bank is located within Colombo. But the res is

in Galle. The case of Fernando v. Waas (1891) 9 S.CC 189 was the first case to consider

this situation. The Court (Burnside, C.]., with Dias, J agreeing) held on 29th September

1891) that an action could be brought in the court within the jurisdiction of which one

of several defendants resided, though that court would not have jurisdiction over the

land or the party in possession if sued alone~see CPC, Section 9(b), (c) and (d). In other

words the action could be brought in the Court within whose jurisdiction anyone of

the Defendants resided. There came a conflicting decision later in Tirimandura v.

Dissanaike (1896) 2 N.LR. 290 which held that to satisfy the requirements of Section

9(a) all the Defendants should reside within the jurisdiction of the court, if it was

sought to get a judgment against all of them. Thus there was a conflict between

Fernando v. Waas and Tirimandura v. Dissanaike (supra).

This conflict was referred by Drieberg, J. to a bench of three judges in Hussan v. Peiris

(1932) 34 N.LR. 238. This was a partition action in which the Plaintiff sued seven

Defendants all resident within the jurisdiction of the District Court of Kalutara to

partition the land situate at Beruwala, a place which was at that time beyond the

jurisdiction of the District Court of Kalutara. So the Plaintiff and all seven Defendants

were resident within the jurisdiction of the District Court of Kalutara and the action

was instituted in that court, though the land was situated in Beruwala. The

intervenients (8th to 9th Defendants) who were living in Beruwala, claimed a portion of

the land and pleaded that the District Court of Kalutara had no jurisdiction. The

District Judge upheld their plea and dismissed the action.

Macdonell, CJ. Garvin, S.P.]. and Dalton, J. held that an action may be brought in a

District Court that any party Defendant resides, viz, any defendant against whom the

right to any relief is alleged to exist. In other words, a party Defendant in Section 9(a)

of the CPC would mean any party Defendant. At p.242 Macdonell, CJ. alluded to

8

Section 14 of the CPC which speaks of a Defendant "against whom the right to any relief is

alleged to exist". Then the term "party defendant" will not include a person made a party

for the reason only that this is necessary for the proper constitution of the action, but

not because any relief against him is claimed by the Plaintiff.

Macdonell, c.J. continued:~

"Further: if a ''party defendant" means one "against whom the right to any relief is alleged to

exist", this definition of the term, will prevent a plaintiff commencing an action in a particular

district against one residing in the same who is in the same interest as the plaintiff and is

therefore a nominal defendant~one who in Baker v. Wait L.R9 Eq.l03, was described as "a

pocket defendant"~ whereby he would compel, by a side wind, the real defendant, the one against

whom a right to relief was alleged to exist, to come and be sued out of his own District."

At p.244~ 24 5 of the judgment Dalton, J. also commented that any Defendant means a

substantial Defendant and not a "pocket" Defendant as mentioned in Baker v. Wait

(supra). In other words the term a party Defendant in Section 9 (a) of the CPC has to be

read with Section 14. If there is a plurality of Defendants and one of them is put forward

to found jurisdiction based on his residence within the jurisdiction of a particular

court, he cannot be a "pocket" Defendant. He cannot be a dummy. He has to be a real or

substantial Defendant against whom a right to relief is alleged to exist. In other words

where a party Defendant resides within the jurisdiction of a particular District Court,

the other Defendants residing outside its jurisdiction, and although the land may not be

within the local jurisdiction, the District Court nevertheless has jurisdiction.

Though the learned Judges in Hussan v. Peiris (supra) did not allude to it, I find a

compelling reason for the above interpretation. All the four jurisdictional bases of

Section 9 of the CPC are framed in the alternative. Every jurisdictional base, from (a) to

(d) is followed by the disjunctive Or. The disjunctive Or follows each jUrisdictional

head. Then it is sufficient if one of the elements in 9 (a) or 9 (b) or 9 (c) or 9 ( d) is

present to found the jurisdiction of a District Court, subject of course to the caveat that

9

if Section 9 (a) is to be used, a party Defendant or any party Defendant has to be real or

substantial. He cannot be a pocket Defendant.

Here the 2nd Defendant~the People's Bank whose head office was within Colombo was

certainly a substantial Defendant against whom the plaint alleged that a right to relief

existed though the res was in Galle, Therefore the action was properly instituted in the

District Court of Colombo and the learned Additional District Judge was in error when

she answered Issue No.5 (Does the Court have jurisdiction to hear and determine this action for

the reasons stated in paragraph 9 of the 1st Defendant's answer?) in the negative and rejected the

plaint. But as I will presently show, the learned Additional District Judge embarked

upon an inquiry to answer this issue in a jurisdiction which the Court did not possess

as a result of the ouster clause.

Before I part with Issue No.5, the question of residence for a corporate personality such

as the People's Bank to found jurisdiction in terms of Section 9(a) remains to be

answered and I need only to make some familiar observations as follows.

Does the People's Bank reside within the jurisdiction of the District Court of

Colombo?

In Sirimavo Bandaranaike v. Times of Ceylon Ltd, II Sriskantha's Law Reports vol. II

134 at139, Samarakoon, C.J (with Wanasundera,J. and Colin Thome,J) agreeing said "A

registered office gives the company a domicile and residence".

In Martin Silva v. Central Engineering Consultancy Bureauand Another (2003) 2

Sri LR. 228Weerasuriya, P CIA with Balapatabendi,J. held:~

"The PlaintifFAppdlants have distinctly averred that the registered office of the 1st Defendant

was at 415, Bullers Road Colombo 7. Therefore, this averment is sufficient for the purpose of

conferringjurisdiction on the District Court of Colombo."~p.233.

In Somasiri v. Ceylon Petroleum Corporation (1992) 1 Sri LR. page 39 at 43 it was

held: "Even if the residence of the corporation is not distinctly and clearly averred it is

no ground to reject the plaint or dismiss the action, when the Plaintiff~Appellant has

10

averred the principal place of business at the mentioned address as within the

jurisdiction of the court".

In Somasiri v. Ceylon Petroleum Corporation (supra) Ananda Coomarasamy, J.

explained at page 42~ "The Ceylon Petroleum Corporation was having its head office at

Kollupitiya and carries on its business all over the island through its branches, but has

its principal place of business at Kollupitiya where it has its Head Office, from where it

had its central control and administration. Therefore it is quite clear that the Ceylon

Petroleum Corporation is deemed to reside for purpose of suit wherever it carried on

business in its own name"

Thus the cursus curiae in Sri Lanka is for the conferment of jurisdiction on the court on

the basis of corporative residence, the corporate residence being determined by the

principal place of business and / or registered office.

Thus all the elements of Section 9( a) were fully satisfied in the case of the 2nd

Defendant Bank.

ResJudicata~Issue No.6

Does the Court of Appeal decision in CA No. 918/85 referred to in paragraph 10 of the 1st

Defendant's answer make the proceedings res judicata?

The above plea was answered in the affirmative by the learned Additional District

Judge. The learned Additional District Judge concluded that the application for a writ

of certiorari constituted res judicata, which precluded a regular action being filed in

court.

The plea of res judicata often reminds me of the tantalizing question of how many bites

of the cherry or apple must be permitted. The answer to that question depends on

whether the apples are the same or different. At this stage it is apposite to take note of

the observations of Dr. Sunil F.A. Coorey in his work Principles of Administrative Law in Sri

Lanka, 3rd Edition Vol. II (2012) at p.l009 wherein the learned author states that an

application for a prerogative writ is not an "action" or "suit" within the meaning of

11

statutory provisions and that statutory provisions dealing with an "action" or "suit"

have no application to a prerogative writ.

It was Basnayake, c.J. in Herath v. The Attorney-General et al60 N.LR 194 who

expressed this compendious view:-

"The whole of our law of res judicata is to be found in sections 34, 207 and 406 of the Civil

Procedure Code. The decrees spoken of in section 207 are decrees drawn up by the court under

section 188 after judgment has been pronounced in the manner contemplated in section 184, 185,

186 and 187 of the Cpc. Section 207 will therefore apply only to decrees pronounced after there

has been adjudication on the merits of a suit and not to a decree entered under section 87 of the

CPC in consequence of the non-appearance of the plaintiff"

In the case of Jayawardene v. Amolishamy 69 N.LR. 497 Samarawickrama, J. having

analysed the authorities on the question of "subject matter", opined that "The term

'subject matter' in Section 406 of the CPC does not mean the property in respect of

which an action is brought. It includes the facts and circumstances upon which the

Plaintiff's right to the relief claimed by him depends. It is incumbent upon a party who

makes a plea of res judicata to place before Court, material necessary to show what the

matters were in dispute in the earlier action and that matters in dispute in the action

under consideration are the same."

In the same case it was further held that, "The dismissal of an action upon its withdrawal by the

plaintiff gives rise to the statutory bar provided for in section 406(2) of the Civil Procedure Code. It

does not, however, provide the basis for a plea of res judicata properly so termed, because there is no

adjudication. That the decision of the question raised in the action that was withdrawn, had it

proceeded to judgment, would have been decisive in respect of some of the issues that arise in the

subsequent action is of no moment if the subject matters of the actions are not the same".

The previous judgment must be a final judgment

It is also settled law that the previous judgment to operate as res judicata, it should have

been finally adjudicated on the cause of action and between the same parties. The

12

matter in question must have been submitted for the decision of the Court and must

have been adjudicated upon and decided or determined as to the rights of the parties.

An order regarding possession made in criminal proceedings does not operate as res

judicata in respect of the question of tide arising in a subsequent civil action~see

Nilabdeen v. Farook 1984 (1) Sri L.R. 14. It must be noted that the jurisdiction of the

Primary Court to inquire into disputes affecting land where a breach of the peace is

threatened or likely, is purely on the question of possession and not on tide.

"A judicial decision is deemed final, when it leaves nothing to be judicially determined or

ascertained thereafter, in order to render it effective and capable of execution and is absolute,

complete, certain and when it is lawfully subject to subsequent rescission, review or modification

by the tribunal which pronounced it." (Spencer Bower, Turner & Handley on the Doctrine of res

judicata Sec.102 p.88~89)

So in light of the above principles I would hold that the application for a writ of

certiorari could not have operated as res judicata. As it would have, the writ application

bearing No. CA 918/85 never went into tide and it must be borne in mind that an

application for judicial review investigates process rights such as failure to afford a

hearing and traditionally it would never go into the merit of a decision. This is the

traditional view of judicial review. English Courts have gone into the distinction

between merits of a decision and procedural defects that preceded the making of a

decision. In Chief Constable of the North Wales Police v. Evans (1982) 1 WLR 1155,

Lord Brightman stated: ~

'Judicial review is concerned, not with the decision, but with the decision making process .... "

In the writ application bearing No. 918/85, S.N. Silva, PICA (as His Lordship then was)

never went into the tide of the Plaintiffs vis~a~vis that of the People's Bank. There was

only the decision making process before the vesting order that was challenged before

the then President of the Court of Appeal. The challenge was based on an absence of

the right to a hearing and the learned President of the Court of Appeal (as His Lordship

then was) concluded that as the ground for judicial review was not established, he

13

would dismiss the application for a writ of certiorari. But the later action filed by the

Plaintiffs in the District Court of Colombo that has led to this appeal was a rei vindicatio

action. Metaphorically the apples were not the same. Judicial review and an action rei

vindicatio are not comparable. Therefore the learned Additional District Judge of Colombo

was quite incorrect when she held that res judicata applied in this case.

I would also adopt the following statement of William Wade &; Christopher Forsyth in

their tome Administrative Law11th Edition (2014) at page 206, which sums it all:,

" ............ ..in these procedures the Court 'is not finally determining the validity of the tribunal's

order as between the parties themselves' but 'is merely deciding whether there has been a plain

excess ofjurisdiction or not'. They are a special class of remedies deSigned to maintain due order

in the legal system, nominally at the suit of the Crown and that they may well fall outside the

ambit of the ordinary doctrine of res judicata".

Therefore the learned Additional District Judge of Colombo was once again in error

when she decided that the writ application filed by the mother of the Plaintiffs

constituted res judicata.

One could thus see that the learned Additional District Judge of Colombo got both

answers to Issues No.5 and 6 wrong. Ordinarily I would have inclined to the view that

in these circumstances the action must be remanded back to the District Court of

Colombo to proceed.

But the question arises whether the learned Additional District Judge had jurisdiction

at all in the first instance to embark on an inquiry to answer the above two issues in

light of the fact that there was a limiting factor to the jurisdiction of the District Court

namely the ouster clause in Section 71 (3) of Finance Act, No. 11 of 1963 which

immunizes the decision of the People's Bank to acquire the premises in question.

In fact Section 9 of the CPC begins with the words,"Subject to the pecuniary or other

limitations prescribed by any law, action shall be instituted in the Court within the local limits of whose

jurisdiction ............. ". The opening words ....... other limitations in Section 9 of the CPC would

14

include an ouster clause and in my view what was fundamental to the jurisdiction of

the District Court of Colombo or any original court for that matter was raised in the

answer and issues of the People's Bank~the 2nd Defendant to the case.

The relevant privative or exclusion clause is Section 71 (3) of the Finance Act, No. 11 of

1963 which provides that the determination of the Bank shall be final and conclusive

and shall not be called in question in any Court. As is trite, this privative clause will not

preclude judicial review but a regular action in the District Court. The Court cannot

but refer to the case of Atapattu and Others v. People's Bank and Others (1997) 1 Sri

LR. 208 where M.D.H. Fernando, J. rejected the argument that Section 71 (3) of the

Finance Act, No. 11 of 1963, as amended deprived the Court of Appeal of jurisdiction to

issue an order in the nature of a writ of certiorari under Article 140 of the Constitution.

It has to be noted that that Section 71 (3) of the Finance Act, No. 11 of 1963, as amended

is a pre~Constitution ouster clause which is kept operative under Article 168 (1) of the

Constitution, read with Section 22 of the Interpretation Ordinance. The view of the

Supreme Court that judicial review is available despite ouster clauses has since been

followed by the Supreme Court~see Sirisena Cooray v. Tissa Dias Bandaranayake

(1999) 1 Sri LR. 1 at p 13~14; Wijayapala Mendis v. Perera (1999) 2 Sri LR. 110 at 119

and Moosajees Ltd, v. Arthur (2004) 2 ALR 1 at p.l5. But an original action in the

District Court would be embargoed by this particular ouster clause that we encounter

in this case namely Section 71 (3) of the Finance Act, No. 11 of 1963, as amended.

The existence of this clause would in my view create a patent want of jurisdiction in

the District Court. T ennekoon, c.J. in Beatrice Perera v. Commissioner of National

Housing (1974) 77 N.LR. 361 drew a distinction between 'patent want of jUrisdiction'

and 'latent want of jurisdiction' at p.366.

"Lack of competency in a court is a circumstance that results in a judgment or order that is void.

Lack of competency may arise in one of two ways. A court may lack jurisdiction over the cause

or matter or over the parties; it may also lack competence because of failure to comply with such

procedural requirements as are necessary for the exercise of power by the Court. Both are

15

jUrisdictional defects; the first mentioned of these is commonly known in the law as a 'patent' or

'total' want ofjurisdiction or a defectus jurisdictionis and the second a 'latent' or 'contingent'

want of jurisdiction or a defectus triationis. Both classes of jurisdictional defects result in

judgments or orders which are void. But an important difference must also be noted ............ In

that class of case where the want of jurisdiction is patent, no waiver of objection or acquiescence

can cure the want of jurisdiction. In the other class of case, where the want of jurisdiction is

contingent only, the judgment or order of the court will be void only against the party on whom

it operates but acquiescence, waiver or inaction on the part of such person may stop him from

making or attempting to establish by evidence, any averment to the effect that the court was

lacking in contingent jurisdiction."

T ennekoon, C.J stated that the distinction is illustrated in Shortt on Mandamus

(1887) and Spencer Bower on the Law Relating to Estoppel by Representation (1st

Edition (1923) at p.l88~189). The learned Chief Justice further held that a judgment

entered by the Court without jurisdiction is a nullity and can be challenged both in the

very Court and in the proceedings in which it was had and also collaterally. But here is

a Defendant who pleaded the want of jurisdiction in its answer and raised it as an issue.

No amount of waiver or acquiescence on the part of the Defendants in suggesting that

the Court should assume jurisdiction to try as preliminary issues of law only Issues No.

5 and 6 could have conferred any jUrisdiction on the District Court.

Though the Court got both answers to Issues No.5 and No 6 wrong, that exercise was

undertaken in an absence of jurisdiction. The usurpation of jUrisdiction cannot validate

the proceedings in the teeth of the ouster clause namely Section 71 (3) of the Finance

Act, No. n of 1963 which declares that the determination of the Bank shall be final and

conclusive and shall not be called in question in any Court. Likewise Section 71 of the

Finance Act, No.n of 1963 as amended gives the modes of acquisition and the

acquisition is focused on lands which are: ~

a) sold in execution of a mortgage decree by a court;

b) transferred by an owner in satisfaction of a debt; 16

,

c) transferred by an owner secured by a Mortgage;

d) a conditional transfer.

If the Plaintiffs or their predecessors had prescribed against the conditional transferee

in this case, a regular action on prescription should have been instituted against the

conditional transferee long before the People's Bank began its process of acquisition,

which right has been statutorily granted to it. It is too late in the day to institute an

action on prescription 15 years after the vesting order had been made in respect of the

land and the 2nd Defendant Bank had become the owner of the land. The District Court

is precluded from entertaining this action by virtue of Section 71 (3) of the Finance Act,

No. 11 of 1963 as amended.

The title paramount by virtue of the vesting order has overtaken any adverse rights

which the Plaintiffs allege their predecessors might have manifested against the

conditional transferee, despite the fact that the predecessors were let into the property

with the leave and license of the conditional transferee. If this permissive possession

had turned adverse, there was no reason why they could not have presented a plaint in

the appropriate court to prove prescriptive title at an anterior point of time. Having let

time lapse, it will be tantamount to a reversal of the jUrisdictional bar if this Court were

not to enforce the strict terms of the finality clause. The People's Bank should be

permitted to carry into effect the intent and purpose of provisions of the Finance Act

which was enacted to afford relief to hapless owners of land who had parted with their

lands owing to impecunious circumstances. Otherwise the vesting order would become

infructuous if the finality clause is rendered inoperative in respect of a District Court

action.

Therefore I hold that the ouster clause operates as a total or patent want of jurisdiction

and accordingly this Court cannot remit this case to the District Court to proceed on

the other remaining issues. Notwithstanding this jurisdictional bar the learned

Additional District Judge went ahead to try Issues No.5 and Issues 6, which task was

undertaken on the presumed assumption that she had jurisdiction. But this was in a

17

..

jUrisdiction she did not possess. In Spencer Bower on the Law Relating to Estoppel

by Representation~(2003) 4th Edition at p.l72~it is declared that no contract or

consent of a party to litigation can confer jurisdiction on any person not already vested

with it by the law of land, or add to the jurisdiction lawfully exercised by any judicial

tribunal; it is equally plain that the same results cannot be achieved by conduct or

acquiescence by the parties. In the words of Lord Reid: ' .. .it is a fundamental principle

that no consent can confer on a Court or tribunal with limited statutory jurisdiction

any power to act beyond that jurisdiction, or can estop the consenting party from

subsequently maintaining that such Court or tribunal has acted without jurisdiction'~

see Essex CC v. Essex Incorporated Congregational Church Union [1963] AC 808 at

820~ 1. Since the total want of jurisdiction bars this action, the District Court cannot

proceed to try the remaining issues.

So I would dismiss the action nunc pro tunc on the issue of lack of jurisdiction embodied

in Issue No. 14 and the appeal would accordingly stand dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

18