==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

Orders in the nature of Writs of

Certiorari, Prohibition and Mandamus

under Article 140 of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

S Potencia L.L.C-FZ Meydan Grandstand, 6th Floor, Meydan Road, Nad Al Sheba Dubai, U.A.E.

CA (Writ) App. No. 1104/2025

PETITIONER

Vs.

1. H. Lanka Coal Company (Pvt) Ltd.

No. 51/3, Suranimala Place Off Dutugemunu Street Kohuwela, Dehiwala.

2. Prof. K.T.M. Udayanga Hemapala

Secretary to the Ministry of Energy Ministry of Energy No. 437, Galle Road, Colombo 03.

2

3. Hon. Eng. Kumara Jayakody

Minister of Energy Ministry of Energy No. 437, Galle Road, Colombo 03. 4. Hon. Attorney General

Attorney-General's Department Hulftsdorp Colombo 12. 5. Hon. (Dr.) Harini Amarasuriya

Prime Minister and Minister of Education, Higher Education and Vocational Education.

6. Hon. Vijitha Herath

Minister of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Employment and Tourism. 7. Hon. K.D. Lal Kantha

Minister of Agriculture, Livestock, Land and Irrigation. 8. Hon. Bimal Rathnayaka

Minister of Transport, Highways and Urban Development. 9. Hon. Sunil Handunneththi

Minister of Industry and Entrepreneurship Development. 10. Hon. Ramalingam Chandrasekar

Minister of Fisheries, Aquatic and Ocean Resources

11. Hon. (Prof.) Anil Jayantha Fernando

Minister of Labour. 12. Hon. Samantha Viddyarathna

Minister of Plantation and Community Infrastructure.

3

13. Hon. Anura Karunathilaka

Minister of Ports and Civil Aviation. 14. Hon. (Dr).Nalinda Jayatissa

Minister of Health and Mass Media. 15. Hon. (Dr.) A.H.M.H.Abayarathna

Minister of Public Administration, Provincial Councils and Local Government.

16. Hon. Wasantha Samarasinghe

Minister of Trade, Commerce, Food Security and Cooperative Development. 17. Hon. Harshana Nanayakkara

Attorney-at-law Minister of Justice and National Integration. 18. Hon. (Mrs.) Saroja Savithri Paulraj

Minister of Women and Child Affairs. 19. Hon. (Dr.) Upali Pannilage

Minister of Rural Development, Social Security and Community Empowerment. 20. Hon. K.M. Ananda Wijepala

Minister of Public Security and Parliamentary Affairs. 21. Hon. (Dr.) Hiniduma Sunil Senevi

Minister of Buddhasasana, Religious and Cultural Affairs. 22. Hon. Sunil Kumara Gamage

Minister of Youth Affairs and Sports.

4

23. Hon. (Dr.) Chrishantha Abeysena

Minister of Science and Technology. 24. Hon. (Dr.) Dammika Patabendi

Minister of Environment. 25. Hon. (Dr.) Susil Ranasinghe

Minister of Housing, Construction and Water Supply. The 4th to the 25th Respondents above named together with the 3rd Respondent above named, all Members of the Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of Sri Lanka Office of the Cabinet of Ministers Loyd's Building, Sir Baron Jayathilaka Mawatha, Colombo 01. 26. W.M.D.J. Fernando

Secretary to the Cabinet of Ministers Office of the Cabinet of Ministers Loyd's Building, Sir Baron Jayathilaka Mawatha, Colombo 01. 27. Eng. Wasantha Edussuriya

General Manager Ceylon Electricity Board 3rd Floor, No. 50, Sir Chittampalam A. Gardiner Mawatha, Colombo 02.

RESPONDENTS

5

Before: K.P. Fernando J.

Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Counsel:

Dr. Romesh De Silva, P.C. with Navin Marapana, P.C., Kaushalya Molligoda and Sahan

Ginige instructed by Sanath Wijewardane Associates for the Petitioner.

Vikum de Abrew, A.S.G. with Rajin Gunaratne, S.C. for the 1st to 26th Respondents.

Argued on: 12.01.2026

Delivered on: 08.06.2026

6

Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.,

Judgement

Introduction

Electricity has now become a part of life; it is not a luxury item anymore; it is recognised as an

essential item of life. Initially, Sri Lanka’s electricity was supplied by gas. The power supply

underwent an evolution; in the course, at one point in time, the main source of electricity generation

was hydro-generated electricity. Later, it became fossil fuel-based generated electricity; namely,

electricity generated by diesel and other petroleum by-products, which counts for forty to forty-

five percent of Sri Lanka’s daily contribution to the generation of electricity to the national grid.

For that purpose, the Government has set up coal powerplant projects in three units in the rural

area of Norochcholai, a village situated off Puttalum in the Kalpitiya Island. The 1st Respondent

was incorporated as a body corporate to manage the same, and so far, it is provided that the 1st

Respondent is a 100% government-owned entity. Once the power plant was commissioned, from

time-to-time for the purpose of generating electricity, the 1st Respondent procured coal through

various agents or suppliers. By 2022 and 2023, the supplier of coal was a foreign-based company.

However, during the year 2022, Sri Lanka faced its worst foreign exchange crisis due to the

shortage of foreign exchange. As such, then the supplier decided to withdraw from supplying.

In 2023, the Minister-in-charge submitted a Cabinet Memorandum to obtain approval of the

Cabinet to enter into a new contract with a new supplier. Accordingly, a procurement committee

was setup by the Cabinet, and through them, a new supplier was selected in the form of “Black

Sand Commodities FZ-LLC Limited” (hereinafter referred to as the “Black Sands Ltd”).

7

Accordingly, Black Sands Ltd, the 1st Respondent, who is the Managing Corporation of the said

powerplant, entered into an agreement which is marked as 1R1 and is part of the record. However,

after the supply of fifteen shipments, due to a certain crisis that Black Sands Ltd faced, resulting

it being blacklisted. Then, with the consent of the 1st Respondent and the approval of the Cabinet,

on the recommendation of the Honourable Attorney General, it had assigned its balance supply of

coal shipment to the Petitioner. Accordingly, the Petitioner came into the picture. Thus, the

Petitioner and the 1st Respondent entered into the agreement marked as P2(a).

After the supply of the balance consignment of coal during the season which is pertinent to P2(a),

the parties have entered into the subsequent agreement P3(c) dated 12.09.2024 for the following

seasons. After the fulfilment of the obligations of the parties, the 1st Respondent had requested a

further additional supply of ten percent (10%) by P4, which is provided for in the agreement

regarding any exigencies; this was confirmed by P5. However, suddenly with the change of the

Government, the 1st Respondent had decided to rescind its request and cancel the agreement by

P6. Then the dispute has arisen between the parties, and the Petitioner seeks to quash the

cancellation of the agreement by the documents marked as P6 and P7 through these proceedings.

After issuance of formal notice, the Respondents have filed their respective Objections, and they

have raised certain inter alia preliminary matters in their Objections as to the jurisdiction of this

Court and sought the dismissal of this Application.

This was argued before Honourable Priyantha Fernando J., and me, on 12.01.2026; hence, this

judgement.

8

The Petitioner’s position

The Petitioner is a body corporate incorporated in the United Arab Emirates, and it has license to

carry on its business, in proof of which it has annexed the document marked as P1 to the Petition.

According to the Petition, the Petitioner and the 1st Respondent have entered into an agreement to

supply coal from 2023/2024. The relevant agreement is marked as P2(a) annexed to the Petition,

which is also a part of P2(b). Once the parties fulfilled their obligations under P2(b), the parties

entered into another contract for the following year (2024/2025 season) as well, which is marked

and annexed to the Petition as P3(c); this is also an addendum. Further, the Petitioner asserts that

the according to P3(c), in addition to the undertaking by the Petitioner to supply the relevant metric

tonnes of coal for the relevant years of 2024/2025, if the Petitioner is required to supply a further

ten percent (10%) of additional supply of coal, amounting to about 225,000 metric tonnes (MT),

the Petitioner has to supply it in terms of the said agreement.

Accordingly, the Chairman of the 1st Respondent, by his letter marked as P4, dated 18.07.2025,

has requested and informed the Petitioner to supply the additional 10% of the quantity of coal for

the purpose of generating electricity without a break till the new contract is entered into between

the 1st Respondent and a new party (coal supplier).

However, to the Petitioner’s surprise and shock, the Petitioner has received the letter dated

24.10.2025, which is marked as P6, informing the Petitioner that the said balance of additional

10% consignment of coal is cancelled, and therefore, the Petitioner was requested not to supply

the same. Thereafter, the Petitioner has sent a letter of protest by 27.10.2025 marked as P6(a). In

response to P6(a), the Chairman of the 1st Respondent has sent the letter dated 28.10.2025, marked

as P7 stating that the agreement marked as P3(c), between the Petitioner and the 1st Respondent to

9

supply coal, is revised and therefore, the additional 10% of the supply of coal is not necessary and

the said decision has been taken pursuant to a Cabinet decision; as such, to cancel the supply of

the additional 10% of the supply of coal.

Thereafter, the Petitioner has sought the intervention of the Court by instituting this Application.

Objections

The Respondents’ have raised several objections to this Application. In the forefront of their

objections, they have raised objections to the jurisdiction of this court. It is their position that the

Petitioner has failed to place before Court, the entirety of the said contract entered into between

the 1st Respondent and the Black Sands Ltd., where a separate agreement of arbitration is also

entered into by and between the parties; as such, any dispute arising out of the said contract has to

be resolved by referring to arbitration. Therefore, it is the Respondents’ position that this Court

does not have the jurisdiction.

Furthermore, the 1st Respondent has strongly taken up the position that the Petitioner has failed to

place before Court, the entirety of the said agreement which is also part and parcel of the agreement

entered into between the Petitioner and the 1st Respondent, though only the addendum is before

this Court.

Further elaborating their position in the year 2023, the 1st Respondent and a company called “Black

Sands Ltd” had entered into a contract for the supply of the necessary consignment of coal;

however, after October of 2023, the said company declined to supply the same and showed their

willingness to assign its part of the contract to the present Petitioner. Thereafter, on the advice of

the Honourable Attorney General, the 1st Respondent and the Petitioner company have entered

10

into the present agreement, which is marked as P2(a), which is an addendum to the original

contract entered into between the 1st Respondent and Black Sands Ltd. It is also the position of the

1st Respondent that the document marked as P2(b) stands as an addendum of the original contract

which is also marked as 1R1 annexed to the Statement of Objections. It is their position that after

the obligations under P2(b) were fulfilled, the parties have entered into P3(c) for the supply of

coal for the years 2024/2025, as an addendum to 1R1.

In addition to that, it is their position that therefore, the Petitioner is guilty of non-disclosure of the

relevant facts, and as such, is not entitled to maintain this Application.

Arguments

It is argued on behalf of the Petitioner that electricity is an essential item for day-to-day life. Similar

to the right to life, right to education, right to equality, and the right to food and shelter, electricity

has become an essential intangible commodity for human life. The generation and supply of

electricity is now entirely undertaken by the Government; therefore, there is a monopoly over the

generation, supply, and distribution of electricity. When a monopoly exists on the part of the

Government, correspondently, it bears a duty to ensure uninterrupted supply of electricity to the

sovereign people who elect the Government. Further, by virtue of the said duty cast upon the

Government, there is a right for the people to obtain electricity by the State. Thus, by the letters

marked as P4 and P5, the 1st Respondent itself has triggered the consignment of 10% of the

additional coal supply to ensure that the electricity is generated and supplied uninterrupted until

the next contract is entered into for the purchase and supply of coal. Then the shipments and date

of unloading were also agreed upon by the parties.

11

Suddenly, by P6, the 1st Respondent has cancelled the same ex parte. Therefore, the cancellation

of the said contract by the stronger party (the Government) amounts to the violation of the rules of

natural justice, and the said decision particularly contained in P7 is irrational, mala fide, and

capricious. As such, a Writ of Certiorari lies to quash P6 and P7 in addition to other writs.

On the other hand, it was argued for and on behalf of the Respondents that the entire agreement is

not before Court as the Petitioner has failed to file the agreement in its entirety.

In addition to that, since there is an arbitration clause in the said agreement, the parties should have

first referred the matter in dispute to arbitration, which the Petitioner has failed to do in this case.

When considering the above matters, including the pleadings of the parties and the arguments

advanced before us, it is my view that the following issues arise for the consideration of the Court;

(i) Whether the document marked as P2(a) is part of the main agreement;

(ii) Whether the agreement entered into between the Petitioner and the 1st Respondent, for the

supply of coal, is a part of the agreement marked as 1R1 which is entered into between the

1st Respondent and the Black Sands Ltd.;

(iii)Whether there is an arbitral agreement contained in the main agreement;

(iv) If so, can the Petitioner have and maintain this Application;

(v) Even if there is an arbitral agreement, is the 1st Respondent guilty of violation of natural

justice in issuing letters marked as P6 and P7;

(vi) Whether the letters P6 and P7 irrational, illegal, and in violation of the contract entered

between the Petitioner and the 1st Respondent;

Now I will consider them as follows.

12

On a perusal of the record, it appears that the Petitioner has failed to submit the relevant documents.

However, quite opposed to that, the Respondents have filed more relevant documents than the

Petitioner. The 1st Respondent has filed the document marked as 1R1, which is the same document

marked as P3(c); along with 1R1, Addendum No. 1 which is marked as P2(a) is annexed to the

Statement of Objections. In addition to that, I found that the Attorney General’s opinion given to

the Secretary of the Ministry of Power and Energy prior to the execution of the documents marked

as P2(a) and P3(c) and annexed to the Petition, and correspondence between the 1st Respondent

and the Black Sands Ltd, who is the predecessor of the Petitioner. In addition to that, the original

agreement entered into between the Black Sands Ltd and the 1st Respondent, and the two Cabinet

Memoranda.

It must be noted that by the Cabinet Memorandum dated 05.10.2023, the Minister-in-charge has

informed the Cabinet that the supply of coal to the 1st Respondent at that time was by “Coral

Energy Limited”; however, due to certain outstanding payment on the part of the Lanka Coral

Company, they were unable to supply further shipments; as such, he submitted the said

memorandum to the Cabinet to enter into a new agreement after a proper procurement process,

which has been granted.

Thereafter, the Black Sands Ltd has entered into the agreement annexed to the said document

which is the main contract bearing No. LLC/23/PROP/1, for the supply of coal for the seasons

2023 to 2025. However, after the fifteenth shipment, due to the inability to collect or receive

payment in US Dollars by the Black Sands Ltd, it opted to assign its duties to a third party, and for

that purpose it has written to the Chairman of the 1st Respondent, and accordingly, the 1st

Respondent has sought the advice of the Attorney General, to which the Attorney General has

responded.

13

As per the Attorney General’s advice, both the 1st Respondent and the Black Sands Ltd had

obtained Board resolutions and thereafter, as nominated by Black Sands Ltd, the third party who

came into the picture was the Petitioner, Potentia. Accordingly, for the purpose of supplying the

balance shipment of 1,390,342 MT, the addendum to the original contract was entered into which

appears to novate the original contract, part of which the Petitioner has marked as P2(a).

The said P2(a) has been entered into for the supply of coal of the balance shipment for the relevant

period for which the Black Sands Ltd had obliged and undertook to supply. However, for the

purpose of continuity of the generation of electricity, the 1st Respondent needed the additional

supply to be continued, and thus, entered into a contract for the next year, which was also supplied

after entering into a contract marked as P3(c) (1R1), the second addendum to the original contract.

However, the dispute arose between the parties when the 1st Respondent suddenly decided to

cancel the further additional 10% of the total supply (2.25 million MT) for the 2025-2026 season,

which had been requested by the 1st Respondent to supply by the document marked as P4; even

the ships have been agreed by the parties by P5. However, suddenly by P6, the 1st Respondent has

cancelled the same, and then the Petitioner protested by P6(a), and the 1st Respondent stood its

ground pursuant to a Cabinet decision dated 24.10.2025. Therefore, the Petitioner has come before

this Court.

On a perusal of the two addendums marked as P2(a) and P3(c), it appears to be an extension of

the original contract between the 1st Respondent and Black Sands Ltd dated 19.03.2024 and

20.09.2024. On a perusal of the addendums marked as P2(a) and P3(c), it reads thus;

“ADDENDUM NO: 01

14

Amendment to the Original Coal Supply Agreement (LLC/23/PROP/1) Dated October 20,

2023, and the Supplementary Agreement Signed on 19th March 2024 for the Supply of 1.39

Mn MT (±10%) for the 2023-2025 coal Seasons to the LakVijaya Power Plant, Sri Lanka.”

“ADDEDUM NO: 02

Amendment to the Original Coal Supply Agreement of LLC/23/PROP/1 made and entered

into on 20th Day of October 2023, and Addendum No: 01 for the Supply of 2.25 Mn MT

±10% of the coal seasons 2023-2024 and 2024-2025 for the LakVijaya Power Plant in Sri

Lanka.”

Therefore, it clearly denotes and connotes that it is part of the original agreement entered between

the 1st Respondent and Black Sands Ltd which is filed along with the Statement of Objections.

Now I will consider the second question that I raised above, on whether there is an arbitral

agreement in the main agreement 1R1.

Existence of an arbitral clause

On a perusal thereof, I found Section 3.22 which contains an arbitration clause in the following

terms;

“3.22 DISPUTES AND ARBITRATION

If a dispute of any kind whatsoever arises between the buyer and the seller, then every

effort will be made by the parties to settle such dispute amicably before the commencement

of Arbitration.

15

If amicable settlement has not been reached, then all such disputes arising out of the

contract agreement shall be dealt in accordance with the provisions of Arbitration Act No.

11, 1995 of Sri Lanka. The language for the Arbitration shall be English and the place of

arbitration shall be Sri Lanka. The following procedure shall be followed:

(a) Any dispute, controversy or claim arising out of or relating to this Contract, or

the breach termination or invalidity thereof ["Dispute"] may be submitted by either

Party to arbitration for final settlement. Each of the Parties submits to arbitration

under this Clause before a panel of three arbitrators under the Arbitration Rules of

the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) as then

in force (the "Rules"), as modified by this Clause. The proceedings shall be

conducted, and the award shall be rendered, in the English language. The seat and

place of arbitration shall be Colombo, Sri Lanka unless any other location is

agreed to by the Parties.

(b) Each Party shall appoint one arbitrator, and the two arbitrators, so appointed

shall appoint a third arbitrator. The third arbitrator shall be the chairman of the

arbitral tribunal. If either Party fails to appoint an arbitrator or if the two Party-

appointed arbitrators fail to agree upon a third arbitrator, then such arbitrator

shall be appointed in terms of the Arbitration Act No. 11 of 1995 or such other law

that governs Arbitration proceedings as in force in Sri Lanka.

(c) Any award rendered by a majority of the arbitral tribunal shall be final and

binding and judgment thereon may be entered and may be enforced in any court of

competent jurisdiction. Any monetary award shall be made in reasonable time and

16

as the arbitral tribunal may consider appropriate. The arbitral tribunal shall be

authorized in its discretion to grant pre-award and or post-award interest as the

case may be. Any costs, fees, or taxes incidental to enforcing the award shall, to

the maximum extent permitted by law, be charged against the Party resisting such

enforcement.

(d) Subject to right of any Party to obtain any appropriate interim relief from any

court of competent jurisdiction, an arbitration award under this Clause shall be a

condition precedent to the commencement of action, suit, or claim in any court or

other judicial forum.

(e) Except, as expressly provided in this Contract, pending the award in any

arbitration proceeding hereunder (i) this Contract and the rights and obligations

of the Parties shall remain in full force and effect and (ii) each of the Parties shall

continue to perform their respective obligations, including payment obligations,

under this Contract. The termination of this Contract shall not result in the

termination of any arbitration proceeding pending at the time of such termination

nor otherwise affect the rights and obligations of the Parties under or with respect

to such pending arbitration.

3.23 GOVERNING LAW

The Agreement shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of Sri

Lanka.”

17

According to the above arbitral agreement, it is very clear that whenever or whatever dispute that

arises between the Petitioner and the 1st Respondent with regard to the supply of coal, quality of

coal, or payment thereof, they have to be resolved by referring to arbitration. Therefore, the arbitral

clause that is part of the main agreement should be treated as independent of the underlying

agreement.

As such, it is my view that when there is an arbitral agreement, it goes to the root of the jurisdiction

of the courts of the country. Since the parties have agreed to refer any dispute to arbitration with

regard to the performance of the agreement on their part or any matters connected thereto, that

agreement must first be adhered to. This has been held in the case of Elgitread Lanka (Private)

Limited v. Bino Tyres (Private) Limited1. Particularly, the parties have agreed upon the seat of

arbitration and the substantive law and procedural law applicable to the said arbitral proceedings

as well.

To further buttress my view, I wish to rely on the following passages from the well-recognised

treatise on arbitration by Redfern and Hunter, “Law and Practice of International Commercial

Arbitration”2;

“The agreement to arbitrate:

An agreement by the parties to submit to arbitration any disputes or differences between

them is the foundation stone of modern international commercial arbitration. If there is to

be a valid arbitration, there must first be a valid agreement to arbitrate. This is recognised

1 SC (Appeal) No. 106/08 (SC Minutes 27.10.2010). 2 A. Redfern, M. Hunter, N. Blackaby, & C. Partasides, Law and Practice of International Commercial Arbitration (4th Edition, Sweet & Maxwell 2004).

18

both by national laws and by international treaties. For example, under both the New York

Convention and the Model Law, recognition and enforcement of an arbitral award may be

refused if the treaties. For example, under both the New York Convention and the Model

parties to the arbitration agreement were under some incapacity, or if the agreement was

not valid under its own governing law.

An arbitration agreement is usually spelt out in the main contract, as an "arbitration

clause"; or it may be set down in a separate "submission to arbitration". Exceptionally,

however, there may be what might be called a "standing offer" to arbitrate disputes, as

with the bi-lateral investment treaties that are discussed later; a claimant may then take

advantage of this offer by commencing arbitral proceedings.

Whichever way it is done, there must be an agreement. If there is no agreement, there can

be no valid arbitration. Moreover, for all practical purposes, and in particular for the

purposes of enforcement internationally, there must be written evidence of the agreement

to arbitrate. The requirement of writing is to be found both in international treaties and in

domestic law. The New York Convention, for example, will only give recognition and

enforcement to an arbitration agreement if it is "in writing". The Convention defines this

by stating:

'The term 'agreement in writing' shall include an arbitral clause in a contract or an

arbitration agreement, signed by the parties or contained in an exchange of letters

or telegrams.’”3

3 A. Redfern, M. Hunter, N. Blackaby, & C. Partasides, Law and Practice of International Commercial Arbitration (4th Edition, Sweet & Maxwell 2004), Chapter I, 5-6.

19

In addition to that, they further state;

“(c) The autonomy (or separability) of the arbitration clause:

Closely linked to the question of who decides a total jurisdiction challenge is another issue,

namely, whether the arbitration clause can be regarded as having an independent existence

of its own, or only as a part of the transactional contract in which it is contained.

The link may not seem to be immediately obvious, but where the body deciding the arbitral

tribunal's jurisdiction is the arbitral tribunal itself, the first issue often depends on the

second. This issue concerns a challenge to an arbitration clause based on an allegation

that the contract in which it is contained is invalid There are many possible reasons for

this. Perhaps the contract was not signed by both parties; perhaps one of the parties did

not have legal capacity to sign it; perhaps it was entered into in reliance on a false

representation; or perhaps the contract was illegal in the country in which it was made.

Moreover, the contract may have simply come to an end by performance or total

repudiation. Whatever the reason, this situation creates a major conceptual problem for

an arbitral tribunal ruling on the validity of an arbitration clause. If the contract (and

hence the arbitration clause) is not valid or is non-existent, then the basis for the tribunal

to convene to decide whether or not the clause is valid is not immediately apparent.

The solution usually adopted is known as the doctrine of separability. As discussed earlier,

this doctrine is shorthand for regarding an arbitration clause as constituting a separate

and autonomous contract. It means that the validity of the arbitration clause does not

depend on the validity of the contract as a whole. By surviving termination of the main

contract, the clause constitutes the necessary agreement of the parties that any disputes

20

between them (even concerning the validity or termination of the contract in which it is

contained) should be referred to arbitration. In this way it provides a legal basis for the

appointment of an arbitral tribunal.”4

In Sri Lanka, with the expansion of commercial agreements, particularly international agreements

similar to which the parties in the instant Application have entered into, the arbitration agreement

is such an agreement included to support such an international agreement. By creating a legal

regime for that purpose, the Arbitration Act, No. 11 of 1995 was introduced. Until then, arbitration

agreements and arbitral awards were conducted under the Civil Procedure Code.

After 1995, with the new enactment introduced, the Legislature’s intention was to create a new

regime for the arbitrations. Pursuant to that, we have created arbitration centres as well to facilitate

arbitration within Sri Lanka as the seat of arbitration. In addition to that, the Arbitration Act itself

provides how arbitrators are to be appointed when there is no provision in the arbitration agreement,

and how the courts of the Judicial structure should assist arbitration and how they should conform

to the arbitration been conducted.

In the case of Elgitread Lanka (Private) Limited v. Bino Tyres (Private) Limited, a question arose

on when the parties have agreed to arbitration but before an non-existing arbitral tribunal, still the

Court held that when there is an arbitral agreement, the matter has to be referred to arbitration, and

to appoint an arbitral tribunal, they can resort to the Court as provided in terms of Act No. 11 of

1995. The following was held by Justice Saleem Marsoof in the aforementioned case;

4 A. Redfern, M. Hunter, N. Blackaby, & C. Partasides, Law and Practice of International Commercial Arbitration (4th Edition, Sweet & Maxwell 2004), Chapter 5, 251.

21

“It is at this stage convenient to deal with the submission that Clause 14 of the Franchise

Agreement is not a Scott v Avery clause. Scott v Avery (1836) 5 HL Cas 811 was a decision

of a bygone era in which it was trite law that the parties cannot by contract oust the

jurisdiction of the court (See, Thompson v Charmock (1799) 8 Term Rep 139). The

refinement to that rule introduced by the House of Lords in Scott v Avery, was that the

stipulation in an arbitration clause in a contract that the award of an arbitrator is a

condition precedent to the enforcement of any rights under the contract, effectively

prevented a cause of action arising to enable a party to sue under the contract until and

unless a favourable award has been obtained, or the other party has by his conduct

forfeited the right to rely on it. In Hotel Galaxy (Pvt) Ltd., v. Mercantile Hotels [1987] 1

Sri LR 5 at page 10, Sharvananda, C.J., compared the then existing statutory provisions in

England with those that existed in Sri Lanka and observed that....

Although the point does not directly arise in this appeal, and no post-1995 pronouncement

has been cited in the course of argument, it appears to me that the distinction between a

bare arbitration clause and a Scott v Avery clause which was drawn in the Hotel Galaxy

judgement is altogether obliterated by Section 5 of the Arbitration Act of 1995, which

expressly lays down that where legal proceedings are instituted in a court by a party to an

agreement to submit any matter for arbitration against another party to such an agreement,

the Court shall have no jurisdiction to hear and determine such matter if the party against

whom proceedings are instituted objects to the court exercising jurisdiction in respect of

such matter. This is because Section 5 does not purport to maintain the said distinction,

and on the contrary, seeks to extend the Scott v Avery refinement that a court would not

exercise its jurisdiction to determine the case on its merits even to a mere arbitration clause

22

which is not couched in the Scott v Avery format. Hence, in my view, it does not matter

whether Clause 14 of the Franchise Agreement is a Scott v Avery clause or not...”

Accordingly, it is my view that when there is an arbitration agreement, the Court does not have

the jurisdiction to look into the matter. As such, the argument advanced in that behalf by the

Respondents holds more water.

It was argued on behalf of the Petitioner that despite the arbitration agreement, the 1st Respondent

and other Respondents have violated the rules of natural justice by not giving any opportunity to

present their stand. Further it is further argued that the Respondents have so violated the rules of

natural justice in so far when the first letter was sent by them triggering the procedure to occur to

place an order for the shipments of coal of the additional supply of 10% consignment of coal by

P4. However, by P6, the Respondents have cancelled the same, on the basis that pursuant to a

Cabinet decision they have cancelled the same. However, as held by the Court in similar cases that

when there is an arbitral agreement, such an agreement should be complied with.

I wish to consider another argument advanced by and on behalf of the Petitioner on the footing of

citizens’ right to uninterrupted supply of electricity.

Electricity is basic need and essential item like food, shelter, air and water for any living human,

and since the Government exercises the monopoly of generating and distributing of electricity, it

is true that it is under a duty to supply uninterrupted electricity.5 However, if there is a failure on

5 K.N. Raveendranadhan v. The Kerala State Electricity Board [No. 34061 of 2014 (G)]; Madan Lal v. State of Himachal Pradesh and Others [Appeal (Crl.) 786 of 2002]; T.M. Prakash v. The District Collector [1996] AIR 1051.

23

the part of the Government, such complaint should not come from a company based in Dubai; it

should come from a member of the citizenry.

In addition to that, if a government fails to supply electricity without any interruption, then a citizen

of this country who is affected and is entitled to receive electricity, can make an application to a

relevant court, complaining against the Government for not supplying uninterrupted electricity. It

is true that there is no allegation against the Petitioner for not supplying coal within the time

stipulated or coal of the required standard.

Therefore, procuring standard coal is entirely within the purview of the Government, which it has

entrusted to the 1st Respondent, but the procurement process is done through a Cabinet committee.

As such, if such substandard coal is procured fraudulently or such procurement is not done within

the time stipulated, then the responsibility is with the Government, and anyone can trigger different

types of actions against the Government and its responsible officers.

However, in this case, the Petitioner is not entitled to raise such an issue because it is not a citizen

or a registered personality within the territorial municipality of Sri Lanka.

In addition to that, if the officers responsible for procuring coal, procures sub-standard coal, and

if the Government needs to purchase coal from an outside third party, then the extra money

incurred by the Government should not be collected by the people; it should be recovered directly

from the officers responsible for such mistake.

However, I do not need to make an order on that as that is for a complainant to make a proper

complaint before the proper court when such rights are affected. In this case, the question arises

24

whether the Petitioner has followed what is stipulated in the contract as everything depends on the

contract.

Conclusion

For the reasons adumbrated above, it is my view that the Petitioner has an alternative remedy

already provided for in the contract itself; thus, the writs sought by the Petitioner do not lie; as

such, this Application is dismissed, without costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K.P. Fernando J.,

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL