1

t I 1

j i I I I 1 i

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

1

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of Section 331 of

the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979

Vs,

The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

COMPLAINANT

Rathnayake Mudiyanselage Jayantha Rathnayake

No. 19 B, Daya Gunasekera Mw,

Badulla.

CN252/2009 ACCUSED H.C Badulla Case No 90/2007

Before

And,

Vs,

Rathnayake Mudiyanselage Jayantha Rathnayake

No. 19 B, Daya Gunasekera Mw,

Badulla.

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

COMPLAINANT - RESPONDENT

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J (PICA) &

H. C. J. Madawala J

Counsel: Anil Silva PC with S. Jayadewarchchi for the Accused- Appellant

Thusith Mudalige SSC and H. J ayaneththi SC for the AG

Argued On: 24.02.2015, 10.03.2015, 16.03.2015, 29.04.2015,03.06.2015, 03.06.2015,

04.06.2015, 18.06.2015,24.06.2015,20.07.2015, 30.07.2015, 06.10.2015, 16.10.2015

Written Submission On: 28.10.2015

Order On: 18.03.2016

Order

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J (PICA)

2

The accused-appellant was indicted before the High Court of Badulla for the murder of Manjula

Priyadarshani Warnakulasuriya, his legally married wife on or about 19th May 2005.

The said Indictment was preferred by the Attorney General directly to the High Court under

section 3 (1) of the Criminal Procedure (Special Provisions) Act No. 42 of 2007.

The accused-appellant elected to be tried before the High Court Judge without a jury and after trial he

was convicted for the said offence and sentenced to death. Being aggrieved by the said conviction and

sentence the accused-appellant had preferred this appeal.

During the arguments before this court it was transpired that the initial investigations in to the death of

the said deceased was proceeded under the provisions of Motor Traffic Act and under section 298 of

the Penal Code on the belief that the said death was caused due to a motor traffic accident.

At the arguments before this court the Learned President's Counsel for the accused-appellant has raised

the following grounds of appeal,

a) The Learned High Court Judge has misdirected himself as to how a defence of accident

under section 73 of the Penal Code should be considered

3

b) The Learned High Court Judge erred in law when he failed to evaluate the items of evidence

which are in favour of the accused-appellant

c) The Learned High Court Judge erred in law when he failed to appreciate properly the legal

concept relating to circumstantial evidence

The position taken up by the accused-appellant right throughout the trial was that, the death of the said

Manjula Priyadarshani Warnakulasuriya was caused due to a motor traffic accident.

As admitted by both parties the deceased and the accused had gone to Mahiyangana on that day (i.e.

19.05.2005) to attend a house warming function of the Magistrate Mahiyangana one Nandani

Abeygunawardena. They traveled to Mahiyangana from Badulla in their Toyota Caml Jeep bearing

registration No UPHM0588 driven by the Accused. It was further admitted by both parties that the

deceased and the accused left Mahiyangana around 6.15 pm. Little prior to 7.00 pm a telephone call

was received by the manager of their shop (Jayantha Trade Centre) from the deceased and she asked the

Manager Francis to close the shop and take the children home. She spoke to the children and asked

them to prepare dinner for them.

The next recorded event or the admitted fact is the making of the 1st Complaint at Mahiyangana Police

Station by the accused-appellant of an accident at 7.50 pm. The events took place in between were

contested by both parties before the High Court as well as before us.

The accused-appellant took up the position that the incident was an accident and in support of this

contention the defence mainly relied on the subsequent conduct of the accused and the evidence of few

lay witnesses who testified to the events took place immediately after the alleged accident.

In the absence of any eye witness to the incident the prosecution mainly relied upon Circumstantial

Evidence which includes medical, scientific and RMV's evidence which was supported by the evidence

of lay witnesses.

4

As referred by me earlier in this judgment, the position taken up by the accused-appellant right

throughout this case was that the death of Manjula Priyadarshani Warnakulasuriya was due to a road

traffic accident. The first and the second grounds of appeal raised by the Learned President's Counsel

were based on the said position taken by the accused-appellant.

In support of his contention he placed several material before this court and I intend analyzing the said

version first.

The fact that the accused and the deceased went to Mahiyangana in their Toyota Cami Jeep bearing

Registration No UPHM0558 to attend a house warming function of the Magistrate Mahiyangana is

admitted by both parties. According to the evidence of the guards attached to the said bungalow, Herath

Mudiyanselage Senarathne and Adikari Mudiyanselage Gunawardena deceased and the Accused had

left the bungalow after being there for about 1 hour around 6.15 pm. The witnesses had opened the gate

for them to leave the bungalow.

The next item of evidence available to establish the movements of the accused and the deceased was

the evidence of Suppiah Anton Francis Manager of Jayantha Trade Centre in Badulla. According to the

evidence of Francis he received a telephone call from the deceased around 7.00 pm. He received this

call little prior to closing the shop and on that day the shop was closed around 7.00 pm.

In addition to the fact that the deceased was alive little prior to 7.00 pm, the accused -appellant relied

on the above evidence to show, that the deceased was in a good state of mind and did not complain of

any harassment to her at that time.

The Accused-Appellant further relied on the evidence of one Bowatta Wijitha Siriwardena who was

summoned by the prosecution and a resident close to the place where the incident took place. She is the

person, whom the accused-appellant said to have contacted soon after the incident. According to her

evidence on the day in question between 7.00-7.30 pm when she was at her house, a person who had

come near her house had worshiped herself and her husband and pleaded with them to rescue his wife.

5

He was in a depressed mood and was crying at that time. Without even inquiring from him, he went on

saying that his car went to the canal with his wife and requested them to save his wife and the car and if

not he will jump into the water. However the witness could not identify the said person as the accused-

appellant at the High Court.

At that stage the witness and her husband went up to the canal but they feared that the said person

might jump in to the water.

This position was confirmed by witness Sitisekara Mudiyanselage Chandradasa, a trishaw driver who

happens to pass the said place in his three-wheeler.

After hearing the cries of a man he went up to them and at that time he saw one linadasa (husband of

Wijitha) holding another person. When questioned, linadasa informed him that a vehicle had fallen to

the canal with the wife of the said person and that he was trying to jump in to the water and therefore he

is holding on to him. The said person was shouting and asking them to rescue his wife.

When referring to the above evidence the Learned Counsel for the accused-appellant requested the

court to consider this conduct of the accused and submitted that the above conduct clearly shows his

genuine feelings at the time the accident took place and the effort he made to rescue his wife or

otherwise to commit suicide because he could not control himself.

The Learned Counsel for the accused-appellant further relied on the evidence of the officer in Charge

of the Mahiyangana Police Station Nihal Priyantha Liyanage (at page 642), the officer who recorded

the statement of the accused-appellant PC Chandana Premasiri Nawarathne (at page 632) and brother-

in-law of the accused-appellant who visited him at the police station Mahiyangana K.A. Ajith Sumith

(at page 459) in support of the above contention.

Based on the above evidence the Learned Counsel for the accused-appellant complained that the

subsequent conduct of the accused-appellant as well as the position taken up by the accused-appellant

# 1 j I

1 ] I I I I I ! ! I I I I

I

6

that this was an accident, was not considered infavour of him by the Learned High Court Judge in his

Judgment.

I will discuss the issue of failure by the Learned High Court Judge to consider matters infavour of the

accused as alleged by the Learned Counsel for the accused-appellant at a later stage of the Judgment.

It was further submitted on behalf of the accused-appellant that, even though there was some

displeasure between the accused-appellant and the deceased some time back, since March 2005 they

decided to live under one roof and there were no fights between the accused-appellant and the deceased

during this period. Magistrate Mahiyangana - Nandani Abeygunasekara had acted as a mediator when

these two had problems, and on the day in question the accused-appellant and the deceased visited the

said Nandani Abeygunasekara to attend her house warming ceremony clearly indicates that they have

patched up their differences by that time.

I now turn to consider the prosecution story of this case and the arguments raised by the Learned Senior

State Counsel before this court, since that will help this court to consider the arguments raised on behalf

of the accused-appellant. As understood from the prosecution story placed before this court, it appears

that the prosecution has relied heavily on establishing the motive by the accused to commit this

offence, even though there is no requirement to establish the motive in a criminal trial.

In the case of Chandra Prakash Shahi V. State of U.P (2000) 5 SCC 152 the importance of the motive

was observed as follows, "Motive is the moving power which impels action for a definite result or

which incites or stimulates a person do an act."

In the case of Nathuni Yadav V. State of Bihar (1998) 9 sec 288 the extent to which the motive can

be established in a criminal trial was discussed as follows, "Motive for doing a criminal act is generally

a difficult area for prosecution. One cannot normally see in to the mind of another. Motive is the

emotion which impels a man to do a particular act. Such impelling cause needs not necessarily be

proportionally grave to do grave crimes. Many a murders have been committed without any known or

II Ii I I! II

i 1,

lI

t

~!! Irt

~f I Ii,IIi

!I

iiKiti!

7

prominent motive. It is quite possible that the aforesaid impelling factors would remain undiscoverable.

Though, it is a sound proposition that every criminal act is done with a motive, it is unsound to

suggest that no such criminal act can be presumed unless motive is proved .......................... .

In some cases, it may not be difficult to establish motive through direct evidence, while in some other

cases inferences from circumstances may help in discerning the mental propensity of the person

concerned. There may also be cases in which it is not possible to disinter the mental transaction of the

accused which would have impelled him to act.' (emphasis added)

However when referring to the danger of acting on the evidence which indicates the motive of the

accused-appellant the Learned President's Counsel relied on the following observation made by

Amaratunga J in the case of Lionel V. Attorney General 2004 (1) Sri LR 123 at 130;

"Motive is a double edged weapon. The deceased also could have had a reason to implicate the accused

due to this reason. The Learned Trial Judge has failed to consider this aspect when he considered

whether there was any motive to the deceased to falsely implicate the accused."

I see no relevance of the said judgment to the present case since the evidence relied by the prosecution

was not based on anything uttered by the deceased but based on the testimony of other witnesses who

gave evidence before the trial court and faced cross examination by the defence. I will now turn to

consider the said material referred to by the Learned Senior State Counsel.

According to the evidence of Somapala Warnakulasuriya father of the deceased Manjula

Warnakulasuriya, a landed proprietor, living in Bandarawela with his wife who was an English

Teacher, deceased Manjula had eloped with accused when she was less than 16 years. On the following

day the girl was brought back home, but the girl eloped again with the accused soon after attaining 16

years and the parents then gave up the attempt in guarding her. Thereafter the deceased gave birth to

two children (a daughter and a son) and gradually commenced visiting her patents. Thechildren were

brought home thereafter and the accused too joined after some time.

8

Accused, who started his life as a salesman in Bandarawela in a Furniture Shop, had moved to Badulla

after he eloped with the deceased for the second time and started a furniture business in Badulla. Both

the accused and the deceased were engaged in the said business which prospered and they moved in to

a five storied building in the heart of the town and carried out the business under the name of "Jayantha

Trade Centre." At the beginning the family lived in a part of their business establishment but later

moved to a two storied house which they purchased in Daya Gunasekara Mawatha, Badulla.

Until mid 2000 both the accused and deceased worked together and there were no complains with

regard to their family life. However the prosecution relied on the evidence of 3 lay witnesses' namely,

1. Somapala Warnakulasuriya (98) farther of the deceased

2. Lakmini (363) cousin of the deceased

3. Sujatha (467) domestic servant at the deceased' house

to establish that the said peaceful environment at the deceased's house

was changed subsequently due to an illicit affair commenced between the accused and one Jayamini

during this period. The said Jayamini was also called as a witness for the prosecution.

According to the evidence of Somapala Warnakulasuriya father of the deceased, after some time, there

was displeasure between the couple over an illicit affair of the accused-appellant and during this period

his daughter returned home with two children about 4 times. Whilst referring to one Nandani

Abeygunasekara a Magistrate, he said that the said Nandani Abeygunasekara was a student of his wife

and had a very close relationship with their family. Whenever his daughter returned home, the said

Magistrate had intervened and tried to settle the differences between the two and managed to send the

deceased back to Badulla to live with the accused-appellant. In December 2004 the Deceased had come

home for the last time and stayed with the parents until March 2005 and again due to the mediation

decides to go back to Badulla. However during her stay in Bandarawela, the deceased had decided to

file divorce action against the accused-appellant and instructed an Attorney-at-Law to institute

proceedings in the District Court of Bandarawela.

10

house of his mistress again and if he wanted, then he should not visit the family. At that stage the

accused-appellant tried to assault the deceased again and when he was prevented by the witness's

husband, he went to the kitchen and came with a knife and threatened to kill the deceased but when

witness's husband prevented the accused-appellant again, he went out of the house with anger and

punched the tyres ofthe deceased's vehicle (Toyota Carny Jeep) with the knife and went away.

Thereafter the witness had accompanied the deceased to the police station to lodge a complaint and the

police visited the house to inquire into the complaint. Thereafter they returned to Bandarawela with the

deceased and her two children.

The above evidence given by witness Lakmini was corroborated by witness Samantha Gajanayake a

Sub-Inspector attached to the Police Station Badulla. According to him he has gone to No. 19B Daya

Gunassekara Mawatha on 21.12.2004 to investigate into a complaint made by the deceased in this case

with regard to damaging of two tyres in a Jeep bearing No. UPHM0558 belonging to the deceased. The

said complaint was against the accused-appellant in the present case and he confirms making positive

observations on that day and thereafter producing the suspect before Magistrate after the accused-

appellant surrendered at the Police Station through an Attorney-at-Law.

The Learned Senior State Counsel referred to several incidents which took place between the deceased

and the accused -appellant during the period the witness Lakmini stayed with the deceased's family to

show that there was no peace prevailed in the deceased's family due to the conduct of the accused-

appellant.

It is further submitted by the Learned Senior State Counsel whilst referring to the evidence of Lakmini

that the, accused-appellant insisted the deceased to agree with him to allow his mistress and her child to

live with deceased's family under one roof. In order to insist the deceased to agree for this, he forcibly

took his mistress along with his family on several occasion and the Learned Senior State Counsel

11

referred to two such occasions narrated by witness Lakmini in her evidence, firstly an outing to a

restaurant in Badulla called "Dunhinda Sisila" and secondly to attend a wedding in Maharagama area.

On both these occasions the deceased objected for the presence of the mistress along with her but the

accused-appellant ignored her protest and insisted to treat both families alike.

When the deceased was returning after attending the wedding in Maharagama, she could not control

herself and jumped out of the van from which they travelled pretending that she wanted to take a phone

call at Ingiriya and when the accused-appellant tried to take her back to the van forcibly, the people of

the area had surrounded the van and tried to apprehend the accused-appellant thinking that he was

abducting a woman.

According to the evidence of Sujatha, who was employed after her sister as the domestic servant at

deceased' house, she had stayed with the deceased's family for one year and 4 months during

2003-2004 periods.

This witness too had referred to several incidents took place between the deceased and the accused-

appellant during her stay. On one such occasion, the accused-appellant wanted the deceased to

accompany him to attend the birthday party of his mistress's child. (His child too) but it was ended up

with a fight between the two since the deceased refused to attend the birth day party.

On another day, after a fight between the two, the accused-appellant locked the deceased inside an

Almirah. The witness and her mother who was also present on that day had rescued the deceased.

According to the witness, the accused-appellant insisted that he be allowed to bring his mistress and the

child to the up stair of their house, but the deceased protested to it saying "eC3 @)<:;d).5)) 80.5) .5)Cj)

Whilst referring to the above evidence the Learned Senior State Counsel submitted that, the above

evidence reveals a strong motive for the accused-appellant to commit this offence.

12

The Learned Senior State Counsel, further submitted that, from the evidence of Lakmini and Sujatha it

is further revealed that the deceased wanted out siders to live in their house as much as possible and in

addition to Lakmini and Sujatha, even Sujatha's mother too was staying in this house from time to time

even though the accused-appellant did not like it.

Learned Senior State Counsel referred to the evidence of Diana Kathrene Gnanamuththu an Attorney-at

Law from Bandarawela, with regard to the Divorce Action filed by the deceased against the accused-

appellant. In the said divorce action, Muthukuda Arachchige Jayamini Priyadarshika Namali was made

the Co-respondent since one of the main grounds averred for grant of the divorce was adultery. The

plaint was filed in the District Court of Bandarawela on 17.02. 2015 and the summons were issued on

the two Respondents. According to the witness, in the said application the plaintiff had asked Rs. 20

million as permanent alimony. The above position was confirmed by the Registrar District Court

Bandarawela H.L. Tuder, who was also called as a witness for the prosecution. At the time the alleged

incident took place, the accused-appellant was served with the summons with regard to the divorce

action and the prosecution position before the trial court was that, at no stage the deceased decided to

drop the divorce action, even though she lived with the accused-appellant between March to May

2005. This position is confirmed by the evidence of instructing attorney Diana Kathrene

Gnanamuththu.

When referring to the above evidence, I observe that the prosecution had placed evidence before the

trial court to establish a strong motive for the accused-appellant to commit this offence. In addition to

the above evidence, prosecution has decided to call Muthukuda Arachchige Jayamini Priyadarshika

Namali as a witness for the prosecution to establish the relationship between her and the accused-

appellant. The prosecution has placed the same reliance on the evidence of Jayamini when the

prosecution decided to call her as a witness for the prosecution. The prosecution has not treated her as

an adverse witness and placed the same reliance on her evidence. According to the evidence of

Jayamini she was married to one Anura Rajapakshe in the year 1985 and lived with him as husband and

13

wife for nearly 15 years. The said Anura Rajapakshe is a cousin of the accused-appellant and

somewhere in 1995 the accused-appellant visited her house in Pinarawa with her husband and

requested her to do some sawing for his shop. During this period both the accused-appellant and his

wife visited her with the material for her to engage in sawing for their shop. However there was a

rumor with regard to a relationship between the witness and the accused-appellant and, her husband had

left her over that rumor.

She speaks of a very strong relationship between the accused-appellant and herself since year 2000 and

accused-appellant renting a house for her. The accused-appellant is the father of the child she delivered

in the year 2003 but according to her the deceased knew all these things but did not object for the affair

no she made any protest when the witness got pregnant from the accused-appellant. During this period

the accused-appellant visited her house and stayed the night with her once or twice a week.

Even though she referred to a cordial relationship with the deceased, during her evidence witness had

admitted some unpleasant incidents took place during this period as well, and the trip to Maharagama

in order to attend a wedding was one such incident. According to her it is the deceased and the accused-

appellant who attended the wedding but she too was taken along with them and on their return at

Ingiriya some incident had taken place.

However according to witness Jayamini she stopped her relationship with the accused-appellant in

February 2005 but admits speaking to him even after the death of the deceased.

The effect of the above evidence on the prosecution case to the effect that the accuse-appellant had a

strong reason to commit this offence which establishes the motive, I will discuss at a later stage of this

judgment.

I will now deal with the rest of the argument raised by the Learned Senior State Counsel, to wit; that

there is a strong case based on circumstantial evidence to establish that this is not an accident as

claimed by the accused-appellant but it is a premeditated murder.

t,t f ,

f tIIf I1ItI

I

1 I i

I 1 I I i 1 I

) , I 1 i ! 1 i

~ I J I I I 1 I I I I I I I I

I I

I

14

In this regard the prosecution has relied on several items of circumstantial evidence. According to the

Learned Senior State Counsel, the items of circumstantial evidence the prosecution has relied upon has

to first rule out the possibility that the death of the deceased Manjula Warnakulasuriya was not a result

of an accident and thereafter establishes that it is due to a voluntary act committed by the accused with

the intention of committing murder of the deceased.

As placed before us by the Learned Senior State Counsel, the post mortem examination of the deceased

Manjula Warnakulasuriya was conducted by the Consultant Judicial Medical Officer-Kandy Dr. A.B.

Senevirathne who has conducted nearly 15,000 Post Mortem inquiries during his carrier. The said post

mortem examination was conducted on 21.05.2005. It was further revealed that the consultant Judicial

Medical Officer had visited the crime scene, and also examined the Jeep in which the deceased and the

accused-appellant had travelled on that day. According to the Post Mortem Report which was produced

marked P-27 the cause of death was due to drowning. The body of the deceased had only one external

injury which was a minor abrasion on the nose.

As said by the accused in his evidence before court, the deceased and the accused were not wearing seat

belts at that time and the accused-appellant was driving the vehicle at 80-90 krnph and the doctor was

expecting much more injuries on the body of the deceased due to above factors.

He had expressed a similar opinion regarding the possibility of receiving injuries to the accused even

though the accused too did not have any injuries according to the evidence of Dr. Dissanayake of

Mahiyangana Hospital who examined the accused-appellant during the same night at 12.50 A.M.

It was also observed by the Medical Expert that the nature of the injuries that the occupants should

sustain while trying to come out from the front shutter were not found on the body of the deceased

since the body was not found inside the Jeep.

15

Considering the dimensions of the body the Consultant Judicial Medical Officer has further opined that

if the deceased was inside the jeep when it went into the water the body too should have been inside the

Jeep.

Based on the observation he has made, the Consultant Judicial Medical Officer had given an opinion

that, when the jeep went into water the deceased wouldn't have been inside the Jeep. He had further

observed an unsecure bridge (across the canal) near the place where the jeep went into water and given

an opinion that if the deceased was pushed from this bridge she could fall into water without injuries as

in the present case.

The Learned President's Counsel for the accused-appellant has brought to our notice the fact that a pair

of ladies slippers found inside the Jeep, which is also another item of circumstantial evidence, cuts

across the above position.

However when this position was put to the Government Analyst, he took up the position that he would

expect a 60 kg human body which was not flexible after the death to remain inside the Jeep if the two

small shoes were found inside the Jeep.

However it is important to note that this observations and opinion given by the consultant Judicial

Medical Officer is his opinion only, which he is entitled to say but this court is not bound to accept it

unless it is the only inference this court can come to, based on the evidence placed before court.

The evidence of the Consultant Judicial Medical Officer was challenged by the defence in the High

Court Trial by calling Dr. Sarathchandra Kodikara (Lecturer in Forensic Medicine at the University of

Peradeniya) as a defence witness.

In his evidence Dr. Kodikara admitted that he conducted only 2000 post mortem inquires within a

period of 8 years and given evidence in 25-30 cases. He further admitted that this is the 2nd occasion he

is giving evidence on a report prepared by a different doctor. In his evidence he stated that it is wrong

ItII!III

~ Il tI

~ ~ r f tf Ii t I

[(,

II

to expect injuries on the bodies of persons who met with accidents, when the vehicle in which the said I

fi !

I I 16

f

person had travelled fallen into water. He was relied his opinion based on the results of a research

conducted in Sweden. He took up the position that only 8% received injuries when their vehicle fallen

into the water. The evidence given by the said witness was challenged by the state and under cross

examination he admitted that according to the findings of the research he referred to, 92% received non

grievous injuries and only 8% received grievous injuries. When he was confronted with above figures

he admitted that according to the findings of the said research the rate of receiving injuries is not 8%

but it is 100%. He further admitted in cross examination that the speed of the vehicle which met with an

accident by falling into water is material to give an opinion with regard to the injuries received by the

inmates of the vehicle.

With regard to the above position he had finally admitted his lapses as follows;

g:

\

II

Ii

~ IlIy!rII

17

The next important aspect the Learned Senior State Counsel relied upon was the evidence and the

report produced marked P-24 by the Government Analyst. Senior Assistant Government Analyst

D.M.L.W. Jayamanne who has visited the scene made his observations with regard to the scene and the

Jeep, had made the following observation with regard to the inspection he has made,

With regard to the .Jeep

a) The Jeep has several damages and scratch marks including some identical dents on the

front buffer.

b) The front windscreen was broken

c) The roof had identical scratch marks

d) Except in one place on the silencer there were no damages on the underneath of the

vehicle

Place where the incident occurred

a) The canal (Viana Ela) was running parallel to the road and it was a constructed canal.

b) There is a three meter gravel area between the road and the edge of the canal.

c) Between the edge of the canal and the real canal which carried water, there is a distance

of 7 meters with 250_300 slants.

d) Tyre marks were found on the gravel stretch as well as on the concrete slope of the

canal.

e) An unprotected bridge was found 100 meters down constructed on some pillars across

the canal.

Based on the above observations he made at the scene and on the Jeep, Senior Assistant Government

Analyst had expressed the following opinion,

a) The entire damage to the Jeep has caused when it was inside the water

i,

18

b) If the jeep was driving at a speed of 80-90 kmph the Jeep should topple when going

down on the precipice (slope)

c) The Jeep has gone down on the precipice

1. Without any damage to the underneath

11. Without topple

and it confirms the fact that the Jeep has gone down on the precipice (slope)

at a slow speed such as two meters per second or 8-10 kmph

d) The damage to the Jeep was caused when the Jeep turned upside down inside the water

and moved down touching the concrete bottom of the canal up to the bridge where it was

stuck and also due to the collusion between the concrete pillar of the bridge, but none of

the damage found on the Jeep was compatible with damages caused during a fall in to

the water if the Jeep was driving at a high speed.

The next witness prosecution has relied upon is the Examiner of Motor Vehicles, Prabath Kusumsiri.

This witness too had given his opinion that the jeep could not have driven at 90 kmph when it went out

of the road since there were tyre marks from the edge of the road to the water level of the canal. If the

vehicle was driven at 90 kmph he expected the vehicle to be flipped in the air for few seconds and

landed half way making more damages to the canal as well as to the vehicle and there can't be tyre

marks for the entire distance.

During the arguments before us the Learned Senior State Counsel referred to the photographs marked

during the trial and the evidence given by the witnesses with regard to the place where the incident

occurred, including the Inspector of Police Priyantha Liyanage, to the effect that there were guard

stones on the road to prevent a vehicle going out of the road at the bend but the place where the vehicle

said to have gone out of the road was beyond the guard stones i.e. to say that the Jeep had veered off

after passing the bend avoiding the guard stones fixed at the bend.

19

The Learned Senior State Counsel further relied on the evidence of two witnesses to establish the

condition of the vehicle at the time incident occurred. The contention of the Learned Senior State

Counsel by leading the said evidence was to contradict one of the positions taken up by the accused-

appellant in his statement to the police, to the effect that there was a defect in the Jeep.

Before analyzing this position, it is important to note at this stage, that the statement made by the

accused-appellant to police which was produced marked P-9, does not offend section 110 (3) of the

Code of Criminal Procedure Act No 15 of 1979 since it was made prior to the commencement of the

investigation.

In the said statement the accused-appellant had "explain as to how the incident had occurred as follows;

"mao 6.300 O@&J @@~c3~05 q@G.)@C35 Ble Bla8~ 8005 C) @rnG.)o(3)&J ~~@@ @)O(3)@c5

G))a.5)G.) 0)6 q(0)~6 g@Grn@c5~ @) O~a)@(3).5) q) eo 6()G.) G))a.5)G.) 0)6@~ 80.5) 00

In this regard prosecution has first relied on the evidence of witness R.M. Sarath Chandrapala the

mechanic who attended to the vehicle during this period. According to this witness on a day in the

month of May 2005 the accused-appellant came to his garage and wanted him to check the brakes of

the vehicle and also complained of a jerk in the front tyres when driving fast. He first attended to the

brakes and replaced the brake pads. With regard to the second complaint he drove the vehicle to check

this and also removed the tyres and checked the ball joints but could not observe any defect. He

informed this to the accused-appellant.

Secondly the prosecution relied on the evidence of Nelson Wijesiri a technician from Toyota Lanka and

Gamini Priyalal De Silva who was the Service Manager at Toyota Lanka during this period.

According to the evidence of Nelson Wijesiri he had examined the vehicle in question on the request of

the Criminal Investigation Department at the Mahiyangana Police Station, in the presence and guidance

I

r

1

IIIi

I

fi! !j

20

of his Service Manager and he could not observe any defect in the tyres, tyre rods shock absorbers,

rack-ends, bearings, ball joints and the coil spring of the said vehicle and the vehicle was in perfect

good running condition and he could not find any reason for a Jerk in the said vehicle at that time. This

position was confirmed by the then Service Manager of Toyota Lanka Gamini Priyalal de Silva.

Out of the above two witnesses the 1st witness who had undergone training at Toyota Lanka work shop

had over 15 years of experience in vehicle repairing. The 2nd witness under whose guidance and

supervision the 1st witness carried the said inspection, is a diploma holder in Motor Mechanism, had

received a Special Mechanical Training from Toyota Japan during his 18 Y2 years service at Toyota

Lanka and the prosecution had relied him as an expert in his field.

The question of, who is considered as an Expert Witness? Was discussed in the case of The State of

Haryana Pradesh V. Jai Lal (1999) 7 see 280 as follows;

"An expert witness is one who has made the subject upon which he speaks a matter of particular

study, practice or observation; and he must have a special knowledge of the subject.

In order to bring the evidence of a witness as that of an expert it has to be shown that he has

made a special experience therein or in other words that he is skilled and has adequate

knowledge of the subject."

This court has no reason to reject the evidence and the report submitted by witness Priyalal de Silva

when considering his experience and the qualification in the relevant filed, as transpired during his

evidence. The evidence of the other two witnesses namely Sarath Chandrapala and Nelson too can also

be considered as evidence in this case but, if they have given any opinion that cannot be considered by

this court as expert opinion, however that can be considered as evidence if it has been corroborated by

the evidence of an expert witness. With regard to the evidence given by witness Nelson, we observe

that, he has carried out an inspection on the instruction of witness Priyalal de Silva and both witnesses

f JI

~ f Ii

r f t! i I l I( IItI

Jf,

21

had corroborated each other with regard to the observations they made and therefore this court has no

reason to reject the evidence of witness Nelson as well.

The Learned Senior State Counsel further relied on the evidence of Dr. Dissanayake of Mahiyangana

Hospital who examined the accused-appellant during the same night around 12.30 am. The accused-

appellant was produced before him as a suspect in a Fatal Accident case by the Mahiyangana Police.

According to the evidence of Dr. Dissanayake, in order to examine the accused-appellant, he got the

shirt removed first and examined him. During his examination he could not observed any injuries on

his body. Before examination he questioned the accused-appellant and he was not confused and could

give a clear description of the events take place during that night. Dr. Dissanayake in his evidence has

referred to the condition of the accused-appellant as observed by him as follows;

g:

@~6l<:5) iiJoci, ~o~ c.i~ ad 60(.J @c.i)(.J)(3)l63O @<:5))~lB iiJoci B5o). o)o)@cJ

B8 q(6360))o(.JB~ @0))60 q~8@@o@~ c.i~~~ 0)(3) C) qoc3o)@CJ <!)~o

i IIII

,

r! Jf t

~

22 I

During the examination he observed only the bottom part of the trouser was wet only up to the knee

level. The balance part of the trouser and the shirt was not wet. When it was suggested to the witness

that due to the laps of time and other outside conditions the cloths he was wearing could have dried up,

the witness's answer was that he is unable to say anything but he could only say that he saw only the

bottom part of the denim trouser worn by the accused-appellant was wet. It is important to be mindful

of this aspect of the evidence since the accused-appellant was wearing a Denim Trouser and not a

cotton or a synthetic trouser at that time.

Prosecution has then called a witness by the name Dassanayake Mudiyanselage Ranbanda

Dassanayake Engineering Assistant at Mahaweli Authority. This witness was summoned to obtain the

water level ofthe "Viyana Ela" on that day.

According to this witness, the Mahaweli Authority is collecting data with regard to the water levels of

this canal and the said water levels are stored in their system. According to the date given, i.e. on 19th

May 2005 the water level of Viyana Ela was 3.05 meters which is approximately 10 feet. When the

water level is 10 feet a person fallen to the canal will have to swim in order to come out from the canal

and therefore it is not wrong to expect all his cloths are soaked with water when he come out from the

canal.

Prosecution has further relied on the different positions taken up by the accused-appellant at different

times with regard to the incident which are contradictory to each other and therefore submitted before

this court, that !f 1

23

a) The accused-appellant was trying to cover up the real incident and therefore he was giving

contradictory versions to different people at different times,

b) The evidence given by the accused on oath should be rejected due to the contradictory

position taken up by him

In this regard the Learned Senior State Counsel relied upon the evidence given by the following

witnesses.

IIt IIi

i a) According to the evidence of witness Chandradasa who was passing the place where the r

incident had occurred, when the accused-appellant made a request to take him to the

Magistrate's bungalow at Mahiyangana, the witness obliged but took the accused-appellant

to Mahiyangana Police. On their way the accused-appellant told him "That he fall asleep

and also said that the shutters were closed since it was drizzling (page 271) this evidence

went unchallenged and there is no reference to excessive speed or mechanical defect to this

witness.

b) According to the evidence of witness Palitha Ariyawansa Lankadeepa Correspondent for

Badulla he had interviewed the accused-appellant prior to his arrest on 20th May 2005. The

said news item was produced marked P-3 and in the said news item the accused-appellant

says he drove the jeep at an excessive speed and failed to negotiate the bend. There is no

reference to him falling asleep or mechanical defect to this witness.

c) According to witness Jayamini, having heard about the incident she telephoned the accused-

appellant. At that stage he told her that the vehicle skidded off the road. There is no

reference to him falling asleep or mechanical defect to this witness too.

d) According to the evidence of witness Ajith Sumith who is the brother in law of the accused-

appellant, when he met the accused-appellant at Mahiyangana Police Station, he told him

that he came at a speed of about 90 kmph and the vehicle went off the road when he was

24

negotiating the bend. However there is no reference to him falling asleep or mechanical

defect to this witness.

In the Police Statement made to Mahiyangana Plice Station prior to his arrest, which was produced

marked P-9 the accused -appellant had taken up the following position; " ....... ~Ol@ ql6 )O(3)@lc5

q(0)~6 g@l~rn@lc5~ ) Ol;O)@l(3)~q) ao 6()(.J G))O~(.J 0)6(d; 85~ C)() oO)o6 00<32(0)

0630) (3)l()()o) 63@~ q0)6 o o())~@lc5 ao 6()(.J G))O~(.J @lo(d; 63~(.J~ oO)o6

As observed by this court, even though the accused-appellant had taken up the position that he drove

the vehicle at 90 kmph at that time, he has not referred to the fact that the vehicle skidded off the road

but stated that when he was negotiating the bend, with a jerk the vehicle moved to the left beyond his

control which is indicative of a mechanical defect in the vehicle.

When the case for the prosecution was concluded and the accused-appellant was explained by court, his

rights, the accused-appellant had preferred to give evidence on oath. In his evidence he has referred to

the incident as follows; (page 1373-1374)

G: ~l~l OO)~ (3)d;~ ~l@@ld; ~l~l (3)d;~@l0))() 8500@l0d; rn~G)(.Jo) q)O)

OO)@lO))() go)O))~ @63~ g~) 6 oo)O) o5(.Jod; 00) O() O)lg~)

t t

~ III

If t,

I

25

The above position taken up by the accused-appellant whilst under examination in chief is almost

similar to his position in the lSI complaint but when the accused-appellant was under cross examination

he had changed his version as follows;

g:

(,: 005 OC))@&

LcltfJ 00Q)(H3)

....,

q~C) 00Q)

....,

CJWGJO @ q<5)q@o @~q @LcO)ci OOQ) g: Cj)~GJ O)GJ<5)

t 5 C))

(,: 005 OC))@&

ClO)ci O)B C))C5)<5)@c5 00Q)

...., q)0))6@c5 @t,J rn gciO))<5) @C)5@, rn~G)GJci c; g: o)GJg

CjC5) (3)lOa?

I l

II

26

g: ooi;V@03 c.:noo 0)@C3 C))~.5)(j o)@6~ tg)C)0)() @(3))c.5 q.5)q6() o05C)@() i;V@Ol@C)

ooi;V@03 C)0 02C) B>a~@6)(j t5)a@~ i;OC)@O))C)(j

G:

g:

Under cross examination the accused-appellant changes his earlier positions of defect in the vehicle to

failure in judging the bend due to his speed, but admitted that he did not inform the police of this

position in his first complaint or thereafter.

When considering the positions taken up by the accused-appellant, as to how the incident had taken

place, at different points, to different authorities and different personal, it is correct to conclude that the

accused-appellant was not sure as to how this incident took place for reasons best known to him.

It is further observed by this court that, according to the evidence of the accused-appellant jeep veered

off when he was negotiating the bend and not after negotiating the bend but, according to the

observations, the incident had taken place after passing the bend, beyond the guard stones.

IIt

t

III , i ,

27

Another argument raised by the Learned Senior State Counsel before this court was the time taken by

the accused-appellant to come from Mahiayangana to the place where the incident had taken place. In

his statement made to the Mahiyangana Police at 7.50 pm which is produced marked P-9 the accused-

appellant had taken up the position that he left Mahiyangana at 6.30 pm, and the incident had taken

place around 7.15 pm. If the accused-appellant had left Mahiyangana at 6.30 pm and did drive fast as

he explains at around 90 kmph he could have reached the place where the incident occurred (i.e. nearly

20 km) easily within 20-25 minutes.

With regard to this issue the Learned Senior State Counsel brought to the notice of court, that the

accused-appellant, even though not referred in his first complaint but later explained that he had to stop

the vehicle for pump petrol, made an offering to a temple and answer a call of nature before he reached

the place where the incident took place to establish the fact that he was driving at a speed of 90 kmph at

the time the incident took place.

Whilst referring to the said statement it was further submitted by the Learned Senior State Counsel that

the accused-appellant had taken the trouble to explain minor details such as, the air conditioner was

switched off, the shutters were opened and they were not wearing seat belts at that time, clearly

indicates that the accused-appellant was trying to build up a case for him in his police statement. In this

regard this court is mindful of the evidence given by Dr. Dissanayake of Mahiyangana Hospital who

has observed that, the accused-appellant was not confused and could give a clear description of the

events took place during that night.

With regard to the incident, the accused-appellant had further taken up the position that the vehicle was

flipped in to the air prior to it being landed on the water. The said evidence can referred to as follows;

I28 f

This evidence is clearly contradictory to the observations made by the official witnesses including the

police officer, Examiner of Motor Vehicles and the Government Analyst to the effect that there was a

tyre mark visible from the edge of the road up to the water level of the canal.

The Learned Trial Judge after analyzing the said evidence placed both by the prosecution and the

defence, had correctly rejected the evidence given by the accused-appellant and also rejected the

evidence given by defence witness Sarathchandra Kodikara. This court too had considered the said

revidence as submitted by the Learned Senior State Counsel and see no reason to interfear with the

above findings of the Trial Judge. I

Other than the evidence given by the accused-appellant the Learned President's Counsel further relied

on the evidence of the prosecution witnesses which indicates the subsequent conduct of the accused-

appellant.

As observed by me earlier in this judgment, the accused-appellant had made contradictory statement to

people whom he met after the incident. In one of the initial statement made to Chandradasa while he

was taken to Mahiyangana by him, the accused-appellant had told him that there was drizzling and the

shutters were closed in the jeep and he felt a sleep prior to the incident. The evidence of witness

Chandradasa admitted unchallenged but this version is contradictory to the subsequent positions taken

up by the accused-appellant.

According to Dr. Dissanayake who examined the accused-appellant few hours after the incident, had

said that the accused-appellant was not confused and could give a clear description of the events that

took place during that night as referred to in this judgment by me earlier.

29 ,

I

Dr. Dissanayake has not observed any injuries on the body of the accused-appellant. Witness Wijitha

Senevirathne the person to whom the accused-appellant had first informed the incident, too in her

evidence had said that, the person, without even asking went on saying things happened at that time.

As submitted by the Learned Senior State Counsel, the accused-appellant in his first complaint, made

at 7.50 pm referred to miner details such as, he and his wife did not wearing seat belts at that time and

also could remember the date of purchase of the said vehicle as 13.10.2003 which clearly indicates the

state of mind of the accused-appellant few minutes after the incident took place.

When considering the events that had taken place immediately after the incident, we observe that the

Learned Trial Judge had correctly considered the material available before court and rejected to

consider the said conduct of the accused-appellant under section 8 (2) of the Evidence Ordinance.

As his first ground of appeal the Learned President's Counsel submitted that the Learned Trial Judge

has misdirected himself when he failed to consider the defence of accident under section 73 of the

Penal Code.

Section 73 of the Penal Code reads thus;

"Nothing is an offence which is done by accident or misfortune and without any criminal

intention or knowledge in the doing of a lawful act in a lawful manner, by lawful means and

with proper care and caution."

When considering the material already discussed in this judgment I see no relevance in the above

provisions to the present case.

As correctly concluded by the Trial Judge to reject the evidence given by the accused-appellant, the

evidence of the defence witness and refuse to consider certain items of evidence under section 8 (2) of

the Evidence Ordinance, this court is not inclined to agree with the contention of the Learned

f

..,

30

President's Counsel that the items of evidence which are in favour of the accused-appellant were not

considered by the Learned Trial Judge.

For the reasons setout above I see no merit in the 15t and 2nd grounds of appeal raised by the accused-

appellant.

Third and the final ground of appeal raised by the Learned President's Counsel was based on the

alleged failure by the Trial Judge to appreciate properly the Legal concept relating to Circumstantial

Evidence.

As observed by me at the very commencement of this judgment, the entire case for the prosecution was

based on circumstantial evidence. As further pointed out by me, in establishing the prosecution case

prosecution relied heavily on motive of the accused-appellant to commit this offence. The Leaned

Senior State Counsel relied on the decision in Plomp V. Queen 37 AIJR 191 to explain the nature of

circumstantial proof needed in a case of this nature.

In the said case of Plomp V. Queen where the facts are very similar to the present case, the deceased

met her death when she was in sea along with the applicant at Southport at dusk on 24th February 1961.

There were no eye witnesses and the only account of what happened was given by the applicant to

various people called as witness.

Other than the said material the rest of the evidence available in the said case was strong evidence to

establish the motive of the applicant including his affair with another lady and his subsequent conduct

to marry her.

The importance of motive in a circumstantial evidence case was discussed by Menzies J in the said case

as follows,

"It would be just as unrealistic to treat the presence of a motive for doing an act which, if it

occurred at all was done by the accused as irrelevant to determining whether he did it as to treat

Ji ,

a

31

the absence of a motive as irrelevant to the determination; yet the absence of a motive is

commonly relied upon as a circumstance tending in favour of accidental death as against suicide

or in favour of a person accused of a crime.

This court is mindful of the requirements needed in establishing a case based on circumstantial

evidence discussed in series of cases, by the Supreme Court as well as Court of Appeal, but at the same

time observe the importance of motive in a Circumstantial Evidence case as observed above.

The importance of motive was again discussed in the case of R. V. Ball [1911J AC 47 by Lord Atkinson

as follows, "Evidence of motive necessarily goes to prove the fact of the homicide by the accused, as

well as his malice afterthought inasmuch as it is more probable that men are killed by those who have

some motive for killing them than by those who have not."

In the case of Don Sunny V. Attorney General 1998 (2) Sri LR 1 the principles that should be applied

by court in analyzing circumstantial evidence was identified as follows,

1. When a charge is sought to be proved by circumstantial evidence the proved items of

circumstantial evidence when taken together must irresistibly point towards the only

inference that the accused committed the offence.

On a consideration of all the evidence the only inference that can be arrived at should be

consistent with the guilt of the accused only.

2. If on a consideration of the items of circumstantial evidence if an inference can be drawn

which is consistent with the innocence of the accused, then one cannot say that the charges

have been proved beyond reasonable doubt.

3. If upon a consideration of the proved items of circumstantial evidence if the only inference

that can be drown is that the accused committed the offence then they can be found guilty.

fJIr

32

4. The prosecution must prove that no one else other than the accused had the opportunity of

committing the offence, the accused can be found guilty only and only if the proved items of

circumstantial evidence is consistent with their guilt and inconsistent with their innocence.

As observed in the said case of Plomp V. Queen a strong motive was considered as crucial evidence in

a circumstantial evidence case but as I have pointed out earlier, our courts have constantly applied the

requirement of following the principles in establishing a circumstantial evidence when the case is

essentially a circumstantial evidence case.

Even though I will not consider the motive as the crucial evidence in the present case, I must say that a

strong motive for the accused-appellant to commit this offence is established by the prosecution in this

case. Even though the accused-appellant had denied such motive and said that since March he lived a

peaceful life with the deceased, that evidence was totally rejected and that could not have even created

a doubt or suspicion in the mind of the Trial Judge. However prosecution has left one single issue for

me to consider with regard to the evidence of Jayamini Priyadarshika Namalie the mistress of the

accused-appellant. She was called by the prosecution as a prosecution witness in order to establish the

illicit affair she had with the accused-appellant. She confirmed this position but went on to say that the

deceased did not object them to continue with their affair and in fact she too had visited her on few

occasions. However in contrary the same witness admitted several instances where the deceased had

objected her being present with the accused-appellant which was corroborated by the evidence of

Lakmini and Sujatha. Witnesses Lakmini and Sujatha in their evidence referred to several such

incidents and last being the incident reported to Badulla Police on 215t December 2004 which was

corroborated through Police Evidence. Under these circumstances, the extent to which the evidence of

witness Namalie could be relied upon becomes essential to be considered by this court.

In this regard I am mindful of the maxim falsus in uno, falsus in omnibus and the decision in

Samaraweera V. The Attorney General 1990 (1) Sri LR 256 where the Court of Appeal held "The

maxim falsus in uno falsus in omnibus could not be applied in such circumstances Further all falsehood

!, I

/I

33

is not deliberate. Errors of memory, faulty observation or lack of skill on observation upon any point or

points, exaggeration or mere embroidery or embellishment must be distinguished from deliberate

falsehood before applying the maxim. Nor does the maxim apply to cases of testimony on the same

point between different witnesses. In any event this maxim is not an absolute rule which has to be

applied without exception in every case where a witness is shown to have given false evidence on a

material point. When such evidence is given by a witness the question whether other portions of his

evidence can be accepted as true may not be resolved in his favour unless there is some compelling

reason for doing so. The credibility of witnesses can be treated as divisible and accepted against one

and rejected against another."

When considering the evidence of witness Nimalie it is obvious that she is trying to help the accused-

appellant since she will become a mother of a child without the father, if the accused-appellant is

convicted in the present case and therefore she has a reason to protect him. Therefore this court is of the

view that the evidence of witness Namalie can be safety separated as material corroborated by the

evidence of the other witnesses and not corroborated by the evidence of the other witnesses and can

safely act upon the evidence corroborated by other witnesses.

Under those circumstances, this court will conclude that the prosecution has established a strong motive

on the part of accused-appellant to commit the murder of the deceased Manjula Priyadharshani

Warnakulasuri ya.

In addition to the motive to kill the deceased, the prosecution has relied on several items of

circumstantial evidence to establish the guilt of the accused.

As observed by the doctor, if the deceased was travelling in the vehicle without wearing a seat belt at

the time it went in to the water, at the speed the accused-appellant explained, she should receive much

more injuries on her body. As admitted by the defence witness Dr. Sarathchandra Kodikara the

percentage of receiving injuries in such a situation is 100%.

,

34

The consultant Judicial Medical Officer had gone a step further saying that even the driver should

receive injuries if he was inside the vehicle at that time. Dr. Dissanayake has not observed any injuries

on the body of the accused-appellant and also observed the Denim trouser the accused-appellant was

wearing at the time he examined him was wet only up to knee level. According to the evidence of

Dissanayake Mudiyanselage Ranbanda Dissanayake of Mahaweli Authority the water level on Viyana

Ela was approx. 10 feet on that day. The doctor has given an opinion that if the deceased was pushed to

the canal from the unprotected bridge which is in close proximity, it is possible the deceased to receive

one single minor injury as observed at the post mortem. This fact is further confirmed by two more

points placed during the argument, one being the fact that the body was found 1 Y2 km away down the

canal and not inside the jeep and secondly the fact that the accused-appellant was very well aware that

the body was not inside the jeep from what he informed the police to the effect; "@@@ q<5)qodi @@<35

The evidence of the Government Analyst and the Examiner of Motor Vehicle had ruled out the

possibility of the jeep falling in to the water at a high speed and the position taken up by them was that

the vehicle carefully gone to the water at a considerably lower speed. When the said witnesses,

expected either the vehicle to topple or flipped in the air and fallen half way, no damage compatible to

such an incident was observed by them.

The accused-appellant at a later stage of his evidence had tried to change his version by saying that the

vehicle was first flipped to the air and landed on the water, this position has to be rejected in view of

the observations made at the scene by the police and other official witnesses.

As observed by this court, the accused-appellant had made every attempt to establish that the vehicle

was driven at a speed closer to 90 kmph in order to justify his defence but the prosecution had

scientifically destroyed the said possibility.

tIIIIiI

(

~ ,I Itf

~

f ,

i. j i IIIi I

f

, ,

35

The Learned President's Counsel tried to gain advantage from the fact that a ladies pair of slippers were

found inside the jeep but could made use of the said point when the expert witnesses took up the

position as to how a stiff body with the weight of 60 KG went out from the jeep.

When considering the above evidence it is our considered view that the only irresistible inference that

can be arrived by this court is that the murder of Manjula Priyadarshani Warnakulasuriya was

committed by the accused-appellant Ratnayake Mudiyanselage Jayantha Ratnayake and not by any

other persons. Prosecution has also ruled out the possibility of an accident in this case. The said items

of circumstantial evidence are consisting only with the guilty of the accused and nothing else.

In this regard we observe that the Learned Trial Judge had carefully evaluated each and every item of

circumstantial evidence in the present case before coming to the conclusion, even though he has not

specifically referred to the principle behind it, this court is mindful of the fact that the trial judge with a

trained legal mind was alive and mindful of the relevant principles of law and has applied them in

arriving at his conclusion.

In the case of Dayananda Loku Galappaththi and Eight Others V. The State 2003 (3) Sri LR 362 this

position was discussed as follows; \

"In a Jury trial an accused is tried by his own peers. Jurors are ordinary laymen. In order to I

perform their duties specified in section 232 of the Code, the Trial Judge has to inform them of

their duties. In a trial by a Judge of the High Court without a jury, there is no provision similar

to section 217. There is no requirement similar to section 229 that the Trial Judge should lay

down the law which he is to be guided. In appeal the Appellate Judges will consider whether in

fact the Trial Judge was alive and mindful of the relevant principle of law and has applied them

in arriving at his conclusion. The law takes for granted that a Judge with a trained Legal mind is

well possessed of the principles oflaw, he would apply."

,

36

For the reasons setout above we see no merit in the 3rd ground of appeal raised by the Learned

President's Counsel for the accused-appellant.

We therefore affirm the conviction and sentence imposed by the Learned High Court Judge Badulla and

dismiss this appeal.

Appeal Dismissed.

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

H.C.J. Madawala J

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

t I I II I

II i

I

f i I! ! r