IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

M.A.S.D. Munasinghe,

No. 2/6,

Vipulasena Housing Scheme,

Sri Vipulasena Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

Petitioner

CASE NO: CA/WRIT/56/2016

Vs.

1. D.C. Shehan Seneviratne,

Competent Authority,

Former Chairman/Managing

Director,

Ceylon Petroleum Storage

Terminals Limited,

Kolonnawa,

Wellampitiya.

1st Respondent

1A. Dammika Ranatunga,

Chairman,

Ceylon Petroleum Storage

Terminals Limited,

Kolonnawa,

Wellampitiya.

2

1B. H.M. Sanjeewa Lushantha

Wijeratne,

Managing Director,

Ceylon Petroleum Storage

Terminals Limited,

Kolonnawa,

Wellampitiya.

Added Respondents

2. Ceylon Petroleum Storage

Terminals Limited,

Kolonnawa,

Wellampitiya.

2nd Respondent

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Chamantha Weerakoon Unamboowe for the

Petitioner.

Kaushalya Nawarane for the Respondents.

Decided on: 20.02.2019

Samayawardhena, J.

The petitioner filed this application seeking a writ of certiorari to

quash the Notice of Quit (P4) issued by the 1st respondent under

section 3 of the Government Quarters (Recovery of Possession)

Act, No. 7 of 1969, as amended, to recover possession of the

quarters occupied by the petitioner.

3

It is the submission of the petitioner that the 2nd respondent is a

public limited liability company incorporated under the

Companies Act in Sri Lanka in terms of section 2 of the

Conversion of Public Corporations or Government Owned

Business Undertakings into Public Companies Act, No. 23 of

1987; and the quarters relevant to the Notice to Quit is now

vested in the said company; and therefore the said public

company with a separate legal personality from its shareholders

has no authority to make use of the provisions of the

Government Quarters (Recovery of Possession) Act to recover

possession of the said quarters as any contract of tenancy

between the petitioner and the 2nd respondent company is private

in nature and shall be governed by the private law principles of

contract.1

Whether I accept or reject that argument, the application for writ

shall fail.

There is no question that if I reject this argument, the

application for writ shall fail.

If I accept this argument too, the application for writ shall fail as

The activities of private persons, whether natural or juristic, are

outside the bounds of administrative law. A public commercial

company like the respondent, incorporated under the Companies

Ordinance in which the Government or a Government-sponsored

Corporation holds shares, controlling or otherwise, is not a public

1 Vide page 6 of the written submission of the petitioner dated 16.02.2017.

4

body whose decisions, made in the course of its business, can be

reviewed by this Court by way of writ.2

Whilst vehemently stating that the relationship between the 2nd

respondent company and the petitioner shall be governed by the

private law as opposed to the public law when it comes to the

issuance of Notice to Quit by the respondent, the petitioner

cannot, in the same breath, state that public law remedy by way

of writ shall be available to him against the same respondent

when it comes to the quashing of Quit Notice.

I am unable to accept the argument of the petitioner that

though CPSTL (the 2nd respondent) is a public limited liability

company, by opting to use the Government Quarters (Recovery of

Possession) Act, the company has attempted to exercise a function

that is dedicated to state bodies or in other words have ventured

into use public authority. Therefore in the event a private body is

using public authority specified in a legislative enactment in

managing its affairs, Court shall have jurisdiction to issue a writ

of certiorari.3

Writ is a discretionary remedy, which cannot be asked as of

right. A party applying for writ shall come to Court with clean

hands and place the facts before the Court quite

straightforwardly for the Court to take a right decision. He

cannot play a hide and seek game with the Court interpreting

2 Trade Exchange (Ceylon) Limited v. Asian Hoels Corporation Ltd [1981] 1 Sri LR 67 at 76 per Sharvananda J. (later CJ) with the agreement of Samarakoon C.J. and Samarawickrame J. Vide also Mendis v. Seema Sahitha Panadura Janaha Santhaka Pravahana Sevaya [1995] 2 Sri LR 284, Somatunga v. Ceylon Fertilizer Company [2005] 2 Sri LR 166. 3 Vide page 9 of the same written submission of the petitioner.

5

the law in one way when it is favourable to him and interpreting

it in another way when it is unfavourable to him.

Whether it is writ or otherwise, it is settled law that a party

cannot be inconsistent in his approach in legal proceedings. He

cannot blow hot and cold, affirm and disaffirm the same

transaction simultaneously to suit the occasion. The doctrine of

approbate and reprobate forbids him from doing so.4

For the aforesaid reasons, there is no necessity to consider the

merits of the argument for the purpose of this application.

Application of the petitioner is dismissed with costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

4 Vide Ranasinghe v. Premadharma [1985] 1 Sri LR 63, Bandula v. Karthelis Appuhamy [1988] 2 Sri LR 114.