1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made

under Section 331 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of

1979.

Court of Appeal Case No:

CA/HCC/0154/2014 Balage Indika Sudarshana

High Court of Negombo

Case No: HC/404/2010 ACCUSED-APPELLANT

vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : Sampath B. Abayakoon,J

P. Kumararatnam,J

COUNSEL : Faisz Musthapha, P.C. with Shantha

Jayawardene and Keerthi Thilakaratne for

the Appellant.

Ayesha Jinasena, ASG with Chaturangi

Mahawaduge, SC and Chaturanga

Bandara, SC for the Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 21/03/2022

DECIDED ON : 01/06/2022

2 | P a g e

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) was directly indicted in the High Court of Negombo under

Sections 364(1) and 296 of the Penal Code for committing Rape and Murder

respectively against Dissanayake Mudiyanselage Chamila Dissanayake on

or about the 12th of November 2007.

Trial commenced before the High Court Judge of Negombo as the Appellant

had opted for a non-jury trial. After the conclusion of the prosecution case,

the learned High Court Judge had called for the defence and the Appellant

had made a dock statement and closed the case. After considering the

evidence presented by both parties, the learned High Court Judge had

convicted the Appellant as charged and sentenced him to 15 years Rigorous

Imprisonment with a fine of Rs.10000/- with a default sentence of 01-year

rigorous imprisonment for the first count and the death sentence for the

2nd count on 03/09/2014.

The prosecution has called 18 witnesses and marked productions P1 to

P44 to prove their case. The Appellant made a dock statement in support of

his plea of innocence against the charges raised.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

The Learned Presidents Counsel appearing for the Appellant informed this

court that the Appellant has given consent to argue this matter in his

absence due to the Covid 19 pandemic. During the argument he was

connected via Zoom platform from the prison.

3 | P a g e

The behalf of the Appellant the following Grounds of Appeal are raised.

1. The Learned High Court Judge had failed to critically analyse the

inherent improbabilities and the inter se contradictions of the

prosecution case.

2. The Learned High Court Judge has been misdirected on the burden

of proof:

a. Considering the defence case before the prosecution case.

b. Considering the evidence of the Appellant after rejecting the

dock statement and shifted the burden of proof on the

Appellant.

3. The Appellant was denied of a fair trial:

a. By not calling finger print and DNA evidence.

b. Due to infirmities in the identification parade.

Background of the case

The Appellant, at the time relevant to the date of offence was attached to

the Negombo Base Hospital as a doctor. He was assigned duty in the

operation theatre situated on the 7th floor of the hospital and further

engaged in examining post-surgery patients during the time period relevant

to this case.

PW1 Beatrice, who was attached as a cleaning worker at 7th floor of the

hospital was the first witness to give evidence in this case. She had

commenced work at the hospital in the year 2002, and was familiar with

the staff and doctors who worked in the operating theatre and the

surroundings. According to her the Out Patient Department (OPD) was

situated on the 1st Floor and the Clinic and X-Ray Rooms were on the 2nd

Floor. On the 3rd Floor there are two discrete ENT Wards for Males and

Females and another similar ward separated based on gender functioned

on the 4th Floor. In the 5th and 6th Floors rooms for doctors and nursing

4 | P a g e

sisters had been allotted. The Operation Theatre and the Intensive Care

Unit were situated on the 7th Floor where she was assigned cleaning duty.

Up to the date of the offence she had worked there for about five years.On

12/11/2007 she had reported for duty around 7.00 a.m. as usual, and has

been engaged in work up until 11.30 a.m., which is when she had gone to

take a break at the end of the corridor where a chair was placed. Visibly

situated in front of the corridor is a wall about 3 feet in height. From

where she was, she could see all the corridors of the other floors. At that

time having heard a dragging sound, she had looked down to see the

Appellant dragging a cardboard with a girl on it along the sixth-floor

corridor. When she called out to the Appellant as Sir, what has happened?

and asked him what the problem was, the Appellant had raised his head

and smiled at her and said had said nothing. At that time, she had

identified the Appellant as the doctor who works in the operation theatre.

His room was also situated on the 6th floor. Although she had told this to

PW12 Mayura Yapa, she had told her to keep quiet and warned her not to

tell anybody else what she saw. As such she had not divulged this incident

to anybody until she was interrogated by the police. Later the same day

around 12.00 p.m. while she was talking with the supervisor in his room,

she had heard a commotion from the direction of the OPD. When inquired,

she was told that a girl had fallen from a higher floor of the building. As lot

of people were running towards the OPD she had not followed the crowd in

that direction. After work she had gone home and the police had visited her

there which is when she had given her statement pertaining to this case.

She had identified the Appellant at the identification parade held at the

Magistrate Court of Negombo.

PW12, Mayura Yapa was working as a nurse at the operating theatre

situated on the 7th floor of the Negombo Hospital. On 12/11/2007 she had

worked in the operation theatre and went to drink some water to the pantry

on the 7th floor. PW1 had told her that a doctor on the 6th floor had carried

a woman. Thinking that as the doctors had been allocated rooms on the 6th

5 | P a g e

floor, the mentioned doctor would have carried his wife, she had advised

PW1 not to divulge it to anybody else. According to her, PW1 had informed

her of this between 11:00 and 12:00 hours on that day. Further, PW1 had

described the doctor as a fair and short person.

PW3 Dammika is a good friend of the deceased as the deceased and her

aunt were residing together in the same room along with her at a boarding

house situated in a village called Kovinne. The deceased had a boyfriend

called Susantha Predeep. Three weeks prior to her demise she had

undergone a surgery on one of her breasts at Negombo Base Hospital. As

the post operation clinic was fixed on 12/11/2007, the deceased had left

her boarding place at 5.50 a.m. to attend it. As the deceased did not return

even after 8.00 p.m. on the same day, PW3 had gone to the Negombo Base

Hospital and inquired about the deceased. Upon inquiry she was told that

a girl had fallen from a higher floor of the hospital and she had been

transferred to Ragama Teaching Hospital. On the following day the police

accompanied her to 6th floor of the hospital where she had observed the

rooms. One of those rooms seemed to be occupied by a tenant. The police

had taken her to a room close to that room and showed her a black

coloured bag in which several items had been packed. This witness had

identified the hand bag of the deceased as P2, the diary of the deceased as

P3, two panties as P6 and P7, a pair of slippers of the deceased as P9, a

bunch of keys of the deceased as P10 and her identity card as P11.

Thereafter she had spotted a hair clip and two crail pins used by the

deceased on the corridor of the 6th floor and she had identified them as P12

and P13 respectively.

According to this witness, the deceased had used to wear two panties as a

habit when she gets her monthly menstrual flow. She had got her period

few days before she went to the hospital. Further this witness was very

certain that the deceased never carries her panties in her hand bag. PW3

was also able to identify the clothes of the deceased during the trial.

6 | P a g e

According to PW4, Nishantha Padmasiri, on the 12/11/2007 he was on

duty at the first stair case where clinics are held. On that day the clinics

had commenced at 8.00 a.m. and people were not allowed to go upstairs

during clinic time. Between 11.30 a.m. and 11.45 a.m. a girl had gone

upstairs after seeking his permission. She had told him that she was going

to meet a doctor and also to collect her reports from the 3rd floor. He had

observed that the girl was carrying a bag, an umbrella and a book. As a

special feature he had observed that the girl had a snagged tooth when she

spoke to him. After some time when he went to the main gate was told that

a girl had fallen from the top of the building. When he went to see the

patient, he had identified the deceased as the girl with the snagged tooth.

PW5 Kapilaratne de Silva in his evidence stated that as a security officer he

was at duty at the gate of the new building on the 12/11/2007. While on

duty he had seen two telephone wires falling down, broken apart and had

looked up to see a girl fall from the building. According to him when he

looked up the girl seemed to be falling parallel to level 3 of the building and

did not cry out. He had identified the dress of the deceased at the trial.

According PW11, Kanthi Swarnalatha was visiting his son who had been

admitted to the male ward situated on the 4th floor of the Negombo Base

Hospital, on 12/11/2007 at 6.00 a.m. As the doctor who was attending to

her son had asked her to stay back till after visiting hours, she had

remained on the 4th floor corridor to meet the doctor. While so waiting

around 10.00 a.m. she had noted a girl who firstly went up the stairs alone

carrying a book coming down the stairs accompanied by a doctor. When

she came to see her son in the evening, she had gotten to know that a girl

had fallen from the building. When she heard the news, she had thought

out loud whether it could be the girl she saw accompanied by the doctor

earlier that day. She had identified the deceased and the doctor after seeing

their photographs which had been marked as P15 and P22 respectively.

According to her the deceased was a beautiful girl.

7 | P a g e

PW32, Nimal Camilus, in his evidence confirmed that the deceased had

come to the clinic on 12/11/2007. As her reports were not in the clinic,

she had gone with the Appellant to get it from the ward. He had seen them

at that time and identified the Appellant in the court. He had also been able

to identify the deceaseds photograph which had been marked as P15.

PW13, Dr. Priyanjith Perera is the JMO who conducted the post mortem

examination of the deceased on 13/11/2007. He had also visited the scene

of crime on 15/11/2007. According to the results of the post-mortem

examination he has observed that the deceased could have fallen from a

height of the 6th floor of the building. According to him, they have observed

the possibility of a straight drop from the 6th floor concrete slab to the place

where the deceased had been found fallen on the ground.

According to him the deceased is a small made and moderately nourished

person. She had been wearing a T-shirt and a skirt which were found to

have blood stains. The deceased was wearing a brassier which had been

torn into two halves on middle. It was unhooked from the back and lifted

up. Stiches were torn closer to the hooks. Further, the deceased was

without any underwear. A head injury with internal bleeding and contusion

on her lips were seen. The doctor excluded the head injury as the cause of

death. The doctor had noted petechial haemorrhages inside the vocal box,

eye lids and behind the left ear indicated that she was asphyxiated

confirming that the injuries on the neck were caused due to the exertion of

pressure on the neck by manual strangulation. According to him this may

not have killed the deceased as she was said to have been found alive at

the scene after a possible fall from the building and strangulation of this

nature, even if it failed to kill the victim, it might have rendered her

unconscious and subsequently contributed to the cause of death.

The doctor further stated that bruises on the lips and laceration of the

frenulum, were likely the result of forceful closure of mouth probably with

hands as the absence of abrasions on the surrounding structures exclude

8 | P a g e

the possibility of the fall or contact with a rough object. Majority of the

bruises on the upper arms, thighs, lower legs and front of the chest

indicted that they were likely to have been caused by finger tips when

applied with force while restraining her during sexual assault or/and

dragging her body by arms and legs.

The bruise on the inner part of the right thigh with overlying intradermal

bruises and abrasions were a likely result of contact with a rough blunt

object with force. The severity of the bruise indicates that it was unlikely to

have been caused by fingertips. It was possible that when the deceased

landed on the buttocks after the fall the inner aspect of the thigh grazed

against some hard object on the ground such as the kerb on the pavement.

The doctor further held that the internal examination revealed bleeding

from the vagina, which was found to be the consequence of a lacerated

hymen. The hymen was freshly lacerated at 7 oclock position, which

extended horizontally to the left and ended at 5 oclock position. Further

examination of the genitalia revealed a small bruise on the vagina wall at 1

oclock position. According to the witness the genital injuries could have

been caused by vaginal penetration with an erect adult penis or penis like

object.

According to the doctor, the cause of death was due to Haemorrhage shock

caused by fracturing of the pelvic bones and soft tissue contusions

contributed by head injury and attempted manual strangulation. The post

mortem report was marked as P25.

PW33, Anuruddhi Samanthika, the doctor who examined the Appellant

states that she had noted 10 non-grievous injuries on the Appellant. He

had been in a confused mood at that time. No evidence was found to prove

that the Appellant has had sexual intercourse. But she had not excluded

the possibility of having sexual intercourse sans any injury on the penis.

She also said that the Appellant had told her that he tried to commit

suicide while being held in the police cell.

9 | P a g e

PW10, Dr. Asela Samaratunga had attended to the deceased immediately

following the fall. When he examined the deceased, she was breathing and

he had noted that she was bleeding from her vagina. The deceased was not

wearing any underwear. Her clothes were not removed when he attended to

the deceased. As per the instructions the deceased was prepared to be

transferred to the National Hospital in Colombo. As the deceased passed

away on her way to the Colombo National Hospital, the deceased was then

transferred to Ragama Teaching Hospital.PW40 Ahamed Fathima has been

working as a Management Assistant at the Negombo Hospital when this

incident took place. She had confirmed that the Appellant had been

allocated room No. 33 on the 6th floor. As only one key was available which

had been in the possession of the wife of the Appellant, the said room was

opened by her for inspection. The witness had stated that up until that

point she had not been aware that the Appellants wife also occupied that

room. She further stated that the hospital authority had not extended

permission for accommodation to the spouses of the doctors. She had gone

in to the Appellants room and noticed that access to the slab outside the

window was only through the window in the room.

PW41, Dammika Wickramasekera was one of the consultant surgeons

attached to Negombo Hospital at the time of the incident. He had confirmed

that the deceased had undergone a surgery on her breast and was

discharged on 25/10/2007. He had identified the exercise book which had

been carried by the deceased. He had identified his handwriting and his

rubber seal on the book which had been marked as P31. As per the book,

the deceased was summoned for further examination on 12/11/2007. As

the Appellant was working under him, he had identified the Appellants

handwriting which had been made on 12/11/2007 in the book.

PW38, Ashley Tissera was the Director of Negombo Base Hospital during

the period pertaining to this case. After being informed of the incident, he

had gone to the place where the deceased had fallen onto. According to him

10 | P a g e

the doctors were given accommodation on the 6th floor and the Appellant

was given room No.33 on the 6th floor. He had excluded the possibility of

suicide as the deceased had hit the ground close to the building. With his

experience, if anybody commits suicide by jumping off a building, the body

would land some distance away from the building. He had visited room

No.33 and according to him the room has only one entrance and a window.

Another window was available in the bathroom. The window in the room is

at about 4 feet height from the floor.

PW22, IP Subasinghe Officer-in-Charge of Crime Branch of the Negombo

Police Station had received information about the death of the deceased

around 4.20 p.m. After receiving the information, he had gone to the scene

of crime around 4.35 p.m. and started the investigation. A blood mark was

seen at the place where the deceased had hit the ground. From the place

where the deceased had fallen, the passages of the 7 storied building are

situated upwards along a straight line. The width of the passage is about 2

feet. With his experience he had excluded the possibility of suicide.

Thereafter, he had gone to 6th floor and commenced investigations. On the

left side corridor of the 6th floor, he had seen a hairpin and two Crail pins

lying on the ground. A lock of hair was seen lying on the ground close to

the room opposite to the Appellants room. Thereafter he had gone to record

statements from PW1, PW4 and PW5. Around 1.40 a.m. he had arrested

the Appellant at the hospital premises. After the arrival of Scene of Crime

Officers, he had gone into the Appellants room for further investigations.

He had noticed that the Appellants room - room No.33 is perpendicular to

the blood mark found on the ground where the deceased hit the ground.

The Appellants room had two windows. One is in the room and the other is

in the bathroom. Another lock of hair was found lying on the ground of the

room close to a cupboard. A cardboard was found under the bed of the

Appellant. He had noticed scratch mark on one of the sides of the

cardboard indicative of dragging something on the same (X13). Upon

11 | P a g e

search of the cupboard, two tablets of Viagra with the brand name, Silagra

had been detected. In the card two tablets had already been removed (X14).

Thereafter, the witness had examined the room opposite to the Appellants

room as a hair sample was found close to the said room. Another hair

sample was found from inside the room. Upon further investigation, a black

coloured bag was detected in a cupboard drawer. Items belonging to the

deceased had been found inside the said bag. A love letter dated

04/11/2007 written to the deceaseds boyfriend was also noticed lying

amongst other items in that bag. He had identified those items in the open

court.

According to PW29, SI Siriwardena a Scene of Crime Officer (SOCO)

attached to the Negombo Police Station who had visited the crime scene,

partaken in the investigation, had taken photographs and prepared the

building sketch. Upon observing the 6th floor corridor, he had noticed drag

marks on the floor of the corridor and found a lock of hair outside room

No.33 which had been accommodated by the Appellant. He has also

noticed a hair clip and Crail pins on the floor of the corridor. There was a

name board MOs Anaesthetists Room fixed to room No. 33. As PW22 had

expressed suspicion about room No.33, he had proceeded to examine the

same. When he examined the room, he had noticed that a Cherry plant on

the slab had broken branches. He had climbed onto the slab through the

bathroom window and noticed that the Cherry plant stood straight beneath

the bathroom window. Although some weeds were there, only the Cherry

plant was observed to be damaged. As the evidence revealed that a witness

had observed a doctor dragging something along the 6th floor corridor from

the 7th floor corridor, he had gone to the 7th floor corridor and looked over

at the 6th floor corridor and has satisfied himself that the place witnessed

as along which the doctor dragged the girl is indeed visible to the 7th floor

corridor. He was also satisfied that if a person speaks out from the 7th floor

corridor, they could be heard from the 6th floor corridor.

12 | P a g e

PW9, Dr. Damayanthi was summoned to the Emergency Treatment Unit

regarding a woman who had fallen off the hospital building. As the patients

condition was serious, the patient was transferred to the Colombo General

Hospital. She had gone in the ambulance as the doctor in-charge. As the

patients condition became worse, the patient was re-routed to Ragama

Teaching Hospital. She had identified the dress of the deceased at the trial.

Finally, the prosecution had called PW15, the Additional Magistrate of

Mahara and proceeded to mark the notes from the identification parade

through him (P44).

Defence was called and the Appellant taken the opportunity to make a

lengthy dock statement and had denied the charge.

When a case solely rests on circumstantial evidence, the inference of guilt

can be justified only when all the incriminating factors and circumstances

are found to be incompatible with the innocence of the accused. It is the

incumbent duty of the prosecution to prove the case beyond reasonable

doubt.

In the case of C. Chenga Reddy and Others v. State of Andhra Pradesh

(1996) 10 SCC 193 the court held that:

In a case based on circumstantial evidence, the settled law is

that the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is

drawn should be fully proved and such circumstances must be

conclusive in nature. Moreover, all the circumstances should be

complete and there should be no gap left in the chain of

evidence. Further the proved circumstances must be consistent

only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused and totally

inconsistent with his innocence.

13 | P a g e

In the case of Attorney General v. Potta Naufer & others [2007) 2 SLR

144 the Supreme Court held that:

When relying on circumstantial evidence to establish the charge

of conspiracy to commit murder and the charge of murder, the

proved items of circumstantial evidence when taken together

must irresistibly point towards the only inference that the

accused committed the offence.

In the case of Kusumadasa v. State [2011] 1 SLR 240 the Justice Sisira de

held that:

The prosecution must prove that no one else other than the

accused had the opportunity of committing the offence. The

accused can be found guilty only and only if the proved items of

circumstantial evidence is consistent with their guilt and

inconsistent with their innocence.

In Premawansha v. Attorney General [2009] 2 SLR 205 the court held

that:

In a case of circumstantial evidence if an inference of guilt is to

be drawn, such an inference must be the one and only

irresistible and inescapable conclusion that the accused

committed the offence.

14 | P a g e

In the case of Regina v. Exall (176 English Reports, Nisi Prius at page 850)

Pollock, C.B., considering the aspect of circumstantial evidence remarked:

It has been said that circumstantial evidence is to be

considered as a chain, and each piece of evidence as a link in a

chain, but that is not so, for then, if any one link broke, the chain

would fall. It is more like the case of a rope composed of several

cords. One strand of the rope might be insufficient to sustain the

weight, but three stranded together may be quite of sufficient

strength.

In this case it is the incumbent duty of the prosecution to prove all the

circumstances which points only at the Appellant as the person who

committed the offence as charged, beyond reasonable doubt.

In the first ground of Appeal the Appellant contends that the Learned High

Court Judge had failed to critically analyse the inherent improbabilities

and the inter se contradictions of the evidence of the prosecution case.

Although the Learned Presidents Counsel contends that glaring

contradictions exists among the evidence produced by the material

witnesses of the prosecution, upon perusal of the entire High Court

proceedings, not a single contradiction is marked on the evidence of any of

the witnesses called by the prosecution.

Learned Presidents Counsel contends that the evidence of PW1 is in

contradiction with the evidence given by PW12. PW1 Beatrice in her

evidence states that while she was taking a break after her work in the

morning, she had seen the Appellant pulling a cardboard with a girl lying

on it along the 6th floor corridor. When she inquired from the Appellant as

to what has happened the Appellant raising his head, smiled at her and

said nothing. According to her evidence she had very clearly had seen the

15 | P a g e

Appellants face and he had pulled the cardboard with a girl lying on it at

that time. The said cardboard was marked as X13 at the trial.

The Learned Presidents Counsel argues that even though PW1 had told

PW12 that she had seen the Appellant pulling a cardboard with a girl lying

on it, the said PW 12 in her evidence had stated that PW1 had mentioned

that a doctor working on the 7th floor had carried a woman believed to be

his wife. Hence the Presidents Counsel argues that there is a contradiction

between the evidence of PW1 and PW12.

The incident happened on 12/11/2007 and PW12 had given evidence on

13/05/2013 nearly about 06 years afterwards. Hence it is not possible for

a witness to recall evidence 100% accurately in accordance with the

statement given to the police. Although PW12 had not mentioned about the

doctor pulling a woman on a board, she had mentioned about him carrying

a woman at that time.

m% ( Th lshk ojfia %h%ia hula lsjo@

W ( T

m% ( fudkjdo lsf@

W (fodia;r uy;a;fhla fkdakd flfkla j;a;ka lrf.k we;a biaiqjd jf.a

oelald lshd lsjd ?

m% ( j;a;ka lrf.k lsf Tijdf.k jf.a o@

W ( tfyu ;ud

m% ( j;a;ka lrkjd lshkafka Wiaid f.k jf.a o@

W ( j;a;ka lrkjd lshd uu lshkafka fya;a;= lrf.k jf.a

m% ( j;a;ka lrf.k we;a biaiqjd jf.a lsjo@

W ( T

(Vide; page 856 of the brief)

16 | P a g e

Hence, this cannot be considered as a serious contradiction which affect

the root of the case. Further PW12, Mayura Yapa seemed to be a reluctant

witness as she had told PW1 Beatrice, not to divulge what she had seen to

anybody else. Only her evidence is at odds with PW1s, as PW12 had said

that she was told that the doctor was seem to be helping a woman to walk

with difficulty. But seeing a woman in the custody of the Appellant at the

appropriate time is not disputed.

In the case of The Attorney General v. Sandanam Pitchi Mary Theresa

(2011) 2 Sri L.R. 292 it was held that,

Witnesses should not be disbelieved on account of trifling

discrepancies and omissions. When contradictions are marked,

the Judge should direct his attention to whether they are

material or not and the witness should be given an opportunity

of explaining the matter.

The court observed further, that human beings are not

computers and that it would be dangerous to disbelieve the

witness and reject evidence based on small contradictions or

discrepancies.

The Learned High Court Judge had visited the scene of crime and the

building from which the deceased had fallen down. The Learned High Court

Judge after going to the spot from where PW1 was supposed to have

witnessed the pulling, confirmed that the place is very much visible from

the 7th floor (X3). For this inspection the defence counsel also participated

and no one made any other observation nor any objection. Hence it is non-

contradictory evidence that PW1 had witnessed that the Appellant had

pulled a cardboard with a girl lying on it on the date of incident.

17 | P a g e

PW22 also accompanied and assisted the Learned High Court Judge at the

scene of crime. PW29 who had conducted the investigation along with

PW22 also endorsed the fact that the visibility of the place where PW1 had

seen the Appellant pulling a girl on a cardboard is clear from the 7th floor.

Next the Learned Presidents Counsel argues that the circumstances which

the police traced the witness PW1 Beatrice is highly improbable and open

to grave suspicion.

According to PW22 IP Subasinghe he had received information regarding

PW1 on the night of the incident from a person believed to be a worker of

the hospital. Upon that information this witness had gone to PW1s house

which is 7 Km away from the Negombo Hospital.

According to PW1 the police had arrived at her residence between 9 and 10

p.m. on 12/11/2007 and recorded her statement. In her evidence she had

only mentioned that the arrival time of the police to her residence and had

not mentioned the time of commencement of recording of her evidence.

According to PW22 the statement of PW1 had been recorded at 00.20 hours

on 13/11/2007. It shows that police had recorded her statement promptly.

The Learned Presidents Counsel further argued that not calling the

attendant from whom the police gathered information to trace PW1 clearly

establishes that she was a witness put up by the prosecution and had lied

to Court.

Section 125 of the Evidence Ordinance reads:

No Magistrate or Police Officer shall be compelled to say

whence he got the information as to the commission of any

offence, and no revenue officer shall be compelled to say

whence he got any information as to the commission of any

offence against the public revenue or the excise laws.

18 | P a g e

E. R. S. R. Coomaraswamy refers to the case of Weston v. Peary Mohan

Dass [1912] 40 Cal.898 at 920 in his much-acclaimed academic work by

the name of The Law of Evidence Volume II (Book 2) as mentioned below:

Section 125 is based on the principle that the public interest in

the detection and combating of crime demands that those

persons who are the channel by means of which the detection is

made, should not be unnecessarily disclosed. If objection is

taken under this section, it cannot be made the ground of

adverse inferences against the witnesses.

Hence, not disclosing the source of information with regard to the detection

of the PW1 has not caused any prejudice to the Appellant.

The Learned Presidents Counsel further argued that the inconsistency of

the evidence of PW1 Beatrice, PW4 Nishantha, PW11 Kanthi Balasuriya

and PW32 Camilus Appuhamy regarding the time and the movements of

the Appellant and the deceased are contradictory inter se.

According to PW31, the Medical Examination book of the deceased clearly

shows that the deceased was present at the Clinic on 12/11/2007 and was

examined by the Appellant. This had been corroborated by PW41,

Dhammika Wickramasekera, who was attached to Negombo Base Hospital

at the time of the incident as a surgeon.

According to PW1, she had seen the Appellant dragging a girl lying on a

cardboard on the 6th floor corridor around 11.30 a.m. Thereafter, she had

heard that a girl had fallen from the building around 12.00 p.m.

PW4, the security guard at the staircase had seen the deceased ascend

from the 2nd floor between 11.30 a.m. to 11.45 a.m. 15 minutes later when

he came down to assume duty near the main door, he was told that a girl

had been pushed off the building from a higher floor.

19 | P a g e

According to PW11 the deceased had gone up the stairs from the 4th floor

around 10.00 a.m. A few minutes later, the deceased had come down the

stairs with the Appellant and was seen getting onto the 4th floor lift.

PW32 had seen the deceased following the Appellant out of the clinic and

the two of them returning to the clinic with the book around 10.30 a.m.

The above-mentioned prosecution witnesses are not expert witnesses. They

are ordinary members of the society who never expect to be called in to give

evidence before a court about these seemingly routine occurrences that

happen during their work shift. All the witnesses had referred to a rough

time stamp without actually having verified it with an accurate clock. These

witnesses had observed the movements of the deceased alone and with the

Appellant inside the hospital. They had not had any advantage of looking at

notes or books when they gave evidence.

In the case of Bhoginbhai Hirjibhai v State of Gujarat [1983] AIR SC 753

the court held that:

Ordinarily, so happens that a witness is overtaken by events.

The witness could not have anticipated the occurrence which so

often has an element of surprise. The mental faculties therefore

cannot be expected to be attuned to absorb the details.

In regard to exact time of an incident, or the time duration of

an occurrence, usually people make their estimates by

guesswork on the spur of the moment at the time of

interrogation. And one cannot expect people to make very precise

or reliable estimates of such matters. Again, it depends on the

time-sense of individuals which varies from person to person.

20 | P a g e

Considering the above-mentioned judicial decision, the time discrepancies

mentioned above cannot be considered as major inter se discrepancies

which affect the root of the prosecution case.

According to PW29 upon receiving information, his Unit - SOCO team had

arrived at the spot along with PW22 to conduct an investigation on this

case. They first had gone to the place where the deceased was supposed to

have landed on the tarred surface. As the place of landing lies straight

below the ledges of the 7 storeys of the hospital building, they started their

investigation from the ground floor and ascended up to the 07th floor,

checking every floor thoroughly. As they found a hair sample (X5) close to

room No.33 they had carried out a thorough check of the 6th floor. Along

the corridor of the 6th floor drag marks had been noted and three ladies

hair pins were found lying on the floor (X3, X4). As room No.33 was closed

at that time, PW40, Fathima, the Management Assistant of the Negombo

Base Hospital was summoned to open it. She had come accompanied by

another woman and opened the room. At that point he had come to know

that room No.33 had been the one which was officially allocated to the

Appellant. After a preliminary observation the witness had returned to the

police station around 8.00 p.m. as PW22 had to go check an information

regarding this case.

PW3 had confirmed that the hair pins which were found on the 6th floor

had belonged to the deceased.

On the following day PW29 had gone into the room again and observed that

the room has a window at a height of 4 feet from the floor. The size of the

window is 3 feet in height and 4 feet in width. It is a sliding window.

Looking through the window he had noticed a concrete slab about 3 feet in

width running along the exterior of the 6th floor (X22). He had gone to the

bathroom and noticed a similar sized window and had climbed through

that window and alighted on the slab. His height is 5 feet and 6 inches. He

had noticed some weeds and a cherry plant growing on the edge of the

21 | P a g e

room wall on the slab. Further he had noticed a branch and some leaves of

the cherry plant had been broken and leaves had fallen on the slab (X25,

X26, X27, X28). According to him his investigation revealed that the point

where the deceased had fallen is just straight below the bathroom window

and the fallen cherry plant leaves (X9, X10). According to PW29, PW22 IP

Subasinghe had headed the investigation and he had acted upon his

directions.

PW40 had confirmed that room No.33 had been officially allocated to the

Appellant. But she was unaware whether the wife of the Appellant was also

accommodating the room. She further said that the spouses of the doctors

were not allowed accommodation in the rooms so allocated. But she

confirmed that the room key was handed over to her by the wife of the

Appellant as the Appellant was not to be found at that time.

According to PW22, he had checked all the rooms on the 5th floor before

proceeding to the 6th floor (Page 1156 of the brief). As a hair sample was

found close to room No.33 on the 6th floor, the investigation was confined to

the 6th floor thereafter. Hence it is incorrect to say that the police had not

checked the other rooms allocated for the accommodation of doctors at that

time.

Considering the evidence pertaining to the police investigation, any major

discrepancies have not been highlighted during the trial.

The Learned Presidents Counsel also contended that the recovery of the

cardboard from the Appellants room is an introduction as it was not shown

to PW1 to confirm neither the description nor its size.

PW1 had given evidence after about 06 years following the incident. As the

time passes the memory of the person also fades away to some extent.

Hence, it is not possible to identify all the productions accurately. In this

case PW1 had given her evidence without any contradiction being marked.

The cardboard cannot be considered as an introduction only as a

22 | P a g e

consequence of it not being shown to her as the said cardboard was

marked as X13 in the trial. Hence, not showing the cardboard X13 to PW1

is not fatal enough to affect the evidentiary value of PW1.

In the case of Wickremasuriya v. Dedoleena and others 1996 [2] SLR 95

Jayasuriya, J. held that;

A judge, in applying the Test of Probability and Improbability

relies heavily on his knowledge of men and matters and the

patterns of conduct observed by human beings both ingenious

as well as those who are less talented and fortunate

His Lordship further held that;

If the contradiction is not of that character the Court ought to

accept the evidence of witnesses whose evidence is otherwise

cogent having regard to the Test of Probability and Improbability

and having regard to the demeanour and deportment

manifested by witnesses. Trivial contradictions which do not

touch the core of a partys case should not be given much

significance, especially when the probabilities factor echoes in

favour of the version narrated by an applicant

In Iswari Prasad v. Mohamed Isa 1963 AIR (SC) 1728 at 1734 the Court

held that;

In considering the question as to whether evidence given by the

witness should be accepted or not, the court has, no doubt, to

examine whether the witness is, an interested witness and to

enquire whether the story deposed to by him is probable and

23 | P a g e

whether it has been shaken in cross-examination. That is

whether there is a ring of truth surrounding his testimony.

Guided by the above cited judgments I conclude that the learned High

Court Judge had adequately applied the probability test and come to a

correct finding. Hence it is incorrect to say that the Learned High Court

Judge had not adequately considered the probability of the prosecution

case. Hence, the first ground of appeal has no merit.

On the second ground of appeal the Appellant contends that the Learned

High Court Judge has misdirected on the burden of proof by:

a. Considering the defence case before the prosecution case.

b. Considering the evidence of the Appellant after rejecting the dock

statement and shifted the burden of proof on the Appellant.

The Learned Presidents Counsel commenting on the judgment submits

that the Learned Trial Judge has grossly misdirected himself on the burden

of proof by examining and rejecting the evidence of the defence prior to

considering the prosecution case and thereby shifted the burden of proof

on to the Appellant.

Writing a judgment is an art. The High Court Judges use different methods

to write judgments. But all those methods must be consistent with Section

283 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of 1979.

In his judgment the learned High Court Judge had firstly narrated and

considered the evidence of the witnesses including the stance taken during

the cross-examination. As correctly stated by the Learned Additional

Solicitor General, this indicates that at the end of this exercise, the trial

judge had a complete version of the prosecution and the defence cases

before him.

24 | P a g e

Thereafter, the Learned High Court Judge adhering to the legal principle

that is necessary had proceeded to consider the dock statement, of the

Appellant and had arrived at the conclusion that the dock statement had

not caused any impact on the prosecution case. This is not an instance of

shifting of the burden of proof to the Appellant as claimed by the Learned

Presidents Counsel.

Thereafter, the Learned High Court judge had moved on to consider the

evidence critically and arrived at the finding that the prosecution had

proved their case against the Appellant beyond reasonable doubt. He had

given reasons as to why he accepted the prosecution case and rejected the

defence case.

The Learned Presidents Counsel submits that the entire approach of the

Learned High Court Judge is flawed from the very commencement of the

judgment.

In this case the approach adopted by the Learned High Court Judge does

accord with the provision of Section 283 of the Code of Criminal Procedure

Act No.15 of 1979. As such, it is appropriate to consider this case under

Section 436 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 and

proviso of Article 138 of The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

Section 436 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of 1979

states as follows:

Subject to the provisions hereinbefore contained any judgment

passed by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be reversed

or altered on appeal or revision on account-

a. of any error, omission or irregularity in the complaint,

summons, warrants, charge, judgment, summing up or

25 | P a g e

other proceedings before or during trial or in any inquiry or

other proceedings under this Code; or

b. of the want of any sanction required by section 135,

Unless such error, omission, irregularity, or want has

occasioned a failure of justice. [ Emphasis Added]

Article 138 of The Constitution of Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka states:

The Court of Appeal shall have and exercise subject to

the provisions of the Constitution or of any law, an

appellate jurisdiction for the correction of all errors in

fact or in law which shall be committed by the High

Court, in the exercise of its appellate or original

jurisdiction or by any court of First Instance, Tribunal or

other institution and sole and exclusive cognizance, by

way of appeal, revision and restitutio in integrum, of all

cases, suits, actions, prosecutions, matters and things of

which such High Court of First Instance, Tribunal or

other institution may have taken cognizance;

Provided that no judgment, decree, or order of any

court shall be revised or varied on account of any

error, defect or irregularity, which has not prejudiced

the substantial right of the parties or occasioned a

failure of justice. [Emphasis added]

Considering the approach adopted by the Learned High Court Judge in

writing the judgment, I find neither a prejudice occasioned nor a failure of

justice occurred in this case. Hence this ground of appeal is also devoid

any merit.

26 | P a g e

As the 3rd ground of Appeal, the Learned Presidents Counsel argued that

the Appellant was denied of a fair trial due to:

c. Not calling finger print and DNA evidence.

d. Infirmities in the identification parade.

In this case the Hon. Attorney General had decided to send out a direct

indictment against the Appellant. The indictment was served on the

Appellant on 23/02/2011. The DNA report was formerly filed of record of

the High Court of Negombo on 30/11/2011. Finger Print Report was

handed over on 29/04/2013.

Even though it was argued that the Finger Print report and DNA Report

were not called, the Appellant had asked a considerable number of

questions pertaining to DNA evidence from PW22. The following questions

have been put to the witness regarding the DNA Report. (Pages 1158, 1159,

1170, 1171)

m% ( ta flia frdo uy;a;hd ;uqkaf.a Ndrhg .;a; o fudk wjia:djloS yrs @

W ( tfyuhs' mrSlaIK lghq;= j,ska miafia

m% ( th mS' wd' .; lrkak;a we;s @

W ( tfyuhs'

m% ( ta mS' wd' .; l,dg miafia uy;a;hd kvq NdKav;a iu`. ta flia frdo;a

'tka'ta' mrSlaIKhg ,la l,do@

W ( tfyuhs'

m% ( uy;a;hd o ta 'tka'ta' mrSlaIKhg wjYH m%Yakdj,sh ieliqf @

W ( tfyuhs'

m% ( ta m%Yakdj,sfha uy;a;hd m%Yakhla k.kak we;s f flia frdo urKldrsf.a o

lsh,d" m%Yak k.kak we;s @

27 | P a g e

W ( tfyuhs'

(vide; page 1158 of the brief)

m% ( uy;a;hd lsjd" uy;a;hd ta 'tka'ta' mrSlaIKh i`oyd Th ysiflia fhduq

l,d lsh,d @

W ( tfyuhs'

m% ( ta ms<sn`oj jd;djla ,enqKd lsh,d okakjd o@

W ( ,enqKd lsh,d okakjd' kuq;a ta jljdkqj jk g ud ta fmd,Sisfha isfha

keye'

m% ( fhdackd lrkjd idlaIslre ta 'tka'ta' jd;djg wkqj fuu ;uqka iska

;uqkaf.a Ndrhg .;a ysiflia urKldrshf.a ysiflia njg ;yjqreula

fj,d keye lsh,d @

W ( ta .ek uu okafka keye iajdkS'

m% ( uy;a;hd m%ldY l,d f ysiflia fidhd .ekSfuka miafia" yekaoEf 5 g

muK ;uhs ysiflia fidhd .;af;a" Bg miafia uy;a;hd .shd lsjd ;j;a

uYk lghq;a;la lrkak@

W ( tfyuhs'

(vide; page 1159 of the brief)

W ( tfyuhs'

m% (Th wdldrhgu ;ud fuu iamsrs;d,fha wks;a ldurj, cfk,a msysgd ;sfnkafka@

W ( tfyuhs'

28 | P a g e

m% ( ta cfka,fhka ;ud uy;a;hd lsf hlsis mqoa.,fhla wr t,sfha ;sfnk

fldkal%S lE,a,g mkskak yelshdjla ;sfnkjd lshd @

W ( we;=,a fjkak mqjka'

m% ( ta wkqj kEu ldurhlska ta cfk,a mhg we;=,a fjkak mqjka @

W ( tfyuhs'

m% ( uy;a;hd kej;;a yekaoEf 8'30 g ;r fuu ;a;slref.a ldurfha flia

j.hla ;s, kej; fidhd .;a;d lsjd @

W ( tfyuhs'

m% (ta fliq;a uy;a;hd wr 'tka'ta' mrSlaIKhg bosrsm;a l,d uy;a;hdf.a

m%Yakdj,sh iu`. @

(vide; page 1170 of the brief)

W ( u;l yehg bosrsm;a l,d'

m% ( ta ;a;slref.a ldurfha ;s fidhd .;a; flia m%udKh;a" urKldrshg wh;a

flia njg 'tka'ta' jd;dfjka ;yjqre fj,d keye lshd lshkafka @

W ( tal uu okafka keye' t;fldg uu ta ia:dkfha isfha keye'

m% ( uy;a;hd lsjd me-20 lshd ldfnda tlla uy;a;hd ;a;slref.a ldurfha

;s fidhd .ekSula l,d lshd @

W ( tfyuhs'

m% ( ta ldfnda tl uy;a;hd 'tka'ta' mrSlaIKhg fhduq lsrSula is l,d o@

W ( ta .ek yrs u;lhla keye'

m% ( uy;a;hd ta .ek igykla fhdod keoao fudkj;a 'tka'ta' mrSlaIKhg hejd

lshd@

29 | P a g e

W ( ia:dkhg bosrsm;a l, miq Wid hk ks,Odrsg ;ud Wmfoia oS,d ;sfnkafka ta

lghq;= lrkak' uu igyka ta inkaOfhka od,d keye'

(vide; page 1171 of the brief)

The above questions put to PW22 clearly establish that the defence was

well aware and possessed the DNA Report when cross-examining PW22,

the chief investigating officer.

In King v. Chalo Singho 42 NLR 269 the court held:

Prosecuting Counsel is not bound to call all the witnesses

named on the back of the indictment or tender them for cross-

examination. In exceptional circumstances the presiding Judge

may ask the prosecuting counsel to call such witnesses or may

call him as a witness of the Court.

As discussed above, it is improper to say that the prosecution had withheld

the Finger Print Report and DNA Report and therefore, the Appellant was

denied a fair trial. In this case the prosecution had called all necessary

witnesses to prove their case.

Next the Learned Presidents Counsel contended that the purported

identification of the Appellant at the identification parade by PW1 is marred

by grave irregularities. To substantiate his argument the Learned

Presidents Counsel submits that the Appellant being a doctor, persons

similar to him were not put up for the parade and thereby occasioned a

grave injustice to the Appellant. At the parade the Appellant was not attired

the way in which a doctor generally dresses. According to the identification

30 | P a g e

parade notes which had been marked as P44, he was dressed in a T-shirt

and a pair of trousers and pair of slippers as a common man. As PW1 did

not know the name of the Appellant but only knew him as a doctor serving

in the operating theatre, the identification parade was held to establish the

correct identity of the Appellant. Up to the point of the incident PW1 had

known the Appellant for about two years. The Appellant had not raised any

objection regarding holding the identification parade except the fact that he

had worked in five wards in the Negombo Base Hospital for about one year

and therefore, majority of the minor staff had been accustomed to him.

Phipson, in his book titled Phipson on Evidence (Sweet & Maxwell

Thomson Reuters, 17th Edn.2015) sates that:

It is often important to establish the identity of a person who a

witness testifies that he saw on a relevant occasion.

Sometimes, the witness will testify that he had seen the person

before, or even know the person well, and therefore recognized

the person observed on the relevant occasion.

In this case accepting the identification evidence has not caused any

prejudice to the Appellant, as the PW1 had seen him regularly at the

hospital prior to the date of incident.

Hence, the Appellant is not successful in his third ground of appeal.

In this case without any contradiction or omission the evidence given by

the prosecution witnesses established that the deceased had come to the

Negombo Base Hospital clinic on 12/11/2007 and died falling from an

upper floor of the building.

PW1 had clearly seen the Appellant dragging a cardboard on which a

female was lying. PW12 had corroborated the evidence of PW1 with regard

31 | P a g e

to the presence of a female. Detection of hair clips and recovery of the

deceaseds bag with her personal belongings amply prove the deceaseds

presence on the 6th floor. Drag marks on the dusty surface of the corridor

floor were observed on the 6th floor.

Before the deceased was seeing lying on the cardboard, the other witnesses

who were in the building had seen the deceased in the company of the

Appellant.

The investigators had searched all the floors of the hospital building and

found hair pins of the deceased only on the 6th floor corridor. Police had

detected the broken and withered leaves of the cherry plant on the concrete

slab adjacent to the bathroom of the room No.33 occupied by the Appellant

on the same floor. The place where the deceased landed is just straight

below the bathroom window of the Appellants room. The deceased is a

small made person whose height is 4.10 feet as per the medical evidence.

PW29 whose hight is 5.6 feet had climbed through the bathroom window of

room no.33 to the sledge area to conduct an investigation and to take

photographs.

Medical evidence revealed that the deceased was raped, strangled and let

down from the building when she was unconscious. The deceased was

without her underwear. Further possibility of committing suicide was

overruled by the Learned High Court Judge.

The Appellant in his dock statement did not deny the evidence given by

PW1. Further the evidence given by PW1 was not challenged in cross-

examination on material points. Further he did not deny that he was in

close proximity with the deceased during the time period of the incident.

32 | P a g e

In Pilippu Mandige Nalaka Krishantha Thisera v. The Attorney General

CA 87/2005 decided on 17/05/2007 the court held that:

I hold that whenever evidence given be a witness on a material

point is not challenged in cross-examination, it has to be

concluded that such evidence is not disputed and is accepted by

the opponent subject of course to the qualification that the

witness is a reliable witness.

Considering the evidence presented by both parties in this case, I conclude

that the prosecution has presented highly incriminating circumstantial

evidence against the Appellant. But he has failed to offer a reasonable

explanation against the incriminating circumstances which had only

pointed at the Appellant as the perpetrator of this case.

In Ajith Samarakoon v. The Republic (Kobaigane Murder Case) [2004] 2

SLR 209 Jayasuriya, J. held that:

The principles laid down in R v. Cochrane and R v. Burdette do

not place a legal or a persuasive burden on the accused to prove

his innocence or to prove that the he committed no offence but

these two decisions on proof of a prima facie case and on proof

of highly incriminating circumstances shift the evidential burden

to the accused to explain away the highly incriminating

circumstances when he had both the power and the opportunity

to do so.

As discussed under the appeal grounds advanced by the Appellant, the

prosecution had adduced strong and incriminating circumstantial evidence

against the Appellant. The Learned High Court Judge had very correctly

33 | P a g e

analyzed all the evidence presented by both parties and come to the

conclusion that all the circumstances are consistent only with the

hypothesis of the guilt of the Appellant and totally inconsistent with his

innocence.

As the Learned High Court Judge had rightly convicted the Appellant for

the charge of Rape and Murder, I affirm the conviction and dismiss the

Appeal of the Appellant.

I greatly appreciate and thank both the counsels for assisting this court by

filing comprehensive and helpful written submissions.

The Registrar is directed to send a copy of this judgement to the High Court

of Negombo along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

SAMPATH B. ABAYAKOON, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL