1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for mandates in the nature of Writs of Certiorari and Mandamus in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

CA (Writ) Application No: 161/2016

1. Godellawatte Liyanarachchige

Diyunuhamy Amaradasa. 2. Mallawa Thantrige Gayantha

Senath Kumara. Both of No: 1303/02, Eksath Mawatha , Hokandara Road, Pannipitiya. PETITIONERS

Vs. 1. R.P.R. Rajapaksha,

Commissioner General of Lands. 2. Deputy Land Commissioner,

Deputy Land Commissioners Office, Ampara. 3. Y.Y.N. Perera,

Assistant Land Commissioner (Ranbima). 4. B.R. Senaratne,

Land Commissioner (Legal), 1st, 3rd and 4th Respondents at Land Commissioner Generals Department, Land Secretariat, No. 1200/06, Rajamalwatta Road, Battaramulla.

2

5. Ms. A.M. Ajantha Kumari,

Divisional Secretary, Divisional Secretariat, Uhana. 6. M.G. Hendrick,

No. 28/162, Weraneketagoda, Uhana. 6(a) Mahinagodagamage Saman Pushpa Kumara,

No. 28/162, Werenketagoda Road, Ampara. 7. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12. RESPONDENTS

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J Arjuna Obeyesekere, J Counsel: Hemasiri Withanachchi with Shantha Karunadhara for the Petitioners Ms. Yuresha Fernando, Senior State Counsel for the 1st 5th and 7th Respondents Charitha Galhena for the 6th and 6A Respondents Argued on: 23rd July 2020 Written Tendered on behalf of the Petitioners on 8th June 2020 and 28th August 2020 Submissions: Tendered on behalf of the 1st 5th Respondents on 8th June 2020 Tendered on behalf of the 6th Respondent on 23rd October 2019

Decided on: 5th October 2020

3

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J.

The State had issued Hendrick Appuhamy a permit in terms of Section 19(2) of the Land

Development Ordinance in respect of a high land in extent of 1A 3R 28P and a paddy

land in extent of 3A 0R 1.5P. The said permit, marked P1 had been issued on 5th June

1955. While it appears that Hendrick Appuhamy had nominated his eldest daughter

Asilin as the successor at the time the permit was issued to him, the said nomination

appears to have been cancelled, and his wife, Manamperige Hamina had been

nominated as the successor on 20th July 1957. However, according to the 1st 5th

Respondents, none of the said nominations have been registered in terms of the

Ordinance.

Hendrick Appuhamy had been issued a Grant in terms of Section 19(4) of the Ordinance

in respect of the above mentioned high land on 6th April 1988. It is not in dispute that

even though the said Grant, marked P9 had been issued in 1988, it had been issued to

the family of Hendrick Appuhamy several years after his death in April 1989.

It is the position of the Petitioners that after the death of Hendrick Appuhamy,

Manamperige Hamina had succeeded to the said lands referred to in P1. In 1993,

Manamperige Hamina had executed a last will marked P2 by which she bequeathed

the aforementioned paddy land and high land to her younger daughter, the 1st

Petitioner. The said last will had been proved in DC Embilipitiya Case No. 65T.

By letter dated 25th February 2015 marked P12, the 3rd Respondent, Assistant Land

Commissioner had informed the 2nd Respondent, Deputy Land Commissioner (Ampara)

as follows:

ld,hla r|jd ;snq merKs oSukdm;% iusnkaOfhks Wla; lreK iusnkaOfhka Tfns iudxl wus$ksbfld$b$9$wusm%$3625 yd 2015.02.09 oske;s ,smsh yd nefoa' 02' fus iusnkaOfhka j,x.= oSukdm;%hla ksl=;a jS we;;a th wjqreoaol ld,hla ;siafiau oSukdm;%lreg ,nd fkdoS ldrahd,fha r|jdf.k isg we;' tnejska oSukdm;%lre tf;la

4

n,m;%h Tiafia isoq l, .Kqfokq j,x.= f,i ie,lSug isoq fjs' ta wkqj n,m;%fha miq Wreulrejk l,;%hd yg uq,a Wreuh ysus jSu ks;Hdkql+, fjS' ta wkqj l,;%hd jsiska wka;Su leu;s m;%hlska b,a,quslre jk wurodi oshKsh kuska whs;sh ,nd oSu ksjeros nejska

oSukdm;%fha uq,a whs;sh weh kuska iy;sl lsrSu iqoqiq nj ldreKslj okajus'

It is noted that P12 refers to the Grant issued in respect of the highland, and that the

author of P12 has recognized the nomination made by Hendrick Appuhamy in favour of

his wife.

Acting on P12, the 5th Respondent, the Divisional Secretary, Uhana had informed the

District Registrar of Lands, by letter dated 30th March 2015 marked P13 to register the

name of the 1st Petitioner as the owner in respect of the highland. The 1st Petitioner had

thereafter nominated her son, the 2nd Petitioner as her successor under the said Grant.

The dispute that gave rise to this application had arisen as a result of the following letter

dated 5th April 2016 marked P15 sent by the 5th Respondent to the 1st Petitioner:

28$41 Pkmo f.dv$uv bvus iusnkaOjhs

28$41 Pkmo f.dv bvu i|yd ilia lr ;snq wuS$m%$3625 orK oSukd m;%h bvus flduidrsia Pkrd,af.a wxl 4$Ps$kef.k$wus$Wyk$34 yd 2015.02.25 oske;s ,smsfha Wmfoia wkqj uq,a Wreuh Tn kuska mjrd we;' 02' kej; bvus flduidrsia Pkrd,a jsiska Tyqf.a wxl 4$PS$kef.k$wus$Wyk$34 yd 2016.03.15 oske;s ,smsh u.ska l,ska ,nd oS we;s Wmfoia ksjeros lr" wNshdpkd wOslrK kvq ;Skaoq wkqj Wreuh idfrdamKh jsh hq;= nj okajd we;' 03' ta wkqj Tn Ndrfha we;s f.dv bvu i|yd jk wuS$m%$3625 orK osukd m;%h;a uv bvu i|yd jk 28$41 orK n,m;%h;a ldrahd,hg Ndr oSug wjYH lghq;= lrk fuka

ldreKslj okajd isgsus'

Dissatisfied with the decision of the 5th Respondent to recall the Permit and the Grant

issued to her, the 1st Petitioner filed this application, seeking the following relief:

(a) A Writ of Certiorari to quash the decision said to be contained in the letter dated

15th March 2016;

5

(b) A Writ of Certiorari to quash the decision calling upon the 1st Petitioner to

surrender the grant;

(c) A Writ of Mandamus directing the 1st 5th Respondents to issue a Grant to the 1st

Petitioner in respect of the paddy land.

Even though the Respondents have not made available to this Court the letter dated

15th March 2016, the learned Senior State Counsel submitted that the decision in P15

recalling the permit and grant issued to the 1st Petitioner was done for two reasons. The

first is that the nomination of Manamperige Hamina had not been registered in the Land

Ledger, and therefore her nomination as a successor is not valid. The second is that, in

these circumstances, Manamperige Hamina was only a lifeholder of the said lands and

therefore she had no power to nominate a successor, either through a last will or

through a nomination made under the Ordinance.

I shall now consider each of the said grounds urged before this Court by the learned

Senior State Counsel, in order to determine if P15 is illegal, irrational or arbitrary.

There are three Sections of the Ordinance that are relevant to a consideration of the

first ground.

The first is Section 56(1) of the Ordinance, which provides that, The nomination of a

successor and the cancellation of any such nomination shall be effected by a document

substantially in the prescribed form executed and witnessed in triplicate before a

Government Agent, or a Registrar of Lands, or a divisional Assistant Government Agent,

or a notary, or a Justice of the Peace.

The second is Section 58(1) which goes on to state that, A document (other than a last

will) whereby the nomination of a successor is effected or cancelled shall not be valid

unless and until it has been registered by the Registrar of Lands of the district in which

the holding or land to which that document refers is situated.

6

The final section is Section 60 of the Ordinance, in terms of which, No nomination .... of

a successor shall be valid unless the document (other than a last will) effecting such

nomination .... is duly registered before the date of the death of the owner of the holding

or the permit-holder.

The cumulative effect of these three Sections is that a nomination carried out in the

prescribed manner must be registered by the Registrar of Lands during the life time of

the owner or permit holder, for such nomination to be valid.

The Respondents have filed together with their motion dated 7th June 2019 a copy of

the permit P1 which clearly shows that the name of Manamperige Hamina has been

nominated as the successor. However, the Land Ledger pertaining to the said permit,

which has also been submitted with the said motion, does not contain the first

nomination made in P1 of Asilin, or the nomination of Manamperige Hamina.

The validity of the nomination of a successor which has not been registered in

conformity with the provisions of the Ordinance was considered by the Supreme Court

in Palate Gedera Gunadasa vs Palate Gedara Marywathy.1 In that case, Palate Gedera

Jamis had nominated his two children, the appellant and the respondent as his

successors by his application made to the Divisional Secretary, Medirigiriya. Their names

were accordingly entered as successors of the said Jamis on 17th June 1993. However, by

letter dated 05th April 1994, the said Jamis had written to the Divisional Secretary,

Medirigiriya requesting to nominate the respondent as his successor to the land in

question. On the basis of this document, the said respondents name had been entered

in to the Register of Permits/Grants under the Land Development Ordinance on 22nd

November 1994. However, by the time the registration was effected, Jamis had passed

away on 25th May 1994.

The Supreme Court, having considered the effect of the registration of a nomination of a

successor after the death of the permit holder held that, According to section 60 of the

Land Development Ordinance, ..., a nomination would become effective, only if such

1 SC Appeal No. 82/2008; SC Minutes of 26th October 2010.

7

nomination or cancellation is duly registered before the date of the death of the owner

of the holding or the permit-holder.

The above decision of the Supreme Court supports the argument of the learned Senior

State Counsel that not only should the nomination be registered, but that the

registration must take place during the lifetime of the permit holder or the owner. In the

absence of such registration, and in view of the mandatory nature of Sections 54, 56 and

60 in the overall scheme of the Ordinance, I agree with the submission of the

Respondents that the nomination of Manamperige Hamina is not valid.

Where does that leave Manamperige Hamina with regard to the said lands? A

determination of that question brings me to the second reason urged by the learned

Senior State Counsel for the issuance of P15, which is that Manamperige Hamina only

had the rights of a lifeholder.

As I have noted earlier, at the time Hendrick Appuhamy died, he had been issued the

Grant P9 in respect of the highland in addition to the Permit P1 in respect of the

paddy land.

In terms of Section 48A(1), Upon the death of a permit-holder who at the time of his or

her death was required to pay any annual installments by virtue of the provisions of

subsection (2) of section 19, notwithstanding default in the payment of such

installments, the spouse of that permit-holder, whether he or she has or has not been

nominated as successor by that permit-holder, shall be entitled to succeed to the land

alienated to that permit-holder on the permit and the terms and conditions of that

permit shall be applicable to that spouse. Thus, in the absence of the registration of the

nomination, all that Manamperige Hamina was entitled to with regard to the paddy land

was to succeed to the said land and occupy the said land by virtue of being the spouse

of Hendrick Appuhamy. By virtue of being only a life-holder, Manamperige Hamina did

not have the power to nominate a successor, as clearly laid down in Section 48A(2)(b).

Thus, the nomination of the 1st Petitioner as her successor by way of her last will

marked P2 is not valid in terms of the law.

8

The position with regard to the high land, although governed by Section 48B of the

Ordinance, is no different. In the absence of the registration of the nomination, and

upon the death of the owner of the holding Hendrick Appuhamy, his spouse,

Manamperige Hamina was only entitled to succeed to that holding, with such right

being subject to the conditions specified in paragraph (b) of Section 48B(1), namely that

such spouse shall have no power to nominate a successor to that holding. Thus, even

with regard to the high land, the nomination of the 1st Petitioner as the successor of

Manamperige Hamina by way of her last will marked P2 is not valid in terms of the law.

There is one matter that I wish to advert to, prior to concluding. That is to the fact that

even if the nomination of Manamperige Hamina as the successor to the lands referred

to in the permit and grant had been registered, and therefore she was entitled to

nominate a successor, the nomination that has been made by way of the last will has

not been registered in terms of the Ordinance, thus depriving the said nomination of

any legal validity.

While in terms of Section 63, a nomination may be made in the last will of the owner of

that holding or the permit-holder to whom that land has been alienated, Section 64

prescribes that a nomination made in the last will of the owner of a holding or a permit-

holder shall not be valid unless it is registered in the prescribed manner within a period

of three months reckoned from the date of the death of the owner of that holding, or of

the date of the death of that permit-holder, as the case may be.

Furthermore, a nomination or a cancellation of a nomination made in the last will of the

owner of a holding or of a permit-holder shall not be registered unless the applicant for

registration shall furnish to the registering officer a certified copy of that will together

with a certificate in the prescribed form to the effect that probate of that will has been

applied for. It is not disputed that the provisions of Sections 64 and 65 have not been

complied with, and therefore I am of the view that the nomination of the 1st Petitioner

by the last will of Manamperige Hamina is not in conformity with the provisions of the

Ordinance.

9

In the above circumstances, I see no legal basis to grant the Petitioners the relief that

has been prayed for. However, considering the fact that Hamina died in 1998, and that

Asilin, who would have been entitled to succeed to both the permit and the grant in

terms of Section 72 by virtue of being the eldest daughter had died in 2012, I direct the

1st 5th Respondents to conduct an inquiry, once P15 has been complied with, in order

to determine the entitlement to the lands referred to in the said permit and grant.

Subject to the above, this application is dismissed, without costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal Mahinda Samayawardhena, J

I agree

Judge of the Court of Appeal