1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal against an order of the High Court under Sec.331 of the code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

Baraniwala Liyanage Sunil alias Wasthuwa alias Diyalape Wasthuwa.

Accused- Appellant C.A.Appeal No: CA 30/2009 High Court Matara. Case No: HC 58/2004 Vs.

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON DECIDED ON

The Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

Complainant - Respondent

Deepali Wijesundera J. L.U. Jayasuriya J.

Indika Mallawarachchi for the Accused - Appellant K. Waidyaratne SASG PC for the A.G

13th October, 2016

27th February 2017

Page 1 of 6

L.U Jayasuriya J.

The Accused-Appellant along with another were indicted under section 296 read with section 32 of the Penal Code in the High Court of Matara and was convicted and sentenced to death on 11.03.2009.

This appeal has been filed against the said conviction and sentence.

The case for the prosecution is that on the day of the incident, the deceased has been shot by the Accused-Appellant and wh~le going to hospital he has made a dying declaration to the wife to the effect that a man named Wasthuwa shot him and assaulted him.

The learned counsel for the accused appellant argued that the wife of the deceased, Siriyawathi did not know who Wasthuwa was when the incident took place. She has testified thus:

"~,",C~d ~ed'~~:> ~~~ ,sjQ)oh ~f)~:> ~~2f))~ ~C)z1 CDtnC"

The witness admitted in her evidence that she did not know as to who Wasthuwa was initially, but got to know the Appellant as Jayasena or Sirisena subsequently.

Witness Lional has stated in his evidence that the deceased was present on the day in question at the funeral house of Dharme, and he saw the Accused-Appellant walking with a weapon. He has come to the funeral house and threatened the people who were playing cards there. This witness has identified the Accused-Appellant as Jayasena and has stated he was also known as Wasthuwa. This shows that the wife of the deceased has identified the accused appellant correctly.

Therefore, the dying declaration links the Accused-Appellant to the cnme.

Page 2 of 6

The learned counsel for the appellant further argues that the witnesses who identified the body before the Judicial Medical Officer were not called to give evidence and thereby the corpus has not been identified.

The learned Additional Solicitor General stated that there is evidence to say that the corpus was identified.

Judicial Medical Officer Dr. Gunawardena while testifying before the High Court has produced and marked the Postmortem Report as P13.

He has testified that the body was identified by the witriesses mentioned in the Postmortem Report before him, as Athapaththu Hewage Jinadasa. Although the counsel for the Accused-Appellant argued that the corpus has not been identified we find by the document marked P13 and the Judicial Medical Officer's evidence that the corpus had been properly identified. The defence has not disputed the identification of the corpus in the High Court.

It was held in Sarwan Singh V s. State of Punjab (2002) II AIR S.C. 3652:

"It is a rule of essential justice that whenever the opponent had declined to avail himself of the opportunity to cross examine the witness, it must follow that the evidence tendered on that issue ought to be accepted."

The counsel for the Appellant argued that as the deceased was shot from behind, he would not have seen the assailant and that the learned High Court Judge has not addressed his mind to this fact. On a careful perusal of the dying declaration made to the wife of the deceased, it can be seen that the deceased had clearly seen him being assaulted with the rifle butt. Further, the Police evidence reveals that they have found pieces of a rifle butt at the scene of the crime.

Page 3 of 6

The learned Additional Solicitor General submitted that there is no dispute regarding the deceased making the dying declaration and the dying declaration has not been challenged in the High Court'

The Appellant's Counsel further argued that witness Atapattu listed on the back of the indictment was not called by the prosecution and therefore section 114 (0 of the Evidence Ordinance operates against the prosecution.

The Accused- Appellant has assumed that " Attapattu would have played a pivotal role in the prosecution's case". The Accused-Appellant had also assumed that "Attapattu" would also identify "Wasthuwa".

If a witness listed on the back of an indictment is not called to give evidence by the prosecution, Section 199(4) comes into play which provides:

"If shall be lawful for the court to call any witness not called by the prosecution in the interest of justice require but such witness should be tendered for cross examination by the prosecuting counsel and by the accused"

As the defence has not made an application under section 199(4) of the Criminal Procedure Code as provided for, to call such witness, the argument of the Counsel should fail.

From the evidence lead before the High Court, we find that it was the Accused-Appellant who came to the scene of the crime armed with a gun. From the evidence of the investigating officer we find that a light was burning and the funeral house was illuminated at the time of the incident. The learned High Court Judge has considered the evidence lead before him in detail.

The learned High Court Judge, whilst analyzing the dock statement has stated that a person who sustained injuries which required a surgery

Page 4of6

travelling from Akuressa to Karapitiya - Galle without going to a nearby hospital is improbable. The learned High Court Judge has stated in the impugned judgment that the Accused-Appellant has not made any attempt to contact the Police and inform them as to what took place and as to how he sustained injuries.

This court is of the view that the learned High Court Judge has applied the several tests and has rejected the dock statement of the Appellant correctly.

We see no reason to interfere with the judgment.

For the afore-stated reasons, we decide to dismiss the appeal and affirm the conviction and sentence dated 11. 02.2009.

Appeal dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Deepali Wiiesundera J.:

I Agree.

Page 5 of 6

I I ! 1 '. I ' I I I ! !

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Page 6 of 6

I1,

t , ! I

t

I

f(

I

I[I! ! , f r

~ t ; ! ! I f f