, I 1 J

I I

J i I

i I I I t i 1 1 J I I 1 1 j i j 1 J I j 1 1 I ! I j !

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

e.A.(PHC)Appeal No. 159/2012

In the matter of an Appeal against the judgment dated 07.06.2012made by the Provincial High Court of the Western Province holden in Colombo In Application No. HCRA/59/2011.

M. J. Rodrigo Kanndappa No. 185/17, Wasala Road, Colombo 13. Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant

P.H.C. Colombo Case No. HCRA 59/2011 M.e. Colombo No. 48506/05/09

Vs. Hewahatege Sumanapala The Commissioner of Local Government, Department of Local Government, Western Province, Torrington Square, Colombo 07 Applicant -Respondent-Respondent Mrs. Chandrani Samarathunga The Commissioner of Local Government, Department of Local Government, Western Province, Torrington Square, Colombo 07 Added Respondent

t I

I

f !' I

BEFORE

COUNSEL

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS

TENDERED ON

DECICED ON

JANAK DE SILVA, J. & ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

M. Pathum Wickremaratne with Prasanna

Liyanaarachchi for the Respondent-

Petitioner-Appellant

C. Nilanduwa for the Added-

Respondent.

10-09-2018( by the Respondent)

20-09-2018 (by the Appellant)

07th November, 2018

*************

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

This IS an appeal by the Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant

(hereinafter referred to as the" Appellant") against an order of dismissal of

his revision application to set aside an order of ejectment issued by the

Magistrate's Court of Colombo in case No. 48506/05/09.

The Applicant-Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as

the "Respondent") had made an application under Section 5 of the State

Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act No.7 of 1979 as amended, to the

Magistrate's Court of Colombo, seeking eviction of the Appellant from the

State land described in the schedule to the said application.

2

In his show cause addressed to the Magistrate's Court, the Appellant

claimed that he was in possession of the said land for a period of over 30

years and tendered utility bills and other documentary proof in support of

his claim. He also alleged that this application is a result of an attempt by a

third party to take possession of the State land in dispute. He prayed from

the Magistrate's Court to grant him sufficient time to find alternative

accommodation.

At the conclusion of the inquiry under Sections 8 and 9 of the said

Act, the Magistrate's Court made order dated 22.02.2011, ejecting the

Appellant as he failed to establish that he is in possession of the said State

land upon a valid permit or other written authority.

Being aggrieved by the said order, the Appellant sought to challenge

its validity before the Provincial High Court of the Western Province

holden in Colombo in revision application No. HCRA 59/2011. In his

petition addressed to the Provincial High Court, the Appellant stated that

the Respondent instituted action against him under the provisions of State

Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act No. 7 of 1979 whereas, he should have

moved under Government Quarters (Recovery of Possession ) Act since

the premises described in the schedule to the application to the

Magistrate's Court in fact is one among several official quarters known as

"laundry houses" belonging to Colombo Municipal Council.

The Provincial High Court, in its order dated 07.06.2012, having

noted that the Appellant had failed before the Magistrate's Court to

establish that he is in possession of the said State land upon a valid permit

or other written authority, proceeded to dismiss his revision application as

3

no exceptional grounds exists to interfere with the findings of the lower

Court.

In support of his appeal against the said order of the Provincial High

Court, the Appellant now contends before us that;

a. the Respondent acted in violation of Section 14(1) of the

State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act No.7 of 1979 by

instituting action before the Magistrate's Court without the

Hon. Minister's prior approval to recover the State land,

b. the Appellant did possess a valid permit to be in

possession of the State land

The 1st ground of appeal of the Appellant is based on the provisions

of Section 14(1) of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act No.7 of

1979. The said sub section reads as follows:-

"In the exercise, performance and discharge of his powers/duties -

and functions under this Act a competent authority shall be

subject to the direction and control of the Minister in charge of the

subject of State lands."

Section 3(1)(a) of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act

conferred authority on the Competent Authority to issue a quit notice on

any person who is in unauthorised possession or occupation of State land

and directing such person to deliver vacant possession of such land to him

or other authorised officer on the date specified in the said quit notice, if he

is of the opinion that such land is a State land.

4

If the person who is in unauthorised possession or occupation of

such land fails to deliver vacant possession as directed in the quit notice,

the Competent Authority is then empowered by Section 5 of the said Act to

make an application for an order of ejection from the relevant Magistrate's

Court against the person who is in such unauthorised possession or

occupation.

None of these statutory provisions imposed a pre-condition of

obtaining prior approval of the relevant Minister in exercising powers

conferred upon him under Sections 3 and 5 of the said Act. However, the

Competent Authority is statutorily bound to II direction and control of the

Minister in charge of subject of State lands". In relation to the instant appeal,

there is no such claim by the Appellant made to any of the Courts below.

In any event the Appellant cannot challenge the invocation of the

provisions of Section 5 of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act in

the instant appeal. If the Appellant wishes to challenge the institution of

. legal proceedings without approval of the relevant Minister-in-charge of-

State lands which in turn could be considered as a challenge to the validity

of quit notice issued by a Competent Authority, it must advise itself

properly as to the nature of remedy it should seek from a competent Court.

In Dayananda v Thalwatte (2001) 2 Sri L.R. 73, referring to a preliminary

objection raised on this point, Jayasinghe J states thus:-

"] hold that the application for revision in terms of Article 138

and on application for Writs of Quo Warranto, Certiorari and

Prohibition under Article 140 of the Constitutions cannot be

5

combined as they are two distinct remedies available to an

aggrieved party and for that reason the Petition is fatally

flawed."

As per the principle enunciated in this judgment, when the

Appellant sought to challenge the invocation of the provisions of the State

Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act by the Respondent and thereby

claiming that the Appellant is in unauthorised possession of State land, in a

revision application and not in an application for judicial review, his

application is "fatally flawed."

The 2nd ground of appeal relates to the possession of the State Land

upon a valid permit or other written authority. The Appellant had

tendered an agreement of long lease entered into by himself and National

Housing Development Authority apparently in respect of the same

property as per the assessment number and the street name. This

document was -tendered annexed to the Appellant's- wtitten- submissions

addressed to this Court marked "X" and is dated 27.09.2016.

The order of ejection is dated 22.02.2011 while the order of the

Provincial High Court is dated 07.06.2012. The lease agreement was

entered into more than four years since the order of dismissal of the

revision application made by the Provincial High Court.

In considering the legal validity of both these orders in the instant

appeal, this Court should not consider any fresh material that had not been

placed before any of the lower Courts when the parties agitated their

6

i f

I;,

1

~ Ir

II

I, J f !

respective claims before them. This Court had held in CA (PHC) 41/14

decided on 02.05.2017 that:-

/I As revision is supervisory in nature, and the learned High Court

Judge in exercising the revisionary jurisdiction can only supervise

what has already been submitted in the lower Court. The said

document had not been tendered in the lower Court, hence the

learned High Court Judge in exercising revisionary jurisdiction is

debarred from supervising the said document"

In any event the lease agreement did not exist when the Provincial

High Court considered the Appellant's revision application and therefore it

had made a correct order after assessing the material placed before him.

The appellate jurisdiction of this Court is defined in Article 138(1) of the

Constitution.

Article 138(1) reads as follows;

"The Court of Appeal shall have and exercise subject to the

provisions of the Constitution or of any law, an appellate

jurisdiction for the correction of all errors in fact or in law which

shall be committed by the High Court, in the exercise of its

appellate or original jurisdiction or by any court of First

Instance, ... "

The Provincial High Court could not have made any other order

other than to dismiss the revision application of the Appellant for want of

exceptional circumstances from the material placed before it by the parties.

7

, .

This Court would therefore, consider the validity of the Provincial High

Court only against the material placed before it by the contesting parties.

Having considered the material, this Court finds no error either in fact or

law in the order of the Provincial High Court.

In view of the considerations contained in the preceding paragraphs,

we are of the considered opinion that both these orders are legally valid,

having made upon consideration of the applicable law and the material

placed before those Courts. This Court affirms both these orders.

The appeal of the Appellant is accordingly dismissed. In

consideration of the facts of the appeal, no order for costs is made against

the Appellant.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JANAK DE SILVA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

8

I

r t I IIt f ,