==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 7

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal under and in terms of Section 154P (3)(b) of the Constitution together with High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Section 19 of 1990. Officer-in-Charge Police Station, Mahiyangana. Complainant Court of Appeal CA PHC 00169/2023 Vs.

Provincial High Court of Badulla Case No. HCRA 98/19 Arpico Finance Pvt Limited No. 146, MC Mahiyangana Havelock Road, Case No. B 26134 Colombo 05. Respondent AND Abeydora Arachchilage Chandani No. 100/49, Gam Uda Niwasa, Ridee Kotaliya, Mahiyangana.

Petitioner- Registered Owner -

Claimant of the Vehicle

Vs.

1. Arpico Finance Pvt Limited No. 146, Havelock Road, Colombo 05. Respondent-Absolute Owner

Page 2 of 7

2. Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12.

3. Officer-in-Charge Police Station, Mahiyangana.

Respondents

AND BETWEEN Abeydora Arachchilage Chandani No. 100/49, Gam Uda Niwasa, Ridee Kotaliya, Mahiyangana.

Petitioner-Registered Owner -

Claimant of the Vehicle

Vs.

1. Arpico Finance Pvt Limited No. 146, Havelock Road, Colombo 05. Respondent-Absolute Owner-

Respondent 2. Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12.

3. Officer-in-Charge Police Station, Mahiyangana.

Respondents - Respondents

Page 3 of 7

AND NOW BETWEEN Arpico Finance Pvt Limited No. 146, Havelock Road, Colombo 05. Respondent-Absolute Owner-

Respondent- Petitioner Vs. Abeydora Arachchilage Chandani No. 100/49, Gam Uda Niwasa, Ridee Kotaliya, Mahiyangana.

Petitioner- Registered Owner - Claimant of the Vehicle- Appellant

1. Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12.

2. Officer-in-Charge Police Station, Mahiyangana.

Respondents-Respondents-

Respondents

Page 4 of 7

Before: B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

Amal Ranaraja, J.

Counsel: W. Dayaratne, P.C. with Ranjika Jayawardena for the Respondent – Absolute Owner – Respondent – Petitioner.

Sapumal Bandara with Lakshitha Edirisinghe for the Petitioner – Registered Owner – Claimant of the Vehicle –Appellant. Tharaka Kodagoda, S.C. for the Respondent-Respondent-Respondents.

Argued on: 25.09.2025 Judgment on: 21.10.2025

JUDGMENT

AMAL RANARAJA, J.

1. In Mahiyangana Magistrates Court case number B 26134, the Officer-

in-Charge (OIC), of the Mahiyangana Police has submitted to the

learned Magistrate a report regarding an investigation into a

complaint involving the robbery of the vehicle bearing registration

number UP PH 7874.

2. The report has included a summary of a statement made by a witness

during the investigation.

3. Upon receiving the report, the learned Magistrate has issued an order

requiring the first respondent-respondent, the absolute owner of the

vehicle (hereinafter referred to as the “Respondent”) to hand over the

Page 5 of 7

vehicle in question, which was in the respondent’s possession, to the

Mahiyangana Police.

4. The respondent has complied with the order and the Police has

subsequently forwarded the vehicle to the Magistrates Court.

5. While the vehicle was in the custody of the Court, the registered owner

(hereinafter referred to as the “Appellant”) has filed a motion

requesting that the vehicle bearing registration number UP PH 7874

be released to him in the interim on a bond.

6. The learned Magistrate has granted the application and ordered that

the vehicle be temporarily handed over to the appellant on a bond.

7. Upon learning that the vehicle has been temporarily handed over to

the appellant, the respondent has filed a motion objecting to its

release on a bond.

8. The learned Magistrate has decided on October 1, 2019, to hear both

parties and thereafter pronounce a ruling regarding the release of the

vehicle in the interim. In the meantime, the petitioner has been

directed to return the vehicle to the Court.

9. The learned Magistrate has also decided to conclude the inquiry

through written submissions. Accordingly, the learned Magistrate

directed the parties to submit their written submissions and has also

fixed the matter for order on October 31, 2019.

10. The registered owner i.e. the appellant, aggrieved by the order of the

learned Magistrate dated October 1, 2019, has submitted an

application for revision to the High Court in Badulla. In this

application, the appellant has sought the following reliefs:

Page 6 of 7

i) That the order issued by the learned Magistrate on October 1,

2019, be set aside.

ii) That the directive requiring the appellant to temporarily return the

vehicle in question to the custody of the Court be stayed until the

matter before the High Court is decided.

11. However, the learned High Court Judge has dismissed the application

of the appellant by order dated August 24, 2023.

12. The appellant also being aggrieved by the order of the High Court

dated August 24, 2023, has forwarded the instant appeal to this

Court.

13. The disputed order issued by the learned Magistrate is temporary,

pending a pronouncement on which party was entitled to take

possession of the vehicle in issue in the interim on a bond. The nature

of the order being so, it indicates the petitioner has abused the legal

process by seeking relief in the High Court in Badulla.

14. This frivolous application could not have shocked the conscience of

the High Court, as alleged by the petitioner. Under these

circumstances, the learned High Court Judge was correct in

dismissing the appellant’s application in the first instance.

15. Additionally, it is important to consider a growing concern regarding

the increasing number of frivolous applications that are being filed,

which serve to undermine the integrity of the judicial process.

16. The judicial process must be safeguarded from such abuses, ensuring

that it remains focused on legitimate disputes rather than being

bogged down by unsubstantial claims.

Page 7 of 7

17. The dismissal of the appellant’s application to the High Court not only

upholds the authority of the Court but also reinforces the need for

judicious approach to the cases presented to it, protecting the judicial

process from misuse.

18. In those circumstances, I am not inclined to interfere with the

disputed orders of the learned Magistrate and the learned High Court

Judge dated October 1, 2019, and August 24, 2023, respectively.

19. I direct the learned Magistrate of the Mahiyangana Magistrates Court

to proceed with the inquiry and render a ruling on which party was

entitled to possession of the vehicle in the interim (i.e. until the trial is

concluded and a production inquiry is held) on a bond.

I dismiss the appeal and fix costs at Rs. 75000.00.

Appeal dismissed.

20. The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgment to the

Magistrates Court in Mahiyangana for compliance.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

B. SASI MAHENDRAN, J.

I agree

Judge of the Court of Appeal