IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF llHE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A. Revision Application No: CA (PHC) APN 57/2017

H.C. Gampaha Bail Application No: BAl139/2016

~ In the matter of an Application for

1/ ' Revision made under Article 138 of

,~ the Constitution of the Democratic

:! - Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Saranya Lakshman Jayasundara ; No. 328/26/1, Aluth Mawatha, Walls Lane, Colombo 15.

i, Petitioner "

; 'f;' Vs.

01. The Hon. Attorney General Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

02.0IC,

Page l!of 7

Police Narcotics Bureau, Colombo 01.

Respondents

Welu Yogendran

(Currently in Mahara Remand Prison)

Suspect

AND NOW BETWEEN

Welu Yogendran of No. 219/T/27,

Ferguson Road, Colombo 15.

BEFORE

COUNSEL

INQUIRY ON

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS

DECIDED ON

K. K. WICKREMASINGHE, J.

(Currently In Mahara Remand Prison)

Suspect-Petitioner

Vs.

01. The Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

02.0IC,

Police Narcotics Bureau, Colombo 01

Respondents -Respondents

K. K. Wickremasinghe, J.

Janak De Silva, J.

AAL Kamal S. Perera with AAL Sumudu Ediriweera for the Suspect-Petitioner

Nayomi Wickramasekara, SSC for the Respondents-Respondents

30~05.2018

The Suspect-Petitioner- On 20.06.2018

The Respondents-Respondents - On 02"07.2018

20.07.2018

'I The Suspect-Petitioner has filed this revision application seeking to set aside the

order of the Learned High Court Judg~ of Gampaha in Case No. Bail/139/2016

. :a\ dated 22.02.2017, refusing to enlarge th,e }letitioner on bail. At the stage of inquiry,

Page 2 of 7

i'

it was agreed by both parties to file written submissions on the legal ground of the requirement of exceptional circumstances. ,;

Facts of the Case:

The Suspect-Petitioner (hereinafter referreq. to as the Petitioner) was arrested with

another on 27.05.2016, and had found 50g9fhyroin in his possession. The team of

Police officers who arrested these suspects Ihad subsequently searched the house of

the Petitioner and nothing was found in the said search. Second suspect was a

driver of a company that operated a Taxi service who was driving the vehicle at the

time of arrest. Investigation notes indicattrd that these two suspects were arrested

on the information received from one PClilewela Wasantha, a suspect, who was

arrested on the same day by the same poli9C team.

r

Thereafter the suspects were produced be{~re the Learned Magistrate of Gampaha

and had been kept in remand. Two separa~, bail applications were filed by the said

driver and the Petitioner in the High Cou~ Of Gampaha and the driver was released ,

on bail under the Bail application No. 13,St2016. The Petitioner had filed the Bail

application No. 139/2016 and the Lea11l.ep High Court Judge of Gampaha had

'-}efused to grant bail since there were~' no exceptional circumstances. Being

/ tlggrieved by the said order dated 22.02.,2.() 17, the Petitioner preferred a revision

'application in this court seeking to set~lc'~ide the said order and to enlarge the

Petitioner on bail.

In the case ofLunumoderage Nishanthi v. AG rCA (PHC) APN 48/2014], it was

held that,

~ ~ "It is trite law that any accused or ~uspect having charged under the above

') act will be admitted to bail only in I~rms of section 83(1) of the said Act and

it is only on Exceptional circumstanpes ... "

:'

Page 3(bf 7

According to Section 83 of the Poisons Opium and Dangerous Drugs [amendment]

~ Act No.] 3 of 1984, the intention of the l~gislature can be construed as to keep the

suspects under the said Act, in remahd unless exceptional circumstances are

demonstrated.

I

!

In the benchmark decision of Ramu Thamotharampillai v Attorney General

(2004) 3 Sri. L.R 180, it was held that,'"

i "The decision must in each case depend on its own peculiar facts and

circumstances. But in order that like cases may be decided alike and that

there will be ensured some uniformity of decisions it is necessary that some

guidance should be laid down for the exercise of that discretion ... "

I i

The Learned Counsel for the Petitioner has submitted that the Petitioner was in

remand for over two years and that its~~f should be considered as an exception~l

circumstance. The Learned Counsel further submitted that the Petitioner is a father

of two children aged 4 and 3 years now. '

~ i ~ However in the case of RaniI Charu!<-a Kulathunga v. AG rCA (PHe) APN

134/2015], it was held that,

"The petitioner submits several grounds to consider bail. The Petitioner I states that he is a married person with two school going children. The ., persons getting married and havi1g children is not an exceptional ground. It

is the normal day to day life of the people. "

In the above mentioned case, it was further held that,

"The quantity of cocaine involve,d in this case is 62.847 grams, which is a

commercial quantity. If Petitione~ is convicted, the punishment is death or

Page 4 of 7

',.

life imprisonment. Under these cir~unlstancesJ it is prudent to conclude the

~ trial early while the Petitioner is kept in custody ... JJ

In the case of Labukola Ange Wisin Ged:ara Ashani Dhanushshika v. AG rCA ! ! (PHC) APN 04/2016], it was held that,'j

"In the present case he Petitionell has fail to establish any exceptional

circumstances warranting this Court to exercise the revisionary jurisdiction.

The Petitioner's first point is that the suspect is in remand nearly for two

,f years, The intention of the Legislature is to keep in remand any person who

\ is suspected of or accused of pos~essing or trafficking heroin until the

conclusion of the case ... "

The Learned Counsel for the Petitioner further submitted that the Police team who

arrested the Petitioner had failed to state the'time they returned to Headquarters of

.1 Police Narcotic Bureau (PNB), and that was a vital omission in this kind of a raid

. ~ and the Police had suppressed the fact thaf;the house of the Petitioner was searched

I and nothing was recovered. Accordingl~. the Learned Counsel has averred to

consider these two grounds as exception~l circumstances in order to invoke the

revisionary jurisdiction of this court.

I-Iowever we hold that these matters related to the raid should be considered at the

stage of trial in the High Court.

In the case of CA Revision (PHC) APN 145/2009, it was held that,

... in a drug case, the fact that there isn't a prima facie case against the

suspect, does not constitute exceptional circumstances in order to grant

b1 " al ... .j

Page S'of 7

Further we observe that the Learned High Court .Judge of Gampaha has considered

,'1

~hat the Petitioner had two previous convict~ons of similar nature and the Petitioner

was given a suspended sentence for one offence. At the page 3 of the Judgment, it

was stated that the Petitioner was involved in the instant offence during the

operative period of the said suspended sent~nce.

1 In the above mentioned case of CA (PH'C) APN [04/2016], it was further held .I that,

.\

"The suspect in the present case hqs been previously convicted on similar

offences. Therefore, remanding itse[f. of a person of this caliber cannot be

an exceptional circumstance to gran~< bail ... "

Considering the gravity of the offence anck,the sentence to be imposed if convicted , . is either death penalty or the life imprisonment, and the existence of previous

convictions of similar nature against thel Petitioner, we affinn the order of the

Learned High Court Judge of Galnpaha dated 22.02.2017.

'Accordingly the revision application is dismissed without costs.

i

The Respondent is advised to take ne~~ssary steps immediately to consider

forwarding the indictment as mentioned at~tage of the inquiry.

Janak De Silva, J

, I'

I r

JUD.GE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JuDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

i

! Page G'of 7

Cases referred to:

1) Lunumoderage Nishanthi v. AG rCA (PHC) APN 48/2014] 2) Ramu Thamotharampillai v. Attorney General (2004) 3 Sri. L.R 180 3) Ranil Charuka Kulathunga v. AG [CA(PHC) APN 134/2015] 4) Labukola Ange Wisin Gedara Ashani I)hanushshika v. AG [CA (PHC) APN 04/2016] 5) CA Revision (PHC) APN 145/2009

Page 7 of 7