IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA.

Mahage Sugith PushpaKumara,

Petitioner

CA 231/2009

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

1

C.A.231/2009 H.C. Colombo Case No: 3335/06

Before Deepali Wijesundera,J. &

L.U. Jayasuriya,J.

Counsel Neranjan Jayasinghe for the accused-Appellant.

Shanka Wijesinghe DSG. for the Respondent.

Argued &

Decided on 01.11.2016

********

Deepali Wijesundera,J.

Heard both Counsels.

The Accused-Appellant in this case has been convicted for murder of

one Bomariyage Siripala Gomas on 13.09.2005 under Section 296 of the Penal

Code, and sentenced to death, by the High Court of Colombo.

This appeal is filed against the said judgment and the conviction.

The main witness at the trial one Daraniyagalage Karunawthie Pieris

who was an eye witness giving evidence has stated, she did not see any

2

exchange of words between the appellant and the victim, before the appellant

stabbed the victim. She was cross examined at length and her evidence has

been consistent.

Counsel appearing for the appellant in his defence took up two grounds

of appeal.

1) Inadmissible evidence have been considered by the High Court

Judge namely LB. extracts of the main Investigating Officer who

was dead by the time of the trial were marked without narrating

what was recorded. We find it is not correct according to the

evidence on pages 100 and 101 of the brief where it has been

marked according to the Section 167 of the Evidence Ordinance.

This evidence can be considered under Section 167 of the Evidence

Ordinance which states

" The improper admission or rejection of evidence shall not

be ground of itself for a new trial or reversal of any decisions

in any case, if it shall appear to the court before which such

objection is raised that, independently of the evidence

objected to and admitted, there was sufficient evidence to

justify the decision, or that, if the rejected evidence had

been received, it ought not to have varied the decision".

The learned High Court Judge has relied upon the LB.

extracts marked Xl to X5 and has said that the evidence by the 1st

[ I l ! ) ,

I f t

\ I

f f, [ t ,

\

3

witness has been corrobor;ted by the Investigating Officer. There

is no provision in the Cod~ Criminal Procedure Act to rely upon the ~

inquiry notes. Anyway this has not caused any prejudice to the

appellant as the 1 st witness has given cogent evidence with regard

to the incident. The only instance where the High Court Judge is

on \/-N permitted to rely inquiry notes is provided for in Section 110 (4) of fJ2 " the Code of Criminal Procedure Act .

This witness has recognized the hand writing and the signature of the

I-O~ main Investigating Officer who is dead by that time. Therefore this evidence will !fJ-

have to be accepted under Section 167 of the Evidence Ordinance.

2. The next ground of appeal was cumulative provocation has not

been considered in this case. The charge should have been

brought down to a lesser offence according to the evidence of the

main eye witness.

The learned D.S.G. in his argument stated the Accused in his dock

statement has totally denied the incident at the time of the trial. Therefore the

appellant at this moment cannot say that he want to plead for a lesser offence

whereas he has totally denied the incident. Therefore the cumulative

provocation does not arise.

For the aforesaid reasons, we find that the two grounds of appeal

argued by the appellant is not sufficient to set aside the said judgment which

we find has been delivered after carefully considering the evidence placed

t i

I , I r

!

j i t [

t I ,

4

before the learned High Court Judge. Therefore we decide to dismiss the

appeal and affirm the judgment and conviction given on 20.11.2009.

Appeal is dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

L. U. Jayasuriya,J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Jmrj-