IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Court of Appeal

Case No. CA/25/2012

High Court of Colombo

Case No. HC 2378/2005

In the matter of an appeal under and in

terms of Section 331 of the Criminal

Procedure Code Act No. 15 of 1979.

The Attorney General of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Complainant

Vs,

Baminehannadige Nilmini Samanthi

Fernando Alia Niluka

Accused

And Now Between

Baminehannadige Nilmini Samanthi

Fernando Alia Niluka

Accused-Appellant

Vs,

The Attorney General of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Com pia ina nt-Respondent

Before : S. Devika de L. Tennekoon, J &

S. Thurairaja PC, J

CA/25/2012 JUDGMENT Page 1 of7

Counsel Anil Sivala PC, with Sahan Kulatunga

for the Accused-Appellant

Azard Navavi SSC for the Complainant-Respondent

Judgment on: 20th February 2018

***********

Judgment

s. Thurairaja PC. J

The Accused Appellant (hereinafter sometimes referred to as Appellant) was originally

indicted before the High Court of Colombo for possession and Trafficking of 40.8

Grams of Heroin (Diacetyl Morphine) punishable under Section 54 a (d)and 54 a (b) of

the Poison, Opium and Dangerous Drugs Act. After the trial Appellant was convicted

on both counts and sentenced to death.

Being aggrieved with the said conviction and the sentence the appellant preferred this

appeal to the Court of Appeal and submitted following grounds of appeal;

I. Defect in adopting the evidence

II. Government Analyst evidence is unacceptable

III. Prosecution failed to prove the case beyond reasonable doubt

IV. Learned Trial Judge unreasonably rejected the Dock Statement.

Prosecution lead the evidence of four witnesses, Chief Inspector Gabadage Upul

Ariruwan, Sub Inspector Moses Rangajeewa Neomal and Chief Inspector Nanayakkara

Nethsinghe Dharmasena Nanayakkara of Police Narcotics Bureau and Government

Analyst Kanapathipillai Sivarajah. When the defence was called the Appellant opted to

make a statement from the Dock and denied the involvement.

CA/2S/20l2 JUDGMENT Page 2 of7

According to the Prosecution witnesses, on the 26th August 2003 at around 2255 hrs,

Sub Inspector Rangajeewa received an information from his private informant that the

appellant Nilu is going to Kanthi's house to pack Heroin. He informed it to his superior

officer CI Ariruwan and a raid team consisting of 9 members, namely CI. Ariruwan, SI.

Rangajeewa, SI. Paul, PS.Samarakoon, Pc. Rohana, Pc. Mahinda, WPS. Gunasekara, Pc.

Weerasinghe and PCD. Niroshan. The team went to Serpentine Road, Borella, on the

way they picked up the informant at Punchi Borella and laid in ambush there for a

while. When the appellant came there and tried to open the gate of Kanthi's house,

having a bag in her hand, the team advanced and apprehended her. At that time there

was another person who was walking behind the appellant started running away and

SI. Rangajeewa chased behind him but couldn't arrest him. The bag of the appellant

was searched and found 14 packets of powder suspected to be Heroin, glass pad, two

knives and blades. The team called the vehicle and proceeded to the house of the

appellant and searched the house there did not find anything incriminatory. She was

taken to PNB office and the brown coloured powder was subjected to a field test and

found positive for Heroin. Thereafter she was formally arrested and produced before

the Magistrate. The substance was referred to the Government Analyst and found 40.8

grams of pure Diacetyl Morphine (Heroin).

The First ground of appeal is that there is a defect in adopting evidence. Perusing the

brief, we find that part of the trial was taken up before a Judge and before the

Prosecution closed the case a new Judge succeeded. New Judge referred this case to

his Lordship the Chief Justice to consider to nominate the previous Judge to hear and

conclude, but His Lordship the Chief Justice had nominated the New Judge and

instructed the new Judge to continue with this case. When the case was taken up

before the New Judge both parties agreed to adopt the evidence so far lead and to

continue.

The complaint by the Counsel for the Appellant is that referring to Chief Justice is

improper. Considering the procedures followed in this case, it was found that this case

CA/2S/20l2 JUDGMENT Page 3 of 7

was unable to be concluded before a single Judge. Most of the evidence were led

before a Judge and before closing the case for the Prosecution the trial Judge was

transferred. The relevant law is Section 48 of the Judicature Act, according to the said

section a new judge can adopt and continue with the trial. In this case the learned Trial

Judge followed a practice which is prevailing with our Judicial Officers that when

substantive evidence is lead before a Judge, they try their best to have the same Judge

to hear and conclude. In this case also the Judge did the same. Considering this act, I

find, it is done to the betterment of the Accused Appellant, even though the Judicature

act makes provision to directly adopt (Subject to conditions stated there). Considering

the fact that both Counsels had properly adopted the evidence, the present complaint

is an afterthought. Therefore, we do not see merit in the ground of appeal.

The Second ground of Appeal is that the evidence given by the Government Analyst

is unacceptable. Facts of this case reveals that the productions were properly sealed

and referred to the Government Analyst. The Appellant had not challenged the sealing

and chain of production referred to the Government Analyst. Chain of custody of the

production were well established, we do not see any loopholes there. When the

substance reached the Government Analyst Department (GAD) it is acknowledged by

a receipt bearing number CD 2366/03. According to the receipt the seals were intact.

Productions were examined by Ms. Navaratne under the supervision of Mr.K.Sivarajah.

Government Analyst Report, bearing number M/49/2004 (CD/2366/03) was issued

under the signature of both officials.

Section 77 A (3) of the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs Act says as follows;

(3) A report submitted to the police officer under subsection (2) shall be

received in eVIdence in any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this

Ordinance.

According to the law, the report can be accepted without calling the Analyst.

CA/25/2012 JUDGMENT Page 4 of7

The contention of the appellant is that the witness Mr. K. Siva raja was not involved in

the testing therefore he cannot give competent evidence. Witness who gave evidence

was the Government Analyst. Unlike the other places this department adopts a

different procedure in doing the analytical examination. When it comes to Drugs it is

always a senior officer and ajunior officer involved in examination. Each and every step

were taken together. Therefore, both becomes competent to give evidence. In this case

also the same procedures followed and we have no reason the question the

competency of the witness, further the Appellant had admitted under section 420 of

the Code of Criminal Procedure Act (CCPA), of the competency of the witness.

Considering all we find this ground of appeal also fails in its own merits.

The third ground of appeal is that the Prosecution failed to prove the case beyond

reasonable doubt. The following arguments were advanced in support of the above

ground of appeal.

~ The appellant was arrested in front of Kanthi's house and her house was not

searched.

~ Can these officers wait for more than one hour in that busy area (Serpentine

Road)?

~ Will the Appellant go to a place in the night leaving two children at home? Test

of Probability.

~ Appellant says she was arrested at her home and the productions were

recovered near the wooden house subsequently it was introduced on her.

Two witnesses who were involved in the raid gave evidence at the trial and we did not

find any material contradictions were marked on them.

Prosecution witnesses submitted that they had clear information about the Appellant

taking Heroin to pack at Kanthi's place. When she arrived at the place before she enters

the house of Kanthi she was apprehended by the PNB officials. Kanthi is not in the

scene at any time, under this circumstance, I do not see any reason for the Police

Officials to search the House of Kanthi. Considering the area in question it is Serpentine

CA/2S/2012 JUDGMENT Page Sof7

Road at Wanathamulla, anyone who knows about Colombo and Borella will know this

area. Knowing the Volatile situation of the area, it will not be prudent for the Narcotics

Officials to involve in search of vast area. Both Witnesses explained why they did not

search the house of Kanthi and they have searched the House of the Appellant which

was situated little away from the place of arrest. The learned Trial Judge was convinced

with the explanation given by the witnesses, we have no reason to interfere with

findings of the Learned Judge of the High Court.

The next submission made by the Counsel was, can the witnesses wait in the said area

for more than one hour. It is evidence before the Court that they left the PNB around

11.45 PM they picked up the informant at Punchi Borella and proceeded to the place

waited for while and arrested the Appellant at around 12.55 midnight. Considering the

time duration, it is much less than an hour. Anyhow it is evidence that only three

officials namely Ariruwan, Rangajeewa and WPC Gunasekara and the informant got

down from the vehicle. As witness explains they took undercover and stayed there until

the appellant comes there. It should be mindful that these officials are trained to

conduct raids so they know how to hide themselves in these areas. The learned trial

Judge had extensively considered these facts and concluded that it is creating any

doubt. Considering the evidence and the Judgment we have no reason to interfere

with the said findings.

The question raised by the appellant is that will appellant being a mother leave her

children and go to another place in the night. Leaving Children by a lady is a subjective

matter, it depends on the person, circumstances, necessity and priority, it cannot be

generalised. In this case it was the evidence of the witnesses that she came alone. There

is no material before the court suggesting it was not. The only evidence by way of

Dock Statement that she was arrested at her place. She did not say any other materials

including the age and health conditions of the Children. Since it is a subjective issue

test of probability does not apply.

CA/2S/20l2 JUDGMENT Page 6 of 7

The Appellant submits that the goods were recovered near the wooden house and it

was introduced to her after her arrest at her home. The case for the prosecution is that

they received an information that the Appellant was going to Kanthi's place to pack

heroin. The PNB organised a raid and arrested her in front of Kanthi's house and

recovered Heroin and equipment that can be used for packing. The Appellant says she

was at her place and the Police came there and arrested her there. Productions

recovered near the wooden house was introduced on her.

Considering the evidence available the following matters were discussed receives our

attention. What is the need for PNB to introduce Such a huge quantity (Net weight of

40.8 grams) of Heroin on the Appellant. There is nothing suggested or advanced in the

trial. Presuming the Police introduced will they introduce about 81 grams (Street

weight) on her. The Law says if anyone possess more than 2 grams will be punished

with Death or Life imprisonment. Under these circumstances if the PNB officials want

to introduce will they do it with such huge quantity. Further the Appellant was not

consistent with her defence in this connection. This does not mean that Accused

should prove his innocence but the defence should be put to the prosecution.

Further the Learned Trial Judge had substantially discussed all these issues in his

Judgment. We do not see any reason to interfere the judgment of the learned Judge

of the High Court. After carefully considering all we find the conviction is warranted

on the evidence available, hence we affirm the conviction and the sentence.

Appeal dismissed and conviction and sentence affirmed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

S. Devika de L. Tennekoon, J

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

CA/25/2012 JUDGMENT Page 7of7