CA/REV/0005/2025

Page 1 of 8

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Revision in terms of Article 138 of the Constitution against the Order dated 6th March 2025 delivered in DC Nugegoda Case No: SPL/679/2024.

SQUIRE MECH ENGINEERING (PVT) LTD, No. 135/1, Old Kottawa Road, Nawinna, Maharagama.

Plaintiff Vs.

ILLAYPERUMA KODITUWAKKUARACHCHILAGE DAYANANDA, 63/2, Araliya Gardens, Elhena Road, Maharagama.

Defendant AND NOW BETWEEN

SQUIRE MECH ENGINEERING (PVT) LTD, No. 135/1, Old Kottawa Road, Nawinna, Maharagama.

Plaintiff-Petitioner

Court of Appeal Case No:CA/REV/0005/2025 DC Nugegoda Case No: SPL/679/2024

CA/REV/0005/2025

Page 2 of 8

Vs. ILLAYPERUMA KODITUWAKKUARACHCHILAGE DAYANANDA, 63/2, Araliya Gardens, Elhena Road, Maharagama.

Defendant-Respondent Before: D. THOTAWATTA, J. K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J. Counsel: Suren De Silva with Jehan Samrasinghe instructed by Kanchana Senanayake for the Plaintiff-Petitioner.

Jagath Wickramanayake PC. with Sachira Andrahannadi instructed by Rasika Wellappili for the Defendant-Respondent. Supported on : 21.07.2025 Written Submissions of the Plaintiff-Petitioner tendered on : 20.08.2025 Written Submissions of the Defendant-Respondent tendered on : 25.08.2025 Decided on : 18.09.2025

CA/REV/0005/2025

Page 3 of 8

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

This is an application in revision filed by the Plaintiff-Petitioner (hereinafter

called and referred to as “Plaintiff”) only against that part of the order of the

Learned District Judge of Nugegoda dated 06.03.2025 made in an action

bearing No. SPL/679/2024, a certified copy of which was annexed to the

petition marked as ‘A2’ (hereinafter called and referred to as “the order”)

refusing a kind of interim injunction as prayed for in prayer ‘f’ of the plaint. We

have heard the Learned Counsel for the Petitioner in support of the application

for notice and interim order and the learned President’s Counsel for the

Defendant-Respondent (hereinafter called and referred to as “the defendant”)

in opposition thereto and this matter is now, coming up before us for order

thereon.

The Plaintiff had instituted the action bearing No. SPL/679/2024 in the

District Court of Nugegoda against the Defendant praying inter-alia, for the

following relief, namely;

(a) a declaration that the Defendant is not entitled to possess or use the

vehicles bearing numbers PH 7136 [P7A and KO 1151 (P7B] since his

resignation from the employment of the Plaintiff Company with effect from 31st

October 2023;

(b) a declaration that the Defendant nor his servants and agents have any right

in law to obstruct and or interfere with the Plaintiff or its servants and agents

from obtaining possession of the vehicles bearing numbers PH 7136 [P7A and

KO 1151 [P7B|;

(c) a permanent injunction restraining the Defendant, his servants and agents

from using in any manner whatsoever the vehicles bearing numbers PH 7136

[P7A| and KO 1151 [P7B];

(d) a permanent injunction restraining the Defendant, his servants and agents

from obstructing and/ or interfering with the Plaintiff or its servants and

CA/REV/0005/2025

Page 4 of 8

agents from obtaining possession of the vehicles bearing numbers PH 7136

[P7A] and KO 1151 [P7B);

(e) an interim injunction restraining the Defendant his servants and agents

from using in any manner whatsoever the vehicles bearing registration

numbers PH 7136 [P7A] and KO 1151 [P7B], pending the grant of the

permanent injunction;

(f) an interim injunction restraining the Defendant his servants and agents

from obstructing and/or interfering with the Plaintiff or its servants and agents

from obtaining possession of the vehicles bearing numbers PH 7136 [P7A] and

KO 1151 [P7B], pending the grant of the Permanent Injunction;

The pivotal basis of the action of the Plaintiff is that the Defendant’s continued,

wrongful and illegal possession of the vehicles bearing registration numbers PH

7136 (P7A) and KO 1151 (P7B) ownership of which admittedly, lies with the

Plaintiff being the registered owner thereof, which were assigned to him by the

Plaintiff as means of facilitating him in performing his official duties in his

position as the Director (Engineering Services) under and in terms of Clause

4.9 of the agreement (P4A) and the provisions of the Contract of Service (P6A)

entered into between the Plaintiff and the Defendant, even upon Defendant’s

resignation from his position as Director (Engineering Services) in the Plaintiff’s

Company as manifest from (P16). It is in this premise, the Plaintiff had in

prayers ‘e’ and ‘f’ of the plaint, prayed for two interim injunctions against the

Defendant and the Defendant had in his statement of objections, objected to

the granting of such interim injunctions on the basis that, those two vehicles

had been purchased by him out of his personal assets and therefore, the

Plaintiff was holding those two vehicles in trust for him. However, the learned

District Judge of Nugegoda had proceeded to grant an interim injunction as

prayed for in prayer ‘e’ of the plaint and refused the interim injunction as

prayed for in prayer ‘f’ of the plaint on the premise that should the interim

injunction as prayed for in prayer ‘f’ of the plaint be granted allowing the

CA/REV/0005/2025

Page 5 of 8

Plaintiff to obtain possession of the vehicle pending final determination of the

said action, there is a possibility that the Defendant may incur potential and

greater loss and damage as the Plaintiff could be able to dispose of the said two

vehicles. It is this part of the order of the learned District Judge of Nugegoda

that the Plaintiff now, seeks to canvas before us by way of revision.

When this matter came up before us for support of the application for notice

and interim relief, learned President’s Counsel for the Defendant raised a

preliminary objection as to the maintainability of the instant application in

revision in that, it was contended by the learned President’s Counsel drawing

attention of this Court to the parallel proceedings in the Civil Appellate High

Court of Western Province and the Court of Appeal and relying on the decision

in SC(SPL) L.A. Application No. 24/2024-decided on 11.07.2025 that the

instant application in revision is an abuse of process of Court as the same is

impugned by the Plaintiff before the Civil Appellate High Court of Western

Province holden in Mt. Lavinia by way of leave to appeal application and

therefore, the instant application in revision ought to be dismissed in-limine.

It may now, be examined.

It is beyond dispute that the Plaintiff had initiated parallel proceedings both in

the Civil Appellate High Court of Western Province holden in Mt. Lavinia and

the Court of Appeal impugning the very same order as is now, being impugned

by the Plaintiff before us by way of Revision.

The core contention of the learned President’s Counsel for the Defendant is

that initiation of parallel proceedings by way of revision before this Court by

the Plaintiff impugning the very same order as is being impugned by the

Plaintiff by way of leave to appeal in the Civil Appellate High Court of Western

Province holden in Mt. Lavinia is in law, an abuse of the process of Court.

It was held by the Supreme Court in the case in SC(SPL) L.A. Application No.

24/2024(Supra) that, “In Saskatchewan (Environment) v. Metis Nation

CA/REV/0005/2025

Page 6 of 8

Saskatchewan [2025 SCC 4] it was held that a multiplicity of proceedings

which engage the same issues can amount to an abuse of process; duplicative

proceedings might waste the resources of the parties, courts and witnesses, or

might risk inconsistent results and therefore undermine the credibility of the

judicial process. However, the fact that there are two or more ongoing legal

proceedings which involve the same, or similar, parties or legal issues, is in

itself not sufficient for an abuse of process. There may be instances where

multiple proceedings will enhance, rather than impeach, the integrity of the

judicial system, or where parties have a valid reason for bringing separate, but

related proceedings. The analysis should focus on whether allowing the

litigation to proceed would violate the principles of judicial economy,

consistency, finality or the integrity of the administration of justice.”

A copy of the petition filed by the Plaintiff in the Civil Appellate High Court of

Western Province holden in Mt. Lavinia was annexed to the instant application

in revision marked as ‘A3’. Upon a careful comparison of the petition (A3) filed

by the Plaintiff in the Civil Appellate High Court of Western Province holden in

Mt. Lavinia and the petition filed by the Plaintiff in the Court of Appeal, it

clearly, appears that both the petitions bear the same date, namely;

25.03.2025 which clearly, appears beyond doubt that both the application were

instituted before Court on the same date; and that the parties in both

applications are one and the same parties; and that the pleadings and the relief

sought in both applications are identical and verbatim the same in substance.

However, upon a careful perusal of the petitions filed by the Plaintiff in the Civil

Appellate High Court of Western Province holden in Mt. Lavinia and before this

Court, it clearly, appears that no reason whatsoever had been adduced by the

Plaintiff in either of those two petitions for bringing separate but, parallel and

related proceedings before both of the Courts. It is however, significant to

observe that it was inter-alia, stated in unambiguous terms by the Plaintiff in

paragraph 16 of the written submissions filed before this Court that the leave

to appeal application was instituted purely, out of an abundance of caution

CA/REV/0005/2025

Page 7 of 8

with the sole purpose of preserving the Petitioner’s rights and ensuring that all

available remedies are properly, invoked which undoubtedly, and

unambiguously shows that the Plaintiff had no valid reason to give for so doing

for; parallel proceedings cannot in law, be permitted to be instituted out of an

abundance of caution as asserted by the Plaintiff.

Under those peculiar circumstances of the instant case, can it be said that

multiple proceedings before the Court of Appeal and in the Civil Appellate High

Court of Western Province holden in Mt. Lavinia will enhance, rather than

impeach the integrity of the judicial system?, I would think not for; it would in

my opinion, open a gateway to abuse of process of Court by instituting parallel

proceedings before different judicial forums on the very same issue, and

between the very same parties, emanating from the very same order of Court

thereby, utterly, wasting of the resources not only of the parties but also of the

Court thus, paving the way for the duplicity of the proceedings.

Besides, if, the parallel proceedings are allowed to be instituted in different

judicial forum in the guise of instituting actions purely, out of an abundance of

caution as averred by the Plaintiff in paragraph 16 of the written submissions,

it will no doubt, be violative of not only of the principles of judicial economy,

(which means promoting the efficient management of court resources by

minimizing unnecessary litigation, streamlining legal processes, enhancing the

efficient use of the court's time and resources to avoid duplication of effort and

unnecessary delays in the legal process, aiming to streamline proceedings with

a view to reducing case backlogs, and ensuring timely justice by encouraging

the resolution of disputes in a manner that conserves judicial resources), but

also of consistency, finality or the integrity of the administration of justice.

In view of the above, I am of the view that institution of the instant application

in revision by the Plaintiff before this Court is an abuse of the process of Court

as the same is impugned by the plaintiff in the Civil Appellate High Court of

Western Province holden in Mt. Lavinia by exercising the statutory right of

CA/REV/0005/2025

Page 8 of 8

appeal with leave first had and obtained as rightly, contended by the learned

President’s Counsel for the Defendant.

I would therefore, hold that the preliminary objection raised by the learned

President’s Counsel for the Defendant is entitled to succeed.

Hence, the preliminary objection is upheld.

In the result, I would refuse to act in revision of the order sought to be

impugned in these proceedings before us.

I would thus, dismiss the instant application in revision with costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL