Page 1 of 5

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL

OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal under and terms of Article 138 of

the Constitution read with Section 11 of the High Court of

the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No.19 of 1990.

S.M. Dhammika Samarakopn

Wariyapola Road, Bamunakotuwa.

Petitioner-Appellant

Vs.

Court of Appeal Case No.

CA/PHC/221/2015

Provincial High Court of the North

Western Province Holden at Kurunegala

Writ Application Case No. H.C.W./10/2012

1. Commissioner of Co-operative Development, (North

Western Province) The Department of Co-operative

Development, 1st Floor, Office of the North Western

Provincial Council, Kurunegala.

2. Bamunakotuwa Sakasuruwam Ha Naya, Ganudenu

Pilibada Samupakara Samithiya, Wariyapola Road,

Bamunakotuwa.

3. Herath Mudiyanselage Piyasena Herath Chairman,

Bamunakotuwa Sakasuruwam Ha Naya Ganudenu

Page 2 of 5

Pilibanda, Samupakara Samithiya, Wariyapola Road,

Bamunakotuwa.

4. Edirisinghe Mudiyanselage Nandasena Vice Chairman,

Bamunakotuwa Sakasuruwam Ha NayaGanudenu

Pilibanda Samupakara Samithiya, Wariyapola Road,

Bamunakotuwa.

5. Herath Mudiyanselage Thilakaratne Banda, Secretary,

Bamunakotuwa Sakasuruwam Ha Naya, Ganudenu

Pilibada Samupakara Samitiya, Wriyapola Road,

Bamunakotuwa.

6. A. Geeman Appuhamy, Pattiyagam, Madampe.

Respondent-Respondents

BEFORE: PRASHANTHA DE SILVA, J.

K.K.A.V. SWARNADHIPATHI, J.

COUNSEL: Migara Kodithuwakku

For the Petitioner-Appellant

S. Ahammed S.C.

For the 1st to 6th Respondent-Respondents.

Date of argument: 20.01.2022

Date of Judgment: 19.10.2022

Page 3 of 5

K.K.A.V. SWARNADHIPATHI, J.

JUDGMENT

The Petitioner-Appellant was employed at the 2nd Respondent Society, and her services were

terminated in December 2000. Later, in November 2005, a letter of demand was received by the

Appellant asking to pay a sum of Rs.1,691,472.00 to the 2nd Respondent Society as a shortage of

funds for the period of 01.02.2000 up to 18.12.2000.

The matter was then referred to an Arbitrator, the 6th Respondent. After an inquiry, the award was

made in favour of the 2nd Respondent society. The Appellant was ordered to pay a sum of

Rs.1,019,178.66.

Aggrieved by this decision, the Appellant appealed to the 1st Respondent. Here the Appellant took

up the position that the document (accounts) taken into consideration was not an audited account;

it was not marked or allowed to cross-examine at the inquiry before the arbitrator.

The 1st Respondent held an inquiry and ordered the Appellant to pay a sum of Rs.875,570.18 to

the 2nd Respondent society.

Aggrieved by the decision, the Appellant instituted the action seeking writ jurisdiction of the

Provincial High Court of North-Western Province Holden at Kurunagala to quash the decisions.

At the argument before the High Court, the Respondents agreed to hold a fresh inquiry.

Accordingly, a fresh inquiry was held in relation to the Appeal of the Appellant, and the order was

delivered on 25.07.2011. According to the said order, the Appellant was ordered to pay a sum of

Rs.740,221.66 to the 2nd Respondent.

Aggrieved by this order, the Appellant moved the Provincial High Court of the North-Western

Province Holden at Kurunagala to exercise its writ jurisdiction.

Page 4 of 5

After the Respondents' objections, the Appellant filed counter affidavits, and on those documents,

the learned High Court Judge delivered his order on 12.10.2015 and dismissed the application of

the Appellant.

Aggrieved by the said order of the High Court, the Appellant sought the intervention of the court

of Appeal. After filing written submissions by both, the parties' matter was argued. Parties were

allowed to file their written submissions after the argument. This judgment is based on the parties'

written submissions, arguments, and documents filed.

The Appellant had argued before this court that marking the "P8" document should not have been

allowed. According to Petitioner, "P8" is a document marked during cross-examination, thereby

not leaving the opportunity to the Petitioner to cross-examine or explain the document. This gross

violation of natural justice is ultra vires and irrationally unreasonable.

Mere saying a breach of natural justice is not enough to set aside an order made by the learned

High Court Judge. He must prove how the violation had taken place.

In this instance, he argued that he had no opportunity to clarify by evidence document marked

"P8" The learned High Court Judge had observed that the witness (Appellant ) had not indicated

such necessity. She had the opportunity to request the court to recall the person who produced "P8"

and cross-examined it. She had not denied the document in evidence.

If the document marked "P8" is fraudulent or prepared against the regular practice witness

(Appellant) had the opportunity to bring that to the notice of the Judge. Her silence proves that she

knows the document; therefore, she is now estopped from raising any objections.

She had not proved any form of violation of natural justice. Her main argument raised for the

Appeal fails, as discussed above.

The Appellant argued that had he called the witness regarding the document marked "P8", he

would not have had the opportunity for the cross-examination. According to the law, when a

Page 5 of 5

document is marked in cross-examination, the witness can object and request the court to call the

witness for cross-examination as the document contains fresh and vital material. If he does not

exercise his right at the proper moment, he will have to suffer consequences.

The document marked "P8" was the cash Account for 01.01.2000 to December 2000, during which

the Appellant was employed. The document marked "P8" was marked in evidence by the witness.

H.M. Piyasena Herath had given evidence regarding "P8" at length. The Appellant's representative

cross-examined this witness.

In perusing evidence of the tribunal, it is clear that questions had been asked regarding "P8" on

page 160 of the brief the answers to the question speak of document "P8". He used the words "P8",

consisting of money received by the Society and paid by the Society separately. This proves that

the witness was open to cross-examination by the Appellant.

As the main ground of Appeal was "P8", this order discussed the validity of evidence regarding

"P8". There is no violation of natural justice as to how the learned High Court Judge had evaluated

the evidence.

Therefore, I am of the view that there is no merit in this Appeal.

The Appeal is dismissed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

PRASANTHA DE SILVA, J. I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal