==== BLOCKS ==== 

WRT/0293/20

Page 1 of 9

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Orders in

the nature of Writs of Certiorari, Prohibition

and Mandamus under and in terms of Article

140 of the Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

M. I. M. Safiyulla,

25, Handiramulla,

Panagamuwa.

PETITIONER

C.A. Case No. WRT/0293/20

Vs.

Divisional Secretary,

Ridigama.

RESPONDENT

BEFORE : K. M. G. H. KULATUNGA, J.

COUNSEL : Lakshman Perera, PC, with Thishya Weragoda, Anusha N.

Fernando and Tharika Jinadasa, instructed by Niluka

Dissanayake, for the Petitioner.

Prabhashanee Jayasekera, SC, for the Respondents.

ARGUED ON : 26.09.2025

DECIDED ON : 24.10.2025

WRT/0293/20

Page 2 of 9

JUDGEMENT

K. M. G. H. KULATUNGA, J.

1. The petitioner, by this application, is seeking to quash letter A-11 dated

21.05.2020, issued by the respondent Divisional Secretary of Ridigama.

According to A-11, the petitioner is informed that a particular land on

which an ancient ambalama was situated had been surveyed by the

surveyor of the Department of Land Commissioner, and the petitioner

is said to be in unauthorised occupation of the same. Accordingly, the

petitioner has been informed to vacate the said identified and

demarcated land situated at Ilukpitiya Junction, Maspotha, within 7

days. The petitioner’s main ground urged is that the said plot of land

inter alia was also a fact in issue in the District Court of Kurunegala

Case No. 3642/L, and the predecessor of the petitioner obtained a

declaration of title in his favour on the basis of prescriptive possession,

and the respondent is estopped from reagitating the same.

2. The said District Court action was in respect of Lot No. 2 of Plan No.

2483A made by Gunasoma Ratnayake, Licenced Surveyor. The

petitioner does claim that the said land also included the ambalama at

the Ilukpitiya Junction. The said District Court action had been initially

between the said predecessor of the petitioner, namely, his father, and

the defendant A. M. Gunarath Banda. In the course of litigation, as it

was alleged that a portion was State Land, the Hon. Attorney General

had intervened as the 2nd respondent, and issues were also framed. The

said issues and answers are as follows:

“දෙවන විත්තිය දවනුදවන් විසඳිය යුතු ප්‍රශ්න

10. දෙෙ නඩුවට අොළ විෂය වස්තුව වන්දන් අංක 816 ෙරන අවසාන ගම් සිටිදයදම් කැබලංක 816 ෙරන අවසාන ගම් සිියදම් කැබල අංක 86 දේෙ?

- ඔප්පු කර නැත.

11. ඉහත සඳහන් අංක 816 ෙරණ අවසාන ගම් සිියදම් කැබල අංක 86 1942.12.11 දවනි දින ෙරන ඉඩම් නිරවුල් කිරීදම් නිදයෝගය අංක 672 යටදත්ත ශ්‍රී ලංකා ජනරජය සතුවී ඇත්තෙ?

- ඔප්පු කර නැත.

WRT/0293/20

Page 3 of 9

12. 1930.03.12 දවනි දින ෙරන අංක 10516 ෙරන ඔප්පුයි උපදල්ඛනය සඳහන් වන්දන් අස්වැද්දුම් පිටිය නැෙැි ඉඩෙෙ?

- ඔව්.

13. අවසාන ගම් සිටියම් අංක අටසිය ොසදයහි කැබල අංක 86 සඳහන් ඉඩෙ සියඹලා දගාඩ ඇල්දල් කුඹුර නම්දේෙ?

- ඔප්පු කර නැත.

14. දවත දොදළාස් වැනි විසඳිය යුතු ප්‍රශ්නදේ සඳහන් ඉඩෙ ෙහතුන් වන විසඳිය යුතු ප්‍රශ්නය සඳහන් ඉඩෙට හාත්තපසින්ෙ අොළ දනාවන ඉඩෙක් වන්දන්ෙ?

- පැන නනොනගී.

15. පළවන විත්තිකරු විසින් රිදීගෙ උපදිසාපි දකාට්ඨාසදේ පිහිටි උප තැපැල් කාර්යාල දගාඩනැගිල්ල 1989 පහදළාස් වැනි දින විනාශ වීෙ ෙත රිදීගෙ උපදිසාපි නිදයෝගය ප්‍රකාර එකී තැපැල් කාර්යාලය පවත්තවාදගන යාෙ සඳහා දෙෙ නඩුදේ විෂය වස්තුදේ සඳහන් රජදේ ඉඩදෙන් පර්චස් 2.8 ප්‍රොණයක් පළවන විත්තිකාවට රජය විසින් බාර දී ඇත්තෙ?

- විෂය වස්තුව රජනේ ඉඩමක් බව ඔප්පු කර නැත.

16. 1993 ෙහයයි 26 දිනට් මිනුම්පිදේ කු/92/611 ඉංග්‍රීසි a b c සහ e දකාටස් රජයරජය සතුදේෙ?

- ඔප්පු කර නැත. (එම පිඹුර ලකුණු කරද නැත.)

17. ඉහත විසඳනාදේ සඳහන් මිනුම්පිදේ කු/92/611 හී සඳහන් ඉඩෙ තුළ දකාටසක පැමිණිලකරු දගාඩනැගිල්ලක් සාො ඇද්දෙ ?

- ඔප්පු කර නැත. (එම පිඹුර ලකුණු කරද නැත.)

18. දෙෙ නඩුවට අොළ දද්දපළ ශ්‍රී ලංකා ජනරජයට අයිිෙ?

- ඔප්පු කර නැත.

19. එදස් රජයට අයිි නම් රජදේ ඉඩම් ආඥා පනදත්ත එකසිය තුන්වැනි වගන්ිදේ ප්‍රකාර පැමිණිලකරුට කාලාවදරෝ ආඥා පනදත්ත විධිවිධාන බල දනාපායිෙ?

- පැන නනොනගී.

20. ඉහත විසඳනාවන් විත්තිකරුදේ වාසියට තීන්ුදේ නම් එකී නඩුව පවරා පවත්තවා දගන යාෙට හැකිෙ?

- පවත්වොනෙන යො හැකිය.”

3. Thus, the learned District Judge answered the said issues in the

negative as aforesaid on the basis that the State failed to prove, and

judgement was pronounced in favour of the plaintiff, the petitioner’s

father. According to the said judgement A-4(e), the learned District

Judge found that the respondents have failed to prove that Lot No. 86

in the Final Village Plan (“FVP”) bearing No. 816 is situated within the

WRT/0293/20

Page 4 of 9

corpus depicted in Plan P-1 and accordingly held that issue no. 10 had

not been proved. The sum total of the learned District Judge’s finding

is that the State failed to tender certified copies or originals of the

relevant plans in evidence and thus failed to establish that Lot No. 86

is State Land and also failed to tender a superimposition to establish

that it is within the corpus (Lot No. 2 of Plan No. 2483A).

4. At pages 22 and 23 of the said judgement, the learned District Judge

has further found that the FVP bearing No. 816, depicting Lot No. 86,

produced as 2V1A and 2V1B, are photocopies of which neither certified

copies nor originals have been produced. Further, the learned District

Judge has concluded that even if it is determined that Lot No. 86 is

Siyambalagodella, depicted in Plan No. 816, yet for all, the respondents

have failed to prove that the said Lot is within the boundaries of the

corpus as depicted in P-1. The relevant portion appears as follows:

“අවස්න් ෙම් පිඹුරු 816 හි අංක 86 විස්තතරවන 2වී1ඒ හො 2වී1බී නේඛණ නදකම ඡොයො පිටපත්ය. ස්හතික නහෝ මුේ පිටපත් ඉදිරිපත් කර නැත. ස්හතික පිටපත් ඉදිරිපත් කිරීමට නියම කර ඇතත්, එය ඉටු කර නැත. ඡොයො පිටපත් ද්වවිතීක නලස් බොර ෙැනීම ස්ඳහො පදනමක්ද නපන්වො දී ඇත. නමම තත්ත්වය ුල 13 වන විස්ඳනොවට ‘ඔප්පු කර නැත’ නලස් පිළිුරු නදමි. 13 වන විස්ඳනො වට නදන පිළිුර අනුව 14 වන විස්ඳනොවට නදන පිළිුර ‘පැන නනොනගි’ නව්. අනනක් අතට 816 පිඹුනේ නලොට් 86 සියඹලොනෙොඩැේල යැයි තීරණය කලත් එය පැ. 1 හි සීමො ුල පිහිටි බව ඔප්පු කර නැත.” 5. It is primarily on this basis the learned District Judge has decided,

determined, and answered the issues raised by the State. Accordingly,

a decree had been entered in favour of the plaintiff. The said judgement

was delivered as far back as 27.08.2002. It is common ground that

neither the State nor any other party appealed therefrom, and the said

judgement remains unassailed up until today. The petitioner thus

argues that in view of the declaration of title made by the learned

District Judge, which is unassailed, the State is not entitled to proceed

under the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act as the State is

estopped and/or the matter is now res judicata, as the State is bound

WRT/0293/20

Page 5 of 9

by the said judgement. As opposed to that, the position of the

respondent is that the notification P-11 is in respect of Lot No. 86 of

FVP No. 816 and that it is State Land. The respondents have, by way of

objection, motion, and affidavit, tendered to this Court that the land in

respect of which the said notice was issued is State Land and had been

resurveyed in 2010 and has now been gazetted under the Registration

of Title Act, No. 21 of 1998. The relevant Gazette Notification published

in Extraordinary Gazette No. 1677/17, dated 27.10.2010, is annexed

as “A”.

6. The relevant cadastral map bearing No. 420132 is annexed as ‘B’, and

the tenement list is annexed as document ‘C’, according to which Lots

No. 142 and No. 143 of the said tenement list marked ‘C’ and Lot No.

86 of FVP No. 816 is depicted as consisting 5.8 perches, and Lot No.

143, the balance portion of Lot No. 86 of FVP No. 816, as consisting 4.7

perches. The name of the said land is referred to as ‘aswaddume pitiya

kumbura’, now ‘watte’, and the land used is depicted as ambalama, and

the claimant is the State. Accordingly, it is argued that in view of the

said registration of lands effected by and under the Registration of Title

Act, No. 21 of 1998, Lot No. 86 of FVP No. 816 is proved conclusively to

be State Land. Further, in support, a certified copy of FVP 816 is

marked and produced as ‘D’, which confirms that Lot No. 86 contains

an ambalama. Further, according to the land settlement order marked

‘F’ and the register of settlement, the said Lot No. 86 is depicted as an

abandoned paddy land containing an ambalama and has been settled

in favour of the Crown, of which the extent is 15 perches.

7. The petitioner filed the counter-affidavit dated 10.09.2025. However,

there is no denial or a different position taken in respect of documents

“A” - “H” tendered along with the objections. Especially, the petitioner

is silent on the publication of the Gazette Notification (“A”) under

Section 12 of the Registration of Title Act.

WRT/0293/20

Page 6 of 9

8. According to the said material placed before this Court, the respondents

have satisfied this Court that the original Lot No. 86 of FVP No. 816 was

settled in favour of the state and remains so up until today.

Subsequently, with the implementation and enactment of the title

registration under the Registration of Title Act, No. 21 of 1998, the said

Lot No. 86 has been depicted and registered as Lots 142 and 143 in the

cadastral map bearing No. 420132 as State Land.

9. That being so, it is now necessary to consider the effect of the District

Court judgement and if a District Court by declaration of title can

change the character of State Land into private land. As I observe, once

the land is settled in favour of the State, under the provisions of the

Land Settlement Ordinance, a declaration by the District Court in

favour of a private party cannot in law change such character. This will

be so even if the State has appeared as a party, and due to the default

or failure to produce and prove the relevant plan, has resulted in

entering judgement in favour of the private party. The learned District

Judge in Case No. 3642/L has answered the issues raised by the State

in the negative due to the failure to prove and produce the relevant

plans and the absence of a superimposition. As I observe, the said

judgement of the District Court has not made any positive

pronouncement or finding in respect of Lot No. 86 of FVP No. 816.

Therefore, the said judgement will have no application, relevance or

bearing as to the nature of Lot No. 86 depicted therein. That being so,

the issue of estoppel or res judicata will not be relevant or applicable

when steps are taken under the State Lands (Recovery of Possession)

Act in respect of Lot No. 86 of FVP No. 816 or part thereof. If I may

further clarify, if FVP No. 816 was proved along with a superimposition,

then a declaration or a finding would have been made in respect of the

said Lot No. 86. In such circumstances, the aforesaid judgement of the

learned District Judge may have had a relevance on the current

application as asserted by the petitioner.

WRT/0293/20

Page 7 of 9

10. Even taking and considering the argument of the petitioner at its face

value, namely that the petitioner has the benefit of the District Court

judgment and declaration made in favour of his father, yet for all, the

District Court has declared the title of Lot No. 2 of Plan No. 2483A. It is

specifically mentioned and observed by the learned District Judge that

no superimposition of Lot No. 86 of FVP No. 816 has been made on the

said Plan No. 2483A. To that extent, even in the District Court there has

not been a superimposition to establish or conclude that Lot No. 86,

consisting of the ambalama, is within the corpus. Similarly, the

petitioner in this application, has not provided any evidence to establish

that the subject matter of P-11 is situated within the corpus District

Court Case No. 3642/L. To that extent, a relevant and important fact in

this application is in dispute. In Attorney General vs. Sandresh

Ravindra Karunanayake (SC/Appeal/104/2024, decided on

03.06.2025) at page 37, Samayawardhena, J., cited the case of St.

Helens Borough Council vs. Manchester Primary Care Trust &

Another [2008] EWCA Civ. 931, at para 13, where Lord Justice May

stated as follows:

“Judicial review is a flexible, but not entirely unfenced jurisdiction. This stems from certain intrinsic features. The court’s relevant function is to review decisions of statutory and other public authorities to see that they are lawful, rational and reached by a fair and due process. The public authority is normally the primary decision maker with a duty to apprehend the facts underlying the decision by a fair procedure which takes properly into account all relevant facts and circumstances. If the public authority does this, the court will not normally examine the merits of the factual determination. Accordingly, a court hearing a judicial review application normally receives evidence in writing only, and does not set about determining questions of disputed fact.”

In this regard, Ranasinghe, J. (as his Lordship then was), in Thajudeen

vs. Sri Lanka Tea Board and Another (1981) 2 SLR 471, held as

follows:

“Where the major facts are in dispute and the legal result of the facts is subject to controversy and it is necessary that the

WRT/0293/20

Page 8 of 9

questions should be canvassed in a suit where parties would have ample opportunity of examining the witnesses so that the Court would be better able to judge which version is correct, a Writ will not issue. Mandamus is pre-eminently a discretionary remedy. It is an extraordinary, residuary and suppletory remedy to be granted only when there are no other means of obtaining justice. Even though all other requirements for securing the remedy have been satisfied by the applicant, the Court will decline to exercise its discretion in his favour if a specific alternative remedy like a regular action equally convenient, beneficial, and effective is available.” 11. Accordingly, both at the District Court as well as in this Court, neither

the petitioner nor his predecessor has placed any material to establish

the fact that the land depicted as Lot No. 86 in FVP No. 816 is in fact

within the corpus of the District Court judgement. This remains so even

now. Unless the petitioner is able to satisfy this Court of that fact, he

cannot succeed in this application. Accordingly, I hold that a vital fact

is in dispute and the petitioner is not entitled to relief as prayed for.

12. In the event an adverse order is made under the State Lands (Recovery

of Possession) Act No. 07 of 1979, and the petitioner is ejected from the

said portion, still for all, Section 12 of the said Act provides for the

petitioner to vindicate his title. Section 12 provides as follows:

“12. Nothing in this Act contained shall preclude any person who has been ejected from a land under the provisions of this Act or any person claiming to be the owner thereof from instituting an action against the State for the vindication of his title thereto within six months from the date of the order of ejectment.”

Thus, the petitioner has an effective remedy to vindicate his title within

six months of such an ejectment.

13. However, it is relevant at this juncture and critical that the respondent

has placed before this Court that a Gazette Notification has been

published under Section 12 of the Registration of Title Act (document

“A”). The said Gazette Notification provides for any person to dispute or

make any claim on or before a date specified therein, namely

WRT/0293/20

Page 9 of 9

20.11.2010. The said Gazette Notification has been published on

27.10.2010. By virtue of the said proceedings and steps taken under the

Registration of Title Act, the title of the land bearing Lot No. 86 in FVP

No. 816, on which the ambalama is situated, even if it be assumed to be

within the corpus of the District Court case, is now statutorily declared

that the title is in the State and is State Land. That being so, the said

process of registration of title, under Act No. 28 of 1998, has now

superseded the said District Court judgement. To that extent, the

judgment of the District Court relied upon will not have the same effect

and would not be applicable as argued by the petitioner. In these

circumstances, the said argument advanced by the petitioner is

untenable, erroneous and misconceived, in view of the said change of

circumstances. There is no illegality, irrationality, or procedural

impropriety established. Accordingly, I hold that the ground urged for

the issuance of the writ is misconceived and untenable.

14. For the aforesaid reasons, I hold that the petitioner has failed to

establish any ground that entitles him to the relief as prayed for.

Accordingly, this application is dismissed. However, I make no order as

to costs.

Application dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL