IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Kumudu Samanthi Akmeemana,

No. 95,

Piriwena Road,

Borelesgamuwa.

1st Respondent-Petitioner

CASE NO: CA/RI/1/2018

DC NUGEGODA CASE NO: SPL/226/12

Vs.

Araliya Kankaanamge Somasiri de

Silva,

No. 94/7/B,

Pepiliyana Road,

Gangodawila,

Nugegoda.

Petitioner-Respondent

Registrar of Lands,

Land Registry,

Delkanda,

Nugegoda.

2nd Respondent-Respondent

2

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: S.N. Wijithsingh for the 1st Respondent-Petitioner.

C. Paranagama for the Petitioner-Respondent.

Decided on: 21.02.2019

Samayawardhena, J.

The petitioner-respondent (respondent) instituted these

proceedings against the respondent-petitioner (petitioner) under

summary procedure in the District Court of Nugegoda seeking

cancellation of the caveat in respect of the land relevant to this

action and recovery of damages for the wrongful registration of the

said caveat. The Court has not from the very beginning followed

the summary procedure, and as seen from the journal entry No.

3A, notice and summons have been served on the petitioner in the

first instance. The petitioner has then filed a statement of

objections seeking dismissal of respondents action and also

seeking a declaration that she is the lawful owner of the said land

and damages. The Court has thereafter fixed the matter for the

inquiry. On the date of the inquiry, the petitioner being absent

and unrepresented, the matter has been fixed for the ex parte

inquiry. After the ex parte inquiry/trial, the Court having realized

that, notwithstanding the action has initially been filed under

summary procedure, all the steps have thereafter been taken

under regular procedure, the Judgment has, as stated in the

Judgment, been pronounced as if the case had been filed under

regular procedure. The ex parte Judgment has been entered

against the petitioner and ordered the ex parte decree to be served

on her. In the ex parte decree it has specifically been stated that

3

any objections shall be notified to Court within 14 days of the

service of the decree in terms of section 86(2) of the Civil Procedure

Code. There is no dispute that the petitioner did not make the

application seeking to set aside the ex parte decree within 14 days

of the service of the decree as directed in the decree. On that

ground the Court has by order dated 09.12.2015 refused the

application of the petitioner to vacate the ex parte decree.

The petitioner has thereafter filed a Notice of Appeal against the

said order, but no Petition of Appeal has been filed to pursue the

appeal. The petitioner has not thought it fit to file a Leave to

Appeal Application or Revision Application before the High Court of

Civil Appeal against that order.

When matters remained as such, more than two years after the

aforesaid final order of the District Court, the petitioner has come

before this Court on 02.01.2018 by way of restitutio in integrum

seeking to quash all the orders of the District Court from the very

inception until the end, with a new argument not taken up before

the District Court, that the entire proceedings before the District

Court are tainted with illegality predominantly because an action

based on summary procedure cannot be converted into regular

procedure.

It must be stressed that the power to grant relief by way of

restitutio in integrum is a matter of grace and discretion. (Usoof v.

Nadarajah Chettiar1) The petitioner cannot seek restitution as of

right. There are several threshold matters to be sorted out before

addressing the core issue. There is no necessity for the present

purposes to address all of them. One such important hurdle to

1 (1958) 61 NLR 173 at 177

4

overcome is that relief by way of restitutio in integrum should be

sought for with the utmost promptitude. Vide Menchinahamy v.

Muniweera2, Babun Appu v. Simon Appu3, Sri Lanka Insurance

Corporation Limited v. Shanmugam.4 Even if we leave aside all the

other requirements, for instance, restitutio in integrum is not

available if the petitioner has another remedy open to her5, it is

crystal clear that the petitioner has not acted with the utmost

promptitude when she decided to come before this Court more

than two years after the District Court held against her. The delay

is too long by any stretch of imagination particularly because the

final order of the District Court against her was not ex parte but

inter partes.

Delay can be excused if there is an acceptable explanation. The

explanation given by the petitioner in the petition that her mother

was suffering from cancer during the material time is misleading, if

not false. She has tendered three sheets marked Z to prove it.

Those documents do not show that her mother was suffering from

a terminal illness. They only suggest that the mother was awaiting

for hysterectomy (surgical removal of the uterus) at her advanced

age. The date of the first sheet of paper, particularly, the last digit

of the year, has intentionally been erased to mislead the Court.

The date of the other document is 04.05.2017 and Reports are

normal. The explanation for delay over two years is unacceptable.

Hence, on that ground alone, the application of the petitioner is

liable to be dismissed.

2 (1950) 52 NLR 409 at 414 3 (1907) 11 NLR 44 at 45 4 [1995] 1 Sri LR 55 at 59 5 Menchinahamy v. Muniweera (1950) 52 NLR 409 at 413

5

Before I part with this Judgment, let me add the following for

completeness.

Unlike in a situation where there is patent or total want of

jurisdiction, when the Court has plenary jurisdiction to deal with a

matter and the question is invoking such jurisdiction in the right

manner, a party cannot keep silent and take up such an objection

as to procedure, if the final order is made against him. That is

against the law and against common sense. Any objection as to

latent or contingent want of jurisdiction shall be taken at the first

available opportunityvide section 39 of the Judicature Act, No.

32 of 1978, as amended. (Navaratnasingham v. Arumugam6) It is

only if want of jurisdiction is patent, the matter can be raised at

any time, even for the first time in appeal, and, in which event, the

whole proceedings including the Judgment pronounced become

nullity ab initio due to coram non judice. (Abeywickrama v.

Pathirana7, Beatrice Perera v. The Commissioner of National

Housing8)

In Dabare v. Appuhamy9 the defendants objection to dismiss the

plaintiffs action on res judicata was overruled. On appeal by the

defendant, the plaintiff submitted that the dismissal of his former

action was invalid as the judge in the former case followed the

wrong procedure in that instead of summary procedure, regular

procedure was followed. At that time, the plaintiff had not taken

objection to the wrong procedure being followed. This Court

rejecting that argument and allowing the appeal stated that

notwithstanding the former judge had followed the wrong

6 [1980] 2 Sri LR 1 at 5-6 7 [1986] 1 Sri LR 120 8 (1974) 77 NLR 361 at 366-370 9 [1980] 2 Sri LR 54

6

procedure, the order of dismissal made by him was valid since he

had jurisdiction to hear and determine the action and the plaintiff

did not take objection to the wrong procedure being followed at

that time.

For the aforesaid reasons, the petitioners application is dismissed

but without costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal