==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0047/2023

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal made in terms

of Section 331 (1) of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979

read with Article 138 (1) of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

Gamage Dharmasiri Gamage

Accused – Appellant

Vs

Hon. Attorney General

Respondent

Before : P. Kumararatnam, J.

Pradeep Hettiarachchi, J.

Counsel : Ershan Ariaratnam for the Accused – Appellant.

Anupa De Silva, DSG for the Respondent.

Inquiry on : 04.09.2025

Decided on : 14.11.2025

Court of Appeal Case No:

CA/HCC/0047/2023

High Court of Badulla Case No:

70/2014

CA/HCC/0047/2023

2 | P a g e

Pradeep Hettiarachchi, J

Judgment

1. The Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Appellant) was indicted before

the High Court of Badulla for having committed the murder of Konara Mudiyanselage

Sagara Wasantha Konara on 04.04.2010 which is an offence punishable under section

296 of the Penal Code. After a trial without a jury, the learned High Court Judge

convicted the appellant of the offence of murder under section 296 of the Penal Code

and sentenced him to death.

2. It is against the said conviction and sentence the appellant has preferred the instant

appeal. For the prosecution, 12 witnesses testified including the interpreter of the

High Court of Badulla. The appellant made a Dock Statement.

The facts germane to this case are as follows:

3. On the day of the incident, the deceased attended a musical show with PW1 and PW2.

Prior to going to the show, they had consumed liquor. They travelled in a three-

wheeler driven by the deceased. After the musical show, they set off in the same

vehicle, and on their way, they met the appellant. Upon meeting the appellant, the

deceased requested liquor, but the appellant informed them that he did not have any.

4. Thereafter, the appellant too got into the three-wheeler, and they proceeded to an

eating house run by him. At that place, the deceased gave the appellant Rs. 100 and

asked him to bring liquor. The appellant went to the back of the eating house, and as

he was getting delayed, the deceased called out to him and again asked him to bring

liquor.

5. The appellant once again informed the deceased that he did not have any liquor, but

the deceased was dissatisfied with this response. Upon alighting from the vehicle, a

verbal altercation ensued between them, during which the deceased abused the

appellant in filthy language. Thereafter, the deceased returned to the three-wheeler

CA/HCC/0047/2023

3 | P a g e

and attempted to start it, and it was at that moment that the appellant stabbed the

deceased.

6. Later, the deceased was admitted to the hospital, where he succumbed to his injuries.

There were two eyewitnesses to the incident, namely Samitha Rukshana (PW1) and

M. Pathirana (PW2). The trial commenced with the evidence of PW1. Since PW2 had

gone abroad, his evidence was taken after the other prosecution witnesses had

testified, namely PW5, PW7, PW8, PW9, PW12, PW10, PW13, and PW6.

The appellant primarily relied on two grounds of appeal.

a. The learned trial Judge failed to evaluate properly the credibility of PW1

and PW2.

b. The defence version was not considered adequately

The prosecution version:

7. As can be seen from the evidence of PW1 and PW2, they, along with the deceased,

were under the influence of alcohol at the time of the incident. PW1’s testimony

reveals that before they approached the appellant’s eating house, they had already

consumed liquor. However, the deceased, desiring to drink more, insisted that the

appellant provide him with liquor, despite the appellant’s repeated statements that he

did not have any. It is also evident that an altercation arose between the appellant and

the deceased when the appellant was unable to comply with the deceased’s demand.

8. The evidence of PW1 and PW2 further indicates that the deceased was well known to

them and that there was no animosity among them. In fact, it was the deceased who

invited the appellant to join him in his three-wheeler when they met on their way. It is

also in evidence that they had consumed liquor prior to attending the musical show.

The defense version:

9. The appellant, in his dock statement, admitted that when the deceased kicked him in

the stomach and attempted to attack him with a knife, he grabbed the knife from the

deceased and stabbed him once, but the stab missed, following which he ran to his

house and closed the door. Throughout the trial, the defence maintained that when the

deceased assaulted the appellant, a fight ensued between them, during which PW1 and

CA/HCC/0047/2023

4 | P a g e

PW2 also became involved, and in the course of that fight, the deceased may have

sustained the fatal injuries.

10. In the written submissions filed on behalf of the respondent, the learned Deputy

Solicitor General (DSG) summarized the evidence of each prosecution witness and

cited several authorities in support of the conviction. It was the position of the learned

DSG that there is absolutely no merit in the grounds of appeal, as the learned High

Court Judge had duly taken into consideration the dock statement of the appellant.

Furthermore, it was submitted that the learned High Court Judge had provided

sufficient reasons for his conclusions, and that there was strong and cogent evidence

establishing the prosecution case beyond reasonable doubt.

11. Hence, the question that needs to be determined by this Court is that whether the

incident amounts to murder, punishable in terms of Section 296 of the Penal Code as

determined by the learned High Court Judge and supported by the learned DSG, or

whether the incident amounts to culpable homicide not amounting to murder in terms

of Section 294 exception 4 of the Penal Code, punishable in terms of section 297 of

the Penal Code.

12. In other words, the point falling for consideration is whether the conviction of the

appellants under Section 294 of the Penal Code is sustainable. As discussed earlier,

the evidence clearly establishes that when the deceased asked liquor from the

appellant there was an exchange of words which resulted in altercation and during the

said altercation, the appellants attacked the deceased.

Exception 4 of Section 294 of the Penal Code reads as follows:

“Culpable homicide is not murder if it is committed without premeditation in a

sudden fight in the heat of passion upon a sudden quarrel, and without the

offender having taken undue advantage or acted in a cruel and unusual manner.

Explanation: It is immaterial in such cases which party offers the provocation or

commit the first assault.”

13. It is not possible to enunciate any general rule as to what shall be deemed to be a

sudden quarrel. It is a question of fact and whether a quarrel is sudden or not must

necessarily depend upon the proved facts of each case. For the application of

CA/HCC/0047/2023

5 | P a g e

Exception 4, it is not sufficient to show that there was a sudden quarrel and there was

no premeditation. It must further be shown that the offender has not taken undue

advantage or acted in cruel or unusual manner. The expression 'undue advantage' as

used in the provision means 'unfair advantage'."

14. In the appeal under consideration, the evidence led by the prosecution itself clearly

demonstrates that there was no element of premeditation and that the incident

occurred as a result of a sudden fight in the heat of passion upon a sudden quarrel.

The evidence reveals that the deceased and the other eyewitnesses had consumed

liquor during the daytime, and that the incident occurred unexpectedly when they

came near the appellant’s eating house.

15. Evidently, the appellant was also known to them and maintained cordial relations with

them. In fact, the deceased, together with PW1 and PW2, had consumed liquor

purchased from the appellant earlier during the day. This circumstance clearly

demonstrates that there was no prior animosity or motive on the part of the appellant

to cause harm to the deceased. The incident, therefore, appears to have occurred in the

heat of the moment, during a sudden quarrel that ensued after the deceased insisted on

obtaining liquor and verbally abused the appellant. The surrounding circumstances,

taken as a whole, strongly support the defence position that the act was committed in

the course of a sudden fight, without premeditation or malice aforethought.

16. Furthermore, there is no evidence whatsoever to suggest that the appellant had acted

with premeditation or that he had gone in search of a weapon following the quarrel.

On the contrary, the evidence indicates that the appellant attacked the deceased with a

sharp cutting weapon that was readily available within his reach. This, in my view,

shows that the appellant did not take any undue advantage of the situation. It is also

evident that all persons present at the time of the incident were under the influence of

liquor.

17. The Indian Supreme Court has laid down in Prabhakar Vithal Gholve v/s The State

of Maharashtra reported in AIR 2016 SC 2292 that if the assault on the deceased

could be said to be on account of the sudden fight without pre-meditation, in heat of

passion and upon a sudden quarrel, conviction of the appellant cannot be sustained

CA/HCC/0047/2023

6 | P a g e

under Section 302 and altered to under Section 304 Part-I of IPC. The help of

Exception 4 can be invoked if death is caused (a) without premeditation; (b) in a

sudden fight; (c) without the offender's having taken undue advantage or acted in a

cruel or unusual manner; and (d) the fight must have been with the person killed. To

bring a case within Exception 4 all the ingredients mentioned in it must be

found.(Sections 302 and 304 of the Indian Penal Code are in terms similar if not

identical to Sections 296 and 293 of the Ceylon Penal Code.)

18. In these circumstances, it is evident that the act of the appellant was committed in the

heat of passion, upon a sudden quarrel, without any premeditation, and without the

appellant taking undue advantage or acting in a cruel or unusual manner. Therefore,

the essential ingredients necessary to constitute the offence of murder under Section

296 of the Penal Code are not satisfied. The facts and circumstances of this case,

however, would clearly fall within the ambit of Exception 4 to Section 294, thereby

rendering the act of the appellant punishable under Section 297 of the Penal Code for

culpable homicide not amounting to murder. The only conclusion that can be reached

under the circumstances is that the incident was a result of a sudden quarrel and the

attack has been a result of the heat of passion. Thus, the incident occurred due to a

sudden fight which, in my view, falls under exception (4) of Section 297 of the Penal

Code.

19. Evidently, the appellant was also known to them and maintained cordial relations with

them. In fact, the deceased, together with PW1 and PW2, had consumed liquor

purchased from the appellant earlier during the day. This circumstance clearly

demonstrates that there was no prior animosity or motive on the part of the appellant

to cause harm to the deceased. The incident, therefore, appears to have occurred in the

heat of the moment, during a sudden quarrel that ensued after the deceased insisted on

obtaining liquor and verbally abused the appellant. The surrounding circumstances,

taken as a whole, strongly support the defence position that the act was committed in

the course of a sudden fight, without premeditation or malice aforethought.

20. It is also desirable to emphasize that there is no evidence to show that the appellant

took undue advantage of the situation, as the evidence demonstrates that he used a

weapon that was readily available in the vicinity to attack the deceased. Furthermore,

CA/HCC/0047/2023

7 | P a g e

there is no evidence to establish who brought the sharp-cutting weapon into the three-

wheeler.

21. It is true that the deceased sustained eight injuries, out of which two were fatal;

however, that fact alone is insufficient to conclude that the appellant acted in a cruel

or unusual manner. It is quite possible for a person, in the heat of passion or under

sudden provocation, to continue attacking another without any premeditated intention,

as a result of the emotion or sudden impulse that arises between the attacker and the

victim.

22. Section 297 of the Penal Code provides for varying degrees of punishment depending

on the intention and knowledge attributed to the offender. I am of the view that the

learned High Court Judge’s rejection of the appellant’s dock statement, on the basis

that the defence of a sudden fight was not taken when the prosecution witnesses gave

evidence, amounts to a misdirection.

23. As discussed above, the evidence of the prosecution witnesses themselves establishes

that the incident amounts to culpable homicide not amounting to murder. Had the

learned High Court Judge considered the evidence in its totality, as he was required to

do, the proper conviction should have been under Section 297 of the Penal Code.

24. It is also pertinent to mention that, even if the defense failed to raise the defense of a

sudden fight during the cross-examination of the prosecution witnesses, the trial Judge

ought to consider it if the evidence indicates that the killing occurred in the heat of

passion during a sudden quarrel. In the present case, the evidence clearly shows that

the deceased and the other eyewitnesses had consumed liquor and that the incident

arose unexpectedly when they came near the appellant’s eating house. The appellant

did not take undue advantage, and the attack appears to have occurred as a

spontaneous reaction to the deceased’s conduct.

25. Therefore, the totality of the evidence supports the view that the killing occurred in

the heat of sudden emotion, and the defense of sudden fight should have been duly

considered by the learned High Court Judge. In this regard following authority would

be of much relevance.

CA/HCC/0047/2023

8 | P a g e

26. In the case of Gamini vs. The Attorney General (2011) 1 SLR 236, it was held,

Though the accused-appellant in his defence did not take up the defence of

grave and sudden provocation, the trial Judge must consider such a plea in

favour of the accused-appellant if it emanates from the evidence of the

prosecution.

In Jayathilaka v.The Attorney General [2003] 1 SLR 107 the court held that:

“Though the accused has not taken up the defence of intoxication if such

defence arises on the evidence, it is the duty of the jury to consider the same”

27. Accordingly, I hold that the conviction and sentence imposed on the appellant cannot

be allowed to stand. The conviction and sentence are therefore set aside. I find the

appellant guilty of culpable homicide not amounting to murder, within the ambit of

Exception 4 to Section 294 of the Penal Code, on the basis of a sudden fight,

punishable under Section 297 of the Penal Code.

28. Upon consideration of the evidence for the prosecution, the evidence led for the

defence, and the evidence as a whole, there are, in my opinion, items that would

affirmatively bring the case against the appellant within Exception 4 to Section 294 of

the Penal Code, even though the appellant did not specifically plead this exception.

29. Hence, I hold that in a case of murder heard without a jury, it is imperative for the

learned High Court Judge to direct his mind to ascertain whether there are extenuating

circumstances that would bring the case against the appellant within a general or

special exception, notwithstanding that the act was committed and the imputable

intention was murderous.

30. Regrettably none of the above principles had been considered by the Learned High

Court Judge when he convicted the appellant for murder and sentenced him to death.

Such a failure to take into account the extenuating circumstances amounts to a mis-

direction resulting in a miscarriage of justice.

31. In light of the foregoing, the appellant’s conviction for murder is hereby altered to

culpable homicide not amounting to murder. The appellant is sentenced to 12 years’

rigorous imprisonment, to run from the date of conviction, namely 14.11.2022.

CA/HCC/0047/2023

9 | P a g e

Additionally, the appellant is directed to pay Rs. 200,000.00 to the heirs of the

deceased, with a default sentence of one year imprisonment in the event of non-

payment.

32. Accordingly, the appeal is partly allowed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P. Kumararatnam, J

I agree,

Judge of the Court of Appeal