1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C. A. WRIT/32/2014

In the matter of an application for an order in the nature of Writ of Certiorari under and in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

1. Dissanayake Mudiyansalage

Wijesuriya Bandara 2. Samarakoon Mudiyanselage

Bandara Menike Both of Nuwarakade, Meegahakiwula

PETITIONERS VS 1. Divisional Secretary,

Divisional Secretariat Office, Meegahakiwula 2. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department Colombo 12

RESPONDENTS

2

BEFORE : M. M. A. GAFFOOR, J. COUNSEL : Dr. Sunil Cooray for the Petitioners U. P. Senasinghe, SC for the Respondents

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS TENDERED ON : 31.08.2018 & 09.05.2017 (by the Petitioners) 04.06.2017 (by the Respondents) DECIDED ON : 14.12.2018

*****

M. M. A. GAFFOOR, J.

The Petitioners have made this application seeking an order in the nature of a

writ of Certiorari to quash the quit notice marked H dated 28.04.2011 (it

has been issued on the 2nd Petitioner) on which the 1st Respondent had made

an application to the Magistrates Court of Badulla under State Lands

(Recovery of Possession) Act No. 07 of 1979 as amended (the object of the

said Act being to make provision for recovery of possession of state lands

from persons in unauthorized possession of occupation thereof) to evict the

Petitioners from the land in respect of which the said quit notice was issued is

described in the schedule thereto, and is said to be a portion of lot 321 in Final

Village Plan No. 613. And the Petitioners also seeking an interim order staying

the execution of the ejectment order dated 10.01.2012 issued in Case bearing

No. 33752 in the Magistrates Court of Badulla.

The Petitioners in their Petition of appeal dated 04.02.2014 stated that as the

2nd Petitioner did not comply with the quit notice, the 1st Respondent

instituted an action in the Magistrates Court of Badulla (Case bearing No.

33752) against the 2nd Petitioner praying for the ejectment from land

described in the schedule to the quite notice.

3

The 2nd Petitioner further stated that she was appeared in the said case and

showed cause why she should not be ejected; and she averred that the land in

dispute called Pihillewatta alias Pihillegedara as depicted in Lot 1-12 in

Plan No. 3921 originally possessed by one D. M. Dingiri Banda and from 1988

it was possessed by one Kiri Banda who is the father of the 1st Petitioner and

the husband of the 2nd Petitioner. The Petitioners further stated that during

the period of 1988 to 1989 a portion in to the said land situated towards its

Western boundary, where a tea kiosk was locate (the kiosk had originally run

by said Dingiri Banda and after, Kiri Banda), was taken for the purpose of

widening the road. At that time a boutique room belonging to Meegahakiula

Pradeshiya Shabawa was given to the said Kiri Banda in lieu of the said tea

kiosk.

The Petitioners also stated that whilst the said Kiri Banda was in possession of

the said land as aforesaid, in or about December 1990 some 8 persons

entered the said land and put up temporary boutique rooms by dispossessing

said Kiri Banda from the said land and thereupon the said Kiri Banda instituted

possessory action No. 394/L in the District Court of Badulla against the said

persons (trespassers) and succeeded in his action as the District Court ordered

to restore the said Kiri Banda in possession of the said land by the judgment

dated 14.06.2001.

The Petitioners further stated that during the pendency of the said possessory

action, said Kiri Banda died leaving his rights to said land in dispute to the

Petitioners who continued to possess and enjoy the said (remaining portion

of) land Pihiliwatta alias Pihillegederawatta (as depicted in Lot 1 to 12 in

Plan No. 3921). The 2nd Petitioner by Deed of Gift bearing No. 7328 dated

21.04.2011 (marked as F) has gifted her rights of the said land to her son.

Thus, the Petitioners stated that at all times material to the present

4

application, the petitioners together with their predecessors have been in the

possession of the said land for well over 70 years.

With regard to the quit notice from the 1st Respondent, the Petitioners stated

that upon being summoned by the Magistrates Court of Badulla, the 2nd

Petitioner appeared and showed cause in writing (marked as I) stating inter

alia that the 1st Respondent had wrongfully and unlawfully made the said

application under the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act and claimed

that she had right to possess and occupy the said land on the basis of her

aforesaid rights of the said land. She also stated that, she later came to know

that the 1st Respondent had disclosed for the first time to the Magistrates

Court that the land in dispute had been acquired by the State under the order

published in gazette dated 31.08.1996 under Land Acquisition Act, No. 9 of

1950 and the 1st Respondent had further stated in the said submissions that

boutique room No. 9 belonging to Meegahakiwula Predheshiya Shabawa had

been given to the husband of the 2nd Petitioner as compensation for acquiring

the said land and that the said Kiri Banda had accepted the said compensation

and therefore, no lawful right had been left over to the 2nd Petitioner to make

any claim for the said land. Further the Petitioners stated that she had no

opportunity to counter to the submissions made by the 1st Respondent.

However, the learned Magistrate of Badulla by his order dated 10.01.2012

(marked L) allowed the application of the 1st Respondent directing the 2nd

Petitioner and her dependents in occupation of the said land to be ejected

forthwith from the said land.

In this application, the Petitioners averred that no compensation whatever

had been paid by the state in respect of the portion of said land which they

have been uninterruptedly possessing and occupying for a long period over 70

years, though the 1st Respondent had submitted to Magistrates Court in his

(written) submissions that compensation had been paid to the said Kiri Banda,

5

therefore, the Petitioners position is that the claim of the 1st Respondent

regard to the compensation is totally incorrect, misleading and false.

In contrast, the Respondents submitted that the said land in dispute had been

acquired by the Sate under Section 38(a) of Land Acquisition Act, by following

the regular procedure for acquisition stipulated in said Act. To show these

proper procedures, the Respondents had marked and annexed some

documents (documents marked as 1R1 to 1R5, 1R5(a) and 1R6 to

1R9).

After careful perusal of the above marked documents, it is clear that the

Respondents had duly followed the proper legal procedures on showing a

public purpose for acquisition, estimated value of the land, communication

letter of public purpose to the original owners, consent letters to the

acquisition subject to the payment of compensation and public notice under

the Section 7 of the Acquisition Act.

In this case, the Respondents main argument was that the said Kiri Banda was

never the owner of the relevant land in dispute. They strongly stated that

after taken the necessary arrangements for acquisition, an inquiry under

Section 9 of the Land Acquisition Act was held by the predecessor in office of

the 1st Respondent (Divisional Secretary), and a decision in respect of the

claims was made under Section 10(1) (a). Prior to proceeding to publish the

vesting order - 1R1, an award of compensation under Section 17 of Land

Acquisition Act was also made awarding compensation to the three Claimants

mentioned in Section 7 notice as decided by the Divisional Secretary after the

aforesaid inquiry into the claims (these notices are marked as 1R6 and 1R7).

They further stated that during these processes, the said Kiri Banda was in

possession of this land as a tenant of the aforesaid claimants and was running

a small scale temporary tea boutique thereon. Therefore, the said Kiri Banda

6

as a tenant running a business on this land, in lieu for the loss of his business

due to the acquisition of this land by the State was allocated and handed over

a shop in the newly constructed public market complex in 1986 which was

duly accepted by the said Dingiri Banda who was the original owner of the said

land and the tea kiosk. To prove this important fact, the Respondents have

annexed two certified copies of the letter reflecting the decision to allocate

and hand over a shop to the tenant are marked respectively as 1R8 and 1R9.

Therefore, the Respondents took up a position that subsequent to the

acquisition, the petitioners claiming to be heirs of Kiri Banda re-entered the

land and was trying to gain the possession of the relevant land. Thus, the 1st

Respondent took steps to evict the instant petitioners from the land in dispute

by resorting to the provisions of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act.

The Respondents above position strongly emphasized in their written

submission as follows:

the lawful owners of the relevant land had given their consent

to the said acquisition and invariably, the names of the said

claimants have been clearly indicated in 1R5, 1R5(a).

if the said Kiri Banda had even a remotest interest to the title

of the relevant land, his name would have been definitely

indicated in the aforementioned 1R5 & 1R5(a). Because any

reasonably prudent person would have promptly taken steps to

put forth any potential claim in order to be recompensed for

their property, especially, since the acquisition process is subject

to such extensive notification regime to make aware any person

having any degree of interest in the relevant lands. (Page 5 of

the Respondents written submission dated 04.06.2017)

7

Further, the Petitioners in their submission highlighted that the said Kiri Banda

had been recognized as the lawful owner by the judgment of the District Court

of Badulla in case No. 394/L. To counter this assertion, State Counsel for the

Respondents has argued that primarily, perusal of the plaint and the prayer in

the said case No. 394/L clearly reveals that it was a possessory action to

restore Kiri Banda to his possession in respect of the subject land; also the said

Kiri Banda did not pray for a declaration that he is the lawful owner and

especially, the said judgment reveals clearly that the Court never recognized

or declared the said Kiri Banda as the lawful owner, rather, it merely said that

the said Kiri Banda had enjoyed long term possession of the land and thus it is

ordered that he be resorted to his possession (vide page 26 of the said

judgment). Therefore, the Respondents strongly submitted that the said Kiri

Banda never had ownership in respect of the land subject to the instant writ

application.

In addition to these averments and arguments, Counsel for the Petitioners

had brought an important contention that the land in dispute having been

allegedly vested in the Sate on being acquired to the State under the Land

Acquisition Act, contained in the same Act, and not under the provisions

contained in a different Act which is the State Lands (Recovery of Possession)

Act. With the reference of this Courts decision in EDWIN VS TILLAKARATNE

[(2001) 3 SLR 34] he further argued that the 1st Respondent did not have any

power to take steps under the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act, in

view of the existence of Section 42 of the Land Acquisition Act.

The excerpts of the mentioned crucial decision in Edwin case as follows:

It is manifest that the procedure adopted by the 1st respondent

in seeking to evict the petitioner in pursuance of the provisions of

the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act, No. 7 of 1979 is

8

misconceived. I think Section 42(1) of the Land Acquisition Act

no. 9 of 1950 (as amended) caters to a situation such as this we

have met with in this case (Emphasized added, page at 33)

But, when the statutory scheme embodied in the relevant Act

(Land Acquisition Act) itself provides a procedure for ejectment

or remedy, it must, in the generality of cases, be taken to exclude

any other procedure or remedy. One has to follow the procedure

given in the Land Acquisition Act itself to remove the petitioner,

more so as the petitioner is not a person who was in

unauthorized occupation but, as explained above,, clearly a

person interested within the meaning of section 7 of the said

Act, This is a case where the right to eject the petitioner existed

solely by virtue of the Land Acquisition Act and where the state

acquired ownership also by virtue of that Act. And as such, rights

as had vested in the state by virtue of the acquisition under the

relevant stature can be enforced only in the way contemplated

and authorized by the same statute. The right (of ownership) and

remedy (procedure in ejectment) - after the state had acquired

the land - are both given by the same Act, so to speak, uno flatu

(in one breath), and one cannot be dissociated or disentangled

from the other.(Page at 39)

Therefore, Counsel for the Petitioners submitted that where special rights are

created by a statute and that same statute provides the special machinery for

the enforcement of those rights, it is not lawful to resort to any other

procedure for the enforcement of those rights.

However, I do not think the above decision relied upon by the Petitioners

could be equated to the case in hand, and the decision in the case of EDWIN

9

VS. TILLEKARATNE (supra) could be read subject to the relevant facts of the

instant case.

In Edwin case, the petitioner was a lessee or a tenant under the person from

whom the land was acquired in 1972 under the Land Acquisition Act and he

was still in occupation of the land in dispute where proceedings of acquisition

process had not been completed. During the pendency of the acquisition

process, the respondent brought action to evict the petitioner under the State

Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act; therefore, it is clear in this case that the

said petitioner was in a danger that he could be evicted without being

compensated according to the Land Acquisition Act, thus, the Court of Appeal

opinioned that if the respondent permitted to evict the petitioner under State

Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act, his rights would be deprived or denied

from receiving the compensation. Therefore, Court was not allowed the

respondent to act under State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act.

The following excerpt of the decision is important:

If the petitioner is permitted to be ejected by invoking the

State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act - he would be

deprived of or denied the compensation to which he is entitled

as matter of law or of right - since there is no sanction or

provision for the payment of compensation (in case he is found

to be entitled to such compensation after inquiry) under the Act

in terms of which the quit notice, sought to be quashed on this

application, had been issued by the 1st respondent (Vide

page 37 of the judgment)

Further, learned State Counsel for the Respondent also in answering the

above alleged argument of the Petitioners, he stated that Section 42 of the

10

Land Acquisition Act makes it amply clear that the provision therein have to

be resorted to only if there is resistance to taking of the possession and he

further stated that there was no resistances whatsoever either from the

lawful owners or the said Kiri Banda for the State to take possession of the

instant land. I incline to agree with this submission.

Furthermore, I wish say that the Writ Order is a matter of ex debito justitia

from this Court.

In JAYAWEERA VS. ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER OF AGRARIAN SERVICES

RATNAPURA AND ANOTHER, [(1996) 2 SLR 70], the Court of Appeal held that:

"A Petitioner who is seeking relief in an application for the issue

of a Writ of Certiorari is not entitled to relief as a matter of

course, as a matter of right or as a matter of routine. Even if he is

entitled to relief, still the Court has discretion to deny him relief

having regard to his conduct, delay, laches, waiver, submission

to jurisdiction - are all valid impediments which stand against the

grant of relief."

In COLLETTES LTD. VS. COMMISSIONER OF LABOUR AND OTHERS, [(1989) 2

SLR 06], the Court held that:

It is essential, that when a party invokes the writ jurisdiction or

applies for an injunction, all facts must be clearly, fairly and fully

pleaded before the court so that the court would be made aware

of all the relevant matters.

In the Case of MENDIS VS. LAND REFORM COMMISSION AND OTHERS,

[S.C. Appeal No. 90/2009, S.C Minutes dated 12.02.2016], Gooneratne, J.

held that:

11

Even if such grounds to issue a Writ of Certiorari and

Mandamus could be established, court has also to consider

whether the Petitioners-Petitioners are disentitled to the relief

prayed for even if the grounds of issuing a writ are satisfied,

due to the discretionary nature of the remedy. It is common

ground that courts are reluctant and had on numerous

occasions refused to issue prerogative writs if it could be

established and Petitioners are guilty of/and or disentitled to

the remedy, based on (a) Laches/undue delay (b) Willful

suppression/misrepresentation of material facts (c)

Acquiescence (d) Grave public/administrative inconvenience

(e) Futility (f) Availability of alternative remedy (g) Locus

standi. (Page at 12)

In the circumstances, I am of the opinion that the Petitioners have no valid

ground in seeking the reliefs prayed for in this writ application.

Therefore, I dismiss the application and the interim order without Costs.

Application dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL