IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIA LIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A. LA. Case No.02/2010

Board of Quazis Case No.4359

Quazi Court of AvissaweUa Case No.247/T and Case No.24?/T

In the matter of an application for leave to appeal under Article 138 of the Constitution of the Democratic Soc aHst Republic of Sri Lanka read with Section 6~;(l) of the Muslim Marriage and Divorce Act, Nc. 13 of 1951 as amended.

N.M.M. Madany,

No. 182, Ganithapura, Warakapola.

APPLICANT

M.S. Fathima F:rrsana,

No. 170/9, Avissa\iVella Road, Ruv.ranwell?,

RESPONDENT

AND BFTWEE \J

M.S. Fathima E"rsana,

No. 170/9, Avissawella Road, Ruwal1well,~.

RESPONDENT -APPELLANT .... --

N.M.M. Madany,

No. 182, Ganithdnura, Warakapola.

APPLICANT ~RESPONDENT

1

BEFORE

AND BETWEEN

N.M.M. Madarty by his Attorney M.D. Neina Mohamed

No. 182, Ganithapura, Warakapola.

APPLICANT ... RESPONDENT ... PETITIONER

... Ys ...

M.S. Fathima Farsana,

No. 170/9, Avissawella Road, Ruwanwella. ,

RESPONDENT ... APPELLANT ... RESPONDENT

AND NOW BETWEEN

M.S. Fathima F~rsana,

No. 170/9, Avissawella Road, Ruwanwella.

RESPONDENT ... APPELLANT ... RESPONDENT ... PETITIONER

... Ys ...

N.M.M. Madany by his Attorney M.D. Neina Mohamed

No. 182, Ganithapura, Warakapola.

APPLICANT ... RESPONDENT ... PETITIONER ... RESPONDENT

A.H.M.D. Nawaz,j.

2

COUNSEL

Decided on

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J.

M.YoosufNazar for the Petitioner (Appellant)

M.H.A.Raheem with M.M.Mohideen

for the Respondent (Respondent)

02.05.2019

Mter leave was granted in this matter, both Counsel agreed that the appeal could be

disposed of on the same oral arguments that were advanced in order to obtain leave. At the

stage of the argument for leave, the matter was comprehensively dealt with by both Mr.

Yoosuf Nazar and Mr. M.H.A. Raheem and I proceed to deliver the judgement based on

the oral argument and the written submissions that have been filed.

The Applicant~ Respondent~ Petitioner~ Respondent (hereinafter referred to as "the

Respondent") and the Respondent~ Appellant~ Respondent~ Petitioner above named

(hereinafter referred to as "the Appellant") began to live at Ganithapura, Warakapola at the

Respondent's house after marriage. Both sired a male child out of their wedlock. The

Respondent after marriag1t had gone to Saudi Arabia for employment. It is on record that

the Respondent found a house on rent in Ganithapura for him and the Petitioner in order

to lead the lives separately from their parents. It was averred by the husband that the wife

had left Ganithapura on 21.10.2003 and went to live with her parents at Ruwanwella. She had

not returned to Ganithapura although the Respondent had asked her to come on

20.04.2004. The Respondent husband by a writing complained to the ~uazi of AlVissawella

to summon his wife and StJn for an inquiry in Case No. 1641 and made a request of the

~uazi to persuade his wife to return to his house. On 24.07.2004 the learned ~uazi called

both parties and attempted a reconciliation by asking both parties to live together. It

would appear that where the Respondent found a house at Gal1ithapura and Grama

Niladhari issued a certificate to that effect, it is the version of the Respondent that the

Appellant wife insisted on the Respondent that he found a house in Ruwal1wella ior her to

3

reside there. No reconciliation could be effected because the Respondent could not find a

house in Ruwanwdla. The Respondent's application, Grama Niladhari's writing and the

order made on 02.08.2004 have been annexed to the pleadings and one could gather these

facts upon a perusal of all these documents.

Since the Appellant was not willing to return to Ganithapura, the Respondent next moved

to institute Talaq procec iings in the ~uazi Court in Avissawella on 02.08.2004 to divorce

the Petitioner giving the same Case No. 1641. The learned ~uazi assigned Case No. 247/T.

When this matter was caJled on 23.08.2004, the ~uazi was successful in arriving at a

settlement between the parties as the Appellant wife was willing to return to resume

cohabitation with the Respondent at Ganithapura. The divorce proceedings were shelved

and withdrawn. When the ~uazi called the case on .28.08.2004, the Respondent was

present but the Appellant was not absent. The @.uazi dismissed the said case on

28.08.2004. The Application for divorce and the order made on 23.08.2004 have all been

annexed for the perusal of, this Court.

The Appellant had not resumed cohabitation with the Respondent in Ganithapura,

Warakapola as promised by her although he had invited her several times. On 06.09.2004

he filed another application for divorce in the ~uazi Court of Avissawella in Case No. 248/T.

The ~uaz.i of Avisaawella called this case on 15.09.2004,22.09.2004 and 13.10.2004 .. As there

was no reconciliation bt~tween the parties on 27.11.2004, the ~uazi permitted the

;' Respondent to pronounce.'r alaq on her at 11.05 a.m. The application and order of the ~uazi

dated 27.l1.2004 have been marked as Zl and Z2.

The Appellant by a writil1g dated 28.11.2004 addressed to the Secretary of Board of ~uazis

preferred a Revision Application by registered post against the pronouncement of the talaq

in ~uazi Court in Case No. 247/T. In the said application the Appellant had preferred the

appeal under Sections 4 3 and 44 of the ~luslim Marriage and Divorce Act. The Board of

~uazis assigned Case No. 4010. The Board could not serve notice on the Respondent as he

was employed in Saudi Arabia. In the meantime the Board of ~uazis by registered letter

4

dated 28.03.2005 addressed to the Quazi of Avissawella asked his explanation regarding

Case No. 247/T. The QUJzi by registered letter dated 05.04.2005 gave his explanation

regarding Case No. 247/T and also regarding Case No. 248/T. In his letter the Quazi stated

Talaq Case No. 247/T wati withdrawn on 23.08.2004 and the Applicant filed a fresh Case

No. 248/T on 06.09.2004 and the case was inquired into on four dates and on completion

of the inquiry pronounceinent of the T alaq was entered aby him on 27.11.2004. This letter

is annexed hereto which was marked P6 in the Revision Application No. 4010. The Board

of Quazis treated the Appellant's writing as a petition of appeal.

A notice was served on the Respondent's father to appear in the Board of Quazis Case No.

4010. He was present in tht Board of Quazis on 18.03.2006. In Board of Quazis Case No. 4010.

Both counsel who appear~d for the respective parties agreed that this Case No. 247/T

I could be remitted back tn the Quazi of Ratnapura for a de novo inquiry and the Board agreed

and recommended to the Judicial Service Commission that that course of actiori could be

adopted and all the previous orders of the Quazi of Avissawella were set aside.

This shows that both COUDBel without knowing that Case No. 247/T has been withdrawn

and the Board too with(I(~t studying the explanation give to the Board by the' Quazi of

Avissawdla by registered post marked P7 agreed to recommend to the JSC for seIlding this

Case No. 247/T to Ratnapura Quazi for inquiry.

Thereafter this case had r'een called in the Board of Quazis on 01.07.2006 without noticing

Neither the Respondent nor his father was present

A perusal of that day's proceedings before the Board \Jf Quazis brings out the fact that a

J . new Case No. 248/Twas added together with Case No. 247/T ,vhen there was no appeal

or amendment of the appeal against the pronouncement of T alaq or any revision

application against the proceedings or the order in C;)se No. 248/T by the Respondent~

Appellant or any motion to mention this Case No. 248/T together with Case No. 247/T

and the Board made the same order as they had made on 18.03.2006.

,', , ,

:1 5

The Board of ~uazis on its own motion took up this Case on 01.07.2006 and made a

recommendation to the J SC that the above cases be heard de novo by the ~uazi of Ratnapura

and all orders given by the' ~uazi of Avissawella were set aside~ see the proceedings marked

P9 and A3 filed by the Appelant.

The Respondent argues he had been unaware of the order made on 01.07.2006 and it was

only through his father hf had come to know about these proceedings. His father, he avers,

had come to know of thj.s~through the ~uazi of RatnaplA.ra after he was summoned by the

Quazi. By a Power of Att~rney the Respondent had appointed his father as his Attorney

to file papers against the 'Jrder made on 01.07.2006. He filed a Revision Application No.

4359 on 09.01.2008 in the Board of ~uazis invoking the inherent powers of the Board to

revise, review and consider the ex parte order dated 01.0'7.206 and prayed that the order be

set aside as it was made p~:r incuriam.

In his application he stated that he had suffered a miscarriage of justice when the order of

the ~uazi of Avis saw ella a116wing him to pronounce Talaq in Case No. 248/T was set aside

without any notification to him and this was in the teeth of the fact that the Appellant had

not preferred any appeal or revision application in the Board of ~uazis and he sought the

relief that the order of the learned ~uazi in Case No. 248/T be restored.

After both parties tendered written submissions, the Board of ~uazis made order on

06.03.2010. d

The Board of ~uazis exercising its inherent power set aside its order dated 01.07.2006 as it

was made per incuriam and. also set aside all consequential orders to the above order and the

Board held that the order of the learned ~uazi of Avissawella in Case No. 248/T was legal

and binding~ see the order of the Board of ~uazis marked All filed by the Appellant.

Being aggrieved by the order of the Board of ~uazis dated 06.03.2010, the Appellant filed an

application seeking leave to appeal in terms of Section 62(1) of the Muslim Marriage and

Divorce Act (hereinafter referred to as "the Act"). Leave was granted and the Appellant's

6

')I.

l'

contention is that no exc ;.>ptional circumstances had been urged in the invocation of the

revisionary jurisdiction add the per incuriam rule has no::tpplication to the facts of the case.

The question that now anses for consideration is on the validity of the order of 01.07.2006

and whether the order of the present Board made on 06.03.2010 setting aside the order of

01.07.2006, as it was made per incuriam is justified upon an exercise of the inherent

jurisdiction of the Board,

The question of validity of the order made on 01.07.2006 in Case Nos. 247fT and 248fT

Initially the Board made an order on 01.7.2006 in respect of the above two cases without

an application in revision or appeal against the order made by the learned ~uazi of

Avissawella or any complairit in writing in respect of Case No. 248fT to the Board by the

Appellant and without nDtice served on the Respondent, violating the cardinal principle

of natural justice (audi alt,?rm partem) which postulates two elements namely;

1. That a person who will be affected by an order should have prior notke of the

matter against him; and

n. Such person be h<~ard in opposition to the order that is sought before it is made.

r Section 44(2) of the Muslim Marriage and Divorce Act is a classic example where the

principle of audi alterm partem has been given statutory effect.

Section 44(2) states:~

"No order under this section shall be made by the Board of ~uazis to the prejudice of any person

unless he has had an opportunity of being heard either in person or by his representative." ,

It is crystal clear that therr has been a failure to comply with the principle of audi alterm

partem embodied in the Nruslim Marriage and Divorce !\ct. The Board has made the order

on 01.07.2006 without having served any notice on the Respondent.

The failure to serve notice on the Respondent and the concomitant contravention of the

principle of audi alterm paru:m denuded the Board of juri~;diction and the order made in those

circumstances would bell tIll and void.

7

It is crystal clear that the1e was no application before the Board in respect of Case No.

248fT. The Board had just-nentioned Case No. 248fT along with Case No. 247fT and made

the impugned order on 01.07.2006 without jurisdiction. In fact in my view there was a

patient want of jurisdiction in the Board to have made that order.

T ennekoon C.J. in the case of Perera v. The Commissioner for National Housing 77

N.LR. 361 drew a distinC!:lon between two classes of jurisdictional defects. The first class

consists of instances wherf there is a lack of total want of jurisdiction. In the second class

the court has jurisdiction :cput is denuded competence or jurisdiction because of a failure

to comply with such procedural requirements as are necessary for the exercise of such

power by the court. T ennekoon C.J. observed that both cases constitute jurisdictional

defects that result in judgments or orders that are void.

, I would in the circumstances hold that the failure to serve notice on the Respondent

before making the order ON 01.07.2006 and the making of the order without an application

before the Board in respccJ of Case No. 248fT would constitute jurisdictional defects that

render the order made by,rhe Board null and void and of no force or avail.

After both parties tendered their written submissions, the Board of '2!.uazis exercising its

inherent powers set aside the order dated 01.07.2006 3.nd all consequential orders to the

above order and further hdd that the order of the learned '2!.uazi of Avissawella in Case No.

248fT was legal and bindi'lg- see the order marked All

The next question that of-rises for consideration is the validity of the order made on

06.03.2010.

The validity of the order made on 06.03.2010

In the case of Esabella Perera v. Emalie Perera Hamine (1990) 1 Sri LR. 03, S.N. Silva J.

(as His Lordship then was) held that a void order resulting from latent or contingent want 1 . of jurisdiction can be chJUenged in the very court itself that made it, except in few

instances where specific piocedure i.c., laid down in the Civil procedure Code or any other

law for the purpose, by invoking the inherent jurisdiction of the court.

8

;,

, )\

Gravin, S.P J. observed in the case of Mohamed v. AnJl:lmaia Chettiar(1932) 12 C.L Rec.

228 as follows:~

"No court may disregard the law of the land or purport in'any case to ignore its provisions. Where

a matter has been specially dealt with or provided for by. law there can be no question that the law

must prevail,for justice. ''1lust be done according to law. Ii is only when the law is silent that a case

for the exercise by a court of its inherent powers can arise ~'

In the case of Sivapathaiingam v. Sivasubramaniam (1990) 1 Sri LR. 378, 388 S.B.

Goonewardea A.J. (Fernando J. and Dheeraratne J. agreeing) adopted Lord Cain's decision

in the case of Roger & Others v. Comptoir D'Escompote de Pari (1871) LR3PC465.

"Now their Lordshil)S are of opinion, that one of the first and highest duties of all

Courts is to take care that the act of the Court does no injury to any of the suitors,

" and when the expression "the act of the Court" does no injury to any of the suitors,

and when the expression "the act of the Court is used, it does not mean merely the

act of the Primary Court, of any intermediate Court of Appeal, but the act of the

Court as a whole, from the lowest Court which entertains jurisdiction over the

matter to the highest Court which finally disposes of the case ... "

I '

He further observed that this case is authority for the proposition that there is an inherent

power in Courts not referable to a particular jurisdicti;n specially given by written law to

correct its errors which result in injury to a suitor. As Lord Cairns said it became the duty

of the aggregate of all tribunals from the lowest to the highest to take care that an act of

the Court does no injury to any of the suitor in the course of the whole of the proceedings,

the authority wherever redress is made must be referable to an inherent power.

I i The principle set out in tJds case was followed by Sansoni J. (with H.N.G. Fernando J.

agreeing) in the case of Sirinivasa Thero v. Sudassi Thero (1969) 3 N.LR. 31, 34 wherein

the learned judge pointed out that it is a rule that a court of justice will not permtt a suitor

to suffer by reason of its own wrongful act and that it is under a duty to use its inherent

powers to repair the injury done to a party by such act.

! " i.:.

9

In Salim v. Santhiya (1965) 69 N.LR. 490, T.S. Fernando]. referred to the case of

I Sirinivasa Thero v. Suda8si Thero(supra) where the court pointed out that it is a rule that

a court of justice will not permit a suitor to suffer by reason of its own wrongful act and

that it is under a duty to use its inherent powers to repair the injury done to a party by its

act.

In Albert v. Veeriahpillfii SharvanandaJ. in a Labour'fribunal case, said:-

"Breach of principles of ,'wtural justice goes to jurisdiction and renders an order or determination

'" made in proceedings oftvhich the person against whom the order of determination was made has

had no notice, void, As the applicant had no notice of the haring on the 2nd October 1966, the

proceedings of that date are a nullity, and the Tribunal had in the circumstances no jurisdiction to

make an order dismis,\ing the application of the appellant. Hence the order of dismissal dated 3rt

October 1966 was made without jurisdiction and the Labour Tribunal had the inherent jurisdiction

to set aside that order, bn it being satisfied that the applicant has had no notice of the hearing."

In the case of Moosajees ltd, v. Fernando(l2) H.N.G.'f<ernando, S.PJ. at page 419 stated

thus:-

, , "This Court has also exercised an inherent power to correct error in a judgment 'which has occurred

per incuriam. I doubt':Nhether this power is exercisable oilly by the Judge who had pronounced the

judgment;for if so. There would be no means of correcting even a manifest clerical error discovered

, Il in a judgment after the >?cath or retirement of the judge who pronounced it."

In Ehambaram and Another v. Rajasuriya Nagalingam, A.J. made the following

observations; "it is true that this Court has, acting in revision, modified or even vacated judgments

pronounced by it on appeal when appraised of the circumstances that the court had erred in regard to an

obvious question of fact or fla~l'; and one may go so far as to say that those are cases where, an error being

pOinted out the court without:,yanting to hear arguments wOLiId ex mero motu proceed to set the error

right". , d

10

i. In the case of Sivapathalingam v. Sivasubramaniam (supra) Goonawardena AJ. also cited

the principle set down in the case of Doraisami v. AIlnasamy Ayyar and others (1899)

ILR 23 Madras 306. It was held there that the principle of the doctrine of restitution is

that on the reversal of a judgment the law raises an obhgation on the part of the party to

the record who received the benefit of the erroneous judgment to make restitution to the

other party for what he has lost and that it is the duty of the court to enforce that

obligation unless it could be shown that restitution wQuld clearly be contrary to the real

justice of the case.

In the case of Ranmenikhamy v. Thisera (1962) 65 N.LR. 214 T.S. Fernando J. held that,

I "inasmuch as the order rejecting the appeal was made per incuriam the Court had inherent jurisdiction to

set aside its own order". I:

I ! : In this case when an appeal had been preferred to the Supreme Court it was rejected on

the ground that notice of appeal had not been served but subsequently it was proved to

the court notice in fact had been duly served.

There are several instances vvhere the courts have exercised its inherent jurisdiction.

In the case of Abeysinghe v. Abeyweera (1995) 2 Sri L.R. (1995) 2 Sri L.R.I04 RanarajaJ.

held that the proceedings being void, the person affected can apply to have same set aside

ex debito justitiae in the exercise of the inherent jurisdiction of the court.

In the case of All Ceylon Commercial and Industrial Workers Union v. Ceylon

Petroleum Corporation and Another (1995) 2 Sri L.R. 295 it was held that this Court has

not been vested with presented to this Court. The extraordinary jurisdictions of this

Court to correct its own errors and revise or modify its judgments have been set out in

numerous reported judgtinents and referred to in two other SC judgments namely

Hettiarachchi v. Seneviratne S.C. Appln. 127/94 . SCM 04.07.94 and Senarath v.

ChandraratneCommissionerofExciseS.C. Appln. 231/95 - SCM 24.08.95.

In the case of Selveduraiv. Raja (1940) 41 N.LR. 423 the Court observed: "this Court has an

inherent jurisdiction to grant; in appropriate circumstances, rdief against on in respect of even previous

11

judgments of this Court itself in order "to do justice". This Court shall exercise this jurisdiction only in

matters for which no express statutory provision has been made and in exercising this jurisdiction, this

Court to see that its decision is in harmony with sound general legal principles and is not inconsistent with

the intention of the Legislature".

Coming to more recent times that Supreme Court, inter alia, analyzed the decisions of

about seventy cases and laid down the inherent powers and the per incuriam principle in

the case ofJayaraj FernaI!dopuJJe v. DeSilva and others (1996) 1 Sri LR. 70 as follows:~

1. All courts have j~lherent power in certain circumstances to revise and order made

by them.

II. The attainment of justice is a guiding factor.

Ill. An order made on wring facts given to the prejudice of a party will be set aside

by way of remedying the injustice caused.

IV. The court has inl1erent powers n correct decisions made per incuriam. A decision

., , will be regarded ;:I.S given per incuriam if it was in ignorance of some inconsistent

statute or biding decision~wherefore some p'1rt of the decision or some step in

the reasoning on which it is based is found on that account to be demonstrably

wrong.

In the case of Ceylon Ceramics Corporation v. Pren7/J.dasa (1984) 2 Sri LR. 250 it was

held that although the ClJ'-lrt had no power to reinstate criminal appeal dismissed in the

absence of the appellant u,tless the order has been mack per incuriam yet it is not powerless

trio rectify a wrong comn'Htted by its own act. The COllrt has inherent power to repair the

injury done to a party by Its own act.

The authorities cited above undoubtedly make clear that all courts civil and criminal and

other institutions like Board of '22uazis and Labour T ri.6unals empowered to act judicially

have an inherent power to rectify their own errors.

In view of the above deciBons the Board rightly held on 06.032010 that the Board had

erred in making the order ex parte on 01.07.2006. The Bi)ard enjoys the right to rectify the

12

~' . ! error made by the previous Board and that the Board can exercise the inherent power as

there is no specific provision contained in the Act.

Board of Quazis

I hold that the order of the Board dated 06.03.2010 is based upon the exercise of its

inherent jurisdiction.

Section 839 of the Civil Procedure Code is reflective of the inherent powers. The second

i Board in its order dated 06.03.2010 (All) observed as follows:-

"when considering this application, 1 at one stage pondered about dismissing it on the grounds of

delay and on the ground of an earlier application being withdrawn-vide P ll. But as it was h3ld by

the Court of Appeal in the aforementioned case of Kariya wasam v. Pridarshini"N 0 man shall

be put in jeopardy by a: mistake by as court" and as the Petitioner has explained the delay in

paragraphs 18 and 190Y~he petitioner, 1 decided to make this order."

In view of the above, the Board, exercising its inherent powers, set aside the order of the

Board dated 01.07.2006 as it was made per incuriam. Further for the sake of clarity and for

the avoidance of ambiguity, all consequential orders to the above order are also set aside

and the Board held that the order of the learned '22uazi of Avissawella in Case No. 248/T is

legal and binding.

r, Therefore from the foregoing, the Board of ~uazis made the right order and I affirm the

order made by the Board of '22uazis and dismiss this appeal.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

13