IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Dilhan Mario De Silva,

No. 483/18,

Kirimandala Mawatha,

Narahenpita,

Colombo 5.

Petitioner

CASE NO: CA/WRIT/7/2015

Vs.

Hon. Gayantha Karunathilaka,

Minister of Lands,

Ministry of Lands and Land

Development,

Mihikatha Medura,

No. 1200/6,

Rajamalwatta Avenue,

Battaramulla.

And 4 Others

Respondents

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Anandalal Nanayakkara for the Petitioner.

Indula Ratnayake, S.C., for the 1st and 5th

Respondents.

Senany Dayaratne for the 2nd-4th Respondents.

Decided on: 25.03.2019

2

Samayawardhena, J.

The petitioner filed this application seeking to quash P9 whereby

he was informed by the Chief Engineer of the Land Branch of

the Colombo Municipal Council that the possession of the

specific part of his premises identified therein would be taken

over under the proviso (a) to section 38 of the Land Acquisition

Act, No. 9 of 1950, as amended.

It is common ground that this acquisition (along with other

acquisitions of similar nature along the Kirimandala Mawatha)

has been done for a public purposeto widen the Kirimandala

Mawatha.

Issuance of Section 2 Notice, Section 4 Notice, filing Objections

by the petitioner against the acquisition, holding an Inquiry into

those Objections etc. have all been done prior to the acquisition.

According to section 38, at any time after an Award is made

under section 17 (which is basically payment of compensation

for the land acquired), the Minister may by Order published in

the Gazette direct the acquiring officer to take possession of the

land on behalf of the State.

However proviso (a) to section 38 states that: Provided that the

Minister may make an Order under the preceding provisions of

this section (a) where it becomes necessary to take immediate

possession of any land on the ground of any urgency, at any time

after a notice under section 2 is exhibited for the first time in the

area in which that land is situated or at any time after a notice

under section 4 is exhibited for the first time on or near that land.

3

As I said earlier, not only Section 2 and 4 Notices, even the

inquiry into the objections of the petitioner had been concluded

when the Minister published the Order in the Gazette under the

proviso (a) to section 38 of the Act.

The pivotal argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner is

that there is no necessity to take immediate possession of the

land on the ground of urgency under the said proviso.

It is well known (as conceded at the argument) that Kirimandala

Mawatha is a highly congested road. Widening of Kirimandala

Mawatha to ease the heavy traffic congestion is not a new idea

vide P11, R5. Far from managing vehicular traffic, there is no at

least a pavement in most of the parts along this road for the

pedestrians to walk.

The petitioner does not dispute these facts. However his

contention is that Kirimandala Mawatha connects Elvitigala

Mawatha and Nawala Road, and widening has been proposed to

be done only up to the canal from the Elwitigala Mawatha, and

there is no plan to widen beyond the canal up to the Nawala

Road, and widening one part (from Elwitigala Mawatha to the

canal) would only result in a bottle neck at the bridge over the

canal and worsen the traffic situation.

The part of Kirimandala Mawatha from Elvitigala Mawatha to

the canal comes under the Colombo Municipal Council area

while the road beyond the canal up to Nawala Road comes

under the Kotte Municipal Council area. We do not know what

the plan of the Kotte Municipal Council is, as Kotte Municipal

Council is not a party to this application.

4

In any event, it does not prevent the Colombo Municipal Council

to take steps to widen the part of Kirimandala Mawatha which

comes under them.

It is nave to argue that as Kotte Municipal Council has not

taken steps to widen the part of Kirimandala Mawatha which

comes under them, the Colombo Municipal Council shall also

resist taking steps to widen the part of the road which comes

under them. The argument that this would worsen the traffic

congestion creating a bottle neck at the bridge is hypothetical. If

such a thing happens, that will compel the Kotte Municipal

Council to take immediate steps to follow suit if they have so far

not taken any steps in that regard.

On the other hand, as the respondents submit, between

Elvitigala Mawatha and the bridge, traffic congestion is heavier

as the Economic Centre, two schoolsSujatha Balika Vidyalaya

and Wijayawardena Maha Vidyalaya, three leading hospitals

Asiri Surgical, Oasis and Ninewells, and a temple

Sadahampaya Sri Maha Bodi Viharaya are situated, and a large

number of vehicles enter Kirimandala Mawatha from Elvitigala

Mawatha and then return the same way after visiting those

establishments, particularly the Economic Centre.

Then the learned counsel draws the attention of this Court to

R5a document tendered by the respondentsto say that there

is no urgency to take immediate possession of the land. R5

document relating to acquisition under proviso (a) of section 38

has been signed by the Acting Municipal Commissioner as the

Head of the Department of the Colombo Municipal Council on

5

30.06.2008 but approved by the Secretary of the line Ministry

nearly after 5 years, i.e. on 27.05.2013. If there was such an

urgency, the learned counsel argues that, it would not have been

lying in the line Ministry for 5 years. According the part filled

by the Head of the Department, the project of widening the road

was to be implemented between 2008 and 2009. That also

shows that this had been a matter of much concern for a long

time. It is not clear why it was signed by the Secretary of the

line Ministry after about 5 years. However it has been sent,

according to R5, to the Secretary of the relevant Ministry, i.e.

Ministry of Lands, on or about 27.05.2013. It appears that R5

has been sent with R6 dated 23.05.2013, which is the

recommendation by the Minister of the line Ministry to the

Minister of the Lands to acquire the land under the proviso (a) to

section 38 of the Act. In R6, the Minister of the line Ministry

refers to the documents sent along with a letter dated

15.12.2009 regarding this acquisition. That means, the Minister

of the line Ministry has written to the Minister of Lands in 2009

requesting the latter to acquire the lands including the part of

the petitioners land urgently. The Order under the proviso (a) to

section 38 has been published by the Minister of Lands in the

Gazette dated 11.09.2014 marked P10. By the letter marked B

dated 13.10.2014, the Secretary of the Ministry of Lands has

informed the Municipal Commissioner of the Colombo

Municipality to take urgent steps to take over possession of the

lands in accordance with the said Gazette.

For the aforesaid reasons the argument that there is no

necessity to take immediate possession of the land on the

6

ground of urgency does not commend itself to me. Hence the

main argument of the petitioner fails.

The next argument of the learned counsel is that in Section 2

and 4 Notices, public purpose has not been mentioned and

therefore acquisition is invalid. Assuming it has not been stated,

it is abundantly clear by P7 and P8 that the petitioner had no

doubt about the public purpose. He filed objections and

attended the inquiry in relation to the acquisition of the lands to

widen the Kirimandala Mawatha, Narahenpitavide heading of

P8. That argument is not sustainable at least after his attending

the inquiry. He has acquiesced to it.

The final argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner

relates to the alleged non-compliance with the provisions of the

Act. The learned counsel makes two points. One is on the basis

of R4. The learned counsel states that recommendation to

acquire under proviso (a) to section 38 has been made not by the

line Minister but by his Secretary. By R6 the Minister of the line

Ministry has recommended urgent acquisition to the Minister of

Lands. The other point is the attention of the Minister not being

drawn to the petitioners objections prior to the Minister taking

the decision. Such a specific position has been taken up only in

the written submissions. However, the petitioners objections

are two-fold. One is the personal loss when a part of his house is

to be demolished due to acquisition. The other is creation of a

bottle neck due to widening a part of the road. The second one

has already been addressed. Regarding the first one, acquisition

is necessary for the greater benefit of the community. Loss can

be minimized by way of compensation. In any event,

7

consideration of objections is beside the point when Order under

the proviso (a) to section 38 is made. As the proviso itself says it

can be done at any time after a notice under section 2 is exhibited

for the first time in the area in which that land is situated.

I dismiss the application of the petitioner with costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal