IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

CA Case No. 238/09

Attorney General

COMPLAINANT

Vs

Seethawaka Liyanage Sugathapala

1ST ACCUSED

Seethawaka Liyanage Sirisena

2ND ACCUSED

HC Hambanthota Case No. 63/00

1

AND NOW

Seethawaka Liyanage Sugathapala

1ST ACCUSED - APPELLANT

Seethawaka Liyanage Sirisena

2ND ACCUSED - APPELLANT

Vs

Attorney General

COMPLAINANT - RESPONDENT

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

DECIDED ON

Deepali Wijesundera J.

: Oeepali Wijesundera J.

L.U. Jayasuriya J.

: Indika Mallawarachchi for the

1 st Accused - Appellant.

Jeffry Zainudeen for the

2nd Accused - Appellant.

Mr. Navavi sse for the

Attorney General

: 23rd May, 2017

: 02nd June, 2017

The first and second accused appellants were indicted under

Section 296 of the Penal Code for the murder of Konegala Unangalge

Sarath after trial both were convicted for murder and sentenced to death.

On the day of the incident the deceased was seated near the

boutique owned by prosecution witness number one Gunadasa who is

the sole eye witness to this incident. He has seen the appellants riding a

bicycle and having parked the bicycle near the boutique the first appellant

had held the deceased by his hair and the second appellant had stabbed

the deceased on the back with a knife. Thereafter Gunadasa had seen

all three of them grappling on the ground. The second appellant had

dashed the deceased's bicycle on the floor. The first appellant had left

the place thereafter and the second appellant has stabbed the deceased

who had fallen into a drain.

2

,

The learned counsel for the appellants referred to injury number

seven and said that it is not a fatal injury and that this injury was caused

while the first appellant was holding the deceased by his hair. She

submitted that the other injuries were caused by the second appellant

after the first appellant left the place and walked about 40 meters away

from the deceased. The argument of the first appellant was that the

common intention ceases at the point the first accused walked away from

the scene of the crime.

The counsel for the second accused appellant was gracious

enough to inform court that the court should act upon evidence placed

before the High Court.

The learned Senior State Counsel for the respondent argued that

the accuseds are brothers and that they walked up to the deceased

together and that the second appellant stabbed him while the first

appellant held him by his hair which proves the common murderous

intention as well as premeditated intention. He referred to page 159 of

the brief and stated that the learned High Court Judge has analysed the

evidence correctly and come to the correct conclusion. He also stated

that although the defence counsel referred to injury number seven as a

non fatal injury it is not so and referred to the Judicial Medical Officer's

evidence.

It appears from the evidence placed before the High Court it is

apparent that the first appellant did not try to stop the second appellant

from stabbing the deceased. In fact he has held the deceased by his hair

while the first stab injury (injury no. 7 in the MLR) was caused. Although

3

,

he has walked away from the scene thereafter one can not say he had

no common murderous intention.

It has been held in Lallan Bhai vs State of Bihar AIR 2003 SC

333 that the requirement of statute is sharing the common intension upon

being present at the place of occurrence. Mere distancing from the scene

can not absolve the accused.

It has been held in Major Singh vs State of Punjab AIR 2003 SC

342, the contention that the appellant was physically not in a position

because of the sixty per cent, disability due to polio on his lower limbs, to

hold the hand of the deceased cannot be accepted. The fact that the

accused held the hand of one of the deceased to facilitate assailants to

assault deceased, is said to have shared common intention of committing

murder of deceased.

The injury number seven was referred to as a non fatal injury by

the appellant's counsel, on perusal of the MLR and the Judicial Medical

Officer's evidence (page 100 of the brief) it is described by the Judicial

Medical Officer as a fatal injury. The Judicial Medical Officer has not been

cross examined and his evidence has gone in unchallenged.

The second appellant has stabbed the deceased after he has

fallen, continuously which proves his murderess intention. He has also

dashed the deceased's bicycle on the ground.

I find that the learned High Court Judge has correctly analysed the

evidence placed before him and come to the correct conclusion. I see no

4

IIl !i

I r

~III

~ !i

reason to set aside a well considered judgment. Therefore the judgment

dated 25/06/2009 is affirmed. Appeal is dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

L.U. Javasuriya J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

5