CA (CPA) 129-2022

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Revision under and in terms of Article 138 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. Weerasekaraarachchige Champika Niranjaili Weerasekara Lelakada, Ginimallagaha. Petitioner Vs.

1. Dadallage Thushara Roshan

Thalhenawatte Kahawa. 2. Munideniya Ederage Jayantha

Thalhenawatte, Kahawa. Respondents AND Weerasekaraarachchige Champika Niranjaili Weerasekara Lelakada. Ginimallagaha. Petitioner Petitioner Vs. 1. Dadallage Thushara Roshan

Thalhenawatte, Kahawa.

CA (CPA) 129 - 2022 HC Balapitiya Case No. Rev. 1007-20 MC Balapitiya Case No. 21631

CA (CPA) 129-2022

2

2. Munideniya Ederage Jayatha

Thalhenawatte, Kahawa. Respondents Respondents AND NOW BETWEEN

Weerasekaraarachchige Champika Niranjali Weerasekara, Lelakada, Ginimallagaha.

Petitioner Petitioner - Petitioner

1. Dadallage Thushara Roshan

Thalhenawatte, Kahawa. 2. Munideniya Ederage Jayantha

Thalhenawatte, Kahawa. Respondents Respondents Respondents

Before : Hon. M Sampath K. B Wijeratne,J.(CA)

: Hon. M. Ahsan R. Marikar, J.(CA)

Counsel : Sanjeewa Dasanayake for the Petitioner Petitioners Petitioner instructed by Athula De Silva Argued on : 03.09.2024 Decided on : 11.10.2024

CA (CPA) 129-2022

3

M. Ahsan R. Marikar, J. (CA)

Introduction

1) The Plaintiff-Petitioner-Petitioner (hereinafter referred to as

Petitioner) preferred this revision application against the

Respondents-Respondents-Respondents (hereinafter referred to as

Respondents) against the Order delivered by the Learned High

Court Judge of Balapitiya on 26th August 2022 in a section 66

application under the Primary Courts Procedure Act (No.44 of

1979), as well as the Orders made by the Magistrate Court of

Balapitiya and the High Court of Balapitiya.

2) The said reliefs sought by the Petitioner in her petition dated 24th

October 2022 are as follows;

a) Issue notice to the Respondent-Respondent-Respondent,

b) Grant reliefs as prayed for in the Petition dated

30.04.2020,

c) Set aside the reliefs as prayed for in the statement of

objection dated 30.04.2021,

d) Set aside and/or revise and/ or vary the Order pronounced

by the High Court of Balapitiya dated 26.08.2022 in case

bearing No. Rev. 1007/20 and the judgement pronounced

by the Magistrates Court of Balapitiya dated 22/01/2020

in case bearing No. 21631,

e) Issue an interim Order staying operation of the Order dated

22.01.2020 of the Learned Magistrate of Balapitiya in case

bearing No 21631 and/or and Order to maintain Status

quo until of the final determination of this application,

f) Grant cost and

g) Such other and further reliefs,

CA (CPA) 129-2022

4

Facts of this case

3) The Petitioner had contended that she instituted action in terms of

Section 66(1) Primary Courts Procedure Act in the Magistrate

Court of Balapitiya by a private plaint. The dispute had arisen for

her to institute the said proceedings, based on the corpus referred

to in the schedule to the facts reported by the Petitioner, which

described an amalgamated land, comprised of lands called

Palewatte and Mapagurugewatte for which the Petitioner had

submitted deeds of gift, marked and produced as P1 and P3.

4) Two plans had been produced as P2 and P4 at the Magistrates

Court to identify the lands.

5) These two lands had been depicted in the sketch marked and

produced as P5. The Petitioner had brought to the notice of Court

that the Respondents had been residing adjacent to the land in

dispute until 6th March 2019, on which date the Respondents had

removed the boundary wire fence. Consequently, the Petitioner

had lodged the complaint to the Police.

6) After instituting the Primary Court proceedings the Respondents

had filed objections, claiming co-owned rights to the disputed land,

and had submitted that there was no demarcation of boundary

and further asserting that the Respondents had been in possession

of part of the land referred to as Mapagurugewatte.

7) The Learned Magistrate had dismissed the application made by the

Petitioner on the grounds that the land cannot be identified.

8) Following that, the Petitioner had filed revision papers at the High

Court of Balapitiya, where the Learned High Court Judge had also

dismissed the revision application on the ground that the disputed

land cannot be identified and the Petitioner had not claimed any

right to the land named Palewatte.

CA (CPA) 129-2022

5

9) Aggrieved by the said Order the Petitioner had filed this revision

application to obtain the reliefs prayed for, as the Learned High

Court Judge had reached an erroneous conclusion and had failed

to consider the documents and the legal fact produced by the

Petitioner.

Disputed facts

10) When this revision application was mentioned after notices were

issued to the Respondents, the Respondents had failed to appear

before this court despite several notices being issued by the

Registrar. As the Respondents were absent when the matter was

called on 6th June 2024, the case was fixed for argument on 3rd

September 2024.

11) On 3rd September 2024, the Respondents were absent and

unrepresented, and the matter was concluded based on the

argument raised by the counsel for the Petitioner.

12) In considering the facts, documents and the Orders made by the

Learned Magistrate and the High Court Judge to come to a

conclusion the following disputed points should be considered.

i) Had this dispute arisen to be considered under Section

66(1) of the Primary Courts Procedure Act?

ii) Had the Learned Magistrate and Learned High Court Judge

considered the facts related to this dispute acting under

Section 66(1) of the Primary Courts Procedure Act?

iii) If not, can the Petitioner get reliefs prayed for in the

petition dated 24th October 2022?

CA (CPA) 129-2022

6

I. Had this dispute arisen to be considered under Section 66(1)

of the Primary Courts Procedure Act?

13) Section 66(1) of the Primary Courts Procedure Act outlines, the

circumstances on which an action can be instituted under Primary

Courts Procedure.

14) Such action can be instituted by a Peace Officer following a

complaint made by a party when there is a breach of peace and a

dispute for the possession of a land.

15) The second method of instituting action is when there is a breach

of peace, in which case a party can file information by an affidavit

to the Primary Court under Section 66(1) (b) of the Primary Courts

Procedure Act.

16) In the instant action, the Petitioner had instituted the action under

the Primary Courts Procedure Act by filing private information.

17) Therefore, this inquiry had been taken up by the Magistrate and

concluded by way of written submissions.

18) On the said context, this action had been instituted pursuant to

the Primary Courts Procedure Act.

II. Had the Learned Magistrate and Learned High Court Judge

considered the facts related to this dispute acting under

Section 66(1) of the Primary Courts Procedure Act?

19) Upon perusal of the Learned Magistrates Order dated 22nd

January 2020, it is evident that the Learned Magistrate had

specified that the Petitioner had submitted a Police complaint and

had informed the Court of a breach of peace when instituting the

Primary Courts Procedure application.

CA (CPA) 129-2022

7

20) However, the Magistrate had reiterated that a breach of peace

must be established for the facts pertinent to the said action to be

considered and dismissed the case on the grounds that the

Petitioner had failed to produce evidence identifying the disputed

land or to establish possession of the land.

21) When the Petitioner filed the revision application the Learned High

Court Judge also concluded that the land in dispute could not be

identified due to the lack of defined boundaries. Therefore, the

issue of the Respondents entry onto the said land could not be

adjudicated in the instant action.

22) On the said ground, the High Court had dismissed the revision

application.

23) In light of the Learned Magistrates Order and the Learned High

Court Judges Order, it remains unclear whether both judges had

considered whether a breach of peace had occurred, thereby

justifying the Petitioners initiation of the initial Section 66

application at the Magistrates court of Balapitiya.

24) Under the provisions of Section 66 applications, the establishment

of a breach of peace is mandatory to proceed with considering the

actual possession of a party.

25) In the instant action and in the petition filed in this revision

application, the Petitioner reiterates that both the Learned

Magistrate and the High Court Judge had failed to consider the

documents filed by them to identify the land in dispute. Further,

the documents filed to support the possession of the Respondents

are dated subsequent to the institution of the Section 66

application at the Magistrates Court of Balapitiya.

26) Drawing my attention to the documents submitted by the

Petitioner, the Police complaint made on 16th March 2019 does not

refer to any breach of peace.

CA (CPA) 129-2022

8

27) This is an application made under Section 66 by the Petitioner by

way of private information. Therefore, the burden lies on the

Petitioner to prove that there was a breach of peace in the event

this dispute is not resolved. Otherwise, on its face this appears to

be a matter to be resolved at the District Court as it seems to be a

land dispute between the parties.

28) Although, neither the High Court Judge nor the Magistrate had

specifically stated that there was a breach of peace to proceed with

this matter, this Court cannot overlook the mandatory provision

provided under Primary Courts Procedure that a breach of peace

must be established to consider a Section 66 application.

29) Although the Respondents had not participated in the instant

application, this Court is of the view that the rights of the parties

should be resolved at the District Court as it seems to be a civil

dispute.

III. If not, can the Petitioner get reliefs prayed for in the petition

dated 24th October 2022?

30) As analyzed above, to institute a Section 66(1) application under

Primary Courts Procedure Act, it is mandatory that there should

be a breach of peace between the parties.

31) In the Petitioners application made to the Magistrates Court by

way of private information, no investigation reports had been

conducted by the relevant Police station. Therefore, by P11 Police

complaint no breach of peace is disclosed.

32) It is decided in the case of Ramalingam v Thangarah1;

In an inquiry into a dispute as to the possession of any land, where a breach of peace is threatened or is likely

1 [1982] 2 SLR 694

CA (CPA) 129-2022

9

under Part VII, of the Primary Courts Procedure Act, the main point for decision is the actual possession of the land on the date of the filing of the information under section 66; but, where forcible dispossession took place within two months before the date on which the said information was filed .

And in the case of Punchi nona v. Padumasena and others 2 Ismail J

articulated as follows;

The primary object of the jurisdiction so conferred is the prevention of a breach of the peace arising in respect of a dispute affecting land. The Court in exercising this jurisdiction is not involved in an investigation into title or the right to possession which is the function of a civil Court. He is required to take action of a preventive and provisional nature pending final adjudication of rights in a civil Court. It was therefore incumbent upon the Primary Court Judge to have initially satisfied himself as to whether there was a threat or likelihood of a breach of peace and whether he was justified in assuming such a special jurisdiction under the circumstances. The failure of the judge to satisfy himself initially in regard to the threat or likelihood of the breach of peace deprived him of the jurisdiction to proceed with the inquiry and this vitiates the subsequent proceedings. For these reasons, acting in revision, 1 set aside the Order of the Primary Court Judge dated 30.1.90.

33) In terms of the aforesaid decisions it has been specifically stated

that the magistrate should satisfy him or herself initially regarding

the threat or likelihood of a breach of peace. In the absence of

such a finding, action under Section 66 cannot be maintained.

34) Thus, my candid view is we cannot overlook a mandatory provision

under Section 66(1) and allow a bad precedent to follow after

making a decision.

2 [1994] 2 SLR 122

CA (CPA) 129-2022

10

35) In the said circumstances, I do not see any merit of the Petitioners

application that this case can be maintained under Primary

Courts Procedure Act.

36) Beside these facts, this being a revision application there should be

exceptional circumstances to warrant the revisionary jurisdiction

to grant reliefs to a party.

37) In the case of Caderamanpulle vs. Ceylon Paper Sacks Ltd 3 ;

The existence of exceptional circumstances is a precondition for the exercise of the powers of revision.

As Per Nanayakkara, J;

when the decided cases cited before us are carefully examined, it becomes evident in almost all the cases cited, that powers of revision had been exercised only in a limited category of situations. The existence of exceptional circumstances is a pre-condition for the exercise of the powers of revision and absence of exceptional circumstances in any given situation results in refusal of remedies

And it is decided in Hotel Galaxy Ltd v Mercantile Hotel Management Ltd 4; as per Sharvananda CJ;

It is settled law that the exercise of revisionary powers of the Appellate Court is confined to cases in which exceptional circumstances exist warranting its intervention.

38) Hence, it is clear, as settled law, that exceptional circumstances

must exist to justify the consideration of a revision application. In

3 [2001] 3 SLR 116

4 [1987] 1 SLR 006

CA (CPA) 129-2022

11

the instant action, I do not see any exceptional grounds warranting

the intervention of this Court.

CONCLUSION

39) For the reasons spelt out, I dismiss the petition dated 24th October

2022 and no cost ordered as there was no participation of the

Respondents.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

M Sampath K. B. Wijeratne, J. (CA)

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal