..

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

1

In the matter of an application for the grant

of Writs of Certiorari and Mandamus under

and in terms of Article 140 of the

Cbnstituti on.

P.L.D.A.S. Panagoda,

No: 55/2, Vijaya Place,

Vijaya Road, Gampaha.

CA (Writ) Application No: 316/2014 Vs.

PETITIONER

l(b). Warakagoda Vidanalage Pradeep Priyankara Yasarathna,

Chief Secretary, Western Province,

Chief Secretary's Office,

"Srasvathi JJ Mandiraya,

No. 32, Sri Marcus Fernand Mawatha,

Colombo 07.

2. N. Nilwala,

Secretary,

Ministry of Agriculture,

Agrarian Development,

Minor Irrigation Industries, Environment,

Arts and Cultural Affairs (Western

Province), P.O. Box 566,

Sir Marcus Fernand Mawatha,

Colombo 07.

Before

Counsel

Argued on

3. W.D.R.P. Chithrangani,

Director- Irrigation,

Western Province,

Provincial Irrigation Director's Office,

No. 25, Maligawa Road,

Rathmalana.

RESPONDENTS

P. Padman Surasena, J. (PICA)

&

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

J.C. Weliamuna, PC for the Petitioner.

Manohara de Silva, PC with Rajitha Hettiarachchi for the

Respondents.

: 14/03/2018

Written Submissions of the Petitioner filed on: 06/04/2018

Judgment on : 05/07/2018

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

2

The Petitioner has invoked the jurisdiction of this Court, inter alia, seeking

a mandate in the nature of writ of Certiorari to quash the decision of the 2nd

Respondent to interdict the Petitioner contained in letter marked P 11, and also to

quash the decision taken by the 2nd Respondent to withdraw the letter marked P13,

, '

3

as contained in document marked P 11, and a mandate in the nature of writ of

Mandamus compelling anyone or more of the Respondents to re-instate the

Petitioner as the District Irrigation Engineer-Gampaha.

When this case was taken up for argument, both parties agreed to dispose of

this application by way of written submissions. The Petitioner has filed written

submissions, however, the Respondents have not filed their written submissions as

per their undertaking.

It is observed that, initially when this application was supported, the Court

has issued an interim order suspending the operation of the decisions contained in

letters marked PII and PIS, however, the Court after inquiry, has vacated the said

interim relief on the basis of non-disclosure of all relevant and material facts to

Court by the Petitioner at the time of supporting this application.

The substantive relief sought by this Petition, is to quash the interdiction of

the Petitioner by impugned letter dated 02/08/2014, marked P 11. Taking into

consideration the findings contained in P 14, the decision to interdict the Petitioner

by the 2nd Respondent contained in letter marked Pll, has been withdrawn by the

impugned letter marked PIS. Therefore, the relief sought by the Petitioner to

quash the decision taken by the 2nd Respondent contained in the letter marked PII,

is futile at this stage.

In prayer ( e), the Petitioner is seeking a mandate in the nature of writ of

Mandamus to compel the Respondents to re-instate the Petitioner as the District

4

Irrigation Engineer- Gampaha. It is an admitted fact that the Petitioner has been re-

instated after the withdrawal of the letter of interdiction. In the written

submissions filed of record, the Petitioner states that "the letter of interdiction was

removed and the Petitioner was re-instated and thereby transferred by the letter

dated 26-05-2015 (Ref: CSO/ADMl09/34/26)". The said letter has not been

pleaded in the Petition nor was it placed before Court, subsequently. Therefore, in

the absence of any evidence in support, this Court is unable to consider the factual

position contemplated by the said letter, in order to grant the relief sought for.

In the written submissions filed of record, it is observed that the Petitioner

is presently aggrieved that after his re-instatement, back wages, increments and

other allowances amounting to over Rs. 800,000/- has not been paid to-date and

for the humiliation suffered in the eyes of the public due to the said transfer.

However, the grievances complained of as stated above, as a result of facing a

disciplinary inquiry are contended by the Petitioner for the first time in his written

submissions filed of record. It is observed that the Petition has been clearly limited

to challenge the interdiction of the Petitioner. Therefore, at this stage, the Court

cannot expand the scope of the pleadings of the Petitioner to bring in facts, which

have not been supported by the affidavit filed of record.

states,

Judicial Remedies in Public Law, Clive Lewis, Fifth Edition, at page 422,

"the fact that the applicant has suffered no prejudice as a result of the

error complained of may be a reason for refusing him a remedy. It is

,

5

necessary to keep in mind the purpose of the public law principal that has

technically been violated, and ask whether that underlying purpose has in

any event been achieved in the circumstances of the case. If so, the court

may decide that the breach has caused no injustice or prejudice and there

is no need to grant a remedy. "

Document marked P 13, reveals that the Petitioners appeal for re-

instatement has been duly considered by the 15t Respondent. Therefore, the

Petitioner has not been denied of the opportunity of having her objections in the

matter considered.

Therefore, in all the above circumstances, the Petitioners grievance has

been adequately considered and the breach complained of has been remedied by

the 15t Respondent and therefore, I see no reason for this Court to intervene in this

matter.

Petition is dismissed without costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

P. Padman Surasena, J. (PICA)

I agree.

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL