IN THE COURT OF APPEAL F THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A. Case No. CA/RI/343/2015

D.C. Homagama Case No. 9940/M

In the matter of an application for Revision/Restitutio

in Integrum in terms of Article 138 of the Constitution.

Jayasekara Liyana Arachchige IyanthaJayasekara,

No.l63/2, Pansala Junction,

Pitipana North,

Homagama.

PLAINTIFF

---Ys---

1. Ranhoti Gedara Chandana Pushpakumara,

No.365, Pitipana South,

Homagama.

2. G.D.N. Yasaratne,

No.404, Pitipana South,

Homagama.

DEFENDANTS

AND NOW BETWEEN

G.D.N. Yasaratne,

No. 404, Pitipana South,

Homagama.

2nd DEFENDANT ---PETITIONER

1

BEFORE

COUNSEL

Decided on

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, I.

jayasekara Liyana Arachchige Iyanthajayasekara,

No.163/2, Pansala Junction,

Pitipana North,

Homagama.

PLAINTIFF .. RESPONDENT

Ranhoti Gedara Chandana Pushpakumara,

No.365, Pitipana South,

Homagama.

lstDEFEN ANT .. RESPONDENT

A.H.M.D. Nawaz,j.

Thishya W eragoda with Iresh Seneviratne for the

2nd Defendant .. Petitioner

Lalith N. Gunaratne for the 1

st Defendant--Respondent

Chandima D. Senarath Yapa with Ayesha Attanayake for the Plaintiff--Respondent

11.12.2018

T

his is a revision application to set aside an ex parte judgment delivered on 23.01.2009.

After the service of the ex parte decree on the 2nd Defendant--Petitioner, he made his

efforts to have the ex parte decree vacated at a default inquiry before the District Court of

Homagama and failed. All his efforts at the appellate procedures first from the Civil

2

..

Appellate Court and ending in a leave to appeal application to the Supreme Court yielded

him no results.

Upon the leave to appeal application being refused in the Supreme Court in August 2015,

the Petitioner moved this Court to revise the ex parte judgment and decree through the

revisionary jurisdiction reposed in this Court by virtue of Article 138 of the Constitution.

Two objections to the maintainability of the revisionary application have been taken

namely 1) delay and 2) absence of exceptional circumstances.

The delay, though not specifically explained in the petition, is tangentially referred to in

several paragraphs of the petition to this Court. The Petitioner avers that he had been

concentrating his efforts on the remedial processes given to him in the event of a default in

appearance namely an application to purge default which he made before the District

Court itself and upon his failure to have the case restated, the Petitioner moved the

Provincial High Court sitting in A vissawe11a and the Supreme Court. The Petitioner failed

both in the Provincial High Court and the Supreme Court. The learned Judges of the High

Court of Civil Appeal affirmed the order of the District Court dated 30.09.2010 not to set

aside the ex parte judgment and decree on the basis that the Petitioner had not satisfied

Court that he had reasonable grounds for default.

On 13.05.2015, the Supreme Court refused to grant leave to appeal in the application of the

Petitioner filed against the judgment of the High Court of Civil Appeal. Thus the efforts

made by the Petitioner to purge his default came a cropper in all forums and it is thereafter

on 28.08.2015 that the Petitioner has moved this Court in revision.

No doubt, since the ex parte judgment of January 23, 2009, 6 years had lapsed when the

Petitioner moved this Court in revision to canvass the propriety of the ex parte judgment

and decree. Does this delay of 6 years bar this revisionary application? As is apparent on a

perusal of the record, the period of 6 years has been spent on efforts to vacate the ex parte

decree and none of the Courts have dealt with the merits of the ex parte judgment.

3

In fact, an ex parte judgment and decree could be attacked in two ways ... both procedurally

and on the merits. If the Petitioner had succeeded on the procedural aspect of offering

reasonable grounds for default in terms of Section 86(2) of the Civil Procedure Code,

needless to say that would have had the ultimate effect of annulment or setting aside of the

ex parte judgment and decree regardless of the merits. It is trite that the merits of an ex parte

decree is incapable of being attacked either before the District Court or this Court in

appeal. It is only the refusal to set aside the decree that becomes appealable. However the

merits of the ex parte judgment and decree are capable of being impugned in the revisionary

jurisdiction of this Court ... see Sirimavo Bandaranaike v. Times of Ceylon limited (1995) 1

Sri L.R at 34 ... 35; Arumugam v. Kumaraswamy(2000) BLR 55.

It is axiomatic that the revisionary jurisdiction of this Court is available to rectify manifest

error or perversity. This principle was explained by this Court succinctly in

Chandraguptha v. Gunadasa Suwandaratne C.A.L.A 508/2005 (CA minutes of

12.09.2017). In Sinnathangam v. Meeramohaideen 60 N.L.R 394 ... T.S. Fernando, J. (with

Weerasooriya, J. agreeing) opined that the Court possesses the power to set right, in

revision, an erroneous decision in an appropriate case even though an appeal has abated on

the ground of non ... compliance with technical requirements. J ayawickrama, J . (with De

Silva, J. agreeing) followed Sinnathangam v. Meeramohaideen (supra)in Soysa v. Silva

and Others (2000) 2 Sri L.R 235 and considered the case of a revision application that had

been filed in the Court of Appeal 10 years after the pronouncement of the judgment in the

District Court.

Revisionary jurisdiction of this Court under Article 138 of the Constitution is

untrammeled by delay in its invocation provided there is irreparable damage, miscarriage

of justice or perversity in the judgment of the court a quo.

The underlying theory behind revisionary jurisdiction is that there must be a manifest

error ... see Saheeda Umma and Another v. Hanifa (1999) 1 Sri L.R 150.

4

..

So in this application for revision, I would not hold the 6 year delay against the Petitioner,

provided he establishes manifest or perverse error in the ex parte judgment that was

delivered on 23rd January 2009.

The Petitioner recites several grounds for attacking the judgment on the merits.

1. lawful ownership of the 2nd Defendant to the offending car has not been established;

2. no evidence has been led in the ex parte trial to establish the liability of the 2nd

Defendant.

I have examined the ex parte judgment dated 23.01.2009 vis--a--vis the solitary evidence of

the Plaintiff and I find that it is destitute of the basic ingredients that go to make out

tortious liability. Vicarious liability has been imposed on the 2nd Defendant--Petitioner but

the judgment is devoid of material as to how this liability arises. Even if liability is capable

of being imposed on a Defendant in an accident case, the judgment must manifest

admissible evidence that establishes the liability. The pith and substance of the

conclusions of the District Judge of Homagama in her terse and laconic judgment of January

23,2009, which does not even traverse less than t 0 pages is to the following effect:--

a) The action has been instituted to recover a sum of Rs.500,OOO/-- as damages jointly

and severally from the 1st and 2nd Defendants.

b) The Plaintiff testified that she had not seen the vehicle rushing towards her but she

later came to know that it was because of the private bus bearing No.4553 she met

with the accident.

c) The 1st Defendant pleaded guilty in a criminal case instituted in the Magistrate's

Court of Homagama and upon this plea he was imposed a fine of Rs.23,OOO/--.

d) It is apparent from the conviction upon the plea that the 1st Defendant has acted

negligently on a balance of probabilities.

e) The Plaintiff has proved on a balance of probabilities that she had suffered

permanent injuries after the accident.

5

f) Therefore the Plaintiff has a right to obtain all the reliefs jointly and severally

against the 1st and 2nd Defendants.

The judgment contains nothing more than the itemized narration as given above. I am

afraid that this is hardly the kind of judgment that would pass muster in a merit based

revisionary or appellate jurisdiction.

There is no discussion as to how the voluntary plea to a charge in the Magistrate's Court

establishes negligence on the part of the 1st Defendant. What was the charge to which the

1st Defendant pleaded in the Magistrate's Court (MC)? Did that charge pertain to items of

negligence on the part of the 1st Defendant? There is no evidence given of the Magistrate's

Court proceedings and it is the Plaintiff who stated in evidence that the 1st Defendant had

pleaded in the Magistrate's Court. From this ipse dixit of the Plaintiff about what had

happened in the Magistrate's Court, the learned District Judge of Homagama concludes that

the negligence of the 1st Defendant has been established. The admissibility of what the

Plaintiff said in evidence about the MC proceedings was in question. Apart from hearsay,

the Plaintiff's evidence cannot be acted upon to conclude negligence without more. If it is

the conviction upon a voluntary plea by the 1st Defendant that the learned District Judge

was relying upon as one item of evidence to conclude negligence, the conviction per se must

have been led in evidence. Absent that item of evidence, the mere ipssima verba of the

Plaintiff that the 1st Defendant pleaded guilty in the Magistrate's Court would amount to

hearsay.

Since the learned District Judge of Homagama was laboring under a mistake as to the effect

of a guilty plea in subsequent civil proceedings, it behoves me to look at the relevancy of

convictions as evidence in subsequent civil proceedings. W hat is the status of an earlier

criminal conviction at the subsequent civil trial relating to the same facts? The answer

outlined at common law was that it had no status at all, despite the fact that the same

defendant may be involved in both sets of proceedings. This was confirmed in the leading

English case of Hollington v. Hewthorn and Co Ltd, (1943) KB 587.

6

This case arose following a collision between two vehicles in which the plaintiff's son

sustained fatal injuries. The plaintiff brought an action under the Fatal Accidents Acts

against the defendants on behalf of his son's estate. However, as his son had died, he had

no evidence of the defendant's negligence except the conviction of the second defendant

for careless driving. It was alleged that the other defendants were vicariously liable for the

action of the second defendant. It was argued that the conviction was admissible as at

least prima facie evidence of negligence, but this argument was rejected by the Court of

Appeal. In giving judgement, Lord Goddard CJ stated that:--

"The conviction is only proof that another court considered that the defendant was guilty of careless

driving. Even were it proved that it was the accident that led to the prosecution, the conviction

proves no more than what has just been stated. The court which has to try the claim for damages

knows nothing of the evidence that was before the criminal court. It cannot know what arguments

were addressed to it, or what influenced the court in arriving at its decision ...

..... .It frequently happens that a bystander has a complete and full view of an accident. It is beyond

question that, while he may inform the court of everything he saw, he may not express any opinion on

whether either or both of the parties were negligent.. .. On the trial of the issue in the civil court, the

opinion of the criminal court is equally irrelevant."

The father'S claim failed. Doubts were expressed as to the fairness of this result, and these

were reflected in the 15th Report of the Law Reform Committee on the subject of what had

come to be known as 'the rule in Hollington v. Hewthorn' --see Law Reform Committee, Cmnd

3391, 1967. In their report, the Committee stated:--

"Rationalise it how one will, the decision in the case offends one's sense of justice. The defendant

driver had been found guilty of careless driving by a court of competent jurisdiction. The onus of

proof of culpability in criminal cases is higher than in civil; the degree of carelessness to sustain a

conviction for careless driving is, if anything, greater than that required to sustain a civil cause of

action in negligence. Yet the fact that the defendant driver had been convicted of careless driving at

the time and place of the accident was held not to amount even to prima facie evidence of negligent

7

driving at that time and place. It is not easy to escape the implication in the rule in Hollington v

Hewthorn that, in the estimation of lawyers, a conviction by a criminal court is as likely to be wrong

as right. It is not, of course, spelt out in those terms in the judgement of the Court of Appeal,

although, in so far as their decision was based mainly upon the ground that the opinion of the

criminal court as to the defendant driver's guilt was as irrelevant as that of a bystander who

witnessed the accident, the gap between the implicit and the explicit was a narrow one."

The criticisms voiced by the Committee were followed by the enactment of Sections 11 ... 13

of the Civil Evidence Act 1968. So this decision of Hollington v. Hewthorn (supra)

remained firm authority from 1943 to 1968 for the proposition that a certificate of a

conviction cannot be tendered in evidence in civil proceedings until the principle was

abolished by Section 11 of the Civil Evidence Act 1968. Section 11 should be sharply

distinguished from Section 13 of the Act, the latter making a conviction conclusive

evidence of guilt in defamation cases. For the sake of comparison, let me cite Section 11

substantially.

(1) In any civil proceedings the fact that a person has been convicted of an offence by

or before any court in the United Kingdom or by a court ... martial there or

elsewhere is admissible in evidence for the purpose of proving, where to do so is

relevant, that he committed that offence, whether he was convicted on a plea of

guilty or otherwise, and whether or not he is a party to the civil proceedings, but

no conviction, other than a subsisting one shall be admissible in evidence by virtue

of this section.

(2) But the effect of proving the conviction is only that the person convicted is to be

taken to have committed the offence, unless the contrary is proved. It is open to

the convicted person to disprove his guilt by evidence led in this regard to displace

the presumption raised by the statute.

Stupple v. Royal Insurance Co Ltd, (1971) 1 QB 50 was the first case in England to deal

extensively with the effect of Section 11 of the English Civil Evidence Act. Lord Denning

Master of the Rolls held that Section 11 has a twofold effect. First, "it shifts the legal

8

.-

burden of proof," namely the burden of persuasion. Secondly, he stated, " ..... the conviction

does not merely shift the burden of proof. It is a weighty piece of evidence of itself." He

accepted that a distinction could be made. He was of the view that the weight to be given

to a conviction would depend on the circumstances, and that a plea of guilty may have less

weight than a conviction after a full trial because often defendants pleaded guilty in error,

or to save time and expense where the offence was minor, or to avoid some embarrassing

fact being made public. The Law Reform Committee took the same view. The Committee

stated in its 15th Report that a conviction after a contested trial, a conviction on a plea of

guilty, and an acquittal did not have the same probative value in relation to the question in

issue in a civil action. Later, when dealing with the defendant's burden of proof, they made

a distinction between convictions after a contested trial and convictions on a plea of

guilty. In the former case, they said that the burden was unlikely to be discharged by the

testimony of the convicted person alone; in the latter case they suggested that it could be,

if he produced a convincing explanation for his plea.

Sri Lankan cases

The Civil Evidence Act of 1968 that abolished the rule in Honington v. Hewthorn was not

drawn to the attention of the Supreme Court and our Court followed the English decision

in Sinniah Nadarajah v. Ceylon Transport Board (1978) 79 (II) N.L.R 48. Wimalaratne,

J. referred to Hollington v. Hewthorn (supra) and said: ~

"Where the driver of a vehicle is sued along with his employer for the recovery of damages resulting

from an accident in which the Plaintiff suffered injuries by being knocked down, a plea of guilt

tendered by the driver when charged in the Magistrate's Court in respect of the same accident is

relevant as an admission made by him and ought to be taken into consideration by the trial judge in

the civil suit".

Wimalaratne, J. also made reference to another passage in Hollington v. Hewthom (supra)

and stated at page 52 of the judgment.

9

:

"In Hollington v Hewthom & Co., Ltd., a conviction of one of the defendants for careless driving was

held to be inadmissible as evidence of his negligence in proceedings for damages on that ground

against him and his employer. But, "had the defendant before the Magistrate pleaded guilt" or made

some admission in giving evidence that would have supported the plaintiff's case, this could have

been proved but not the result of the trial."

So Sinniah Nadarajah ~ case followed Hollington v. Hewthorn (supra) in placing an

embargo on convictions after a contested trial but allowed the adduction of a conviction

after a guilty plea in the subsequent civil pleadings. Even if the Civil Evidence Act of 1968

had been brought home to the attention of the Supreme Court in Sinniah Nadarajah,

Wimalaratne, J. could not have sanctioned the admissibility of convictions after a

contested criminal trial in civil proceedings because Section 43 of the Evidence Ordinance

would have prohibited the reception of such convictions after a contested trial. The

exceptions to rule against judgments were firmly enacted by Sir James Fitszjames Stephen

in Sections 40, 41 and 42 and Section 43 declared that any other judgment other than those

mentioned in Sections 40,41 and 42 are irrelevant unless the existence of the judgment is a

fact in issue, or is relevant under some other provision of the Evidence Ordinance. It is for

this reason that the judgment of Wimalaratne, J. in Sinniah Nadarajah (supra) is also

justifiable because the guilty plea in the Magistrate's Court could be admitted in the civil

proceedings as an admission.

If at all a conviction after a contested trial were to become relevant, specific provisions had

to be enacted into the Evidence Ordinance like in England and it is common knowledge

that this did not happen in Sri Lanka until 1998 when the Evidence (Amendment) Act

No.33 of 1998 was legislated to bring in the necessary changes by way of Sections 41A, 41B,

and 41C. I will return to this presently after having looked at our cases since Sinniah

Nadarajah.

In De Mel and Another v. Rev. Somaloka (2002) 2 SrLL.R23, the original charge sheet

against the driver (the 2nd Defendant in the civil proceedings) had been causing death by a

rash and negligent act not amounting to murder in terms of Section 298 of the Penal Code.

10

Later it was converted to Section lSl(3)-negligent driving and Section 149(1)-failure to

avoid an accident under the Motor Traffic Act.

Weerasuriya, J. stated at p 27-"one cannot ascertain with certainty as to the items which

formed the charge if it was reduced to Section 149(1). There was also no reference in the

charge sheet to items that formed the basis for negligent driving in terms of Section lSl(3)

of the Motor Traffic Act."

The driver (the 2nd Defendant) had pleaded guilty to these charges whose ingredients were

unclear. The admission of guilt in the Magistrate's Court was produced in the District

Court trial.

The plaint in the District Court had itemized the following acts:-

a) failure to take a proper look out of the road

b) using the road without consideration

c) failure to have a proper control

d) driving ay an excessive speed

The learned District Judge held in this case that the admission of guilt was not sufficient

to establish negligence as itemized in the plaint.

The Court of Appeal held that the admission in the Magistrate's Court must specifically

relate to the items of negligence as set out in the plaint. The importance of this judgment is

that the admission of guilt in the Magistrate's Court cannot be used in the District Court

as relevant evidence if the guilty plea does not coincide with what is averred in the plaint.

One cannot apply the ratio of Sinniah Nadarajah in such a situation.

In this case under revision, the items of negligence in the Magistrate's Court could not be

ascertained since the MC record was not before the learned District Judge of Homagama. So

how the learned District Judge could relate the items of negligence to the charges in the

MC is inexplicable and she could not have concluded negligence in the civil trial as she

was quite unaware of what charge that the 1st Defendant had admitted.

11

."

Therefore one has to read the ratio of Sinniah Nadarajah (supra) subject to what has been

quite correctly stated in De Mel and Another v. Rev. Somaloka (supra). The principles of

Sinniah Nadarajah will not apply in a civil case where the plaint alleges items of

negligence but the plea tendered in the MC does not have any reference to these items of

negligence.

Marsoof, ]. followed Sinniah Nadarajah in Delungala Kotuwe Jain Nona v. Lalith

Gamage [CA Appeal 467/2003 writ], which was decided on 04.11.2004.

I would now refer to an earlier case Ranbarana v. Kusumalatha reported in (1989)

Sriskantha's Law Reports vol--VII -- part--l at p.Ol, because this case quite significantly

reiterated the need to bring in legislative changes to our Evidence Ordinance on the lines

of the Civil Evidence Act of 1968. Wijeyaratne, ]. (with Wijetunge, ]. agreeing)

emphasized the following.

1. The Civil Court must independently of the decision of the Criminal Court

investigate facts and come to its own findings.

2. A plea of guilty in a criminal case may, but a verdict of a conviction cannot be considered as

evidence in a civil case.

Section 43 of the Evidence Ordinance would render the judgment of a Criminal Court

irrelevant.

Having said the above, Wijeyaratne, J. next referred to the English case of Hollington v.

Hewthorn (supra) and observed:--

"In an action for damages arising out of a collision between two motor cars the judgment of the

criminal court convicting the defendant driver of negligent driving is not relevant. However, the case

was decided in England in 1943 prior to the Civil Evidence Act of 1968 which changed the position."

The learned judge was quite alive to the necessity to enact an identical legislation as the

Civil Evidence Act of England and quite poignantly pointed out thus:--

12

"In our country it should be seriously considered whether such an enactment is desirable as it would

save a lot of time in cases and inquiries in courts of law, tribunals and other bodies exercising

judicial and / or administrative functions."

All the cases-Hollington v. Hewthorn; Sinniah Nadarasa v. Ceylon Transport Board;

Ranbarana v. Kusumalatha; De Mel and Another v. Rev. Somaloka and Delungala

Kotuwe Jain Nona v. Lalith Gamage took the view that a previous conviction after a plea

of guilt in the Magistrate's Court is relevant in a subsequent civil proceedings. Conviction

after a full trial was a taboo. But for a conviction after a contested trial to become relevant

in civil proceedings an amendment to the Evidence Ordinance was long overdue. After all,

our Evidence Ordinance proceeds on the basis that it is inclusionary-see Section 5 of the

Evidence Ordinance. All evidence, whether it be in a trial or in an inquiry, becomes

relevant unless it is expressly excluded by a rule of evidence. A judge cannot shut out

relevant evidence unless it is excluded by an exclusionary rule of evidence. Exceptions to

these exclusionary rules of evidence are diffusely scattered in the Evidence Ordinance.

The exclusionary rule against judgments of other courts is a rule of evidence and

exceptions to this rule were found only in Sections 40, 41, 42 and 43 and Section 43 in

particular prohibited the reception of a conviction after a contested trial (a judgment in a

criminal court) in subsequent civil proceedings. This prohibition was repealed when the

legislature enacted further exceptions to the rule against judgments in 1998 with the

passage of Evidence (Amendment) Act No.33 of 1998.

Sections 41A(1) and (2) that were inserted into the Evidence Ordinance as further

exceptions to the exclusionary rule against judgments go as follows:-

1. Where in an action for defamation, the question whether any person committed a

criminal offence is a fact in issue, a judgment of any court in Sri Lanka recording a

conviction of that person for that criminal offence, being a judgment against which

no appeal has been preferred within the appealable period or which has been finally

affirmed on appeal, shall be relevant for the purpose of proving that such person

committed such offence, and shall be conclusive proof of that Fact.

13

2. Without prejudice to the provisions of subsection (I), where in any civil

proceedings, the question whether any person, whether such person is a party to

such civil proceedings or not, has been convicted of any offence by any court or

court martial in Sri Lanka, or has committed the acts constituting an offence, is a

fact in issue, a judgment or order of such court or court martial recording a

conviction of such person for such offence, being a judgment or order against which

no appeal has been preferred within the appealable period, or which has been finally

affirmed in appeal, shall be relevant for the purposes of proving that such person

committed such offence or committed the acts constituting such offence.

So the law on relevancy of previous convictions in subsequent civil proceedings boils

down to this..-Section 41A(2) of the Evidence Ordinance which reflects the spirit of Section

11 of the Civil Evidence Act of 1968 renders a conviction, regardless of whether it was

entered after a contested trial or upon a guilty plea, relevant to prove the fact in issue in

subsequent civil proceedings.

The fact in issue in the subsequent civil trial should be whether the Defendant in the civil

case committed such offence or committed the acts constituting such offence. If it is a case

of negligence, the criminal conviction becomes relevant only if the acts constituting the

offence are facts in issue in the civil trial.

Subsequent cases have considered Section 4lA(2 )..-see Wimalachandra, J. in Mahipala v.

Martin Singho (2006) 2 Sri L.R 272 and Anil Gooneratne,j. in Balapatabendige Piyadasa

v. Donjayantha Hemakumara (2002) 2 Galle Law Journal 296. I had occasion to consider

the effect of this provision in Hettiarachchige Dominic Marx Perera v. Kuruwita

Archchige jeramious Perera and Others CA Case No.713/2000 (C.A. minutes of

13.02.2017) and observed in the context of an application to admit a previous conviction as

fresh evidence that only two types of convictions become relevant under Section 41A(2).

Either it has to be an unappealed conviction or if it had been appealed, it must have been

affirmed in appeal. In the appeal before me, the 1st Defendant in the civil case who was

found guilty in the criminal case had appealed against the conviction but before the appeal

could be adjudicated upon, she passed away. The Plaintiff..-Appellant sought to lead the

14

conviction as fresh evidence under Section 773 of the Civil Procedure Code. This was a

conviction which was appealed against but not adjudicated upon. It cannot be an

unappealed conviction nor can it be said that the conviction was affirmed. Therefore I

proceeded to hold that this conviction which was left in limbo does not fall within Section

41A(2) of the Evidence Ordinance.

In Rosairo v. Basnayake 2011 (1) Sri L.R 34Abdus Salam,]. observed, "A plea of guilt is

most relevant and ought to be taken into consideration in assessing the plaintiff's case and

further plea of guilt on a charge of failing to avoid an accident by the driver cannot be

lightly ignored in considering as to whose negligence it was which caused the accident.

The learned Judge referred to Section 41( A) (2) of Evidence Ordinance.

In A. W. Pushmakumara Perera v. Wickramage David and others CA 977/1998 (CA

minutes of 27.05.2015) Dehideniya,]. following the earlier cases on the point, held that:

"When the 1st defendant pleaded guilty to the aforesaid charges of reckless and negligent

driving under the Motor Traffic Act in the Magistrate's Court, it has legal proof in the legal

sense. A conviction of charge of failure to avoid an accident under Motor Traffic Act to

become relevant in a civil action for compensation for negligent driving; the conviction

must be on the same items as complained of by the plaintiff, which constitute the

negligent driving".

So a conviction may be, either upon the plea of the accused or after trial. There is no

difference. If the accused has pleaded guilty to the charge of negligent driving, his

conviction on that charge by the criminal court becomes relevant in a subsequent civil

action. Thus, our law is in pari materia with English Law when a conviction, irrespective of

whether it is on the admission of guilt or otherwise, becomes relevant in evidence in a

subsequent civil suit. It has to be borne in mind that this relevant evidence can be repelled

or rebutted by proof of contrary evidence by the Defendant. The Defendant against whom

the previous conviction is tendered in evidence can lead contrary evidence in the civil trial

to show that he did not commit the acts that constituted the offence. The defendant could

lead rebutting evidence to establish on a preponderance of evidence that there was no

negligence on his part though the Court had found him guilty in the criminal trial--for

15

several examples of contrary evidence see Previous Conviction as Evidence of Guilt by A.

Zuckerman in 1971 L.Q.R 21.

None of the above principles were borne in mind by the learned District Judge of

Homagama when she automatically adopted the ipse dixit of the Plaintiff in the ex parte trial

that the 1st Defendant had pleaded guilty in the Magistrate's Court. There is no evidence

before the learned District Judge that the 1stDefendant had been convicted at all. But she

proceeded to infer negligence from the mere testimony which was at the most hearsay. An

ex parte judgment cannot rest on hearsay evidence .... Sheila Seneviratne v. Shereen

Dharmaratne (1997) 1 Sri L.R 76 (SC).

In an accident case, it is axiomatic that the liability of the 2nd Defendant .... Petitioner qua a

master would arise on proof of a master and servant relationship and the fact that the

driver .... the 1st Defendant was acting in the course of his employment and not on a frolic of

his own. The ex parte judgment dated 23.01.2009 is patently devoid of evidence showing

this ingredient, apart from the absence of proof on evidence that the offending 1

st

Defendant himself was negligent.

Therefore the imposition of vicarious liability on the 2nd Defendant .... Petitioner is without

any foundation. There is no discussion on the tortious liability of duty of care, breach and

quantum. These are manifest errors in the judgment that shock the conscience of court.

In the circumstances I would proceed to set aside the ex parte judgment dated 23.01.2009

and in consequence the judgment dated 30.09.2010 refusing to set aside the ex parte

judgment and decree is also set aside.

I allow this application in revision and remand this case to the District Court of Homagama

to notice the parties and conduct an inter partes trial de novo. The learned District Judge of

Homagama is directed to take all steps to conclude the trial on the same pleadings as

expeditiously as possible.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL 16