IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for

revision and/or restitutio in

integrum in terms of Article 138

and 145 of the Constitution of Sri

Lanka against an Order dated

21.09.2008 of the Learned

District Judge of Awissawella in

Case No. 275/P

Jayasinghe Mudiyanselage

Ariyawathi,

No. C/64/1, Amithirigala South,

Amithirigala.

And 11 Others.

Applicant Petitioners Under 70(2)

of the Partition Law

CASE NO: CA/RI/21/2018

DC AWISSAWELLA CASE NO: 275/P

Vs.

Kehelwala Gamaralalage Nimal

Padmabandu,

Amithirigala South,

Amithirigala.

Substituted Plaintiff-Respondent

And 3 Other Respondents

2

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: J.M. Wijebandara for the Petitioners.

Respondents are absent and unrepresented.

Decided on: 09.01.2019

Samayawardhena, J.

The 12 petitioners filed this application for revision and/or

restitutio in integrum seeking basically to set aside the Partition

Judgment entered several years ago, and the order delivered on

21.09.2018 disallowing the application of the petitioners to

dismiss the partition action under section 70(2) of the Partition

Law, No. 21 of 1977, as amended.

Out of these petitioners, the 11th and 7th petitioners are,

according to the petition, the 1st and 7th defendants in the

partition case. The other petitioners are not parties to the

partition case. They have, for the first time, made applications

under section 70(2) of the Partition Law, after the

pronouncement of the Judgment and the registration of the

Interlocutory Decree.

The 11th and 7th petitioners who have participated at the trial

with full legal representation and given 1/5th share each by the

Judgment, can, in my view, have no right to move in revision

and/or restitutio in integrum challenging the Judgment entered

many moons ago. According to the Journal Entries, they have

throughout been represented by their Attorneys until the case

was, in my view, erroneously, laid by the Court on 03.11.2006.

3

The 11th and 7th petitioners have no right to make an application

under section 70(2) of the Partition Law seeking dismissal of the

action for non-prosecution, after the 6th defendant, in terms of

the proviso to section 70(1) of the Partition Law, made an

application to substitute him as the plaintiff and permit him to

prosecute the action. Vide Peiris v. Chandrasena [1999] 3 Sri LR

153.

It is elementary that the 11th and 7th petitioners who are parties

to the action cannot, pending partition, claim prescriptive title to

the corpus.

The other petitioners (except 11th and 7th) who are not parties to

the main case, cannot come before this Court by way of restitutio

in integrum as that remedy is only available to a party to the

action. Vide Perera v. Wijewickreme (1912) 15 NLR 411,

Menchinahamy v. Muniweera (1950) 52 NLR 409, Dissanayake v.

Elisinahamy [1978/79] 2 Sri LR 118, Sri Lanka Insurance

Corporation Ltd v. Shanmugam [1995] 1 Sri LR 55, Fathima v.

Mohideen [1998] 3 Sri LR 294 at 300, Velun Singho v. Suppiah

[2007] 1 Sri LR 370.

The remaining matter is whether the other petitioners can

succeed in the revision application.

It is the position of these petitioners that according to the

Journal Entry No. 160 dated 03.11.2006, the case has been laid

by, and until 2017for more than 10 yearsno steps have been

taken to prosecute the action, and during that period they

acquired prescriptive rights to the land, and therefore the

learned District Judge was wrong to have refused their

4

applications to dismiss the action in terms of section 70(2) of the

Partition Law for non-prosecution for more than two years.

This argument presupposes that they have prescribed to the

land when they made the application under section 70(2). Who

has decided it? The petitioners themselves. This goes to show

the vanity of that argument. Can the Court, at that stage, i.e.

after entering the Interlocutory Decree but before entering the

Final Decree, have another inquiry in the partition case to

decide whether the petitioners, who are not parties to the action,

have prescribed to the land pending partition? The answer shall

necessarily be in the negative. According to that argument, the

petitioners have started prescriptive possession as soon as the

case was laid by in 2006. Is it practically possible? Have they

maintained adverse possession? Against whom have they

maintained such possession? These are only questions with no

answers.

Section 70(2) of the Partition Law, in terms of which the

petitioners made the application before the District Court, reads

as follows:

Any party in a partition action or any person claiming an

interest in the land in respect of which such action has been

instituted, may, if no steps have been taken to prosecute

the action for a period of two years, apply, by way of

motion to court, to have such action dismissed, and the

court may dismiss the action if it is satisfied that dismissal

is justified in all the circumstances of the case.

5

Dismissal is not automatic when no steps are taken for two

years. Before entering an order of dismissal, the Court shall be

satisfied that dismissal is justified in all the circumstances of

the case.

According to the Journal Entry No. 158, the Court

Commissioner to whom the commission has been sent to

prepare the final scheme of partition, has sought some

instructions from Court. According to the Journal Entry No.

159, the Court has, in the presence of the Attorneys-at-Law of

the plaintiff and the 2nd, 5th and 7th defendants, dictated the

instructions to be sent to the Court Commissioner. Then,

according to the Journal Entry No. 160, the plaintiffs Attorney-

at-Law has stated to Court that the plaintiff is absent, and

thereafter the Court has simply laid by the case. I cannot

understand why the Court laid by the case on the ground of the

absence of the plaintiff, which is not necessary when the plaintiff

is represented by his Attorney-at-Law. The plaintiffs physical

presence is absolutely not necessary on a calling date when he is

represented by his Attorney.

Section 70(1) of the Partition Law reads as follows:

No partition action shall abate by reason of the non-

prosecution thereof, but, if a partition action is not

prosecuted with reasonable diligence after the court has

endeavoured to compel the parties to bring the action to a

termination, the court may dismiss the action:

Provided, however, that in a case where a plaintiff fails or

neglects to prosecute a partition action, the court may, by

6

order, permit any defendant to prosecute that action and

may substitute him as a plaintiff for the purpose and may

make such order as to costs as the court may deem fit.

According to section 70(1), it is the duty of the Court to endeavor

to compel the parties to bring the action to a termination, which

the District Judge in this case has manifestly failed to discharge.

There is absolutely no reason for the District Judge to lay by a

partition action ex mero motu after the Interlocutory Decree is

entered. An order to lay by a case causes, especially a partition

case, enormous difficulties because when the case is to be taken

back to the roll, the party who makes the application shall take

all the troubles to serve notices to all the parties or their

registered Attorneys afresh.

In Samsudeen v. Eagle Star Insurance Co. Ltd. (1962) 64 NLR 372

at 379 it was held that:

The practice of laying by cases has been disapproved in

certain judgments of this Court and, in our opinion, this

practice should ordinarily be avoided and the practice

indicated by Bonser C.J., in Fernando v. Curera (1896) 2

NLR 29, observed. Where, however, an order laying by a

case has been made by a Court, the duty of restoring the

case to the trial roll rests, in our opinion, on the Court and

not on the parties.

Further, in my view, the petitioners cannot use section 70(2) of

the Partition Law as a shield. They can only use it as a weapon.

To put differently, the petitioners could, if no steps were taken

for two years, make an application under section 70(2) seeking

7

dismissal of the action. But, once a party takes a step to

prosecute the case, the petitioners cannot object to it on the

basis that no steps were taken for two years, as, a step has

already been taken within two years before such objection is

taken. The two-year period shall be counted from the date of

the last entry of an order or proceeding in the record1 for

otherwise it would lead to absurdity allowing one to make an

application under section 70(2) seeking dismissal of the action

at any time before the termination of the proceedings on the

basis that, at one stage of the case, no step was taken for two

years.

I refuse to issue notice on the respondents. Application is

dismissed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

1 Cf. section 402 of the Civil Procedure Code