IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Singakkara Nekathige Stephen

and 10 Others.

All Wellangalla,

Getahetta.

1st-11th Defendant-Appellants

CASE NO: CA/989/1995/F

DC AVISSAWELLA CASE NO: 17085/L

Vs.

Rev. Ambanwala Hemalankara

Thero,

Kirthi Sri Raja Maha Viharaya,

Maniyangama.

1A Plaintiff-Respondent

Singakkara Nekethige Magilin of

Welangalle, Getaheththa

12A Defendant-Respondent

And 5 Others.

12th-17th Defendant-Respondents

Website Copy

Website Copy

2

Before: A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Gamini Marapana, P.C., with Navin

Marapana, P.C., and Uchitha Wickremasinghe

for the Defendant-Appellants.

Lakshman Perera, P.C., with Shalini Fernando

for the 1A Plaintiff-Respondent.

Argued on: 17.12.2019 and 18.12.2019

Decided on: 16.01.2020

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The Plaintiff filed this action against the Defendants seeking a

declaration that the Plaintiff is the owner of the land described

in the schedule to the plaint (as the Viharadhipathy of

Maniyangama Keerthi Sri Raja Maha Viharaya), ejectment of the

Defendants therefrom, and damages. The Defendants filed the

answer seeking dismissal of the Plaintiffs action and a

declaration that the Defendants are the owners of the land

described in the schedule to the answer. After trial, the learned

District Judge of Avissawella entered Judgment for the Plaintiff.

Hence this appeal by the Defendants.

On appeal, the learned Presidents Counsel for the Defendants

mounted several arguments in challenging the Judgment of the

District Court. Among them, the one in relation to the

identification of the land in suit, in my view, goes to the root of

the dispute in this case.

Website Copy

Website Copy

3

The land in suit, according to the schedule to the plaint, is as

follows:

The land known as Nakathige Watta, formerly situated in

Maniyangama but now situated in Wellangalla in Panawal

Korale within Thunkorale in the Sabaragamuwa Province,

bounded North by Nakathige Kumbura and Minuwangala

Watta, East by Kandage Bima now Mr. Mahadewas Watta,

South by Kandage Watta alias Radage Watta, West by

Kandege Radage Kumbura alias Radage Kumbura in extent

of 2 Pelas and 5 Lahas paddy sowing area.

The Plaintiff filed the case on P1, which is the Register of Lands

owned by the Maniyangama Raja Maha Viharaya, and P2, which

is a Sannasa.

At the argument, the learned Presidents Counsel for the Plaintiff

informed Court that the Plaintiff does not rely on P2.

Then the Court is left with only P1.

In P1, Nakathige Watta has been described as follows:

North by Nakathige Kumbura, East by Kandage Bima,

South by Kandage Watta, West by Kandage Radage

Kumbura in extent of 1 Pela.

Ex facie, there is a remarkable difference in extent between

Nakathige Watta described in P1 and Nakathige Watta described

in the schedule to the plaint, notwithstanding the description of

the land in the plaint is admittedly based on P1. The former

refers to 1 Pela and the latter refers to 2 Pelas and 5 Lahas. In

Website Copy

Website Copy

4

other words, P1 refers to a land in extent of 100 Perches, and

the plaint refers to a land in extent of 250 Perches. No

explanation was given for this difference at the argument.

The Plaintiff, in his evidence, has given different extents to

Nakathige Watta, the subject matter of this case. In evidence in

chief, at page 76 of the appeal brief, the Plaintiff has one time

stated that it is about 6-7 Acres in extent. Immediately

thereafter, the Plaintiff has stated that it is 2 Pelas of paddy

sowing area in extent, which is 1 Acre and 1 Rood. Then, in

cross examination, at page 85 of the brief, the Plaintiff has

stated that it is 10 Acres in extent, and immediately thereafter,

at page 86 of the brief, that he is unable to state the extent as

there is no Plan. The extent of the land in suit is still an

unresolved issue.

The Plaintiff, in his evidence, at page 76 of the brief, has

categorically stated that Nakathige Watta, the land in suit, is a

high land and not a paddy land.

At the argument, the learned Presidents Counsel for the Plaintiff

made it abundantly clear that Nakathige Kumbura, which lies

immediately to the North of Nakathige Watta, is a paddy land,

but Nakathige Watta is a high land.

P3, which is Paraweni Nilakarayas Register for Nakathige

Panguwa, and P4, which is the Plan for Nakathige Panguwa, are

admittedly not relevant to the subject land in this case, which is

Nakathige Watta.

Website Copy

Website Copy

5

The learned Presidents Counsel for the Plaintiff, at the

argument, admitted that Nakathige Panguwa, which is a paddy

land, is subject to Panguwa, where Paraweni Nilakarayas are,

as seen from P3, Kiri Baba and Tikira, who are predecessors of

the Defendants. Nakathige Watta, according to the learned

Presidents Counsel for the Plaintiff, is not subject to Panguwa.

Citing the Full Bench decision in Appuhamy v. Menike (1917) 19

NLR 361, the learned Presidents Counsel for the Plaintiff himself

admitted that Paraveni Nilakarayas are the owners of the lands

comprised in the Panguwa. The learned Presidents Counsel for

the Defendants cited the Privy Council decision of The Attorney-

General v. Herath (1960) 62 NLR 145, which is also to the same

effect.

If this is the position, the finding of the learned District Judge in

the Judgment, at page 134 of the brief, that the Defendants are

Paraweni Nilakarayas of the land in suit is unmistakably

erroneous because Nakathige Watta is not subject to Panguwa

and the Defendants are not Paraweni Nilakarayas of Nakathige

Watta.

On the other hand, if the Defendants are Paraweni Nilakarayas

of Nakathige Watta, as the learned District Judge holds, they are

the owners of the land and therefore cannot be ejected from the

land on the basis that the Plaintiff is the owner of the land.

The learned Presidents Counsel for the Plaintiff submitted that

according to the Gemming Licence marked by the Defendants

V5, Nakathige Watta lies to the South of the Defendants land,

and this goes to prove that the Defendants have encroached

Website Copy

Website Copy

6

upon Nakathige Watta. Then what is the extent of

encroachment? Has the part of encroachment been shown by

way of a Plan in order to eject the Defendants from the

encroached portion? The answer is in the negative. This means,

even if the decree is entered in favour of the Plaintiff, the decree

will not be an executable decree.

The Defendants in their answer made a cross claim to a

declaration of title to the following land:

The land known as Guralaye Watta alias Nakathige Watta,

situated in Wellangalla in Panawal Korale within the

District of Kegalle in the Sabaragamuwa Province, bounded

North by Nakathige Kumbura alias Guralaye Kumbura and

Hal Dola which separates Minuwangala Watta, East by

Mahadewa Watta and Gal Atula, South by Siyabalagaha

Watta and Uda Watta, West by Godaparagaha Kumbura in

extent of about 10 Acres.

The learned District Judge in the Judgment, at page 137 of the

brief, has stated that the land described in the schedule to the

plaint and the land described in the schedule to the answer are

clearly two different lands.

This is the position of the learned Presidents Counsel both for

the Plaintiff as well as the Defendants. There is a consensus

among the parties on this issue.

Nakathige Watta, which is, according to the plaint, in extent of 2

Pelas and 5 Lahas of paddy sowing area and claimed by the

Plaintiff, is situated at Maniyangama. The Plaintiff also in his

Website Copy

Website Copy

7

evidence, at page 76 of the brief, stated that according to P1,

there are 21 lands situated at Maniyangama belonging to the

Plaintiffs temple, and Nakathige Watta, which is a high land, is

one of those lands.

If Nakathige Watta is a high land, I cannot understand why the

extent of land has been computed by paddy sowing area. Paddy

sowing area is taken as a method to measure the extent of

paddy lands.

Conversely, Nakathige Watta alias Guralaye Watta, which is

about 10 Acres in extent and claimed by the Defendants, is

situated at Welangalla (and not Maniyangama).

Although the Plaintiff, in the schedule to the plaint, states

Nakathige Watta was formerly situated in Maniyangama but is

now situated at Wellangalla, there is no evidence to say that the

boundaries of the two villages were changed at any particular

time so as to shift the land in suit from Maniyangama village to

Welangalla village.

The learned District Judge answered the issues raised by the

Defendants on that point in favour of the Defendants. They are

as follows:

13. (a) Has a land known as Nakathige Watta alias

Guralaye Kumbura as described in the schedule to

the answer is situated at Welangalla?

Yes.

(b) Is that land about 10 Acres in extent?

Yes.

Website Copy

Website Copy

8

14. Are the original owners of Nakathige Watta alias

Guralaye Kumbura mentioned in issue No. 13,

Singakkara Nakathige Tikira and Singakkara Nakathige

Baba Gura?

No. They are Paraweni Nilakarayas.

According to these answers, the Defendants are Paraweni

Nilakarayas of Nakathige Watta of about 10 Acres in extent

situated at Wellangalla.

This is confusion worse confounded on the part of the learned

District Judge.

It is abundantly clear that identification of the land in suit still

remains a mystery.

Admittedly, Plan P4 tendered by the Plaintiff at the trial does not

depict the land in suit. According to this Plan, Nakathige Watta

lies to the South of Dulkarayage Kumbura and

Tammattankarayage Kumbura, which is, as seen from P3,

subject to Nakathiya Panguwa.

According to P3, the Paraweni Nilakarayas of Nakathiya

Panguwa were predecessors of the Defendants. This means the

Defendants are the owners of Nakathige Panguwa. The learned

Presidents Counsel for the Plaintiff, at page 11 of his written

submission, has stated that Nakathige Watta is a totally

different land from Nakathige Panguwa which consist of

Dulkarayage Kumbura and Tammattankarayage Kumbura.

Website Copy

Website Copy

9

There is no Plan prepared by the Plaintiff to identify the land in

suit despite identification of the land being an issue from the

very beginning of the case.

In the course of the argument, the learned Presidents Counsel

for the Plaintiff was heard to say that the Defendants should

have taken out a commission to identify the land claimed by

them. I beg to disagree.

This action filed by the Plaintiff is a rei vindicatio action. There is

no burden for the Defendants to prove. The burden of proof of

the case for the Plaintiff lies, fairly and squarely, on none other

than the Plaintiff himself. Whether the Defendants prove their

cross claim is totally irrelevant. If the Defendants fail to prove

their cross claim, the cross claim can be dismissed. That will in

no way prove the Plaintiffs case. If the Plaintiff fails to prove his

case, his case will be dismissed. The proof of the cross claim in

that event has no significance. The Plaintiff, in the plaint,

expressly states that the Defendants have been in adverse

possession of the land in suit since 1964.

The law in this regard was lucidly set out by Herath J. in

Wanigaratne v. Juwanis Appuhamy (1962) 65 NLR 167 at 168 in

the following manner:

[I]n an action rei vindicatio the plaintiff should set out his

title on the basis on which he claims a declaration of title to

the land and must, in Court, prove that title against the

defendant in the action. The defendant in a rei vindicatio

action need not prove anything, still less, his own title. The

plaintiff cannot ask for a declaration of title in his favour

Website Copy

Website Copy

10

merely on the strength that the defendants title is poor or

not established. The plaintiff must prove and establish his

title.

It is clear that the Plaintiff has failed to identify the land in suit,

which is of paramount importance to succeed in this action.

It is essential in a vindicatory action, as much as in a partition

action, for the corpus to be identified with precision. This

becomes extremely important for the execution of the decree in

the event the Plaintiff succeeds. (David v. Gnanawathie [2000] 2

Sri LR 352, Gunasekera v. Punchimenika [2002] 2 Sri LR 43)

It was held in Peeris v. Savunhamy (1951) 54 NLR 207 that a

Plaintiff in a rei vindicatio action, such as this, must not only

prove dominium to the land but also the boundaries of it, by

evidence admissible in law.

In Hettiarachchi v. Gunapala [2008] 2 Appellate Law Recorder 70

at 79, it was held that if the Plaintiff fails to identify the land he

claims dominium with the land on the ground, his action must

fail.

Justice Marsoof in Latheef v. Mansoor [2010] 2 Sri LR 333 at 378

had this to say on this matter:

The identity of the subject matter is of paramount

importance in a rei vindicatio action because the object of

such an action is to determine ownership of the property,

which objective cannot be achieved without the property

being clearly identified. Where the property sought to be

vindicated consists of land, the land sought to be vindicated

Website Copy

Website Copy

'f f -

11

must be identified by reference to a survey plan or other

equally expeditious method. It is obvious that ownership

cannot be ascribed without clear identification of the

property that is subjected to such ownership, and

furthermore, the ultimate objective of a person seeking to

vindicate immovable property by obtaining a writ of

execution in terms of Section 323 of the Civil Procedure

Code will be frustrated if the fiscal to whom the writ is

addressed, cannot clearly identify the property by reference

to the decree for the purpose of giving effect to it. It is

therefore essential in a vindicatory action, as much as in a

partition action, for the corpus to be identified with

precision.

For the aforesaid reasons, I set aside the Judgment of the

District Court and allow the appeal.

The Plaintiffs action shall stand dismissed.

I make no order as to costs.

A.L. Shiran Goonera tne, J .

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Website Copy

Website Copy