IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

1

In the matter of an application against an order of the High Court under Section 331 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

CA 68 - 69/2015

HC Polonnaruwa 283/06

BEFORE: P.R. W ALGAMA J

1. Mangodage N andasiri

2. Mangodage Jayasena

ACCUSED - APPELLANTS

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General, Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12.

RESPONDENT

S. DEVIKA DE LIVERA TENNEKOON J

COUNSEL:

ARGUEDON~

Dr. Ranjith Fernando for the Accused Appellant Dilan Ratnayake D.S.G. for the Respondent

20.07.2016

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS - 01.09.2016

2

DECIDED ON: 28.10.2016

s. DEVIKA DE LIVERA TENNEKOON J

The Accused- Appellants (Hereinafter sometimes referred to as the

Appellants) were indicted in the High Court of Polonnaruwa under Section 294

and punishable under Section 296 read together with Section 32 of the Penal Code

of Sri Lanka for committing the murder of Konagedera Upali Wijenanda on or

around the 1 st of September 2000.

Consequent to a trial before a judge of the High Court the Appellants were

convicted for the offence of murder and sentenced to death.

The facts pertaining to this case may be set out briefly as follows, as per the

evidence led by the prosecution. The incident occurred around noon in the vicinity

of the village temple namely Buddhayaya Serathilakaramaya Temple when the

Head Priest was away. The "English Teacher" who had been entrusted to look after

the temple by the head priest in his absence was alerted by a person pelting stones

at the temple. The "English Teacher" thereafter requested the Appellants who were

from the adjacent land to assist in expelling this person and both the Appellants

and another person had acceded to the request and confronted this intruder. After

an exchange of abusive words the Appellants had assaulted this person with bricks

and rafters which were collected from the surrounding area. Subsequently the

deceased person had collapsed and thereafter the villagers who gathered at the

scene had tied the intruder to a tree and the Police was informed. After which the

deceased had succumbed to his injuries.

3

The postmortem report revealed that there were 23 external injuries which

mainly consisted of contusions, abrasions and lacerations and that the cause of

death was asphyxia. The learned trial Judge in evaluating the medical evidence

observed that injuries Nos.l and 2 were such that were caused by blunt objects and

were sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death within lO minutes of

such injuries.

The Appellants made their respective dock statements by which they

admitted only their presence at the scene but denied assaulting the deceased. The

learned Counsel for the Appellants in the instant application urge that the learned

Trial Judge has erred in fact and law by concluding that the mens rea / murderous

intention had been established under Section 294 of the Penal Code beyond

reasonable doubt.

The learned High Court judge has correctly observed that although it is

established that the Appellants were present at temple at the time of the incident it

cannot be said that they entered the scene with the common intention of causing

the death of the deceased. There is no evidence that either of the Appellants knew

the identity of the deceased prior to the incident. Therefore there is no evidence of

a prearranged plan or premeditation to cause death on the part of the Appellants. It

is the subsequent conduct of the Appellants which the learned High Court judge

has evaluated to have indicated that they shared the common intention to cause the

death of the deceased at the time of assaulting him.

At this stage it is pertinent to consider certain items of evidence in this case

to determine whether there is culpability for a lesser offence on the basis of grave

and sudden provocation.

4

Considering the material evidence placed before the High Court it appears

that the Appellants were provoked by the deceased pelting stones at the temple

which had gone on for some time and it was said in evidence by the PWI

Somasundara that the deceased appeared to be drunk at the time. The learned High

Court Judge has accepted that the Appellants were unarmed when arriving at the

scene. It is pertinent to note at this stage that the Appellants presence at the scene

was only because they were called upon by the "English Teacher" to assist in

expelling the intruder from the temple premises and therefore the Appellants in the

instant case cannot be held to have entertained a murderous intention.

In the case of Gamini V s. Attorney General 2011 SLR (1) 236 it was held

that 'Though the accused-appellant in his defense did not take up the defense of

grave and sudden provocation, the trial judge must consider such a plea in favor of

the accused- appellant if it emanates from the evidence of the prosecution.'

In the case of The King V. Aldon 44 NLR 575 it was held that the accused

should be given the benefit of the doubt and sentenced under the latter part of

section 297 of the Penal Code where, in a charge of murder, if the Court of

Criminal Appeal is satisfied that there was some doubt as to whether the jury were

of opinion that the accused had a murderqus intention or merely the knowledge

that what he did was likely to cause death. The King v. Ponnasamy (43 N.L.R.

359) followed.

In the case of Somapala, R. G. Vs. The Queen 72 NLR 121 it was held that

'there was misdirection in- that there was a lack of appreciation of important points

of difference between Section 293 and Section 294 of the -Penal Code. While the

act of causing death with knowledge that the act is likely to cause death is culpable

5

homicide, such an act is not murder, unless either (a) the offender intends to cause

bodily injury and has the special knowledge that the intended injury is likely to

cause the death of the person injured, or (b) the offender knows that, because the

act is so imminently dangerous, there is the high probability of causing death or an

injury likely to cause death.'

In the circumstances of the case it is clear that the Appellants did not

entertain a murderous intention and as such they must be considered under Section

297 of the Penal Code since the Appellants have not had any intention to cause the

death or to cause such bodily injury as is likely to cause the death of the deceased.

As correctly submitted by the learned Deputy Solicitor General the learned

trial judge has not addressed his judicial mind as to whether the Appellants ought

to be given the benefit of lessor culpability. In the instant case the learned Deputy

Solicitor General does not object to altering the conviction of the Appellants by

convicting the Appellants for the lesser offence under Section 297 of the Penal

Code.

In the circumstances this Court takes the opportunity to reiterate and

emphasis the principle accepted by the Court of Criminal Appeal of this Country

that the mitigatory plea of gave and sudden provocation must be considered by the

trial Court in favor of he accused if it emanates from the evidence of the

prosecution even if it is not been taken as a defense.

For the above reasons I set aside the conviction of murder and the death

sentence and substitute a conviction of culpable homicide not amounting to murder

on the basis of a lack of murderous intention by the Appellants.

f I / I'

y,-----/ /

6

Considering the above I sentence the 1 s l and 2nd Appellants to a term of 7

years rigorous imprisonment each on the offence of culpable homicide not

amounting to murder which should be implemented from the date of conviction in

the High Court which is from 26.04.2015.

Further I order a fine of Rs. 10,0001- on each of the Appellants and in default

a term of 3 months simple imprisonment.

The learned High Court judge is directed to lssue a fresh committal

indicating the sentence imposed by this Court.

Appeal allowed.

JUDGE OF THE COUTR OF APPEAL

P.R. WALGAMAJ

I agree

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL