IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Wijeratne Mudiyanselage Dona

Theresa Jayawardena,

No. 22, Heyyanthuduwa.

More correctly

No. 22C, Sapugaskanda,

Makola.

1st Defendant-Petitioner

CA Case No: CA/RI/6/2017

DC Gampaha Case No: 35998/P

Vs.

Kaluthanthrige Dona

Madurawathie,

No. 22, Sapugaskanda,

Makola.

Substituted Plaintiff-Respondent

2B. Egodawatta Arachchige Don

Frank Desmon,

No. 21A, Sapugaskanda,

Makola.

3. Wijeratne Mudiyanselage Don

Simon Singho Jayawardena,

No. 158, Dalupitiya,

Kadawatha.

2

3. Wijeratne Mudiyanselage Don

Lillie Liyanora Jayawardena,

Thuduwegedara,

Ragama.

Defendant-Respondents

5. Divisional Secretary,

Divisional Secretariat,

Biyagama.

Respondent

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Jacob Joseph for the 1st Defendant-Petitioner.

S.N. Wijithsingh for the Plaintiff-Respondent.

Nayomi Kahawita, S.C., for the 5th

Respondent.

Argued

& Decided on: 21.11.2018

Samayawardhena, J.

The 1st defendant filed this application of restitutio in integrum

dated 05.04.2017 seeking to set aside the Judgment,

Interlocutory Decree and Final Decree entered by the District

Court of Gampaha in Partition Case No. 35998/P.

In the plaint it was disclosed that the plaintiff is entitled to

23/48 shares and the 1st defendant is entitled to 25/48 shares

3

of the land to be partitioned. The 1st defendant accepted that

position and did not contest the case.

There is no dispute that out of the land described in the 2nd

schedule to the plaint, which is in extent 1 Acre 1Rood and

12.60 Perches, 72.50 Perches have been acquired by the State.

This has been accepted by the plaintiff in his evidence and also

produced the relevant Gazette as P4.

The Preliminary Plan is the Plan No.189 prepared by Meril

Perera, L.S. marked X. However, the plaintiff has got another

commission issued to show the acquired portion by the State

with precision. That commission has been issued to Piyasiri

Ranasinghe, L.S., even though the correct course of action

would have been to issue that commission also to the first

commissioner, Meril Perera, L.S. The second Plan No. 1330 has

been marked as P1.

The learned District Judge in the Judgment has identified the

land to be partitioned as Lot 1 in Plan No. 1330 in extent 3

Roods and 35.19 Perches.

One of the arguments of the learned counsel for the 1st

defendant is that 15 Perches (out of 72.50 Perches acquired by

the State) is still included in Lot 1 in Plan No. 1330 and that has

to be excluded. The argument of the learned counsel is simple

and straightforward. That is, as I said earlier, there is no

dispute that, out of this land, 72.50 Perches were acquired by

the State; and the surveyor by Lot 2 in Plan No.1330 has

excluded only 57.50 Perches thereby including balance 15

Perches in Lot 1.

4

This is disputed by the learned counsel for the plaintiff, who

says that it is not clear whether the entire 57.50 Perches

acquired by the State has been excluded. The State was not a

party to the Partition action, but the 1st defendant has, at a later

stage of the case, informed this inclusion to the District

Courtvide documents marked C, D and F with the present

petition. In my view, the plaintiff should have made the State a

party to the partition action for the purpose of proper

identification of the portion acquired by the State. However, the

1st defendant-petitioner made the Divisional Secretary of

Biyagama a party to this application, but unfortunately, the

State has informed this Court that they do not file objections to

this application and kept silent without making use of this

opportunity to put an end to that mattervide Journal Entry of

this Court dated 13.12.2017.

Hence this Court cannot grant any relief to the State, who has

failed to identify with certainty, by way of a survey or otherwise,

whether the land acquired by the State in extent 72.50 Perches

has properly been excluded by Plan No. 1330.

Nevertheless, as the parties and the learned District Judge in

the Judgment have in express terms accepted that 72.50

Perches out of the land to be partitioned were acquired by the

State, the State is at liberty to take any steps in that regard, if so

advised, and this Judgment will not be binding upon the State.

Therefore I take the view that the Judgment and the

Interlocutory Decree cannot and need not be set aside on that

basis.

5

The next argument of the learned counsel for the 1st defendant

is that the Final Scheme of Partition has not been prepared

according to the Judgment and the Interlocutory Decree.

This is prima facie a valid argument.

According to the Preliminary Plan marked X and the Report

thereto marked X1, the land, buildings and plantations in Lot 1

are possessed by the plaintiff and the land, buildings and

plantations in Lot 2 are possessed by the 1st defendant. In the

Judgment, and in the Interlocutory Decree prepared in terms of

the Judgment, it has clearly been stated that the land,

plantation and improvements shall be apportioned, as far as

possible, according to the Report X1.

Nevertheless, according the Final Partition Plan No. 796

prepared by some other surveyor (not the one who prepared the

Preliminary Plan No. 189 and the Superimposed Plan No. 1330

due to the reason that both of them were not in the Panel at that

time), the division between the two Lots has apparently been

made in an unjustifiable manner forcing the 1st defendant to

demolish a part of her house, the water tank, lavatories etc. for

no apparent reason.

The 1st defendant says that she was bed ridden after a surgery

when the final survey was done and the surveyor obtained her

signature to a letter stating that it was to conclude the matter

expeditiously. Thankfully, the plaintiff produced that letter

marked X2 with his objections to say that the 1st defendant

consented to demolish a part of her own house. That letter has

been written by the surveyor or some other person on his behalf

6

and obtained the signature of the 1st defendant. It is dated

02.01.2015 and the Final Plan No.796 is dated 03.01.2015.

That letter says that, as a portion of the land to be given to the

plaintiff was not to be found on the ground, the 1st defendant

agrees to give that portion by demolishing a part of her house!

22C

35998/ 2015-01-02

...

22C

.

This is a misleading letter. To give the portion of land, which the

plaintiff is entitled to have in terms of the Interlocutory Decree,

as I see from the Plan 796 (at page 226 of the Brief), there is no

necessity to demolish the 1st defendants house or demolish the

water tank and lavatories or demarcate the boundary preventing

the 1st defendant allegedly from opening the windows of her

house. According to Plan No.796, subject to correction, there is

enough vacant land available from the northern portion of the

corpus.

Section 33 of the Partition Law, No.21 of 1977, as amended,

reads as follows: The surveyor shall so partition the land that

each party entitled to compensation in respect of improvements

effected thereto or of buildings erected thereon will, if that party is

entitled to a share of the soil, be allotted, so far as is practicable,

7

that portion of the land which has been so improved or built upon,

as the case may be.

The policy of the law has been to allot to a co-owner the portion

which contains his improvements whenever it is possible to do

so1 unless in doing so a fair and equitable division is rendered

impossible2.

If there was a difficulty to demarcate the boundary line without

demolishing a part of the house, the water tank, lavatory etc. of

the 1st defendant, the surveyor would have reported it to the

Court and obtained further instructions. Otherwise, the

surveyor could have shown the division in such irregular

manner along the western boundary of Lot 2 (as presently

shown in the Plan 796), without obtaining the signature of the

1st respondent to a letter consenting to such division, which the

1st defendant now says was obtained by misleading her. Such a

consent is not necessary to prepare the Final Scheme of

Partition. All what the surveyor is expected to do is to prepare

the Plan in terms of the Interlocutory Decree and send it to

Court for the Court to take the final decision. Taking the

signature to a prepared letter from a party who is feeble, gives

the impression that the surveyor was bias in preparing the Final

Scheme of Partition.

According to section 31(1) of the Partition Law, No.21 of 1977, as

amended, The surveyor shall, on the date or altered date fixed

for partitioning the land, proceed to the land and prepare a

1 Thevchanamoorthy v. Appakuddy (1950) 51 NLR 317 at 321

2 Sediris Perera v. Mary Nona (1971) 75 NLR 133 at 134

8

scheme of partition in conformity with interlocutory decree and

with any special directions contained in this commission.

The surveyor to whom a commission is issued under section

27(2) must act within the ambit of the interlocutory decree and

any special directions contained in his commission. Section 31 so

enacts and he is not free to travel outside the authority given to

him and arrogate to himself any functions or powers not

contained in the decree or commission.3

The learned counsel for the plaintiff informs Court that there

was no objection to the scheme of partition proposed by the

surveyor. That may be due to the purported consent letter

obtained by the surveyor from the 1st defendant. The

confirmation of the scheme of partition with or without

modification is an important step in a Partition Case. The

learned District Judge as a matter of routine has confirmed the

final scheme of partition assuming that it is in conformity with

the Interlocutory Decree whereas it is not.

After the Final Decree was entered, the plaintiff has taken steps

to execute the writ. The first attempt to execute the writ has, as

seen from the Fiscals Report dated 07.02.2017 marked E, failed.

Thereafter the 1st defendant has, as seen from the application

marked F, inter alia, moved the Court to recall the writ. Then,

as seen from the Fiscals Report dated 17.02.2017 marked G,

boundaries of Lot 1 as per the Final Plan No.796 has been

3 Sardiris Perera v. David Perera (1963) 67 CLW 108 per Basnayake CJ

9

demarcated. The Fiscal in that Report inter alia states as

follows:

10x10

.

.

...

.

796 01

. .

Thereafter the 1st defendant has filed a revision application

before the High Court of Civil Appeal of Gampaha and later

withdrawn. Subsequently, the 1st defendant has filed this

application for restitutio in integrum.

Article 138(1) of the Constitution vests this Court with

jurisdiction to grant relief by way of restitutio in integrum. This

jurisdiction cannot be invoked as a matter of right, but as a

10

matter of grace and discretion to be exercised in unique facts

and circumstances of each individual case. If the Court decides

to grant the relief, it reinstates a party to his original legal

condition which he has been deprived of by the operation of law.

I think this is a fit and proper case to exercise that jurisdiction

to grant the limited relief to the 1st defendant to minimize the

damage.

In the result, whilst keeping the Judgment and the Interlocutory

Decree intact, I set aside the order of the learned District Judge

dated 13.10.2015 confirming the Final Partition Plan No. 796

and the orders made thereafter based on it. I direct the learned

District Judge to issue a fresh commission to another surveyor

of the Panel to prepare the Final Scheme of Partition according

to the Interlocutory Decree and take follow up steps according to

law. This does not in any manner take to mean that the new

surveyor shall necessarily divide the land giving all the

buildings, plantations, improvements in Lot 2 of the Preliminary

Plan No. 189 and the Report thereof to the 1st defendant. If the

new surveyor thinks the scheme suggested in Plan No.796 is the

most practical one, he can prepare the Plan in the same

manner. Let the learned District Judge decide the matter afresh

after a proper inquiry.

Application is partly allowed. No costs.

Judge of the court of Appeal