1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

CA IWritl 611 2015

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Vs,

In the matter of an application under

Article 140 of the constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka for mandates in the nature of

Writs of Quo Warranto, Certiorari

and Mandamus.

Shasheendra Kumara Rajapakshe,

No. 219, Pottuvil Road,

Monaragala.

Petitioner

1. M.G. Jayasinghe,

Governor of the Uva Province,

Office of the Governor- Uva Province,

King's Street,

Badulla.

2. C. Nanda Mathew,

Former Governor of the Uva Province,

C/O: Office of the Governor-Uva

Province,

King's Street,

Badulla.

3. Anura Ravindra Vithanagamage,

Member,

Uva Provincial Council.

IIIII

Ii !i t

~ If i

~ fi

\

2

4. Arthur Chamara Sampath Oisanayaka

Don,

Member,

Uva Provincial Council.

5. A.S. Thodaman Muttuvinayagam,

Member,

Uva Provincial Council.

6. Oenipitiya Sudarshana Wasantha

Kumara,

Member,

Uva Provincial Council.

7. A.M. Buddadasa,

Member,

Uva Provincial Council.

8. W.Suresh,

Member,

Uva Provincial Council.

9. Hema Rathnayaka,

Member,

Uva Provincial Council.

10. M. Patabendige Leelasena,

Member,

Uva Provincial Council.

11. A. Ganeshamurthi,

Member,

Uva Provincial Council.

1,

I I,

Jf f , I ! I i ,

I Itf! rt, f

f !I' !(I I 1If ff I

f

tI Ii I

liJ

I I I i ! j I ; ; I :t

i 1 4 l

12. R.M. Kumarasiri Rathnayake,

Member,

Uva Provincial Council.

13. W. Udara Soysa,

Member,

Uva Provincial Council.

14. B.S.Sumeda de. Silva,

Member,

Uva Provincial Council.

15. A.M. Kithsiri Senarath Bandara,

Member,

Uva Provincial Council.

16. G.R. Wimaladasa,

Member,

Uva Provincial Council

3

17. R.M. Harindra Dharmadasa Bandara,

Member,

Uva Provincial Council.

18. R.M. Padma Udayasantha,

Member,

Uva Provincial Council.

19. A. Sivalingam,

Member,

Uva Provincial Council.

20. D.B.W. Mudiyanselage,

Member,

Uva Provincial Council.

21. Harin Fernando,

Member,

Uva Provincial Council.

22. D. Rudradeepan,

Member,

Uva Provincial Council.

23. D. S. Jayantha Kannangara,

Member,

Uva Provincial Council.

24. U. D. Samaraweera,

Member,

Uva Provincial Council.

25. Ravindra Samaraweera,

Member,

Uva Provincial Council.

26. N.K. Senarath Jayasuriya,

Member,

Uva Provincial Council.

27. H.M. Upali Senathne,

Member,

Uva Provincial Council.

28. R.M.Rathnayake,

Member,

Uva Provincial Council.

29. J.M.Ananda Kumarasiri,

Member,

Uva Provincial Council.

30. H.W.M.Darmasena,

4 1

5

Member,

Uva Provincial Council.

31. 1.A. Chaminda Janaka,

Member,

Uva Provincial Council.

32. R.M. Jayasighe Bandara,

Member,

Uva Provincial Council.

33. A.K. Weerarathne Jayasuriya ,

Patabendige, l

~ l Member, ~

~ Uva Provincial Council. I i

~ 34. Sampath Vidyratne, 1

~ j Member' ,1

1

Uva Provincial Council. i I

35. R. M. JAyawardena,

Member, ,j t Uva Provincial Council.

I I I , 2nd to 35th Respondent all at: I Uva Provincial Council ! Raja Veediya I Badulla. I i 36. United People's Freedom Alliance, I 301, 1.B. Jayah Mawatha, l I Colombo 10. t I 37. Susil Premajayantha, 1

General Secretary,

United People's Freedom Alliance, 301, 1.B. Jayah Mawatha,

Colombo 10. I

j ! l i

Before

Counsel

6

38. United National Party,

Sirikotha,

Sri Jayawardanapura Kotte.

39. Kabir Hashim,

General Secretary,

United National Party,

Sirikotha,

Sri Jayawardanapura Kotte.

40. People's Liberation Front,

464/20, Pannipitiya Rd,

Pelawatta,

Battaramulla.

41. Tilvin Silva,

General Secretary, People's Liberation Front, 464/20, Pannipitiya Rd, Battaramulla.

Respondents

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J (PICA) &

H.C.J. Madawala J

Manohara de. Silva PC with Avindra

Wijesundara forthe Petitioner,

Indika Deumini de. Silva DSG with Avanthi

Perera for the 1st ,2nd ,Respondents,

fI

JI! )

t r I,

7

Chandimal Mendis with V. Vithanage for the

3rd and 8th Respondents,

Riad Amin for ih and 1ih Respondents,

Ronald Perera PC with Chandimal Mendis,

Nalin Amarajeewa , Suren Fernando Akila

Amunugama for 21st ,31st and 39th

Respondents,

Suren Fernando for 25th and 29th

Respondents,

Inquiry on Preliminary Objection: 20.02.2015

Order on Preliminary Objection : 02.03.2015

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J (PICA)

Petitioner has filed the present application before this court praying that court be

pleased to,

a. Grant and issue a mandate in the nature of a writ of Quo Warranto

declaring that the 21st Respondent is not entitled to be appointed to

and/ or hold the office of Chief Minister ofthe Uva Province,

b. Grant and issue a mandate in the nature of a writ of Certiorari to quash

the decision to appoint the 21st Respondent as the Chief Minister of the

Uva Province an evinced by letter dated 16. 01. 2015 marked P 10 and

the said appointment of the 21st Respondent to the office of Chief

Minister of the Uva Province,

f1I

\

8

c. Grant and issue a mandate in the nature of a writ of Prohibition,

prohibiting the 1st Respondent from appointing any other person other

than the Petitioner as the Chief Minister of the Uva Provincial Council,

d. Grant and issue a mandate in the nature of a writ of Mandamus to direct

the 1st Respondent to re- appoint the Petitioner as the Chief Minister of

the Uva Province,

e. Grant and issue an interim order suspending the decision to appoint the

21st Respondent as the Chief Minister of the Uva Province as evinced by

letter dated 16.01.2015 marked P 10,

f. Grant and issue an interim order restraining the 1st Respondent from

acting on the advice of the 21st Respondent and/or any other member of

the Board of Ministers of the Uva Provincial Council if constituted,

When the matter was taken up for support before us, Respondents appearing though

their counsel raised number of Preliminary objections challenging the validity of this

application.

The objections raised by the Respondents can be categorized into two, i.e. firstly the

respondents have raised number of objections on the failure by the Petitioner to comply

with Rule 3(1)(a) of the Court of Appeal (Appellate Procedure) Rules 1990 (here in after

referred to as Court of Appeal Rules) and secondly raised several objections on the

maintainability of some of the reliefs claimed by way of prerogative writs. At this stage

this court is not in favour of looking at the second objection since it can be looked into

at the time of when considering the final relief.

Therefore this court will at this stage only consider the preliminary objections raised by

the Respondents with regard to the failure by the Petitioner to comply with Rule 3 (1)

(a) of the Court of Appeal Rules.

Rule 3(1)(a) of the said Rules reads follow;

f Ilt !If III! ! { t tII

f

1

\

9

"3(1) (a) every application made to the exercise of the powers vested in the Court of

Appeal by Articles 140 or 141 of the Constitution shall be by way of petition, together

with an affidavit in support of the averments there in, and shall be accompanied by the

original of document material to such application (or duly certified copies thereof) in the

form of exhibits. Where a petitioner is unable to tender any such document, he shall

state the reason for such inability and seek the leave of the Court to furnish such

document later. Where a petitioner fails to comply with the provisions of this rule the

court may, Ex Mero Motu or at the instance of any party, dismiss such application./I

I will now proceed to identify some of the objections raised by the respondents based

on the above rule.

a) Failure by the Petitioner to submit that the facts averred in the affidavit

are within his personal knowledge,

b) Failure by the Petitioner to annex originals or certified copies of relevant

documents,

c) Failure by the Petitioner to file the decision he moves to quash, along

within the application,

d) Failure by the Petitioner to seek leave of this court to furnish such

documents later.

(a) Failure by the Petitioner to submit that the fact averred in the affidavit are

within his personal knowledge.

Requirement of the affidavit to be submitted along with the Petition is enshrined in the

rule as;

"shall be by way of petition, together with an affidavit in support of the averments

there in./I (emphasis added)

In this regard the objection raised before us was, that the petitioner has failed to submit

in his affidavit that the facts pleaded in affidavit are within his personal knowledge. In

support of this contention, respondents submitted the provisions in sec.181 of the Civil

Procedure Code which sets out the requisites for a valid affidavit. I!

J: ,,

10

Sec. 181 of the Civil Procedure Code reads as follow;

Section 181; Affidavit shall be confined to the statement of such facts as the declarant

is able of his own knowledge and observation to testify to, ......

It is therefore, understood that the affidavit should only contain facts which are within

the declarants own knowledge and observations.

When both those provisions are taken together it is clear that a person should not

affirm to an affidavit without his own personal knowledge and therefore, it is not

necessary to specifically state in the affidavit that the declarant has a personal

knowledge with regard to the facts referred to in the affidavit.

On the other hand Sec. 3(1)(a) as discussed earlier only requires, an affidavit in support

of the averment therein and rule does not specifically speaks of declarants personal

knowledge but it is understood that the requirement under Sec. 181 has to be fulfilled

when an affidavit is submitted.

In the case of Kobbekaduwa V. Jayawardena 1983 I Sri LR 416 the Supreme Court

observed that liThe function of an affidavit is to verify the fact alleged in the Petition.

The affidavit Furni- shes prima facie evidence of the facts deposed to in the affidavit. In

an affidavit a person can depose only to facts to which he is able to testify of his own

knowledge and observation"

Even on this decision there is no finding to the effect that the petitioner has to state in

the affidavit that the facts affirm are from his personal knowledge and from the

documents perused.

With regard to the admissibility of the affidavit, Respondent referred to the decision in

Kumarasiri and another Vs. Rahjapakshe 2006 I Sri LR 359 but I see no relevance in this

decision to the objection raised, since this decision only refers to a Jurat under Oaths

and Affirmation Ordinance.

For the reason adduced above I overrule this objection.

11

(b) Failure by the Petitioner to annex Originals or certified copies of relevant

documents.

Article 3(1) (a) requires the Petition and affidavit "shall be accompanied by originals of

documents material to such application (or duly certified copies thereof)

Petitioner has annexed documents marked P-1 a ,b, c, P2 - Pll along with his petition.

Out of the said documents P-1a, b, c, P-3,P-4 and P-6 are true copies of Government

Gazettes. The said PS is a document purported to have been signed by the General

Secretary of United People's Freedom Alliance. Even though it is not addressed to a

specific person, it appears to be an original document. P-7 and P-10 are true copies of

letters received by the petitioner. P-8 is a true copy of an unsigned letter purportedly

sent by the Petitioner to the Governor Uva Province and Pll is a true copy of a letter

purportedly sent by an Attorney at Law to the Governor Uva Province. P-9 contains true

copies of some newspaper articles.

Having perused these documents, this court observes that the petitioner has failed to

fulfill some of the requirements stipulated in rule 3(1) (a). According to the petitioner

the most important document is said to be P-10. If it is a letter received by him, he had

no difficulty in filing the letter he received, in this Court. Instead, he had filed a true

copy of the said letter. As P-8 he has filed an unsigned copy of a letter purportedly sent

by him to the Governor Uva Province.

In the case of Browns & Company Ltd. and another V. Ratnayake 1994 3 Sri LR 91 the

Supreme Court held that, Rule 46 of the Supreme Court Rules of 1978 requires the

petition to be supported by affidavit and to be accompanied by original or duly certified

copies of documents material to the case in the form of exhibits. The burden of

presenting a proper application is on the party that seeks the intervention of the court.

The procedure is specified for this threshold stage. The Rule regulates the mode of

enforcing a legal right. The petitioner has to tender all relevant material to the Court in

order to invoke its jurisdiction. If he has failed to do this, there is a failure to comply

with a substantial aspect ofthe Rule.

12

However, in the unreported case of Yatagampiti loku Acharige Piyasena and another

Vs. Mary Jacintha Sandrasegaram SC Appeal 69/2001 Supreme Court decided that "An

application for leave to appeal to the Court of Appeal was dismissed upon the

preliminary objection that the eight documents annexed to the petition were only true

photocopies certified by an Attorney at law and that there was a failure to comply with

the mandatory provisions of Rule 3 (1)( a) of the Court of Appeal (Appellate Procedure)

Rule 1990.

Counsel for the plaintiff Respondent concedes that the eight documents produced by

the defendant- Petitioner in the Court of Appeal were in fact "duly certified copies

within the meaning of Rule 3 (1) (a). In any event the court should have exercised its

discretion under that Rule not to dismiss the defendants' application on that ground as

the accuracy of the copies was not disputed. Besides, the court did not even consider

whether those documents were material to the application.

The order of the Court of Appeal dated 21.09.2001 is set aside and the Court of Appeal

is directed to hear and determined the defendant application on merits."

Even in the Application before us, as referred by me earlier, the Petitioner has tendered

True Copies of documents he is relying in this case. Majority of those are Government

Gazettes. P7, 8, 10 and 11 are True Copies of letters either sent or received by the

petitioner. Respondents are not challenging these documents for its accuracy except the

admissibility of P-10 as a decision by the 2nd Respondent. This issue will be discussed

separately by me at a later stage of this order. Considering all these issues the Court

decides to follow the decision by the Supreme Court in SC Appeal 69/2001 and decides

to overrule this objection.

(c) Failure by the Petitioner to file the decision he moves to quash, along within

the application,

(d) Failure by the Petitioner to seek leave of this court to furnish such documents

later.

13

Since these two objections are interwoven to each other, this court has decided to

consider the two objections together. In paragraphs 20, 21 and 22 of the petition, the

Petitioner explains as to how he was informed by the Governor Uva Province of his

decision to appoint the 21st Respondent as the Chief Minister Uva Province and despite

his objections, the appointment of 21st Respondent was informed to him by a letter

dated 16.01.2015 which was marked as P-10. This document is only a letter sent by the

Governor. Petitioner while tendering the said letter marked P-10 pleads before court to

Grant and issue a mandate in the nature of a writ of Certiorari to quash the decision

made by the Governor Uva Province as evinced by the said letter. This is the only

document tendered by the Petitioner to the effect that Petitioner's rights to hold office

of Chief Minister of Uva Province have been affected. Any decision purported to have

been taken by the 1st and/or 2nd Respondent is not before this court.

During the argument Petitioner whilst referring to Wade and Forsyth in Administrative

Law (10th Edition) which bears a passage titled "Decisions, Determinations and Acts" and

submitted that there need not be a "Decision", but that even an "Act" can be quashed.

This position taken up by the counsel before us is contradicted by paragraph 29 of his

own petition. Therefore, we are not convinced with the above submission.

In the case of Wasana Trading Lanka (Pvt.) Ltd. Vs. Dr. Sarath Amunugama Minister of

Finance and Planning and another (2005 2 Sri LR 290) His Lordship Sripawan J held that

"This court cannot and will not quash a document that is not before it."

In the case of Appapillai Amirthalingam vs. M A Piyasekara Commissioner of Elections

and another (1980 2 Sri LR 285) this court held that "there has necessarily to be a formal

decision or determination ..... before a Writ of Certiorari could issue quashing that

decision or determination." Petitioner is well aware as to how a Chief Minister is

appointed. In fact the petitioner has documented his previous appointments marked P

1-C and P-6. Therefore, what is pleaded before this court by the Petitioner that, there is

a decision to appoint the 21st Respondent as Chief Minister of Uwa Province as evinced

by letter dated 16.01.2015 is inadequate without submitting the purported decision

before this Court.

The next objection raised before this court was the failure by the Petitioner to seek

leave of this court to furnish such document later. As pointed out by me earlier, Rule

3(1)(a) stipulates "where a petitioner is unable to tender any such document, he shall

I! I I t t ! I

14

state the reason for such inability and seek the leave of the Court to furnish such

document later'

Petitioner has neither pleaded the above to reserve the right to file any document later

nor pleaded a direction from this court to call for the document from the relevant

authorities.

When both these objections are considered together this Court observes that the failure

by the Petitioner to produce before us the purported decision by the 1st and/or 2nd

Respondent to appoint the 21st Respondent as the Chief Minister Uva Province and the

petitioners failure to plead his inability and seek the leave of this Court to furnish such

document later and/or failure to plead for a direction from this Court to call for such

document from the relevant authority is a violation of Rule 3(1)(a) of the Rules of this

Court. The above Rule further says "Where a petitioner fails to comply with the

provisions of this Rule the Court may, Ex Mero Motu or at the instance of any party,

dismiss such application.

Therefore this Court decides to uphold the 3rd and 4th objections referred to above and

accordingly make order dismissing the application without cost.

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

H.C.J. Madawala,

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE CUORT OF APPEAL