CA/HCC/0382/18

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal No:

CA/HCC/0382/2018 Sonnadaralage Chintaka Suranga

High Court of Colombo

Case No: HC/7049/2013

Accused-Appellant

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

Complainant-Respondent

BEFORE : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

P. Kumararatnam, J.

COUNSEL : Tenny Fernando with H. Silva for the

Appellant.

Suharshi Herath, DSG for the Respondent.

CA/HCC/0382/18

2 | P a g e

ARGUED ON : 10/07/2024

DECIDED ON : 22/10/2024

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) was indicted by the Attorney General in the High Court of

Colombo under Sections 54(A) (d) and 54(A) (b) of the Poisons, Opium and

Dangerous Drugs Ordinance as amended by Act No. 13 of 1984 for

Possession and Trafficking of 3.42 grams of Heroin (diacetylmorphine) on

08th January 2012.

The prosecution had called 04 witnesses in support of their case and marked

production P1-11. When the defence was called, the Appellant had made a

dock statement and closed his case.

After the consideration of evidence presented by the prosecution and the

defence, the Learned Trial Judge found the Appellant guilty on 1st count and

has sentenced him to life imprisonment on 07/11/2018. The Appellant was

acquitted from 2nd count.

CA/HCC/0382/18

3 | P a g e

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

The Counsel for the Appellant informed this Court that the Appellant had

given his consent to argue this matter in his absence. Hence, argument was

taken up in his absence but was connected via Zoom platform from prison.

On behalf of the Appellant the following Grounds of Appeal are raised.

1. That the Learned Trial Judge failed to analyse the improbabilities of the

prosecution version and thereby the conviction is unsafe.

2. That the Learned Trial Judge failed to analyse inter se and per se

contradictions of the prosecution witnesses which creates a

reasonable doubt on the prosecution case.

3. That the Learned Trial Judge misdirected himself by failing to correctly

analyse the dock statement in line with the defence eversion.

Background of the case.

On 08/01/2012 SI/Gayantha attached to the Police Narcotics Bureau upon

receiving an information had gone to Campbell Car Park at Borella with a

team of police officers. As per the informant, the Appellant would be arriving

near the main gate of the Oval Play Ground with drugs. At the location,

spotted a person matching with the information standing there wearing a

yellow-coloured T-Shirt and black coloured three-quarter trouser. When he

reached him with PW2 PC 9036 Mahinda and inquired, his suspicious

conduct led to further inquiry. When he was subjected to a body check a

parcel with a brown coloured substance had been detected from his right-

side trouser pocket. As the substance recovered from the Appellant reacted

for Heroin, the Appellant was arrested immediately and brought to the Police

Narcotics Bureau. At there, the substance was weighed in front of the

CA/HCC/0382/18

4 | P a g e

Appellant. The gross weight of the substance had been 24 grams and the

same had been sealed and handed over to the reserve police officer PW9,

SI/Rajakaruna under PR No.91/2012 at 20.35 hours.

PW2, PC 9036 Mahinda had corroborated the evidence given by PW1 on every

aspect including on minute details put in the police Information Book.

To prove the chain of custody witness PW09, SI/Rajakaruna was called. The

Government Analyst report was admitted under Section 420 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act. Hence, the Government Analyst Report was marked

as P9. Thereafter, the prosecution had closed the case. When the Learned

Trial Judge had called for the defence, the Appellant made a dock statement

and closed the case for the defence.

In every criminal case the burden is on the prosecution to prove the case

beyond reasonable doubt against the accused person and this burden never

shifts. Hence an accused person has no burden to prove his case unless he

pleads a general or a special exception in the Penal Code.

In the case of Mohamed Nimnaz V. Attorney General CA/95/94 held:

A criminal case has to be proved beyond reasonable doubt. Although

we take serious view in regard to offences in relation to drugs, we are

of the view that the prosecutor should not be given a second chance to

fill the gaps of badly handled prosecutions.

In the Attorney-General v. Rawther 25 NLR 385, Ennis, J. states thus: [1987} 1 SLR 155

"The evidence must establish the guilt of the accused, not his innocence. His innocence is presumed in law, from the start of the case, and his guilt must be established beyond a reasonable doubt.

CA/HCC/0382/18

5 | P a g e

Per Viscount Simon in Stirland v. Director of Public Prosecution [1944]

AC (PC) 315,

"A judge does not preside over a criminal trial, merely to see that no

innocent man is punished. A judge also presides to see that a guilty man

does not escape. Both are public duties

At the hearing the Learned Counsel for the Appellant commenced his

augment by combining the first and second grounds of appeal together. In

those grounds the Appellant contended that the Learned Trial Judge failed

to consider that the prosecution version did not pass the test of probability

and erred in both facts and law when concluding that the prosecution proved

the case beyond reasonable doubt without considering inter se and per se

contradictions between PW1 and PW2.

In this case PW1 had vividly given evidence as to how the raid was conducted

after the information he had received while on duty. Acting on that

information, he had successfully arrested the Appellant who was totally a

stranger to him. The Learned Counsel strenuously placed his submission on

the time factor consumed for the entire raid and reporting back to the police

station.

As correctly pointed out by the Learned Deputy Solicitor General, PW1 and

PW2 had clearly explained that after the arrest of the Appellant at 20:00

hours and returned to the station at 20:35 hours. Though the exact time is

not mentioned and the time referred to as 21.20 hours is not the time, but it

was the time they entered their notes in the Information Book. This position

had been very clearly explained during the trial by the witnesses. The

Learned High Court Judge had very accurately discussed and analysed the

evidence pertaining to time consumption for the entire raid and accepted the

prosecution position which clearly demonstrate that the prosecution had

CA/HCC/0382/18

6 | P a g e

passed the test of probability of the prosecution case sans any inter se or per

se contradiction.

The next point that the Counsel for the Appellant argued about going to the

raid without a police driver. Two police officers including PW2 could drive

the vehicle at that time. Although other police officer could drive the vehicle,

PW2 only had the police licence to drive the vehicle. As such PW2 had drove

the vehicle and stopped at convenient place and went to arrest the Appellant.

After arrest, PW1 and PW2 took the Appellant in a three-wheeler up to the

place where their vehicle was parked. This is not an unusual happening

considering the nature of the case. Further, as the people of the area

gathered in large numbers, they had evacuated the Appellant in a three-

wheeler without keeping him at the place of arrest. They had properly entered

notes in the Information Book after the raid.

Bradford Smith, Law Commission, WWW.smithlitigation.com 2014 states

that:

Good police note taking is important for two reasons. First, it invariably

bolsters the credibility of the police officer giving evidence. Second, it

promotes the proper administration of criminal justice by facilitating the

proof of facts.

Hence, the Learned Counsel for the Appellant had failed to the satisfy any

merit under these appeal grounds.

In the final ground of appeal, the appellant contend that the Learned Trial

Judge did not evaluate the defence evidence from the correct perspective and

rejected the same in the wrong premise.

The Appellant in his dock statement submitted that he was wrongly joined

to this case by PW1. According to him on the date of incident while returning

CA/HCC/0382/18

7 | P a g e

from temple, a person namely Chamara Srimal had called him to have a

word. While both were talking a police jeep had come arrested both took them

to the Police Narcotics Bureau. A lady namely Shanika was also in the jeep.

He alleged that he was connected to this case with the Heroin recovered from

Chamara Srimal.

Even though the dock statement of an accused has less evidential value our

courts never hesitated to accept the same when it creates a doubt on the

prosecution case.

In Don Samantha Jude Anthony Jayamaha v. The Attorney General

CA/303/2006 decided on 11/07/2012 the court held that:

Whether the evidence of the defence or the dock statement is sufficient

to create a doubt cannot be decided in a vacuum or in isolation because

it needs to be considered in the totality of the evidence that is in the light

of the evidence for the prosecution as well as the defence.

In Kathubdeen v. Republic of Sri Lanka [1998] 3 SLR 107 the court held

that:

It is settled law that an unsworn statement must be treated as

evidence. It has also been laid down that if the unsworn statement

creates a reasonable doubt in the prosecution case or if it is believed,

then the accused should be given the benefit of that doubt.

In this case the Learned Trial Judge had very correctly and extensively

discussed and analysed the dock statement of the Appellant and correctly

concluded that the dock statement of the Appellant not created any doubt

against the overwhelming evidence of the prosecution. He has correctly given

CA/HCC/0382/18

8 | P a g e

reasons as to why he rejects the defence evidence. Thereby, the Learned High

Court Judge had considered all the evidence placed in its correct perspective

and arrived at the finding to convict the Appellant. Hence, this ground also

sans any merit.

In this case PW1 and PW2 are key witnesses. Their evidence is clear, cogent,

and unambiguous. The court considering all other evidence presented by the

prosecution, without any hesitation relied on that evidence and convicted the

Appellant. Further their evidence has passed the probability test.

As the prosecution had proven this case beyond reasonable doubt, I affirm

the conviction and the sentence imposed by the Learned High Court Judge

of Colombo dated 07/11/2018 on the Appellant. Therefore, his appeal is

dismissed.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgment to the High

Court of Colombo along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

SAMPATH B. ABAYAKOON, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL