CPA-32-21 Page 1 of 8 20/06/2022 IJ-28-22

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Revision under and in terms of section 11(1) of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act, No. 19 of 1990 read with section 20(2) of the Bail Act, No. 30 of 1997 and Article 138 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. Hon. Attorney General, Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12.

Complainant Court of Appeal Application No: CPA/32/2021 High Court Colombo Case No: HC 6474/2013

Vs.

Saruwa Liyanage Sunil, Polosmiriya, Maraba, Akuressa. (Presently at Welikada Prison)

Accused

And now

Saruwa Liyanage Sunil, Polosmiriya, Maraba, Akuressa. (Presently at Welikada Prison)

Accused-Petitioner

Vs.

Hon. Attorney General, Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12.

CPA-32-21 Page 2 of 8 20/06/2022 IJ-28-22

Complainant-Respondent

And now between

Saruwa Liyanage Sunil, Polosmiriya, Maraba, Akuressa. (Presently at Welikada Prison)

Accused-Petitioner-Petitioner

Vs. Hon. Attorney General, Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12.

Complainant-Respondent-

Repondent

BEFORE : Menaka Wijesundera J. Neil Iddawala J. COUNSEL : Sarath Jayamanne, PC With Darshana Kuruppu, Vineshka Mendis, and Prashan Wickramaratne for the Petitioner M. Tennakoon, DSG for the Respondents. Argued on

:

02.06.2022

Decided on

:

20.06. 2022

CPA-32-21 Page 3 of 8 20/06/2022 IJ-28-22

Iddawala J

This is a revision application filed on 22.02.2021 by the accused-

petitioner-petitioner (hereinafter the petitioner) canvassing the order

granted by the High Court of Colombo on 06.01.2021 refusing to grant

him bail pending appeal.

The petitioner was convicted of statutory rape under Sections 364(2),

364(2)(e) of the Penal Code by order dated 17.01.2020. He was sentenced

to a term of fifteen years of Rigorous Imprisonment and a fine of 25,000/-

(default of 1 year of Rigorous Imprisonment) and compensation of Rs.

250,000/- to the Prosecutrix which carried a default sentence of two years

Rigorous Imprisonment. Against such conviction and sentence, petitioner

has filed an appeal. Meanwhile, the petitioner filed an application for bail

pending appeal, which the High Court refused on 06.01.2021. Aggrieved

by such refusal, the petitioner has filed the instant application, invoking

the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal.

In the confines of the present revision application, this Court shall limit

itself to inquiring into whether the impugned order is deemed illegal so as

to warrant the invocation of Article 138 of the Constitution. Any other

contentions presented by the learned Presidents Counsel for the petitioner

on discrepancies in evidence presented by the complainant-respondent,

corroboration of evidence, and any other discussion on merits of the case

will have to be addressed in the main appeal against the original

conviction. In support of such a construction, this Court would like to echo

the words of His Lordship Justice Sisira de Abrew in Sulaiman Lebbe

Mohamad Uvais v Director General, The Commission to Investigate

Allegations of Bribery and Corruption CA/PHC/APN/ 86/2010 CA

Minute dated 3.2.2011: Although the learned trial Judge rejected the

evidence of the complainant at page 14 of the judgment, he, at page 24, 25,

CPA-32-21 Page 4 of 8 20/06/2022 IJ-28-22

and 26 accepted his evidence. Whether the above observation is sufficient

to vitiate the conviction or not must be decided by the Court of Appeal

hearing the main appeal. Even if this is considered to be a misdirection Court

of Appeal hearing the main appeal is empowered to affirm the conviction

under provisos to Section 334 of the Criminal Procedure Code and Article

138 of the Constitution after considering the evidence of the case. The Court

hearing an application to release an accused person on bail pending appeal

should not pre-empt the hearing of the appeal. This view is supported by the

judgment of the Supreme Court in Attorney General Vs Ediriweera [2006]

BLR page 12 wherein Justice Thilakawardene remarked thus: "In any event

our Courts have held consistently, that in an application for bail after

conviction, the appellate Court should not pre-empt the hearing of the

substantive appeal. For these reasons, I reject the above contention of the

learned PC..

Instead, this Court will focus on determining whether the petitioner has

sufficiently dispensed the burden to invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of

the Court of Appeal against the impugned order of the learned High Court

judge. Prominent legal authorities have highlighted the crucial test of

exceptional circumstances as a precondition to invoking the revisionary

jurisdiction of the Court. The Court observed in Ediriweera v. The

Attorney General (2006) 1 SLR 25 that, It is a settled principle that the

release of a prisoner on bail pending an appeal to the Court of Criminal

Appeal will only be granted in exceptional circumstances. This was

reiterated in Ramu Thamotharampillai v. The Attorney General (2004)

3 SLR 180, where the Court affirmed the principle that the Court would

require the appellant to show the existence of exceptional circumstances

to warrant the grant of bail pending appeal. However, which facts would

satisfy the threshold of exceptionality must be construed within the

confines of the factual matrix of the case concerned. Therefore, it is a

subjective assessment, contingent on the peculiar facts of each case. The

CPA-32-21 Page 5 of 8 20/06/2022 IJ-28-22

instant application deals with a conviction of statutory rape where a term

of fifteen-year Rigorous Imprisonment has been imposed by the High

Court. Within such a context, it is incumbent upon this Court to determine

whether the circumstances averred by the petitioner satisfactorily

dispense the threshold of exceptionality required.

The exceptional circumstances averred by the petitioner are contained in

paragraph 7 of the petition. They are succinctly that there is a reasonable

prospect of petitioners main appeal being allowed and as such, the delay

in hearing petitioners appeal will render any judgment in his favour futile;

suicidal thoughts and mental instability of petitioners child; petitioner

being the sole breadwinner of the family; and his businesses and employs

being negatively impacted by his imprisonment; the petitioner being

present at Court on all dates of trial and will not abscond; and the

petitioner being more susceptible to COVID-19 when at prison. These

grounds were similar to the grounds raised before the High Court (Vide

page 61 of the Brief). Whilst the said grounds were averred in the petition

of the instant application, the same were not relied on during oral

submissions. The learned Presidents Counsel representing the petitioner

confined his submissions to the admissibility of a video recorded evidence

of the child prosecutrix as envisioned by Section 163A and Section 163A

(5) of the Evidence Ordinance as amended by Act No. 32 of 1999. However,

as held by Sulaiman Lebbe Case (supra), these are matters forming the

crux of the appeal filed by the petitioner and are to be determined by the

Court sitting in appeal. Hence, this Court will refrain from passing

judgment on the material facts pertinent to the conviction and sentence of

the petitioner and will limit its determination on whether the impugned

order of the High Court dated 06.01.2021 is illegal or irregular to the extent

of shocking the conscience of this Court.

In the impugned order the learned High Court judge carefully analyses the

submission on the health condition of the petitioners child and holds the

CPA-32-21 Page 6 of 8 20/06/2022 IJ-28-22

following:

. (Vide page 61 of the Brief). On a perusal of

the said medical records and the impugned order, this Court finds no

reason to interfere with the reasoning of the learned High Court judge who

held the purported medical condition of the petitioners child as not

amounting to an exceptional circumstance. Similarly, the impugned order

has dismissed the submissions on the petitioners status as the sole

breadwinner of the family and the negative repercussions of his

incarceration on his employees. I see no reason to interfere with such

dismissal as such facts carry no exceptionality. The reference to the

implications of COVID 19 on the petitioner is also dismissed as this Court

has held time and again on previous occasions.

Mapping out the expanse of the revisionary jurisdiction of this Court under

Article 138, it was held in Bank of Ceylon v. Kaleel and others (2004) 1

SLR 284 as follows:

In any event to exercise revisionary jurisdiction the order

challenged must have occasioned a failure of justice and be

manifestly erroneous which go beyond an error or defect or

irregularity that an ordinary person would instantly react to it; the

order complained of is of such a nature which would have shocked

the conscience of court. (page 284)

Similarly, it was held in Wijesinghe Vs Tharmaratnam (Sri Kantha's LR

VOL IV 47), Revision is a discretionary remedy and will not be available

unless the application discloses circumstances which shocks the conscience

of court. (page 49)

Hence, it is the considered view of this Court that the reasons averred by

the petitioner, do not sufficiently establish that the impugned order by the

learned High Court judge, is an error, defect, or irregularity which has

CPA-32-21 Page 7 of 8 20/06/2022 IJ-28-22

prejudiced the petitioners substantial rights or occasioned a failure of

justice as per Article 138 of the Constitution. They do not point towards

any illegal, irrational, capricious or arbitrary decision on the part of the

learned High Court Judge, and the reasons averred fail to satisfy the test

of exceptional circumstances.

When considering the application for revision by the petitioner, it must be

must be taken together with the fact that the petitioner has been convicted

on a severe charge of statutory rape with a significant sentence of fifteen

years of Rigorous Imprisonment, and if the impugned order is reversed

and the petitioner enlarged on bail, due to the severity of the offence and

the level of penalty, there is a risk of the petitioner absconding. The risk of

absconding by the petitioner puts more weight on satisfying the court as

to the existence of exceptional circumstances. As Vythialingan J held in

Thamotharampillai (above),

When the offence is grave and the sentence is heavy the temptation

to abscond in order to avoid serving the sentence in the event of his

appeal failing would of course be great. In such cases the court

would still require the appellant to show the existence of exceptional

circumstances to warrant the grant of bail pending appeal. (page

190-191)

In any case, roughly two years have passed since the conviction on

17.01.2020, and the petitioners appeal against the conviction is fixed for

argument on 12th of September 2022. When viewed within the ordinary

manner in which Courts function in Sri Lanka and the time spent to

conclude proceedings, the petitioner has failed to satisfy the Court that his

circumstances with relation to delay are unreasonable to the extent of

exceptionality. This Court cannot deem such a period of time oppressive

so as to constitute a serious miscarriage of justice. Hence, it can be

CPA-32-21 Page 8 of 8 20/06/2022 IJ-28-22

surmised that there is no significant delay in hearing the petitioners

appeal amounting to an exceptional circumstance.

It is pertinent at this point to also note the proviso to Article 138(1) of the

Constitution:

Provided that no judgement, decree or order of any court shall be

reversed or varied on account of any error, defect or irregularity,

which has not prejudiced the substantial rights of the parties or

occasioned a failure of justice.

In light of the above, it is the considered opinion of this Court that the

petitioner has failed to establish exceptional circumstances which justifies

the invocation of the discretionary revisionary jurisdiction of this Court.

The petitioner has not been able to establish that, as Per Article 138 of the

Constitution that his substantial rights have been prejudiced, nor that the

impugned order of the learned High Court Judge is manifestly erroneous

so as to occasion a failure of justice. Thus, the petitioner has not been able

to establish how the impugned order is a miscarriage of justice that shocks

the conscience of the Court.

Application is dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Menaka Wijesundera J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL