Page 1 of 13

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

Tharanga Vishvajith Sembukuttiarchchi

140/1, Mahabuthgamuwa,

Angoda.

Petitioner

Vs.

1. Construction Industry Development

Authority Savsiripaya, 123, Wijerama Mawatha, Colombo 07.

2. Prof. N. T. Sohan Wijesekara Chairman Construction Industry Development Authority,

Savsiripaya, 123, Wijerama Mawatha, Colombo 07. 3. Eng. Prasad Amarasooriya

Director General (Acting), Construction Industry Development Authority,

Savsiripaya, 123, Wijerama Mawatha, Colombo 07.

4. Udaya S. Abeyratne Working Director/Member of the Board of Management,

5. Eng. R. G. S. K. Rajapaksha

Director/Member of the Board of Management,

In the matter of an application for Mandates in the nature of Writs of Certiorari, Prohibition and Mandamus under and in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution.

CA/WRIT/40/2022

Page 2 of 13

6. Ajantha Galhena Director/Member of the

Board of Management,

7. Prof. Mrs. Chitra Weddikara

Director/Member of the Board of Management,

8. Ch. QS. Upul Shantha

Director/Member of the Board of Management,

9. Eng. M. G. Hemachandra

Director/Member of the Board of Management, 10. Eng. M. H. Samantha Indika

Director/Member of the Board of Management,

11. Eng. A. W. Gamage

Director/Member of the Board of Management,

12. Eng. Major Ranjith Gunatilleke

Director/Member of the Board of Management,

13. Eng. J. A. Tissa Seneviratne

Director/Member of the Board of Management,

14. Mr. Susantha Ranjith Liyanarachchi

Director/Member of the Board of Management, 4th to 14th Respondents all at Construction Industry Development Authority, Savsiripaya, 123, Wijerama Mawatha, Colombo 07.

Page 3 of 13

15. Eng. Keerthi Ranjith Abesiriwardana

The Secretary, State Ministry of Rural Housing and Construction & Building Materials Industries Promotions, 2nd Floor, Sethsiripaya, Sri Jayawardanepura Kotte, Battaramulla. 16. Hon. Indika Anuruddha Herath

M.P., State Ministry of Rural Housing and Construction & Building Materials Industries Promotions, 2nd Floor, Sethsiripaya, Sri Jayawardanepura Kotte, Battaramulla. 17. N.S. Wathukarawatta

Acting Director (Finance), Construction Industry Development Authority, Savsiripaya, 123, Wijerama Mawatha, Colombo 07. 18. P. A. S. Athula Kumara Director General,

Department of Public Enterprise Ministry of Finance, Colombo 01.

Respondents

Before : Sobhitha Rajakaruna J.

Dhammika Ganepola J.

Counsel : Dilrukshi Dias Wickramasinghe PC with Dilumi De Alwis and Sithari Perera for the Petitioner. Udara Thilakawardena with Nadeesha Abeyratne for the 1st Respondent.

Page 4 of 13

Prince Perera for the 2nd to 14th and 17th Respondents. Hashini Opatha, SC for the 15th,16th and 18th Respondents. Argued on : 15.06.2022

Written Submissions : Petitioner - 15.07.2022

1st Respondent - 15.07.2022

2nd to 14th and 17th Respondents - 15.07.2022

Decided on : 29.07.2022

Sobhitha Rajakaruna J.

The Petitioner is seeking, inter alia, for a writ of Certiorari quashing the decision to

terminate the services of the Petitioner with effect from 08.10.2021 as contained in the

letter dated 31.12.2021, marked P7.

In terms of the said letter P7, the services of the Petitioner have been terminated due to

purported misappropriation of funds disclosed in an internal audit. The 1st to 14th and 17th

Respondents along with their Statement of Objections have submitted two internal audit

reports and a letter issued by an Assistant Director (Internal Audit) marked as R7, R8

and R10 respectively. The Petitioner also, along with his Counter Affidavit, has

submitted a report prepared by Mr. M. G. Kandeepan (Chief Internal Auditor) marked as

C8.

During the initial stages of the sequence of events in regard to this case, the Petitioner has

been served with a letter dated 17.02.2021 (P27) by one of the Assistant Directors of the

1st Respondent-Construction Industry Development Authority (CIDA), to inform the

Petitioner that a vehicle with a driver has been allocated to him with effect from 19.02.2019

in lieu of a transport allowance. The payment of the transport allowance to the Petitioner

was withheld with effect from 19.02.2021 by the same letter P27. The Petitioner claims

that he has been receiving a monthly transport allowance of Rs. 50,000.00 together with a

monthly fuel allowance since May 2019 until the issuance of the said letter P27. The

Petitioner in response to the said letter P27 has informed the said Assistant Director by

Page 5 of 13

his letter dated 18.02.2021 (P28) that he would not be requiring an official vehicle and

further that he would continue to use his personal vehicle. The document dated

18.02.2021, marked P29 evinced that the 2nd Respondent-Chairman (Chairman) on his

own has decided to provide a vehicle and a driver to the Petitioner as his preferred option

in respect of his entitlement for official transport.

Before the termination of services, the Petitioner was placed on compulsory leave and such

decision has been taken consequent to a meeting held on 08.10.2021. The purpose of the

said meeting which was presided by the said Chairman, was to discuss the affairs of the

Petitioner. The minutes of the said meeting is marked as R5. The participants of the

meeting have discussed on the effect of the Public Enterprise Department Circular

01/2015 (PED Circular 01/2015) and have observed that an officer who is entitled to an

official vehicle has the option of either to use the official vehicle or to avail a monthly

transport allowance and monthly fuel allowance. However, it is apparent that the

Petitioner has been provided a vehicle and a driver notwithstanding the provisions of the

said Circular, but merely on the basis that providing a vehicle to the Petitioner is more

favourable to CIDA.

Furthermore, it appears that a vehicle and a driver had been provided to the Petitioner

despite his refusal to accept such a vehicle and his willingness to accept the other benefits

instead, under the aforesaid Circular. Based on the Chairmans decision that providing a

vehicle and a driver to the Petitioner is more favourable to CIDA, several subsequent

decisions have been taken against the Petitioner by the authorities. Moreover, allegations

have been raised against the Petitioner for accepting the transport allowance and the fuel

allowance when a decision had been taken to provide a vehicle and a driver to the

Petitioner.

The Petitioner was placed on compulsory leave with effect from 08.10.2021 by virtue of

the letter dated 08.10.2021, marked P6. The allegation against the Petitioner in the said

letter P6 is that the Petitioner has misappropriated a sum of Rs.538,720.00 by accepting

the monthly transport and fuel allowance for the months from February to September 2021

during which period the Petitioner was prohibited by the Chairman from receiving such

allowances.

Page 6 of 13

At this juncture, I need to examine the Audit Reports tendered to Court as the cause for

termination of services of the Petitioner shown in the letter of termination marked P7, is

based on an Audit Report.

The objective of the internal Audit Report R7 dated 09.11.2021 is to identify who had

the responsibility over assigning duties of keeping custody of all paying documents and

the filing of paid documents during preceding five years. No action has been proposed

against the Petitioner in the said report. The Audit Report dated 01.10.2021 marked R8

proposes that the question on PED Circular 01/2015 should be referred to the Board of

Management of CIDA in order to obtain a directive in that regard. The Petitioner alleges

that the Audit Report marked C8 has been issued by Mr. M. G. Kandeepan soon after

the Petitioner was placed on compulsory leave. The said Mr. Kandeepan has inter alia

recommended as follows;

a) Since a letter has been issued by the authorities discontinuing the transport

allowance paid to Mr. Vishvajith from February 2021, it is an indecent act to obtain

such allowance from February to October 2021. It is the responsibility of a

disciplined officer to adhere to the decisions made by his superior although such

decisions are unfair.

b) It is recommended to acquit Mr. Vishvajith from all the other charges and to

reinstate him in the same position whilst issuing a warning letter to avoid him

repeating such acts in future.

c) Decision to recover the allowances that were paid during last 10 months is against

the rule of natural justice and the circulars; and it is favourable for both parties to

pay the transport allowance to Mr. Vishvajith as opted by him earlier.

d) It should be understood that it is favourable for both parties to let bygones be

bygones and come in to terms with their differences and continue work in a

peaceful manner.

In such a backdrop, it is pertinent to note that no effective investigation has been carried

out in those Audits to establish the purported allegations against the Petitioner and also

no due recommendation has been made against the Petitioner based on the provisions of

the said Circular. By observing all facts of this case, it appears that the crucial issues of this

case revolve around the PED Circular 01/2015 dated 25.05.2015 (P25A).

Page 7 of 13

The provisions which are material to this case are Clause 3.3, Clause 3.4 & Clause 3.5 of

the said PED Circular 01/2015. Those provisions read as follows;

3.3 An officer who is entitled to an official vehicle has the option either to use the

official vehicle or to avail a monthly transport allowance of Rs.30,000/ and

monthly fuel allowance applicable to the post. However, such officers shall not

be provided with a driver or drivers allowance.

3.4 The transport allowance and the fuel allowance would be added to the

monthly salary.

3.5 The officers who are entitled to official assigned vehicles or a transport

allowance are not permitted to use any other official vehicle including those in

the vehicle pool.

In the circumstances, the pivotal question that this Court should examine is;

a) whether an officer has an absolute discretion, in terms of the PED Circular

01/2015, to opt either to use the official vehicle or to receive a monthly transport

and fuel allowance in lieu of an official vehicle;

b) whether the said Chairman or the CIDA has the authority to prevent an officer of

CIDA enjoying the discretion as mentioned above, on the pretext that providing a

vehicle and a driver is more favourable to CIDA.

The said PED Circular has been issued by the Department of Public Enterprises of the

Ministry of Finance and the signatory to the said Circular is the Secretary to the Treasury.

It is no doubt that the above Circular has been issued based on the Government policy on

transport facilities for the offices in commercial corporations, statutory boards and state-

owned companies.

As per the website of the Ministry of FinanceSri Lanka, its functions, inter alia, are;

providing policy guidance to relevant State Ministries and formulating policies in relation

to the subject of Finance in conformity with the prescribed Laws, Acts and Ordinances.

Further, the said Ministry has responsibilities in relation to macro-economic policies,

annual budget and Appropriation Acts, public financial management etc.

I take the view that a Government formulates its policy such as what is incorporated in

the above PED Circular, usually based on several facts & law including constraints upon

its resources and on social security and public welfare. Hence, those factors need to be

Page 8 of 13

taken in to consideration when assaying the question whether the said Chairman or the

CIDA has the power to deny the rights of an officer under the said PED Circular 01/2015.

Similarly, it is observed that the Clause 6 of the said PED Circular 01/2015 deals with the

clarifications on the said Circular. Any such clarification regarding the Circular may be

obtained from the Additional Director General or the Director of the Department of Public

Enterprises. As I have observed earlier, the internal auditor in R8 has recommended to

refer the issue on the said Circular to the Management of CIDA and not to the Public

Enterprises Department (PED). I draw my attention to the letter issued by the said PED

dated 10.02.2021, marked P45A by which the said Department has categorically

informed the Secretary to the Ministry (with copies to the Director General to CIDA,

Auditor General and the Petitioner) to get a clarification if needed on the provisions of the

said Circular from the PED.

The Petitioner by his letter dated 02.03.2021 has requested the Director General of CIDA

to seek clarifications from the PED on his entitlement for the monthly transport allowance

and however, the said Chairman without adhering to such request has withdrawn both the

vehicle and the payment of those allowances by his letter dated 05.03.2021, marked P33.

In State of UP vs. S. K. Theater Production (2007) 10 SCC 198, 200 (para 11), it was

held as follows;

It is well settled that a relevant factor for interpretation, if there is some ambiguity in a

circular is how the circular has been understood by the department itself which issued it."

However, I am of the view that the said Clause 3.3 of the PED Circular 01/2015, in an

ambiguous language, provides that an officer who is entitled to an official vehicle is given

two options and that is;

a) To use the official vehicle or

b) To avail the monthly transport allowance of Rs.30,000.00 and monthly fuel

allowance applicable to the post.

(The relevant monthly transport allowance of Rs.30,000.00 has been enhanced to

Rs.50,000.00 by virtue of Circular No. PED 01/2015 (i) dated 27.10.2016 marked

P25B)

Page 9 of 13

There is no provision in the said Circular which restricts, impliedly or expressly, an officer

using his discretion to opt either to use the official vehicle or to receive such allowances.

The Secretaries to Ministries or the Chairmen of Commercial Corporations, Statutory

Boards and Government Owned Companies to whom this Circular is being addressed also

have not been bestowed with any authority in terms of the said Circular to compel any

officer to select a particular option in line with the wish of such Secretary/Chairman/Head

of the Institution. I have arrived at the said finding as the said Circular is based on a

Government policy and is issued by the Ministry of Finance which has a prime duty and

a responsibility than the said Chairman/Head of the Institution to consider the financial

constraints, if any, due to the implementation of this Circular.

Thus, I take the view that the PED is empowered to give an interpretation at any point of

time on the aforesaid discretion of an officer in respect of the said Clause 3.3 and it is

obvious that during the period relevant to the instant application, the said Department has

not issued any special interpretation upon the said discretion. It is pertinent to note that

the Director General of PED is the 18th Respondent of this application and the Attorney

General who appears for the PED and also for the 15th and 16th Respondents filing a

motion dated 20.04.2022, has informed Court that no objections would be filed in respect

of the instant application of the Petitioner. In the circumstances, I hold that the said

Chairman has no authority whatsoever to discriminate an officer when using his or her

discretion under the said Clause 3.3 of the Circular. The said Chairman among other

decisions particularly in his decision reflected in P33, has clearly oppressed the discretion

of the Petitioner, impeding him from exercising such discretion at his pleasure.

Now, I advert to examine whether the services of the Petitioner have been terminated

unlawfully. The Petitioner has been serving at CIDA as the Director (Finance) until his

services were terminated with effect from 08.10.2021. The Respondents do not dispute

that the Petitioner is an eligible officer under the Public Administration Circular 22/99,

dated 08.10.1999, marked P25C to avail the benefits in terms of the said PED Circular

01/2015 as amended by PED Circular 01/2015 (i). The PED also has not made any

direction during the period relevant to this case that a probationer is not entitled to the

benefits under the said clause 3.3 of the said Circular. In any event, I am of the view that

the benefits under the said clause 3.3 are being given to officers for them to execute official

Page 10 of 13

duties effectively and such efficiency of work is expected from all the officers irrespective

of the fact that he or she is confirmed in service or not.

As mentioned earlier, the Petitioner has been paid the said transport and fuel allowance

until 19.02.2021 by the CIDA. The Petitioners contention is that he has received

allowances every time with the approval of the Director General of CIDA, although the

Respondents complain that the Petitioner has improperly received the said allowances

during a period where such payments were withheld by the Chairman. Further, it is

observed that no formal disciplinary inquiry has been held against the Petitioner before

taking the decision to terminate his services. The Petitioner avers in his Petition referring

to several instances that his services has been terminated due to malice and mala fides on

the part of the said Chairman.

On a careful consideration of all the circumstances, I take the view that the decision to

terminate the services has been taken as a consequence to the decisions of the said

Chairman or of other authorities interfering with the discretion of the Petitioner when he

was exercising his rights under the PED Circular 01/2015. In light of the above, I hold

that the Chairman has assumed a jurisdiction which he does not have and has exceeded

his jurisdiction by acting contrary to the rule of natural justice and also by arriving at a

decision which is eminently irrational and unreasonable in respect of the concept of the

discretion of an officer embodied in Clause 3.3 of the said Circular. Therefore, in addition

to the decision to terminate the servicers, any subsequent act or decision flowing

therefrom, particularly the charges against the Petitioner on misappropriation of funds are

also ultra vires and void.

Having considered the legality of the impugned decisions of the said Chairman and other

authorities, now it is necessary to proceed to resolve the objections raised by the

Respondents other than the 15th, 16th & 18th Respondents who have not filed statement of

objections.

The contention of the 1st to 14th & 17th Respondents (Respondents) is that the Petitioner

has an alternative remedy and accordingly, the Petitioner should have applied to the

Labour Tribunal in the first instance as the Petitioner is not entitled to invoke the

jurisdiction of this Court upon his termination of services. On principle, I agree that in

terms of Section 31(B) of the Industrial Disputes Act, a workman should first make an

Page 11 of 13

application to the Labour Tribunal for relief or redress in respect of the termination of

services by his employer.

In terms of Section 31(C)(1) of the said Industrial Disputes Act, where an application

under Section 31(B) is made to the Labour Tribunal, it shall be the duty of the Tribunal to

make all such inquiries and make an order as may appear to the Tribunal to be just and

equitable. Thus, in my view, what is applicable to the Labour Tribunals is the law of equity

and essentially not the common law. This Court exercises writ jurisdiction by virtue of the

provisions of Article 140 of the Constitution and thereby it exercises not the Appellate or

Revisionary jurisdiction. The Petitioners instant application to this Court is for Judicial

Review in Administrative Law. In that context, the Labour Tribunal is not competent to

quash an order or a decision of a public authority based on principles of ultra vires.

Certainly, the Labour Tribunal is qualified to analyze evidence and arrive at a conclusion

whether the termination of services is just and equitable. Anyhow, for the reasons set forth,

the Labour Tribunal is not empowered to quash the said Chairmans aforesaid unlawful

decision which is the root cause for the termination of services of the Petitioner. In the

circumstances, I am of the view that the Petitioner will not be able to secure an effective

and efficacious remedy by applying to Labour Tribunal at the first instance. The reasons

for my said findings are that not only the wrongful decisions of the Chairman but even the

subsequent decisions of the authorities flowing from the Chairmans said decision should

become void for the Petitioner to get an effective and efficacious remedy upon his all

grievances.

My view is that not only the Petitioner but many others including the officers of the CIDA

would probably get affected by not giving due effect to the said clause 3.3 of the said

Circular and therefore, such wrongful decisions are definitely tend to be quashed through

an application for Judicial Review. Thus, if an unlawful decision of a public authority

affects the public as a whole other than the person who has recoursed to the Review Court,

such facet certainly should be taken in to consideration when the Review Judge focuses

his mind to the aforesaid effective and efficacious remedy.

The Supreme Court has dealt with section 4(1) and 20 of the Industrial Disputes Act in

E.S. Fernando vs United Workers Union and another (1989) 2 Sri. L.R. 199. G.P.S. De

Silva J. in that case held as follows;

Page 12 of 13

To disentitle the petitioner-appellant to the remedy by way of certiorari, the "alternative

remedy" must be an adequate and an effectual remedy

(Also see- J S H Jayamaha vs. Provincial Public Service Commission, Kurunegala and

others CA/PHC/188/2014, decided on 15.07.2018 and Wickramasinghage Francis

Kulasooriya and another vs. Officer-in-Charge, Police Station, Kirindiwela and others

CA(Writ) 338/2011, decided on 22.10.2018 )

Further, the 1st Respondent contends that the Petitioner should have made a complaint to

the Labour Commissioner with regard to the change in conditions of employment in order

to seek remedies under sections 2 and 3 of the Industrial Disputes Act. This argument of

the 1st Respondent fails in view of my above findings.

The Respondents by way of further objections assert that the Petitioner has committed a

criminal misappropriation of Rs.538,720.00 of state money due to which the Respondents

has lost confidence and trust placed on the Petitioner. Moreover, the 1st Respondent alleges

that the CIDA has conducted an inquiry regarding the actions of the Petitioner in order to

provide him with a fair hearing. I cannot accept these assertions based on my above

findings that the decision to terminate the services emerges from an unlawful decision of

the said Chairman in reference to clause 3.3 of the said Circular.

Similarly, the argument of the Respondents that the Petitioner was under a three-year

probationary period and his services could be terminated at any given time upon valid

reasons, is not strong enough to outweigh my above findings in respect of the unlawful

decisions of the said Chairman and other authorities.

The Respondents attempt to emphasize the fact that the Petitioner did not possess required

experience for the post of Director of Finance and whereby, he was recruited as a

probationer. The Respondents further state that if the Petitioner submits wrong

information with regard to his experience and qualifications, his services can be terminated

as per Clause 6 of the letter of appointment. Anyhow, I observe that no lawful inquiry has

been conducted against the Petitioner based on those alleged grounds and accordingly, I

am not inclined to accept the said proposition of the Respondents.

In the circumstances, I proceed to issue a mandate in the nature of a writ of certiorari

quashing the letter of termination dated 31.12.2021 marked as P7 and all the decisions

reflected in the said letter P7. Furthermore, I issue a mandate in the nature of a writ of

Page 13 of 13

Mandamus directing the 1st to 14th Respondents to reinstate the Petitioner with immediate

effect under the same conditions of service prevailing at the time of his termination

together with all emoluments lawfully entitled by the Petitioner for the period

commencing from the date of termination until his reinstatement and without break of

service.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Dhammika Ganepola J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal