1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal Case No. The Hon. Attorney General

CA/HCC/0032/2016 Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

High Court of Chilaw

Case No. HC/91/2009 Vs

COMPLAINANAT

1. Hettiarachchige Rohan Christy

Kumara Appuhamy

2. Pallawattage Chandana Madhushan

Costa

3. Warnakulasuriya Peruthotage Nuwan

Ameera Fernando

ACCUSED

AND NOW

2 | P a g e

Pallawattage Chandana Madhushan

Costa

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : Sampath B.Abayakoon, J.

P. Kumararatnam, J.

COUNSEL : Anil Silva, PC with Aman Bandara and

S.Neranga for the Appellant.

Azad Navavi, DSG for the Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 13/03/2023

DECIDED ON : 16/05/2023

*******************

3 | P a g e

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam. J,

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) along with 1st and 3rd accused were indicted for committing the

murder of Warnakulasuriya Joseph Rohan Fernando on 12/07/2008 which

is an offence punishable under Section 296 of the Penal Code.

After a non-jury trial, the Learned High Court Judge has found the Appellant

guilty of the charge and sentenced him to death on 29/02/2016. The

Learned High Court had acquitted 1st and 3rd accused from the charge. The

prosecution had called five witnesses and marked productions P1-6 at the

trial. The Appellant along with the 1st and 3rd accused had made dock

statements and closed their case.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

The Learned Presidents Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that

the Appellant has given consent to argue this matter in his absence due to

the Covid 19 pandemic. Also, at the time of argument the Appellant was

connected via zoom platform from prison.

Background of the Case

In this case the deceased was the owner of the Melgahawatte Coconut Estate.

PW1 and PW2 are husband and wife who worked under the deceased at that

time, and they were provided with accommodation in the same estate.

According to PW1, she had worked as a domestic maid at a house. Her

husband PW2, worked as a labourer. On the day of the incident when PW2

returned home, his son was not to be seen. PW1 had told PW2 that their son

had gone to the Appellants house for play. After hearing this, PW2 had gone

4 | P a g e

to the Appellants house and brought his son back. Before he could remove

his son, he had assaulted him in front of the Appellant.

On the following day, i.e., 12/07/2008, the Appellant along with 1st and 3rd

accused had gone to PW1s house and attempted to assault PW2 who

manged to lock himself inside the house. At that time, the Appellant carried

a sword and the 3rd accused carried a knife. When PW2 locked himself inside

the house, the 3rd accused had dealt a blow on the door which resulted in

the door getting damaged. At that time, the deceased had come to the scene

and had inquired as to why they were harassing the innocent people. At that

time, the Appellant had dealt several blows on the deceaseds head with the

sword. During that situation PW1 had run away from the scene due to fear

and returned to the scene of crime only after people gathered there. She had

not seen the 1st and 3rd accused assaulting the deceased. Upon admission

the deceased was pronounced dead. The sword had been identified by this

witness.

PW2, who locked himself in the house had witnessed the incident through

the hole on the door created by the 3rd accused. He had corroborated the

evidence given by PW1.

According to PW4, Dr. Illangaratna Banda, the death has occurred due to

multiple deep incised wounds involving scalp, skull bone and underlying

brain substance.

PW7, CI/Sumith Fernando of Chilaw Police Station had conducted the

investigation. The 1st accused and the 2nd Appellants were arrested on

19.07.2008 and the 3rd accused was arrested on 15.07.2008.

The following grounds appeal were advanced by the Learned Presidents

Counsel.

1. In the absence of adoption of evidence can the conviction be sustained

in this case.

5 | P a g e

2. Has there being a denial of an effective assistance of a Counsel, and

thereby denied a fair trial.

3. In the circumstances of this case should a mitigatory plea under

Section 297 of Penal Code should have been considered.

The Learned Presidents Counsel for the Appellant under the first ground of

appeal argued that the Learned Trial Judge who continued and delivered the

judgment has failed adopt the proceedings as required by Section 48 of the

Judicature Act.

It was held in the case of Herath Mudiyanselage Aruyaratna v. Republic

of Sri Lanka CA/307/2006 decided on 17/07/2013 that:

Transfer of a judge to another station covers the words other disability

as stated in Section 48 of the Judicature Act, hence the succeeding judge

has no disability to continue with a trial.

This Court already held in Case No.CA/HCC/0168/2015 decided on

24/02/2022 that:

In the case under consideration, it is clear from the proceedings that

the succeeding High Court Judge has decided to continue with the case

by calling the remaining witnesses as formally adopting the evidence

previously recorded was not a matter that needed the attention of the

Learned High Court Judge, as there was no such requirement, and the

provision is for the continuation of the trial.

.. although it has been the long-standing practice of our judges to

formally adopt the evidence led before their predecessors, it is not a

mandatory requirement.

As this Court had already held that formal adoption of evidence is not a

mandatory requirement, this ground of appeal will not be perused any

longer.

6 | P a g e

In the second ground of appeal, the Learned Presidents Counsel has

contended that the Appellant had been denied of an effective assistance of a

Counsel, and thereby denied a fair trial.

To substantiate his argument the following portions of evidence and the

portion of the judgment are highlighted.

Under cross examination of PW1, the following question had been put

forward.

(Page 85 of the brief)

m% ( ;ud fmd,sishg lgW;a;r fok wjia:df tfia lsj njg igyka fj,d ;sfnk

ksid th wjOdkhg ,la lrkjd' kqjka iy frdIdka uOqIdkag fldgkak tmd

lshka lvqj .kak yejd' tfyu igyka fj,d ;sfnkjd k yrso@

W ( yrs'

(Pages 95-96 of the brief)

m% ( ;ud fmd,sishg lgW;a;r kakd 2009'07'12 osk' ta lgW;a;rh ;udg lshj,d

kakd u;lo @ ;uka tys m%ldY lr,d ;sfnkjd fufyu @ kqjka iy frdIdka

uOqIdkag fldgkak tmd lshka $ fmdrn`oska lvqj .kak yejd ;udg my,

wlrKfha fl lshj,d oS,d ;sfnkjd' ffl ;sfnk nj ms<s.kakjdo tfyu

lshmq nj igyka fj,d ;sfnkjd @

W ( keye' fmdr lEjd' ta lhu tlg'

m% ( ta fmdrlEf fudlgo@

W ( tal okafka keye'

(Pages 241-242 of the brief)

meKs,sldr mdYjh fjkqfjka bosrsm;a we;s idlaIshkag wjOdkh fhduq l,g 01" 03

pQos;hska" urKlreg 02 pQos; iska myr ka ia:dkfha is njg lreKq bosrsm;a we;;a

7 | P a g e

tu pQos;hska iska urKlreg myr oSug 02 pQos;j osrs .ekajQ njg idlaIshla bosrsm;a

ke;' 02 pQos;g ta i`oyd wdhqOhla ,nd ka njg idlaIs bosrsm;a ke;' urKlreg myr

t,a, lsrSug myiqjk l%shdjl 01" 03 pQos;hska kshek njg idlaIs bosrsm;a ke;' 02

pQos; w; ;snQ lvqf t,a,S bka 02 pQos; iska myroSu je,elaug 01" 03 pQos;hska W;aiyhl

fhkq njg idlaIs wkdjrKh we;'

The Learned Presidents Counsel highlighting the above-mentioned portions

of evidence of PW1 argued that the Appellant had been deprived a fair trial

which is guaranteed under our Constitution due to the deficient performance

of the Counsel who appeared in the High Court. Had the Counsel who

defended the Appellant in the High Court conducted himself professionally,

that the result of the proceeding would have differed. To support his

argument following passage was quoted from the Book titled Professional

Ethics and Responsibilities of Lawyers authored by Dr.

A.R.B.Amerasinghe at page 360.

Sri Lanka provides as follows in rule 8:

Where a conflict arises between the interests of two or more clients for

whom the attorney-at-law is acting, the attorney-at-law shall ease to

act for all his said clients unless he decides that he can without

professional impropriety or embracement to himself appear for any one

or more of such clients provided such other clients or agree that he

might so appear.

Although the Rule appears under the Chapter entitled Acceptance of

instructions, it really covers cases where there was no conflict at the time

of the acceptance of a matter but where it subsequently arises in a matter

in which the attorney is already acting. Generally, where the attorney

cannot consider, recommend, or carry out a course of action for a person

who seeks his services because of his other responsibilities or interests,

which in effect would foreclose alternatives that would otherwise be

available to such a person, and might materially limit his effectiveness,

8 | P a g e

the matter should be declined. If the conflict arises after he accepted the

matter, he should cease to act in the matter. Rule 8 permits an attorney

to appear in a matter if the other client agrees or the clients agree that

he might so appear and if the attorney decides that he can act for the

several parties without any professional impropriety or embarrassment

to himself. There is no guidance given by the rule on how professional

impropriety or embarrassment may be avoided.

Ineffective assistance of a Counsel will lead to a violation of the defendants

right to a fair trial. If the ineffectiveness comes after the trial and the accused

was found guilty, to the remedy the situation the best course of action would

be either the Court reverse the guilty verdict or order a new trial.

In this case, PW1 had clearly witnessed all three accused who came to her

house. The Appellant who was carrying a sword came after PW2, who ran

inside their house and closed the door. At that point, the deceased had come

to the scene only to rescue PW1 and PW2 from the group. But the Appellant

had cut the deceased on his head. Although the deceased raised his hands

to cover from the shots that were being directed on him, he could not save

his life.

Although PW2 had given cogent and convincing evidence in corroborating

the evidence given by PW1, strangely the Learned High Court had not

considered the evidence given by PW2 in his judgment. This is a serious flaw

on the part of Learned High Court Judge.

Considering the evidence given by PW1 and PW2, finding the Appellant guilty

to the charge has not caused any prejudice to the Appellant. Hence, I

consider this is an appropriate case to consider under the proviso of the

Article 138 of the Constitution.

9 | P a g e

Article 138 of The Constitution of The Democratic Socialist Republic of

Sri Lanka states:

The Court of Appeal shall have and exercise subject to the provisions of

the Constitution or of any law, an appellate jurisdiction for the correction

of all errors in fact or in law which shall be committed by the High Court,

in the exercise of its appellate or original jurisdiction or by any court of

First Instance, Tribunal or other institution and sole and exclusive

cognizance, by way of appeal, revision and restitution in integrum, of all

cases, suits, actions, prosecutions, matters and things of which such

High Court of First Instance, Tribunal or other institution may have

taken cognizance;

Provided that no judgment, decree, or order of any court

shall be revised or varied on account of any error, defect, or

irregularity, which has not prejudiced the substantial right

of the parties or occasioned a failure of justice. [Emphasis

added]

The above-mentioned provision of the Constitution clearly demonstrates that

any failure to adhere to the legal provisions can be considered only if such

failure prejudices the substantial rights of the parties or occasions a failure

of justice.

In this case, the Learned High Court Judge considered the evidence

presented by the prosecution very carefully and had come to the conclusion

that that the Appellant is responsible for committing the murder of the

deceased. This finding has certainly not prejudiced the Appellants right to a

fair trial. Hence, no re-trial can be ordered. Therefore, this ground has no

merit.

In the third ground of appeal, the Learned Presidents Counsel contended

that in the circumstances of this case should a mitigatory plea under Section

297 of Penal Code have been considered.

10 | P a g e

In this case, evidence presented by both the prosecution and the defence did

not reveal any mitigatory circumstances that had existed at the time of

committing the offence. Hence, this ground of appeal also devoid any merit.

Considering the evidence led in this case and guided by the judgements

mentioned above, I conclude that this is not an appropriate case in which

the judgement delivered by the learned High Court Judge on 29/02/2016

against the Appellant can be interfered upon. Therefore, the appeal is

dismissed.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send a copy of this judgment to High

Court of Chilaw along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL