1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for a

mandate in the nature of a Writ of

Prohibition in terms of Article 140 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka

C A (Writ) Application No. 09/ 2018

'Daladagama Dhammasiddi

," Thero,

Sri Naagala Rajamaha

Viharaya,

Polpithigama.

PETITIONER

-Vs-

2

,

1. Pujith Jayasundara,

Inspector General of Police,

Police Headquarters,

CoJom be' 01.

2. Shani Abeysekera,

Director,

Criminal'

Department,

Colombo 01.

Investigation

3. I M r Bandara,

Inspector of Police,

Criminal

i. Department,

Colombo 01.

4. Upul Ranjith,

Investigation

Sub Inspector of Police,

3

Criminal Investigation

Department, (CID)

Colombo 01.

5. Fernando,

:. Officer-in-Charge,

Crime Investigation Division,

Police Station,

Polpithigama.

6. Dharmasiri, ,

Sub Inspector of Police,

Special Raid Unit,

,Walana.

7. Officer in Charge,

Special ,Raid Unit,

Walana.

Before:

4

8. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's

Department,

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

r

, !

P. Padman Surasena J (PICA)

A. L. Shiran Gooneratne J

Counsel: Faiz Musthapha PC for the Petitioner.

Manohara Jayasinghe SC for the Attorney General.

Supported on: 2018 - 01 - 26

Decided on 2018 - 02 - 16

5

ORDER

P Padman Surasena~l (PICA)

The Petitioner in this application, who claims1to ,be the chief incumbent of

I

the Sri Naagala Rajamaha Viharaya Temple situated in Kurunegala District . ,

has prayed inter alia for a writ of prohibition _ to restrain the 1st to ]th

Respondents and / or anyone or more of them -from arresting him on an

,allegation of having committed any offence under the Fauna and Flora

Ordinance and / or being concerned with in any offence referred to in the

reports filed in the said case bearing No. B 1052 / 17. .

Learned President's Counsel appearing for the Petitioner submitted that

there is no evidence transpired against the Pefitioner from the contents of

the B reports he had annexed to the Petition.

The averment setting out the apprehension of the Petitioner that the said

. Respondents would arrest him is in paragraph 10 of his petition. The relevant

part in that averment is as follows;

1 Paragraph 2 of the petition

6

"", the Petitioner has become aware of rumors that the Petitioner is to be

arrested and has credible reason to believe that he may be so arrested by

the 1st to 7h Respondents in as much as Mr. Dileepa Peiris DSG who

appeared on behalf of the prosecution on the 12h of December 2017 is

reported to have stated that the Petitioner may be arrested The Petitioner

/ applied for a certified copy of the proceedings of the Said dated 12h Dec

ember 2017 and the Petitioner tenders herewith marked "Y" proof of such

application. The Petitioner states that the Petitioner has not been provided

.. with the said certified copy but has credible information that Mr. Dileepa

Peiris did in fact make such a statement and the Petitioner has become aware

that several newspaper report that the Petitioner is due to be arrested. ","

At the outset, it is the observation of this Court that the previously mentioned

apprehension of the Petitioner is based on hearsay evidence. This Court

cannot act upon such evidence.

Learned President's Counsel for the Petitioner referred to Section 32 of the

Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979. According to the said section ,

it is lawful for any peace officer to arrest without an order from a Magistrate

and without a warrant any person who has been concerned in any cognizable

offence or against whom a reasonable complaint has been made or credible

7

information has been received or a reasonable suspicion exists of his having

been so concerned.

The main prayer is for a writ of prohibition to restrain the Police from

, i arresting the Petitioner on an allegation of having committed any offence

under the Fauna and Flora Ordinance and / or being concerned with in any ,

offence.

, It is the observation of this Court that the issuance of the 'writ of prohibition

1 .f,

prayed for by the Petitioner, would amount to a sit'uation,where it would not

be possible to arrest the Petitioner in respect ofany offence described in his

Petition even when there is ample evidence unearthed by the investigators

against the petitioner. This is particularly so because ~he 'writ sought is for

, , 1 an indefinite period.

It is the view of this Court that the Petitioner has not e?tablished any legal

,'I 0,:, '

basis for this court to issue notices on the Respondentsi':,

) . ,~

The writ jurisdiction vested in this Court by yirtue ot' arti'de 140 of the

, 1- ':

; constitution is a jurisdiction, which this Court, should exercise in its

~ I , ; deiscretion only in a fit case. This is not a fit case in which this Court

should exercise its writ jurisdiction.

8

In these circumstances, this Court decides to refuse to issue notices on the

Respondents.

This Application must therefore stand dismissed.

PRESIDENT OF THE ;COURT OF APPEAL

\ . ; ,

A.L Shiran Gooneratne J

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL