IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

1. E. Kalyanawathie,

Saman, Yamanmulla,

Akuramboda.

2. Athpatiyawe Gedara Jinadasa,

Yamanmulla, Akuramboda.

3. Athpatiyawe Gedara Narasinghe,

(Deceased)

Yamanmulla, Akuramboda.

3A. Tusaratunga Narasinghe,

3B. Ihala Wahunpurage Ciciliyana,

3C. Senani Indra Narasinghe,

3D. Sunethra Nilmini Narasinghe,

All of Yamanmulla, Akuramboda.

4. Athpatiyawe Gedera Seelawathie,

Yamanmulla, Akuramboda.

Defendant-Appellants

CASE NO: CA/891/2000/F

DC MATALE CASE NO: 1821/P

Vs.

1. Pesharatne Patakara Gedera

Wijesiri,

Ruksevana,

Akuramboda,

Matale.

2

2. Pesharatne Patakara Gedera

Sirineris,

Dalalande, Ruksevana,

Akuramboda, Matale.

Plaintiffs-Respondents

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Eraj de Silva for the Defendant-Appellants.

Upendra Walgampaya for the Plaintiff-Respondents.

Decided on: 21.01.2019

Samayawardhena, J.

The two plaintiffs instituted this action against the four defendants

seeking to partition the land described in the schedule to the plaint

between the two plaintiffs and the 1st defendantundivided 1/3rd

share to the two plaintiffs and undivided 2/3rd share to the 1st

defendant. After trial the learned District Judge entered the

Judgment granting undivided 1/3rd share to the plaintiffs but left

the balance 2/3rd share unallotted. It is against this Judgment the

defendants have preferred this appeal.

There is no corpus dispute and the 1st defendant in her evidence

admitted that the land to be partitioned is depicted in the

Preliminary Plan marked X.1

1 Vide page 131 of the Brief.

3

The learned District Judge has accepted the position of the

plaintiffs that by virtue of the Final Order made under the Waste

Lands Ordinance and published in the Gazette marked P4,

Rathnapata Berakara Gedara Siriya became entitled to 1/3rd share

of the corpus and Athpatiyawe Gedara Devaya became entitled to

the balance 2/3rd share. The 1st plaintiff at the trial produced

deeds to show how Siriyas rights devolved on them.

In the joint statement of claim of the 1st-4th defendants, they first

relied on paper title, and then claimed the entire land on

prescription, and sought dismissal of the plaintiffs action. If they

claimed the entire land on deeds, I cannot understand how they

could thereafter claim prescriptive title to the land as one cannot

claim prescription against himself.

According to the statement of claim of the 1st-4th defendants, they

are the children of Athpatiyawe Gedara Devaya. However, only the

1st defendant participated at the trial, and the 1st defendant in her

evidence stated that 2nd-4th defendants never came to Court and

they do not claim any rights from the land.2

The 1st defendant in her evidence has clearly admitted the Gazette

P4 and stated that Athpatiyawe Gedara Devaya referred to therein

and who was declared entitled to 2/3rd share of the land was her

father.

The pivotal argument of the learned counsel for the defendant-

appellants before this Court is that the learned District Judge was

wrong to have admitted the Gazette P4 published under the Waste

Land Ordinance as the primary document of title because a

2 Vide page 133 of the Brief.

4

Settlement Officer cannot decide the question of ownership. This

argument is not entitled to succeed in view of the Full Bench

decision of the Supreme Court in Appuhamy v. Martin3 where it

has been held:

Proceedings under the Ordinance relating to Claims to Forest,

Chena, Waste and Unoccupied Lands, No. 1 of 1897, are

proceedings in rem, and an order embodying an agreement or

admission and falling under section 4(2) of that Ordinance

gives to the claimants mentioned in the order a title good

against all others, including the claimants who failed to

appear before the Special Officer.

The learned counsel for the appellants next drawing attention to

Jane Nona v. Dingiri Mahatmaya4 moves to dismiss the plaintiffs

action on the ground that the plaintiffs have failed to disclose a full

pedigree in the plaint. In my view, the plaintiffs have, to the best

of their knowledge and ability, disclosed a pedigree. The relevant

parties to the action, after P4, shall be the successors in title of

Siriya and Devaya. They have been made parties to the action.

The learned District Judge has refused to grant undivided 2/3rd

share to the defendants (despite the plaintiffs stating so in the

plaint itself) as there was no proof before the learned Judge that

the defendants are the children of Devaya. This being a partition

action, it is on that basis, the 2/3rd share has been left unallotted,

which, in my view, is flawless. That does not mean that the

defendants are disentitled to 2/3rd share. They can, if so advised,

make a proper application before the District Court claiming the

3 (1945) 46 NLR 481 4 (1968) 74 NLR 105

5

unallotted shares. Vide David Danthanarayana v. Nonahamy5,

Sapin Singho v. Luwis Singho6.

In terms of section 26(2)(d) of the Partition Law, No. 21 of 1977, as

amended, the District Judge, after trial inter alia can order that

any portion of the land representing the share of any particular

party only shall be demarcated and separated from the remainder of

the land, and in terms of section 26(2)(g) can order that any share

remain unallotted. Hence the argument of the learned counsel for

the appellants that the purpose of filing a partition action, i.e. to

end co-ownership, is not achieved by the Judgment of the District

Court and therefore the Judgment shall be set aside is

unsustainable.

The rejection by the learned District Judge of the claim of

prescription by firstly the 1st-4th defendants and then at the trial

only by the 1st defendant is justifiable in the facts and

circumstances of the case. No co-owner has been in exclusive

physical possession of this land. Both parties have led evidence to

say that during rainy seasons they did some chena cultivation.

According to the Preliminary Plan and the Report marked X and Y

respectively, nobody is living on the land and there are no

buildingstemporary or permanenton the land. There are,

according to the Report marked Y, 2 Mara trees, 1 Damba tree, 1

Teak tree, 1 Midella tree and 7 pepper plants on the entire land.

By the very nature of those trees (may be except pepper), they

seem to have grown on their own. The claim of payment of

Acreage Taxes to the land by the 1st defendant, even if admitted, do

5 (1978) 79(2) NLR 241 6 [2002] 3 Sri LR 271

6

not prove exclusive possession. Vide Sirajudeen v. Abbas7, De Silva

v. Commissioner of Inland Revenue.8 I need hardly emphasize that

prescription among the co-owners cannot be established by such

fragile evidence.

For the aforesaid reasons, I affirm the Judgment of the District

Court and dismiss the appeal with costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

7 [1994] 2 Sri LR 365 at 369-370 8 (1978) 80 NLR 292 at 296