1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

revision of an order of the Provincial

High Court in the exercise of its

revisionary jurisdiction.

C A (PHC) / APN 79 / 2016

Provincial High Court of

Southern Province (8alapitiya)

Case No. Rev 879 / 2013

Magistrate's Court 8alapitiya

Case No. 53498

1. Somalatha Kumarage,

Thalgaswatta,

Athuruwella,

Induruwa.

! I

2

2. Gorakanage Sumanawathi Alwis,

Thalgaswatta,

Ath u ruwella,

Induruwa.

2ND PARTY RESPONDENT -

RESPONDENT - PETITIONERS

Vs

Jayantha Parakrama Akuratiyagama,

Athuruwella,

Induruwa.

1ST PARTY RESPONDENT-

PETITIONER - RESPONDENT

Before: K K Wickremasinghe 1

P. Padman Surasena 1

3

Counsel; Tenny Fernando for the 2nd Party Respondent - Respondent -

Petitioners.

Vinod Wickramasuriya with Nadeesha Waduge for the 1st Party

Respondent - Petitioner - Respondent.

Argued on: 2017-09-04.

Decided on: 2017 - 10 - 23

JUDGMENT

P Padman Surasena J

The Officer in Charge of Kosgoda Police Station had filed an information in

the Primary Court of Balangoda under section 66 (1) of the Primary Courts

Procedure Act, complaining to the learned Primary Court Judge about an

existence of breach of peace between 2nd Party Respondent - Respondent -

Petitioners (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the 1st and 2nd Petitioners

or Petitioners) and the 1st Party Respondent - Petitioner - Respondents

(hereinafter sometimes referred to as the 1st and 2nd Respondents or

Respondents). This information had been filed on 2012-10-17.

I

I

4

Learned Primary Court Judge having inquired into this complaint, by his

order dated 2013-06-19, had concluded that the Petitioners are entitled to

the possession of the land in dispute.

Being aggrieved by the said order made by the learned Primary Court

Judge, the Respondents had filed an application for revision in the

Provincial High Court of Southern Province holden in Balapitiya urging the

Provincial High Court to revise the order made by the learned Primary

Cou rt Judge.

The Provincial High Court after hearing parties pronounced its judgment

dated 2016-05-11 revising the order of the learned Primary Court Judge.

The Provincial High Court in that judgment had held that it is the

Respondents who are entitled to the possession of the impugned land.

It is against that judgment that the Petitioners have filed this revision

application in this Court.

This Court considered the material adduced by the parties, the order of the

learned Primary Court Judge dated 2013-06-19 and the judgment of the

Provincial High Court dated 2016-05-11.

5

This Court too agrees with the finding of the Provincial High Court that the

learned Primary Court Judge had erred when he had understood the nature

of the dispute to be a dispossession and applied the provisions in section

68 (3) of the Primary Courts Procedure Act No. 44 of 1979.

In this regard, the following passage from a judgment of this Court in the

case of Punchi Nona V Padumasena and others! would be relevant. It is as

follows;

" ... Section 68 (1) of the Act is concerned with the determination as to

who was in possession of the land on the date of the filing of the

information to Court. Section 68 (3) becomes applicable only if the Judge

can come to a definite finding that some other party had been forcibly

dispossessed within a period of 2 months next preceding the date on which

the information was filed .... "

Learned Primary Court Judge had clearly erred when he had applied

provisions in section 68 (3) when the Respondent has .not even complained

of a dispossession. All what he had complained was that the Petitioners

had disturbed his peaceful possession.

11994 (2) Sri. L R 117.

r \

I ! i ! l'

! I

~ I' < I 1!! ! i i ,

I .i ! i ! I ! j

~;

~

6

In these circumstances, this Court is of the view that the learned High

Court Judge was correct when he held that it is the Respondents who are

entitled to the possession of this land.

In these circumstances, this Court sees no merit in this application.

Thus, this Court decides to refuse this application and proceed to dismiss

the same. The Petitioners are directed to pay Rs. 40,000/= to the

Respondent as costs.

Application is dismissed with costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K K Wickremasinghe J

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL