==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 18

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of Section 331 (1) of the Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 The Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General‟s Department, Colombo 12. Complainant Court of Appeal Case No. CA HCC 196-198/2023 Vs. High Court of Tangalle Case No. HC 04/2001 1. Samarasekara Widanapathiranage Sirisena

2. Samarasekara Widanapathiranage Amolis (Deceased) 3. Nanhamy Senanayake 4. Palagasingha Kodithuwakkuge Leelawathie

5.Samarasekara Widanapathiranage Ravindra

6. Samarasekara Widanapathiranage Ajith

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Samarasekara Widanapathiranage Sirisena 1st Accused-Appellant

Samarasekara Widanapathiranage Ravindra

5th Accused-Appellant

Page 2 of 18

Samarasekara Widanapathiranage Ajith

6th Accused-Appellant

Vs. The Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General‟s Department, Colombo 12.

Complainant-Respondent

Before: B. Sasi Mahendran, J. Amal Ranaraja, J.

Counsel: U.R. De Silva P.C. with Pradeepa Kaluarachchi, Thilini Atapattu, Chathura Weeramantry, Sanuri Dissanayake and Hansani Pathirana for the 5th and 6th Accused-Appellants. Anil Silva, P.C. with Aravinda Silva for the 1st Accused-Appellant. Anoopa de Silva, D.S.G for the Respondent. Argued on: 02.12.2025 Judgment on: 19.01.2026

Page 3 of 18

JUDGMENT

AMAL RANARAJA, J.

1. The accused appellants together with three others have been indicted in

the High Court of Tangalle in High Court case number HC/04/2001.

The charges in the indictment are as follows:

Charge 01

That on or about January, 10, 1995, at Tharapeliya, within the

jurisdiction of this Court, the accused appellants along with other

accused, by being members of an unlawful assembly with the common

object of causing injuries to one Dissanayake Kodithuwakku

Kankanamge Thilakarathne, committed an offence punishable under

section 140 of the Penal Code.

Charge 02

During the same course of transaction as above, the accused appellants

along with the other accused, committed murder by causing the death of

one Dissanayake Kodithuwakku Kankanamge Thilakarathne whilst being

members of an unlawful assembly; and thereby committed an offence

punishable in terms of section 146 read with section 296 of the Penal

Code.

Charge 03

During the same course of transaction as above, the accused appellants

along with the other accused, committed murder by causing the death of

one Kankanamge Dharshana Saman Kumara whilst being members of an

Page 4 of 18

unlawful assembly; and thereby committed an offence punishable in

terms of section 146 read with section 296 of the Penal Code.

Charge 04

During the same course of transaction as above, the accused appellants

along with the other accused, committed murder by causing the death of

one Dinneris Rajapakshe whilst being members of an unlawful assembly;

and thereby committed an offence punishable in terms of section 146

read with section 296 of the Penal Code.

Charge 05

During the same course of transaction as above, the accused appellants

along with the other accused, committed attempted murder of one

Wannigamage Piyasena whilst being members of an unlawful assembly;

and thereby committed an offence punishable in terms of section 146

read with section 300 of the Penal Code.

Charge 06

During the same course of transaction as above, the accused appellants

together with the other accused, voluntarily caused hurt to Peramuna

Arachchige Piyathilaka, by means of a dangerous weapon, whilst being a

member of an unlawful assembly; and thereby committed an offence

punishable in terms of section 146 read with section 315 of the Penal

Code.

Charge 07

During the same course of transaction as above, the accused appellants

together with the other accused, voluntarily caused hurt to Peramuna

Arachchige Premarathne by means of a dangerous weapon, whilst being a

member of an unlawful assembly; and thereby committed an offence

Page 5 of 18

punishable in terms of section 146 read with section 315 of the Penal

Code.

Charge 08

During the same course of transaction as above, the accused appellants

together with the other accused, committed murder by causing the death

of one Dissanayake Kodithuwakku Kankanamge Thilakarathne; and

thereby committed an offence punishable in terms of section 32 read

with section 296 of the Penal Code.

Charge 09

During the same course of transaction as above, the accused appellants

together with the other accused, committed murder by causing the death

of one Kankanamge Dharshan Saman Kumara; and thereby committed

an offence punishable in terms of section 32 read with section 296 of the

Penal Code.

Charge 10

During the same course of transaction as above, the accused appellants

together with the other accused, committed murder by causing the death

of one Dinneris Rajapakshe; and thereby committed an offence

punishable in terms of section 32 read with section 296 of the Penal

Code.

Charge 11

During the same course of transaction as above, the accused appellants

together with the other accused, committed attempted murder of one

Wannigamage Piyasena; and thereby committed an offence punishable in

terms of section 32 read with section 300 of the Penal Code.

Page 6 of 18

Charge 12

During the same course of transaction as above, the accused appellants

together with the other accused, voluntarily caused hurt to Peramuna

Arachchige Piyathilaka by means of a dangerous weapon; and thereby

committed an offence punishable in terms of section 32 read with section

315 of the Penal Code.

Charge 13

During the same course of transaction as above, the accused appellants

together with the other accused, voluntarily caused hurt to Peramuna

Arachchige Premarathne by means of dangerous weapon; and thereby

committed an offence punishable in terms of section 32 read with section

315 of the Penal Code.

2. The second accused named in the indictment has passed away prior to

the trial. The third and the fourth accused have been acquitted of all

charges consequent to the trial. The first, fifth and the sixth accused

appellants (hereinafter referred to as “first accused appellant”, “fifth

accused appellant”, “sixth accused appellant” or “appellants”) have been

convicted of eighth to thirteenth charges and acquitted of the other

charges.

3. Upon being convicted, the first, fifth and sixth accused appellants have

been sentenced as follows:

i. The first accused appellant has been sentenced to death in respect

of the eighth, ninth and tenth charges.

ii. The fifth and the sixth accused appellants being under eighteen

years of age, at the time of the commission of the offences, have

Page 7 of 18

been sentenced to life imprisonment in respect of the eighth, ninth

and tenth charges.

iii. Also, the first, fifth and the sixth accused appellants have been

sentenced to ten years rigorous imprisonment and have been

imposed a fine of Rs. 10000.00 each for the same with a term of six

months simple imprisonment in default, in respect of the eleventh

charge.

iv. The first, fifth and sixth accused appellants have been sentenced

to two years rigorous imprisonment and have been imposed a fine

of Rs. 5000.00 each with a term of six months simple

imprisonment in default, in respect of the twelfth charge.

v. The appellants have been sentenced to two years rigorous

imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 5000.00 each with a term of six

months simple imprisonment in default, in respect of the

thirteenth charge.

vi. Further, the substantive terms of imprisonment in respect of the

eleventh, twelfth and thirteenth charges have been directed to run

concurrently.

4. The first, fifth and the sixth accused appellants being aggrieved by the

conviction, disputed judgment together with the sentencing order have

preferred the instant appeal to this Court.

Case of the prosecution

5. On January 10, 1995, PW04 who had been the titleholder of a paddy

land named Lindhagawa Deniya Kumbura, has arrived at the site. PW04

Page 8 of 18

has been accompanied by the injured and the deceased, their collective

purpose being to harvest the paddy crop.

6. Upon their arrival, various tasks have commenced, some members of the

group have begun cutting the stalks of the paddy plants, while others

have been gathering these into bundles, preparing them to be taken to

the designated threshing area.

7. It is alleged that while this process was ongoing, the appellants and the

other accused named in the indictment have arrived at the site. They

have approached the site the injured and the deceased were from the

direction of the first accused appellant‟s house.

8. Upon their arrival, the appellants and some of the other accused have

assaulted the injured and the deceased. Specifically, the first accused

appellant has used an axe while the fifth and the sixth accused

appellants have used „kathis’ (machetes) during the assault.

9. While the individual named in the second and eighth charges has died at

the scene of attack, the other deceased have succumbed to their injuries

in the hospital following admission for treatment.

10. The post-mortem report for the deceased marked ඳැ02, ඳැ03 and ඳැ08

document the findings of the medical officers who have attributed the

deaths to shock and hemorrhage due to cut injuries. The medico-legal

reports issued in respect of the injured, i.e. PW01, PW02 and PW03 have

been produced as evidence marked ඳැ04, ඳැ05 and ඳැ06.

Page 9 of 18

Case of the appellants

11. The first accused appellant has denied any knowledge of the incident

that resulted in injuries of the deceased and other victims. He has

claimed that at the time, he was located in the backyard of his property.

According to his dock statement, he has heard a sound and upon

checking, he has found his parents injured. He has then promptly taken

them to the hospital for medical attention.

12. The fifth and the sixth accused appellants have maintained that they

were away in Lunugamwehera at the time of the alleged incident and only

became aware of it through their father.

Grounds of appeal

13. When the matter was taken up for argument the learned President‟s

Counsel for the first, fifth and sixth accused appellants urged the

following grounds of appeal:

i. Prosecution has failed to prove its case beyond a reasonable doubt.

ii. Matters favourable to the appellants have not been taken into

account by the learned High Court Judge.

14. Sharing similar grounds of appeal, with the fifth and the sixth accused

appellants, the learned President‟s Counsel for the first accused

appellant has contended that his client was entitled to the benefit of the

exception of sudden fight instead of being convicted of murder, as set out

in the eighth, ninth and tenth charges in the indictment.

Page 10 of 18

15. The exception iv for murder as set out in section 296 of the Penal Code is

as follows:

“Culpable homicide is not murder if it is committed without premeditation

in a sudden fight in the heat of passion upon a sudden quarrel, and

without the offender having taken undue advantage or acted in a cruel or

unusual manner”.

16. To benefit from the legal exception of sudden fight, the following facts

must be established.

i. Absence of premeditation - The act causing the death must not be

planned or pre-arranged, it must be a sudden occurrence.

ii. Sudden quarrel and fight – There must be a sudden quarrel that

leads to an impromptu physical fight or “mutual combat” between

the parties.

iii. Heat of passion – The offender must have committed the act in heat

of passion, where his sober reasoning was clouded by anger or

excitement, with insufficient time for his emotions to cool down.

iv. No cruel or unusual manner – The degree or the nature of force

used must be proportionate to the fight and the offender must not

have acted in a cruel or unusual manner. (e.g. inflicting merciless

wound on a helpless victim negates this element)

17. A key aspect of this exception is that it is immaterial as to which party

offered the provocation or committed the first assault. The focus is on the

sudden and unpremeditated nature of the mutual fight and the

subsequent conduct of both parties as equals in the confrontation. If

these conditions are met, the accused is entitled to the benefit of the

exception, even if he intended to cause the bodily injury that resulted in

death.

Page 11 of 18

18. In Kumarasinghe v The State 77 NLR 218, H. N. G. Fernando C.J. has

observed as follows:

“Any of the five Exceptions specified in Section 294 of the Penal Code

(including Exceptions dealing with provocation and sudden fight) is

applicable in a case, in which an accused has caused death with the

murderous intention; if the mitigating circumstances set out in any of these

exceptions are established…the effect of such an exception is that the

accused is guilty only of culpable homicide not amounting to

murder despite the fact that he did entertain a murderous

intention”.

19. The prosecution witnesses have testified that while they were collectively

harvesting the paddy crop on PW04‟s land, the appellants along with the

other indicted accused have approached from the direction of the first

accused appellant‟s house armed with axes and „kathis‟ (machetes).

20. They have thereafter, attacked the deceased and the injured as detailed

in the witness testimonies. Although it has been claimed that the third

and the fourth accused were also present, no witness has described the

specific involvement of the third and the fourth accused in the attack.

Consequently, these accused have received the benefit of the doubt.

21. Crucially however, no witnesses have testified to an incident supporting

the first accused appellant‟s claim of a sudden fight legal exception.

Indeed the learned President‟s Counsel has been unable to point out to

any witness testimony suggesting such an incident. Moreover, the first

accused appellant‟s own testimony has failed to describe circumstances

that would trigger the application of this legal exception of sudden fight.

Page 12 of 18

22. As stated earlier in this judgment, the first accused appellant has

claimed to have heard a sound when he was in the backyard of his

property and upon checking, has found his parents injured. He has

promptly taken them to the hospital for medical attention thereafter.

23. The learned President‟s Counsel for the fifth and the sixth accused

appellants have contended that his client were entitled to succeed in

their plea of alibi instead of being convicted of the eighth to thirteenth

charges in the indictment.

24. An alibi is a plea where the accused claims to have been elsewhere at the

time of the alleged crime, making his presence at the scene of crime

impossible. The core principles of a plea of alibi in Sri Lanka are as

follows:

i. An alibi is an “evidentiary fact” under section 11 of the Evidence

Ordinance, used to cast doubt on the prosecution‟s case by

demonstrating the physical impossibility of the accused‟s

involvement.

ii. The accused does not bear the burden of proving his alibi on a

balance of probability.

iii. If the evidence for the alibi when weighed against the prosecution‟s

evidence creates a reasonable doubt, the accused must be

acquitted.

iv. The alibi must cover the exact time of the alleged offence to

effectively exclude the accused‟s presence from the crime scene.

25. In Banda and Others v Attorney General [1999] 3 SLR 169, F.N.D.

Jayasuriya, J. has held:

Page 13 of 18

“There is no burden whatsoever on an accused person who puts

forward a plea of alibi and the burden is always on the

prosecution to establish beyond reasonable doubt that the

accused was not elsewhere but present at the time of the

commission of the criminal offence.”

26. Also in Punchibanda v The State [1973] 76 NLR 293 at 308, G.P.A. De

Silva, S. P. J. (as he was then) has held:

“Where the defence is that of an alibi, the accused person has no

burden as such of establishing any fact to any degree of

probability.”

27. Further when an accused sets up a plea of alibi, J. A. N. De Silva C.J. in

Jayatissa v Attorney General [2010] 1 SLR 279 at 283 has suggested

three postulates;

i) If the evidence is not believed the alibi fails,

ii) If the evidence is believed, it succeeds,

iii) If the alibi evidence is neither believed nor disbelieved, but

would create a reasonable doubt, the accused should get the

benefit of the doubt.

28. A trial Judge must consider all evidence, including the alibi in its totality.

The entire evidence must be considered to determine if the alibi evidence

is false or if it raises a reasonable doubt.

29. The learned High Court Judge in this regard has undertaken a thorough

examination of the evidence presented. Firstly, he has focused on the

reliability of the identification of the fifth and the sixth accused

appellants by the prosecution witnesses.

Page 14 of 18

30. The learned High Court Judge has considered the nature and the extent

of the relationship or the familiarity between the prosecution witnesses

and the fifth and sixth appellants, as a prior acquaintance can bolster

identification reliably. He has satisfied himself that the witnesses

possessed the actual capacity to correctly identify the fifth and sixth

appellants. In that regard, he has also drawn his attention to the

scrutinizing conditions at the scene of the incident.

31. Thereafter, the learned High Court Judge has carefully reviewed the

narratives provided by the prosecution witnesses regarding the fifth and

sixth accused appellants‟ specific involvement in the incident that led to

the injuries of the deceased and the injuries to the victims (injured).

32. The learned High Court Judge has also taken into account contextual

factors that influence the likelihood of the fifth and sixth accused

appellants‟ presence. Specifically, the relationship between the fifth and

the sixth accused appellants with the other accused and the distance

between the actual scene of the incident and the area known as

Lunugamwehera. This has been considered, as a significant distance

could impact the feasibility of the fifth and sixth appellants‟ presence. He

has also assessed the overall probability of the fifth and sixth accused

appellants being at the scene of the incident, weighing all circumstantial

evidence and logical inferences.

33. Moving to the fifth and sixth accused appellants‟ position, the learned

High Court Judge has conducted a holistic evaluation of all testimony,

from both the prosecution and the appellants, specifically addressing the

fifth and sixth accused appellants‟ plea of alibi. Having considered all the

testimony, (prosecution and appellants‟) in its entirety, the learned High

Court Judge has decided to disregard the fifth and sixth accused

appellants‟ testimony related to their alibi, finding it insufficiently

Page 15 of 18

established or credible. Instead, the learned High Court Judge has

chosen to act upon and accept the consistent and compelling testimony

provided by the prosecution witnesses concerning the events.

“එමෙන්ෙ 5, 6 විත්තිකරුවන් විසින් අනයස්තානිකකානව ිළිබඳ඲ ක්ෂණය ්ෂ දිරිපඳත්

කකමින් විත්තිකූඩුමේ සිට ප්‍රකන බඳන ී ඇා 5 ස්හ 6 විත්තිකරුවන් නු දැනට මි ම ොස්ත

සිටින 2 විත්තිකරු ස්හ 3 විත්තිකරුමේ මුණුබුකන් මදමදමනකි ඳළමු විත්තිකරුමේ

ස්මහෝදකම කුමේ දරුවන් මේ ඔවුන් ප්‍රකන කකනුම ඔවුන් ලුණු ්වමවමහක ප්‍රමශ ම

ස්තථික ඳිරිංචිකරුවන් වන ඳවත්, අඳකනධ සිදු ව෕ ිරනම ී ඔවුන් ලුණු ්වමවමහක ප්‍රමශ ම

සිටි ඳවත් මෙෙ ආකවුබ ස්්වඳන්ධම න් ඔවුන් මදමදනන ද අව ය ස්ැකකරුවන් ඳවට දැන

ැනීමෙන් ඳසුව ස්තමේච්ඡනමවන් මඳොලීසි ට ානක ව෕ ඳව ඔවුන් ප්‍රකන කක ඇා

මකමස්ේ නමුදු ඳැමිණිල්බ ෙඟින් කැ඲වන බද ස්න්ෂශිකරුවන් විසින් 5, 6 විත්තිකරුවන්

අඳකනධ ස්තථනනම සිටිමින් ක්‍රි නකනිපව එෙ අඳකනධ ට දන ක ව෕ ආකනක ස්්වඳන්ධම න්

ස්න්ෂශි බඳන ී ඇා එෙ ස්තථනවක බි඲ මහළීෙට 5, 6 විත්තිකරුවන් ස්ෙත්ව නැා අඳකනධ

සිදු ව෕ ස්තථනන ස්හ ඔවුන් කි න සිටින ලුණු ්වමවමහක ප්‍රමශ ස්ළකන ඳැලීම්විර එෙ

ස්තථනන මදක එකිමනකට දුිපන් ිළහිටි බඟනවීෙට අසීරු භූම ෝලී දුණතකකානවලින් යුත් ස්තථනන

මදක්ෂ මනොවන ඳව ඳැහැිරලිව මඳික යි ම්ව අනුව 5, 6 විත්තිකරුවන්මේ ප්‍රකන ෙඟින්

ඳැමිණිල්මල් නඩුව මකමකහි කිසිදු ස්ැක ්ෂ ජිකා මනොමේ ”

34. Further, a crucial aspect requiring consideration is the belated

introduction of the plea of alibi by the fifth and sixth accused appellants.

This plea has not been presented until the very late stage of the trial,

specifically, when they made their unsworn statements from the dock.

Critically, the plea of alibi has never been put to any of the prosecution

witnesses during cross examination. This has deprived the prosecution of

any opportunity to test its veracity.

35. Furthermore, the appellants have offered no explanation for this

significant delay in raising the particular plea, nor have they accounted

for the failure to present it earlier or to challenge the prosecution‟s case

Page 16 of 18

on the specific ground. In light of these cumulative circumstances, the

only reasonable inference to be drawn, is that the plea of alibi constitutes

an afterthought on the fifth and sixth accused appellants, thereby

diminishing its probative value and credibility.

36. In the case of Gunasiri and two others vs. The Republic of Sri Lanka

[2009] 1 SLR 39, Sisira de Abrew J. held that:

“It is a rule of essential justice that when ever the opponent has declined

to avail himself of the opportunity to put his case in cross examination, it

must follow that the evidence tendered on that issue ought to be accepted.

The failure to suggest the defence of alibi to the prosecution witnesses who

implicated the accused, indicates that it-was a false one.”

37. Finally, the appellants have been convicted of the offences set out in

charges eight to thirteen in the indictment read with section 32 of the

Penal Code, i.e. common intention.

38. In criminal law, common intention refers to a shared, prearranged plan

or meeting of minds among several accused to commit a specific criminal

act. It is a principle of joint liability, where each person involved is held

responsible for the entire act as if they did alone.

39. Common intention requires a prearranged plan or a prior meeting of

minds. This plan need not be long-standing, it can be formed suddenly,

even at the spur of the moment, during the incident. The criminal act

must be done by an accused “in furtherance of” this shared intention.

The act committed must be connected to the common plan.

40. Once the common intention is established, the law imposes vicarious or

joint liability. Every participant is deemed to have committed the entire

Page 17 of 18

criminal act “as if it were done by him alone”, regardless of the degree of

the physical participation.

41. Courts typically infer common intention from the surrounding facts and

circumstances of the case, using circumstantial evidence.

42. The actions of the accused before, during and after the crime are crucial.

A court can examine whether the actions of the accused were performed

in concert with and to achieve the shared plan. The evidence of a

prearranged plan can be strong evidence. This can be inferred from how

the accused arrived, their coordinated movements and the weapons they

carried.

43. While physical presence is not always a prerequisite for common

intention (e.g. a master mind directing remotely might be liable), active

participation can be key evidence. The mere presence as a passive

bystander is not enough. Statements made by the accused before, during

and after the incident that suggest a shared purpose can be used as

evidence. The nature of the relationship between the accused can be

relevant in supporting inference of a shared plan. If the accused carried

out different acts that collectively completed the offence, it could imply a

common plan.

44. The learned High Court Judge‟s inference that the appellants were acting

in furtherance of a common intention are based on several concerning

factors. These include the pre-existing dispute over the title of the paddy

land, the very location of the incidence between the deceased, the

prosecution witnesses and the appellants along with the other accused.

45. Crucially, the court has noted the coordinated arrival and movements of

the appellants and the other accused named in the indictment at the

Page 18 of 18

scene coupled with the fact that they were already armed with the axe

and „kathis‟ (machetes). Furthermore, their active and sustained

participation in attacking both the deceased and the injured, with these

weapons, have demonstrated a concerted effort.

46. Finally, the distinct actions of the appellants when viewed in their

entirety constituted the offences with which they have been charged

indicating a unified execution of a criminal plan. In light of these

circumstances, the learned High Court Judge was correct in inferring

common intention to cause fatal injuries, to cause bodily injury sufficient

in the ordinary course of nature to cause death to the deceased/injured

and also to cause hurt to the injured.

47. In those circumstances, I am not inclined to interfere with the conviction,

disputed judgment together with the sentencing order and affirm the

same. I proceed to dismiss the appeal and make no order regarding

costs.

Appeal dismissed.

48. The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgment to the High

Court of Tangalle for compliance.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

B. SASI MAHENDRAN, J.

I agree

Judge of the Court of Appeal