==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

Orders in the nature of Writs of

Certiorari, Prohibition and Mandamus

under Article 140 of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

1. Nekath Gedara Tikiri Banda,

No. 8/132, Golden Medows, 4A Lane, Kirigampamunuwa, Polgasowita.

2. Nekath Gedara Jayarathna Bandara,

No. 75, Kothmalpura, Thambuttegama.

CA (Writ) App. No. 08/2023

PETITIONERS

Vs.

1. Sri Lanka Mahaweli Authority,

No. 500, T.B. Jaya Mawatha, Colombo 10.

2. The Director General Sri Lanka

Mahaweli Authority No. 500, T.B. Jaya Mawatha, Colombo 10.

3. W.M. Sugath Weerasinghe

Resident Project Manager, Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka Office

2

of the Resident Project Manag System H, Thambuttegama.

4. I. Ranaweera Deputy Resident Project

Manager (Land), Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka, Office of the Resident Project Manager System H, Thambuttegama.

5. R.S. Nilmini Sriyalatha

Block Manager, Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka, Block Office - Thambuttegama System-H, Thambuttegama.

6. A. Nisantha Bandara,

Unit Manager, Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka Unit 404, System – H, Thambuttegama.

7. Nekath Gedara Wijerathna Bandara,

No. 74, Mahaweli Kandawura. Thambuttegama.

8. Nekath Gedara Bandara Menike,

No. 75, Kothmalpura, Thambuttegama.

9. Nekath Gedara Dingiri Banda,

No. 86, Samagipura, Nawalapitiya.

10. Nekatha Gedara Jayamenike,

Maliyadewapura, Thambuttegama.

11. Nekath Gedara Wije Menike,

No. 1395, 3rd Lane, Bogaswewa 2, Vavuniya.

12. Nekath Gedara Sunil Bandara,

No. 75, Kothmalpura, Thambuttegama.

3

13. Nekath Gendra Nimal Bandara,

No. 75, Kothmalpura, Thambuttegama.

14. Nekath Gedara Jayantha Nimal

Bandara, No. 72, Sama Uyana, Kundasale.

15. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department, Hulfsdorp, Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

Before: Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Counsel:

Naveen Maharachchi instructed by Usha Kannangara for the Petitioners.

Shehan Soysa, S.S.C., for the 1st to 6th Respondents.

Kushan Illangatillake instructed by Udeni Gallage for the 7th Respondent.

Shanika Kariyawasam instructed by Ms. Gimhani Gamage for the 8th to 14th Respondents.

Argued on: 15.09.2025

Delivered on: 09.06.2026

4

Dr. D.F.H. Gunawardhana, J.

Judgement

Introduction

The two Petitioners are the eldest and the second child of one Nekath Gedara Appuhamy, and the

7th to 14th Respondent are also the said Appuhamy’s children and the siblings of the Petitioners.

The 1st Respondent is the Mahaweli Development Authority (hereinafter referred to as the

“MDA”), the 2nd Respondent is its Director General, the 3rd Respondent is the Resident Project

Manager of the MDA, the 4th Respondent is the Deputy Resident Project Manager (Land), and the

5th Respondent is the Block Manager while the 6th Respondent is the Unit Manager. The 7th

Respondent was once a manger of the 1st Respondent and a child of the said Appuhamy.

The said Appuhamy had been initially issued with a permit in respect of certain parcel of paddy

land which is morefully described in the schedule to the grant issued to him later to legalise his

possession, marked as P1A annexed to the Petition. After he had been issued with the said grant,

he had not nominated anybody to succeed to the rights, and he died in 2013. Thereafter, his wife

survived him, and died in 2021.

After the death of the original grantee’s wife, the 1st Petitioner, who is the eldest child, had made

an application to the 6th Respondent to succeed to the rights of the original grantee. However, he

initially refused to accept the same, and returned the same, asking him to submit it with certain

other documents including the Grama Sevaka Certificate, which he had complied with.

Later, he was informed by the 6th Respondent that the 7th Respondent had been nominated as the

successor, and therefore, his succession will be accepted; as such, he rejected the application of

5

the 1st Petitioner. Thereupon, there had been various appeals by the Petitioners and the other

siblings who objected to such succession of the 7th Respondent, and however, on the advice of the

Honourable Attorney General, the 5th Respondent has decided to accept the 7th Respondent to

succeed to the rights of the original grantee. The said information had been notified to the 1st

Petitioner, and the Petitioners thereupon has instituted the above-styled application before this

Court, challenging the same which is marked as X annexed to the Petition.

After issuance of formal notice, the 1st to 6th Respondent and the 8th to 14th Respondents have filed

their respective Objections, while the 7th Respondent has filed separate Objections.

This was argued before me on 28.04.2026; hence, this judgement.

Arguments

The thrust of the main contention of Mr. Maharachchi is that there is a cancellation of the original

nomination made by the permit holder, who had nominated the 7th Respondent by the document

marked P16. Subsequently, after cancellation of the nomination by document P18, he has re-

nominated the 12th Respondent as the new nominee.

Since the new nominee has declined to succeed, the 1st Petitioner, who is the eldest in the family,

should succeed to the said rights of the original grantee. In addition to that, he argued that Justice

Asoka Silva’s judgment in the case of Piyasena v. Wijesinghe & Others [2002]1 on succession

applies; however, he further argued that Justice Sarath Silva’s judgment in the case of Mallehe

1 2 Sri L.R. 242.

6

Vidaneralalage Don Agosinno v. The Divisional Secretary of Polonnaruwa and Others2￼ will not

apply.

On the other hand, Mr. Shehan Soysa, the learned State Counsel, argues that no registration is

required for nomination, as mentioned by Justice Sasi Mahendran in the case of Ihala Jawara

Gedara Hema Malani v. The Divisional Secretary of Medirigiriya and Others [2024]3.

He contended, therefore, the P16 will prevail as P18 is a disputed document, and there is no valid

cancellation of the original nomination as well.

On the other hand, Mr. Illangatillake argued for the 7th Respondent that registration is not required

as far as the original nomination is considered. However, he disputes the authenticity of P18 when

compared the two signatures on P16 and P18 of the nominator. In addition to that, he contends

that he is not aware of the existence of the document marked as P17.

In reply, Mr. Mahawaniarachi argued that the only question to be decided is whether the

cancellation should be registered or not. Hence, all parties concede that registration is not required

when there is a nomination. In that case, the only question is whether cancellation also needs to be

registered.

The Petitioners’ position

According to the Petitioners, the said copy of the grant given to the said Appuhamy is marked as

P1A annexed to the Petition, and the same has been registered in the relevant folio of the Land

Registry and registered in the Mahaweli Development Registry; the relevant documents are

2 SC (Appeal) No. 30/2004 (SC Minutes 23.03.2005). 3 CA (WRT) 425/2022 (CA Minutes 25.09.2024).

7

marked and annexed to the Petition as P1A to P1B. In addition to that, it is their position that the

same has been registered under the Title of Registration Act, which is depicted in the cadastral

plan of the Surveyor General; in proof thereof, the Petitioners have marked P2A to P2B annexed

to the Petition.

The said Appuhamy had several children, including the two Petitioners and the 7th to 14th

Respondents; to establish that, the Petitioners have marked and annexed their birth certificates as

P3C(i) to P3C(x). The said Appuhamy died in 2013, and his death certificate is annexed to the

Petition, marked as P3A. His wife also died in 2021, and in proof thereof, her death certificate is

marked as P3B annexed to the Petition.

Thereafter, according to the Petitioners, the 1st Petitioner has made an application to the 6th

Respondent to accept him, being the eldest male child, as the successor. The said application was

returned by the 5th Respondent asking him to submit it with relevant documents including the

Grama Sevaka Certificate, which he complied with.

Thereafter, the 1st Petitioner has been informed by the 5th Respondent that the 7th Respondent’s

name has been accepted to the rights of the original grantee, Appuhamy, and therefore, his

application cannot be accepted.

The Petitioners’ father, Appuhamy, had initially been issued with a permit, and under the said

permit, he had nominated the 7th Respondent as his successor, which is registered as well and

reflected by the document marked as P16. However, after the issuance of the grant in terms of

Section 19(4) of the Land Development Ordinance, which is marked as P1A annexed to the

Petition, there was no nomination.

8

Nevertheless, it is asserted in the Petition that the father of the Petitioners, namely the late

Appuhamy, had cancelled the nomination made under the permit and, having cancelled the same,

re-nominated the 12th Respondent as the successor. In support of that position, the Petitioners have

annexed the documents marked as P18 and P18(i) along with the Petition.

Thereupon, all the children including the 2nd Petitioner and the 8th to 14th Respondents have

objected to the same. Thereafter, there had been certain inquiries and correspondence which the

Petitioners have annexed to the Petition. However, after consulting the Honourable Attorney

General, the Honourable Attorney General has given the opinion directing the 4th to 6th Respondent

to accept the 7th Respondent as the successor and accordingly register him as the successor.

It is their position that the 7th Respondent cannot be treated as the successor in so far as he is not

the eldest child in the family. Additionally, when Appuhamy was indisposed in 1995, the 1st and

2nd Petitioners were involved in cultivation in the land in suit, particularly the 2nd Petitioner’s name

has been registered in the Govi Sangamaya and other relevant places to be the farmer who

cultivated the said paddy field. In addition to that, the fertilizer subsidiary was issued in the 2nd

Petitioner’s name, and he has attended to all the relevant cultivation work, including the

preparation of the field, sowing paddy seeds, fertilizing, manuring, treating the young paddy plants,

reaping the harvest, and dealing with harvest, except for two seasons where only the 7th Respondent,

by force, has cultivated the land; however, there had been complaints against each other on that.

Except for those two seasons, even to date from 2000, the 2nd Petitioner has cultivated the land and

therefore should be treated as the person who developed the paddy field.

As such, it is the position of the Petitioners that if the 1st Petitioner is not accepted, being the eldest

child, then the 2nd Petitioner should be accepted as the person who developed the land as the

successor, and not the 7th Respondent.

9

According to the Petitioners, the 7th Respondent, being a manager of the 1st Respondent Authority

of a particular unit has used his influence and instigated all other relevant people, including the 2nd

to 6th Respondent, to accept him as the successor, which he should not have done and has no right

to do; to establish that, a document issued to that effect by the 1st Respondent Authority in 2022

stating that the 7th Respondent, having joined as an officer therein and on promotion, served from

2018 as a manager of a unit under the 1st Respondent, and after completing sixty years, had retired

from the said unit, is marked and annexed to the Petition as Y.

Therefore, the Petitioners impugned the document marked as X has been influenced by the 7th

Respondent over the other Respondents to take a decision in his favour to accept him as the

successor who has no right. As such, the Petitioners challenge the same and seek inter alia the

following relief;

“b) Grant and issue an Order in the nature of writ of Certiorari quashing and/or setting

aside the decision by the 3rd Respondent morefully set out in the letter dated 07.06.2022

marked ‘X’ hereto, to name the said Nekath Gedara Wijerathna Bandara, the 7th

Respondent as the owner to the land in question morefully described in the Schedule

hereunder;

c) Grant and issue an Order in the nature of writ of Mandamus directing the 1st to 6th

Respondents above named, to name and/or appoint the 1st Petitioner and/or 2nd Petitioner

as the owner and/or owners, and/or successor and/or successors to the land in question

morefully described in the Schedule hereunder;”

10

The Respondents’ Objections

The 1st to 6th Respondents have filed their Objections, and according to them, while denying the

averments contained in the Petition, the 7th Respondent had been nominated as the successor while

the original grantee held the land under a permit. Thereafter, it was their position that there was no

other nomination or cancellation of nomination made under the permit; therefore, the 7th

Respondent is entitled to succeed, and as such, they have sought the dismissal of this Application.

The 7th Respondent has also filed a separate set of Limited Objections, where he has admitted

certain averments contained in the Petition. He, being a child of the late Appuhamy, admitted that

he also cultivated the land along with the 2nd Petitioner.

However, P18 and P18(i) are seriously challenged by the 7th Respondent; in particular, P18 does

not bear any signature. Further, P18(i) has been submitted by an attesting witness to P18; however,

the said attesting witness has not stated anything with regard to the non-existence or execution of

P18. In addition to that, neither P18 nor P18(i) had been submitted to the relevant authorities

communicating the cancellation of the original nomination and the fresh nomination of the 12th

Respondent.

However, he denies the rest of the averments contained in the Petition, except for the fact that he

worked as a manager of a unit of the 1st Respondent, and he retired with effect from 2018; thereafter,

his daughter, initially having been trained as a data operator of the 1st Respondent, was later

attached to the same as a permanent employee.

In addition to that, he has admitted that his daughter-in-law also worked under the 1st Respondent

as an officer; in proof of that, he has annexed the documents marked as 7R4 and 7R5 to his

Statement of Objections.

11

As such, he has sought the dismissal of this Application as well.

In addition to that, certain other Respondents, as siblings of the Petitioners, have filed their

respective Objections, where some have moved for a dismissal of this Application while others

have sought the relief be granted in favour of the Petitioners.

Among them, the 12th Respondent has also filed his respective Objections, and in his Statement of

Objections, he has mentioned that he was nominated after the cancellation of the nomination of

the 7th Respondent under the permit by the father, but he asserts that his nomination was never

submitted for registration since he was under the impression that it might prejudice the rights of

all other siblings, particularly the 2nd Petitioner who cultivated the land during their father’s illness.

In this case, the two Petitioners as well as the 12th Respondent, in their Objections, state that the

land in question was cultivated at different times by different siblings. In fact, this position was

further confirmed by the document marked as X, according to which, after the death of the original

grantee, the said Appuhamy, his widow, as the life interest holder and the mother of all the children,

including the two Petitioners and the 7th to 14th Respondents, had permitted her children from time

to time to cultivate the land depending on the season, namely ‘Yala’ and ‘Maha’. Accordingly, the

7th Respondent had also cultivated the land for four seasons, and the other children had likewise

cultivated it in the same manner, which is known as seasonal cultivation.

Accordingly, they all cultivated paddy, the subject matter being a paddy field. Therefore, nobody

can claim any development or improvement by way of permanent vegetation on the property

because paddy, being considered a seasonal crop, falls within the category of fructus industriales,

as enunciated in several judgments. Therefore, on the basis of development or possession, nobody

can claim entitlement to the land.

12

Non-communication of new nomination and cancellation is fatal

Now I have to consider whether there was communication of the cancellation of the original

nomination made by the grantee and whether such cancellation was communicated to the relevant

authorities for registration. According to the Petitioners, although there was a cancellation, there

was no communication of such cancellation, as reflected in P16. In addition to that, the new

nomination had also not been communicated. In fact, the 12th Respondent has confirmed this

position.

Therefore, such non-communication is a fatal defect because none of the 1st to 5th Respondents

was aware of the alleged cancellation and fresh nomination for the purpose of considering and

accepting the same for registration. Accordingly, the purported cancellation by the late Appuhamy

through P18 and the alleged fresh nomination of the 12th Respondent remain uncommunicated

documents and, therefore, cannot form part of the official record. As such, they have no validity

in law.

In those circumstances, the interpretation given by the Honourable Attorney General to the

relevant provisions of the Land Development Ordinance (hereinafter referred to as the “LDO”) is

consistent with the procedure laid down therein. Hence, to buttress my view, I rely on the

judgement of Justice Sarath Silva in the case of Mallehe Vidaneralalage Don Agosinno v.

Divisional Secretary and Others [2005]4.

The Honourable Attorney General has given an opinion on the issue of succession based on the

registration of the original nomination made under the permit. The permit had been issued by the

said late Appuhamy in terms of Section 19(2), and the same was duly registered. Thereafter, a

4 SC Appeal No. 30/2004 (SC Minutes 23.03.2005).

13

grant was issued under Section 19(4) of the Land Development Ordinance. However, the said

Appuhamy never made a nomination under the grant. Although the original nomination was

purportedly cancelled, it has not been cancelled ostensibly or otherwise, nor was any new

nomination made in its place; this position is clearly admitted by the 12th Respondent. Further,

upon a clear perusal of documents marked as P16, P17 and P18, it is evident that there is no

cancellation of the former nomination nor any valid acceptance of a new nomination.

As correctly interpreted and applied thereunder the provisions of the LDO by the Honourable

Attorney General to the facts of the instant case, where a nomination made under the original

permit has not been cancelled or replaced by a valid subsequent nomination, such nomination

should be treated as continuing in force. This position holds notwithstanding the allegations of

undue influence sought to be attributed to the 7th Respondent or his family members.

In addition, document marked as X reveals that the original grantee’s wife, after succeeding to the

property upon the death of the original grantee in 2013, continued in possession until her death in

2021. During this period, she permitted different children to cultivate the paddy land depending

on the season. Therefore, no single child can claim exclusive possession.

In that context, no development activity has been carried out, except for the cultivation of seasonal

crops such as paddy. Paddy being a seasonal crop, is considered fructus industriali and not fructus

naturali; vide, Gunatilaka Appu v. Mudainse.5

5 [1880] 3 S.C.C. 80.

14

Conclusion

For the reasons adumbrated above, no writ lies. Accordingly, this Application is dismissed, without

cost.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL