IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A.Application No. 228/2010

High Court Balapitiya

In the matter of an appeal in terms of

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 read with

Article 138( 1) of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka

COMPLAINANT

Vs

Hewa Hakuru Somadasa

ACCUSED

Case No. 1158/2008 AND NOW

1

Hewa Hakuru Somadasa

ACCUSED - APPELLANT

Vs

The Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENT

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

DECIDED ON

L.U. Jayasuriya J.

: Deepali Wijesundera J.

L.U. Jayasuriya J.

: Amila Palliyage for the

Accused - Appellant

H.I. Peiris D.S.G. for the

Attorney General

: 23rd May, 2017

: 23rd June, 2017

The accused - appellant was indicted in the High Court Balapitiya

under Section No. 364 (3) of the Penal Code for committing rape on his

daughter named Priyadarshanie and was convicted and sentenced to 15

years RI.

The story of the prosecution is that on the day of the incident the

appellant, the prosecutrix and her husband have gone to visit

prosecutrix's mother in the night whose house was about five minutes

walking distance from the prosecutrix house. On the way they spent the

night in someone else's house which the prosecutrix said belonged to an

2

old man. All three of them have slept in the same room and in the morning

they have left for the prosecutrix's mother's house.

While they were walking, the appellant had assaulted the

prosecutrix's husband and chased him away. Thereafter appellant had

thrown a sarong on the ground and had raped the prosecutrix thrice.

The ground urged by the appellants counsel is that;

1. The evidence placed before the High Court has not been

analyzed by the High Court Judge properly.

The prosecutrix while giving evidence in chief has stated that her

husband accompanied her (vide page 44 of the brief) while being cross

examined she has admitted that her husband was assaulted and chased

away by the appellant before leaving her house.

She has admitted to court (vide page 100 of the brief) that all she

said in evidence was not true. The appellant had given evidence and has

been cross examined. We find that his testimony had been un

contrad icted.

3

On a perusal of her evidence I find that the prosecutrix has not

been a consistent and a reliable witness. She has admitted to court that

all she said was not true. It is unsafe for the High Court Judge to convict

an accused on her evidence. Therefore I decide to set aside the judgment

dated 12/05/2010 and acquit the accused appellant.

Appeal allowed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Deepali Wijesundera J.

I Agree

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

4