==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 7

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal under Article

154P(6) read with Article 138 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

Court of Appeal case No: CA/PHC/155/22

Provincial High Court of Ratnapura

Case No : RA 30/2020

Additional Magistrate’s Court of Ratnapura

No. 29319A

Abeythunga Wijekoon Mudiyanselage

Wijesekera,

Formerly at with Salgahayata Kade,

Gonapitiya, Kuruwita

and now at with Ranjith, Galamuna,

Gonapitiya, Kuruwita.

Petitioner - Aggrieved Party

VS.

1. Abeythunga Wijekoon Mudiyanselage

Tikiri Bandara,

Gonapitiya, Kuruwita.

2. Galabada Gamage Renuka Tharangani,

Gonapitiya, Kuruwita.

Respondents

Page 2 of 7

AND BETWEEN

Abeythunga Wijekoon Mudiyanselage

Wijesekera,

Formerly at with Salgahayata Kade,

Gonapitiya, Kuruwita

and now at with Ranjith, Galamuna,

Gonapitiya, Kuruwita

Petitioner - Petitioner - Aggrieved Party

VS.

1. Abeythunga Wijekoon Mudiyanselage

Tikiri Bandara,

Gonapitiya, Kuruwita.

2. Galabada Gamage Renuka Tharangani,

Gonapitiya, Kuruwita.

Respondent – Respondents

AND NOW BETWEEN

Abeythunga Wijekoon Mudiyanselage

Wijesekera,

Formerly at with Salgahayata Kade,

Gonapitiya, Kuruwita

and now at with Ranjith, Galamuna,

Gonapitiya, Kuruwita.

Petitioner - Petitioner - Petitioner -

Page 3 of 7

Aggrieved Party

Vs.

1. Abeythunga Wijekoon Mudiyanselage

Tikiri Bandara, Gonapitiya, Kuruwita.

2. Galabada Gamage Renuka Tharangani,

Gonapitiya, Kuruwita.

Respondent - Respondent - Respondents

Before: B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

Amal Ranaraja, J

Counsel : Lakmal Sooriyagoda with Kalpana Dissanayake for the 1st and 2nd

Respondents

Written

Submissions: 19.01.2026 (by the 1st and 2nd Respondent-Respondent-Respondents)

On

Argued On: 22.01.2026

Judgment On: 26.02.2026

JUDGMENT

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

The Petitioner-Petitioner-Petitioner-Aggrieved Party (hereinafter referred to as the

"Aggrieved Party") has filed this appeal seeking to set aside the order delivered by the

learned High Court Judge of the Provincial High Court of the Sabaragamu Province,

holden in Ratnapura, dated 16th June 2020, in Case No. RA 30/2020, where the learned

High Court Judge affirmed the order of the Learned Magistrate of Ratnapura on 17th

January 2020 in Case No. 29319.

Page 4 of 7

The Aggrieved Party who is the father of the 1st Respondent and father in law of the 2nd

Respondent, has instituted an action in the Magistrate Court of Ratnapura by a private

plaint on 28.10.2013 in terms of the Prevention of Domestic Violence Act No. 34 of 2005

against the Respondents seeking a permanent Protection Order against them, claiming

that they threatened him, caused annoyance, and unlawfully occupied a house which he

had constructed. He stated that after his wife’s death 18 years ago, he lived in the house

with his children and had only temporarily allowed the 1st Respondent to reside there.

The Aggrieved Party further alleged that the Respondents benefited from the income of

the tea plantation on the disputed land and had issued death threats to him. He claimed

that he was chased away from the house on 24.09.2013.

In contrast, the 1st Respondent denied these allegations and claimed that the Aggrieved

Party neglected the family and was addicted to gambling and cannabis. He further

claimed that he built and developed the house through his own efforts and obtained a

valid permit from the Divisional Secretariat in his name. He also stated that he pays the

electricity bills and that both he and his wife are registering voters at that address,

whereas the Aggrieved Party is not.

During the inquiry, the Aggrieved Party admitted that the permit for the land was issued

in favour of the 1st Respondent and that he owns another house and land where he

currently resides. It was also revealed that the Aggrieved Party was not registered on the

voters’ list for the relevant years.

By Order dated 17.01.2020, the learned Magistrate of Ratnapura held that the Aggrieved

Party failed to establish that the Respondent had committed Domestic Violence against

the Aggrieved Party. Further, Learned Magistrate stated that the Aggrieved Party was

not residing in the said house at the time the action was instituted; nevertheless, the

Court issued a Protection Order for twelve (12) months restraining the Respondents from

committing domestic violence and from following or tailing the Aggrieved Party, while

refusing and dissolving all other reliefs sought in the Petition.

Being dissatisfied with the said order, the Aggrieved Party filed a revision application in

the Provincial High Court of the Sabaragamuwa Province holden in Ratnapura. After the

matter was supported, the Learned High Court Judge delivered the order dated

30.08.2022 dismissing the petition of the Aggrieved Party on the premise that he had

failed to show any exceptional circumstances to invoke the revisionary jurisdiction. The

relevant portion of the said order is produced below.

Page 5 of 7

Page 94 of the brief,

“2005 අංක 34 දරණ ගෘහස්ථ ප්‍රචණ්ඩ ක්‍රියා වැලැක්වීමේ පනත යටමේ සහන ලබා ගැනීම සඳහා

මපේ සේකරුට අදාල ගෘහමේ නීතයානුකූල අයිතිවාසිකමක්ව තිබීම අවශ්‍ය මනාමේ. එකී පනමේ 23

වන අර්ථ නිරූපන වගන්තතිමේ සදහන්ත පරිදි " හවුමේ භුක්වති විඳින සේපේ '' යන්තමනන්ත දක්වවා ඇති

නනතික තේවය සලකා බැලීමේදී ඒ බව පැහැදිලි මේ.

එමස් වුවද ඔහු අදාල නිවමස් එම කාලමේ පදිංචිව සිටින ලද බවේ වග උේතරකරුවන්තමේ ක්‍රියා මඟින්ත

" ගෘහස්ථ, ප්‍රචන්තඩේවයට " ලක්වවන බවේ මපේසේකරු විසින්ත සාක්වි මඟින්ත අනාවරණය කළ යුතුය

එකී කරුණු සැලකිේලට ගැනීමේදී ඉදිරිපේ වූ සාක්වි මත උගේ මමහ්ස්රාේතුමා විසින්ත සිය නිමයෝගය

ලබා දී ඇති බවේ, එකී නිමයෝගය 2005 අංක 34 දරණ ගෘහස්ථ ප්‍රචණ්ඩ ක්‍රියා වැලැක්වීමේ පනමේ

නනතික ප්‍රතිපේති වලට අනුකූලව ලබා දී ඇති බවටේ මමම අධිකරණමේ මතයයි.

එමස්ම මමම ප්‍රතිමශ්‍ෝධන අධිකරණ බලය එකී අධිකරණමේ අභිමතානුසාරී බලයකි. මමහ්ස්රාේ

අධිකරණ ආඥාව ප්‍රතිවර්ථනය කිරීමට නේ මමම අධිකරණමේ මනස ප්‍රකේපනය කරවන සුළු බරපතල

නනතික මදෝෂයක්ව මහෝ යුක්වතිය අපගමනය ීමක්ව සිදු ී තිබිය යුතුය.

...........................

එකී සියළු කරුණු සැලකිේලට ගැනීමේදී මපනී යන්තමන්ත මමම අධිකරණමේ ප්‍රතිමශ්‍ෝධන බලතල

ක්‍රියාේමක කරීමට ප්‍රමාණවේ සුවිමශ්‍්ි කරුණු මහෝ මහ්තු මපේසේකරු විසින්ත මමම නීති කෘතයමේදී

ඉදිරිපේ කර මනාමැති බවයි. එමස් මහයින්ත මමම ප්‍රතිමශ්‍ෝධන අයදුේ පරය ගාස්තු රහිතව නිශ්‍්ප්‍රභා

කරමි. මුේ නඩු වාර්තාව සහ මමම නිමයෝගමේ පිටපතක්ව රේනපුර අතිමර්ක මමහ්ස්රාේ අධිකරණය

මවත යැීමට මමම අධිකරණමේ මරජිස්ටාර් මවත නියම කරමි.”

Being aggrieved by the said order, the Aggrieved Party instituted the present appeal

before this Court.

I am mindful that generally, our Courts have allowed the revision application when the

applicant has no other remedy. In the instant case, the Aggrieved Party has a right to

appeal to the high court, but he has failed to do so. But it is also now settled law that

revisionary powers would be exercised even though there is an alternative remedy.

However, this could be exercised only in exceptional circumstances.

The object of revisionary jurisdiction is to ensure the due administration of justice and

correction of errors regarding either the law or the facts in order to avoid miscarriage of

justice.

Page 6 of 7

In Mariam Beebee, Vs. Seyed Mohamed, 68 NLR page 36 at page 38, His Lordship Sansoni,

C.J. stated that:

“The power of revision is an extraordinary power which is quite independent of

and distinct from the appellate jurisdiction of this Court. Its object is the due

administration of justice and the correction of errors, sometimes committed by this

Court itself, in order to avoid miscarriages of justice. It is exercised in some cases

by a Judge of his own motion, when an aggrieved person who may not be a party

to the action brings to his notice the fact that, unless the power is exercised,

injustice will result.”

This judgment was followed by His Lordship Aluwihare PC. J in Wijesiri Gunawardane

and Others v. Chandrasena Muthukumarana and Others, SC Appeal No. 111/2015 with

SC Appeal No. 113/2015 and SC Appeal No. 114/2015, decided on 27.05.2020 and further

held that;

“The above argument is firstly premised on the assumption that the revisionary

jurisdiction and the appellate jurisdiction are one and the same. It is only if the

former is a subset of the latter, could the taking away of the appellate power results

in automatically suspending the revisionary powers. However, historically, it has

been the opinion of our Courts that the revisionary jurisdiction is distinct from

appellate jurisdiction. One basic distinction would be that while the appellate

rights are statutory, the exercise of revisionary power is discretionary. Although

revisionary jurisdiction shares characteristics with the appellate jurisdiction, they

are not one and the same.”

Upon reviewing the learned Magistrate’s order, he has reached the following

determinations.

Page 243 of the brief,

“ඉදිරිපේ වූ සාක්වි සලකා බැලීමමන්ත අනතුරුව මපේසමේ ආයාචනමේ VI හි ඉේලා ඇති පරිදි පීඩාවට

පේ තැනැේතා සමග සාමය කඩවන ආකාරමේ සේබන්තධතාවයක්ව 01 වන සහ 02 වන වග

උේතරකරුවන්ත විසින්ත ඇති කර ගනු ලැබීමට උේසහ කිරීම වලක්වවාලමින්ත, සහ ආයාචනමේ VII හි

ඉේලා ඇති පරිදි පීඩාවට පේ තැනැේතාට හිරි හැරයක්ව වන පරිදි සහ ඔහු පීඩාවට පේ වන අයුරින්ත 01,

02 වග උේතරකරුවන්ත පීඩාවට පේ තැනැේතා පසුපස ගමන්ත කිරීම වලක්වවාලමින්ත ද ස්ිර ආරක්වෂන

ආඥාවක්ව මාස 12 ක කාලයකට නිකුේ කරමි. මපේසේකරු අදාළ නිවමස් දීර්ඝ කාලයක්ව පදිංචිව

Page 7 of 7

මනාසිටින බැවින්ත සහ පීඩාවට පේ තැනැේතා හට ඔහුමේ නමට මවනේ ඉඩමක්ව සහ නිවසක්වද තිමබන

බැවින්තද ආරවුේ ගත ඉඩලි වග උේතරකරුමේ නමට ඇති බැවින්තද යන කරුණුද අනිකුේ කරුණු ද

සලකා බලා මපේසමේ ආයාචනමේ ii, iii, iv, v, viii, ix, x හි ඉේලා ඇති පරිදි ස්ිර ආරක්වෂක

ආඥාවක්ව නිකුේ කිරීමට කරන ලද ඉේලීම ප්‍රතික්වමෂ්ප කරමි. මපේසමේ ආයාචනමේ iii, iv, v, viii,

ix, x හි ඉේලා ඇති පරිදි නිකුේ කර ඇති අතුරු ආරක්වෂන ආඥාව විසුරුවා හරිමි.”

The question before us is whether this order shocks the conscience of the Court. The

Aggrieved Party has failed to establish that the respondents committed any offence listed

under Schedule I of the said Act. Furthermore, there is no evidence to demonstrate that

the Aggrieved Party has suffered emotional damage, nor is there proof that he is in

occupation of the said house.

I am of the view that the learned Magistrate has correctly come to the conclusion stating

that no domestic offence has been committed by the respondents as stated by the

Aggrieved Party. Therefore, the Learned High Court Judge correctly considered that the

Aggrieved Party had failed to show any exceptional circumstances to invoke the

revisionary jurisdiction and made the said order.

For the above-said reasons, there is no need to interfere with the order made by the

Learned High Court Judge dated 6th June 2020

For the aforesaid reasons, I dismiss the Appeal. No order for costs.

The Registrar is hereby instructed to transmit a copy of this Judgment to the Magistrate's

Court of Ratnapura.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Amal Ranaraja, J.

I AGREE

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL