1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRAIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

Court of Appeal Case No. CA (PHC) 196/2007

High Court Rathnapura Case No. RA 46/2007

Magistrate Court Rathnapura Case No. 50597

Before : P.R.WIgama J.

: L.T.B. Dehideniya J.

David Wanniarachchi, Marapona South, Rathnapura.

Ambagahage Watte Ganga Addara Gunarathne Menike, Marapona South, Rathnapura.

2nd and 3rd Party Respondents-Appellants

Vs.

J ayaweera Gamaathiralalage Brahmanawatte Linton Jaayaweera, Marapona, Ma-Udella, Rathnapura.

1 st Party Petitioner Respondents

Counsel : 2nd and 3rd Party Respondents Appellants absent and unrepresented.

R.M.D. Bandara with M, de Silva for the 1 st Party Petitioner Respondent.

Argued on : 13.05.2016

Decided on : 14.07.2016

2

L.T.B. Dehideniya J.

This is an appeal from an order of the Learned High Court Judge of

Rathnapura. The 1 st Party Petitioner Respondent (Respondent) made a

complaint to the police stating that access road to the land belonged to

him was obstructed by the 2nd and 3rd Party Respondent Appellants (the

Appellants). After investigation, the police filed a report in the Magistrate

Court under section 66 of the Primary Court Procedure Act. The

Magistrate Court after inquiry determined that the Respondent is entitle to

a foot path. Being aggrieved by the said order, the Respondent moved in

revision to the Provincial High Court of Rathnapua. The Learned High

Court Judge set aside the order of the learned Magistrate and held that the

Respondent is entitle for a right of way of 9 feet wide. Being dissatisfied

with the order of the High Court, the Appellants presented this appeal.

Although the notice of this appeal was served on the Appellants they

were absent and unrepresented. Only the Respondent appeared and

participated at the argument.

The Learned High Court Judge has come to the finding that the

Respondent was using the disputed road as a 9 feet wide road. The police

officer who. visited the road way has reported to Court that the entry point

of the read is about 10 feet and the place obstructed is 9 feet wide. Further

observed that there were tire marks in the road. The barbed wire used to

obstruct the road was new and the obstruction was a recent one.

Under section 69 of the Primary Court Procedure Act, Court has to

determine who is entitle to the right. Under section 75 disputes affecting

land includes any dispute as to any right in the nature of a servitude

affecting the land. It has been held in the case of Ramalingam v

Thangaraja [1982] 2 Sri L R 693 at 699 that;

3

On the other hand, if the dispute is in regard to any right to any

land other than right of possession of such land, the question for

decision, according to section 69(1), is who is entitled to the right

which is subject of dispute. The word "entitle" here connotes the

ownership of the right. The Court has to determine which of the

parties has acquired that right, or is entitled for the time being to

exercise that right. In contradistinction to section 68, section 69

requires the Court to determine the question which party is entitled

to the disputed right preliminary to making an order under section

69(2).

In the present case the Learned High Court Judge has come to the

finding that the Respondent is entitle to a road way of 9 feet wide. The

evidence, the police inquiry notes, leads to the finding that the

Respondent was using the disputed right of way as a 9 feet wide road. I

see no reason to interfere with the finding of the Learned High Court

Judge.

Accordingly the appeal is dismissed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P.R.Walgama J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal