IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Abid Sherwani,

No. 27 1/3,

Alfred Place,

Colombo 3.

Petitioner

CASE NO: CA/WRIT/652/2011

Vs.

1. The Monetary Board of the Central Bank

of Sri Lanka.

2. Mrs. T.M.G.Y.P. Fernando,

Director,

Bank Supervision,

Central Bank of Sri Lanka.

Respondents

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Faisz Musthpha, P.C., with Faisza Markar for the

Petitioner.

Vikum De Abrew, Senior D.S.G., for the Respondents.

Decided on: 25.07.2019

2

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The petitioner filed this application seeking a writ of certiorari to

quash P12 whereby the 1st respondent Monetary Board of the

Central Bank of Sri Lanka has, in terms of section 42(8) of the

Banking Act, No.30 of 1988, as amended, directed the Habib Bank

Limited to remove the petitioner from the post of Country Manager

of Sri Lanka of the said Bank.

This is as a result of large sums of moneys in US Dollars being

illegally remitted out of Sri Lanka by two non-existing bogus

companies through Habib Bank Sri Lanka on the pretext of

payments for imports on forged documents.

The learned Presidents Counsel for the petitioner submits that the

said decision of the Monetary Board is ultra vires.

Section 42(8) of the Banking Act reads as follows:

Where the Director of Bank Supervision, having regard to the

matters specified in subsections (1), (2) and (3) is satisfied at

any time that a person appointed, elected or nominated as the

case may be as a director of a licensed commercial bank is not

a fit and proper person or that he is otherwise ineligible for

appointment, election or nomination as the case may be or

that the election, appointment or nomination as the case may

be of a person as a director of a licensed commercial bank

contravenes the provisions of subsection (3) or subsection (7)

the Director shall submit a report to the Monetary Board. The

Board may, if it is satisfied on consideration of the report and

such other matters which in its opinion merit inquiry, that the

3

person is not a fit and proper person or the election,

appointment or nomination as the case may be of the person

contravenes the provisions of subsection (3) or subsection (7)-

(a) direct the bank in writing to remove such person from

the office of director within such period as may be specified in

such direction, giving the reasons for such direction; and

(b) notify in writing the person whose removal is required

under such direction, of such direction, a copy of which shall

be annexed to such notification,

and the bank shall within the period specified in the direction

remove such person from the office of the director and notify

such person in writing of his removal from the office of

director, and shall take such steps as are necessary to inform

the shareholders of the bank and the Registrar of Companies

of such removal. The removal of a director in accordance with

the directions given under paragraph (a) shall take effect from

the date of receipt by the director of the notification of removal

given by the bank, notwithstanding the provisions of any

other law or the Articles of Association of the bank.

The first argument of the learned Presidents Counsel for the

petitioner is that it is an essential prerequisite for a decision by the

Monetary Board to first have a Report from the 2nd respondent-

Director of Bank Supervision of the Central Bank that the person

concerned is unfit to hold that position, but in this instance, there

was no such Report. The learned Presidents Counsel argues that

the Report on the Spot Examination marked P5 is the material

used by the Director of Bank Supervision to commence

4

investigation against the petitioner, and it is not a Report of the

Director of Bank Supervision, which was submitted to the

Monetary Board.

This argument is unacceptable inter alia in view of P6 tendered by

the petitioner himself wherein the 2nd respondent-Director of Bank

Supervision has informed the petitioner that Spot Examination

was carried out by the Bank Supervision Department. Together

with P6, the Director of Bank Supervision has sent a copy of the

Report of the Spot Examination to the petitioner, and also

informed the petitioner by P6 that the said Report was submitted

to the Monetary Board.

Then it is clear that the Director of Bank Supervision has

submitted a Report, which is P5, to the Monetary Board.

It is relevant to note that before compiling the Report P5, as seen

from R3, the petitioner has been given a hearing. In R3, the

petitioner has thanked the Deputy Governor of the Central Bank

for the patient hearing and your appreciation of our submissions.

The next submission of the learned Presidents Counsel for the

petitioner is that the Director of Bank Supervision has failed to

satisfy herself the matters mandated by section 42(8) of the

Banking Act. I have quoted section 42(8) above.

Section 42(2)(b) reads as follows:

In determining whether a person would, for the purposes of

subsection (1) be considered to be a fit and proper person, the

following matters shall be taken into consideration(b) that

there is no finding of any regulatory or supervisory authority,

5

professional association, any Commission of Inquiry, tribunal

or other body established by law in Sri Lanka or abroad, to

the effect that such person has committed or has been

connected with the commission of, any act which involves

fraud, deceit, dishonesty or any other improper conduct.

According to section 28 of the Monetary Law Act, No. 37 of 1974,

as amended, the Director of Bank Supervision Department of the

Central Bank is statutorily authorized to supervise all Banking

institutions in Sri Lanka. That section reads as follows:

28(1) For the purposes of the continuous supervision and

periodical examination of all banking institutions in Sri Lanka,

the Central Bank shall establish and maintain a department

of bank supervision.

(2) The head of the department established under subsection

(1) shall be called the Director of Bank Supervision.

Hence the 2nd respondent, the Director of Bank Supervision

conveniently falls into the category of Supervisory Authority

established by law for the purpose of section 42(2)(b) of the

Banking Act.

The Director of Bank Supervision by P5 arrived at several findings

against the petitioner. One such finding reads as follows:

The Country Manager and Compliance Officer of HBL are

directly responsible for the above-mentioned willful breaches

of regulatory requirements and lapses in internal control

mechanism in an attempt to cover up the fraudulent foreign

currency remittances of PSS and BMD.

6

In terms of section 42(2)(b), the petitioner to be considered as unfit

to hold that position, there need not necessarily to be a finding

that he has committed an act which involves fraud, deceit,

dishonesty or any other improper conduct. A finding that he has

been connected with the commission of any such act is adequate.

Hence the second argument that the 2nd respondent-Director of

Bank Supervision failed to perform her statutory duty fails.

The third argument of the learned Presidents Counsel for the

petitioner is that the 1st respondent-Monetary Board has acted in

abdication of its statutory duty.

The learned Presidents Counsel states that, under section 42(8),

there shall be a report submitted by the Director of Bank

Supervision and such other matters which in its opinion merit

inquiry before making the decision by the Monetary Board.

According to the learned Presidents Counsel this has not

happened.

I have already stated that the Director of Bank Supervision has

submitted the Report P5 to the Monetary Board. Board Paper

submitted with annexures compendiously marked as R4 fortifies

this position.

Thereafter, as seen from R5, the Monetary Board inter alia has

decided to issue a show cause letter to the Habib Bank as to why

the Central Bank shall not determine that the petitioner is not a fit

and proper person to hold the office of the Country Manager of

Habib Bank in Sri Lanka.

7

As seen from R7 and P6 this has been communicated both to the

Habib Bank and the petitioner.

Habib Bank has, by R8 and P11, sent adverse reports against the

petitioner.

In R8, the Regional General Manager of South Asia of the Habib

Bank has inter alia stated as follows:

His (the petitioners) performance for year ended 2010 was

rated unsatisfactory. His contract with HBL expires on July

31, 2011. We do not intend to renew the contract any further.

We have already requested CBSL approval for appointment of

an officiating Country Manager Mr. Muhammad Asaf Sheikh.

Mr. Abid Sherwani will hand over his charge as Country

Manager to Mr. Muhammad Asaf Sheikh as soon as we

receive CBSL approval.

In Habib Bank Investigation Report marked P11 inter alia it has

been noted that the petitioner has approved the transfers (TRF)

beyond his mandate, and has recommended immediate change of

the petitioner as the Country Manager.

By R6 it is clear that by 5th July 2011 the Habib Bank has removed

the petitioner as the Country Manager and a new (Acting) Country

Manager has been appointed.

The petitioner in the meantime has sent P10 to the Director of the

Bank Supervision in reply to P6.

Having taken everything into consideration, the Board Paper

marked R9 together with annexures has been presented to the

8

Monetary Board and the Monetary Board has by R10 dated

07.07.2011 (or 15.07.2011) decided to direct the Habib Bank to

remove the petitioner from the post of Country Manager.

However, as seen from R6, by that time, the petitioner had been

removed from that post and a new acting appointment had already

been made by the Habib Bank. Further, as seen from R8, the

Habib Bank has already decided not to renew the petitioners

contract which was to expire on 31st July 2011.

For the aforesaid reasons, I cannot accept the argument of the

learned Presidents Counsel that the Monetary Board abdicated

their statutory duty when they took the decision as reflected in

P12.

The last submission of the learned Presidents Counsel for the

petitioner is that the impugned decision was taken in violation of

the rules of natural justice in that the petitioner was not given a

full hearing. I am not impressed by that submission. There was a

Spot Examination carried out by the Bank Supervision Division as

seen from P6. Thereafter, as seen from R3, the petitioner was

given a patient hearing by a Deputy Governor of the Central

Bank. Thereafter with a copy of the Spot Examination Report

marked P6, the petitioner has been asked to show cause why he

should not be removed from the post. The petitioner has presented

his explanation by P10. In the meantime, independent

investigations have been carried out by the Habib Bank1 regarding

this massive exchange racket.2 The adverse findings contained in

those Reports and Letters marked R8 and P11 against the 1 Vide annexures 4 and 5 attached to R9. 2 This term has been used by Director of Customs in R11.

9

petitioner are unchallenged and uncontroverted. The Habib Bank

has not been made a party to this application. In terms of section

42(8) of the Banking Act, the Monetary Board can take such other

matters into consideration when deciding whether a person shall

be removed from office.

The learned Senior D.S.G., has taken up several preliminary

objections to the maintainability of this application such as

necessary parties, in particular, the members of the Monetary

Board have not been made parties3; and the petitioner has not

pursued the appeal procedure provided by law if he was

dissatisfied with the findings of the Director of the Bank

Supervision of the Central Bank and the Monetary Board of the

Central Bank.

In view of my above findings on merits, I do not think that it is

necessary for me to dwell on them.

Application of the petitioner is dismissed with costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

3 Relying on Wijeratne (Commissioner of Motor Traffic) v. Ven. Dr. Paragoda Wimalawansa Thero [2011] 2 Sri LR 258 at 267.