==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/PHC/0069/2020

Page 1 of 10

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

Chairman, Urban Council Kegalle.

Petitioner Vs.

W.A. Pushpa Kumara, No.32/6C, Kahatapitiya Kegalle

Respondent AND

W.A. Pushpa Kumara, No.32/6C, Kahatapitiya Kegalle

Respondent-Appellant Vs. Chairman, Urban Council Kegalle.

Petitioner-Respondent AND NOW BETWEEN

W.A. Pushpa Kumara, No.32/6C, Kahatapitiya Kegalle Respondent-Appellant-Appellant

Court of Appeal Case No:CA/PHC/0069/2020 Kegalle High Court Case No:5466/19 අȴ MC Kegalle Case No: 17061/ Ƌ /18

CA/PHC/0069/2020

Page 2 of 10

Vs.

Chairman, Urban Council Kegalle.

Petitioner-Respondent-Respondent Before : D. THOTAWATTA, J. K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J. Counsel : Dr. Sunil Abeyratne with Eshini Perera instructed by Buddika Alagiyawanna for the Respondent-Appellant-Appellant.

Akila Aluthwatte with Miss Dilini Rajapakse and Amhar Wassim for the Petitioner-Respondent-Respondent. Argued on : 17.07.2025 Written Submissions of the Respondent-Appellant -Appellant tendered on : 02.10.2024 Written Submissions of the Petitioner-Respondent -Respondent tendered on : 07.10.2024 Decided on : 21.11.2025 K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J. The instant appeal arises from an order of the learned High Court Judge of the

Sabaragmuwa Province holden at Kegalle dated 11.06.2020 (hereinafter called

and referred to as ‘the Order’) made in case bearing No. 5466/19/අȴ wherein,

the learned High Court Judge of Kegalle had dismissed an application in

revision preferred thereto by the Respondent-Appellant-Appellant (hereinafter

called and referred to as ‘the Appellant’) against the order of the learned

CA/PHC/0069/2020

Page 3 of 10

Magistrate of Kegalle dated 18.01.2019, wherein the learned Magistrate of

Kegalle had made order directing the Petitioner-Respondent-Respondent

(hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the Respondent’) to demolish an

unauthorized construction erected by the Appellant on the premises as

morefully, described in the petition preferred thereto by the Respondent under

and in terms of section 28A(3) of the Urban Development Authority Act No. 41

of 1978 as amended (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the Act’) seeking an

order for demolition of the same. Being aggrieved by the order, the Respondent

has now, preferred to this Court the instant appeal on the grounds of appeal as

morefully set out in paragraph 7 (i) to (vi) of the petition of appeal among any

other grounds of appeal that may be urged by Counsel at the hearing of this

appeal and they may be reproduced as follows;

“i) The said judgment is contrary to law and not material evidence

placed in this case;

ii) The Learned High Court judge failed to take cognizance of the fact

that the Respondent has no authority to institute an action as the

powers are duly vested with the Urban Development Authority;

iii) The Learned High Court judge failed to take cognizance of the fact

that the said alleged unlawful construction was outside the city limits of

the Respondent council which does not attract the provisions of the

Urban Development Authority Act;

iv) The Learned High Court judge failed to take cognizance of the fact

that the Respondent's notices annexed to the Petition does not states

who has authenticated the said notices;

v) The Learned High Court judge erred in law by coming to the

conclusion that there were no exceptional circumstance consider the

said application in revision and whereas alleged construction does not

CA/PHC/0069/2020

Page 4 of 10

come within the purview of the Urban Development Authority Act,

where by erred in law;

vi)In the circumstances, the said judgment is void, illegal and bad in

law in as much as the learned High court Judge had not analyzed and

evaluated the material facts in this case in the correct perspective.”

The facts material and relevant to the instant appeal as can be deducible from

the petition of appeal, may be briefly, set out as follows;

An application dated 05.06.2018 had been made by the Respondent to the

Magistrate Court of Kegalle under and in terms of section 28A(3) of the Urban

Development Authority Act No. 41 of 1978 as amended praying for a demolition

order of an unauthorized construction erected by the Appellant on the

premises as morefully described in the petition preferred thereto by the

Respondent along with his application; that the Appellant had then filed his

statement of objections wherein he had inter-alia, raised a jurisdictional

objection to the application on the premise that the Respondent cannot have

and maintain the instant action for; alleged unauthorized construction is

situated not within an Urban Development Area but, within a Regional

Development Area (ȝාෙǊɵය සංවəධන ȝෙǊශය) as averred by the Respondent

himself in his own pleadings, namely; paragraph 3 of his petition preferred to

the Magistrate Court of Kegalle along with his application, and as such it

should be dismissed in-limine; that the learned Magistrate of Kegalle had

having inquired into the application and the jurisdictional objection so raised

thereto by the Appellant, proceeded in his order dated 18.01.2019 to grant the

application of the Respondent directing the unauthorized construction to be

demolished thereby totally, rejecting the jurisdictional objection and the several

other defences raised by the Appellant thereto; that being aggrieved by the

order of the learned Magistrate of Kegalle, the Appellant had preferred an

appeal therefrom to the High Court of the Sabaragmuwa Province holden at

CA/PHC/0069/2020

Page 5 of 10

Kegalle, and the Respondent had raised a preliminary legal objection to the

maintainability of the appeal on the basis that a right of appeal will not lie from

an order made by Magistrate in an application made thereto under section

28A(3) of the Urban Development Authority Act No. 41 of 1978 as amended and

the learned High Court Judge of Kegalle had nevertheless, proceeded to

consider it as an application in revision and having inquired into it, he had

proceeded to dismiss the application in revision by holding that Court sees no

error in law in the order and therefore, there was no reason to interfere with

the order of the learned Magistrate of Kegalle for; he had come to the impugned

decision after having considered all the facts and circumstances and the law

applicable thereto. It is this order, that the Appellant now, seeks to impugn

before us in the instant appeal.

It is to be re-iterated here that the learned High Court Judge of Kegalle had

proceeded to consider the appeal preferred to it by the Appellant as an

application in revision.

It is true that it was averred in paragraph 3 of his petition by the Respondent

that the alleged unauthorized construction is situated within a Regional

Development Area (ȝාෙǊɵය සංවəධන ȝෙǊශය). However, it appears that the

Respondent had forthwith, rectified the error so committed by him in

paragraph 3 of his petition preferred to the Magistrate Court of Kegalle through

paragraph 4 of his counter objections.

Upon a careful scrutiny of the Gazette Notification which was annexed to the

petition of the Respondent preferred to the Magistrate Court of Kegalle marked

as ‘ෙප1’ which was also, annexed to the statement of objections of the

Appellant preferred to the Magistrate Court of Kegalle, marked as ‘ɫ1’ together

with the letter which was annexed to the petition of the Respondent preferred

to the Magistrate Court of Kegalle marked as ‘ෙප2’ and which was also annexed

to the statement of objections of the Appellant marked as ‘ɫ2’, it clearly, shows

CA/PHC/0069/2020

Page 6 of 10

without any doubt and/or without any ambiguity that the whole area coming

within the ambit of Kegalle Urban Council had been declared by the Hon.

Minister in-charge of the subject of Urban Development, to be an Urban

Development Area by virtue of powers vested in him by section 23(5) of the Act

as amended.

Besides, upon a careful consideration of the statement of objections of the

Appellant in its totality, it becomes manifestly, clear that he too, had clearly,

and unequivocally, admitted that it was so.

Hence, it is a common ground that the area in which unauthorized

construction is situated is coming within the ambit of the area so declared by

the Hon. Minister in-charge of the subject of Urban Development, to be an

Urban Development Area by virtue of powers vested in him by section 23(5) of

the Act as amended.

However, the principal objection raised to the application by the Appellant

being that the area in which unauthorized construction is situated within a

Regional Development Area (ȝාෙǊɵය සංවəධන ȝෙǊශය) and not within an area

coming within the ambit of an area so declared by the Hon. Minister in-charge

of the subject of Urban Development, to be an Urban Development Area by

virtue of powers vested in him by section 23(5) of the Act as amended.

It is however, significant to observe upon a careful reading of his statement of

objections, that the Appellant himself had clearly, and unequivocally, admitted

that unauthorized construction is situated in an area coming within the ambit

of an area so declared by the Hon. Minister in-charge of the subject of Urban

Development, to be an Urban Development Area by virtue of powers vested in

him by section 23(5) of the Act as amended as manifest from ‘ෙප2’ as well as

from ‘ɫ2’-his own document.

CA/PHC/0069/2020

Page 7 of 10

Hence, the Respondent had established without an iota of doubt before the

Magistrate Court of Kegalle that unauthorized construction is situated in an

area coming within the ambit of an area so declared by the Hon. Minister in-

charge of the subject of Urban Development, to be an Urban Development Area

by virtue of powers vested in him by section 23(5) of the Act as amended as

manifest from ‘ෙප2’ as well as from ‘ɫ2’-Appelant’s own document as rightly,

held by the learned Magistrate of Kegalle.

In the circumstances, I would hold that the learned High Court Judge of

Kegalle had rightly, proceeded to dismiss the application in revision filed before

it by the Appellant by holding that the Court sees no error in law in the order

and therefore, there was no reason to interfere with the order of the learned

Magistrate of Kegalle for; he had come to the impugned decision after having

considered all the facts and circumstances and the law applicable thereto.

In the circumstances, it clearly, appears to me that the order complained of,

cannot in any manner, be regarded and/or construed as one that is palpably

wrong and/or one tainted with illegality and/or one of such a nature that had

shocked the conscience of the Court and/or one that had caused positive

miscarriage of justice to the Appellant.

Hence, I would hold that the Appellant had not in any manner, shown any

exceptional circumstances warranting the exercise of the extra-ordinary

revisionary jurisdiction vested in the learned High Court Judge of Kegalle in

revision of the order complained of, as rightly, held by the learned High Court

Judge of Kegalle.

In the circumstances, I would hold that the application in revision is not

entitled to succeed both in fact and law and as such, it ought to have been

dismissed in-limine as rightly, done by the learned High Court Judge of Kegalle.

CA/PHC/0069/2020

Page 8 of 10

Let me now, deal with a further point which is in my view, of vital importance

in determining the propriety and/or legal soundness of the two orders sought

to be revised and set aside by the Appellant in the instant appeal, namely; the

orders of the learned Magistrate of Kegalle and the learned High Court Judge of

Kegalle.

It may now, be examined.

As observed by me elsewhere in this judgement that the Appellant himself had

clearly, and unequivocally, admitted that unauthorized construction is situated

in an area coming within the ambit of an area so declared by the Hon. Minister

in-charge of the subject of Urban Development, to be an Urban Development

Area by virtue of powers vested in him by section 23(5) of the Act as amended

as manifest from ‘ෙප2’ as well as from ‘ɫ2’-his own document.

In a situation where an application has been made to a Magistrate Court under

and in terms of the provisions of section 28A(3) of the Act, the pivotal question

that would arise before Court for consideration is whether the construction in

question has been effected upon a valid permit. The existence of a valid permit

is the only valid defence to the application under section 28A(3) of the Act. The

burden of showing that the construction in question had been done on a valid

permit is on the person noticed.

However, it is significant to observe that although the Appellant had clearly,

and unequivocally admitted in paragraph 6, 8 and 10 of his statement of

objections in particular, that the construction in question had been effected by

him, or else, he had at least been in possession thereof at the time of the

application being made to the Magistrate Court of Kegalle under and in terms

of the provisions of section 28A(3) of the Act, he had never shown to Court that

the construction in question had been effected by him upon a valid permit

issued to him under and in terms of the provisions of the Act. Hence, the

Appellant had not in any manner, discharged the burden of proof vested in him

CA/PHC/0069/2020

Page 9 of 10

by producing a valid permit in respect of the construction in question as

rightly, held by the learned Magistrate of Kegalle as well as the learned High

Court Judge of Kegalle made acting in revision.

In the circumstances, I would see no error whatsoever, in the orders of the

learned Magistrate of Kegalle as well as the learned High Court Judge of

Kegalle made acting in revision.

I would therefore, hold that appeal is not entitled to succeed both in fact and

law on this ground too, and as such it should be rejected in-limine on this

ground too.

It is interesting to observe that the Appellant in the course of the argument

before us, had made an attempt to contend that the construction in question is

situated beyond the limits of the Urban Council of Kegalle. However, it is

significant to observe that this is not a matter raised before the learned

Magistrate of Kegalle in the first place for his consideration and determination

nor was a matter raised in the High Court of Sabaragamuwa Province holden in

Kegalle for his consideration and determination. Hence, this is a matter raised

by the Appellant for the first time in appeal before this Court. The matter,

namely; whether the construction in question is situated beyond the limits of

the Urban Council of Kegalle or not; is not a pure question of law but a mixed

question of fact and law and therefore, the Appellant is debarred in law, from

raising such a matter mixed with fact and law for the first time in appeal before

us. Hence, it too, should be rejected as rightly, contended by the learned

Counsel for the Respondent.

In view of the foregoing, I would hold that appeal is not entitled to succeed both

in fact and law.

In the result I would proceed to dismiss the instant appeal with costs of this

Court and the Courts below.

CA/PHC/0069/2020

Page 10 of 10

I would thus, affirm both the orders of the learned Magistrate of Kegalle and

the Learned High Court Judge of the Sabaragamuwa Province holden at

Kegalle.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL