Page 1 of 5

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

C.A Bail Application No: BAL/ 0021/ 20

Magistrates Court Case No:

29389/2019(Homagama)

In the matter of an application for bail in

terms of section 10 (1) (a) of the ACT No.

4 of 2015, Assistance to and Protection

of Victims of Crime and Witnesses.

The Officer in Charge,

Police Station

Meegoda.

Complainant

Vs.

1.Aththanayake Mudiyanselge Wiraj Chamara.

2.Aththanayaka Mudiyanselage Indika Sanjeewa.

3.Kottawa Gamage Udaya Sarath Kumara.

Suspect

AND NOW BETWEEN

Aththanayaka Mudiyanselage Champa Manimekala Kumari.

No. 457, Dadimuththuduwa,

Dadigamuwa.

Petitioner

Page 2 of 5

Before Menaka Wijesundera J.

Neil Iddawala J.

Counsel Gayan Perera for the

Petitioner.

S. Weerasuriya, SC for the

State.

Argued On 30.11.2021

Vs.

1. The Officer in Charge.

Police Station, Meegoda. 2. The Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12.

Respondents

And

Aththanayaka Mudiyanselage Indika Sanjeewa

No 47/2 Sumanasekearapura

Welipillawa,

Dadigamuwa

(Presently at Welikada Prisons)

Second Suspect

Decided On 14.12.2021

Page 3 of 5

MENAKA WIJESUNDERA J.

The instant application for bail has been filed under the Assistance to and Protection of

Victims of Crime and Witnesses Act no 4 0f 2015 to obtain bail for the suspect petitioner

namely Atthanayake Mudiyanselage Indika Sanjeewa (hereinafter referred to as the

suspect).

The allegation against the suspect had been for kidnapping and raping a girl of 15 years

namely DilumIllesha Abeweera.

The mother of the victim had made a complaint on 28.6.2019 against the suspect stating

that her victim daughter had eloped with the suspect. According to the mother of the

victim the suspect has had a three wheeler and he had been engaged to transport the

victim from school. But the mother had realized that there was a very unusual

friendship between the two.

Anyhow after the above mentioned complaint the police had commenced investigations

and on the 20th of November the victim had returned home and had been admitted to

hospital. The mother of the victim on the 21st of November 2019 makes another

complaint against the suspect stating that the suspect had threatened her. Thereafter

the suspect had been arrested on the 17th of January 2020 and had been in remand up

to date.

The police had recorded statements from the relatives of the mother of the victim but

the respondents are not relying on those.

The position of the suspect is that the material against him is all fabricated.

The police had recorded a statement from the victim and according to which the

suspect had eloped with her at first but subsequently has had sexual inter course with

Page 4 of 5

her on multiple occasions and thereafter he had got her to put in writing that she

eloped with him on consent after threatening her.

The purpose of the Act under which the suspect has been produced is to uphold and

enforce the rights and entitlements of victims of crime and witnesses and to provide

for a mechanism to promote, protect enforce and exercise such rights and

entitlements.

But the counsel for the suspect states that according to section 10(2) of the above

mentioned act trial under this act should be given priority as against others and it should

be heard on day to day basis, as such he states that the suspect in the instant case has

been arrested in 2020 but yet in remand up to date without any progress.

But the counsel for the respondents state that the indictment against the suspect had

been dispatched to the relevant High Court in October, therefore it is only to be served

and the trial to commence.

According to the provisions of this act a suspect indicted or produced under this act can

be enlarged on bail only on grounds of exceptional circumstances by the Court of

Appeal. The exceptionality urged by the counsel for the suspect is the delay in instituting

action against the suspect.

The term exceptional has been gone in to very lengthily by our legal fraternity and it has

been finally decided that exceptionality varies from case to case, and the general

conditions of any persons life as being married and having children are not exceptional.

Therefore as the indictment against the suspect has already been dispatched this Court

sees no unusual delay in the administration of justice and in terms of the Act the

suspect can urge the High Court to give priority to this case.

Page 5 of 5

Furthermore this Court has to observe the vulnerable age of the victim in comparison to

the advanced age of the suspect which only makes the possibility of the suspect

interfering with the victim in giving evidence at the trial being very high, which would be

a clear violation of the objectives of this act stipulated in section 2 of this act.

Therefore in view of the above mentioned material this Court is compelled to refuse the

instant application for bail.

Hence the instant application for bail is hereby dismissed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal.