"

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

Vairamuttu Palagapodi,

Mahiloormunai,

Kaluwanchikudi.

PLAINTIFF

C.A. Case No. 201/1998 (F) -Vs-

D.C. Batticaloa Case No. 4228/L/1993 1. Gnanamuttu Kanmani,

2. Palagapodi Alagaiah,

3. Samithamby Perinpapushpawathy,

4. Palipodi Ratnasingham

All of Mahilloor, Kaluwanchikudi.

DEFENDANTS

AND NOW BETWEEN

Vairamuttu Palagapodi (Deceased)

of Mahiloormunai,

Kaluwanchikudi.

PLAINTIFF - APPELLANT

Palagapodi Balasundaram

Mahiloormunai,

Kaluwanchikudi.

SUBSTITUTED - PLAINTIFF - APPELLANT

1

\

...

BEFORE

COUNSEL

Argued on

Decided on

A.H.M.D. NAWAZ, J.

-Vs-

1. Gnanamuttu Kanmani,

2. Palagapodi Alagaiah,

3. Samithamby Perinpapushpawathy,

4. Palipodi Ratnasingham

All of Mahilloor, Kaluwanchikudi.

RESPONDENTS

A.H.M.D. NAWAZ, J.

V. Puvitharan with Subhani Kalugamage for

the Plaintiff-Appellant.

Mano Thevasagayam for the Defendant-

Respondents.

11.05.2015 and 2.07.2015

30.05.2016

The Plaintiff-Appellant (hereinafter sometimes referred to as lithe Plaintiff")

instituted this action against the 1st to 4th Defendant-Respondents (hereinafter

sometimes referred to as lithe Defendants") for a declaration of title to the land

bearing Lot No.3453 situated at Mahiloor in Eruvil Pattu in the Batticaloa District

which is morefully described in the schedule to the plaint, for ejectment of the

Defendants, their agents and all those who claimed under them, for an order to set

aside Deed No.14 dated 05.10.1987 on the ground of laesio enormis; and the deeds

executed thereafter be declared null and void as having been executed to defraud

and disentitle the Plaintiff to the said land and for costs.

2

!II, I !

f I l , I

t, ! ! (I

& ! !t t f ,

The plaintiff's position was that the land in dispute originally belonged to his

mother, one Kanthapodi Valliammai and the said Kanthapodi Valliammai died

intestate and inadministrable estate leaving behind the Plaintiff as the sole heir and

thus the Plaintiff became the owner of the said land. This position is not disputed

by the Defendants.

The Plaintiff stated that he borrowed a sum of Rs.s,OOO/- from the 1st Defendant on

05.10.1987 and for securing of the repayment of the said sum of money he

executed a purported transfer deed bearing No.14 dated 05.10.1987 and attested

by S. Arulanantham, Notary Public, to be re-transferred on the repayment of the

said sum of Rs.s,OOO/- and thus the 1st Defendant was holding the said land in trust

for the benefit of the Plaintiff. The Plaintiff also takes up the position that the

property was more than double the sale price but was sold at half the real value

and therefore he is entitled to rescind the sale on the ground of laesio enormis.

The Defendants filed their joint answer and traversed that Deed No.14 was an

outright transfer. Quite inappropriately as would be clear from my analysis of the

facts later in the judgment, the Defendants also stated in their answer that Deed

No.14 was a conditional transfer. Admittedly on the same day as Deed No.14 was

executed, the 1st Defendant gave the Plaintiff a document marked as 01. This is an

informal document by which the 1st Defendant undertook to effect a retransfer of

the land in question within a period of two years if the Plaintiff paid him Rs.s,OOO/-

with interest at 72% per annum. This writing was not notarially executed.

The Defendants further averred that since it was a conditional transfer it could not

be construed as a trust and the claim of the plaintiff that the conveyance must be

cancelled on the ground of laesio enormis cannot hold good because the claim of

laesi oenormis is prescribed in one year.

Before going into the questions whether the transfer from the Plaintiff to the 1st

Defendant is an outright transfer or a trust or a conditional transfer, I wish to first

consider the claim of the plaintiff based on the ground of laesio enormis.

Knowledge of the Real Value of the Land

The principle of laesio enormis will not apply to a situation, where the seller was

aware of the true value of the property at the time of the sale and execution of the deed and notwithstanding such knowledge, the seller proceeded to sell the property at a lesser price. The Plaintiff stated in his evidence that his mother

became entitled to the land in dispute by a decree entered in Case No.s02 of the

3

District Court of Batticaloa, and "since it was worth Rs.20,OOO/- and there was no

other heir, I became the owner of the said land". From this evidence it is clear that

the Plaintiff knew of the value of the land. He himself assessed the value at

Rs.20,OOO/-. But his evidence is not clear whether this value was earlier to the sale

or at the time of the sale. But the fact remains that the Plaintiff was aware that the

land in question was worth more than Rs.5,OOO/- which he borrowed from the

Defendants.

It is important for a person seeking a remedy on the principle of laesio enormis to

establish that at the time he sold the property he did not know the actual value of

the property in the open market. But a seller who knows the real value of the land

is not entitled to rescission of the sale on the ground of laesio enormis. It is

axiomatic that the burden is on the person claiming the benefit of the doctrine to

prove the true value of the property in question. This may be done by expert

evidence or by proving the market value at the time and place of sale. None of

these has been satisfied by the Plaintiff in the case.

In other words it is not the law that where a proprietor, who is in a position to

know the value of his property, sells it for less than half of what is afterwards held

to be its true value, he is entitled to come into Court and claim rescission. It is

clearly laid down in Voet;

"A proprietor who knows the value of his property is not entitled to rescission merely by reason of the fact that the price at which he has sold the property is less than half its true value. The proprietor, in such a case, has only himself

to thank for any loss he may have suffered. The case is otherwise where the property is sold at a price grossly disproportionate to its value. In that case the law is on the side of the party who stands to lose by the transaction, and not on the side of the party who stands to make an unconscionable profit".l

It was held by this Court that it is incumbent on the Plaintiff to have established

that she was not aware of the true value of the property for her to succeed on the

plea of laesio enormis - See Court of Appeal 216/76 (F) D.C. Kalmunai 875/L.

This plea of laesio enormis will not be entertained when a party, knowing the true

value of his property, sells it for less than half of such value. The principle of laesio enormis applies where the vendor was unaware of the true value of the land sold-

lSee Voet 11118.05.17 The Selective Voet Being the Commentary on the Pandects (trans Gane) (1956) 4

..

i !

see Sobana vs. Meera Lebbe and Anothel where the aggrieved party was aware,

or ought to have been aware of the true value at the time of making the contract,

the plea of !aesio enormis would not lie.3

With regard to the value of the land in question, the evidence of the retired Grama

Sevaka, Nallathambipody Thambirasa who testified at the trial must be adverted to.

He said that the value of half an acre of land (vacant land) was about Rs.2,400/-,

and the incumbent Grama Sevaka Chelliah Rasanayagam also said that the value of

one acre was Rs.10,OOO/-. The evidence of these two witnesses was not

contradicted by the Plaintiff. The land in dispute is 2 Roods and 20 perches, that is

about half an acre and therefore, in view of the evidence of the above two

witnesses, the fact that the land (half an acre) at the time of sale was worth

Rs.5,OOO/- can be accepted. The Plaintiff has therefore failed to adduce any

evidence to show that the value of the land was Rs. 10,000/- or more and that he

was damnified to the extent of getting only half the price of the land. There is no

evidence to show that he has been inadequately paid. I therefore reject the

contention ofthe Plaintiff on this ground.

Before I next move on to the other issues in the appeal, let me set down some

observations gleaned on !aesio enormis.

laesio enormis in South African law

It is worth mentioning that the doctrine of !aesio enormis constituted part of South

African Common law but was soon abrogated in the Cape Colony by the General

Law Amendment Act of 1879 and thereafter in the Free State by the General Law

Amendment Ordinance of 1902. In the Union of South Africa !aesio enormis was

abolished by statute in 1952.4 Morice states that the remedy was out of harmony

with modern legal views: Although they are in favour of increasing the protection

of the law against acts in bad faith, they are not in favour of interference with

contracts entered into voluntarily and with the eye open.s But yet the doctrine

obtains in full force and vigor in Sri Lanka-one of those rarest of jurisdictions where

Roman-Dutch law prevails.6

2 5 Ceylon Law Journal Reports 46

3 See Jayawardene v Amerasekera (1912) 15 N.L.R 280; Roff & Co., Ltd v Mosely (1925) T.P.D 101; Hoffman v Prins/oo and Hoffman (1928) T.P.D 621.

4 See Act 32 of 1952 s 25.

5 See Moriceon Sale in Roman-Dutch law with Reference to English, French and German Law (1919) p.198.

6 See Bodiga v Nagoor (1943) 45 N.L.R 1 at 4. 5

The expression IIlaesio enormisll used in the above passages refers to "Iaesio ultra dimidium vel enormis" which in Roman Law meant the injury sustained by one of

the parties to an onerous contract when he had been overreached by the other to

the extent of more than one half of the value of the subject-matter, as for example,

when a vendor had not received half the value of property sold, or the purchaser

had paid more than double value.

Pacta sunt servanda (contracts are to be kept)

On the basis of my finding that the Plaintiff has not established that he received

less than half the value of the property, the maxim IIpacta sunt servandall which

means IIcontracts are to be kept" would hold sway in this instance. It has to be

observed in passing that when the plea of laesio enormis fails, the maxim IIpacta sunt servandall would apply and the Plaintiff would be bound by the contract of

sale, subject of course to any other vitiating factors or restitutionary relief that

might be pleaded by the Plaintiff to impugn the transaction. In fact laesio enormis

also finds its place in English law under the umbrella rubric of uncoscionability.

Laesio enormis in the English Law of unconscionability

The English Law position has been best summed up by John R. Peden in liThe Law of

Unjust Contracts" published by Butterworths in 1982 at pages 28-29;

" ..... Unconscionability represents the end of a cycle commencing with the Aristotelian concept of justice and the Roman law laesio ennuis which in turn formed the basis for the medieval church's concept of a just price and condemnation of usury. These philosophics permeated the exercise, during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries of the Chancery Court's discretionary powers under which it upset all kinds of unfair transactions. Subsequently the movement towards economic individualism in the nineteenth century hardened the exercise of these powers by emphasizing the freedom of the parties to make their own contract. While the principle of pacta sunt servanda held dominance, the consensual theory still recognised exceptions where one party was overborne by a fiduciary or entered a contract under duress or as the result of fraud. However, these exceptions were limited and had to be strictly proved. It is suggested that the judicial and legislative trend during the last 30 years in both civil and common law jurisdictions has almost brought the wheel full circle. Both courts and Parliaments have provided greater protection for weaker parties from harsh

6

contracts. In several jurisdictions this included a general power to grant relief from unconscionable contracts, thereby providing a launching pOint from which the courts have the opportunity to develop a modem doctrine of unconscionability ....... "

The above passage shows how pacta sunt servanda (agreements must be kept)

must be given effect to in law subject to the power of courts to vitiate a contract or

transaction on the grounds of exemptions such as laesio enormis, fraud, duress,

undue influence, illegality and existence of fiduciary obligations such as a trust.

Unconscionability would lie at the root of a suit to vitiate a transaction and an

unconscionable bargain brought about between the parties would be liable to

avoidance owing to the umbrella doctrine of unconscionability.

Does such an unconscionable element exist between the parties? I have already

disposed of the unconscionability alleged on the ground of laesio enormis.

Another ground smacking of unconscionability which was alleged in the plaint to

invalidate Deed No.14 is the existence of a constructive trust. Issue No.3 framed in

the case puts in issue the existence of a trust, though Deed No.14 dated 05.10.1987

(P1) is an out and out sale on the face of it.

Outright Transfer or a Constructive Trust

I would proceed to examine whether the Deed bearing No.14 is an outright transfer

as alleged by the Defendant or whether it amounts to a constructive trust as

alleged by the Plaintiff. In the process I would also discuss the question of

conditional transfers that was raised by Counsel before the learned District Judge.

On the face of the deed there is no doubt that Deed No.14 (P1) is an outright

transfer. The notary in his attestation has stated that the consideration was paid in

his presence and that the 1st witness to the deed Nallathambipody Thambirasa also

states in his evidence that the amount mentioned in the deed was paid by the

Defendant and it was thereafter that the Plaintiff set his signature on the deed. The

said deed was executed and read as an outright transfer.

Non notarial agreement (01) - parol agreement

On the same day as the deed was executed i.e. 05.10.1987, an agreement was written stipulating a condition that if the plaintiff (vendor on the deed) returned

the money with 72% interest per annum within two years, the 1st Defendant (the

vendee on the deed) should retransfer the land. This non-notarial writing (parol

agreement) was marked as 01. In fact the 1st Defendant has signed this non-notarial

7

document promising to retransfer the land if the Plaintiff returned the purchase

price of Rs.5,OOO/- with 72% interest per annum. This document does not speak of

a loan. Rather it is quite consistent with the deed of transfer which unequivocally

evidences an outright sale. What is the effect of this parol agreement? Can this be

used to contend that what took place between the parties was a conditional

transfer? Or as the Plaintiff claimed in the trial, should this non-notarial document

signed by the vendee (1st Defendant) lead to creation of a constructive contract

within Section 83 of the Trust Ordinance?

Evidence has been led on both sides to show whether the repayment of Rs.5,OOO/-

took place or not within two years. As I conclude presently, there is no satisfactory

evidence that the Plaintiff paid back the sum of Rs.5,OOO/- with interest. Even

assuming that the Plaintiff paid back but the 1st Defendant refused to re-convey the

land, that breach of 01 (breach of parol agreement) would not have been

actionable as 01 was not a valid pactum de retrovendendo7 or a contract with a

condition to re-convey.

Pactum de Retrovendendo (agreement to resell or reconvey)

I must straightaway dispose of the argument for a conditional transfer. No doubt

the condition is that if the Plaintiff paid back Rs.5,OOO/- with 72% interest within

two years from 1987, the 1st Defendant would retransfer the land. Unfortunately

for the Plaintiff, this promise on the part of the vendee was embodied in a non

notarial document (01) which would not be binding on the parties. If the

agreement to re-convey the land were to be binding, that agreement would have

to be executed by way of a notarial conveyance. It is laid down in Section 2 of the

Prevention of Frauds Ordinance that such a non-notarial document in respect of an

immovable property is of no force or avail in law. Lascelles c.J elucidated the

principle in the following passage of Amarasekera vs. Rajapakse8;

"It is simply an agreement that the defendant, after having bought the land, must reconvey to the plaintiff. It is an agreement for an interest in land, and in order to be valid, it should have been embodied in a notarial document.',9

If there was a notarial agreement to re-transfer the land, E.F.N. Gratiaen J. declared

in the case of Thambipillai vs. Muthucumarasamy:

7 A conveyance with a condition that the property should be retransferred, if the purchase price is tendered within a certain period. This is what is popularly known as the "Moratuwa Mortgage". The Roman and Roman Dutch Law-Voet 18.3.7.

8 (1911) 14 N.L.R 110

9 Ibid at p.112 8

'7ime is the essence of the contract in a pactum de retrovendendo. In such a contract it is not open to the Court to take the view that the transaction was in reality a mortgage and not a sale. 1011

Gratiaen J. commented thus because in a pactum de retrovendendo there is a

conditional sale and in order to recover back the land, the vendor in the sale must

tender the money on time. He must comply with the condition which is precise as

to time and the amount payable. If the vendee does not keep his promise to

retransfer the land despite the timely payment, there is a suit that would lie at the

instance of the vendor. This is the essence of a pactum de retrovendendo.

But in this case before me there is no pactum de retrovendendo. There is only an

informal agreement on the part of the 1st Defendant to reconvey. Notwithstanding

the absence of an actionable contract to reconvey, evidence was led by the Plaintiff

to show a timeous payment but the Defendant led evidence to the contrary.

Evidence of Repayment of Rs.5,OOO/-

I would at this stage summarize the evidence on repayment and subsequent acts

undertakes by the 1st Defendant. The Plaintiff stated in evidence that he had paid

the money in April 1989 within 2 years of the sale and requested the 1st Defendant

to retransfer the land, but the Defendant failed to do so. This action based on

constructive trust was instituted only on 28.09.1993, after a lapse of 4 years from

this alleged date of payment. I would not state that delay would defeat equitable

remedies such as a declaration of a constructive trust. In any event the evidence of

performance by the Plaintiff of repayment of the sum of Rs.5,000/- is not borne out

by satisfactory evidence for the following reasons.

The informal agreement to reconvey the land (01) is not denied by the 1st

Defendant. The 1st defendant's position is that she asked the Plaintiff to repay the

money but he had said he did not have money and she waited for 4 years, and

since the Plaintiff failed to pay back, she made a complaint to the Grama Sevaka,

which is marked as 04.

Subsequent acts undertaken by the 1st Defendant in relation to the land

Since the Plaintiff had failed to pay back the money, the 1st Defendant divided the

land into four parcels, keeping one piece for her, and sold three parcels to the 2nd,

3rd and 4th Defendants and the evidence is that they are in possession thereof. That

10 58 N.L.R 387 9

\ I

t,

the sale price of the said three parcels in 1990 was Rs.6,OOO/- per piece is not

material, because as the time passes, the value of the land must have gone up in

price. The three deeds were not produced in evidence though.

The evidence of the Plaintiff and his wife Kanapathipillai Alagamma was that they

paid back the said amount in April 1989 on two occasions and got receipts for the

payment from the 1st Defendant but subsequently, the 1st defendant's son came up

to them and retrieved the receipt by force at gun point and as a result they could

not produce the receipts to establish payment. The Plaintiff stated in evidence, III did not make any complaint in this regard as the defendant was a relation of mine. Police was not functioning, but I told the Grama Sevaka verbally and not in writing".

If the 1st Defendant refused to retransfer after she received the money, it would be

natural for a person like the Plaintiff to seek the assistance of the Grama Sevaka

particularly at a time when the police was non-functional. If he could make a verbal

complaint against the 1st Defendant, despite the fact that the 1st Defendant was his

relation, what prevented him from making a written complaint? If he had made a

written complaint to the Grama Sevaka, it would have been decisive on the

question of repayment. No explanation was given by the Plaintiff as to why he did

not make a complaint in writing. On the other hand the 1st Defendant states that

she went to the Plaintiff and demanded payment of the money in order to

retransfer the land but as he was non-responsive, she sought the Grama Sevaka's

assistance to get the money back. She subsequently made a complaint to the

Grama Sevaka on 03.05.1990. This complaint was marked as 04. Grama Sevaka

Chelliah Rasanayagam states in his testimony that he went to question the Plaintiff

on the complaint of the 1st Defendant and the plaintiff's response was entered in 05. I have to state that though this document is missing from the record, the

Grama Sevaka's testimony remains uncontradicted.

Nonpayment of interest

As against the complaint of the 1st Defendant to the Grama Sevaka (04) which is

dated 03.05.1990, the evidence of the Plaintiff that he repaid the money in April

1989 on two occasions cannot be accepted, because, when 01 (the parol

agreement to reconvey the land) speaks of repayment of Rs.5,OOO/- with 72% interest, how could the 1st Defendant accept a mere sum of Rs.S,OOO/- without any

interest? The Plaintiff and his wife did not mention any additional payment they

paid as interest. They said they paid Rs.2,500/- on 04.04.1989 and the balance sum

of Rs.2,SOO/- before the end of the same month. The evidence on these purported

10

payments shows that no interest was added. Therefore, the evidence of the

Plaintiff and his wife about the repayment is unsatisfactory and cannot be accepted

without any independent evidence.

I therefore hold that the Plaintiff has failed to establish the payment of Rs.5,OOO/-

with interest as stipulated in 01-the parol agreement to pay back Rs.5,OOO/- with

interest which might have resulted in the retransfer of the land. Though the

agreement 01 was informal, the assertion that the plaintiff discharged his

obligations under the parol agreement has not been established.

There was another opportunity that arose in the case to test the credibility of the

story of repayment in the form of a decisory oath but it does not seem to have

been pursued.

Oecisory Oath

In the course of the plaintiffs evidence he has suggested that if the 1st Defendant

could take an oath that she did not receive money from him, he would pay the

money in Court. In the same breath he also said that he was prepared to take an

oath in the Kovil (temple) to the effect that he paid the money. But these oaths had

not been pursued and no oath has been taken by either party. The pursuit of

decisory oath would have thrown some light on the veracity of some of the rival

positions taken by the parties and it is noteworthy to observe that the celebrated

jurist e.G. Weeramantry in volume II of his tome The Law of Contracts states the

following on decisory oaths:

"Disputes are often settled in Ceylon on the basis of a challenge thrown by one party to the other to take an oath at some recognized place of worship, in which event the challenger agrees to give up his claim or to settle on agreed terms. Such agreement, when there is a pending action, will be one in accordance with Section 408 of the Civil Procedure Code, and would receive the sanction of court, so long as it is not illegal or contra bonos mores.ll

Be that as it may, though the parol agreement (01) is unenforceable because of the

lack of formalities as prescribed by Section 2 of the Prevention of Frauds Ordinance,

I deemed it appropriate to indulge in the above discussion on the rival versions of repayment as the informal agreement (01) would however form the basis for my

11 See pages 704-705 of Volume II which cite William v Nagoor Adumai (1945) 46 N.L.R 375, Sinnapody v Mannikkan (1949) 53 N.L.R 9 at 12; Tirugnasambanthapillai v Namasivyampillai (1925) 26 N.L.R 344: Also see P.V. Suppiah v Brampy and Another 6 c.L.J 62. 11

next consideration of the issue of constructive trust on which the Plaintiff has

pivoted his case for a declaration of title. The above discussion will also show the

distinction between a notarial agreement to re-convey which is called pactum de retrovendendo and a non-notarial agreement to re-convey such as 01. Whilst the pactum de retrovendendo gives rise to a cause of action provided there is a timely

tender of money, a non-notarial agreement to reconvey such as 01 may not afford

a basis to ground a cause of action for specific performance of the promise to re-

convey the land, as a promise to convey interests in a land has to be notarially

executed.

But a non-notarial document such as 01 is often relied upon by a vendor to support

a case of constructive trust against the vendee and it is exactly what the Plaintiff

sought to do in the court a quo-the District Court of Batticaloa.

Constructive Trust-Is it made out on the facts?

It is often said that in regard to deeds it is more correct to speak of an executa nt's

"manifestation of intention" rather than his intention. What is manifested in the

deed is the intention of effecting an out and out transfer for a consideration of Rs.5,OOO/-.

"In construing the terms of a deed, the question is not what the parties may have intended, but what is the meaning of the words which they used"12

In this case, the terms of Deed No.14 are quite clear in that it declares itself to be a

deed of outright transfer. One cannot get behind the words used in the deed

namely it is a sale upon which legal title to the land passed to the 1st Defendant. It

smacks of nothing but a sale. After having sold the land as an outright transfer, is it

open to the Plaintiff to claim that there exists a trust between him and the 1st

Defendant giving rise to a fiduciary relationship between the duo? In other words

does the 1st Defendant hold the property in trust for the Plaintiff? Does the

beneficial interest or title yet inheres in the plaintiff though he passed the legal title

to the 1st Defendant? This is not the first time that our courts have been confronted

with this legal conundrum.

Equity will not allow a statute to be an instrument of fraud.

It is a recognized maxim of equity that equity will not allow a statue to be used as

an instrument of fraud. In other words a plaintiff may rely on the lack of formalities

12 See Fernando v lassie (1956) 58 N.L.R 114 at 115 Citing Lord Parmoor in Maharaja Manindra Chandra Nandi v Raja Durga Prashad Singh (1917) A.LR 23 p.e 12

in the transfer of rights as a way of re-claiming property. Section 5(1) of the Trust

Ordinance states that a trust in relation to immovable property is valid only if it is

created by a last will or by a non-testamentary instrument such as a deed in writing

signed by the author of the trust or the trustee, and notarially executed. Thus the

Provisions of the Prevention of Frauds Ordinance are reflected in Sections 5(1) and

5(2) of the Trust Ordinance. Despite these provisions which impose formalities for

creation of an express trust, if the transferor can prove that the transfer was upon

trust and not a sale, the Court would declare the transferor entitled to a

conveyance of the property. This is by virtue of Section 5(3) of the Trust Ordinance,

by which the Provisions of the Trust Ordinance will not be applied if the insistence

of formalities would have the effect of a fraud upon the transferor. The maxim of

equity I cited above is mirrored in Section 5(3) of the Trust Ordinance. In other

words Sub-Section (3) of Section 5 of the Trust Ordinance allows exceptions to

Sections 5(1) and 5(2) of the Trust Ordinance.

So if the 1st Defendant promised to retransfer the land in 01 but refused to do so

upon payment, would that be considered a fraud on the Plaintiff? Drieberg J.

answered this question in the negative. In Don vs. Don/3 there was a parol promise

to execute a written contract. The Respondents (the purchasers of property from

the appellants) in the case refused to sign the written contract. The refusal to

execute the written contract was held not to be fraud on the Appellants. In other

words the principle that equity does not allow the Statute of Frauds to be used as

an instrument of fraud does not apply to cases where the fraud alleged is merely a

refusal, after a parol agreement to sign a written one. In this instant case there was

a parol promise to execute a re-conveyance upon repayment. So a refusal to

perform the parol promise to reconvey the land, even after repayment, would be

no fraud of which this Court can take cognizance. Since I have concluded that the

Plaintiff has not proved payment and even if there was payment after which the 1st

Defendant refused to carry out his parol promise, the Plaintiff would not be able to

establish fraud and make out a trust in terms of Section 5(3) ofthe Trust Ordinance.

But Section 5(3) has been applied to establish trusts in other circumstances-see

Valliamma; Atch; vs. Abdul Majeecf4 wherein there was an unconditional transfer

by notarial deed of immovable property by A to B. In pursuance of a verbal agreement B was to hold the property in trust for A. B was to remain in possession

of the property and to payout of the income of the property certain specified debts

13 31 N.L.R 73

14 (1947) 48 N.L.R 289 (P.C); (1944) 45 N.LR 169 (S.C). 13

and interests to himself and to others, and to reconvey the property to A. B died

and his widow claimed to hold the property free of the trust. A brought an action

for a declaration of trust and for consequential relief. The Privy Council held,

affirming the judgment of the Supreme Court, that oral evidence was admissible to

establish the trust; that the formalities for trust were laid down by Section 5 of the

Trust Ordinance and not by Section 2 of the Prevention of Frauds Ordinance, and

the act of the widow in seeking to ignore the trust and to retain the property for

the estate was to effectuate a fraud; and that under Section 5(3) of the Trust

Ordinance, even a writing was unnecessary and Sections 91 and 92 of the Evidence

Ordinance, therefore, had no application. It has to be noted that this case

establishes an important fact. Sections 91 and 92 of the Evidence Ordinance have

no application in a case governed by Section 5(3) of the Trust Ordinance, which,

after laying down the formalities for a trust, declares that the rules would not apply

where they would operate so as to effectuate a fraud.

Other than Section 5(3) of the Trust Ordinance which has no application to this

case, there is another gateway through which vendors have in the past sought to

establish trusts through parol evidence. This is of course with recourse to Chapter

IX of the Trust Ordinance.

In other words even though the Plaintiff is incapable of using the refusal of the parol promise in 01 to establish fraud on the part of the 1st Defendant, the parol is

certainly admissible to establish a trust through another gateway in the Trust

Ordinance namely Section 83 of the Trust Ordinance.

In fact the celebrated jurist l.J. Mark Cooray who authored the seminal work on the

Reception in Ceylon 0/ the English Trust (1971)15 declared thus in relation to the

chapter on constructive trust/6

"Chapter IX has effected a fundamental change in that fraud (discussed in article 33) which as we have seen before 1918 was a prerequisite for the admission of the parol to resulting trust is after 1980 not relevant. The claimant has to make out a case falling within sections 83 to 96 ........... The change in the post-1918 law has not always been appreciated, and there are a minority of cases after 1918 which continue to follow the pre-1918 cases in

15 This was a revised and expanded version of a dissertation for which the learned author was awarded the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy by the University of Cambridge.

16 Ibid at p 111 14

the construction of sections 83 and 841 and in which fraud was considered relevant. II (Sic)

Does Section 83 of the Trust Ordinance include an Agreement to Reconvey?

I have shown that an agreement to reconvey can be notarially executed or may be

embodied in a parol agreement such as Dl in this case. If it is the former, the

Plaintiff must establish a timely payment and can sue on the enforceable

instrument as it is a pactum de retrovendendo. If it is the latter, there is no bar to

the Plaintiff to use the parol agreement to establish a constructive trust under the

chapter on constructive trusts. Upon a careful reading of a slew of cases, I deduce

one principle. The parol agreement alone would not be sufficient to establish a constructive trust. The parol agreement is only one of the attendant circumstances referred to in Section 83 of the Trust Ordinance. It would not establish trust on its

own. It must be supplemented by other "attendant circumstances" which lead

irresistibly to the construction of a constructive trust. This seems to be the pivotal

prescription of Section 83 of the Trust Ordinance.

Section 83 of the Trusts Ordinance states as follows:

"Where the owner of property transfers or bequeaths itl and it cannot reasonably be inferred consistently with the attendant circumstances that he intended to dispose of the beneficial interest thereinl the transferee or legatee must hold such property for the benefit of the owner or his legal representative".

The retention of the beneficial interest in the transferor has to be established by

attendant circumstances which include the parol evidence. But the parol evidence

alone is not conclusive of a constructive trust. The parol must be supplemented and

substantiated by other attendant circumstances. What constitutes attendant

circumstances was clarified in Muttammah vs. Thiyagarajcl7;

" ..... circumstances which precede or follow the transfer but are not too far removed in point of time to be regarded as attendant which expression in this context may be understood as accompanyingl or connected with."

Notable precedents bring out the necessity to establish attendant circumstances

along with a non-notarial writing.

17 (1960) 62 N.L.R SS9 15

A precedent which established that a non-notarial agreement to retransfer

property is not trust is Saverimuttu vs. Thangavelautham1B The Privy Council held

that the informal agreement relied on by the Appel/ant in the case amounted not to a trust but to a contract for the transfer of immovable property and was therefore invalid as it contravened the Provisions of Section 2 of the Prevention of Frauds

Ordinance. In other words an informal writing to re-transfer property is neither a

trust nor does it create a valid contract to re-transfer property. Counsel for the

Appellant in that case argued that if B transfers land to A for a consideration by an

effective notarial document and A as part of the same transaction agrees orally or

by a non-notarial agreement to transfer the land to B for the same or another

consideration, a trust in favour of B arises. Their Lordships of the Privy Council did

not agree. Their Lordships thought that further facts clearly indicative of a trust

must be proved before a trust can be said to arise. These further facts are the other

attendant circumstances as contemplated in Section 83 of the Trust Ordinance.

In the judgment delivered by Mr. L.M.D. de Silva19 (the Sri Lankan Puisne Justice

who had the privilege to sit in the Privy Council), the Privy Council referred to the

case of Perera vs. Fernando20 where it was held that where a person transferred a

land to another by a notarial deed purporting on the face of it to sell the land, it is

not open to the transferor to prove by oral evidence that the transaction was in

reality a mortgage and that the transferee agreed to reconvey the property on

payment of the money advanced. It was further held in that case that lithe agreement relied on amounted not to a trust but to a pure contract for the purchase and sale of immovable property". I must add here that though the three

distinguished members of the Privy Council called it a pure contract for the

purchase and sale of immovable property, it was an unenforceable contract as it

contravened Section 2 of the Prevention of Frauds Ordinance. Their Lordships of

the Privy Council were of opinion that Perera vs. Fernando21 set out correctly the

law of Ceylon.

There is another reason why the informal agreement will not per se give rise to a

trust apart from its invalidity as a contract to retransfer land. Dean J's statement in

18 (1954) 55 N.L.R 529: See (1951) 54 N.L.R 28 (S.C).

19 Puisne Justice of the Supreme Court in 1933 and again so between 1952 and 1953. The judgment of the PC was delivered on July 13, 1954.

20 17 N.L.R 486

21 Ibid 16

\

\ I

! f-

the High Court of Australia in Muschinski v. Dodcf2 strikes me as pertinent.

"A claim for the imposition of a constructive trust in order to provide a remedy for a disappointed expectation engendered by a representation made in the context of incomplete contractual negotiations is, in my opinion, misconceived and cannot be sustained by reliance on unconscionable behavior on the part of the representor"

There is vagueness and incompleteness in the informal promise such as 01 which

cannot convert the absolute transfer into a trust, merely because it engenders an

expectation in the transferor that the transferee will keep his promise upon

payment of the principal and interest. 01 is so incompletely negotiated that it

results in an infructuous document conferring no automatic conversion of the

original deed of sale into a trust. But as recognized by precedents of this country, it has a utilitarian value. It can be treated as one of the attendant circumstances within Section 83 of the Trust Ordinance and it has to be supplemented with further facts or attendant circumstances for the deed of transfer to be construed as a constructive trust.

Their lordships of the Privy Council in Saverimuftu vs. Thangavelautham23 had

occasion to allude to another precedent Val/iammai Atchi vs. Abdul Majeecf4 and

observed:

'7he decision does not in terms or otherwise detract from the force of the view expressed by the Board in the case Adicappa Chetty vs. Caruppan Cherry25. In that case it was sought to establish by oral evidence that a person who held a land under a notarially attested document held it in trust for another. It was held that parol evidence was inadmissible. It was further held that the agreement in respect of which parol evidence was led sought to "create something much more resembling a mortgage or a pledge than a trust" and was of no force or avail in law if it contravened Section 2 of the Prevention of Frauds Ordinance."

There are distinguishing features between Val/iammai Atchi vs. Abdul Majeed and

Saverimuftu vs. Thangavelautham in that in the former case "Chief among the purposes of that trust was that the transferee should enter into possession, collect

22 (1985) 160 CLR 583 at 615 23Supra 24Supra

25 22 N.L.R 169 17

t fI!

I! I

\

ff

f,

the income and therewith payoff the debt due to himself and debts due to certain

other persons. It was thereafter that the transferor was to reconvey the property to

the transferee."

Their Lordships of the Privy Council in the course of their Judgment in Saverimuttu vs. Thangavelautham also referred to the existence of common elements with the

case of Valliammai Atchi vs. Abdul Majeed namely, that in each case there was an alleged agreement by a transferee of land to reconvey to the transferor and the transferor in each case was indebted to the transferee at the time of the transfer.

But their Lordships were of the view that those elements themselves did not

establish a trust and that they established only an agreement to convey. Their

Lordships also pointed out that the judgment in Valliammai Atchi vs. Abdul Majeed did not indicate that these common elements are in all cases sufficient to

give rise to a trust.

Thus, it is clear that in the instant appeal before me the parol agreement by the 1st

Defendant to reconvey the land to the Plaintiff on the payment of Rs.5,OOO/- with

interest does not give rise to a trust. Further facts, clearly indicative of a trust must

be established before a trust can be said to arise. Further, the parol agreement

relied on by the Plaintiff amounts to a contract for the transfer of immovable

property which is invalid and cannot be enforced as it contravenes Section 2 of the

Prevention of Frauds Ordinance. I would get on to the next question of whether the

plaintiff proved further facts or attendant circumstances and my conclusion is in the

negative for the reasons which become apparent shortly.

Attendant Circumstances

It is certainly not possible to itemize a comprehensive list of such attendant circumstances as will come within the meaning of those words within Section 83.

Let me cite some indicia that have been laid down by courts as attendant

circumstances or further facts that are required to establish a constructive trust in

terms of Section 83 of the Trust Ordinance. These circumstances will go to show

whether the transferor of a land did or did not intend to dispose of the beneficial

interest in such land. These guidelines are not exhaustive though. I will only set out

the attendant circumstances that are relevant to the deed of transfer in question.

Parol promise to retransfer

As I have shown this promise may be an oral promise or might even be contained in

a non-notarial instrument which is null and void in terms of Section 2 of the

18

Prevention of Frauds Ordinance but if such a promise is available as in this case, it is

an attendant circumstance but it will not give rise to a trust without more-see the

PC decision of Saverimuttu vs. Thangavelautham26 and the rationale behind it. On

the utility of a non-notarial instrument to operate as an attendant circumstance -

see Premawathi vs. Gnanawathf7 and Thisa Nona and Three Others vs.

Premadas,/8.

Where an adequate purchase price has not been paid

If the transferor of property did not receive adequate purchase price it is certainly

an important attendant circumstance. The transferor can bring in the parol

agreement and show by the further fact of inadequate consideration that he

reserved the right to buy back the property within a specific period and therefore

did not intend to part with the beneficial interest. In such a situation the parol

agreement would become quite relevant to raise the probability of the absolute

transfer becoming a constructive trust.

I have concluded that the plea of laesio enormis raised by the Plaintiff must fail for

the reasons stated in the anterior part of this judgment. The Plaintiff could not

establish by evidence that the 1st Defendant paid him less than the true value ofthe

land. In the circumstance this attendant circumstance was not established.

Was interest paid by the transferor to the transferee?

If interest is payable to the transferee by the transferor and it is paid as promised,

that may be an attendant circumstance. The payment of interest may show that

the transferor did not intend to dispose of the beneficial interest even though he

signed the deed of transfer. In this case the parol agreement specified an interest

component but the Plaintiff never adduced proof of payment of interest. I have

also concluded that there is no satisfactory evidence that the Plaintiff paid the

prinCipal at all within the specified period. So this attendant circumstance too was

not established.

Did the transferor continue in possession?

By remaining in possession, it could not be said that a person who retained

possession has parted with the beneficial interest. The fact that after the execution of the deed of transfer, the transferor remained in possession of the land would be

26 Supra

27 (1994) 2 SrLLR 171

28 (1997) 1 SrLLR 169 19

an attendant circumstance. It would show that the transferor did not intend to

dispose of the beneficial interest, although he signed the deed of transfer. If the

transferor has improved the land at his own expense after having executed the

deed of transfer, that will make it more probable that the transferor has retained

the beneficial or equitable title. But I must state that continual possession by the

transferor may not be an attendant circumstance if the transferor becomes a lessee of the transferee after the deed of transfer and proceeds to possess the land. We

are not unaware of contemporaneous leases that are executed by transferees in

favour of transferors immediately after the deed of transfer and in such a situation

the continual possession of the transferor cannot be taken into account as an

attendant circumstance, unless the transferor-lessee can show that such a lease is

spurious as no consideration passed between the parties. For a combined

operation of a non-notarial instrument and continued possession of the transferor

to establish a constructive trust-see Thisa Nona and Three Others vs. Premadascl9

and observations thereon by Dissanayake J. in Carthelis vs. Ranasinghe.30

As I have observed before, there is no continued possession of this land by the

plaintiff. The evidence is that immediately upon transfer, the 1st Defendant entered

into possession and he subsequently parted with his legal title of some portions of

the land to the 2nd, 3rd and 4th Defendants. These items of evidence go to negative

any kind of beneficial title being retained by the Plaintiff.

So my decision flows from the foregoing. It is axiomatic that such attendant

circumstances or further facts as are required by Section 83 of the Trust Ordinance

do not exist in this case or co-exist with the non-notarial agreement. I have found

that there was adequate price paid by the 1st Defendant for the purchase.

Immediately upon transfer, the transferee (the 1st defendant) entered into

possession and continued until she parted her own title, as was alleged, to the

other defendants.

In the circumstances the original deed of transfer remains an out and out sale. Now

that the parol agreement stands alone without any attendant circumstances, a

curious upshot emerges. The parol agreement would be prohibited by Section 92 of

the Evidence Ordinance because a constructive trust does not arise on the facts

without further facts or attendant circumstances and if the original deed remains

an outright sale without a constructive trust arising on the facts, Section 92 of the

29 Supra

30 (2002) 2 Sri.LR 359 20

Evidence Ordinance would place an embargo on the parol evidence to vary the

terms of the deed of sale-see the 5-bench decision of the Supreme Court William

Fernando vs. Roselyn Cooray.31 Section 92 does not bar parol evidence only to

establish a trust by showing that the transferor did not intend to pass the beneficial

interest in the property.32 But it has to be supplemented by other attendant

circumstances. If other attendant circumstances have not been established, the

parol agreement would have lost its utility. So one simply disregards the parol

agreement in the end, though it remains on the record.

If the deed of transfer remains a deed of sale to all intents and purposes, the Plaintiff cannot follow the property into the hands of 2nd, 3rd and 4th Defendants

just as much he cannot do so against the 1st Defendant.33

I therefore hold that there is no sufficient evidence to uphold the Plaintiff-

Appellant's proposition that a constructive trust has been established. I proceed to

disallow the appeal and affirm the conclusion reached by the learned District Judge of Batticaloa. The judgment would be entered for the Defendant-Respondents as

prayed for in their joint answer.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Appeal dismissed.

31 (1957) 59 N.L.R 182-see a discussion on Section 92 of the Evidence Ordinance in Dayawathie v Gunasekara (1991) 1 SrLLR 115 (Dheeraratne J) and Karunawathie v RoboSingho (1983) (2) Sri.LR 407 at 416.

32 See Dheeraratne J in Dayawathie v Gunasekara (1991) 1 SrLLR 115.

33 See Section 65(1) of the Trust Ordinance on this aspect of the matter and Warnaku/asuriyage Char/ert v Don Wima/ Harischandra Gunathilaka (SC Appeal No 157/2011) decided on 4.4.2014 for a discussion on trust property coming into the hands of third parties-see 2014 Supreme Court Law Reports (1) 537 at 551 compiled by Athula Bandara Herath. 21