1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for

Restitutio-in-integrum under Article

138 of the Constitution of the Republic

of Sri Lanka.

1. Gamage Rankirihami,

2. G. Sarath Chandralal,

(both of at) 10th Mile Post,

Alubodaweketiya,

Kella, Kolonna.

PLAINTIFFS

CA (RII) Application No. 54/2023

SP/HCCA/RAT/12/2022(FA)

D.C. Embilipitiya No.10387/L - Vs.-

B.L. Weerawansha Appuhamy,

Urawela, Kella,

Kolonna.

DEFENDANT

AND BETWEEN

B.L. Weerawansha Appuhamy,

Urawela, Kella,

Kolonna.

DEFENDANT-APPELLANT

Page 2 of 10

- Vs. -

1. Gamage Rankirihami.

2. G. Sarath Chandralal.

(both of at) 10th Mile Post,

Alubodaweketiya,

Kella, Kolonna.

PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENTS

AND BETWEEN

B.L. Weerawansha Appuhamy,

Urawela, Kella,

Kolonna.

DEFENDANT-APPELLANT-

PETITIONER

-Vs.-

1. Gamage Rankirihami.

2. G. Sarath Chandralal,

(both of at) 10th Mile Post,

Alubodaweketiya,

Kella, Kolonna.

PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT-

RESPONDENTS

AND NOW BETWEEN

Page 3 of 10

B.L. Weerawansha Appuhamy,

Urawela, Kella,

Kolonna.

DEFENDANT-APPELLANT-PETITIONER

(DECEASED)

Bambarawana Liyanage Thilaka Rathna

No. 392/3

Perakatiya,

Kella

SUBSTITUTED DEFENDANT-

APPELLANT-PETITIONER

- Vs.

1. Gamage Rankirihami.

2. G. Sarath Chandralal.

(both of at) 10th Mile Post,

Alubodaweketiya,

Kella, Kolonna.

PLANTIFF-RESPONDENT-

RESPONDENTS

Before: R. Gurusinghe J.

&

Dr. Sumudu Premachandra J.

Page 4 of 10

Counsel: Sandamal Rajapaksha with Aruni Danapala Arachchi

and Hasini Haldamulla for the Defendant-Appellant.

Anuraddha Dharmaratne with Indika Jayaweera for

the Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent.

Written Submissions: By the Substituted Defendant-Appellant-Petitioner on

07th of April 2025

By the Plaintiff- Respondent-Respondents on the 02nd

of April 2025

Argued On: 17/03/2025

Judgment On: 20/05/2025

Dr. Sumudu Premachandra J.

1] The Defendant-Appellant Petitioner (Hereinafter referred as the Petitioner)

has filed this action against the Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondents (Hereinafter

referred as the Respondents) seeking inter-alia following relief:

1. to set aside or vary, revise the Judgment dated 29/10/2021 of the learned

District Judge of Embilipitiya and

2. set aside the judgment dated 4th April 2023 of the Civil Appellant High

Court held in Ratnapura.

3. He further prays to have a re-trial for the Embilipitiya DC Case bearing

No.10387/L or ask to call the witnesses on behalf of the Defendant (the

Petitioner).

2] This is an application for Restitutio-in-integrum. Thus, the Petitioner seeks a

relief on the Article 138 of the Constitution of the Republic of Sri Lanka. The

Respondent resisted this application, and they raised the following objections.

a. The Defendant failed to prefer a leave to appeal the application to the

Supreme Court against the judgment of the Civil Appellate High Court

Page 5 of 10

of Sabaragamuwa dated 4th of April 2023, case bearing number

HCCA/FA/12/2022.

b. The relief of Restitutio-in-integrum is only available where there is no

other remedy available.

c. The Petitioner is guilty on lashes.

d. The Petitioner slept over his right and now, he is not entitled to

invoke the Jurisdiction of this court.

e. The Defendant has been negligent in his conduct during the trial and

after the judgment.

f. The relief in Restitutio-in-integrum cannot be considered if the

Petitioner is in own folly, negligence, or lashes

g. The Petitioner has failed to disclose any exceptional circumstances

which is a pre-requisite to invoke jurisdiction of this court.

h. The Petitioner has failed to disclose the nature and extent of any

damages and only made bare assertion.

3] Countering the objections made by the Respondents, the Petitioner says that

Respondents have not come with a clean hand and is guilty of misrepresentation

and suppression of material facts. Those were that;

a) The Respondents have failed to establish their possession against the

possession of the Petitioner since 1973.

b) Although a Fiscal Officer came to execute the writ of possession against

the Petitioner, the Petitioner continued to be in possession of the land in

dispute. (he was never dispossessed)

c) The Petitioner further says since the Respondents were not in possession,

there was no necessity, therefore, he did not take any step to evict the

Respondents.

4] The backdrop of this case is as follows; the Plaintiffs, by amended plaint, have

filed this case against the Defendant to evict the Defendant and persons holding

under him. The Plaintiffs say that the husband of the 1st Plaintiff, K. P.

Somadasa, got the permit under the Land Development Ordinance to the land

Page 6 of 10

in question and by Embilipitiya District Court Case bearing No. 4859/, their

rights were vindicated, the possession was given to them. They say, on

29/05/2008, they were dispossessed and by this instant action was filed for the

recovery of possession. Thus, this is an action for recovery of possession under

section 4 of the Prescription Ordinance. The After pleadings were completed, the

matter went inter-parte. The evidence was concluded for the Plaintiffs and on

05/12/2019, the Defendants evidence was also concluded. The Defendant was

given a further date to call his remaining witnesses, which he failed to do. The

learned trial judge delivered the judgment on 29/10/2021 on the available

evidence considering the oral and documentary evidence of both parties. Being

aggrieved to the said judgment, the Petitioner appealed to the Civil Appellate

High Court of Ratnapura under case bearing No. SP/HCCA/RAT/12/2022. By

judgement dated 04/04/2023, this appeal was dismissed with costs.

5] Both parties have filed written submissions. I now consider the matter in

detail. The Petitioners contention was although the Fiscal Officer came to

execute the writ of Embilipitiya District Court Case bearing No. 4859/, the

Petitioner continued to remain in possession for 10 years, on his adverse,

uninterrupted possession, he has the prescriptive title to the land in question,

which learned judges of Civil Appellate High Court had failed to consider.

Further, the Petitioner said despite several dates had been given to the Plaintiffs

(the Respondents), he was given single opportunity to call witnesses and his

application for postponement was disallowed by the learned trial judge, amounts

to a denial of the principle of fair trial which warrants exercise the jurisdiction

of this court under Article 138 of the Constitution. Further, the Petitioner

contends that the judgment of the lower court is not in accordance with section

187 of the Civil Procedure Code, therefore it is bad in law.

6] I now consider the merits of this application. The Article 138 of the

Constitution enacts:

Page 7 of 10

138. (1) The Court of Appeal shall have and exercise subject to the

provisions of the Constitution or of any law, an appellate jurisdiction for the

correction of all errors in fact or in law which shall be [committed by

the High Court, in the exercise of its appellate or original jurisdiction

or by any Court of First Instance], tribunal or other institution and sole and

exclusive cognizance, by way of appeal, revision and restitutio in

integrum, of all causes, suits, actions, prosecutions, matters and things [of

which such High Court, Court of First Instance], tribunal or other institution

may have taken cognizance:

Provided that no judgement, decree or order of any court shall be reversed

or varied on account of any error, defect or irregularity, which has not

prejudiced the substantial rights of the parties or occasioned a

failure of justice. [ Emphasis is added]

7] The Petition dated 06th December 2023, paragraph 08, clearly shows that this

application is sought under remedy of Restitutio in Integrum. The relief of

Restitutio in Integrum has been developed by the plethora of apex court

judgements. In century ago, in PERERA et al. v. WIJEWICKREME et al 15 NLR

411, His Lordship PEREIRA J.- agreeing with His Lordship Ennis J. held that;

Restitutio in integrum is not granted in Ceylon if the applicant has any

other remedy equally effectual open to him

8] Moreover, the remedy is available for judgments of original courts entered

consequent to misrepresentation of facts or fraud due to which the party seeking

relief has suffered damages. In Kusumawathie vs. Wijesinghe [2001] 3 SLR

238, His Lordship Jayasinghe, J., held;

"When a party appears and complains that she has been wronged by a

process of law, this Court would not helplessly watch and allow the fraud

practised on that party to be perpetuated. Restitutio - in - integrum provides

this Court the necessary apparatus to step in and rectify any miscarriage

of and failure of justice. If this is not the case then there is a serious vacuum

Page 8 of 10

in the law, which can be made use of by designing individuals as the

Petitioner alleges had happened to her."

9] In Menchinahamy v. Munaweera 52 NLR 409, His Lordship Dias, S.P.J.

held It has also been laid down that relief by way of restitutio in integrum should

be sought for with the utmost promptitude. Further in Babun Appu v. Simeon

Appu 11 N. L. R. 44, His Lordship WENDT J. held that in the absence of fraud

the remedy of restitutio in integrum is not available in a partition suit on the ground

of discovery of fresh evidence after judgment. The only remedy available is an

action for damages as provided for by the Partition Ordinance.

10] His Lordship Ranaraja J in Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation v.

Shanmugam and another [1995] 1 SLR 55 has mentioned that the remedy of

restitution in integrum is not available to a party that has been guilty of a blatant

lack of due diligence.

11]Recently, His Lordship Nawaz J. in Edirisinghe Arachchilage Indrani

Chandralatha v. Elrick Ratnum, CA RII Case No. 64/2012 decided on

02.08.2017, laid down following occasions that the remedy of restitution in

integrum can be considered. Those are;

a. Fraud

b. False Evidence

c. Non-disclosure of material facts

d. Deception

e. Fresh Evidence

f. Mistake

g. Fear

h. Minority

Page 9 of 10

12] More recent, in Kumudu Samanthi Akmeemana v. Araliya

Kankaanamge Somasiri de Silva & Others CA/RII/1/2018, Decided on

21.02.2019, His Lordship Samayawardhena, J held,

It must be stressed that the power to grant relief by way of restitutio in

integrum is a matter of grace and discretion. (Usoof v. Nadarajah

Chettiar, 58 NLR 436) The petitioner cannot seek restitution as of

right. There are several thresholds matters to be sorted out before

addressing the core issue. One such important hurdle to overcome is

that relief by way of restitutio in integrum should be sought for with the

utmost promptitude. Vide Menchinahamy v. Muniweera, Babun Appu

v. Simon Appu, Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation Limited v.

Shanmugam , it is crystal clear that the petitioner has not acted

with the utmost promptitude when she decided to come before this Court

more than two years after the District Court held against her. The delay is

too long by any stretch of imagination particularly because the final order

of the District Court against her was not ex parte but inter partes

The explanation for delay over two years is unacceptable. Hence, on that

ground alone, the application of the petitioner is liable to be dismissed.

[Emphasis is added]

13] In applying above legal principles to the case in hand, it is seen that the

Petitioner has not exercised his right to appeal at the very first instance to the

Supreme Court by way of special leave, against the judgment of Civil Appellatte

High Court Ratnapura filed under case bearing No. SP/HCCA/RAT/12/2022.

Thus, it is clearly seen that the Petitioner has filed this case where there are

other remedies, thus, the application should be dismissed on above premises as

the relief of Restitutio-in-integrum only available where there is no other remedy

available. It should be noted that the judgement of SP/HCCA/RAT/12/2022 has

been given on 04th of April 2023 and this application was filed on 06th December

2023 after 8 months. There are no reasons had been given for the delay; thus,

the Petitioner is guilty on lashes. That too contributes for the dismissal of this

Page 10 of 10

application. Despite the there is remedy available to vindicate Petitioners rights,

the Petitioner has slept over his right and I am of the view, now, he is not entitled

to invoke the jurisdiction of this court. It is seen that the Petitioner has been

negligent in his conduct during the trial and after the judgment. In his evidence

he has blamed his previous five attorneys that they had ruined his case. He

denied the right of represent by a counsel in the latter part of the case at the

trial court, just because he disbelieved all five previous counsels. He was bold

enough to conduct his case without support of an attorney thereafter, thus, the

Petitioner is in own folly and negligence, it cannot be condoned. If the Petitioner

opted to conduct the District Court case without legal representation, he should

take the repercussions. Later, he cannot say that he was denied a fair trial.

Moreover, the Petitioner has failed to show any reason which shock the

conscious of this court. Further, the Petitioner has not satisfied this court that

impugned judgement had been obtained by a fraud, leading false evidence, the

Respondent has not disclosed material facts at the trial or in the Civil Appeal

High Court, it was obtained by deception and there is fresh evidence, that

impugned judgement can be toppled or the judgement was given by mistake or

fear. Thus, I am of the view that this application has no merits.

14] For the forgoing reasons, the application for restitutio in integrum is

dismissed with costs.

Dr. Sumudu Premachandra

Judge of the Court of Appeal

I agree.

R. Gurusinghe

Judge of the Court of Appeal