IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCLALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A. Appeal No. 565/2000 (F)

D.C. Kalutara case No. 4146/P

1. Mohamed Sheriff Mohamed Naim Alias

Ismail,

67, Arab Road, Beruwala,

Plaintiff.

1a. Mohomed Ismail Mohomed Abdul

Cader,

67, Arab Road, Beruwala

Substituted Plaintiff.

Vs

1. Seinadeen Mohammed Ziard 42/17, Henewatta, Beruwala.

2. Seinadeen Mohomed Sadik 42/17, Henewatta, Beruwala.

3. Abdul Hamid Mohamed Wahabdeen 43A. 1 Usuf Avenue, Beruwala.

4. Mohomed Sally Kaira 45, Old Road, Beruwala.

5. Mohomed Cassim Mohomed Iqbal

Old Road, Beruwala.

6. Ahamed Rahuman Umma 42/20, Henewatte, Beruwala.

2

7. Abdul Hamid Mohamed Hashim

42/20, Henewatte, Beruwal.

8. Abdul Hamid Mohamed Samsudeen 38/26, Henewatte, Beruwala.

9. Charlis Fernando 42/15, Henewatte, Beruwala.

10.Miskin Patumma 38/32, Henewatte, Beruwala.

l1.Abdul Majid Sitti Nushina 43A/l Usuf Avenue Beruwala.

6a. Mohamed Ahamed Abdul Hameed Henewatte, Beruwala.

9a. Kankanathanthrige Leelawathi Silva H2/15 Henewatta, Beruwala.

6a. Abdul Hamid Patumma

42/20 Henewatte, Beruwala.

8a. Samsudeen Mohamed Ziard Henewatte, Beruwala.

Defendants.

AND NOW BETWEEN

la. Mohamed Ismail Mohamed Abdul

Cader.

67, Arab Road, Beruwala.

Substituted Plaintiff

Appeallant.

3

-vS-

1. Seinadeen Mohomed Ziard 42/17, Henewatte, Beruwala.

2. Seinadeen Mohomed Sadik 42/17, Henewatta, Beruwala.

3. Abdul Hamid Mohamed Wahabdeen 43A. 1 Usuf Avenue, Beruwala.

4. Mohomed Sally Kaira 45, Old Road, Beruwala.

5. Mohomed Cassim Mohomed Iqbal

Old Road, Beruwala.

6. Ahamed Rahuman Umma

42/20, Henewatte, Beruwala.

7. Abdul Hamid Mohomed Hashim

42/20, Henewatte, Beruwal.

8. Abdul Hamid Mohomed Samsudeen 38/26, Henewatte, Beruwala.

9. Charlis Fernando 42/15, Henewatte, Beruwala.

10.Miskin Patumma 38/32, Henewatte, Beruwala.

l1.Abdul Majid Sitti Nushina 43A/1 Usuf Avenue Beruwala.

6a. Mohomed Ahamed Abdul Hameed Henewatte, Beruwala.

Before

Counsel

E.A.G.R. Amarasekara J.

4

9a. Kankanathanthrige Leelawathi Silva

H2/15 Henewatta, Beruwala.

Ga. Abdul Hamid Patumma

42/20 Henewatte, Beruwala.

8a. Samsudeen Mohomed Ziard Henewatte, Beruwala.

2A. Mohomed Mustafa Lebbe Waseela

Umma

2B. Mohomed Sadik Esmin Begam

Both are of 39/1, Henewatte,

Beruwala.

9B. Mahabaduge Nimal Shantha

Fernando Jayasooriya.

42/15, Henewatte, Beruwala.

Defendant - Respondents.

Milindu Sarathchadra AAL with Asthika Devendra AAL for the

Substituted Plaintiff - Appellant.

N.I.S. Kularathna AAL with S.A. Kulasooriya for the Defendant-

Respondent.

Decided on : 05.10.2018.

5

E.A.G.R. Amarasekara J.

This is an appeal filed by the substituted Plaintiff - Appellant against the Judgment

dated 22.08.2000, delivered by the learned District Judge of Kalutara, in the

Partition Action No.4146/P. By the said Judgement, the learned District Judge

dismissed the Plaintiff's Action mainly on the ground that the corpus sought to be

partitioned had not been identified.

The aforesaid District Court case was filled in 1976 by the deceased Plaintiff to

partition a land in the extent of 2 roods and 9 perches, called Senetottam and more

fully described in the schedule to the Plaint. The original Plaint named only five

Defendants. However, 6 to 10th Defendants claimed their rights during the

preliminary survey and later intervened to the action as added parties. The 6th and

7th Defendants together and the 8th, 9th, and 10th Defendants separately filed their

statements of claim taking up the position that the land sought to be partitioned in

the Plaint is not the land surveyed for the preparation of the preliminary Plan No.

966 made by G. Ambepitiya Licensed Surveyor. The said preliminary Plan was

marked as 'X' at the trial.

The 8th Defendant, who was the 3rd claimant at the survey to prepare the

preliminary Plan, sought another commission to be issued to include the correct

name and description of the boundaries to the corpus surveyed by the preliminary

Plan. His position was that the land surveyed for the preliminary Plan was not

Senetottam as described in the schedule to the Plaint but a land called

Barasiyawatta Kattiya as described in the schedule to his statement of claim. The

6

6th and 7th Defendants in their amended statement of claim have named the subject

matter as ((Barasiyathottam"

After the 2nd commission, the Commissioner G. Ambepitiya, Licensed Surveyor had

submitted the Plan No. 966A which was marked as 751 at the trial, naming the land

surveyed as ((portion of Barasiyawatta". It is common ground that physical metes

and bounds and the extent depicted in the aforesaid Plain No. 966A and the same

of the preliminary Plan marked 'X' are identical, except for the name of the land

and the manner by which the boundaries are described. However, the Western

and Eastern boundaries in Plan No. 966A (751) are described as ((Kottawasalawatta

alias Land belonging to Mohammed Kandu Master" and ((Kelawantottam alias

Nakiyawatte" respectively, which description is similar to the description of

Western and Eastern boundaries of the Preliminary Plan No.966. As per the

preliminary Plan the Southern boundary is described as 'Henewatta alias

Henatottam', which as per 751 (Plan No. 966A) is described as 'Senetottam Watta

alias 'land wherein the heirs of Uduman Labbe Marikkar reside'. However, there

is a similarity or closeness in both the descriptions as one is 'Henetottam' and the

other is 'Senetottam Watta'. However, the Northern boundary in 751 (Plan No.

966A) is described as a portion of the same land. In other words, it can be also

described as a portion of 'Barasiyawatta' as the land surveyed is named as 'portion

of Barasiyawatte'. Even in the Preliminary Plan the Northern boundary is described

as 'Barasiyawatta'. The aim of making the 751 (Plan No. 966A) is to show that the

land surveyed in the preliminary Plan is a part of Barasiyawatta containing 2 roods

14.50 perches, but not Senetottam of 2 roods and 9 perches as described in the

7

schedule to the Plaint. This court observes, as per the evidence placed by the

Plaintiff the relevant assessment number given for Senetottam, the land sought to

be partitioned is 3050. This is also supported by the land registry extracts (al . 1,

a12) in relation to Senetottam of 2 roods and 9 perches in extent and deeds marked

all, al 9 and al . 7 which refer to the assessment No. 3050 to describe the premises

or the land. This Court further observes the commissioner in describing the land in

a true copy of 751 (Plan No. 966A) found on page 158 of the District Court case

record has referred to the same assessment No. 3050 but the original of Plan

marked 751 found on page 152 does not refer to that assessment number in

describing the land. However, since deeds marked 752, 753, 754 and 755 refer to

the same assessment number to describe a bigger land of one acre named

Barasiyawatta, this Court finds it difficult to think that the use of assessment

number 3050 in describing the land in Plan No. 966A (751) or any other document

such as land registry extracts or deeds is decisive in deciding the identity of

Senetottam, the land sought to be partitioned.

The Land to the South to the land surveyed in Plan No. 966 marked as X is identified

as Henewatta alias Henetottam and the same is described in Plan No. 966A (Plan

marked as 751) as Senetottam Watta. If the two lands that form the boundaries of

the East and West (namely Kottawasalathottam and Kelawantottem) extend

further to the south, the boundaries described in the schedule to the Plaint may

tally with the boundaries of the land described as the southern boundary in the

Plans No. 966 and 966A. Even a portion of the land surveyed in aforesaid plans

together with a portion of the land to the North or South to the land surveyed may

form a corpus that may tally with the description of boundaries given to the land in

8

the schedule to the Plaint, if the lands on the east and west to the land surveyed

extend beyond the north and/or south limits of the land surveyed.

It must be noted that there are Defendants who do not get title according to the

Plaintiff's pedigree, but have claimed plantation and buildings found within the

corpus surveyed without any challenge or cross claim. Some of them have filed

their answers showing their title through a different pedigree to a land with a

different name. The Plaintiff has attempted to say some of these are licensees of

his predecessors or their descendants. If it is the truth, he could have revealed that

in the Plaint and made them parties to the action. The position of the Plaintiff that

some of them are licensees or their descendants appears to be an afterthought.

In the same manner the Plaintiff has attempted to state in his evidence that

Senetottam has another name as Barisiyawatta. If so, he could have mentioned

that in his Plant. This too appears to be an afterthought of the Plaintiff that

originated after seeing the positions taken by the Defendants. This Court also

observes that the boundaries described in the schedule to the statement of claims

to the portion of Barisiyawatta are totally compatible to the Plans made, but the

northern boundary of the land in the schedule to the Plaint is not compatible with

the northern boundary of the plans made unless Senetottam is another name for

Barisiyawatta.

In the aforesaid circumstances and when the position of the Defendants is that the

land surveyed is part of Barisiyawatta, the burden is on the Plaintiff to prove that

the land sought to be partitioned is properly depicted in the preliminary Plan.

It should be noted that the land sought to be partitioned has been described in the

schedule to the Plaint as the land shown in the Plan No. 317 dated 27.07.1939. It

9

is nothing else but the 2 roods 9 perches land that is depicted in the said plan is the

subject matter of the partition action. The Plaintiff argues that there need not be

a previous plan for the subject matter of a partition action. It may be true, but here

in this action what is sought to be partitioned is the land depicted in the said plan.

Especially where there is a dispute as to whether the land is Senetottam of 2 rood

9 perches or portion of Barisiyawatta, the best way to prove that it is the land

sought to be partitioned is the superimposition of the pervious plan used to

describe the said land in the schedule to the Plaint and plaintiff's title deeds. The

Plaintiff has failed to do that and had not given any acceptable reasons for that

while giving evidence. In his written submissions the counsel for the Plaintiff

attempts to show that the said plan was destroyed by fire that engulfed the

Beruwala Urban Council building. The Plaintiff in his evidence had said that certain

documents were destroyed by fire at the Urban Council building, but it was when

he was questioned with regard to the certificate of sale by which the Urban Council

got title to the subject matter. However, no witnesses who came from the

Beruwala Urban Council has said that the documents were destroyed by fire. The

Plaintiff not being an employee or officer of the Urban Council cannot state by his

personal knowledge that such and such documents were destroyed by fire at the

Urban Council building unless he was communicated with such information. No

such communication had been marked by the Plaintiff at the trial. Nothing was led

through a witness of the Urban Council to prove that there was a fire that destroyed

the documents.

On behalf of the plaintiff, the counsel argues that Henewatta (Senathottam) is a

bigger area and Barisiyawatta is only a portion of it and furthermore, Barisiyawatta

is also called Henewatta. If Henewatta or Senatottam is a bigger area of land, it

10

makes it more necessary to superimpose the plan referred to in the schedule to the

Plaint to identify the land of 2 roods 9 perches in extent which is sought to be

partitioned and its location within the bigger area of land. It is worthy to note that

as per some deeds, even Barisiyawatta is about 1 acre in extent.

The counsel for the Plaintiff brought this court's attention to the 2nd paragraph of

the report of the preliminary plan marked Xl and stated that the Commissioner

had identified the land surveyed as land sought to be partitioned but this court

observes that he had not done any superimposition or given any reason to

substantiate such opinion. The facts revealed at the trial show that the boundaries

of the land surveyed tally with the boundaries given to the land described in the

schedule to the statement of claim of the 8th Defendant. Furthermore, in his 2nd

plan the same commissioner had named the land as a portion of Barisiyawatta and

shown the northern boundary as a portion of the same land. It must be noted that

as per the deeds marked by the 7th Defendant, Barisiyawatta is a land of 1 acre in

extent. As per the report made to plan 966A marked as 752, it appears that the 2nd

commission was issued to show the correct name of the land sought to be

partitioned. Accordingly, he has named the land surveyed in the 2nd plan No. 966A

as a portion of Barisiyawatta and abutting lands with additional descriptions when

compared with the preliminary plan. In the report to the aforesaid 2nd plan the

commissioner has not stated that he named and described the land and the

boundaries in the manner described by the Defendants and the true descriptions

are as mentioned in the preliminary plan and report. Therefore, the report of the

plan marked 966A qualify the statement made by him previously in the report of

the preliminary plan marked Xl stating that the land surveyed is the land sought to

be partitioned by the Plaint.

11

The claims made to certain Plantations by the Plaintiff without a dispute does not

suffice to prove the land sought to be partitioned is properly depicted by the

preliminary Plan. Even the possession of certain part of Barisiyawatta by wrongly

considering it as the land sought to be partitioned or falling of a portion of the land

sought to be partitioned within the boundaries of the land surveyed may explain

the possibility for such claims to the plantation. Such claims along with the claims

made to the plantations and buildings by the defendants, who do not get title under

plaintiff's pedigree, but relying on a different pedigree to a differently named land,

confirms the need of a superimposition of the plan referred to in the schedule to

the plaint.

Even the Plaintiff's counsel in his written submissions at para 5.69 states as follows:

(Quote) "However, it is submitted that the learned District Judge has not conducted

a proper investigation to identify the corpus. Nevertheless sufficient evidences

were in the brief to identify the corpus." (Unquote)

If there is sufficient evidence, the learned District Judge cannot be blamed for not

conducting a proper investigation with rega rd to the identity of the corpus, but by

blaming the learned district judge for not conducting a proper inquiry, the counsel

himself doubts the sufficiency of evidence. On the other hand, the learned District

Judge cannot go on a voyage of discovery. The burden of proof with regard to the

identity of the corpus is on the Plaintiff but he has failed to discharge that burden.

Identification of the corpus of a partition action is based on facts but not on law.

Unless the decision is perverse this court shall not interfere to change it.

12

As per the reasons given above, the Plaintiff failed in proving the identity of the

corpus through the preliminary Plan made for the partitioned action. In that

backdrop, this Court's view is that the appeal must fail.

Hence the appeal is dismissed with costs.

E.A.G.A. Amarasekara

Judge of the Court of appeal.