1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for mandates in the nature of Writs of Certiorari and Mandamus under and in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

CA (Writ) Application No: 457/2015

1) Dr. Malcolm Stanislaus, Chairman. 2) Mohan De Silva, Vice Chairman. 3) Preneetha Perera, Secretary. 4) Camillus Fernando, Treasurer.

Of the Lions Club International Sight First Hospital Trust, No. 45, Hekitta Road, Hendala, Wattala.

PETITIONERS

Vs.

1) S.G.Wijayabandu,

1A) Sirisoma Lokuwithana,

Secretary, Ministry of Education, Western Province, Ranmagapaya, Battaramulla.

2) P. Sri Lal Nonis.

2A) Deepthi Fonseka.

2

2B) Jayasundera Herath Mudiyanselage Wasantha Ranjith. 2C) P.D.I.K.Pranagama,

Director of Education, Kelaniya Zonal Education Office, Makola.

3) P.R. Devabandu, Assistant Director of Education, Kelaniya Zonal Education Office, Makola. 4) Quintus Paul, Principal, Christu Raja Vidyalaya, Hekitta, Wattala.

5) R.P.R. Rajapakse.

5A) R.M.C.M. Herath,

Commissioner General of Lands, Mihikatha Madura, Sri Jayawardenapura, Kotte. 6) E.A.R.Renuka.

6A) Udupila Arachchige Sujith Harshapriya

Sisira Kumara. Provincial Land Commissioner, Western Province, Dam Street, Colombo 12.

7) M.K.D.S. Gunewardena.

7A) Gayantha Karunatilleke. 7B) S.M. Chandrasekara,

Minister of Lands, Ministry of Lands, Battaramulla.

8) W.D.Premalal, Divisional Secretary, Divisional Secretariat, Wattala.

RESPONDENTS

3

Before: Arjuna Obeyesekere, J / President of the Court of Appeal Counsel: Saliya Peiris, P.C., with Isuru Balapatabendi for the Petitioners

Thishya Weragoda with M. Gamage for the 1st 3rd and 6th Respondents Manohara De Silva, P.C., with Ms. Nadeeshani Lankatilleke and H. Kumarage for the 4th Respondent Ms. Anusha Fernando, Deputy Solicitor General for the 5th, 7A and 8th Respondents

Argued on: 14th October 2020 Written Tendered on behalf of the Petitioner on 28th November 2019 and Submissions: 21st October 2020 Tendered on behalf of the 1st 3rd and 6th Respondents on 30th September 2020 Tendered on behalf of the 4th Respondent on 29th November 2019 Tendered on behalf of the 5th, 7A and 8th Respondents on 25th November 2019 Decided on: 11th June 2021 Arjuna Obeyesekere, J., P/CA

The issue in this application relates to the legality of a representation made in 2004

by the Provincial Council of the Western Province to grant a lease to the Lions Club

International District 306/B (the Lions Club) in respect of a State land used by the

Christu Raja Vidyalaya, Hekitta, Wattala (the School) and the subsequent decision

taken in 2015 that the land must be handed back to the Ministry of Education of the

Western Province.

The facts of this matter very briefly are as follows.

4

The Petitioners are the Chairman, Vice Chairman, Secretary and Treasurer,

respectively, of the Lions Club International Sight First Hospital Trust, a charitable

trust established in June 2004 by Deed of Trust marked P1. The Petitioners state

further that the primary object of the Trust is to carry on a hospital where inter alia

patients with eye issues are screened and cataract surgeries are carried out.

The Petitioners state that in 2003, the Lions Club was in need of a land to establish

an eye care hospital that they intended building for the benefit of the members of

the public in Sri Lanka. The Petitioners state further that the Lions Club had identified

a dilapidated abandoned building that was situated on a land adjoining the School

for the said purpose. The Petitioners had thereafter made representations to the

then Minister of the Interior and Christian Affairs, who was also a member of

Parliament for the Gampaha District seeking the release of the said State land for the

said purpose. It is evident that the Petitioners were aware from the outset that the

said land was State land and had been used for the School.

The Petitioners state that the 4th Respondent, the Principal of the School, by letter

dated 21st October 2003, marked P2, had informed the Secretary to the Ministry of

Education of the Western Province as follows:

yeo, isxy iudch u.ska mj;ajdf.k hkq ,nk wlaIs frday, ioyd f.dvke.s,s myiqlus ,ndoSu Wla; ldrKh ioyd .usmy osia;S%la mdra,sfuska;= uka;S% wNHka;r lghq;= iy lS%ia;shdks lghq;= ms<sno .re wud;H;=uka jsiska yeo, isxy iudch u.ska wlaIs frday,la mj;ajdf.k hdu ioyd fuu jsoqyf,a merks fouy,a f.dvke.s,a, ,ndfok f,i b,a,Sula lr we; tu b,a,Su mrsos fuu mdief,a merks fouy,a f.dvke.s,a, wod, ld, iSudj ioyd

jsoqyf,a bosrs myiqlus j,g ndOd fkdjk whqrska ,nd osh yels nj jdra:d lrus.

It would thus be seen that the 4th Respondent had only agreed to release an old

building of the School and that too only for a limited period of time, provided it did

not hinder the future activities of the School. The learned Presidents Counsel for the

4th Respondent submitted that the 4th Respondent never agreed to lease the said

land to the Lions Club or to the Petitioners, and that in any event, the 4th Respondent

does not have the power to agree to the lease of the said land.

5

The Petitioners state that by letter dated 21st April 2004, marked P3, the 6th

Respondent, the Provincial Land Commissioner of the Western Province had

informed the Secretary to the Ministry of Agriculture, Land and Transport of the

Western Province that the land can be leased to the Lions Club under Section 17(1)

of the Land Development Statute No. 7 of 2002 of the Western Province, provided

the Board of Ministers of the Western Province approves such a lease.

The Petitioners state that by Memorandum dated 22nd April 2004, marked P4, the

Chief Minister of the Western Province had sought approval from the Board of

Ministers of the Western Province to execute a long term lease of the said land to

the Lions Club for the purpose of establishing the said hospital. The Chief Minister

has pointed out in P4 that having consulted the relevant officials with regard to the

present student population and the needs of the School, it is clear that the release of

the said building together with the land appurtenant thereto,1 will not be an

obstruction to the functioning of the said school. It must be noted that P4 does not

set out the exact area of land that was sought to be leased nor the entire extent of

land that was possessed by the School.

The Petitioners state that pursuant to P4, the Board of Ministers of the Western

Province at its meeting held on 23rd April 2004 had approved the execution of a long

term lease of the proposed land for the purpose of establishing the eye care hospital.

The Board Minutes have been marked P6.

By letter dated 29th April 2004 marked P7, the Assistant Secretary, Ministry of

Agriculture, Lands, Animal Protection and Health, Irrigation and Transport of the

Western Province had informed the 6th Respondent that upon consideration of the

decision contained in P6, the Minister of Lands of the Western Province had

approved the handing over of possession of the said land to the Lions Club, and had

requested that necessary action be taken.

By letter dated 30th April 2004, marked P8, the 6th Respondent had instructed the

8th Respondent, the Divisional Secretary, Wattala to act according to the decision of

the Board of Ministers and the instructions contained in P7, and to take steps for

the preparation of a long term lease of the said land. By letter dated 19th May 2004 1 f.dvke.s,a, iys; bvus fldgi

6

marked P10, the 8th Respondent had granted approval to the Petitioner to

commence construction subject to the condition that lease rental must be paid from

the date that possession is handed over and that no compensation would be paid in

the event the execution of a long lease is rejected.

By his letter dated 26th May 2004 marked P11 sent to the Lions Club, the 8th

Respondent had annexed a sketch of the land that was being handed over.

Incidentally, the said sketch had been prepared by the 8th Respondent in February

2004, which was prior to the above decision of the Board of Ministers of the Western

Province. This Court has not been presented with details of any other steps that the

6th and/or 8th Respondents may have taken with regard to the execution of a lease.

The Petitioners state that based on the above representations, the Lions Club

commenced refurbishment of the said building, and that they incurred a cost of

approximately Rs. 30 million in constructing the said hospital which had thereafter

been utilized to carry out several charitable projects, including over 10,000 cataract

operations without any charge.

Although the Petitioners state that they had requested the Respondents to formalize

their occupation of the said land by granting a long-term lease, no such lease has

been executed either in favour of the Lions Club or in favour of the Trust. The

Petitioners state that several years later they found out that the said school is

seeking the release of the building and the land for school development activity. By

letter dated 7th May 2015 marked P27, the Petitioners had made representations to

the Chief Minister of the Western Province that a long-term lease of the said land be

executed in their favour.

By letter dated 8th October 2015 marked P30, the Secretary, Ministry of Education,

Western Province had informed the Secretary of the Lions Club that the said land

was required for the development work of the said School and therefore to hand

over the said land. This request had been reiterated by letter dated 6th November

2015 marked P31.

It is in the above circumstances that the Petitioners filed this application, seeking a

Writ of Certiorari to quash the decisions contained in P30 and P31, and a Writ of

7

Mandamus compelling the Respondents to grant the Petitioners a long term lease in

respect of the said land.

The learned Presidents Counsel for the Petitioners submitted that the Petitioners

have incurred heavy costs in establishing and constructing the said hospital and that

such an investment was done due to the representations made by the Board of

Ministers of the Western Province that a long term lease of the said land would be

executed in their favour and therefore the Petitioners have a legitimate expectation

that a lease would be executed. It was also submitted that the hospital has been

operating for a long period of time providing yeoman service to the members of the

public.

I must state at the outset that for an expectation to be recognized by Court on the

basis of a representation made by a statutory authority, such representation must

first be clear and unambiguous. In this instance, P10 very clearly states that even

though the Lions Club can commence construction, that it would not be entitled to

any compensation if the lease is refused for whatever reason. Thus, there has not

been a promise that a lease will be executed but only a representation to act on a

best endeavours basis.

The learned Deputy Solicitor General for the 5th, 7A and 8th Respondents submitted

that the law governing the disposition of State land is the State Lands Ordinance No.

8 of 1947, as amended. Section 2 thereof reads as follows:

Subject to the provisions of this Ordinance and of the regulations made

thereunder, the President may in the name and on behalf of the Republic of Sri

Lanka

(2) sell, lease or otherwise dispose of State land;

(3) enter into agreements for the sale, lease or other disposition of State

land.

The learned Deputy Solicitor General thereafter drew the attention of this Court to

List II (the Reserved List) of the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution in terms of which

8

State Lands and Foreshore except to the extent specified in item 18 of List I is with

the Central Government.

Item 18 of List I (the Provincial List) sets out the power that a Province has over land,

and reads as follows:

Land - Land that is to say, rights in and over land, land tenure, transfer and

alienation of land, land use, land settlement and land improvement to the

extent set out in Appendix II

Paragraph 1 of Appendix II reads as follows:

State land shall continue to vest in the Republic and may be disposed of in

accordance with Article 33(d) and written law governing this matter.

Subject as aforesaid, land shall be Provincial Council Subject, subject to the

following special provisions :

1:2 Government shall make available to a Provincial Council, State land within

the Province required by such Council for a Provincial Council subject. The

Provincial Council shall administer, control and utilise such State land, in

accordance with the laws and statutes governing the matter.

1:3 Alienation or disposition of the State land within a Province to any

citizen or to any organisation shall be by the President, on the advice of

the relevant Provincial Council, in accordance with the laws governing the

matter.

The learned Deputy Solicitor General submitted that while a Provincial Council shall

have the power to administer, control and utilise such State land made available to it

by the Government, a Provincial Council does not have the power to alienate State

land and that, that power continues to remain with the President, who shall act in

terms of the State Lands Ordinance.

9

The above position has been clearly laid down in The Superintendent, Stafford

Estate and two others v Solaimuthu Rasu,2 where the Supreme Court, in providing

an authoritative analysis on the devolution of State Land in terms of the 13th

Amendment to the Constitution, held as follows:

The 13

thAmendment to the Constitution refers to State Land and Land in two

different and distinct places. In my view the entirety of State Land is referred to

in List II (Reserved List) and it is only from this germinal origin that the Republic

could assign to the Provincial Councils land for whatever purposes which are

deemed appropriate. It is therefore axiomatic that the greater includes the

lesser (Omne majus continent in se minus) and having regard to the fact that in

a unitary state of government no cession of dominium takes place, the Centre

has not ceded its dominium over State Lands to the Provincial Councils except in

some limited circumstances as would appear later in the judgment.

State can make grants absolutely and more often it does so provisionally with

conditions attached or by way of leases, permits, licenses as per provisions

governing disposition of state lands. Such conveyances can be made by the

State to any person/organization entitled to hold land including Provincial

Councils. All this partakes of the dominium that the State enjoys in having

ownership and its attendant incidents of ownership such as its use and

consistent with these characteristics it is pertinent to observe that the

Constitution unequivocally in List II and in Appendix II has placed State Lands

with the Centre, Except to extent specified in item 18 of List I [quoted from List

II]. Thus the Constitution as far as State Land is concerned traverses from List II

via List I to final destination Appendix II.

List II and List I

In List II (Reserved) it reads as follows :

State Lands and Foreshore except to the extent specified in item 18 of List I.

In List I (Provincial Council) appearing in item 18 the sentence reads as follows:

2[2013] 1 Sri LR 25.

10

Land - Land that is to say, rights in and over land, land settlement, land tenure,

transfer and alienation of land, land use, land settlement and land improvement

to the extent set out in Appendix II

A perusal of the above two provisions unequivocally points to the fact that State

Lands as referred to in List II embraces the comprehensive entirety of the corpus

of State Land out of what is carved out Land. It is not just land but land that is to

say, rights in and over land, land settlement, land tenure, transfer and

alienation of land, land use, land settlement and land improvement to the

extent set out in Appendix II

. Appendix II begins with an unequivocal opener -State Land shall continue to

vest in the Republic and may be disposed of, in accordance with Article 33 (d)

and written laws governing the matter. This peremptory declaration is a

pointer to the fact that State Land belongs to the Republic and not to a

Province. The notion of disposition of State Land in accordance with Article 33

(d) and written laws governing the matter establishes beyond doubt that

dominium over all State Land lies with the Republic and not with the

Provincial Councils. In fact the relevant portion of Article 33 (d) would read as

follows -

33 (d) - to keep the Public Seal of the Republic, and to make and execute under

the Public Seal, the acts of appointment of the Prime Minister and other

Ministers of the Cabinet of Ministers, the Chief Justice and other Judges of the

Supreme Court, such grounds and disposition of lands and immovable property

listed in the Republic as he is by law required or empowered to do, and use the

Public Seal for sending all this whatsoever that shall pass the Seal.

It was therefore submitted that the Board of Ministers of the Western Province could

not have decided to grant a lease of the said land to the Lions Club, and that its

decision contained in P4 and P6, which the Petitioners are relying on, have been

made in excess of authority of the Board of Ministers of the Western Province. The

learned Deputy Solicitor General submitted further that the Petitioners cannot claim

that they have a legitimate expectation arising out of something done in excess of

authority.

11

As stated in De Smiths Judicial Review:3

In R v. Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food Ex p. Hamble (Offshore)

Fisheries Ltd.4 Sedley J said that to bind public bodies to an unlawful

representation would have the dual effect of unlawfully extending the[ir]

statutory power and destroying the ultra vires doctrine by permitting public

bodies arbitrarily to extend their powers. On the other hand, to bind bodies to

a promise to act outside their powers would in effect endorse an unlawful act. It

must, on this view, be doubtful whether the expectation that a body will exceed

its powers can be legitimate.

This position has very clearly been laid down in Tokyo Cement Company (Lanka) Ltd.

vs. Director General of Customs5 where the Supreme Court held that the

representation must be intra vires for there to be a legitimate expectation.

Similarly, in Ginigathgala Mohandiramlage Nimalsiri v. Colonel P.P.J. Fernando and

others6, Priyantha Jayawardena, J held that:

In order to succeed in an application made on the grounds of legitimate

expectation, the expectation must be legitimate. Mistakes, decisions based on

erroneous factual data or illegality cannot be the basis for a legitimate

expectation. A similar view was expressed in Vasana v. Incorporated Council of

Legal Education and Others ( 2004 ) 1 SLR 154.

In M.R.C.C. Ariyarathne v. and Others v. Inspector General of Police, Police and

others7 Prasanna Jayewardena, J held as follows:

the law, as it presently stands, is that an assurance given ultra vires by a

public authority, cannot found a claim of a legitimate expectation based on

that assurance.

3Harry Woolf, Jeffery Jowell, Catherine Donnelly, Ivan Hare, De Smiths Judicial Review [8th Edition, 2018] Sweet and Maxwell, page 703. 4[1995] 2 All ER 714 at 731. 5 (2005) BLR 24 6SCFR 256/2010; SC Minutes of 17th September 2015. 7SCFR 444/2012; SC Minutes of 30th July 2019.

12

In that case, the Supreme Court considered the hardships faced by an individual who

bona fide relies on an assurance given by a public authority that has done so in

excess of authority, and recognised that in such instances, the principle of legality

comes into conflict with the principle of certainty. However, the Supreme Court went

on to conclude that the law as it stands now, is that the illegality of the assurance

will defeat the value of certainty which contends that the assurance should be given

effect.

The learned Presidents Counsel for the Petitioners submitted that the Petitioners

should have been afforded a hearing prior to P30 and P31 were issued. This

position would be correct if the representation had been made by a person who had

the authority to make such representation. However, that is not the position in this

application, and hence I do not see any need for the Respondents to have given the

Petitioners a hearing prior to the issuance of P30 and P31.

In the above circumstances, I am of the view that P4 and P6 cannot give rise to a

legitimate expectation and therefore the decisions contained in P30 and P31 are

not illegal. The Petitioners are therefore not entitled to the relief prayed for.

Taking into consideration the fact that the Petitioners have been operating a hospital

on the said premises which benefits the people of the area for fifteen years or more,

this judgment shall not be an impediment to the proper authority considering a

request by the Petitioners for a long term lease of the said land or a lesser extent of

land limited to the area on which the said building is situated. If such an application is

made, the proper authority shall also consider the requirements of the said school,

prior to arriving at a decision.

Subject to the above, this application is dismissed, without costs.

President of the Court of Appeal