IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal under and in terms of Section 331 of the Criminal Procedure Code Act No. 15 of 1979.

The Attorney General of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Complainant

Court of Appeal Case No. 252/2016 Vs, Rajapakse Mudiyanselage Abeysekara

Accused

And Now Between

Rajapakse Mudiyanselage Abeysekara

Accused-Appellant

High Court of Monaragala Case No. HC 101/2015 Vs,

Before

Counsel

Argued on : Judgment on

CAl 252/2016

The Attorney General of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

: S. Devika de L. Tennekoon, J &

S. Thurairaja PC, J

Complainant-Respondent

: Shashika Mithuna Arcachi, AAL for the Accused-Appellant

Anoopa de Silva, SSC for the Complainant-Respondent

14th February 2018 28th February 2018

***********

JUDGMENT Page 1 of6

Judgment

S. Thurairaja PC. J

The Accused Appellant Rajapakse Mudiyanselage Abeysekara (Hereinafter sometimes

referred to as The Appellant), was indicted before the High Court of Monaragala for

committing the Murder of Jayaweera Muhandiramlage Rashmi Yasodara MAduwanthi.

After the trial he was found guilty and sentenced to death. Being aggrieved with the

said conviction and the sentence the Appellant preferred an appeal to this Court and

submits following grounds of appeal. (Reproduced as in the written submissions)

1. Mistrial amounting to denial of fair trial and miscarriage of justice.

2. Credibility of the sole eye witness Anandha Pushpakumara.

3. Misdirection of Law - Consistency of the witness.

4. Misdirection of Law - Corroboration.

5. Motive

6. Misdirected question of law regarding intention

7. Misdirection of Post Conduct.

The learned Senior State Counsel filed written submissions and submits that she is

supporting the conviction and the Sentence.

The Prosecution led the evidence of 8 witnesses, namely, 1. Herath Mudiyanselage

Ananda Pushpakumara,2. Rajapakse Mudiyanselage Nimal Rajapakse,3. Rajapakse

Mudiyanselage Appuhamy, 4. Inspector of Police (lP). Welikanna Mudiyanselage

Amarasiri Rajapakse,S. Pc. 41827 Rajapakse Mudiyanselage Amarasiri Rajapakse, ,6.

Kapila ArachigeManjula Wasantha Fernando,7. Dr. A.S. Sisira Seneviratne, 8. Court

Interpreter D.M.N. B. Disanayake. Three of them were lay witness and 5 were official

witnesses. After the case for the Prosecution was concluded the learned Trial Judge

called for the defence and the Appellant made a Dock Statement and completely

denied the incident.

CAl 252/2016 JUDGMENT Page 2 of6

According to the Prosecution witnesses the incident had occurred at around 10 am on

the 27th April 2012, when the deceased was answering a call on her mobile phone at

the front area of the home, the Accused who came there with a club had attacked the

deceased by hitting her on the head. The deceased on receiving the blows, fell on the

ground, bleeding from the nose and the mouth, she was taken to the Hospital and she

succumbed to her injuries. It is also on evidence that the accused was the brother in

law of the deceased. The Appe"ant, Deceased and a" witnesses are related and known

to each other.

First ground of appeal of the appellant is; Mistrial amounting to denial of fair trial and

miscarriage of justice. When explaining this ground, the Counsel submitted that the

Attorney at Law who appeared had taken up a defence of grave and sudden

provocation. There was no evidence available for him to take that defence hence the

appellant was denied of a fair trial which in turn results in miscarriage of justice.

Considering this ground of appeal, we observe the following, trial proceedings at the

High Court was in Sinhala and the mother tongue of the appellant was also the same.

The appellant was present in Court, when the trial was taken up. Presuming his family

members would have attended the courts. If the Appe"ant found it inappropriate he

could have changed his Counsel, if not he had a" the opportunity to complained to

the Trail Judge. As per the brief it appears the appellant was on bail, so he had a" the

opportunity to take steps in this regard. There are no complaints to the Court nor to

the Bar Association, it was the first time such an allegation is leve"ed against the

Counsel. We find this is not the forum for such a complaint. Any how we carefully

considered the evidence before the court and we find that the Learned Trial Judge had

properly considered a" materials in his judgment hence, we have no reason to

intervene at this juncture. Considering a" we find there is no merit in this ground of

appeal.

The Second ground is that; Credibility of the sole eye witness Anandha Pushpakumara.

The Counsel submits that the Eye witness has contradicted himself hence he is not

CAl 252/2016 JUDGMENT Page 3 of6

credit worthy. It is submitted that the witness had said that he was inside the house at

the time of the incident. When considering the evidence, it should be considered fully

and not a word of a sentence in isolation. In this case we considered the testimony of

the eye witness carefully and find that this VIJ itness was consistent. The portion

submitted by the Counsel was an answer given is not a contradiction per - se nor inter

- se.

Other submissions made in this regard were considered by us in detail and we find

there is no merit in the said ground of appeal.

The 3rd and the 4th grounds of appeal are; Misdirection of Law - Consistency of the

witness and corroboration. The Appellant submits that there no consistency nor

corroboration by the witnesses for the Prosecution.

There are three lay witnesses, a Judicial Medical Officer(JMO), three Police Officers and

the Court Interpreter gave evidence at the trial. Eye witness Pushpakumara gave

evidence and said that he saw the Appellant coming towards to the deceased who was

on the phone and attacked her with a wooden plank (Club/stick) on the head once and

twice again, on the other parts of the body. It was corroborated by the JMO and the

death was due to a blow on the head. Other lay witnesses and the Police witnesses

also observed the injury on the head and other injuries. In addition to the evidence

given at the High Court trial, Lay witnesses including eye witness made statements to

the Police and gave evidence at the Non-summery inquiry. They were saying what they

saw and heard and they were consistent in their evidence and corroborating the

portions of the others consistently.

Our law does not require corroboration but it is better if there is any that's why our

Evidence ordinance does not stipulate such number of witnesses to corroborate a fact.

It depends on the credibility of the evidence of the witnesses it can be one or more to

prove a fact. This concept is time and again accepted by our Courts.

CA/252/2016 JUDGMENT Page 4of6

The 5th Ground of appeal is motive; the Counsel submits that the defence counsel who

appeared at the trial stage had submitted motive for the incident, but the appellant

now submits that it was not his instructions. This matter was discussed already in this

judgment. Motive is not an integral requirement for the prosecution to prove, but if it

is proved, it will strengthen the case for the Prosecution. On a careful perusal we find

that the Attorney at Law who appeared in the trial was acted for the betterment of the

appellant. He was trying to break the case for the Prosecution and creating a defence.

if not, at least a mitigatory circumstances for the appellant. Considering the

submissions of both counsels we do not see any merit in this ground of appeal.

The 6th Ground of appeal of the appellant is; the learned High Court Judge misdirected

himself on the question of murderous intention. It is mandatory for the Prosecution to

prove the ingredients of the charge, if not the appellant will be acquitted. The act of

the appellant as revealed by the evidence is that the appellant came there and attacked

the deceased on the head with a club. And the cause of death was due to 'Cranio-

cerebral injuries following blunt force application to the back of the head'. The JMO

who gave evidence also stated that the force was used when the head was free i.e. not

held or on the ground (Not someone holding it or she was lying on the floor.) this

corroborates with the evidence of the eye witness and the other witnesses. When a

person attacking another person on the head with a club like heavy object with a force

to break the skull, what will be the intention other than causing the death of the later.

We carefully considered the reasons stated by the learned trial Judge and we find that

there is no merit in this ground of appeal.

The final ground of appeal is the trial Judge misdirected himself with the post- conduct

of the appellant. Even though the counsel submitted this ground in his written

submission She had not supported at the argument stage. Considering this ground,

we find that the learned High Court Judge had not considered the conduct of the

appellant for conviction, but it was also considered with the statement made from the

CAl 252/2016 JUDGMENT Page 5of6

Dock for the defence case. We also perused the reasons stated in the judgment and

find that there is no merit in this ground too.

After careful consideration of the submissions, evidence and written submissions we

find that there is no merit in the grounds of appeal, hence we find no reason to

interfere with the findings of the learned Trial Judge and dismiss the appeal.

Accordingly, we affirm Conviction and the sentence and dismiss the appeal.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

S. Devika de L. Tennekoon, J

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

CAl 252/2016 JUDGMENT Page 60f6