IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

1. A.W. Warnakula,

No.359, Peradeniya Road,

Kandy.

2. Ecotech Lanka (private) Limited,

No.37/A, Thekkawatta,

Gohagoda Road,

Katugastota.

Petitioners

CASE NO: CA/WRIT/399/2016

Vs.

1. Central Environmental Authority,

Parisarapiyasa,

No.104,

Densil Kobbekaduwa Mawatha,

Battaramulla.

2. Lal Mervin Dharmasiri,

Parisarapiyasa,

No.104,

Densil Kobbekaduwa Mawatha,

Battaramulla.

3. Udaya R. Seneviratne,

Secretary,

Ministry of Mahaweli

Development and Environment,

2

No.82, Sampathpaya,

Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

4. Commissioner,

Municipal Council,

Hill Street, Kandy.

5. Kandy Municipal Council,

Hill Street, Kandy.

And 9 Others

Respondents

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Roshan De Rafayal for the Petitioner.

Vikum De Abrew, Senior D.S.G., for the 1st and

2nd Respondents.

Bharatha Abeynayake for the 4th and 5th

Respondents.

Decided on: 23.05.2019

Samayawardhena, J.

The petitioner company filed this application seeking: to quash

by writ of certiorari the decision of the 1st respondent Central

Environmental Authority marked P10 not to extend the

Environmental Approval, and the rejection of the appeal made

against this decision by the 3rd respondent by P17; to compel the

1st respondent Authority to extend the said Approval by writ of

mandamus; and to prohibit the 1st and the 3rd respondents from

acting upon P10 and P17 by writ of prohibition.

3

The petitioner has entered into an Agreement with the 5th

respondent Kandy Municipal Council marked P2 to implement a

project of generating bio gas, electricity and manufacturing

organic fertilizer at the garbage dump yard in Gohagoda, Kandy

subject to the conditions stated in the Agreement.

It is common ground that obtaining Environmental Impact

Assessment Certificate or as the petitioner has loosely called

the Environmental Approval from the 1st respondent is

mandatory to carry out this project. This has been granted from

14.11.2011 for the first three years, and thereafter the 1st

respondent has allowed another one year to fulfil the conditions

to grant another extension. Admittedly, the required conditions

have not been fulfilled by the petitioner during the aforesaid

four-year period. The site inspections carried out by the 1st

respondent periodically, as seen from 1R1-1R4, clearly explain

this fact.

It is clear that although the petitioner entered into the

Agreement, it did not have an investor to carry out this massive

project during the four-year period. This is manifest inter alia by

the letter marked P6 sent by the petitioner to the 1st respondent

dated 29.06.2015 whereby the petitioner has informed the 1st

respondent that the petitioner has decided to sell the petitioner

company to another company known as Star Group Lanka Ltd,

and in the interim, the latter company would fund the former to

carry out immediate work in terms of the Agreement, and on

that basis, has sought Environmental Approval.

This is extremely unsatisfactory situation. The garbage disposal

problem in the Kandy cannot be solved in this manner.

4

Before P10 letter (which is sought to be quashed by certiorari)

was issued, the 1st respondent granted the petitioner more than

four years to fulfil the conditions, and sent several letters

(advising, warning and reminding) the dire need to comply with

them. P10 letter was not issued unexpectedly or arbitrarily.

The contention of the petitioner seems to be that after P10 letter

was issued and before Appeal Inquiry against that decision was

held, the petitioner found an investor and fulfilled the necessary

conditions. Assuming that is correct, that itself goes to show

that P10 decision is not illegal. Finding an investor does not

solve the issue. If P10 decision is not illegal, the Appeal decision

confirming P10, cannot also be illegal.

Garbage disposal is a national issue and an essential public

duty carried out by local bodies such as the 5th respondent.

There is no space or time to mollycoddle the petitioner.

Hence, as seen from 5R3 and 5R4, some cabinet decisions have

been taken pending the case, to assign this project to be carried

out by some other parties. Thereafter the 5th respondent has

terminated the Agreement P2 by 5R6 on violation of the terms of

the Agreement. Hence this application in any event has now

become futile and academic.

There is no way that the Court could grant the reliefs sought for

by the petitioner.

Application is dismissed without costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal