IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal under

and in terms of Section 331 (1) of

the Code of Criminal Procedure

Act No. 15 of 1979

Democratic Socialist Republic of

C.A. Case No. 157-19 Sri Lanka Complainant

High Court of Homagama

Case No. 46/2018 Vs.

1. Ishwara Arachcige Raveendra

Hemantha

2. Palagedara Arachchilage Alias

Makulukotunnage Bandula

Sudathsiri Perera

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Palagedara Arachchilage Alias

Makulukotunnage Bandula

Sudathsiri Perera

2nd Accused Appellant

2

Vs.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondent

BEFORE : K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J (P/CA)

WICKUM A. KALUARACHCHI, J

COUNSEL : Harishka Samaranayaka AAL for the Accused-Appellant

Harippriya Jayasundara PC, A.S.G.

with Maheshika Silva, SSC for the

Respondent

WRITTEN SUBMISSION

TENDERED ON : 07.10.2021 (On behalf of the

Respondent)

ARGUED ON : 19.01.2022

DECIDED ON : 24.02.2022

WICKUM A. KALUARACHCHI, J.

The Accused-Appellant along with the deceased 1st accused, Ishwara

Arachchige Ravindra Hemantha was indicted for committing the

murder of Sriyani Wijerama on or above 31.01.2001 punishable under

Section 296 of the Penal Court. The first Accused, Ravindra Hemantha

had passed away during the trial. Thereafter, the trial proceeded

against the second Accused-Appellant.

3

The prosecution led the evidence of 19 witnesses and documents P1 to

P21 were marked. After the prosecution case was closed, a defence was

called by the Learned High Court Judge. The Accused-Appellant made

a dock statement and called 3 other witnesses on behalf of the Defence.

After the trial, the Learned High Court Judge convicted the Accused-

Appellant for the offence of murder and imposed the death sentence on

him. This appeal was preferred against the said conviction and

sentence.

Prior to the hearing of this appeal, written submission was filed only on

behalf of the respondent. Although several grounds of appeal have been

stated in the petition of appeal, no written submissions were filed on

behalf of the appellant. In perusing the grounds of appeal, it appears

that the same ground has been reproduced in some instances. However,

when the appeal was taken up for hearing, the Learned Counsel for the

appellant informed the court that he relies on grounds b, f, g, h, j, p

and q stated in the petition of appeal.

One of the contentions of the learned counsel for the appellant was that

the Learned High Court Judge has not complied with section 283 of the

Code of Criminal Procedure Act. The learned counsel pointed out that

in the impugned judgment, points for determination and the reasons

for the decisions are not set out. The Learned Counsel contended that

the judgment without reasons should not be allowed to stand.

In addition, the learned counsel for the appellant pointed out the

following defects in the judgment.

I. Proved circumstances were not given in the judgment.

II. Irrelevant and inadmissible evidence was allowed to be led.

III. The dying declaration has not been evaluated carefully.

4

IV. The fact of not proving the time of death had not been taken into

consideration in concluding that the appellant has committed

the murder.

Answering the aforesaid arguments raised on behalf of the Appellant,

the Learned Additional Solicitor General for the respondent submitted

the motive for committing the murder, previous conduct of the

appellant, the fact of some items being missing from the house on the

day that deceased was last seen alive, events took place on 31.01.2002

and contended, on that circumstantial evidence, it has been proved

beyond reasonable doubt that the accused-appellant had committed

this murder.

There is no dispute on the fact that this case is entirely based on

circumstantial evidence. Proved circumstantial evidence could be

summarized as follows:

I. The Accused-Appellant was a Karate instructor. The deceased

was the wife of the Accused-Appellant who lived separately at the

time of the death.

II. Kanthi Wijerama, the sister of the decease observed on

17.01.2002 that the face of the deceased was swollen and the

decease had informed Kanthi that the appellant had assaulted

her.

III. Three weeks before the death, the deceased had asked her

brother, Ajith Wijerama to assist her to accompany her to file a

divorce case and he had asked her to be patient.

IV. The deceased had called her nephew Rangajeewa on 30.01.2002

and said that the deceased had filed a complaint against the

accused-appellant at the Womens Bureau that the accused-

appellant strangled and assaulted her. The accused-appellant

had threatened the deceased to withdraw the complaint failing

which he will kill her first and then kill her relatives.

5

V. The accused-appellant has forced the deceased to leave the house

that she occupied and convey the property in his name.

VI. Wasanthi who was boarded at the house of the deceased has last

seen the deceased alive on the 30th or 31st of January 2002.

VII. Wasanthi had gone to work on the day that Wasanthi had last

seen deceased alive. When she returned from work, the deceased

was not there and some items of furniture and some other items

were missing.

VIII. On 31.01.2002, the deceased called her brothers house and

requested to speak to her brother but he was not at home and

the deceased told her sister-in-law that she cannot talk and

asked her to come to the house of the deceased.

IX. Nuwan Dushantha testified that he transported a TV, TV stand,

roofing sheets and some other items from the house of the

deceased to the appellants ancestral home by his lorry on

31.01.2002.

X. There is no evidence that the deceased was alive after

31.01.2002.

XI. The appellant made a complaint to the Homagama Police that the

deceased is missing.

XII. The Accused-Appellant made a dock statement and admitted that

he went to the house of the deceased on 31.01.2002 and took

away some goods. Thereafter, he had left for Japan on

02.02.2002.

Before considering the other arguments advanced on behalf of the

Appellant, I propose to consider whether the circumstantial evidence

adduced before the High Court is sufficient to prove the charge of

murder beyond reasonable doubt against the 2nd accused-appellant.

There is no doubt that there is strong evidence against the deceased

first Accused. This court has to examine whether there is substantial

evidence against the 2nd accused.

6

In considering the aforesaid items of circumstantial evidence, no doubt

there is a pretty much possibility for the 2nd accused-appellant to

commit this murder. However, the appellant cannot be convicted only

on possibilities. Whether it is the evidence of eye-witnesses or the

circumstantial evidence, a criminal charge should be proved beyond

reasonable doubt and not on possibilities. The entire burden of proving

the charge lies on the prosecution.

There is a long line of Judicial Authorities that explain how to prove a

criminal charge on circumstantial evidence.

In Junaiden Mohomed Haaris Vs. Hon. Attorney General - SC Appeal

118/17, decided 09.11.2017, it was held that It was incumbent on the

prosecution to establish that the circumstances the prosecution relied on,

are consistent only with the guilt of the accused-appellant and not with

any other hypothesis.

In the case of King Vs. Abeywickrama - 44 NLR 254, it was held that In

order to base a conviction on circumstantial evidence the Jury must be

satisfied that the evidence was consistent with the guilt of the accused

and inconsistent with any reasonable hypothesis of his innocence.

In King Vs. Appuhamy 46 NLR 128, it was held that In order to justify

the inference of guilt from purely circumstantial evidence, the inculpatory

facts must be incompatible with the innocence of the accused and

incapable of explaining upon any other reasonable hypothesis than that

of his guilt.

In considering the circumstantial evidence of this case, an inference

could be drawn that the appellant has committed this murder.

However, that is not the only inference that can be drawn. There were

opportunities for any other person to come and kill the deceased when

Wasanthi had gone to work leaving the deceased alone in the house. No

one saw what had happened in the house of the deceased during that

time. Only when Wasanthi returned home in the evening after work,

7

she found that the deceased was not there. Committing this murder by

some other person during those few hours, cannot be excluded. It was

also held in the case of Podisingho Vs. King 53 NLR 49 that In a case

of circumstantial evidence, it is the duty of the trial judge to tell the Jury

that such evidence must be totally inconsistent with the innocence of the

accused and must only be consistent with his guilt. In the instant

action, the evidence led in the High Court is not totally inconsistent

with the innocence of the Accused.

In Don Sunny Vs. Attorney General (Amarapala murder case) (1998)

2 Sri L.R. 1 it was held that when a charge is sought to be proved by

circumstantial evidence the proved items of circumstantial evidence when

taken together must irresistibly point towards the only inference that the

accused committed the offence. On a consideration of all the evidence,

the only inference that can be arrived at should be consistent with the

guilt of the accused only. It was held further in the said case that the

prosecution must prove that no one else other than the accused had the

opportunity of committing the offence, the accused can be found guilty

only and only if the proved items of circumstantial evidence is consistent

with their guilt and inconsistent with their innocence.

In view of the decision of the aforesaid case of Don Sunny Vs. Attorney

General also, the appellant in the instant action could not be found

guilty because the opportunity for someone else other than the accused

to commit the offence could not be excluded for the reasons stated

above. As explained previously, on the evidence of this case, the only

inference that can be arrived at is not consistent with the guilt of the

appellant only.

On this circumstantial evidence, one can have a suspicion that the

accused-appellant murdered the deceased when she was alone in the

house and thereafter, he removed some goods from the house. But that

is only a suspicion. It was held in The Queen Vs. M.G. Sumanasena

8

66 NLR 350 that In a criminal case, suspicious circumstances do not

establish guilt. Nor does the proof of any number of suspicious

circumstances relieve the prosecution of its burden of proving the case

against the accused beyond reasonable doubt and compel the accused

to give or call evidence.

On the other hand, the date on which the death of the deceased

occurred has not been established. Although Wasanthi had last seen

the deceased alive on the 30th or 31st of January, no evidence discloses

the date of the death. The Judicial Medical Officer who conducted the

post-mortem and the Judicial Medical Officer who gave evidence were

also unable to form an opinion regarding the date of the death.

Therefore, even the medical evidence does not substantiate that the

death occurred on 31st January 2002. Hence, it cannot be concluded

that the deceased was not alive after the 31st of January 2002.

If the possibilities are considered, there is a possibility for the deceased

to leave the house for some reason on 31st January. As there was no

one in the house, the appellant could have removed some goods from

the house on that day. Then someone else could have committed the

murder on a subsequent day. There is no substantial basis to exclude

all these possibilities. Therefore, it is precisely clear that the accuseds

guilt is not the only inference that can be drawn on this circumstantial

evidence.

In view of the legal position established by the aforesaid line of judicial

authorities and on the available circumstantial evidence of this case, I

hold that there is no sufficient evidence against the 2nd accused-

appellant to convict him for the charge of murder.

In the aforesaid circumstances, the necessity does not arise to consider

the other arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the appellant.

9

Accordingly, I set aside the conviction and the death sentence imposed

on the Appellant. The 2nd Accused-Appellant is acquitted from the

charge of murder.

Appeal allowed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K. Priyantha Fernando, J (P/CA)

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL