IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A. Case No.837/1999 (F)

D.C. Panadura Case No. 784/M

BEFORE

COUNSEL

Decided on

jinapala Mapalagama

No.S36, Siyambalagastenna Road,

Kandy.

Presently at

No.91/3, SriJinaruwan Mawatha,

Illukwatta,

Pilimatalawa.

DEFENDANT ;-APPELIANT

Kalapugamage Don Diamond Weerasekera

No.21, Grace Peiris Mawatha,

Panadura.

PIAINTIFF;-RESPONDENT

A.H.M.D. Nawaz,j.

Ronald Perera, PC with Anslam Kaluarachchi, for the Defendant ... Appellant

Ranjan C. Gooneratne for the Plaintiff ... Respondent

08.11.2018

1

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, I. T

he Plaintiff..-Respondent (hereinafter sometimes referred to as "the Plaintiff")

instituted this action against the Defendant ... Appellant (hereinafter sometimes

referred to as "the Defendant") for the recovery of a sum of Rs.289,415.03 and legal

interest thereon from 01.10.1990. The sum of Rs.289, 415.03 is a cumulative sum of several

claims made by the Plaintiff in the plaint dated 05.10.1990.

The Plaintiff recited the following to found a cause of action against the Defendant:

1. he was engaged in the business of supplying timber to the timber co ... operation;

2. on 17.02.1987 the Plaintiff entered into an oral contract employing the Defendant

as his manager/agent for his business within the jurisdiction ofPanadura.

In addition, the plaint recites several instances of wrongdoing by the Defendant namely:

a) he sold timber at reduced prices or gave timber free to third parties;

b) he has failed to account for the expenditure of certain sum of money;

c) he has appropriated certain sum of money;

d) he has deposited money in his bank account which had been given to him to meet

recurring expenditure;

e) he has not recovered the money due on timber given on credit to a customer called

Leslie.

Thus, the Plaintiff ... Respondent averred several sums of money that had been allegedly

misappropriated by the Defendant ... Appellant and prayed cumulatively for Rs.289,415.03

to be awarded to him, along with legal interest.

The answer filed by the Defendant ... Appellant raised two defences in the main namely:

a) The District Court of Panadura did not have jurisdiction to hear and determine this

case.

b) The Plaintiff was not the party who had undertaken to supply timber to timber

co ... operation but it was an entity known a.s Devapriya Enterprises. The Plaintiff

2

was only a sub--contractor and the implicit assertion in this averment was that the

Plaintiff could not be the proper Plaintiff in the case.

The answer also contained an averment to the effect that the work of the Defendant was

confined to felling trees in areas such as Medirigiriya and Dehiattakandiya and this was

possibly put forward for the purpose of showing that the cause of action did not arise

within Panadura. It has to be noted that the plaint asserted that the contract was entered

into and the cause of action arose within the jurisdiction of the District Court of

Panadura.

When the trial was taken up on 26.08.1992, an admission was recorded that felling of

trees took place in Medirigiriya and Dehiattakandiya.

On behalf of the Plaintiff, 22 issues were raised, whereas on behalf of the Defendant

Issues No.23 to 53 were formulated

It is a notable feature of this trial that though, in a protracted trial that lasted for 5 years,

only the Plaintiff gave evidence on behalf of the Plaintiff, the Defendant who was

represented at the trial neither gave evidence not did he call any witnesses.

The learned District Judge of Panadura delivered his judgment on 11.06.1999 declaring

that the Plaintiff was entitled to the sum of Rs.289,415.03 that had been claimed in the

plaint. It is against this judgment that this appeal was preferred by the Defendant--

Appellant and two pivotal objections that figured in the trial have been put forward by

the learned President's Counsel for the Defendant--Appellant in support of the argument

that the District Court of Panadura had no jurisdiction to hear and determine this case.

The Plaintiff had no locus standi to institute this action against the Defendant.

This Court would now assess the arguments put forward on the two frontal pleas of

jurisdiction of court and locus standi.

If one goes through the averments in the plaint, it is a recitation of a long narrative about

the failure on the part of the Defendant to perform obligations to pay money. Let me

trawl through the averments in the pleadings to bring this fact out.

3

The 3rd paragraph of the plaint pleads that the Plaintiff suffered a loss of Rs.l5,680/-- as

the Defendant had disposed of the timber referred to in the paragraph. In other words

the allegation is that this money should have been collected from the vendee of the

timber and paid to the Plaintiff. In paragraph 04 of the plaint, the Plaintiff pleads that

the Defendant has not accounted for a sum of Rs.20,800/-- he had received. In paragraph

OS, it is pleaded that the Defendant had misappropriated a sum of Rs.25,000/-- and a sum

of Rs.32,0001-- he received for the timber that has been felled at Medirigiriya, Maduru Oya

and Dehiattakandiya.

All these paragraphs bespeak a case of failure to pay money that was due to the Plaintiff

though the term misappropriation has been used to denote the mode in which the money

due to the Plaintiff was taken away.

So the facts that emerged at the trial reveal the following in a nutshell. P (the Plaintiff)

alleges that he employed D (the Defendant) to work for him in places such as Medirigiriya

and Polonnaruwa. P resides in Panadura and D resides in Kandy.

D traverses in his answer that the felling of trees took place outside of Panadura and

therefore the suit would not lie in the District Court of Panadura.

In order to resolve this issue let me bring forth that all too familiar definition of what a

cause of action is all about. Section 5 of the Civil Procedure Code defines it as the wrong

for the prevention or redress of which an action maybe brought, and includes the denial

of a right, the refusal to fulfill an obligation, the neglect to perform a duty, and the

infliction of an affirmative injury.

So it is a denial of a right or failure to perform an obligation. What is the jural relation

between the parties that imposes an obligation on the Defendant or bestows a right on

the Plaintiff? In my view it is the oral agreement that both the Plaintiff and Defendant

reached.

4

The question arises as to the place where the contract was entered into. If there is a

breach of this contract, oral or otherwise, yet the court which is competent to try the

breach would be the court that is set out in Section 9 of the Civil Procedure Code.

Section 9 states the familiar refrain. Subject to the pecuniary or other limitation

prescribed by any law, action shall be instituted in the court within the local limits of

whose jurisdiction:

a) a party defendant resides; or

b) the land is respect of which the action is brought lies or is situate in whole or in

party; or

c) the cause of action arises; or

d) the contract sought to be enforced was made.

It is either head (c) or (d) which would confer jurisdiction having regard to the

particular facts and circumstances of this case. Do the facts as alleged in the plaint, issues

and evidence enable the case to be filed in the District Court of Panadura?

Having pleaded that the Defendant misappropriated the above sums of money, the

Plaintiff also pleaded that his case of cause of action arose within Panadura and the

contract was also entered into within the local jurisdiction of Panadura. No doubt it is the

contract that imposed reciprocal obligations on the parties. Upon a perusal of the

evidence and the pleadings it is quite clear that it was an oral contract to employ the

Defendant as an agent for the business of the Plaintiff to supply timber. The question

arises though where the contract was entered into.

One finds numerous items of evidence from the testimony of the Plaintiff to show that

the contract was entered into at Panadura.

In the letter sent by the Defendant to the Plaintiff on 10.02.1987 marked as PI (page 201

of the brief), the Defendant says "I am badly in need of a job just to support my family ..... .I am

informed that my mother is not well and I shall go to see her in the next few days, shall try to meet you on

my way back". Then the Plaintiff says he met the Defendant on 16.02.1987. On that day, the

5

Plaintiff said "I will take you as a manager, presently at salary ofRs.2500". Thereafter, he gave him

an exercise book, marked P2 (pages 71..-27 of the brief). In that book it is recorded "gave

DW Rs.lOOO". The Plaintiff says the entries in this book were made by the Defendant,

and the money was given to the Defendant, and he was employed at Panadura (page

72/197 of the brief). The Plaintiff goes on to say "this job was given to the defendant, as his

employee and not as an employee of Devapriya Enterprises" (page 102/227 of the brief). The

Plaintiff also says that Devapriya Enterprises had given him instructions to employ any

person he likes at whatever salary he determines (page 103/228 of the brief). He paid the

salary to the Defendant with his money.

This uncontroverted testimony establishes the fact that the contract of employment took

place in Panadura and not in Kandy as the Defendant alleged in his answer. In the

circumstances I take the view that the contract was entered into in Panadura and the

District Court of Panadura had the competence and jurisdiction to hear and determine

this action. This would simply dispose of the jurisdictional question. But I find that even

under the head that founds jurisdiction based on the place where the cause of action

arose, the District Court of Panadura would have jurisdiction.

Contract of Agency

The contract between the Plaintiff and Defendant that was entered into in Panadura was

a contract of agency, albeit oral. No doubt this contract imposes implied duties on the

agent.

In a contract of agency there arise a number of duties and obligations between the

principal and agent. Such duties and obligations are usually spelt out in an agency

agreement but in a situation such as we encounter in this case, they can be implied into

the agency agreement. A disregard or breach of the agent's obligations can lead to the

agent's liability to the principal for the agent's liability for damages for breach of contract

and for negligence.

6

English law of agency applicable in Sri Lanka

It is apt to bear in mind that the law governing agency in Sri Lanka is the law applicable

in England. This is made clear by Section 3 of the Civil Law Ordinance No.5 of 1852

which states that: "in all questions or issues which have to be decided in Sri Lanka with respect to the

law of principal and agent, the law to be administered shall be the same as would be administered in

England in the like case". Accordingly, English cases on agency disputes will apply in Sri

Lanka.

Bearing the above in mind, I next pose the question as to what breaches the plaint

alleged against the Defendant.

The learned President's Counsel for the Defendant,Appellant submitted that the Plaintiff

was engaged in the felling of trees and selling in the name of Devapriya Enterprises. Even

if it is so, it does not entitle an employee of the Plaintiff to misappropriate monies

received by the Defendant for and behalf of the Plaintiff. All the averments in the plaint

refer to monies paid to the Defendant for and behalf of the Plaintiff and not for and on

behalf of Devapriya Enterprises.

In Stroud's law Dictionary a contractor is defined as "a person who, in pursuit of an independent

business undertakes to do specific jobs of work for other persons, without submitting himself to their

control in respect to the details of work".

Thus the very fact that the Plaintiff was a contractor establishes that he was not subject

to the control of Devapriya Enterprises. Thus the persons employed by him are directly

responsible to him. Therefore, the obligations entered into by the employees have to be

performed by the employees to the satisfaction of the Plaintiff.

Evidence shows that the entire operation of felling timber was carried out by the

Plaintiff, at his expense. The Plaintiff paid the Defendant a salary, his travelling and other

expenses. The Defendant acted on Plaintiff's instructions. The statement of accounts was

sent by the Defendant to the Plaintiff. All these facts come through evidence which

remain unassailed.

7

The learned Counsel for the Defendant--Appellant relied on the affirmative answer given

to Issue No.23 to submit that the Plaintiff--Respondent has no locus standi to maintain this

action. In Issues No.23 and 24, the Defendant--Respondent formulated the following

questions.

Did Devapriya Enterprises obtain the contract to sell the trees in the forest at Medirigiriya

(Issue No.23) and Dehiattakandiya (Issue No.24)? Only Issue No.23 has been answered in

the affirmative The Dehiattakandiya contract was given to the Plaintiff. Defendant took

the contract in his name.

It was submitted that in view of the said testimony that the Devapriya Enterprises was

in supervision, control and felling, loading and delivering same to Timber Corporation;

The very answers elicited in cross--examination referred to above completely demolish

this submission. It is the Plaintiff's evidence that he spent money to operate this

contract. The lorry, tractors, and the men engaged in the felling of trees were his men,

subject to his control, and paid for with the personal funds of the Plaintiff, not with the

money received for the felling of trees. The case of the Defendant that employees were

paid for by Devapriya Enterprises was denied by the Plaintiff. The Plaintiff obtained

permission from Devapriya Enterprises for the Defendant to sign for the vouchers. If he

did not obtain such permission, the Plaintiff as the contractor of Devapriya Enterprises

had to sign for the vouchers. Therefore, the evidence establishes that the vouchers were

signed by the Defendant, not for and behalf of Devapriya Enterprises, but for and on

behalf of the Plaintiff. Further, the Dehiattakandiya contract was given to Weerasekera

Enterprises, but the contract was signed, without the Plaintiff's knowledge by the

Defendant.

These items of evidence establish that the Plaintiff was in total control, and supervision

of the felling of trees. The men who were engaged in the felling of trees were the

Plaintiff's employees, and paid for by the Plaintiff. The answerer elicited in cross--

examination clearly establish that the felling of trees was under the supervision, control

and direction of the Plaintiff. Devapriya Enterprises had no role to play in the felling of

8

trees at Medirigiriya, even though they had obtained the contract from the Timber

Corporation, the evidence reveals that they had assigned their rights under the contract

to the Plaintiff.

I am fortified in my view that it is the Plaintiff who suffered the loss. Therefore I take the

view that he could institute this action for the loss he suffered due to the wrongful acts

of the Defendant. In any event Devapriya Enterprises cannot institute action against the

Defendant either in delict or in contract.

If one were to pose the question whether the Defendant was an employee of the Plaintiff--

Respondent or the Devapriya Enterprises, evidence shows that he was the employee of

the of the Plaintiff. None of the answers elicited in cross--examination establish that the

Defendant was an employee of Devapriya Enterprises. In fact, the Defendant by reserving

the right to claim EPF and gratuity from the Plaintiff, concedes that his relationship was

with the Plaintiff and the Defendant. Therefore assuming without conceding that (1) the

expenses in respect of the felling of trees and transport were paid to Devapriya

Enterprises by the State Corporation, (2) Plaintiff was engaged in the felling of trees in

the name of Devapriya Enterprises, (3) felling of trees in the Medirigiriya forest to

Devapriya Enterprises (this is conceded by the Plaintiff (4) Devapriya Enterprises was in

supervision, control and direction of felling trees), it will not absolve the Defendant from

any liability to the Plaintiff, for the simple reason that the Plaintiff was the employer of

the Defendant, and the oral contact was entered into with the Plaintiff and not with

Devapriya Enterprises. The letters sent by the Defendant to the Plaintiff establish the

relationship in sharp relief.

In the circumstances I take the view that the Plaintiff had locus standi to institute this

action and the District Court of Panadura had jurisdiction to embark upon the

adjudication into this matter.

As an agent the Defendant owed the Plaintiff fiduciary duties. The essence of the duties

owed by a fiduciary has been expressed in the following statement:--

9

"A person will be a fiduciary on his relationships with another when and in so far as that other is

entitled to expect that he will act in that other's interests or (as in a partnership) in their joint

interests, to the exclusion of their several interests.--see Finn, in Commercial Aspects of Trusts and

Fiduciary Obligations." (McKendrick ed., 1992) p.99.

In a leading case, Bristol and West Building Society v. Mothew (1998) Ch. IMillett L]

stated:--

"A fiduciary is someone who has undertaken to act for or on behalf of another in a particular

matter or circumstances which give rise to a relationship of trust and confidence."

Millett L] went on to say:--

"The distinguishing obligation of a fidUciary is the obligation of loyalty. The principal is entitled

to the single--minded loyalty on his fidUciary. This core liability has several facts. A fidUciary must

act in good faith; he must not make a profit out his trust; he may not act for his own benefit or the

benefit of a third person without the informed consent of his principal.

There has been a clear breach of contractual as well as delictual duties on the part of the

Defendant and since some of the contractual duties such as payment of money due to the

Plaintiff had not been performed in Panadura, the cause of action arose in Panadura. In

HanilIa v. Ocean Accident and Guarantee Corporation 35 N.L.R 215 Garvin,]. said:--

"The place where the cause of action arises must be ascertained with reference to the rule that, in

the absence of a special agreement, an obligation must be performed at the place at which the

contract was entered into."

In Somasiri v. Ceylon Petroleum Corporation (1992) 1 Sri L.R 39, Ananda

Coomaraswamy,]. held:---

"The true definition of a cause of action was an act on the part of the Defendant which gives rise to

a cause of action."

10

This case also added a rider namely "the place of business of the Defendant was necessary to

determine the residence of the Defendant." Be that as it may, in this case the Plaintiff did not rely

on the Defendant's residence to vest court with jurisdiction.

So I would conclude that the contract between the Plaintiff and Defendant was entered

into and the cause of action arose in Panadura.

From the foregoing analysis I conclude that the learned District Judge of Panadura arrived

at the right decision and I see no reason to depart from these findings. As such I affirm

the judgment dated 1l. 09.1999 and proceed to dismiss the appeal.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

11