j I j i j j I I I I

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

CA No. 684/97 (F)

D.C. Marawila Case No. 249/P

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

DECIDED ON

1

Etin Epitawela of "Bambaraudula"

Of Temple Road,

Mahawewa - 61200.

Plaintiff - Appellant

Vs

Embuldeniyage Dona Susilawathie

Wickremanayake

Of Temple Road

Mahawewa - 61220

Defendant-Respondent

: Deepali Wijesundera J.

M.M.A. Gaffoor J.

: Bimal Rajapaksha with Muditha

Perera for the Plaintiff-Appellant

Sudarshani Cooray for the

Defendant-Respondent

: oih September, 2015

: 03rd February, 2016

I

Iff II I

I

~ 1 f i i !

f, j " ! i i I i I I I I I

I

Oeepali Wijesundera J.

The appellant had filed a partition case to partition a land

described in the schedule to the plaint in the District Court of Marawila.

The appellant had claimed an undivided 21/32 shares of the corpus and

the respondent had claimed % share of the land. After trial the learned

District Judge has delivered his judgment on 04/04/1997 dismissing the

plaintiff's action. The plaintiff appellant has filed the instant application

against the said judgment.

The appellant referring to the decided cases argued that the

learned District Judge failed to observe that the respondent relied upon

an amicable partition without a partition plan signed by all the co-owners

consenting to such decision. Citing the judgments of Gifhohamy vs

Karanagoda 56 NLR 250 and Dias vs Dias 61 NLR 116 and Maria

Perera vs Albert Perera 1983 2 SLLR 399, the appellant stated that

there were no deeds of partition or cross deeds exchanged between the

parties being co-owners to the corpus. He stated that the deed

submitted to the District Court shows that the predecessors in title to

land had no intention of terminating co-ownership.

2

I i

~ II I

\

The appellant submitted that the lots 1 and 2 in plan marked X in

the District Court is not separated by a distinct boundary and that the

fence shown is a travelling fence and stated that the appellant was

subjected to lengthy cross examination on these issues at the trial. He

further stated that the respondent in evidence stated the fence was ten

to fifteen years old and her husband has stated it was over twenty years

and may be forty to fifty years old but the surveyor in evidence stated

that the trees framing the boundary was four to five years old.

The learned counsel for the defendant respondent argued that the

defendant respondent possessed a divided portion of the corpus which

is lot 1 in plan marked X and that her possession is undisturbed and

uninterrupted for a period of more than ten years. The defendant

respondent stated that she moved for prescriptive title to the said lot 1

and to prove it deeds V3 and V4 were produced which showed that the

defendant owned % share of the disputed land.

The respondent citing the judgments in Selenchi Appuhamy vs

Livinia 9 NLR 59 and Mensin Nona vs Nimal Hamy 10 LLR 159

submitted that a partition action is not maintainable if there was no

common possession between the co-owners and the land possessed by

3

II i

\

\

J

f

each co-owner for a period of over ten years entitles that co-owner to

claim prescriptive title to the said partition of land.

On perusal of the learned District Judge's judgment it could be

seen that he has only taken into consideration the deeds V3 and V4

marked by the defendant respondent at the trial. If the defendant

respondent had title deeds and possessed an undivided share for more

than ten years there should have been a partition plan to show the land

divided between the parties. There was contradicting evidence

regarding the boundary which the respondent claimed divided the two

blocks of land. The District Judge has failed to consider the evidence

regarding the division. If the District Judge relied on an amicable portion

he should have called for a partition plan signed by the co-owners. The

evidence and the surveyor's report and plan shows that the parties

occupies two separate blocks of land but this does not mean they

occupied the land after the said land was amicably partitioned. The

plaintiff appellant had filed the partition action to partition the corpus.

The learned District Judge has failed to consider the plaintiff appellant's

evidence and only considered the defendant respondent's evidence in

his judgment. The evidence placed before the District Judge has not

been properly evaluated which amounts to a miscarriage of justice.

4

,. ,If [ II

I!

\

$

I

Ii

Ie l

For the afore stated reasons I decide to vacate the judgment of

the learned District Judge of Marawila dated 04/04/1997 and order a re

trial.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

M.M.A. Gaffoor J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

5