1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

CA (PHC) 56/2010 PHC Anuradhapura Application No-HCRA 47/2009

In the matter of an Appeal made in terms of Article 154 P (6) of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

M.C. Anuradhapura Case No-57931 R.A. Prageeth Jaliya Jayathilaka Authorized Officer under the Food Act and Public Health Inspector, Vijayapura, Anuradhapura. Complainant Vs.

Raigam Marketing Services(Pvt) Ltd No. 277, Koswatta Road, Kiriwattuduwa, Homagama. Accused And

Raigam Marketing Services(Pvt) Ltd No. 277, Koswatta Road, Kiriwattuduwa, Homagama Accused-Petitioner Vs.

(1) R.A. Prageeth Jaliya Jayathilaka Authorized Officer under the Food Act and Public Health Inspector,

Vijayapura, Anuradhapura.

Complainant-Respondent

(2) Hon. Attorney General Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

Respondent And

2

Raigam Marketing Services(Pvt) Ltd No. 277, Koswatta Road, Kiriwattuduwa, Homagama.

Accused-Petitioner-Appellant

Vs.

(1) R.A. Prageeth Jaliya Jayathilaka Authorized Officer under the Food Act and Public Health Inspector, Vijayapura, Anuradhapura.

Complainant-Respondent-Respondent

(2) Hon. Attorney General Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

Respondent-Respondent

And Now Between

(1) Raigam Marketing Services(Pvt) Ltd No. 277, Koswatta Road,

Before

Counsel

H.C.J. Madawala , J

&

L. T .B. Dehideniya, J

Kiriwattuduwa, Homagama.

3

Accused-Petitioner-Appellant-Petitioner

Vs.

(1) R.A. Prageeth Jaliya Jayathilaka Authorized Officer under the Food Act and Public Health Inspector, Vijayapura, Anuradhapura.

Complainant-Respondent-Respondent-Respondent

(2) Hon. Attorney General Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

Respondent-Respondent-Respondent

Anil Silva P.e. with Ranil Samarasooriya for the Accused-Petitioner-Appellant-Petitioner V. Hettige DSG for the Respondent-Respondent-Respondent

Written Submissions on : 23 102 12017

Decided On : 02/05/2017

4

H. C. J. Madawala , J

The Accused-Petitioner-Appellant-Petitioner Raigam Marketing Services

(Pvt) Ltd who was the Accused in MC Anuradhapura case No. 57931 and

was the Accused-Petitioner in PHC Anuradhapura application No. HCRA

47/2009 and is the Accused-Petitioner CA Appeal No. CA(PHC) 56/2010

to set aside the order dated 11 th September 2009 made by the Learned

Magistrate in MC Anuradhapura case No. 57391 acting in terms of section

18(2) of the Food Act is bad in law and the order dated 10th May 2010 made

by the Hon High Court Judge in PHC Anuradhapura Application No. HCRA

No. 47/2009 is bad in law.

Having considered the fact that the consolation of the license in question

is discretionary and the assertion of the Appellant that the discretion has not

been properly exercised together with the fact that the company in question

covers around 500 workman's and 1300 dealers this court issued a stay order

dated 27/6/2013 staying the connected proceedings in the Magistrate Court

of Anuradhapura until the appeal is disposed of. Thereafter when this matter

came up for argument on 1111112016 both parties were heard in support of

their respective cases. Thereafter both parties were directed to file their

written submissions and judgment was reserved on 2/5/2017.We have heard

counsel and as perused and considered the written submissions tendered to

court by both parties. The Complainant-Respondent-Respondent authorized

, "

5

officer under the provisions of the Food Act and public health Inspector of

Wijayapura had instituted Me Anuradhapura case No. 57931 against the

Accused-Petitioner-Appellant on summons returnable date the Accused-

Appellant representative appeared in court and the charge sheet in MC

Anuradapura case No 57391 was read out to him in open court. Thereupon

the representative of the Accused-Appellant pleaded guilty to the said

charge read out to him in open court. Consequent to the tendering ofthe plea

of guilt, the Learned Magistrate enlarged the said representative of the

Accused-Appellant on bail and called for a previous conviction report and

postponed the case to the 28th August 2009.

On the 28th August 2009 the previous conviction report was available and

same was filed of record. The representative of the Appellant admitted the

12 previous conviction and the case was postponed to 11th September 2009

for the Appellant to make a plea in mitigation and the Learned Magistrate

after having heard the plea in mitigation imposed the following sentence on

the Appellant.

The said sentence are;

(i) A fine of Rs,5000/- under the provisions of section 18(1) of

the Food Act;

6

(ii) A notice to be published in three newspapers of all three

languages under the provisions of section 18(2) (a) of the Food

Act; and

(iii) Cancellation of any licence or registration certificate issued to

the Appellant under the Food Act or any other law for

manufacture, import, preparation, storage and distribution of

food products under the provisions of section 18(2) (b) of the

Food Act.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid sentence, the Appellant instituted a

revision Application in the provincial High Court of North Central Province

Holden at Anuradhapura in PHC Anuradhapura Application No. 47/2009

seeking to revise the aforesaid sentence.

However the Hon. High Court Judge made an order on 10th May 2010

without hearing the Appellant. Being aggrieved by the said dismissal, the

Appellant lodge this appeal in this court. The President Counsel for the

Accused-Appellant submitted that in terms of section 18(2) of the Food Act

where a person convicted for an offence under this act or any regulations

made there under is convicted for a second or subsequent offence of a like

or similar nature under this act or any regulations made there under, the court

convicting him for the second or subsequent offence may-

7

(a) Cause the name and the address of the person convicted and the

offence and the punishment imposed for that offence to be published

in such newspaper or in such other manner as the court may direct

and recover the cost of publication from the person convicted as if

it were a fine imposed on him;

(b) Cancel the licence (if any) issued to the person convicted for the

manufacture, importation, preparation, storage, sale and distribution

of food under this act or any other law and inform the relevant

licensing authority accordingly.

It was submitted that in accordance with the provisions contained in the

aforesaid section 18(2) of the Food Act that the Learned Magistrate is

empowered to make anyone or more of the orders set out in section 18(2)(a)

and lor 18(2)(b) where a person is convicted for an offence under this act or

any regulations made thereunder is convicted for a second or subsequent

offence of a like or a similar nature under this act or any regulations made

thereunder, the court convicting him for the second or subsequent offence

may on being satisfied the Learned Magistrate has convicted and sentenced

the Accused as aforesaid.

It was contended that on a perusal of the report it does not provide

sufficient information in relation to the nature of the offences in respect of

which aforesaid 12 convictions have been made. It was further contended

8

that it was that the said report was insufficient for me to be satisfied that the

present conviction of the Appellant is the second or subsequent offence of a

like or similar nature under this act or any regulations made thereunder

which is a prerequisite in terms of section 18(2) of the Food Act. Therefore

no court could act under section 18(2) of the Food Act and make any order

acting in terms of section 18(2) of the Food Act would be bad in law. It was

also submitted despite the aforesaid lack of information in relation to the

nature of the offences contained in the said previous conviction report the

Learned Magistrate proceeded to make orders under section 18 (2) of the

Food Act. It was also submitted that the Senior State Counsel who appeared

on behalf of the Respondents too submitted that there is no material to be

satisfied that the Appellant has been convicted of offence of a like or similar

nature under the Food Act or any regulations made thereunder before and as

such the order of the Learned Magistrate dated 11 th September 2009 acting

under 18(2) of the Food Act should be set aside as it is bad in law.

It was also submitted that the Learned High Court Judge in PHC

application No HCRA 47/2009 dated loth May 2010 preceded to dismiss the

revision application without having considered the above. Thus the said

order of the Provincial High Court Judge Holden in Anuradhapura dated 10th

May 2010 is also bad in law and should be set aside.

"

9

The Learned DSG appearmg for the 1st Complainant-Respondent-

Respondent-Respondent and the 2nd Respondent-Respondent-Respondent

submitting that under section 18(2) (b) the Accused-Petitioner-Appellant-

Petitioner continues to engage in the offence the licence to be cancelled. In

case No 78647 in the Kahatagasdigiliya Magistrates Court the Accused-

Petitioner-Appellant-Petitioner was warned that if he is persists the licence

will be cancelled. However the Accused-Petitioner-Appellant-Petitioner did

continue the offence having scant regard for the court order and the entire

court system. Once again he was charged for the offence of labeling and

pleaded guilty. The Learned Magistrate then having due regard to the all the

previous convictions made order preventing the Accused-Petitioner-

Appellant-Petitioner from further manufacturing the red string hoppers

flour. The Accused-Petitioner-Appellant-Petitioner has appeal to the marked

red string hoppers flour without stating the expiry date. The Learned

Magistrate and the Learned High Court Judge in case No 1112010 made

order dismissing appeal. The Accused-Petitioner-Appellant-Petitioner also

filed a revision application to the High Court of Anuradhapura under case

No 47/2009 which was also dismissed on 10/5/10 and it is against the order

that the Accused-Petitioner-Appellant-Petitioner has appealed to this court.

It was submitted that the main argument of the Accused-Petitioner-

Appellant was that the previous conviction do not state if they were similar

offences. However it was submitted that the Accused-Petitioner-Appellant-

10

Petitioner have considered the possession that the 12 previous convictions

were of similar offences, in the submissions at the Magistrates Court. At that

stage the Accused-Petitioner-Appellant-Petitioner did not state that he is

challenging the certificate of previous convictions nor did he at least make

any attempt to distinguish the previous convictions. It was submitted that

the prosecution made submissions at page 27/29. The Accused-Petitioner-

Appellant-Petitioner was first convicted in 2001. Then in 2003,2004, 2006

and 2009 the Accused-Petitioner-Appellant-Petitioner had been convicted

of similar offences. The Learned Magistrate at page 29 has stated very

clearly that the Accused-Petitioner-Appellant-Petitioner has conceded to the

12 previous convictions and these previous conviction are similar offences.

The Accused-Petitioner-Appellant-Petitioner who had taken the position

that the previous conviction were not a similar offences and has taken up

this grounds of appeal for the 1 st time before this court. It was contended that

the Accused-Petitioner-Appellant-Petitioner having considered to that fact

and not taking it up as a ground in the appeal nor the revision, is now barred

from taking up in this appeal.

It was submitted that the item in dispute is red string hopper flour. This is

an item bought by mainly the common consumer. It was this item that was

sold without stating the expiry date. When the primary necessaries of life

11

are sold without any concern for the health and wellbeing simply to make a

profit, the only protection is the Food Act.

In Me Leod V. Buchanan (1940 2All E.R. 179) it was held that;

"intention to commit a breach of statute need not be, shown. The breach

in fact is enough. Social defense reasonably overpowers individual

freedom to injure, in strict liability. "

In Sunil Kumar V. State of Haryana (2012 5 see 398) the Supreme

Court of India held thus;

" ..... these economic offences committed by white collar criminals are

unlikely to be dissuaded by the gentle probationary process, neither casual

provocation nor motive against particular persons but planned profit

making from numbers of consumers furnishes the incentive- not easily

humanized by the therapeutic probationary measure. " This was a case filed

for relief after losing in courts below, and it was held that the application"

cannot be entertained- Judicial process should not be permitted to be

abused-" This judgement is particularly pertinent to the case before the

court. In that the Accused-Petitioner-Appellant-Petitioner, has appealed to

the High Court of Anuradhapura, while that appeal was going on filed a

revision application, and now seeks to appeal against the order of revision

application. "

It was contended on behalf of the Respondent that the Magistrates Court

order is not to close the industry. It is only to refrain from manufacturing

that particular product namely the red string hopper flour and it is incorrect

12

to state that the whole industry will have to be closed. Accordingly the 1 st

Claimant Respondent-Respondent-Respondent and the 2nd Respondent-

Respondent-Respondent moved that this court be pleased to dismiss the

petition of the petitioner with cost and grant such other and further reliefthis

court shall deem fit.

We have considered the submissions of both parties. We are of the view

that the Magistrate has come to a correct finding regarding the previous

convictions been similar offences committed by the Accused which has been

duly admitted by the Accused. We do not think that we should interfere with

the findings of the learned Magistrate. We hold that the said order of the

Magistrate is only to the item to refrain from manufacturing that particular

product Viz red string hopper flour and it is incorrect to state that the order

for concelation of licence in to the whole industry.

As such we disallow the appeal and affirm the order of the Learned

Magistrate dated 11/09/2009 and the order of the Learned High Court Judge

of Anuradhapura in case No. 47/2009 dated 10/05/2010.

Appeal is disallowed with costs ofRs.25,000/-.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

L. T .B.Dehideniya, J

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal