IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal

in terms of Section 331 of the

Code of Criminal Procedure Act

No. 15 of 1979 read with Article

138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of

Sri Lanka.

The Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka

C.A. Case No. HCC-273/19 Complainant

High Court of Panadura Vs.

Case No. 3392/2016

Palamandige Roshan Maheel

Fernando

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Palamandige Roshan Maheel

Fernando

Accused Appellant

Vs.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondent

2

BEFORE : K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J (P/CA)

WICKUM A. KALUARACHCHI, J

COUNSEL : Mohan Sellapperuma with Sandeepani Wijesooriya

for the Accused-Appellant.

Wasantha Perera, DSG for the Respondent.

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS

TENDERED ON : 01.02.2021 (On behalf of the Accused-Appellant)

05.03.2021 (On behalf of the Respondent)

ARGUED ON : 14.10.2022

DECIDED ON : 10.11.2022

WICKUM A. KALUARACHCHI, J.

The accused-appellant was indicted in the High Court of Panadura for

trafficking and possessing 3.98 grams of Heroin, offences punishable

under Section 54A(b) and 54A(d) of the Poisons, Opium and

Dangerous Drugs Ordinance. After trial, the learned High Court Judge

of Panadura convicted the accused-appellant of both charges and

sentenced him to life imprisonment. This appeal has been preferred

against the said convictions and the sentences.

The learned Counsel for the appellant and the learned Deputy

Solicitor General for the respondent made oral submissions at the

hearing of this appeal. Prior to the hearing, written submissions have

been filed on behalf of both parties.

3

The learned Counsel for the appellant has stated two grounds of

appeal in his written submissions.

1. That the learned trial Judge failed in applying the correct legal

principles when rejecting the defence evidence.

2. The Learned Trial Judge erred in law by failing to consider the

credibility of the evidence of prosecution witnesses.

However, at the hearing of the appeal, the learned counsel for the

appellant informed the court that he would base his arguments only

on the issue whether the appellant was the correct person to be

arrested for the offences.

The accused-appellant was taken into custody by the police officer,

PW-3 while traveling in a bus. However, this was not a raid carried out

by police officers. PW-3 had got onto the bus to go to Moratuwa. The

appellant was also a passenger on the bus. Whilst on the bus, PW-3

had noticed that this passenger who was seated in front of him and

holding a black bag was behaving in a suspicious manner. He opened

and searched the bag and found heroin in pink colour small

cellophane bags. PW-3 identified the said passenger as the appellant.

He had arrested the appellant, asked the driver of the bus to stop the

bus at the nearest police station, and then produced him to the

Headquarters Inspector of Panadura Police Station (PW-1).

After the prosecution case was closed, the accused-appellant gave

evidence. The appellant admitted that he traveled on the said bus. The

position that he took up was that an unknown woman handed over a

bag to PW-3, then PW-3 asked him whether it was his bag, stopped

the bus, and took him to the Panadura Police Station. Accordingly, the

appellant denied that he had the bag which contained lumps of heroin

with him.

4

One of the contentions of the learned Counsel for the Appellant was

that the conductor or the driver of the bus was not called in evidence

to corroborate PW-3s evidence. PW-1 has stated in his evidence that

he thought that it was not necessary to record their statements.

Therefore, it is PW-3s testimony against the appellants testimony

that must be considered in the analysis of the evidence regarding the

incident.

The learned counsel for the appellant formulated his arguments on

the basis that the appellants version was more probable and, thus, it

created a reasonable doubt on the prosecution case. The learned

counsel for the appellant contended that the evidence of PW-1 and

PW-3 was contradictory in respect of the colour of the small bags that

contained heroin lumps. He also pointed out that there is a

contradiction per se in PW-3s evidence with regard to the place where

the appellant was seated. While contending that there is an issue in

the evidence regarding the stopping of the bus by traffic police before

this incident, the learned counsel drew the attention of the Court to

the fact that PW-3 had no sufficient time to search the parcel, as he

explained. It is to be noted that all these issues need to be considered

only if there were issues as to whether PW-3 arrested the appellant on

the bus and handed him over to the Panadura Police with the parcel

that contained heroin. In this case, the appellant admitted in his

evidence that PW-3 produced him to the HQI of the Panadura Police

Station with the parcel that contained heroin. The appellant only

disputes the fact of having the heroin parcel with him. His position

was that the said parcel was in the possession of PW-3 but only on

suspicion, he was produced to the police with the parcel. Therefore,

the aforesaid matters of where the appellant was seated on the bus,

and how the traffic police stopped the bus, are immaterial in

determining this appeal. The colour of the small bags that contained

heroin lumps and whether there was sufficient time for PW-3 to

search small heroin bags were also not important to consider because

5

the appellant admitted in his evidence that when the HQI took out

what was in the bag and searched, he found that it was heroin (Page

347 of the appeal brief).

Furthermore, the learned counsel for the appellant contended that a

statement of PW-3 had not been recorded by the HQI of the Panadura

Police Station, and if his statement had been there, the defence

counsel could have cross-examined him on the facts of the said

statement and pointed out discrepancies between the statement and

his evidence. The learned Deputy Solicitor General stated that PW-3

had made his notes regarding this incident. The learned High Court

Judge has considered this and his view was that not recording a

statement is a flaw, but it is not a decisive factor. I agree with the view

of the learned High Court Judge because the learned defence counsel

was entitled to the notes of PW-3 as there was no other first

information regarding this matter. Although PW-3 was a police officer,

he did not search the parcel or arrest the appellant in the course of

his official duties. This incident occurred while he was traveling on the

bus after finishing his duties for the day. Therefore, his statement

could have been recorded as the first information about this incident.

However, no prejudice has been caused to the appellant, as he was

entitled to the notes made by PW-3.

Under these circumstances, there was no reason to doubt PW-3's

testimony. However, it should be considered whether the appellant's

evidence would cast reasonable doubt on the prosecution's case. The

learned High Court Judge has decided that the two charges against

the appellant have been proved beyond a reasonable doubt and no

reasonable doubt has arisen due to the improbable defence version.

The contention of the learned DSG for the respondent was also that

the defence version was improbable.

6

A vital matter to be considered is that PW-3 had no reason whatsoever

to implicate the appellant for this offence falsely. Even the appellant

did not suggest that there was a reason for PW-3 to implicate him. The

appellant was an unknown person to PW-3. It was suggested to PW-3,

on behalf of the appellant that the appellant was produced to the

Panadura Police only on suspicion. According to the appellant's

testimony, when an unknown woman handed over a bag to PW-3 and

got off the bus, PW-3 sat down on a seat and asked the appellant

whether this was his bag. (Page 357 of the appeal brief). It is strange

and highly improbable that PW-3 took a bag from an unknown woman

and asked the appellant, who was near him, whether this was his bag.

There is no reason or basis whatsoever for PW-3 to ask that question

from the appellant because the said bag was given to him by an

unknown woman and the appellant had no connection to that,

according to the appellant. Hence, it is apparent that it is improbable

that the incident would happen the way the appellant described it.

In addition, according to the appellant, after inquiring whether it was

the appellants bag, PW-3 arrested the appellant, stopped the bus, and

took the appellant to the Panadura Police station. So according to the

way the appellant describes the incident, PW-3 had not searched what

was in the parcel. Without knowing what was in the parcel, there was

no reason for PW-3 to arrest the appellant and produce him at the

police station. Hence, this is a highly improbable story.

Apart from that, it is apparent that the unknown woman who handed

over the parcel knew that the parcel contains heroin or some illegal

substance. That is why she had slowly got down from the bus. So, if

she wanted to hand over the heroin in order to traffic heroin, there

was no reason for her not to hand over the heroin directly to the

person to whom she wanted to hand it over. Also, it is improbable that

a woman who wanted to hand over a parcel of heroin to someone

involved in their illegal activities would hand it over to an unknown

7

person when there was no obstacle to handing it over directly to the

person concerned. Therefore, as correctly concluded by the learned

High Court Judge, the improbable defence version casts no doubt on

the prosecution version that PW-3 arrested the appellant while the

appellant was in possession of the parcel of heroin.

As the two charges of trafficking and possessing heroin have been

proved beyond reasonable doubt for the reasons stated above, I hold

that the learned High Court Judges decision to convict the appellant

for the two counts against him is correct.

Accordingly, the judgment dated 11.10.2019, the convictions and

sentences are affirmed.

The appeal is dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K. Priyantha Fernando, J (P/CA)

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL