1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

CA(PHC) 08/2007 Ratnapura High Court N o.HCRIRAI63/2005 Balangoda Magistrate's Court Case No. 99259. Emhilipitiya Magistrate's Court No. 33179

In the matter of an appeal in terms of Article 154 (P) of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka read with the provisions of the High Court of the Province (Special provisions) Act No. 19 of

1990.

Hetti Muhandiramalage Podi Menike, Pahala Pandeniya - Pallewela, Gurubewila, Pinnawala, Balangoda.

1 st Party - Petitioner-Appellant.

VS.

01. Ellepola Gedara Premeratne, Durakanda, Alankara Panguwa, Balangoda.

3rd Party-Respondent-Respondent

02. Officer in Charge, Minor Complaints Unit, Police Station, Balangoda.

Applicant-Respondent-Respondent

1I f

f ,

BEFORE

COUNSEL

Argued on

Written submissions

filed on

Decided on

Malinie Gunaratne, J.

2

W.M.M. Malinie Gunaratne, J. and

P.R Walgama J.

Chathura Galhena with Manoja Gunawardena for the Appellant.

Respondent was absent and unrepresented.

01.08.2015.

12.11.2015.

02.02.2016

Pursuant to an information filed by the Officer-in-Charge of

Balangoda Police Station in terms of Section 66 of the Primary Procedure

Act, the learned Primary Court Judge held an inquiry into the dispute

between 2nd Party Respondent - Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the

Respondent) and 1 st Party - Petitioner - Appellant (hereinafter referred to as

the Appellant) in respect of the land called Walawewatte, held that he is

unable to decide who had been in possession of the land in dispute on the

date of the filing of the information under Section 66 of the Primary Court

Act (Vide Page H4 of the Brief). Nevertheless, at the end of the Order, the

learned Primary Court Judge has decided that the possession of the land in

dispute should be given to the Respondent in terms of Section 68 of the

Primary Court Procedure Act, (Vide Page H4).

3

Aggrieved by the said Order, the Appellant sought to revise the said

Order by Revision Application No. HCRIRAI63/2005 filed before the High

Court Rathnapura.

The learned High Court Judge of Rathnapura having considered the

submissions made by both parties dismissed the Revision Application by

Order dated 22.01.2007.

The Appellant being aggrieved by the said Order preferred an Appeal

to this Court seeking to set aside the Order made by the learned High Court

Judge dated 22.01.2007.

When this appeal was taken up for argument, the Respondent was

absent and unrepresented. Hence, the Court heard only the submissions

made by the Counsel for the Appellant.

It is the first and principal stance of the Counsel for the Appellant, that

the finding of the learned Primary Court Judge is contrary to his own

findings made in the same Order regarding the possession of the land in

dispute.

In an inquiry where the dispute relates to the possession of any land or

part thereof it shall be the duty of the Judge of the Primary Court to

determine as to who was in possession of the land or the part thereof on the

date of filing of the information under Section 66 and make order as to who

is entitled to possession of such land or part thereof. But where a forcible

dispossession has taken place within a period of two months immediately

before the date on which the information was filed under Section 66, he may

make an order directing that the party dispossessed be restored to possession

4

prohibiting all disturbance of such posseSSIOn otherwise than under the

authority of an order or decree of a competent Court.

Thus, the duty of the Judge is to ascertain which party was or deemed

to have been in possession on the relevant date, namely on the date of the

filing of the information under Section 66.

In this case the learned Primary Court Judge has held, that he IS

unable to decide who had been in possession of the land at the time of filing

the information. However, at the same time, in the same order the learned

Primary Court Judge has decided the possession of the land in dispute

should be given to the Respondent under Section 68 of the Primary Court

Act.

I am also agreeable with the contention of the learned Counsel for the

Appellant that the second part of the Order made by the learned Primary

Court Judge is contrary to his own findings made in the same order. It is

seen therefore, that the learned Primary Court Judge has failed to make a

correct determination and to make an order in terms of Section 68 (l) of the

Primary Court Procedure Act. Therefore the Order of the learned Primary

Court Judge has no validity before the law. However, the learned High

Court Judge has wrongfully affirmed the Order of the learned Primary Court

Judge and dismissed the Revision Application filed by the Appellant.

On perusal of the entirety of the Judgment of the learned High Court

Judge, it is apparent that the learned High Court Judge has failed to consider

the right question. He has not taken both the facts and the law when arriving

at his order. As such, I am of the view that the Order made by the learned

5

High Court Judge cannot stand before law. Therefore I set aside the Order

of the learned High Court Judge made on 22.01.2007.

For the aforesaid reasons I allow the Appeal.

However, it is significant to note that the Appellant has not sought to

set aside the Order dated 31.05.2005 made by the learned Primary Court

Judge of Balangoda. Hence, the Order of the Primary Court Judge would

prevail in favour of the Respondent and against the Appellant.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

P.R. Walgama, J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Appeal is allowed.