Page 1 of 28

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

1. Ven. K. Wacheeswara Thero

Buddhist Cultural Center, Malasinghagoda Road, Hokandara. 2. Ven. H. Gnanissara Thero,

Sri Sugatharamaya, Urule Deniya, Dewalegama. 3. W. M. J. B. Wijekoon

430, 3rd Lane, Ranasingha Road, Neduna, Ganemulla. 4. J. K. S. Pathirana

Pathirana Vila, Koodella, Anguruwa Thota. 5. S. S. G. Pushpakumara

No.6, Wickramasinghapura, Mawathagama. 6. L. G. De Lenarolle

No. 30/37, Walawwatta, Meerigama.

In the matter of an application for an Order in

the nature of Writ of Mandamus in terms of

Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

CA/WRIT/45/2019

Page 2 of 28

7. P. Hemachandra

No.188 Dambagoda, Danture. 8. D. A. R. C. K. Silva

534C, Ransiri Mawatha, Narangodapaluwa. 9. C. L.W. Senanayaka

117, 5th Lane, George E. De Silva Road, Kandy. 10. D. M. I. S. Dharmadasa

No.4 Pussa Wila, Kadawan Gama, Kadugannawa. 11. I. Alahakoon

35/21A, Maligathenna Road, Matale. 12. R. A. N. Mangala Ranasingha

158/C, Bandaranayake Road, Asgiriya, Gampaha. 13. D. M. Premarathna

21, Dora Kumbura, Dunkolawatta, Mathale. 14. H. M. Bandara Menike

144, Wijaya Rajadahana, Mirigama. 15. Padma Batathota

54/B/1, 3rd Lane, Hansagiri Road, Gampaha.

Page 3 of 28

16. S. R. D. J. B. Senanayake

260/B, Wathurugama Road, Urapola. 17. D. M. Piyathilaka

125A, Palipana Poojapitiya. 18. M. S. Ponnambalam

No.1, Alwiswatta, Hendala, Wattala. 19. D. D. Thamara Dilrukshi Perera

23/21, Diyawanna Garden, Pagoda Road, Nugegoda. 20. W. G. N. Amaradiwakare

138/6 High Level Road, Meepe, Padukka. 21. W. W. N. Senarathne

Palle Pamunuwa, Dewanagala. 22. W. D. Muthukumarana

Kreedangana Road, Kegalle. 23. K. Rupasingha

6/64/01, 8th Lane, Nadun Uyana, Halpe, Mirigama. 24. D. A. Ekanayake

Disne, Kongolla, Hakmana.

Page 4 of 28

25. K. S. Ranaweera

210, Balagolla, Kengalla. 26. D. E.V.S. Premarathna

Premali, Muragoda, Thelijjawila. 27. P. Daniel

38, New Weligama, Norwood. 28. B. N. D. Shanthi Batagoda

Beliatta Road, Polkiripitiya, Hakmana. 29. R. S. K. Abenayaka

813, Sakwithi Uyana, 8th Lane, Jayamalapura, Gampola. 30. W. M. Y. P. K. Senewirathna

34, Lakshaya Watta, Ethgala, Gampola. 31. P. A. Gunasena

76/3, Palle Kanda Road, Walasmulla. 32. R. C. W. Nanayakkara

44C, Walaw Watta Thelijjawila. 33. D. A. P. Sandya Kumari

92, Katuwaweala Road, Ambagahapura, Maharagama. 34. A. G. B. Kumarihamy

No. 8/389, Wewa Road, Kapuruwala, Alawwa.

Page 5 of 28

35. R. M. P. K. Ilukkubura

35/28, Maligathenna, Hulangamuwa, Mathale. 36. N. A. A. P. Nissanka

No. 21A, Napagoda, Nittambuwa. 37. K. E. Premasooriya

No. 197, Meerigama Road, Kal Eliya. 38. S. A. H. Gunawardhana

38/1, Medawatta, Mudungoda, Gampaha. 39. Kamala Samarasingha

98/4, Attanagalla Road, Nittambuwa. 40. M. L. Seetha Jayawardhana

No. 251/13, Kandy Road, Horagolla, Nittambuwa. 41. A. G. Gunapala

Weda Niwasa, Poththewela, Hakmana. 42. M. S. M. Farook

114, Nazar Road, Mallawapitiya, Kurunegala. 43. R. M. D. C. Dasanayaka

278, Bate pola, Donnagaha.

Page 6 of 28

44. Leela Baladora

333/3, Vijayaba Place, Ihala karagahamuna Kadawatha. 45. R. L. M. Rajapaksha

No.09, Niyangoda, Kumburegama. 46. T. Juvaneswary

61, Flory Road, Nattipiddy, Munai, Kalmunai. 47. A. S. Yogarajah

60/2, Adigar Road, Batticaloa. 48. M. M. Leelawathi

No.92, Yata Rawum Road, Horagollawatta, Nittambuwa. 49. S. R. Liyanamanage

257/12, Pelawatta, Pamburana, Matara. 50. P. W. Bandara

Randeniya Wewa Road, Pelwehera, Dambulla. 51. A. H. W. Jayasekara

14/85, Hiththetiya Central, Matara. 52. Maddumage Samarawickrama

No.117, Kulupana, Pokunuwita, Horana.

Petitioners

Page 7 of 28

Vs.

1. Dharmasena Dissanayaka

Chairman, 2. Prof. Hussain Ismail

Member, 3. Dhara Wijayatilake

Member, 4. Dr. Prathap Ramunujam

Member, 5. V. Jegarasasingam

Member, 6. Santi Nihal Seneviratne

Member, 7. S. Ranugge

Member, 8. D. Laksiri Mendis

Member, 9. Sarath Jayatilaka

Member, All of 1st to 9th Respondents: The Public Service Commission, No. 1200/9, Rajamalwatta Road, Battaramulla. 10. M. M. N. D. Bandara

Chairman, 11. E. H. M. P. Elkaduwa

Member,

Page 8 of 28

12. K. L. M. Thamby

Member, All of 10th to 12th Respondents: The Education Service Committee of the Public Service Commission, No. 1200/9, Rajamalwatta Road, Battaramulla. 13. Secretary to the Ministry of Education,

Ministry of Education, Isurupaya, Battaramulla.

Respondents

Before : Sobhitha Rajakaruna J.

M. T. Mohammed Laffar J.

Mayadunne Corea J.

Counsel : Shantha Jayawardana with Neranjan Arulpragasam, Hirannya Damunupola

and A. Basheer for the Petitioners.

Vikum de Abrew PC, ASG with Avanti Weerakoon SC for the Respondents.

Argued on : 13.10.2022

Written Submissions: Petitioner - 27.07.2020

Respondents- 18.09.2020

Decided on : 30.03.2023

Page 9 of 28

Sobhitha Rajakaruna J.

The Petitioners in the instant Application seek an order in the nature of a writ of Mandamus

directing the 1st to 12th Respondents to promote the Petitioners to Class 2 Grade 1 of the Sri

Lanka Teacher Educators Service with effect from 01.01.2005. This Court on 07.03.2019 has

decided to issue notice of this Application on the Respondents and fixed the matter for

hearing. The parties have filed Statement of Objections and also the Counter Affidavit.

Before this matter was taken up for hearing, the learned Counsel for the Petitioners has

brought to the attention of this Court that certain Respondents have ceased to hold office and

accordingly, he has sought to substitute current office bearers in place of 2nd, 3rd and 6th

Respondents who were previously holding office. At this stage a question has arisen whether

the named Respondents who have ceased to hold public office can be substituted with new

office bearers in an application for a writ of Mandamus. The learned Counsel for the

Petitioners has submitted that there are conflicting judgements on the said point of view. The

learned Deputy Solicitor General who appeared for the Respondents has pointed out the

judgements where it has been decided that a Mandamus can be issued only against a

designation and also judgements where it has been decided that a Mandamus can only be

issued against a natural person.

His Lordship the President, Court of Appeal, taking into consideration the importance of

resolving this issue, appointed a Divisional Bench to hear and determine the above issue

before dealing with the merits of the instant Application. The Divisional Bench assembled to

consider the issues arising out of the aforesaid conflicting judgements without prejudice to the

jurisdictional objections under Article 61A of the Constitution raised by the learned

Additional Solicitor General (ASG) who asserts that the Application be dismissed in limine

based on such jurisdictional objection.

The learned Counsel for the Petitioners as well as the learned ASG, after their submissions

invited this Divisional Bench to pronounce a judgement considering the below mentioned

questions and also based on the facts and circumstances of this case.

Page 10 of 28

1) Whether it is necessary to name a respondent in person in an application seeking

orders in the nature of a writ of Mandamus against a public officer in view of Rule No.

5 of the Court of Appeal (Appellate Procedure) Rules 1990;

2) Whether the substitution is necessary when a respondent who is a public officer has

ceased to hold office in an application seeking orders in the nature of a writ of

Mandamus.

In fairness to their Lordships, it needs to be stressed that their Lordships have arrived at such

conclusions in those conflicting judgements by applying the relevant legal provisions to the

facts and circumstances of each case. This Court is of the view that the above questions should

be dealt with considering the importance of such questions from the perspective of its

legislative and legal antecedents. The jurisdictional objection raised by the learned ASG and

if necessary, the merits of the instant Application will be examined after resolving the above

questions.

Origin

At this stage, I must draw my attention to the origin of writ of Mandamus. Prof. Christopher

Forsyth in Administrative Law by the late Sir William Wade and Christopher Forsyth, 11th

Edition (2014), Oxford, has shown a tendency to identify the writs of Mandamus as

mandatory orders. The prerogative remedy of a mandatory order has long provided the

normal means of enforcing the performance of public duties by public authorities of all kinds1.

Like the other prerogative remedies, it is normally granted on the application of a private

litigant, though it may equally well be used by one public authority against another. The

commonest employment of a mandatory order is as a weapon in the hands of the ordinary

citizen, when a public authority fails to do its duty by him. As per Prof. Forsyth, Mandamus

reached the zenith of its utility in the 18th century (above Administrative Law, p.520).

H. W. R. Wade in Administrative Law, 4th Edition (1977), Clarendon Press Oxford, has stated

that the essence of Mandamus is that it is a royal command, issued in the name of the Crown

from the court of Kings Bench (now the Queens Bench Division of the High Court), ordering

1 See- Harding, Public Duties and Public Law, ch. 3

Page 11 of 28

the performance of a public legal duty. In the 5th Edition (1982) and as well as in the 6th Edition

(1988) of the said Administrative Law the same sentence appears therein. However, the said

sentence is reflected in the 11th Edition (2014) of the above Administrative Law, p.520 using

the words mandatory order instead of writ of Mandamus. This may be due to the

amendments in reference to the judicial review procedures in English law introduced to the

Supreme Court Act 1981 (now known as the Senior Courts Act 1981). The Clause 3(a) of the

Civil Procedure (Modification of Supreme Court Act 1981) Order 2004 No. 1033 which came

into effect on 1st May 2004 provides that the orders of mandamus, prohibition and certiorari

described in Section 29 of the said Supreme Court Act shall be known instead as mandatory,

prohibiting and quashing orders respectively.

I found the following passage in a publication by Lewis & Clark Law Review;

In its earliest uses in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, mandamus served as a

charge from the Crown to a third party with no option of return2. An option of return

in this context would give the party subject to the mandamus an opportunity to come

to court and explain why the commanded action could not or should not take place3.

Later into the fifteenth century, mandamus offered individuals a way to petition

Parliament for redress, most commonly restoration to public office, and it eventually

came to be known as a writ of restitution4. Next, it grew into its modern use as an

original writ, offering a legal remedy in the form of a command from Kings Bench5.

(See- Audrey Davis, A Return to the Traditional Use of the Writ of Mandamus in Lewis

& Clark Law Review, Audrey Davis (Editor in Chief), 24 Lewis & Clark L. Rev.

1527 [2020])

2 Thomas Tapping, The Law and Practice of The High Prerogative Writ of Mandamus 2 (1853), at 57; see also, e.g., John Cowell, A Law Dictionary (London, D. Browne et al. 1708) (defining mandamus as a Charge to the Sheriff, to take into the Kings hands all the Lands and Tenements of the Kings Widow, that against her Oath formerly given, marryeth without the Kings consent) 3 See-John Cowell, A Law Dictionary (London, D. Browne et al. 1708) (defining Return). 4 Thomas Tapping, The Law and Practice of The High Prerogative Writ of Mandamus 2 (1853), at 57; see also, e.g., James Baggs Case (1615) 77 Eng. Rep. 1271, 1272; 11 Co. Rep. 93 b. (KB) (restoring plaintiff to his position in a corporation on a writ of restitution). 5 Thomas Tapping, The Law and Practice of The High Prerogative Writ of Mandamus 2 (1853), at 57 (explaining that mandamus grew to obtain[] the sanction of an original writ).

Page 12 of 28

Originally, the writ of Mandamus was merely an administrative order from the sovereign to

his subordinates. Modern government is based almost exclusively on statutory powers and

duties vested in public bodies, and a mandatory order is a regular method of enforcing the

duties. The plethora of ancient and customary jurisdictions no longer exist. A mandatory

order now belongs essentially to public law. Today the majority of applications for a

mandatory order are made at the instance of private litigants complaining of some breach of

duty by some public authority. Typical application of a mandatory order in modern cases are

to enforce statutory duties of public authorities to make a rate,6 to refer a complaint to a

statutory committee,7 to decide a dispute between education authorities on proper grounds,8

to determine an application for a licence,9 to reconsider an application for a licence on proper

grounds,10 to appoint an inspector of a company,11 to adjudicate between landlord and

tenant,12 to approve building plans,13 to pay college lecturers,14 top pay a police pension,15 to

improve conditions of imprisonment16 and to implement an employment scheme.17 (vide-

Administrative Law by the late Sir William Wade and Christopher Forsyth, 11th Edition, Oxford,

p.522 to p.523)

Parameters Adopted

Having considered the origin of the writs of Mandamus, it would be useful to briefly observe

the parameters adopted by other jurisdictions in applications for writs of Mandamus for the

purpose of better adjudication of the above questions which need consideration of this Court.

M. P. Jain and S. N. Jain (in Principles of Administrative Law, 9th Edition (2022), LexisNexis,

at p.2440) observe that Mandamus means a command; Mandamus is used to enforce the

6 R vs. Poplar Borough Council [No. 1] (1922) 1 KB 72 7 Padfield vs. Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (1968) AC 997 8 Board of Education vs. Rice (1911) AC 179 9 R vs. Tower Hamlets London Borough Council ex. p. Kayne-Levenson (1975) QB 431 10 R vs. London County Council ex. p. Corrie (1918) 1 KB 68 11 R vs. Board of Trade ex. p. St. Martins Preserving Co. Ltd. (1965) 1 QB 603 12 R vs. Pugh (Judge) (1951) 2 KB 623 13 R vs. Tynemouth Rural District Council (1896) 2 QB 219 14 R vs. Liverpool City Council ex. p. Coade, The Times, 10 October 1986 15 R vs. Leigh (Lord) (1897) 1 QB 132 16 R vs. Home Secretary ex. p. Herbage [No.2] (1987) QB 1077 17 R vs. Liverpool City Council ex. p. Secretary of State for Employment (1989) COD 404

Page 13 of 28

performance of public duties by public authorities; The essence of mandamus is that it is a

command by the court ordering the performance of a public legal duty.18 Mandamus is a

command issued by a court to an authority directing it to perform a public duty belonging to

its office; Mandamus is issued to enforce performance of public duties by authorities of all

kinds; Mandamus is available against any public authority including administrative and local

bodies. It is further observed that a Mandamus can be issued to any kind of authority in

respect of any type of function-administrative, legislative, quasi-judicial, judicial and only

when (a) a legal duty is imposed on the authority in question and it does not perform the

same; and (b) the petitioner has a legal right to compel performance of this duty.19

It is observed that in order to issue a writ of Mandamus, the court must be satisfied of the

existence of a public duty owed and an existing legal right in the petitioner to have it

performed. Therefore, it will not be available conditionally or for the performance of merely

moral duties. The court must take cognisance of the distinction of a duty and a privilege or

discretion as a Mandamus exists only where a duty lies. A duty and privilege found in a statue

may be distinguished to a large extent by examining the language of the statute.

The Sri Lankan courts in cases such as De Alwis vs. De Silva 71 NLR 108; Weligamawa Multi

Purpose Co-operative Society Ltd. vs. Daluwatta (1984) 1 Sri L.R. 195; Hakmana Multi-Purpose

Co-operative Society Ltd. vs. Ferdinando (1985) 2 Sri L.R. 272; Piyasiri vs. Peoples Bank (1989)

2 Sri L.R. 47; Sannasgsala vs. University of Kelaniya (1991) 2 Sri L.R. 193 and Samaraweera vs.

Minister of Public Administration (2003) 3 Sri L.R. 64 have established that a writ of Mandamus

is issued only if there is a public or statutory duty. Duties arising out of orders or directives,

regulations and circulars have however been enforceable by a writ of Mandamus, despite the

lack of statutory duty or flavour, so long as it attracts the feature of a public duty and/or a

statutory right.

18 KVR Setty vs. State of Mysore, AIR 1967 SC 993: 1967 (2) LLJ 434: 1967 (2) SCR 70 19 M.P. Jain & S.N. Jain, Principles of Administrative Law, 9th Edition, Volume 2 (2022, LexisNexis) at p.2441

Page 14 of 28

Contrasting Views

Now, I need to assay the contrasting views taken in those conflicting judgements in granting

the prerogative remedy of a mandatory order enforcing the performance of public duties by

public authorities. The judgements referred to this Court by both parties of the instant

Application for consideration are mainly in the cases of (i) Haniffa vs. The Chairman, U.C.

Nawalapitiya 66 NLR 48; (ii) Samarasinghe vs. De Mel and another (1982) 1 Sri. L.R. 123; (iii)

Abayadeera and 162 others vs. Dr. Stanley Wijesundera, Vice Chancellor, University of Colombo

and another (1983) 2 Sri. L.R. 267; (iv) Shums vs. Peoples Bank and others (1985) 1 Sri. L.R.

197; (v) Kamil Hassan vs. Fairline Garments (International) Ltd. and Two others (1990) 1 Sri.

L.R. 394; (vi) Dayaratne vs. Rajitha Senaratne, Minister of Lands and others (2006) 1 Sri. L.R.

7; (vii) Dhilmi Kasunda Malshini Suriyarachchi vs. Sri Lanka Medical Council and others

CA/Writ/187/2016 decided on 31.01.2017; (viii) Methodist Trust Association of Ceylon vs.

Divisional Director of Education of Galle CA/Writ/192/2015 decided on 08.01.2019;

(ix)Wickramamthanthrige Viraj Amanda Wickramasinghe vs. Minister of Education and Others

CA/Writ/230/2016 decided on 08.01.2019; (x) Rupahinge Nayanananda Indrakumara vs. Land

Reform Commission and others, CA/Writ/271/2013 decided on 15.10.2019.

The principal position on the need to name natural persons as respondents in an application

for the issuance of a writ of Mandamus was propounded in the Supreme Court case Haniffa

vs. The Chairman, U.C. Nawalapitiya 66 NLR 48 where Dr. H.W. Tambiah J. (in agreement

with Sri Skanda Rajah J.) held that a Mandamus can only be issued against a natural person,

who holds a public office and if such person fails to perform a duty after he has been ordered

by court, he can be punished for contempt of Court; therefore, the application for a writ of

Mandamus against the Chairman of the Urban District Council failed on the basis that the

person against whom the writ can be issued was not named.

In Samarasinghe vs. De Mel and another (1982) 1 Sri. L.R. 123 (at p.128) H. D. Tambiah J. (in

Court of Appeal) observed referring to the said Haniffa case that;

...A Mandamus can only issue against a natural person, who holds a public office. If such a

person fails to perform a duty after he has been ordered by Court, he can be punished for contempt

Page 15 of 28

of Court. (See, Haniffa v. The Chairman, U.C. Nawalapitiya, 66 NLR 48). Before this Court

issues a Mandamus, it must be satisfied that the respondent will in fact be able to comply with

the order and that in the event of non-compliance, the Court is in a position to enforce obedience

to its order

However, the Court of Appeal took a different view in Abayadeera and 162 others vs. Dr.

Stanley Wijesundera, Vice Chancellor, University of Colombo and another (1983) 2 Sri. L.R. 267.

Atukoralle J. (P/CA) in agreement with Tambiah J. and Moonemalle J. held that;

In our view the proper body to be directed by a Mandamus, assuring that a writ can go, is the

University of Colombo and not the respondents to this application. The University of Colombo

therefore is a necessary party and ought to have been made a party to these proceedings. The

failure to do so is fatal to the petitioners' application.

The Court in the said case has referred to Halsbury's Laws of England, 4th Edition, Vol. 1,

p.111, para. 89;

"The Order of Mandamus is of a most extensive remedial nature, and is, in form, a command

issuing from the High Court of Justice, directed to any person, corporation, or inferior tribunal,

requiring him or them to do some particular thing therein specified which appertains to his or

their office and is in the nature of a public duty."

In Shums vs. Peoples Bank and others (1985) 1 Sri. L.R. 197 (at p. 204), which is one among the

other cases referred to us as mentioned above, H. A. G. De Silva J. referring to the decision

in Haniffa case distinguished writs of Certiorari and writs of Mandamus and observed;

Therefore it would be seen that the remedy by way of writ of Certiorari could not be equated to

one of Mandamus as far as the effect on the parties is concerned.

Meantime, in the year 1991, Rule 5 of Part IV of the Court of Appeal (Appellate Procedure)

Rules 1990 was published in the Extraordinary Gazette Notification No. 645/4 on

15.01.1991. I believe it is pertinent to take cognizance of the said Rule 5 at this juncture as it

deals with applications to which public officers are respondents. Such Rules shall apply to

Page 16 of 28

applications under Articles 140 and 141 of the Constitution under which the Court of Appeal

exercises writ jurisdiction including writs of Mandamus. It is important to note that the said

Rule 5 was adopted and enacted after the aforesaid cases including the Haniffa case. The Rule

5(1) to 5(7);

5 (1) This rule shall apply to applications under Articles 140 and 141 of the Constitution,

in which a public officer has been made a respondent in his official capacity,

(whether on account of an act or omission in such official capacity, or to obtain

relief against him in such capacity, or otherwise).

5 (2) A public officer may be made a respondent to any such application by reference to

his official designation only (and not by name), and it shall accordingly be

sufficient to describe such public officer in the caption by reference to his official

designation or the office held by him, omitting reference to his name. If a

respondent cannot be sufficiently identified in the manner, it shall be sufficient if

his name is disclosed in the averments in the petition.

5 (3)No such application shall be dismissed on account of any omission, defect or

irregularity in regard to the name designation, description, or address of such

respondent, if the Court is satisfied that such respondent has been sufficiently

identified and described, and has not been misled or prejudiced by such omission,

defect or irregularity. The Court may make such order as it thinks fit in the interests

of justice, for amendment of pleadings, fresh or further notice, costs, or otherwise,

in respect of any such omission, defect or irregularity.

5 (4) (a) In respect of an act or omission done in official capacity by a public officer who

has thereafter ceased to hold such office, such application may be made and

proceeded with against his successor, for the time being, in such office, such

successor being made a respondent, by reference to his official designation only,

in terms of sub-rule (2).

(b) If such an application has been made against a public officer, who has been

made a respondent by reference to his official designation (and not by name),

Page 17 of 28

in respect of an act or omission in his official capacity, and such public officer

ceases to hold such office, during the pendency of such application, such

application may be proceeded with against his successor, for the time being, in

such office, without any addition or substitution of respondent afresh, proxy,

or the issue of any notice, unless the Court considers such addition substitution,

proxy or notice to be necessary in the interests of justice. Such successor will be

bound, in his official capacity, by any order made, or direction given, by the

Court against, or in respect of, such original respondent.

(c) Where such an application has been made against a public officer, who has

been made a respondent by reference to his official designation (and not by

name), and such public officer ceases to hold such office after the final

determination of such application, but before complying with the order made

or direction given therein, his successor, for the time being, in such office will

be bound by and shall comply with, such order or direction.

5 (5) The provisions of sub-rules (4) (b) and (4) (c) shall apply to an application under

Article 140 or 141, filed before such date as may be specified by the Chief Justice

by direction, against a public officer, in respect of an act or omission in his official

capacity, even if such public officer is described in the caption both by name and

by reference to his official designation.

5 (6) Nothing in this rule shall be construed as imposing any personal liability upon a

public officer in respect of the act or omission of any predecessor in office.

5 (7) In this rule, ceases to hold office means dies, or retires or resigns from, or in

any other manner ceases to hold, office.

Dayaratne vs. Rajitha Senaratne, Minister of Lands and others (2006) 1 Sri. L.R. 7 has been

decided after the publication of the said Gazette Notification No. 645/4 which introduced the

said Rule 5. In the said case Marsoof J. (P/CA) (as he then was) distinguishing Rules 5(2)

and Rule 5(4)(a) observed that neither Rule 5(4)(b) nor Rule 5(4)(c) would apply to the said

case as it was not a case where a public officer is cited as respondent by his official designation

Page 18 of 28

only and has ceased to hold office during the pendency of the case or after the judgement but

prior to its execution. However, the application in that case was filed after 31st of December

1991, which is the date specified by the Chief Justice for the purposes of Rule 5(5). On that

basis, Marsoof J. decided that Rule 5(5) will not have any application to that case and

accordingly, Rule 5(4)(b) too will not have any application. Finally, Marsoof J. dismissed the

application upholding the preliminary objections that the petitioners cannot seek a writ of

Mandamus directing the respondents to continue the relevant acquisition since the 1st and 2nd

respondents do not hold office respectively as Minister of Lands and Minister of Highways.

The Court of Appeal in Mohideen and others vs. Director General of Customs, CA/784/1998

decided on 14.12.2011; Kahapolage Kithsiri Palitha Fernando vs. The Registrar General and

others, CA/Writ/43/2012 decided on 07.07.2015 and Abdul Carim Mohamed Rizvi vs. The

learned Magistrate and others, CA/PC/APN 150/2016 decided on 18.05.2017 has favoured the

position that a Mandamus does not lie against a nomine officii and that no Court should make

orders which cannot be enforced.

In the year 2016, His Lordship Justice A. H. M. D. Nawaz with the concurrence of His

Lordship Justice Vijith Malalgoda PC (P/CA) (as he then was) has taken a progressive

approach in N. Ekanayake vs. Hon. Attorney General, CA/Writ/58/2012 decided on 25.04.2016.

The analytical view of His Lordship Justice Nawaz in that judgement can be considered as a

recent milestone in the evolution of the principles governing the writ of Mandamus in this

country as he has arrived at a conclusion completely disregarding Haniffa case of the Supreme

Court. The Court in that case rejecting the argument of the respondent that Mandamus cannot

lie against a public body such as the Sri Lanka Ports Authority, decided:- the law seems to

have moved away; and today a juristic person, no less than a natural person, can be

commanded by Mandamus to carry out its public duty. His Lordship Justice Nawaz has

given much weight to the dicta of Abayadeera and 162 others vs. Dr. Stanley Wijesundera, Vice

Chancellor, University of Colombo and another20 when arriving at his above conclusion and has

also observed;

20 (1983) 2 Sri. L.R. 267

Page 19 of 28

Darling Js dictum in R v Hanley Revising Barrister21 is pertinently cited to drive home the

point that no shackles should be placed on the issue of this constitutional remedy.22

"Instead of being astute to discover reasons for not applying this great constitutional

remedy for error and misgovernment, we think it our duty to be vigilant to apply it in

every case which, by any reasonable construction, it can be made applicable."

So we reject the argument that mandamus cannot lie against a public body such as the Sri Lanka

Ports Authority.

The above modern trend in reference to Mandamus enunciated in the above N. Ekanayake vs.

Hon. Attorney General has been echoed in Dhilmi Kasunda Malshini Suriyarachchi vs. Sri Lanka

Medical Council and others, CA/Writ/187/2016 decided on 31.01.2017 in which His Lordship

Justice Vijith K. Malalgoda PC. (P/CA) (as he then was) has considered the preliminary

objection that a writ of Mandamus does not lie against a juristic person, in light of the above

mentioned decisions including Haniffa case. His Lordship Justice Malalgoda held;

Recently in the case of Ekanayake V. Attorney General and two Others CA Application

58/2012 (CA minute dated 25.04.2016) this court re affirm the position taken in the

Abeydeera's case referred to above and observed that "the law seems to have moved away.

Today a juristic person, no less than a natural person, can be commanded to carry out its public

duty" and rejected the argument that Mandamus cannot lie against a public body such as the Sri

Lanka Ports Authority.

When considering the decisions referred to above I see no merit in the said argument raised by

the 1st respondent. (Emphasis added)

Further, in the year 2019, another significant departure has been made from the decision in

Haniffa case by His Lordship Justice Mahinda Samayawardhena in Methodist Trust

Association of Ceylon vs. Divisional Director of Education of Galle and others CA/Writ/192/2015

decided on 08.01.2019. His Lordship has held that it is a myth that Mandamus can only be

21 (1912) 3 KB 518 at 529 22 See Administrative Law, Eleventh Edition, Wade & Forsyth p522

Page 20 of 28

issued against natural persons; Mandamus, like any other prerogative writ, can be issued

against natural, juristic or non-juristic persons including tribunals, corporations, public

bodies, public officials identified by their official designations provided the other requirements

to issue Mandamus are fulfilled.

His Lordship Justice Samayawardhena has categorically decided that the only exception to

Rule 5 is Rule 5(5) which is applicable only in respect of applications filed before 31.12.1991.

He has further held that the reference to Haniffas case by Marsoof J. in Dayaratne v. Rajitha

Senaratne23 is clearly obiter dicta; thus, the judgment of Marsoof J. is not an authority to say

that writ of Mandamus is an exception to Rule 5. The Court in that case further held;

Is the judgement in Haniffas case a well-considered Judgement? This is a nagging question for

me.The observation in Haniffas case that If such a person fails to perform a duty after

he has been ordered by Court, he can be punished for contempt of Court presupposes the position

that if mandamus is issued against a juristic person as opposed to a natural person, in case of a

violation, the juristic person cannot be dealt with for contempt of Court. This is not correct. When

a writ of mandamus is issued against a juristic person the parties who must obey it are those in

control of the affairs of the juristic person, and in case of a violation, they can be dealt with for

contempt.

His Lordship Justice Samayawardhena even in Wickramamthanthrige Viraj Amanda

Wickramasinghe vs. Minister of Education and Others CA/Writ/230/2016 decided on

08.01.2019, after considering the preliminary objection that the 1st to 3rd respondents against

whom Mandamus has been sought are not natural persons in order to avail the issuance of a

writ of Mandamus, has concluded pronouncing that such objection is baseless as the Court of

Appeal (Appellate Procedure) Rules 1990 speak of the exact antithesis, i.e., the Rules say that the

petitioner need not specify and identify the respondents by names..

The Court of Appeal when pronouncing the judgement in the same year 2019 in Rupahinge

Nayanananda Indrakumara vs. Land Reform Commission and others, CA/Writ/271/2013

decided on 15.10.2019 has not taken into consideration the dicta of the above judgements of

23 (2006) 1 Sri. L.R. 7

Page 21 of 28

His Lordship Justice Samayawardhena. The court in the said case deciding that all persons

who would be affected by the issue of Mandamus shall be made respondents to the

application, has favoured the proposition that a writ of Mandamus could only be issued

against a natural person who holds public office. For completeness, I must mention here the

case of Jayantha Liyanage vs. Commissioner of Elections, SC Appeal/96/2011 decided on

17.12.2014 also. Although the Supreme Court in the said case has not dealt with the question

whether a Mandamus can be issued only against a natural person, the Court has not shown

any reluctance to issue a writ of Mandamus against the Commissioner of Elections, who was

the respondent (to recognize the Sinhala Jathika Peramuna (SJP) as a political party and to

assign an appropriate symbol to such party).

Evolution

Now, I advert to assay the experience in other jurisdictions including such as England relevant

to the above questions. It appears that there is a considerable evolution in the concept of

Mandamus that has taken place over the last few centuries.

It is important to note that Prof. Christopher Forsyth in Administrative Law by the late Sir

William Wade and Christopher Forsyth, 11th Edition, Oxford explaining the modern statutory

duties in reference to mandatory orders has referred to the famous case of R vs. Poplar Borough

Council ex. p. London County Council [No. 1] (1922) 1 KB 72 which dealt with a matter similar

to the present question in the instant Application. In the said case when the Borough Council

of Poplar refused to pay their statutory contributions to the London County Council for rates,

the London County Council obtained a Mandamus ordering the proper payments to be made

and when they were not made, the County Council obtained writs of attachment for the

imprisonment of the disobedient councillors (See also-[No. 2] (1922) 1 KB 9524).

Where parliament has imposed a duty on particular persons acting in some particular

capacity, a mandatory order will issue not withstanding that those persons are servants of the

Crown and acting on the Crowns behalf. This is because the legal duty is cast upon them

personally, and no orders given to them by the Crown will be any defence. If therefore the act

24 R vs. Poplar Borough Council ex. p. London County Council

Page 22 of 28

requires the Minister to do something, a mandatory order will lie to compel the minister to

act. (Padfield vs. Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (1968) AC 997; R vs. Home Secretary

ex. p. Phansopkar (1976) QB 606). Similarly, a mandatory order was granted against the Special

Commissioners of Income Tax, acting as servants of the Crown, commanding them to

authorize repayment to a tax payer. (R vs. Special Commissioners of Income Tax (1888) 21 QBD

313). (vide-Administrative Law by the late Sir William Wade and Christopher Forsyth, 11th

Edition, Oxford, p.530)

The above Poplar Borough Council case prescribed that disobedience to a mandatory order is

punishable as a contempt of court by fine or imprisonment. In the case of a corporation, which

cannot be imprisoned, the members responsible should be named in the writs of attachment;

but in the Poplar case this requirement was held to be waived by the members who appeared

and persisted in disobedience. Whereas in Kamil Hassan vs. Fairline Garments (International)

Ltd and Two others (1990) 1 Sri L.R. 394 (at 405) it was held;

In the case of disobedience to injunctions and undertakings given to court - coercive orders

- there is strict liability. But in the case of other orders, non-compliance with the judgment of a

Court would not ordinarily be a contempt of Court Ismail v. Ismail (1). In the latter case, (a)

where the law provides for execution contempt proceedings should not be resorted to as a means

of obtaining execution, and (b) even where there is no provision for execution, contempt

proceedings cannot be used as a legal thumbscrew" to compel enforcement, and mere

disobedience would not be contempt, unless there is defiance of the court, or contumacious

disregard of its order

In Guruswamy vs. State of Mysore, AIR 1954 SC 592: 1955 (1) SCR 305, the Supreme Court of

India decided that the Mandamus is a command issued to direct any person, corporation,

inferior court or government requiring him or it to do some particular thing therein specified

which appertains to his or its office and is in the nature of a public duty.25 Birendra Kumar vs.

25 Also see-State of Mysore vs. Chandrasekhara, AIR 1965 SC 533; S. I. Syndicate vs. UOI, AIR 1975 SC 460: (1974) 2 SC 460: (1974) 2 SCC 630; Bihar Eastern Gangetic Fishermen Co-operative Society vs. Sipahi Singh, AIR 1977 SC 2149: (1977) 4 SCC 145; Chet Ram vs. Delhi Municipality, AIR 1981 SC 653: (1980) 4 SCC 647; Samir Kumar vs. State, AIR 1982 Pat 66; Comptroller & Auditor General vs. K. S. Jagannathan, AIR 1987 SC 537: (1986) 2 SCC 679.

Page 23 of 28

UOI, AIR 1983 Cal 273 is a case where the High Court (in India) directed the telephone

authorities to restore the connection within a week when the telephone of the applicant was

wrongfully disconnected in spite of him paying his dues regularly.

By perusing the above legal literature and the judgements on the evolution of Mandamus, to

my mind, the tool of Mandamus has been used many a time not only against the individual

public servants but at certain instances even against the local government institutions such as

county councils/borough councils. Hence, a reasonable question arises in my mind on what

grounds our Courts, such as in Haniffas case, have attempted to limit the expansion of this

prerogative remedy completely overlooking the systematic progress in the relevant field of law

and the environment which prevailed at the birth of Mandamus. The scope of remedy in

administrative law has been expanded with a considerable degree of judicial activism for the

last three decades. At a time where the judges take a liberalized or progressive stand in their

judicial creativity to control public power, I possibly cannot understand why we still need to

cling to primitive principles on Mandamus whereas the English courts themselves have

already broken the traditional parameters and taken drastic measures to use Mandamus as a

powerful tool to issue orders in the mandatory nature against juristic persons such as local

government institutions. The Administrative Court Judicial Review Guide 2022 in England26

specifically provides in its Clause 12.2.1 that a mandatory order is an order the Court can

make to compel a public body to act in a particular way.

It is essential to bear in mind the socio-political factors in the country to a certain extent when

judges exercise their jurisdiction in order to review the public power. The removal from a

post, dismissal and transfers are in the hands of administration or sometimes its a prerogative

of the executive subject to limitations. It cannot be assumed that holding a high post for a

long period would be available all the time in public service as well as at semi-governmental

institutions. Such premise should not be a hindrance for an individual to recourse to the

remedy under Mandamus when he or she seeks to get the public duties executed. I am

attracted to the words of His Lordship Justice Samayawardhena in Methodist Trust Case where

he has addressed exactly the same point;

26 which applies to cases heard in the Administrative Court wherever it is sitting and in the Administrative Court Offices (ACOs) across England and Wales.

Page 24 of 28

When mandamus is sought, public officers are made respondents by their names and

designations for otherwise their applications are destined to be dismissed in limine on the

Judgment of Haniffas case. Quite often, holders of the public office are changed, and whenever

there is such a change, substitution is made and caption is changed adding the successor in office

by his name, and notice is then issued upon the successor. This is a never-ending process until the

Judgment is delivered. If the holder of the public office is changed even after the delivery of the

Judgment but before giving effect to it, still the successor needs to be substituted as the former has

been cited by name.

The foundation of judicial review in Sri Lanka is constitutional, as such looking at the

exercising of judicial review jurisdiction in the constitutional perspective cannot be considered

outdated. Adherence to the conventional views in respect of the parameters of judicial review

has restrained the judges from taking expected measures to protect citizens rights. No proper

codification of accepted parameters for the purpose of exercising the jurisdiction in respect of

judicial review is available in Sri Lanka27. Jan-Erik Lane has observed in Constitutions and

political theory, Manchester University Press, p. 41;

Old constitutionalism used to be the political theory that attempted to constrain State power

and authority by means of special institutions, formulated in a so-called fundamental law. The

development of constitutionalism over time has already been portrayed, but a new interpretation

of constitutionalism would have to focus upon institutions that decentralize political power and

authority in various ways as well as protect citizen rights.

Conclusion In light of the above, our Courts in some cases have correctly deviated from the dicta in

Haniffa case. Based on the reasons adduced above, I am inclined to follow the judicial

precedent enunciated in the above cases of N. Ekanayake vs. Hon. Attorney General, Dhilmi

Kasunda Malshini Suriyarachchi vs. Sri Lanka Medical Council and others, Methodist Trust

27 Statutes such as Crown Proceedings Act 1947, Common Law Procedure Act 1852 and Senior Courts Act 1981 (earlier known as the Supreme Court Act 1981) on various aspects are seen in England.

Page 25 of 28

Association of Ceylon vs. Divisional Director of Education of Galle and others,

Wickramamthanthrige Viraj Amanda Wickramasinghe vs. Minister of Education and Others and

Abayadeera and 162 others vs. Dr. Stanley Wijesundera, Vice Chancellor, University of Colombo

and another in order to arrive at the final conclusion of the instant Application. I take the view

that there is no bounden duty to follow the misconstrued principle that a writ of Mandamus

can only be issued against natural persons.

As I have observed earlier, it is not practical in the present day context to expect a litigant to

always be aware of the frequent changes in respective public office. Anyhow, the Court of

Appeal (Appellate Procedure) Rules 1990 have clearly identified the notion that a public

officer may be made a respondent to any such application by reference to his official

designation only (and not by name), and it shall accordingly be sufficient to describe such

public officer in the caption by reference to his official designation or the office held by him,

omitting reference to his name.

On a careful consideration of the above legal antecedents together with the relevant

jurisprudence and for the reasons set out above, I have come to the conclusion that it is not

essential to name a respondent in person in an application seeking orders in the nature of a

writ of Mandamus and it can even be issued against juristic persons/public bodies such as

corporations, tribunals, local government institutions or against any person holding a post of

a public nature28 and who has been sufficiently made a respondent in his official capacity or

by reference to his official designation. The above conclusion is always subject to the other

established requirements that should be fulfilled by a petitioner when seeking for a writ of

Mandamus. Similarly, when such respondent has been named in person in an application for

writs of Mandamus, the substitution should be allowed when he or she ceases to hold office.

However, the prerogative nature of issuing writs should not be undermined at any cost and

thus, the Review Court should be able to deviate to a certain extent from the above

conclusions as it thinks fit in the interest of justice. This is merely because the far reaching

principle of the Rule 5 of Part IV of the Court of Appeal (Appellate Procedure) Rules 1990 is

28 Similarly, it is observed that the term public officer is defined in the Constitution as well as in the said Rule 5(8) of the Court of Appeal (Appellate Procedure) Rules 1990 for the purpose of such Rules.

Page 26 of 28

that the Court should satisfy that such respondent has been sufficiently identified & described

and has not been misled or prejudiced any party. Hence, the Review Court should have the

sole discretion to decide, upon satisfaction, that such respondent who is a natural person or a

juristic person or otherwise, has been sufficiently identified and described for the purpose of

making a mandatory order which can be enforced. This emphasized the fact that such

discretion of the Review Court should exist even in an application for substitution of parties

in applications for Mandamus.

In the case of disobedience to a Mandatory order of the Review Court, the law in the said

area should certainly be guided by the decision of His Lordship Justice Samayawardhena in

the said Methodist Trust case where His Lordship has underscored the notion that when a writ

of mandamus is issued against a juristic person, the parties who must obey it are those in

control of the affairs of the juristic person, and in case of a violation, they can be dealt with

for contempt.

Substantive reliefs

Having considered the above questions specifically referred to this Divisional Bench, now, I

need to examine the substantive reliefs sought by the Petitioners of the instant Application.

The Petitioners primary relief is for an order in the nature of a writ of Mandamus directing

the 1st to 12th Respondents to promote the Petitioners to Class 2 Grade 1 of the Sri Lanka

Teacher Educators Service (SLTES) with effect from 01.01.2005. It is observed that the 1st

to 12th Respondents were the members of the Education Service Committee of the Public

Service Commission (PSC).

The Petitioners have submitted applications to the post of Class II Grade 1 of SLTES, in view

of the advertisement published in the Gazette Notification marked E. The Petitioners state

that they were not promoted on the premise that the prescribed date referred to in the 'Note'

in the Clause 15 of the Service Minute, marked D and as the Petitioners have not completed

the age of 45 years by 01.01.1995; the Petitioners cannot be exempted from the said

qualifications required under its Clause 15(i). The Petitioners further contend that they

became aware that four officers who are similarity circumstanced to the Petitioners have been

Page 27 of 28

promoted to the said post consequent to an order made by Administrative Appeals Tribunal

(AAT). It is specifically noted that the Petitioners have not lodged an appeal to the AAT.

The Petitioners main complaint is that the PSC and the Education Service Committee of the

PSC have failed to grant the said promotions to the Petitioners and such failure amounts to a

refusal to promote the Petitioners. In view of my above conclusions on the questions raised

upon writ of Mandamus, the Petitioners will be entitled for substitution of Respondents

afresh. Even such substitution is effected, the current members of the PSC will be the 1st to

12th Respondents.

Anyhow, as per the learned ASG, the grievance of the 52 Petitioners is based on the purported

failure on the part of the PSC or the Education Service Committee of the PSC and as such he

raises the preliminary objection that the Petitioners cannot maintain the instant Application

by virtue of the provisions of Article 61A of the Constitution29.

Article 61A;

Subject to the provisions of Article 59 and of Article 126, no court or tribunal shall

have power or jurisdiction to inquire into, or pronounce upon or in any manner call

in question any order or decision made by the Commission, a Committee, or any

public officer, in pursuance of any power or duty conferred or imposed on such

Commission, or delegated to a Committee or public officer, under this Chapter or

under any other law.

It is reflected in the advertisement (E) upon which the Petitioners have submitted their

applications for the said promotion that the selection process is based on the results of a

structured interview conducted by a panel approved by the PSC and according to a Scheme

of Recruitment approved by the PSC. It appears that if this Court commence relevant

examination to consider the reliefs prayed for by the Petitioners, this Court certainly will have

to inquire into or call-in question orders or decisions made by the PSC or by the Education

Service Committee of the PSC. The restrictions contained in the Article 61A are ouster clauses

29 1978 Constitution of the Republic of Sri Lanka.

Page 28 of 28

stipulated in the Constitution itself and the powers of this Court will be restricted by those

provisions.

As discussed by Shiranee Tilakawardane J. (P/CA) (as she then was) in Katugampola vs.

Commissioner General of Excise and others (2003) 3 Sri. L.R. 207, the Writ jurisdiction could be

sought under circumstances where the person who made the impugned decision did not have

any legal authority to make such a decision. However, in the instant Application no claim

has been made that the person who made the impugned decisions had no legal authority to

make such decisions. The learned ASG has drawn the attention of this Court that the PSC

has delegated its powers relating to the SLTES to an Education Service Committee by a

delegation published in Extraordinary Gazette No. 1989/29 dated 19.10.2016.

In the circumstances, the Petitioners are not entitled to maintain the instant Application in

this Court based on the above jurisdictional question raised by the learned ASG. Hence, I

proceed to refuse this application in view of the constitutional ouster stipulated in the Article

61A of the Constitution, however, without any hinderance to the legal regime upheld in this

judgement in respect of issuing writs of Mandamus.

Application is dismissed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

M. T. Mohammed Laffar J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Mayadunne Corea J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal