1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

Revision under Article 138 of the

Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka read

with the provisions in Chapter XXIX of

the Code of Criminal Procedure Act and

Section 9 of the High Court of the

Provinces (Special Provisions) Act

No.19 of 1990.

Court of Appeal No: The Hon. Attorney General

CA//PHC/APN/0132/2021 Attorney Generals Department

Colombo-12

High Court of Negombo

Case No. HC/273/2014 COMPLAINANT

Vs. 1. Migel Juliasge Priyantha alias

Chaminda

2. Edirisinghe Arachchige Prasanna

alias Chooty Putha

ACCUSED NOW AND BETWEEN

2 | P a g e

Edirisinghe Arachchige Prasanna alias

Chooty Putha

2nd ACCUSED-PETITIONER

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

P. Kumararatnam, J.

COUNSEL : Kamal Suneth Perera with Anjalee

Fernando for the Petitioner.

Kanishka Rajakaruna, SC for the

Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 21/07/2023 DECIDED ON : 30/10/2023 *******************

3 | P a g e

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named 2nd Accused Petitioner (hereinafter referred to as the

Petitioner) was indicted along with 1st Accused by the Attorney General on

following charge:

On or about the 16th October 2011 the accused jointly committed the murder

of Wannakuwatta Waduge Chamara Buddhika which is an offence

punishable under Section 296 of the Penal Code.

As the Petitioner opted for a non-jury trial, the trial commenced before a

judge and the prosecution had led seven witnesses and marked production

P1 and closed the case. Learned High Court Judge having satisfied that the

evidence presented by the prosecution warrants a case to answer, called for

the defence and explained the rights of the accused.

The Petitioner and the 1st Accused after making dock statements closed the

defence case.

The Learned High Court Negombo in his judgment dated 10.09.2021 had

acquitted the 1st Accused and convicted the Petitioner under Section 297 of

the Penal Code on basis of a sudden fight, which is an exception to Section

294 of the Penal Code.

The exception 4 to Section 294 (Murder) of the Penal Code states as

follows:

Culpable homicide is not murder if it is committed without

premeditation in a sudden fight in the heat of passion upon a sudden

quarrel, and without the offender having taken undue advantage or

acted in a cruel or unusual manner.

4 | P a g e

Explanation: - It is immaterial in such cases which party offers the

provocation or commits the first assault.

Having heard the submissions of both parties and considering the evidence

presented by the prosecution, the Learned High Court Judge had convicted

the Petitioner for culpable homicide not amounting to murder under Section

297 and sentenced him to 12 years rigorous imprisonment with a fine of

Rs.10000/-. In default, 06 months simple imprisonment ordered.

The Petitioner did not appeal against the conviction.

The Learned Counsel for the Petitioner informed this court that the Petitioner

has given consent to argue this matter in his absence. At the hearing the

Petitioner was connected via Zoom platform from prison.

The Learned Counsel for the Petitioner contended that as the Learned High

Court Judge, in his judgment at last paragraph, found the Petitioner guilty

under 2nd limb of Section 297 of the Penal Code, he should have been

convicted appropriately.

Section 297 of the Penal Code states as follows:

Whoever commits culpable homicide not amounting to murder shall be

punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may

extend to twenty years, and shall also be liable to fine, if the act by which

the death is caused is done with the intention of causing death, or of causing

such bodily injury as is likely to cause death;

or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may

extend to ten years, or with fine, or with both, if the act is done with

the knowledge that it is likely to cause death, but without any intention

to cause death, or to cause such bodily injury as is likely to cause

death.

5 | P a g e

The Petitioner has advanced following exceptional circumstances to

invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of this Court to reduce the sentence

by ordering compensation of the aggrieved party.

a) That the sentence is illegal, as the Court after finding the Petitioner

guilty under second limb of Section 297 of the Penal Code, has

sentenced for 12 years imprisonment where the maximum term of

imprisonment provided in law is 10 years.

b) That the Learned Judge erred in law by not awarding compensation to

the victim thereby violated the Section 2(d) and 3 (o) of the Assistance

to and Protection of Victim of Crimes and witnesses Act No.4 of 2015.

c) That the Learned Trial Judge erred in law by not awarding

compensation to the victim thereby violated the Section 17(4) of the

Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.15 pf 1979.

d) That the Learned Trial Judge has failed to strike a balance between

compensation and imprisonment.

e) That the Learned High Court Judge has failed to consider the

precedent in the case of Kumara v AG reported in [2003] (1) SLR 139.

f) That the term of imprisonment is excessive in considering attended

circumstances.

The Petitioner states that he is a father of two daughters and they were only

three years and one years old respectively when this unfortunate incident

had happened. Now he is a single parent, as his wife deserted and left them

long ago.

The Petitioner further states that he is a heart patient and diagnosed for

single vessel disease and a coronary stent was implanted in the year 2019.He

has submitted his medical report along with his revision application.

As correctly pointed out by the State Counsel that Sections 2(d) and 3(o) of

the Assistance to and Protection of Victims of Crimes and Witnesses Act

No.04 of 2015 have no bearing to discretion of the Judge of the High Court

6 | P a g e

vested by the Constitution and other prevailing laws in imposing sentence to

an offender.

Further, Section 17(4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.02 of 1979

does not make it mandatory to award a compensation to the victim.

The Learned High Court Judge in his judgment finding the Petitioner guilty

under 297 of the Penal Code stated as follows:

Page 13 of P2 (The High Court Judgment)

02 jk pQos; wOs fpdaokd m;%fha jrog fkdj wvq jrola jk yosis onrhloS fldamh

wejsiaiqKq jsg l,a ;nd l,amkd lsrSulska f;drj urKlreg myr oS Tyqg urKh f.koqka

;=jd,hka isoq lsrSfuka idj ukqIH >d;kfha jrog jrolre lrus'

Hence, it is quite clear that the Learned High Court Judge has convicted the

Petitioner under second limb of 297 of the Penal Code. Therefore, the

Petitioner should have been sentence with an imprisonment up to 10 years.

But the Learned High Court Judge has sentenced the Petitioner for an

imprisonment of 12 years. Hence, I set aside the 12 years imprisonment

imposed on the Petitioner.

Considering all the circumstances of this case, especially his family situation

and his health condition, I substitute with a term of 05 years rigorous

imprisonment on the Petitioner. The fine imposed by the Learned High Court

Judge will remain unchanged with the default sentence.

Further, the Petitioner is directed to pay a compensation of Rs.300,000/- to

the deceased family with a default sentence of 2 years rigorous

imprisonment.

As the Petitioner is in prison since the date of conviction by the Learned High

Court Judge, I order the sentence imposed by this Court be operative from

10/09/2021.

7 | P a g e

Subject to the above variation the revision application is dismissed.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgment to the High

Court of Negombo.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

SAMPATH B. ABAYAKOON, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL