IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

S.A. Piyasena,

5/27, Flower Lane,

Pepiliyana Road,

Nugegoda.

Petitioner

CASE NO: CA/WRIT/274/2015

Vs.

R.M.D.P.I. Pushpakumari,

Divisional Secretary,

Hingurakgoda.

And 6 Others

Respondents

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Manohara de Silva, P.C. for the Petitioner.

Chaya Sri Nammuni, S.S.C., for the 1st-4th

Respondents.

Uditha Egalahewa, P.C., for the 5th-7th Respondents.

Decided on: 26.07.2019

2

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

There is no necessity to unfold the long history of this case as the

facts relevant to the present purposes are straightforward.

The petitioner filed this writ application seeking to compel the 1st

Respondent Divisional Secretary of Hingurakgoda by way of writ of

mandamus (a) to cancel the Permit No. 156 marked P1, and (b) to

issue a new Permit in the name of the petitioner for 30 perches out

of the above land and referred to in Permit No. 156A marked P3.

The petitioner basically makes this claim based on a settlement

entered into before this Court on 25.01.2008 in a former writ

application marked P14.

However in a subsequent appeal1 decided on 05.02.2013, the

Supreme Court in the Judgment marked P12B has clearly held

that the Permit No. 156 is legal and the Permit No. 156A is illegal.

Hence this Court cannot based on P14 settlement compel the

Divisional Secretary to cancel the Permit No. 156. If that cannot

be done, the question whether the petitioner could be issued a new

Permit for 30 perches out of the said land does not arise.

The point emphasized by the learned Presidents Counsel for the

petitioner that the attention of the P14 settlement was not brought

to the notice of the Supreme Court when the Supreme Court

delivered Judgment P12B is not relevant at this stage. The

petitioner will only have himself to blame for that lapse. If that

argument is to be accepted, this Court would indirectly be

nullifying the Judgment of the Supreme Court. 1 This appeal is from the Judgment of the District Court regarding the same dispute among the same parties.

3

The petitioner has now been evicted from the portion of the land

covered by Permit No. 156 by the Fiscal on the strength of the said

Judgment of the Supreme Court.

This application cannot be maintained. The same is therefore

dismissed without costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal