==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/185/25

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal Case No. Kandambige Sunil Rathnasiri

CA/HCC/0185/2025

High Court of Embilipitiya

Case No. HCE/103/2021

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

CA/HCC/185/25

2 | P a g e

COUNSEL : Mohan Senaviratne with S. Dissanayake

for the Appellant.

Yuhan Abeywickrama, DSG for the

Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 26/05/2026

DECIDED ON : 15/07/2026

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Appellant was indicted by the Attorney General for

committing offences under Section 354 and 365B (2) (b) of the Penal Code

that is, Kidnapping from lawful guardianship and Grave Sexual Abuse

respectively, on Ranasinghe Liyanage Nuwan Sameera between the period of

01.10.2001 and 28.04.2002.

The trial commenced on 07.11.2023. After leading all the necessary

witnesses, the prosecution closed the case. The Learned High Court Judge

CA/HCC/185/25

3 | P a g e

had called for the defence and the Appellant had given evidence from the

witness box and closed his case.

The Learned High Court Judge after considering the evidence presented by

both parties before him and his predecessor, convicted the Appellant as

charged and sentenced him as follows:

• For the first count, 5 years rigorous imprisonment with a fine of

Rs.5000/-. The fine carries a default sentence of 06 months simple

imprisonment.

• For the second count, 10 years rigorous imprisonment with a fine of

Rs.5000/-. The fine carries a default sentence of 06 months simple

imprisonment.

In addition, a compensation of Rs.50,000/- to be paid to PW1, was ordered

with a default sentence of 12 months rigorous imprisonment. The Court has

ordered both sentences imposed on counts one and two to run concurrently.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the Appellant

has given consent to argue this matter in his absence. During the argument

he was connected via the Zoom platform from prison.

Both Counsel had consented to dispose this case by their written

submissions.

The Facts of this case albeit briefly are as follows.

PW1, the victim of this case, had been about 11 years old when he faced this

grave violation. When he gave evidence, he was 33 years old. The alleged

incident had happened at a Chena, which belonged to the Accused.

According to PW1, when he went to the Chena, he had met the Appellant

near a well. Thereafter, the both of them had gone into the Chena and

stopped near a coconut tree. The Chena had been cultivated with coconut

CA/HCC/185/25

4 | P a g e

trees and egg-plant. Under the coconut tree, the Appellant made the victim

lie on a Cadjan after removing the victim’s short. Thereafter, the Appellant

came on to the victim’s body and had intercrural sex with the victim. After

the said act, the Appellant had said that he would divulge about the acts of

sexual abuse committed on PW1 by the three others if he tells this to his

parents.

A few days after the incident, the younger brother of the victim’s father, had

visited them and informed the victim’s father about a rumour spreading in

the village that the victim was sexually abused by several persons including

the Appellant. On the following day, after being inquired about this by the

victim’s mother, the victim was taken to the police and a complaint was

lodged. The complaint further revealed that, apart from the Appellant, two

others also had sexually abused the victim.

The JMO who had examined the victim had not been called to give evidence

during the trial.

After the closure of the prosecution’s case, the defence was called, and the

Appellant denied the charges while giving evidence from the witness box.

The following Grounds of Appeal were raised on behalf of the Appellant:

1. Did the Learned Judge of the High court err himself, while

pronouncing the impugned judgment, regarding the principles of law

relating to burden of proof?

2. Did the Learned Judge of the High court err himself when he

concluded that the prosecution had proved the date of the alleged

incident of sexual abuse beyond reasonable doubt?

3. Did the Learned Judge of the High court err himself when he failed to

apply the provisions of section 114(f) of the Evidence Ordinance in

respect of the failure of the prosecution to call and mark the Medico

CA/HCC/185/25

5 | P a g e

Legal Report issued in respect of the PW1, during the course of the

trial?

4. Did the Learned Judge of the High court err himself, while

pronouncing the impugned judgment, regarding the principles of law

relating to corroboration?

5. Did the Learned Judge of the High court err himself, while

pronouncing the impugned judgment, when he decided to act upon

the uncorroborated evidence of PW1, whom he had concluded as an

untruthful witness in respect of certain portions of evidence given by

him during the course of the trial before the High Court?

In a case of this nature, the testimonial trustworthiness and credibility of

PW1, mainly the probability of the occurrence of events as recounted by him

should be assessed with utmost care and caution by the Trial Judge. PW1

was 33 years old when he narrated the incident which happened to him.

In respect of the 1st ground of appeal, the Learned Counsel contended that

the prosecution had failed to pose any question to PW2, the father of the

victim regarding whether he had given consent or not to go with the

Appellant. He further argued, in the absence of such questioning, the

conviction entered in respect of the 1st count is bad in law.

PW2, Dharmakeerthi had given evidence and narrated how PW1 was abused

by the Appellant. According to PW2, upon hearing about this alleged incident

from his younger brother, he had inquired about it from PW1. PW1 had then

disclosed about the incident to PW2, and had given details of the location

where the said incident had taken place. PW1 had stated that three others

too had committed abuse on him prior to this incident, along with their

names.

Further, when questioned during the trial, PW2 stated that PW1 had revealed

to him that the Appellant had gotten onto his body and committed the act of

CA/HCC/185/25

6 | P a g e

sexual abuse to him. PW1 had specified to PW2 that the Appellant had

rubbed his penis between PW1’s legs. PW2 clearly stated that upon hearing

this, he understood that an act of abuse of his son had been committed by

the Appellant.

Afterwards, PW2 stated that a complaint was lodged with the police. Since

he is the father of the victim, his evidence itself reveals that the incident had

taken place without his knowledge. As such, it is sufficient proof to establish

that PW1 was taken out of the lawful guardianship of PW2 without his

consent. Therefore, in my view, his evidence is enough to prove the 1st count

against the Appellant.

In respect of the second count, the Learned Counsel contended that the date

of offence has not been proved beyond reasonable doubt. According to PW1,

he had lodged his complaint on 30.04.2022. He further said that the incident

pertaining to this case had happened two weeks prior to lodging the

complaint at the police.

The Learned Counsel, quoting the evidence given by PW2, argued that there

is a glaring discrepancy between the evidence given by PW1 and PW2

regarding the date of the incident. Therefore, he submits that this inter se

contradiction raises a doubt regarding whether such an incident happened.

It must be noted that both PW1 and PW2 had given evidence about 22 years

after the incident. Accurate evidence cannot be expected from the witness.

Considering the evidence given by PW1 and PW2 with regard to the date of

the incident, I conclude that the inter se contradiction shown by the

Appellant will not affect the core of the case.

In this case, the creditworthiness of the evidence given by the victim did not

suffer at any stage of the trial. I too agree that the contradictions highlighted

in the evidence of the victim are not strong enough to shake the credibility

of the victim or the core issues of the case against the Appellant.

CA/HCC/185/25

7 | P a g e

The Learned High Court Judge in his judgment had very correctly analysed

the evidence of the victim and given reasons as to why he accepted the same.

In The Attorney General v. Sandanam Pitchai Mary Theresa [2011] 2 SLR

292 the court held that:

“Whilst internal contradictions or discrepancies would ordinarily affect

the trustworthiness of the witness statement, it is well established that

the Court must exercise its judgment on the nature of the inconsistency

or contradiction and whether they are true material to the facts in issue.”

In the case of Joy Devaraj vs The State of Kerala (2024) INSC 473 it was

held:

“The appellant was required to demonstrate that the incongruities in the

statements of the several eye witnesses shook the roots of their

credibility. The threshold for disbelieving a witness is not mere

discrepancy or inconsistency but material discrepancy and

inconsistency, which renders the account narrated by the witnesses so

highly improbable that the same may safely be discarded altogether

from consideration.”

In the case of Gangadhar Behera v. State of Orissa: (2002) 8 SCC 381 it

was noted:

“Normal discrepancies in evidence are those which are due to normal

errors of observation, normal errors of memory due to lapse of time, due

to mental disposition such as shock and horror at the time of occurrence

and those are always there however honest and truthful a witness may

be. Material discrepancies are those which are not normal, and not

expected of a normal person. Courts have to label the category to which

a discrepancy may be categorized. While normal discrepancies do not

corrode the credibility of a party's case, material discrepancies do so.”

CA/HCC/185/25

8 | P a g e

In the third ground of appeal, the Learned Counsel contended that the failure

to adduce medical evidence has caused great prejudice to the Appellant.

Therefore, the Learned Counsel strenuously argued that this is appropriate

to consider under Section 114(f) of the Evidence Ordinance.

Section 114(f) of the Evidence Ordinance states:

“that evidence which could be and is not produced would if produced, be

unfavourable to the person who withholds it”

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant contended that, although the Medico

Legal Report of the victim was named in the production list in the indictment,

the report was not tendered and the JMO who examined the victim was not

called to give evidence in Court. The Counsel argued that this has caused

great prejudice to the Appellant.

In cases of grave sexual abuse, a medical or medico-legal report would not

be a strict requirement in order to successfully prove the charge of grave

sexual abuse. The most pertinent requirement in relation to the evidence in

sexual assault prosecutions is that the victim’s testimony is clear, consistent

and credible.

If a medical report is not available, other types of evidence can be used by

courts and prosecutors in order to meet the required burden of proof. A

medical examination is a standard part of the investigation process to ensure

the health of the victim as well as to recover any available forensic samples,

however, it is not a legal prerequisite that is absolutely necessary to secure

a conviction.

Furthermore, a Medico Legal Report would contain the opinion of experts. In

criminal cases, when such a medico legal report is not produced, it would

not adversely affect the prosecution’s case. Generally, appellate courts are of

the view that trials are decided as per the totality of the available evidence.

If the testimony of the victim is believable and is corroborated by

CA/HCC/185/25

9 | P a g e

eyewitnesses or strong circumstantial evidence, a missing report would not

break down the case of the prosecution.

As courts mainly consider whether the guilt of the accused has been proven

beyond a reasonable doubt, merely the lack of medical documentation would

not automatically result in an acquittal, if other available evidence is proved

to be reliable.

In the case of Deepak Kumar Sahu v. State of Chhattisgarh 2025 INSC

929, decided on 05.08.2025 it was noted:

“The credible and reliable evidence of prosecutrix could not be jettisoned

for want of corroboration including the corroboration by medical report or

evidence.

Merely because the medical evidence was less corroborative and less

supportive or absent in details or indictive of no external injuries. It in no

way weakened the prosecution case. Sole testimony of the victim was

strong evidence to rely on along with available attendant evidence.”

The Learned High Court Judge had considered the evidence given by PW1

with caution and care and had correctly held that his evidence is convincing

and cogent and sufficient on its own to prove the case against the Appellant.

Therefore, I conclude that failure to call medical evidence had not caused

any prejudice to the Appellant.

In the fourth and fifth ground of appeal, the Appellant contends that the

Learned High Court Judge has erred himself while pronouncing the

impugned judgment, regarding the principles of law relating to

corroboration.

Corroboration is not a strict nor absolutely necessary requirement for

conviction in sexual abuse cases. In other words, corroboration is not a sine

qua non. In most modern legal jurisdictions, courts generally rely on the

principle that the solitary testimony of the victim (prosecutrix) would be

CA/HCC/185/25

10 | P a g e

legally sufficient to secure a conviction, as long as the victim’s account is

credible, reliable and inspires the confidence of the court.

In the case of The State Of Himachal Pradesh vs Manga Singh (2019) 16

SCC 759 it was held:

“The conviction can be sustained on the sole testimony of the prosecutrix,

if it inspires confidence. The conviction can be based solely on the solitary

evidence of the prosecutrix and no corroboration be required unless there

are compelling reasons which necessitate the courts to insist for

corroboration of her statement. Corroboration of the testimony of the

prosecutrix is not a requirement of law; but a guidance of prudence under

the given facts and circumstances. Minor contradictions or small

discrepancies should not be a ground for throwing the evidence of the

prosecutrix.

It is well settled by a catena of decisions of the Supreme Court that

corroboration is not a sine qua non for conviction in a rape case. If the

evidence of the victim does not suffer from any basic infirmity and the

‘probabilities factor’ does not render it unworthy of credence. As a general

rule, there is no reason to insist on corroboration except from medical

evidence. However, having regard to the circumstances of the case,

medical evidence may not be available. In such cases, solitary testimony

of the prosecutrix would be sufficient to base the conviction, if it inspires

the confidence of the court.”

In this case, nowhere during the trial PW1 had given untruthful evidence.

The victim had given detailed and cogent evidence in the trial. No ambiguities

have been noted in the victim’s evidence. Therefore, I conclude that acting

on the evidence given by PW1 has not caused any prejudice to the Appellant.

CA/HCC/185/25

11 | P a g e

In criminal law, the presumption of innocence is a fundamental

principle that requires the prosecution to prove the guilt of the accused

beyond a reasonable doubt.

Considering the evidence led in this case and guided by the judgements

mentioned above, I conclude that this is not an appropriate case in which

the judgement delivered by the learned High Court Judge on 24/06/2025

against the Appellant can be interfered upon. I therefore, dismiss the appeal.

Having considering the circumstances of this case, I order the sentence to be

operative from the date of sentence, namely on 24.06.2025.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgement to the High

Court of Embilipitiya along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL