CA (Writ) Application No.18120 18

,

't!IJI_l' , I ,.,'_ ULIII\ '"" uW .. ,:)ULldll::.l HepuullL UI ~rt Lalli\{l

"'" In the matter of an application for mandates in the ........ nature of Writs of Certiorari and Mandamus in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of Sri Lanka.

1. 'rdWlti "G)W e"~<(J)e"" @d C:lo(CC!Jeo, (Inter Provincial Private Elus Association), 62/2, Kandy Road, Ihala Imbuleoda, Imbulgoda.

2. C:l8do Co"") e"'o<(J)8"" @dC:l8)(J)<'!l C:l<'!le<'!lcZ51"', (All Sri Lanka Private Elus Owners' Federation), No.1S8/1, Bodhiraja Mawatha, Colombo 11.

Petitioners -vs-

1. Western Province Provincial Road Passenger Transport Authority, No.89, 'Ranmagapaya', Kaduwela Road, Battaramulla.

2. Thusitha Kularathna,

Chairman, Western Province Provincial Road Passenger Transport Authority,

No.89, 'Ranmagapaya', Kaduwela Road, Elattaramulia.

3. Jagath Perera, General Manager, Western Province Provincial ROild Passenger Transport Authority, No.89, 'Ranmagapaya', Kaduwela Road, Battaramulia.

4. Western Provincial Council, NO.204, Denzil Kobbekaduwa Elattaramulla.

S. Pradeep Yasarathne, Chief Secretary, Western Provincial Council,

Mawatha,

No.32, Sir Marcus Fernando Mawatha, Colombo 07.

6. Hon.lsura Dewapriya, Chief Minister, Western Provincial Council, Srawasthi Mandirya, No.32, Sir Marcus Fernando Mawatha, Colombo 07.

7. Hon.K.C.Logeswaran Governor, Western Province, NO.109, Sth Floor,

Rotunda Tower, Galle Road, Colombo 3.

8. Rasika Abeydeera, Secretary, Provincial Roads, Transport, Co-operative and Trade, Housing and Construction, Estate Infrastructure Facilities, Industry and Rural Development - Western Province, No.89, 'Ranmagapaya', Kaduwela Road, Elatlaramuiia.

9. Hon.Lalith Wanigaratne, Minister of Provincial Roads, Transport, Co-operative, and Trade, Housing and Construction, Estate Infrastructure Facilities, Industry and Rural Development - Western Province,

I

1

.1

,

No.89, 'Ranmagapaya', Kaduwela Road, Battaramulla.

10. National Transport Commission, No.241, Park Road, Colombo 05.

11. Eng.M.A.P. Hemachandra, Chairman,

National Transport Commission, No.241, Park Road, Colombo 05.

12. Dr.D.M.S.Dassanayake, Director-General, National Transport Commission, No.241, Park Road, Colombo 05.

13. Hon.Nimal Siripala de Silva, Minister of Transport and Civil Aviation, ih Floor, Sethsiripaya Stage II, 8attaramulla, Sri Lanka.

14. G.S.withanage, Secretary, Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation, ih Floor, Sethsiripaya Stage II, Battaramulla, Sri Lanka.

15. Hon.Attorney-General, Department of the AttorneY-General, Colombo 12. Respondents

CA 18/2018 Writ Application

Before P. Padrnan Surasena,J. (PiCA) &

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J.

Counsel N.M. Reyaz for the petitioner

Dr. Wijedasa Rajapakshe,PC for the 1st , 2nd ,

3 rd , 5th & 9th Respondents

Decided on

Nayomi Kahawita, SSC for loth and 15 th

Respondents

28.03.2018

P. Padrnan Surasena, J. (PiCA)

Court heard the submissions of learned counsel for the

petitioner, learned Senior State Counsel and learned President's

Counsel for the Respondents. The primary complaint made by the

petitioner is the fact that the 1st Respondent is issuing route

permi ts for the buses operating in the expressway wi thin the

province. It is his submission that this route permits should

have been issued by the loth Respondent.

It was the contention of the learned President's Counsel for the

1st Respondent that the substantive prayer in the petition is the

prayer 'd' of the petition which has only prayed for a Writ of

Certiorari to quash the tender advertisement dated 15.11.2017

produced marked as ~.

This court observes that the petitioner has made

application in terms of article 140 of the constitution.

this

It is

stated in the caption of the application that this is an

application for mandates ln the nature of writs of Certiorari

and Mandamus. However, this Court observes that the petitioner

has not prayed for a mandamus but has only prayed for a writ of

Certiorari to quash the tender advertisement dated 15.11. 2017

marked P 6 (in prayer 'd').

In these circumstances, this Court identifies the main prayer in

this application as prayer 'd' which has prayed for a Writ of

Certiorari to quash the tender advertisement dated 15.11.2017.

As has been pointed out by the learned President's Counsel for

the 1st Respondent, the petitioner has not prayed for any writ to

quash any decision made by any relevant authority with regard to

the issuance of route permits.

Petitioner has not prayed for a writ of prohibition to restrain

the 1st respondent from issuing route permits.

In these circumstances, it is the view of this Court that it

would be either an academic or a futile exercise to grant only a

writ of certiorari merely to quash the particular tender

advertisement produced marked P 6.

This Court observes the fact that the 1st Respondent had

previously also had not only published the tender notices but

also had granted the similar route permits.

Further, this Court is of the view that the matters complained

by the petitioner are realy matters for the loth Respondent to

address and complain to Court if necessary. The loth Respondent

being the National Transport Commission has not so far agitated

these matters in any appropriate forum.

Therefore, this Court is also not satisfied with the locus

standi of the petitioner.

In these circumsatnces, this Court decides to refuse to issue

notices on the Respondent. This application must stand

dismissed without costs.

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

LA/-