Page 1 of 11

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for mandates in the nature of writs of certiorari and mandamus under Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. CA/Writ Application 226/18

Orient Pearl Hotels Limited No. 335 A, D.R. Wijewardena Mawatha, Colombo 10. PETITIONER VS. 1. Cey-Nor Foundation Limited,

No. 90 (335), D.R. Wijewardena Mawatha, Colombo 10. 2. M.H.K. Paranavitharana,

Chairman, Cey-Nor Foundation. 3. M.A. Nihal Chandrasiri,

Managing Director, Cey-Nor Foundation Limited. 4. K.D.S. Ruwan Chandra,

Secretary, Ministry of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources Development, New Secretariate, Maligawatte, Colombo 10.

5. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12. RESPONDENTS

Page 2 of 11

Before: M. T. MOHAMMED LAFFAR, J. and

K. K. A. V. SWARNADHIPATHI, J.

Counsel: P. Radhakrishnan, instructed by S.W. Weerasuriya for the

Petitioner. Sabrina Ahmed SC for the Respondents. Written Submissions on: 27.07.2019 & 25.09.2020 (by the Petitioner). 25.06.2019 & 11.03.2020 (by the Respondents). Decided on: 02.08.2021

MOHAMMED LAFFAR, J.

The Petitioner in this application has invoked the supervisory writ jurisdiction

of this Court under Article 140 of the Constitution, seeking, inter alia, the

following relief:

d. A writ of certiorari, quashing the decision of the 1st to 4th Respondents

to eject the Petitioner from the premises in question as contained in

letter marked P9 of the Managing Director of the 1st Respondent dated

09.05.2018.

f. A writ of mandamus, directing the 1st to 4th Respondents to implement

the Cabinet decision granted as per the Cabinet Memorandum No.

MFAR/AD/2/10/1/1-(14)-2018 dated 21.02.2018 marked P6.

g. A writ of prohibition, prohibiting the 1st to 4th Respondents from

granting the leasehold rights of the premises in question to any third

party.

When this matter was taken up for argument on 29.04.2021, all learned

Counsel moved that the judgment be delivered on the written submissions

that have already been tendered on behalf of the respective parties.

Page 3 of 11

The subject matter of this case is a large prime land owned by the 1st

Respondent Company established under the Conversion of Public

Corporations or Government owned Business Undertakings into Public

Companies Act1, functioning under the Ministry of Fisheries and Aquatic

Resources Development, and situated at D.R. Wijewardene Mawatha in

Colombo, located in the tourist zone of the Lotus Tower consisting of an extent

2 Roods and 18.24 Perches.

By virtue of the Lease Agreement bearing No. 1834 dated 04.07.1998 attested

by P. Chandra Perera, Notary Public marked P2, the Petitioner Company took

on lease from the 1st Respondent Company the aforesaid subject matter for a

period of twenty years from 04.07.1998 to 03.07.2018. As per the said

agreement, the Petitioner set up a restaurant and was continuing the

management of the same for the tenure of the lease period.

In 2016, the Petitioner made representations to the 1st Respondent, Cey-Nor

Foundation Limited and the Ministry of Fisheries and requested for an

extension of the lease of the said premises in question. Thereafter, a Cabinet

Memorandum was preferred by the Minister seeking approval for the grant of

lease of the premises in dispute to the Petitioner P6. Accordingly, the Cabinet

granted approval for the said premises to be leased out to the Petitioner.

The Petitioner states that, in terms of the said Cabinet approval, a draft lease

agreement was submitted to the Hon. Attorney General, and thereafter, the

Hon. Attorney General has recommended certain amendments to the terms

and conditions of the same.

Subsequently, the 1st Respondent, as per the clause 22 of the original Lease

Agreement marked P2, dispatched a letter dated 09.05.2018 marked P9 to the

Petitioner, directing the latter to hand over the vacant possession of the said

premises to the 1st Respondent, which reads thus:

This has reference to the lease agreement entered on 4th July 1998 with Cey Nor Foundation Ltd and Cey Nor Orient Pearl Restaurant.

1 No. 23 of 1987

Page 4 of 11

We would like to remind you, the 20 years lease period of the above agreement will be completed on 4th July 2018. Accordingly, as per the clause numbers 23 (a) of the lease agreement, the agreement will be terminated on 4th July 2018 by expiration of the 20 years period. So we request you to follow the conditions stipulated in the clause number 22 of the above agreement.

In addition, I have annexed herewith the letter sent by our Finance Manager on 9th April 2018, regarding the outstanding payments to be settled by you to Cey Nor Foundation Limited. As mentioned in the letter, take immediate action to settle the outstanding dues

The Petitioner states that the 1st to 4th Respondents are engaged in delaying

the finalization of the lease agreement and are deliberately withholding the

same being submitted to the 5th Respondent with ulterior motives to hand

over the leasehold rights to a third party.

The Petitioner further states that the purported decision of the 1st to 4th

Respondents in not implementing the Cabinet decision is arbitrary, unfounded

and illegal.

In a nutshell, the primary position of the Petitioner is that on the basis of

Legitimate Expectation, the Petitioner is entitled to an extension to the lease

hold rights of the corpus in this case. The Petitioner submits that such

legitimate expectation arises out of the initial approval granted by the Cabinet

of Ministers by Memorandum dated 21.02.2018 (P6) and the draft lease

agreement submitted to the 5th Respondent for consideration.

The Respondents submit that though the Cabinet Approval was initially

received on 21.03.2018 to lease the land out to the Petitioner, the said

decision was not conveyed to the Petitioner by the Respondents. Considering

the commercial value of the location of the land in issue, and the losses

experienced by the 1st Respondent due to the poor performance by the

Petitioner in receiving the profit share; subsequently on 02.08.2018 a second

decision was reached by the Cabinet to call for Expressions of Interest from

any interested parties and thereafter to decide on the granting of the new

lease. The Petitioner is not prevented from such bidding of which the

procedure is yet to commence.

Page 5 of 11

The Respondents state that the Petitioner has showed profits only for five

years of the twenty years of the lease and has therefore caused a considerable

loss to the 1st Respondent. Thereby, the Petitioner had deliberately and/or

willfully neglected to settle the profits on the due dates. The Petitioner was

unable to pay even the 40% profit share for those five year period on the due

dates. The copies of the reminders dispatched to the Petitioner by the 1st

Respondent requesting the Petitioner to settle the dues are produced as R4A,

R4B, R4C, R4D, R4F, R4G and R4H.

The Respondents further state that the Petitioner is not prevented and/or

barred from submitting its interest once the Expressions of Interest are called,

and therefore, no prejudice will be caused to the Petitioner.

Moreover, the Respondents categorically asserted in their objections that the

lease agreement marked P2 has already been expired at the time of the

institution of this action by the Petitioner, and therefore, the Petitioner is an

unauthorized occupant of the premises in dispute. Hence, the Petitioner has

no locus standi to prefer this application.

In these respects, the central questions to be considered in this application

are as follows:

1. Whether the Petitioner is entitled to the relief as prayed for on the basis

of legitimate expectation.

2. Whether the Petitioner has preferred this application with clean hands.

What is legitimate expectation? This concept is focused upon the idea of

fairness and the enforcement of promises or representations. This principle

creates the idea that it is unlawful for a public authority to fail to abide by a

promise or representation that it has made without good reason, provided that

the promise is lawful and that whoever made the promise was entitled to bind

the authority.

Page 6 of 11

In Junaideen Mohamed Iqbal vs. The Divisional Secretary, Kundasale2

the Court of Appeal simply described the principle of legitimate expectation

as follows:

When a public authority represents that it will or will not do something

within its authority and later attempts to rescind the said representation,

a person who has reasonably relied on it should be entitled to enforce it

by law. This concept is based on the principles of natural justice and

fairness, and seeks to prevent the abuse of power by public

authorities

Wade discusses the principle of legitimate expectations3 as follows:

A further and more satisfactory reason for the protection of legitimate

expectations lie in the trust that has been reposed by the citizen in what

he has been told or led to believe by the official. Good government

depends upon trust between the governed and the governor. Unless that

trust is sustained and protected officials will not be believed and

government becomes a choice between chaos and coercion.

It is not enough that an expectation should exist: it must in addition

be legitimate. But how is it to be determined whether a particular

expectation is worthy of protection? This is a difficult area since an

expectation reasonably entertained by a person may not be found to be

legitimate because of some countervailing consideration of policy or law.

A crucial requirement is that the assurance must itself be clear,

unequivocal and unambiguous. Many claimant fail at this hurdle after

close analysis of the assurance. The test is how on a fair reading of the

promise it would have been reasonably understood by those to whom it

was made. (Page 452).

2 CA/WRIT/328/215, CA Minutes of 19.02.2020. 3 H.W.R. Wade and C.F. Forsyth, Administrative Law, 11th Edition, p.451.

Page 7 of 11

The meaning and scope of the doctrine of legitimate expectation was

considered at length in Union of India vs. Hindustan Development

Corporation4, where it was stated that,

Time is a three-fold present: the present as we experience it, the past as

a present memory and future as a present expectation. For legal

purposes, the expectation cannot be the same as anticipation. It is

different from a wish, desire or a hope nor can it amount to a claim or

demand on the ground of a right. However, earnest and sincere a wish,

a desire or a hope may be and however confidently one may look to them

to be fulfilled, they by themselves cannot amount to an assertable

expectation and a mere disappointment does not attract legal

consequences. A pious hope even leading to a moral obligation cannot

amount to a legitimate expectation. The legitimacy of an expectation can

be inferred only if it is founded on the sanction of law or custom or an

established procedure followed in regular and natural sequence. Again it

is distinguishable from a genuine expectation. Such expectation should

be justifiable, legitimate and protectable. Every such legitimate

expectation does not by itself fructify into a right and, therefore, it does

not amount to a right in a conventional sense. 5

When applying the above stated principles to the instant application, the

question that begs an answer is whether a promise or an assurance was given

by the Respondents to the Petitioner to lease out the premises in dispute after

the expiry of the original lease agreement marked P2. Having scrutinized the

documents tendered, it is abundantly clear that the Petitioner totally failed to

establish the fact that the Respondents had promised to lease out the said

premises to the Petitioner. It is pertinent to be noted that the aforesaid

Cabinet decision marked P6 (Cabinet Memorandum) and the draft lease

agreement submitted to the 5th Respondent for his recommendation were not

communicated to the Petitioner. As such, the contention of the Petitioner

stating that the said documents marked P6 and the draft lease agreement

4 1994 AIR 988, 1993 (3) SCC 499. 5 Vide para 28 of the judgment.

Page 8 of 11

dispatched to the 5th Respondent amount to a promise and/or assurance

given by the Respondents to the Petitioner to execute a fresh lease agreement

is unacceptable in law.

Furthermore, in terms of the clause 22 of the lease agreement marked P2, the

petitioner unconditionally consented and agreed to handover the vacant

possession of the premises in question to the 1st Respondent on the expiry of

the said lease agreement, which reads thus:

On the expiry of the aforesaid period of twenty years and consignment termination of this Agreement, the party of the second part shall handover the vacant possession of Ceynor Orient Seafood Restaurant premises to the party of the first part. Failing to handover the vacant possession of Ceynor Orient Seafood Restaurant premises the party of the second part shall be liable to pay Rs. 5,000/- per each day to the party of the first part

In these respects, it is abundantly clear that the Petitioner was well aware of

the fact that, upon the expiry of the original lease agreement (after 20 years)

he is not entitled to be in possession of the said premises. In the

circumstances, the Petitioner legally or reasonably cannot expect the

Respondents to execute a fresh lease agreement after the expiry of P2, in the

absence of an apparent and expressed assurance by the Respondents.

The letter marked P9, demanding the Petitioner to handover the vacant

possession of the premises in suit was dispatched to the Petitioner in terms

of the Clause 22 and 23 of the lease agreement marked P2. The document

marked P9 is a valid and enforceable one as it was issued in terms of the

agreement. Hence, the relief prayed for in paragraph (d) of the prayers to the

petition seeking a writ of certiorari against P9 is misconceived in law.

This Court observes that the Cabinet Memorandum dated 21.02.2018 (P6)

proposed an extension of the lease at a renewed rate subject to consideration

of such agreement by the 5th Respondent, Attorney General. However, the

Petitioners right to occupy the said premises was terminated by operation of

law at the expiry of the lease agreement after 20 years on 03.07.2018. The 3rd

Respondents letter marked P9 refers to such expiry and invoke the provisions

of the said agreement. As there was no form of contractual authority or

Page 9 of 11

otherwise for the Petitioner to continue in possession and/or occupation, this

Court is of the view that the document marked P9 requiring the Petitioner to

act in terms of the agreement is valid in law.

The learned Counsel for the Petitioner relied upon the judgment of

Kurukulasooriya vs. Edirisinghe and Six Others6 where it was held that,

It would be necessary for the party which claims the benefit of legitimate

expectation to show that such expectation arises from a promise or hope

given by the authority in question7

In the instant case, it is apparent that the Respondents have not given

promise or hope to the Petitioner that the premises in dispute would be leased

out to the latter on the expiry of the agreement marked P2. As aforesaid, mere

expectation, desire or wish of the Petitioner will not amount to a legitimate

expectation.

For the foregoing reasons, this Court is of the considered view that the

Petitioner in this case is not entitled to the relief on the principle of legitimate

expectation.

Furthermore, it is settled law that a party seeking prerogative relief should

come to Court with clean hands. The expression is derived from one of

Equitys maxims - He who comes to Equity must come with clean hands.

In Perera vs. National Housing Development Authority8 the Court of

Appeal observed that,

It is also relevant to note that the petitioner has submitted to this Court

a privilege document which he is not entitled to have in his possession.

He has not explained the circumstances under which he came to possess

this document. Writ being a discretionary remedy the conduct of the

6 S.C. Application (FR) No. 577/2009, SC. Minute of 01.11.2011. 7 Vide p. 12 of the judgment 8 [2002] 3 Sri LR 50.

Page 10 of 11

applicant is also very relevant. The conduct of the applicant may

disentitle him to the remedy.

In the case of Alphonso Appuhamy vs. Hettiarachchi9 it was held that,

When an application for a prerogative writ or an injunction is made, it is

the duty of the petitioner to place before the Court, before it issues notice

in the first instance, a full and truthful disclosure of all the material facts;

the petitioner must act with uberima fides.

The attention of this Court is drawn to the fact that, at the time of the

institution of this action on 06.07.2018, the Petitioner was an unauthorized

occupant of the premises in dispute on the basis that the lease agreement

marked P2 was expired on 03.07.2018. This is a material fact to this action

which was willfully suppressed by the Petitioner in his petition. In terms of

the clause No. 22 of the lease agreement, the Petitioner agreed to handover

the vacant possession of the subject matter. After the expiry of P2, instead of

adhering to the said clause 22, the Petitioner, who is in unlawful occupation

of the said premises, surreptitiously has instituted this action.

Moreover, the documents marked R4A, R4B, R4C, R4D, R4F, R4G, R4H and

P10 substantiate the fact that the Petitioner has not paid profit share of 40%

as per the clause 6 (a) of the agreement to the 1st Respondent on time, and

thereby has breached the said agreement. In these respects, it appears to this

Court that the Petitioner has suppressed material facts in the petition and the

Petitioner has not come before this Court with clean hands.

It is trite law that the Petitioner in this case should handover the vacant

possession of the subject matter to the 1st Respondent in accordance with the

clause 22 of the lease agreement before the institution of this action on the

doctrine of comply and complain. In this regard, I refer to the case of

Bandara vs. Piyasena10, where it was held that,

9 77 NLR 131 10 77 NLR 102.

Page 11 of 11

A lessee is not entitled to dispute his landlords title. Consequently he

cannot refuse to give up possession of the property at the termination of

his lease on the ground that he acquired certain rights to the property

subsequent to his becoming the lessee and during the period of lease.

His duty in such a case is first to restore the property to the lessor and

then litigate with him as to the ownership.

Besides, it is to be noted that the fact stated in paragraph 11 of the Petition

stating that the 1st Respondent has passed a resolution to grant the lease of

the land and premises in question to the Petitioner, has not been

substantiated by the Petitioner with adequate testimonies.

I incline to accept the contention of the Respondents that the Petitioner has

not been barred from participating at any future bid, and therefore, no

prejudice caused to the Petitioner.

For the foregoing reasons, the Petitioners application is dismissed.

The parties will bear their own costs.

Application dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K. K. A. V. SWARNADHIPATHI, J. I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL