i i I I I ,

1

I t I

1 j I

1 i I i 1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

In the matter of an appeal under Article

154 (P) (6) of the Constitution of the

C.A (PHC) No.123/2000

Democratic Socialist

Lanka.

G.F. Dunuwila,

237/B, Sri Kudaratwatte Mawatha,

Kandy.

Annlicant

H.C. Hambantota 07/2000 Vs.

1. Wimalasena Amaraweera,

Kachcheriyagama,

Tissamaharamaya.

2. Maginona Jayawardena,

Elapara,

Kachcheriyagama,

Tissamaharamaya.

Respondents

AND

Wimalasena Amaraweera,

Kachcheriyagama,

Tissamaharamaya.

1

Vs.

1 st Respondent - Petitioner -

Appellant

1. K.P. Wijeratne,

Assistant Commissioner,

Agrarian Services Department,

Colombo 7.

2. Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian

Services Department,

Hambanthota.

Respondent

1. Maginona J ayawardena,

Elapara,

Kachcheriyagama,

Tissamaharamaya.

1 st Respondent - Respondent

NAD NOW BETWEEN

1. Wimalasena Amaraweera,

Kachcheriyagama,

Tissamaharamaya.

1 st Respondent - Respondent

Vs.

1. K.P. Wijeratne,

Assistant Commissioner,

2

Agrarian Services Department,

Colombo 7.

2. Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian

Services Department,

Hambanthota.

Respondent - Respondent

3. G.F. Dunuwila,

237/B, Sri Kudarawatta Mawatha,

Kandy.

Auulicant - Resuondent -

Respondent

4. Maginona Jayawardena,

Elapara,

Kachcheriyagama,

Tissamaharamaya.

2nd Respondent - Resuondent -

Respondent

Before : W.M.M.Malinie Gunarathne, J

: P.R.Walgama, J

Counsel : M.R. de Silva, P.C. with Nimal Hippola for the 1st

Respondent - Petitioner - Appellant.

3

1 I : J.C. Boange for the Applicant - Respondent-

Respondent.

: Janak de Silva, D.S.G., for A.G.

Argued on : 21.07.2015

Decided on: 18.12.2015

CASE-NO-CA(PHC)- 123/2000 - Order - 18.12.2015

P.R.Walgama, J

This appeal concerns the jurisdiction of the Provincial High

Court to deal with the matters outside the Ninth Schedule, List

1 of the (Provincial Council List) the 13th Amendment to the

Constitution.

Article 154p of the Constitution deals with the powers of the

Provincial High Court.

Article 154p( 4 )(b) deals with the writ jurisdiction of the

Provincial High Court, embodied thus;

"order in the nature of writs of certiorari, prohibition, procedendo,

mandamus and quo warranto against person exercising, within the

Province any power under

a. Any law: or

b. Any statutes made by the Provincial Council established for

that Province

In respect of any matter set out In the Provincial Council

list.

4

1r I

I

~ I I 1 I , ,

~

\

I I I

The 1 st Respondent - Petitioner - Appellant has sought relief In

terms of High Court of Provinces Act No.19 of 1990 and In

terms of Article 154p( 4 )(b) of the Constitution, a mandate In

the nature of writ of Certiorari, to quash the decision of the

1 st Respondent.

The facts germane to the relief are as follows;

The subject land in this case is a land called PUNCHIMAHA

KUMBURA- containing in extent 5 acres. The Landlord of the

said land IS Applicant - Respondent - Respondent, and the said

paddy field was cultivated by the Respondent - Petitioner who is

the tenant cultivator, along with one Sayaneris Amaraweera (un

uncle of the Petitioner) and has paid the rental to the

Applicant - Respondent.

Further it is averred by the Petitioner that his name has been

entered In the register as a tenant cultivator on 02.06.1988. In

the year 1995 6th of September said Sayaneris died and after

his demise, the Applicant - 3rd Respondent has denied, the

rights of the Petitioner to work as the tenant cultivator of the

disputed land.

It is the stance of the Petitioner that his name is registered as

the tenant cultivator in the said land and the Applicant - 3rd

Respondent has been informed of the said registration on

24.11.1997.

The Petitioner has also averred in the petition that an InqUIry

was held by the Commissioner of Agrarian Services, at

Hambantota had informed the Applicant - 3rd Respondent that an

identity card has been issued to the Petitioner on 03.10.1988.

5

I

The said information was conveyed by the letter marked V8. In

pursuant to the said letter the Applicant - 3rd Respondent by her

letter dated 30.12.1997 has informed the Commissioner of

Agrarian Services at Colombo, that only Sayaneris Amaraweera

was cultivating the paddy field, and if any other party has been

allowed to work in the disputed paddy field that alleged act

deems be a violation of Section of7,8,9 of the Agrarian Services

Act No. 04 of 1991. Therefore the 3rd Respondent had urged

the Commissioner of Agrarian Services at Colombo to hold a

proper investigation in terms of Section 9 of the above Act.

After the said mqUIry the 15t Respondent by his determination

had stated that the Petitioner's appointment was illegal as it has

contravened the Section 11(1) and 11(2) of the Agrarian

Services Act No.59 of 1979, and as such he has held that the

said appointment is invalid.

It is against the said impugned order of the 15t Respondent that

the Petitioner has sought relief from this Court to quash the

said order by way of a writ of Certiorari.

It IS intensely relevant to note that the Petitioner IS now

assailing the order made by the Assistant Commissioner of

Agrarian Services based in Colombo. It is the contention of the

Respondents that he was exercising the powers of Commissioner

General of Agrarian Services on delegation. Therefore it is said

m VIew of the judgment of WIJESURIYA .VS.

W ANIGASINGHE- DECIDED ON 26.06.2008, it does not make

difference, whether the order

General him self or the

was made by the Commissioner

Assistant Commissioner who IS

exercising his powers under delegation.

6

I

j

In the above case an interpretation was gIven to the word

'within' In eXerCISIng powers within the proVInce.

" while 'within' may gIve flse to multiple interpretation, the only

reasonable interpretation In light of the legislative history and

purpose of Article 154(p)(4)(b) and indeed the 13th Amendment

as a whole, is that it refers to that qualitative nature and scope

of the power at Issue, and not necessarily the geographic

location of the person who exercised it."

In the instant matter it is to be noted that impugned order

purported to be made by the 1 st Respondent after an InqUIry.

The said InqUIry was sequent to the complaint made by the

Applicant - 3rd Respondent to the Commissioner General of

Agrarian Services by letter dated 03.12.1997, and which IS

marked as PI, the Applicant - 3rd Respondent had made an

application In terms of Section 9 of the Agrarian Services Act

No. 58 of 1979. It IS further stated by the Respondents that

although the InqUIry was held at Hambantota, it was done so by

the powers delegated by the Commissioner General of Agrarian

Services. In fact it was the categorical position of the

Respondents that In VIew of the interpretati on gIven to the

'within' does not necessarily refer to the geographic location

of the person who exercised it.

In the above context it is contended by the Respondents that

the Provincial High Court has no jurisdiction to issue a writ of

Certiorari against the decision of the 1 st Respondent as he has

exercised the powers of the Commissioner General of Agrarian

Services, and arrived at the determination, whidl wa:, ilUpUgilt:J

7

,

I

I I 1 !

by the Petitioner by way of a writ of Certiorari, In Provincial

High Court.

The stance of the Petitioner -Appellant is crystallized as follows;

That the alleged inquiry was held at Hambantota by the 2nd

Respondent who was Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Services,

and therefore the High Court of Province, IS empowered to

quash such order In terms of Article 1 54(P)( 4) of the

Constitution by issuing a writ of Certiorari accordingly.

The Petitioner - Appellant, to buttress his position has referred to

the case of MADDUMA BANDA .VS. ASSISTANT

COMMISSIONER OF AGRARIAN SERVICES AND ANOTHER-

2003(2)SLR- 80, was held thus;

I. "The word "agrarian" in section 9 of the Provincial Council

List relates to landed property and such property could no

doubt attract paddy lands and tenant cultivators of such

land and hence the impugned order wouid be l:overed by

said section 9 in the Provincial Council list.

2. In case of ambiguity, the enactment should be interpreted

so as to give effect to its purpose. The purpose of the

13th Amendment IS to gIve a right to an aggrieved party to

have recourse to the Provincial High Court instead of

having to seek relief from the Court of Appeal In

Colombo."

It is undoubted that the subject of Agrarian which deals with

the matters referred to above IS a devolved subject and could

be resolved in the province it self. But it is intensely relevant

to note that the Petitioner -Appellant has by her letter stated

8

\

II

I

above, referred the matter m dispute to the Commissioner

General of Agrarian Services, at Colombo. Thereupon he

delegated the powers to the 2nd Respondent hold the mqUIry

which IS the subject matter of this action.

The Counsel for the Petitioner - Appellant has also referred to

the case of NIMALARATNE .VS. ASISTANT COMMISSIONER

OF AGRARIAN SERCICES -2000(3) SLR -184 which wa:s helJ

that;

The Agriculture and Agrarian Services is a devolved subject and

had further held that if the inquiries under the Agrarian Services

Act are not amenable to writ jurisdiction of the High Court of

the Province, then the Article 154(P)( 4) becomes meaningless.

Besides it was also held that the creation of the High Court of

the Provinces was to give effect to the devolution of power that

arose with the 13th Amendment.

It is pertinent to note that the cases which was referred by the

counsel for the Petitioner -Appellant were decided prior to the

case that referred to by the Respondents.

As stated above m the case of WIJESURIYA .VS.

WANIGASINGHE - decided on 26.06.2008- has given a wide

interpretation to the term 'within' and as the above case was

referred to the Commissioner General as m the case m hand it

was decided that the High Court of the Province has no

jurisdiction to entertain any application made under Article 154

(p)( 4) of the Constitution.

In light of the above, this Court IS inclined to accept the legal

interpretation of the above article given in the above stated case,

9

\

i

l tII

and will hold that the Petitioner -Appellant has no locus standi

to maintain this appeal.

Hence we dismiss the appeal subject to a costs of Rs. 50001.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

W.M.M.Malinie Gunarathne, J

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

10

\

[