Page 1 of 18

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of section

331 (1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act

No- 15 of 1979, read with Article 138 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

Court of Appeal No: Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

CA/HCC/0282/17 COMPLAINANT

Vs.

High Court of Gampaha 1. Vithana Weerasinghe Aarachchilage

Case No: 259/2006 Lalith Premakumara

2. Hewa Waraketiyage Indika Sampath

Waravita

ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

1. Vithana Weerasinghe Aarachchilage

Lalith Premakumara

2. Hewa Waraketiyage Indika Sampath

Waravita

ACCUSED-APPELLANTS

Vs.

Page 2 of 18

The Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department

Colombo 12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

Before : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

: P. Kumararatnam, J.

Counsel : Sumith Senanayake, P.C. with Nisali Balachandra

instructed by Damitha Wickramaarachchi for the

Accused Appellants

: Dilan Ratnayake, S.D.S.G. for the Respondent

Argued on : 11-09-2023

Written Submissions : 23-05-2018 (By the Accused-Appellant)

: 28-08-2018 (By the Respondent)

Decided on : 16-01-2024

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

The 1st and the 2nd accused-appellants (hereinafter referred to as the appellants)

were indicted before the High Court of Gampaha for committing the following

offences.

1. On or around 02-09-2002, at a place called Paththalagedara within the

jurisdiction of the High Court of Gampaha, abducted a female with the

intention of forcing her to have sexual intercourse with them, and

thereby committed the offence of abduction punishable in terms of

section 357 read with section 32 of the Penal Code.

Page 3 of 18

2. At the same time and at the same transaction, the 1st accused-appellant

having ganged up with the 2nd accused-appellant raped the earlier

mentioned female, and thereby committed the offence of gang rape,

punishable in terms of section 364 (2) of the Penal Code as amended

by Penal Code (Amendment) Act No. 22 of 1995.

3. At the same time and at the same transaction, the 2nd accused-

appellant having ganged up with the 1st accused, committed the offence

of gang rape on the earlier mentioned female, and thereby committed

an offence punishable in terms of 364 (2) of the Penal Code as amended

by Penal Code (Amendment) Act No. 22 of 1995.

After trial, the learned High Court Judge of Gampaha found both the appellants

guilty as charged of his judgement dated 18-07-2017. The learned High Court

Judge, after having considered the relevant facts and circumstances, and several

mitigatory circumstances urged on behalf of the appellants, and also the gravity

of the crime, has sentenced the appellants in the following manner.

Both the appellants were sentenced to a period of 2 years each rigorous

imprisonment on count 1. In addition, both of them were imposed a fine of

Rs.1000/- each and in default, one-month simple imprisonment.

The 1st appellant who was convicted for the 2nd count was sentenced for a period

of 18 years rigorous imprisonment. In addition, he was imposed a fine of

Rs.1000/- and in default, a period of one-month simple imprisonment.

The 2nd appellant who was convicted for the 3rd count was also imposed a period

of 18 years rigorous imprisonment, and in addition, he was imposed a fine of

Rs.1000/- and in default one-month simple imprisonment.

The sentence in relation to the 1st and the 2nd counts against the 1st accused

appellant was ordered to run concurrently, while the sentences imposed on the

2nd accused-appellant for the 1st and the 3rd counts were also ordered to run

concurrently to each other.

Page 4 of 18

In addition to the above sentences, both the accused-appellants were ordered to

pay Rs.250000/- each to the victim, who was PW-01 in the case and in default,

they were sentenced to a period of one year each simple imprisonment.

On the basis of being aggrieved by the said conviction and the sentence, the

appellants preferred this appeal.

Facts in Brief

PW-01 was the victim of this incident. She had been married, and a mother of

three children. On the day relevant to this incident, namely, 02-09-2002, she

was working in a factory at Katunayake area, where she had been working for

over 18 years by that time. On this day, after completing her day's work, she has

left her work place to return home and has got down from the bus around 9.00

p.m. near Veyangoda railway crossing. She had got down at that point because

she wanted to change some money from a known shop nearby, as she was in the

need of giving change money to her husband and children on the next day for

them to travel to school and work.

After attending to her need, she has returned near the railway crossing expecting

to catch a bus to reach her home as it was easy for her to get into a bus from

that point rather than going to the Veyangoda bus stand. While she was waiting

for a bus, a known person who lived near their house whom she referred to as

Nimal Weerakkody malli has come in his motorcycle and had offered to give her

a lift. Being a person well known to her, she has got on to his motorbike and the

said Nimal Weerakkody has taken a shortcut where they can reach their houses

within 10-12 minutes. The shortcut was across a paddy field. While they were

traveling, the victims purse which she was carrying on her lap had fallen off the

motorbike, and when she informed Nimal Weerakkody about that, he has

stopped the bike few feet away from the place where the purse fell off. The victim

has gone to fetch the bag, and at the same time, Nimal Weerakkody has turned

the bike so that she can find her belongings with the aid of its light.

Page 5 of 18

After collecting her goods, she has got onto the bike again, and when they were

in the process of turning the bike towards the direction they intended to go, a

three-wheeler has come and blocked the path of the bike.

The three-wheeler has come from the direction where the victim intended to go,

and the victim has identified the three-wheeler as well as the driver as he was

well known to her. There had been another person seated on the back whom she

did not know. She has identified the person who drove the three-wheeler as

Lalith, the 1st accused-appellant.

She has identified the 2nd accused-appellant as the person who was seated on

the rear of the three-wheeler. She has identified the said person at an

identification parade held at the Attanagalla Magistrates Court.

When the bike was blocked, the 2nd appellant had come near the motorbike and

the 1st appellant has started using filthy language towards the victim. She has

observed both of them drunk, and as they were forcing her to get down from the

bike, through fear she has got down. Fearing something worse, she has run

towards a house she saw nearby. While running, he has seen both the appellants

grappling with Nimal Weerakkody.

After coming near the house, she has pleaded with the inmates to open the gate

stating that she is being harassed. However, no one has come to her aid, but she

has seen a female looking out from a window of the house.

In the meantime, the two appellants have come near the house in their three-

wheeler and has informed the female who was inside the house and had come

out by that time, to not get involved. Thereafter, both the accused-appellants

had forced the victim into the three-wheeler, and the 1st accused-appellant had

gotten into the back seat along with her while the 2nd accused-appellant had

started driving the three-wheeler. Although she has made several attempts to

escape the appellants, she has failed.

Page 6 of 18

They have taken the three-wheeler to an abandoned land where there were

several partly built houses. Both the appellants have forced her into one of the

partly built houses despite her pleas to release her. Due to the fear of being

killed, she had surrendered to them and the appellants had taken her inside the

house, and the 1st accused-appellant has told the 2nd accused-appellant to go

back to the three-wheeler.

Thereafter, the 1st accused-appellant has forced the victim to lie down and has

forcibly inserted his penis into the anus of the victim. He has then turned her

over and inserted his penis into her vagina and had sexual intercourse with her.

After the 1st accused-appellant , the 2nd accused-appellant has come and had

first attempted to force her to have oral sex with him which she has resisted.

Thereafter, the 2nd accused-appellant also had inserted his penis into the victims

vagina and had engaged in sexual intercourse with her.

After achieving what they wanted, they have gone back to the three-wheeler

leaving her inside the house. The victim has observed that both of them

consuming something while inside the three-wheeler. The victim has used this

window of opportunity to escape, and has crawled towards a thicket behind the

house. She has seen a lavatory nearby and has hidden inside. She has felt that

the two appellants were looking for her and both of them fighting with each other

in the process. Having failed to find her, they have left.

After about 10 minutes, the victim and come out of the latrine and had seen a

light of a house some distance away. She has managed to reach that house and

had identified the house as the house belonging to Doctor Sigera, who was their

family physician. The place where she was raped by the two appellants was the

land behind Doctor Sigeras house. After reaching the house, she has informed

what happened to Doctor Sigera and had given a call to her husband using

Doctor Sigeras phone.

Page 7 of 18

Thereafter, she has gone to the Veyangoda police station with her husband and

had lodged a complaint about what happened to her, and the police had

instructed her to get herself admitted to the hospital. She has got admitted to

Gampaha hospital where she has been examined by a doctor and necessary

treatment had been provided to her.

Under cross-examination, she has explained the reasons as to why Nimal

Weerakkody went on the shortcut route to reach their houses saying that it was

a shortcut and because she had no helmet, Nimal Weerakkody decided to take

the shortcut route.

Under repeated cross-examination, she has explained in further detail what

happened at the time of the incident. It had been suggested to her that the victim

got into the three-wheeler on her own free will, which the witness has

strenuously denied, explaining the reasons as to why she was forced to get into

the three-wheeler.

It has been revealed during the evidence that Doctor Sigera mentioned by the

victim was dead at the time this case was taken up for trial. She has also stated

that since she is giving evidence 14 years after the incident, she cannot

remember some of the intricate details of the incident.

The position taken up by the 1st accused-appellant had been that this incident

happened with the consent of the victim, which the victim has denied. The 2nd

accused-appellant has taken up the position that the victim got into the three-

wheeler on her own free will which the victim has denied. In other words,

although the 2nd accused-appellant said nothing about the consent, he too has

not denied the incident.

Nimal Weerakkody mentioned by the victim in her evidence has given evidence

at this trial as PW-02. During the time relevant to this incident, he had been

working at the Ports Authority in Colombo, and was travelling on his motorbike

Page 8 of 18

to reach his home when he met PW-01 near the Veyangoda railway crossing. As

she was well known to him and was a neighbour, he had offered to give a lift to

her for which she has agreed. According to the witness, he was also in need of

obtaining a loan of Rs.1000/-, and when he asked for the loan, the victim has

stated that once she reaches home, she will ask her husband to give it to him.

PW-02 has corroborated the evidence of the victim as to the reasons why they

had to stop the motorbike.

When they were about to leave, the three-wheeler driven by the 1st accused-

appellant had blocked their path. The 1st accused-appellant was well known to

PW-02 as well. He has come and had attempted to grab the motorbike key from

PW-02, and PW-02 has seen the victim running away towards a house nearby.

The two appellants who came in the three-wheeler has pursued the victim in the

three-wheeler and using that opportunity, PW-02 has moved away from the place

of the incident.

He has stated that due to fear, he decided to leave the place without looking as

to what happened to the victim. He has not gone to the police station, but has

gone home. After waiting for some time, he had phoned the house of the victim

and asked whether she returned home, for which he had been informed in the

negative. However, during the night, the husband of the victim had called him

and informed the incident faced by the victim.

Other than questioning about the incident and of some omissions in relation to

the statement PW-02 made to police, and suggesting that he was lying, the two

appellants had not taken any line of defence to challenge the evidence of PW-02.

PW-03 had been the inmate of the house mentioned by PW-01 where she has

attempted to enter in order to escape the appellants. She has corroborated that

in the night on the day of the incident, she heard a female screaming in front of

the gate of her house and had confirmed that it was the PW-01.

Page 9 of 18

The victim has pleaded to let her into the house stating that these people are

harassing me. She has observed the 1st accused-appellant who was well known

to her near the female and he had informed that this is my work, do not put

your hand.

She has also observed the 2nd accused-appellant whom she knew previously as

Waravita sitting inside the three-wheeler. Because of the threat made to her, she

has not gone to help the victim and she had seen the two accused-appellants

forcing the victim into the three-wheeler, and had seen the three-wheeler

travelling towards Veyangoda town. She has given a statement as to what she

saw to the police subsequently.

It needs to be noted that both the accused-appellants had not cross-examined

PW-03 challenging her evidence.

The Judicial Medical Officer (JMO) who examined the victim on the following day

morning, namely on 03-09-2002, has observed two injuries on her body. First

injury had been above her right breast, which the JMO had opined as a bite

mark. The 2nd injury had been described as an abrasion observed on the middle

part of her inner left thigh. He has also observed fresh tear marks in her vagina

as well as in her anus. He has opined that the injuries are compatible with the

history given by the patient.

According to the evidence of PW-05 who was the investigating police officer, the

complaint with regard to the incident had been received at 23 hours on 02-09-

2002, which means a prompt complaint has been lodged. The investigating

officer has conducted an inspection as to the place of the incident and the place

where the abduction took place, and has confirmed the narration given by the

victim in that regard. The 1st accused-appellant had been arrested in the

afternoon of 03-09-2002, while the 2nd accused-appellant has surrendered to the

police subsequently. The investigating officer has recorded the statements of the

witnesses as well.

Page 10 of 18

At the conclusion of the prosecution case, the learned High Court Judge has

decided to call for a defence from the appellants where both of them had made

dock statements.

1st accused-appellant has stated that he came in his three-wheeler through the

shortcut which was across the paddy field. His version had been that, he saw a

motorbike parked in the threshing floor of the paddy field and a man and a

female in a compromised position near the motorcycle. According to him, when

he went near the motorcycle to inquire, the male person has adjusted his trouser

zip and moved away, and when he inquired from the female whether she is facing

any trouble, she has informed him that her Identity Card fell off and was looking

for it. He has also claimed that the female went near a house thereafter, which

was about 50 meters away. He too had gone near the house and invited the

female to get into his three-wheeler, but she has refused. However, she has later

got into the three-wheeler and it was the 2nd accused-appellant who was with

him had driven the three-wheeler thereafter.

Although he has offered to take her home, she had offered to have sex with them

and has willingly come with them to the abandoned partly built house. He has

claimed that he never had sexual intercourse with her, but only engaged in a

sexual activity other than having sexual intercourse. He has claimed that after

the said sexual encounter, the female left on her own.

The 2nd accused-appellants version of events had been the same, and he has

stated that after going inside the partly built house, he had consensual oral sex

with her, and thereafter, the female wanted them to leave.

The Grounds of Appeal

At the hearing of this appeal, the learned Presidents Counsel formulated the

following grounds of appeal for the consideration of the Court.

Page 11 of 18

1. The learned High Court Judge misdirected himself of the evaluation of

the defence version.

2. The learned High Court Judge failed to properly evaluate the evidence

of prosecution witnesses.

3. The learned High Court Judge failed to appreciate that there was no

corroborative evidence.

4. No substantial evidence to support the alleged abduction and that it

will affect the credibility of the prosecution case.

As all four grounds of appeal are interrelated, I will now proceed to consider all

the said grounds together.

Consideration of the Grounds of Appeal

Although the learned Presidents Counsel who represented the appellants

claimed that the learned High Court Judge has failed to properly analyze the

evidence of the prosecution and was misdirected himself in his evaluation of the

defence, I find no reason whatsoever to agree with such a contention.

The judgement amply demonstrates that the learned High Court Judge, after

having considered the charges against the appellants, has summarized the

evidence led on behalf of the prosecution and the defence taken up by the two

appellants.

Thereafter, the learned High Court Judge has proceeded to analyze the evidence

inter se and per se and had looked whether the version of events as narrated by

the prosecutrix was cogent and credible, and whether the defence taken up by

the appellants had created any doubt as to her evidence. It had been determined

that the prosecutrixs evidence can be believed and acted upon. It had also been

determined that the prosecutrixs evidence had been corroborated by the

evidence of PW-03 who was an independent witness. The medical evidence had

been well considered in relation to the other evidence. It was only after

considering the evidence in its totality, the learned High Court Judge has

determined that the defence evidence or the stand taken up by the appellants

Page 12 of 18

cannot be believed and there was no reason to accept that the incident occurred

with the consent of the prosecutrix.

The learned High Court Judge has convicted the appellants for the offence of

abduction and also for gang rape accordingly.

In his submissions before this Court, the learned Presidents Counsel made an

attempt to show that since the evidence of the prosecutrix had been to the effect

that she was put on the floor of a partly built house and raped by two persons

against her will, there should have been much more injuries on the body of the

prosecutrix, if it happened in the way narrated by her.

I find no basis whatsoever to see any merit in the said argument. The prosecutrix

has given clear evidence that after her abduction and taken to the abandoned

house, through fear for life, she did not resist her assailants.

There is no basis to assume that there should be more injuries on the body, if

the prosecutrix was laid on a rough surface.

However, the medical evidence clearly establishes the fact that there had been a

bite mark above her right breast which cannot be attributed to anyone else other

than the appellants. The prosecutrix has given clear evidence that when the 1st

appellant removed her undergarment, her thigh got injured, which was reflective

in the medical evidence. The doctor has observed fresh tears in her anus as well

as the vagina. The prosecutrix being a sexually active married woman who has

given birth to three children, cannot receive such injuries if she engaged in

sexual activities with consent as claimed by the appellants.

In the case of D. Tikiribanda Vs. The Attorney General Bar Association Law

Reports 2010 (B.L.R. 95) it was observed,

The law as it stands today in this country certainly does not accept the

innocent victims of a sexual crime to struggle with the assailant valiantly

that would not result in the victim sustaining injuries. Under the amended

Penal Code Act No. 22 of 1995, the legislature has categorically expressed

Page 13 of 18

this view by way of explanation (II) of section 363 of the Penal Code Act No.

22 of 1995.

The relevant explanation II of section 363 of the Penal Code reads as follows.

II. Evidence of resistance such as physical injuries to the body is not

essential to prove that sexual intercourse took place without consent.

However, in the instant action there had been injuries to the body of the victim,

as well as to her vagina and anus, which are perfectly consistent with the version

of events by the prosecutrix.

The learned Presidents Counsel took up the position that the learned High Court

Judge has failed to consider the defence position that the incident happened with

consent in its correct perspective.

I find no reason to agree with such a contention. It is clear from the stand taken

up by the appellants that they had not taken a consistent stand as their defence.

When the prosecutrix gave evidence, it had been suggested to her that the

incident occurred with her consent. In other words, the appellants have admitted

having sexual intercourse with her, but has claimed that it happened with the

consent of the prosecutrix.

However, when they were called upon for a defence, both of them in their dock

statements had not taken up the position that they had sexual intercourse with

her. Their position had been that they engaged in sexual activities with her that

were not amounting to having sexual intercourse.

In fact, in their dock statements, they have made several admissions as to the

evidence of the prosecutrix as well as other witnesses. They have admitted that

when they encountered the victim she was with the PW-02, and the fact that she

informed them that she was looking for her identity card. The fact that the victim

went near the house of the PW-03 had also been admitted.

Page 14 of 18

When the prosecutrix was giving evidence and subjected to cross-examination,

the stand taken by the appellants in their dock statements had never been put

to the prosecutrix or PW-02 and 03. The only suggestion made to the prosecutrix

had been that the incident happened with her consent. When PW-02 Nimal

Weerakkody was giving evidence, the stand taken by the appellants in their dock

statements that he was in a compromising position with the prosecutrix had not

been suggested to him. The evidence of PW-03 who was the inmate of the house

where the prosecutrix had gone, had never been challenged during the trial.

This goes on to establish that the stand taken up by the appellants in their dock

statements had been a concocted story created out of the prosecution witness

evidence without any truth behind in it.

The learned High Court Judge has well considered the defence as I have

determined previously which provides no basis for the contention that the

learned High Court Judge has failed to consider or evaluate the defence case.

The victim had been a 63-year-old female when she gave evidence before the trial

Court some 14 years after the incident. When she was confronted with some

omissions and discrepancies as to the original statement she made to the police

and at the non-summary inquiry, she has given clear evidence stating that she

cannot remember things in exact terms due to this time factor.

No doubt that the victim had faced a horrifying experience at that night, where

she has feared for her life, other than being repeatedly raped. Given her family

background and the fact that she was a mother of three children, there need not

be any argument that the victim would attempt to forget this experience and

move on with her life.

The earlier considered D. Tikiribanda Vs. The Attorney General (Supra) was a

case where the inherent weaknesses of evidence of small children was

considered. I am of the view that the observation made in that case is relevant

Page 15 of 18

to the appeal under consideration as well. It was held that mostly the victims of

sexual harassment prefer not to talk about the harrowing experience and would

like to forget about the incident as soon as possible (withdrawal symptom). The

offenders should not be allowed to capitalize or take mean advantage of these

natural inherent weaknesses.

Per Ranjith silva, J. ;

In the Indian as well as the Sri Lankan settings, it can be safely said that

rarely will a girl or a woman make false allegations of sexual assault or will

a mother instigate, induce or compel her small daughter to make such

allegations for fear of the lasting consequences. One cannot expect her to be

so silly, not to appreciate the stigma attached and that she and the rest of

her family would be virtually ostracized for the rest of her life.

Another matter taken up by the learned Presidents Counsel was that there was

no corroborative evidence as to the incident of rape and no substantial evidence

to support the alleged abduction.

This is an incident that has happened late into the night and at an isolated,

abandoned, partly built house. Any perpetrator of a crime of this nature will

make sure that his actions will be seen by no one knowing very well the

consequences of it, unless it is seen by chance by someone.

In the case of Sunil And Another Vs. The Attorney General (1986) 1 SLR 230,

it was held thus,

It is very dangerous to act on the uncorroborated testimony of a woman

victim of a sex offence, but if evidence is convincing such evidence could be

acted on even in the absence of corroboration ...

Corroboration is only required or afforded if the witness requiring

corroboration is otherwise credible. If the evidence of the witness requiring

corroboration is not credible, such testimony should be rejected and accused

acquitted. Seeking corroboration of a witnesses evidence should not be

Page 16 of 18

used as a process of inducing belief in such evidence where such evidence

is not credible.

At this stage, I find it appropriate to refer to the Indian case of Bhoginbhai

Hirjibhai Vs. State of Gujarat (AIR 1983-SC 753 at pp 756-758) very often

cited in our Courts. It was held:

1) By and large a witness cannot be expected to possess a photographic

memory and to recall the details of an incident. It is not as if a video tape

is replayed on the mental screen.

2) Ordinarily, so happens that a witness is overtaken by events. The witness

could not have anticipated the occurrence which so often has an element

of surprise. The mental faculties therefore cannot be expected to be

attuned to absorb the details.

3) Ordinarily, a witness cannot be expected to recall accurately the sequence

of events which take place in rapid succession or in a short time span. A

witness is liable to get confused or mixed up when interrogated later on.

4) A witness, though wholly truthful, is liable to be overawed by the Court

atmosphere and the piercing cross-examination made by counsel and out

of nervousness mix up facts, get confused regarding sequence of events,

or fill up details from imagination on the spur of the moment. The sub-

conscious mind of the witness sometime so operates on account of the

fear of looking foolish or being disbelieved though the witnesses is giving

truthful and honest account of the occurrence witnessed by him perhaps

it is a sort of a psychological defense mechanism activated on the spur of

the moment.

As I considered above, the evidence of the prosecutrix is highly credible and

trustworthy. I find no reason not to believe the version of events as narrated by

the prosecutrix in this case.

Page 17 of 18

Although there are no eye witnesses to the actual incident of rape, the

prosecution has led ample evidence to establish by way of circumstantial

evidence to show the credibility and trustworthiness of the prosecutrixs

evidence.

The unchallenged evidence of PW-03 clearly establishes the fact that the

prosecutrix was forced into the three-wheeler by the two appellants, despite her

pleas to the PW-03 to let her into her house, where she has informed her that

the two persons are attempting to harass her.

The evidence of PW-02 clearly establishes that the two appellants came and

blocked their path and attempted to harass them, and as a result, the

prosecutrix ran towards the house of PW-03.

The police officer who investigated the matter has observed that all the places

indicated by the prosecutrix to police are in existence. The prosecutrix has

straightaway gone to the police after the incident with her husband, and has

made a prompt complaint. Her version of events to the JMO who examined her

on the following day had been consistent with her evidence and the injuries

sustained by her.

I am of the view that all these pieces of evidence have provided ample

circumstantial evidence to support the evidence of the prosecution.

There was no basis to consider that the defence taken up by the appellants had

created any doubt as to the prosecution case. It is my considered view that the

evidence, when taken as a whole, has proved the case beyond reasonable doubt

against the two appellants.

I am of the view that the sentence imposed has been determined after well

considering the gravity of the crime and the mitigatory circumstances pleaded

on behalf of the appellants.

Page 18 of 18

For the reasons considered as above, I find no basis to interfere with the

conviction and the sentence imposed upon the appellants by the learned High

Court Judge of Gampaha.

Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed as it is devoid of any merit. The conviction

and the sentence affirmed.

However, having considered the fact that the appellants had been in

incarceration from the date of the conviction and the sentence, it is ordered that

the sentence shall deemed to have taken effect from the original date of the

sentence, namely, from 18-07-2017.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P Kumararatnam, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal