1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

CA (Writ) Application No:

Writ-0346-19

In the matter of an Application for Writs of Mandamus in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. 1. Colonel P.K.D.C. Alwis

No. 709, Pokuna Mawatha, Ambalanwatta, Galle. 2. Lieutenant Colonel S.G. Hewawitharana

No. 11/3/C, Kandaoluwawa, Bemmulla, Gampaha. 3. Lieutenant Colonel E.M.U.W.L.Boyagoda,

No. 119, Amunugama, Gunnapanna

PETITIONERS Vs. 1. Lieutenant General N.U.M.M.W.

Senanayake Commander of Army, Army Headquarters, Colombo 03. 1(a). Lieutenant General L.H.S.C. Silva

Commander of Army, Army Headquarters, Colombo 03. 2. Major General S.W.L. Daulagala

Commandant, Sri Lanka Army Volunteer force, Army Camp, Salawa, Kosgama.

2

3. Brigadier Chanaka Weragoda

Director, Sri Lanka Army Directorate of Pay and Record, Army Cantonment, Panagoda. 3(a). Brigadier W.A.A.C.P. Weragoda

Director,

Sri Lanka Army Directorate of Pay and Record, Army Cantonment, Panagoda. 4. Major General M.M.S. Perera,

Director, National Cadet Corps, No. 15, Dutugemumu Steet, Pamankada, Dehiwala. 5. A. Jagath D. Dias

Director General of Pensions, Department of Pensions, Maligawatta, Colombo 10. 6. J.J. Rathnasiri

Secretary, Ministry of Public Administration and Disaster Management, Independence Square, Colombo 07. 7. Lieutenant General S.H.S. Kottegoda

Secretary, Ministry of Defence, No. 15/5, Baladaksha Mawatha, Colombo 03.

3

Before: M. T. Mohammed Laffar, J.

S. U. B. Karalliyadde, J.

Counsel:

Sanjeewa Jayawardena, PC with Ms. Ranmali Meepagala instructed by Ms.

Lanka R. Dharmasiri for the Petitioners.

Z. Zain D.S.G. with Ms. Medaka Fernando, S.C. for the Respondents

Written submissions tendered on:

18.08.2022 by the Petitioners

19.08.2022 by the 1st - 3rd and 5th - 10th Respondents

Argued on: 20.06.2022

Decided on: 29.09.2022

8. H.A. Chandana Kumarasinghe

Director General of Establishment (Act.) Ministry of Public Administration, Disaster Management and Rural Economic Affairs. 9. P.B.S.C. Nonis

Director General of Budgets, 2nd Floor, Ministry of Finance, The Secretariat, Colombo 01. 10. Hon. Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

4

S.U.B. Karalliyadde, J.

Since the material facts and the reliefs sought by the Petitioners in the Writ Applications

bearing numbers Writ-0346-19, Writ-0389-19 and Writ-384-19 are almost same and

identical, the parties agreed to abide by the judgement delivered in this Application in

respect of the other two Writ Applications as well. The Petitioners to this Writ

Application were serving in the Civil Government Service and thereafter joined the Sri

Lanka Army Volunteer Force. By virtue of Presidential Proclamations published in the

Government Gazettes dated 10.08.1990 marked as P3A, 08.12.1989 marked as P3AB

and 08.02.1991 marked as P4 they were commissioned and posted as Officers of the

Sri Lanka Army Volunteer Force. By the Government Gazette dated 08.02.1991

marked as P4, the Petitioners were declared to be the Officers of the National Cadet

Corps (hereinafter referred to as the NCC). Thereafter, during the period of 1991 to

1993, the Petitioners were mobilized for active service in terms of section 44 of the

Mobilization and the Supplementary Forces Act, No. 40 of 1985 read with the NCC

Regulations published in the Government Gazette dated 29.04.1988 marked as P14 and

they were directed to report for work at the Headquarters of the NCC. Once the

Petitioners were reported at the Headquarters, they were Commissioned for mobilized

service as NCC Officers. Subsequently, the 1st, 2nd and 3rd Petitioners in the instant

Application were demobilized from the NCC. Even though, they were demobilized

from the NCC their services were required by the Army and therefore, they had reported

for duty at the Army Headquarters and went on retirement upon reaching 60 years. At

the time of the retirement, the 1st Petitioner was in the rank of Colonel and 2nd and 3rd

Petitioners were in the rank of Lieutenant Colonel. Upon their retirement, they were

awarded Civil pensions (as per as per the documents marked as P16(a), P16(b)).

5

It is the contention of the learned Counsel appearing for the Petitioners that the

Petitioners are entitled to Army pension and non-granting of Army pension is unjust,

unreasonable, irrational and against the law. The learned Counsel for the Petitioner

submitted to the Court that in terms of the Sri Lanka Army Volunteer Force

Regulations, Army Pensions and Gratuities Code of 1981 (as amended in 1991 and

2007) (hereinafter referred to as the Army P & G Code) and the Mobilization and the

Supplementary Forces Act, No. 40 of 1985 read with the NCC Regulations, the

Petitioners are duly entitled to an Army pension which is higher than the pension they

could have entitled had they in the Civil Service. By these Writ Applications, the

Petitioners are seeking reliefs, inter alia, mandates in the nature of Writs of Mandamus

directing the Respondents to duly compute and award the due Army pension to them,

to forward the Pay and Records pertaining to them to the 3rd Respondent in order to

calculate the reckonable service of them, directing the 3rd Respondent to calculate the

reckonable service of them in term of the Army P & G Code and forward the same to

the 5th Respondent in order to grant an Army pension, directing the 3rd Respondent to

calculate the loss incurred by them in depriving them from obtaining an Army pension

ab initio and inform the 5th Respondent regarding said loss suffered by them and

directing the 5th Respondent to indemnify them with regard to the said loss incurred as

calculated by the 3rd Respondent and to make good the shortfall in the payment pension.

The learned State Counsel for the Respondents argued that the Petitioners are not

entitled for Writs of Mandamus as prayed for in the Petition due to two reasons. The

learned State Counsel for the Respondents submitted that the nature of the service of

members of the NCC is inherently different to the nature of the service of Officers in

the Sri Lanka Army Volunteer Force and therefore, the Petitioners in the instant

Application cannot be regarded as Officers of the Sri Lanka Army Volunteer Force.

6

Hence, the learned State Counsel appearing for the Respondents argued that the

Petitioners are not entitled to an Army pension in terms of the Army P&G Code.

The organization of the Sri Lanka Army is set out in section 2 of the Army Act, No. 46

of 1950 as follows;

2. (1) There shall be raised and maintained, in accordance with the provisions of this

Act and of the regulations made there under, an army not exceeding such strength as

may, from time to time, be determined by Parliament.

(2) The Army shall consist of -

(a) a regular force,

(b) a regular reserve, and

(c) such Volunteer force and Volunteer reserve.

Furthermore, the organization of the Sri Lanka Army Volunteer Force is stipulated in

section 5 of the Act as follows;

5 (1) There may be raised and maintained, in accordance with the provisions of this

Act and of the regulations made thereunder, a force of volunteers for the purpose of

rendering service under this Act.

(2) The Force of volunteers raised and maintained under this Act shall be called the

Volunteer Force.

(3) The Volunteer Force shall be organized into such corps as may, from time to time,

be determined by the President.

7

The Petitioners to the instant Application have been Commissioned as Officers of the

Sri Lanka Army Volunteer Force by the Presidential Proclamation dated 08.12.1989

marked as P3B.

The said Presidential Proclamation states thus;

His excellency the President has been pleased to approve the Commissioning of the

undermentioned gentlemen in the Volunteer Force of the Sri Lanka Army and their

Postings to the National Cadet Corps in the ranks and with effect from the dates shown

against their names.

Thereafter, by the Presidential Proclamation dated 08.02.1991 marked as P4, the

Petitioners were considered to be the Commissioned Officers of the NCC. P4 reads

follows;

As per the legal provisions hereinbefore mentioned in the Army Act and the Gazette

notifications, marked as P3(A), P3(B) and P4 it is evident that the Petitioners have been

Commissioned as Officers in the Sri Lanka Army Volunteer Force and then posted to

the NCC as Officers by the President. Therefore, it is established that the Petitioners

are the Officers of the Sri Lanka Army Volunteer Force.

In terms of the Regulations 70(1) of the Sri Lanka Army Volunteer Force Regulations

published in the Extraordinary Gazette Notification No. 476/26 dated 20.10.1987, the

pension rights of the Officers of the Sri Lanka Army Volunteer Force are governed by

the Army P&G Code.

8

Regulations 70(1) stipulates as follows;

70. (1) An officer who performs an aggregate of active military service for a period

not less than twenty years or is seconded for Regular Service for twenty years shall be

entitled to a pension as in the case of a Regular Officer in accordance with the

provisions of the Army Pensions and Gratuities Code...

The learned State Counsel for the Respondents argued that the Petitioners have not

completed a period of 20 years in continuous active service in the Sri Lanka Army in

order to be eligible for an Army pension under the Army P&G Code and the central

issue which the Court has to address in this Writ Application is whether the Petitioners

have required aggregate 20 years of service to be eligible for an Army pension.

According to the facts of the instant Application, before Commissioning in the Sri

Lanka Army Volunteer Force, the Petitioners were serving in the Civil Government

Service and they do not have 20 years of active service in the Sri Lanka Army Volunteer

Force. Therefore, the Court should decide as to whether their period of service other

than in the Sri Lanka Army Volunteer Force could be reckoned for them to be eligible

for an Army pension.

The Army P&G Code as amended by the Gazette bearing No. 679/10 dated 11.09.1991

marked as P-25 has facilitated the Volunteer Officers of the Sri Lanka Army to be

eligible for Army pension. Regulation 29 (c) mentioned in P25 provides thus;

(c) An officer of the Volunteer Force inclusive of a Quarter Master who has an

aggregate of not less than twenty years mobilized service on the date of his retirement,

transfer to the reserve, or on the date a decision is taken to the effect that further

employment is not available to him, such date being a date not earlier than September

1, 1981 shall be entitled to a pension in the case of a regular officer.

9

Regulation 29 (i) provides that;

(i) Reckonable Service for the purpose of a Volunteer Officer or soldier shall be as

set out in Regulation 18 and 27 of this Code.

The provisions of Regulation 29(i) reiterated in the Gazette Notification No. 1512 dated

31.08.2007 marked as P-27.

The services which could be reckoned to be eligible for an Army pension is stated in

the Regulations 18 (1) of the Army P&G Code 18 (1)(d) and 18(1)(e) reads as follows;

18(1) The following service shall be reckonable service for a pension or gratuity of

an officer, including Quartermaster.

d. Pensionable Service of a Public servant in a permanent office, which has been

declared to be pensionable by notification published in the gazette

e. Service as a teacher that is reckoned as 'Recorded Service' under regulation 2 (ix) of

the School Teacher's Pension Regulations

Under the above stated circumstances, it is clear that the Officers who do not have 20

years active service in the Sri Lanka Army Volunteer Force are entitled to aggregate

their reckonable service to the Army service in terms of Regulations 29 (c), 29 (i) and

18 of the Army P&G Code to become eligible for an Army pension. Since it is

established that the Petitioners to this Writ Application are Officers of the Sri Lanka

Army Volunteer Force, the relevant legal provisions pertaining to their pension rights

are governed by the Regulations 70(1) and 70 (2) of the Sri Lanka Army Volunteer

Force Regulations read together with Regulations 18, 29 (c) and (i) of the P & G Code

(as amended in 1991 and 2007). Therefore, subject to these Regulations the previous

service of the Petitioners in the Government Civil Service should be considered as

reckonable service for the purpose of calculating their Army pension. When

10

considering the aggregated period of services of the Petitioners in the Government Civil

Service, and in the mobilized and demobilized services in the Sri Lanka Army

Volunteer Force (as depicted at pages 15-17 of the Petition dated 13.08.2019) the Court

is satisfied that such period exceeds 20 years and therefore, the Petitioners have fulfilled

the requirements to be entitled for an Army pension in terms of the Army P&G Code.

Be that as it may, the entitlement of the Petitioners for Army pension has been

recognized by the Sri Lanka Army, the Hon. Attorney General (the 10th Respondent)

and the Ministry of Defense in many occasions.

In the letter marked as P27A, the Director General of Legal of the Sri Lanka Army has

referred the Regulations 70(1) and 70(2) of the Sri Lanka Army Volunteer Force

Regulations and the Regulations 18, 27 and 29 of the Army P & G Code and stated as

follows;

Therefore, where officers and soldiers of the SLAVF are concerned, the relevant

legal provisions applicable in relation to pension rights are Reg 70(1) and 70 (2) of

the SLAVF Reg read together with Reg 29 (c) to (i) of the P & G Code as amended

by Gazette Notification No 679/10 and provided for under Reg 18(d) to (j) of the P &

G Code, where SLAVF officers are concerned, and 27(d) to (k) of the P & G Code

where SLAVF soldiers are concerned. Therefore, subject to the

specifications/restrictions in the aforesaid Reg 18 and Reg 27 the previous service of

the such personnel in the Govt/Public sector shall be deemed to be considered as

reckonable service for purposes of pension

In the letter dated 13.09.2016 marked as P26 the 10th Respondent upon referring the

provisions of the Army P&G Code and the Sri Lanka Army Volunteer Force

Regulations opined that;

11

I am of the opinion that the amendment of the Army Pensions and Gratuities Code

by the above-mentioned Gazette No. 679/10 dated September 10, 1991; by providing in

regulation 29(i) that reckonable service for Volunteer Officers shall be as set out

regulations 18 and 27 of the said code, would permit a volunteer officer or soldier to

aggregate previous service as set out in regulation 18 or 27 of the Pensions and

Gratuities Code as the case may be, for the purpose of pension entitlement.

By the letter dated 11.11.2016 marked as P28, the Commander of the Army (the 1st

Respondent) after obtaining the advice of the 10th Respondent on the matter has

concluded that the Petitioners are entitled to an Army pension and the Director Pay and

Records of the Army (the 3rd Respondent) has directed to proceed with the formalities

to pay them the Army pension.

In the letter marked as P30, the Legal Adviser to the Ministry of Defence has observed

as follows;

,

. (at page 2)

Under the above stated circumstances, it is clear that even though, the Petitioners are

entitled legally for Army pension the Respondents had denied that entitlement and

decided to pay them the pension of the Government Civil Service. Therefore, the

considered view of this Court is that by failing to take necessary steps to pay the Army

pension to the Petitioners the Respondents have failed to perform a public duty. A Writ

of Mandamus lies when the rights of an individual have been infringed by the failure

of a public officer to perform their duties.

12

In their work Administrative Law1, H. W. R. Wade and C. F. Forsyth have stated as

follows;

The prerogative remedy of a mandatory order has long provided the normal means of

enforcing the performance of public duties by public authorities of all kinds. Like the

other prerogative remedies, it is normally granted on the application of a private

litigant, though it may equally well be used by one public authority against another.

The commonest employment of a mandatory order is as a weapon in the hands of the

ordinary citizen, when a public authority fails to do its duty by him. The quashing order

and a prohibiting order deal with wrongful action, a mandatory order deals with

wrongful inaction. The prerogative remedies thus together cover the field of

governmental powers and duties.

In Credit Information Bureau of Sri Lanka Vs Messers Jafferjee and Jafferjee (Pvt) Ltd2

the Supreme Court referred to the conditions that should be fulfilled prior to issuance

of a Writ of Mandamus.

There is rich and profuse case law on mandamus, on the conditions to be satisfied

by the applicant. Some of the conditions precedent to the issue of mandamus appear

to be:

a) The applicant must have a legal right to the performance of a legal duty by the

parties against whom the mandamus is sought The foundation of mandamus is

the existence of a legal right.

b) The right to be enforced must be a public right and the duty sought to be

enforced must be of a public nature.

1 H. W. R. Wade and C. F. Forsyth, Administrative Law (11th edn, Oxford 2014) 520. 2 2005 (1) SLR page 89.

13

Furthermore, in the case of Kaluarachchi vs Ceylon Petroleum Corporation and

Others3 Fernando J, stated that,

The foundation of mandamus is the existence of a legal right. A court should not

grant a Writ of Mandamus to enforce a right which is not legal and not based upon

a public duty.

Considering all the above stated facts and circumstances, the Court holds that the

Petitioners have a legal right to an Army pension and the Respondents have a public

duty to pay the Petitioners an Army pension. Under the above stated circumstances,

the Court decided to issue Writs of Mandamus as prayed for in the prayers (b), (c) and

(d) in the Petition. No costs ordered.

Application allowed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

M.T. MOHAMMED LAFFAR, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

3 SC Appeal No. 43/2013; SC Minutes of 19th June 2019.