1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C A (Writ) Application

No. 447 / 2015

In the matter of an Application for

mandates in the nature of Writs of

Certiorari and Mandamus in terms of

Article 140 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Pathiranage Mihipathi Madhuranga,

16/6,

Uswatte Road,

Nathuduwa,

Ke.laniya.

PETITIONER

2

-Vs-

1. National Savings Bank, "Savings House", No. 255, Galle Road, Colombo 03.

2. Aswin De Silva,

Chairman,

3. K M M Siriwardene, Director General, Department of Fiscal Policy,

4. Ajith Pathirana, Director,

5. Bradley Emerson, Director,

6. Suranga Naullage,

Director,

7. D L P R Abeyaratne, Postmaster General (ex-officio Director),

8. Wasantha Batagoda, Director,

9. H.M. Hennayake Bandara,

General Manager,

10. Manager (Human Resources Development),

Before:

Counsel

Decided on:

3

2nd - 10th Respondents, all of National Savings Bank, "Savings House", N o. 255, Galle Road, Colombo 03.

RESPONDENTS

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC 1 (PICA)

P. Padman Surasena 1

Sanjeewa Ranaweera for the Petitioner.

Nayomi Kahawita, Senior State Counsel for

Respondents.

2016 - 11 - 29

4

ORDER

P Padman Surasena 1

The complaint made by the Petitioner to this Court, inter alia, that the

Respondents have by the decision/ determination made by the 10th

Respondent above named had deprived the Petitioner of his salary / wages/

emoluments during the period of his interdiction/ suspension.

It is the position of the Petitioner that, whilst he was serving as the

'Second Officer' of the Ragama branch of the 1st Respondent namely the

National Savings Bank, the 10th Respondent, by his letter dated 2013-02-18

produced marked P 2, interdicted/ suspended the Petitioner without a

pending formal disciplinary inquiry into certain alleged fraudulent

transactions which he is alleged to have been involved when serving at

Ragama branch.

The Petitioner has sought to argue that in terms of clause 6.4 of the

Disciplinary Rules of the 1st Respondent, it is not the 10th Respondent who

has authority/power to deprive the Petitioner of his

wages/salary/emoluments during the period of his interdiction/suspension.

5

Petitioner has sought from this Court inter alia,

(a) a Writ of Certiorari to quash the decision/ determination made

by the 10th Respondent (reflected / contained in the document

marked P 2) depriving the Petitioner of his salary / wages /

emoluments during the period of his interdiction / suspension;

(b) a Writ of Mandamus to compel the 1st Respondent and/ or any

other Respondent/s and/ or any other authority to pay the

Petitioner's salary/ wages/ emoluments which have been denied to

him by the 10th Respondent's decision / determination reflected/

contained in P 2.

(c) In the alternative to (b) and (c) above, a Writ of Mandamus to

compel the 1st Respondent and / or any other Respondent/s and/ or

any other authority to pay one-half of the Petitioner's salary/ wages/

emoluments for the period commencing from 2013-08-16 until the

final conclusion of the formal disciplinary inquiry conducted against

the Petitioner;

6

This Court had decided to issue notices on the Respondent upon the

Petitioner supporting this case for notices on 2015-11-20. Thereafter

when this case was mentioned in this Court on 2016-09-01, 2016-09-

03, 2016-09-19 and 2016-09-28 Respondents have taken up the

position that the service of the Petitioner has now been terminated

upon the findings of the disciplinary inquiry held against the

Petitioner. The Respondents thereafter has filed the letter of

dismissal dated 2016-08-02 addressed to the Petitioner. The

Respondents in that letter, had informed the Petitioner,

i. that he has been found guilty of all the charges contained in the

charge sheet issued to him at the formal domestic inquiry held against

him,

ii. that upon consideration of the seriousness of the charges for which he

has been found guilty, it has been decided to dismiss him from service

with effect from 2013-02-18 which is the date he was interdicted,

iii. that he is not entitled to receive the salaries and any other allowance

that had not been paid to him during his period of interdiction.

The Petitioner was granted two weeks time to file written submissions with

regard to the objection raised by the Respondent pertaining to the

7

maintainability of this case. However the minute dated 2016-10-19 on the

docket (which is a date after two weeks) shows that the Petitioner has

failed to file any material.

As has been pOinted out earlier the letter dated 2016-08-02 dismissing the

Petitioner and depriving him of his salary and allowances during his period

of interdiction is not under challenge. Hence even if this Court is to quash

the document produced marked P 2 the Petitioner will continue to be

deprived of his salary and allowances during the period of his interdiction

by virtue of the letter dated 2016-08-02 above referred to. Therefore we

are of the view that this application has now become futile.

Although the dismissal from service had been communicated to the

Petitioner by letter dated 2016-08-02, the Petitioner has at no stage shown

any interest to bring this fact to the notice of this Court. What he had

opted, when this fact was brought to the notice of Court by the learned

Senior State Counsel, was to argue that he still can proceed as that fact

has no bearing on this case. It would suffice to state here, in this regard,

that a Petitioner in a Writ application has a duty to place all material facts

_pertaining to the case and that it is not open for him, at a later stage to

I \I

8

say that he was not aware of the importance of certain facts which he had

omitted to place before Court. 1

In any case all these issues could be agitated by the Petitioner in the

proper forum designated by law for such purposes in accordance with law.

In these circumstances and for the foregoing reasons we see no basis to

proceed with this case. Therefore we decide to terminate proceedings in

this case and dismiss this application. We make no order for costs.

Application is dismissed without costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC 1

I agree,

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

1 Walker Sons & Co. Ltd. Vs. Wijayasena [1997 (1) SLR 293 at 301].

f

f

~

II i