==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

Orders in the nature of Writs of

Certiorari, Prohibition and Mandamus

under Article 140 of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

1. Premakumara Rajapakse,

No. 247/1, Dabahena Road, Maharagama. CA (Writ) App. No. 323/2024

2. S.A Prageeth Lakmal,

No. 245, Dabahena Road, Maharagama. 3. P.V.K Apsara Lakshmi,

No. 129/3, Dabahena Road, Maharagama. 4. D.L. Chandika,

No. 189/11, Dabahena Road, Maharagama. 5. R.A.S.P. Kumara,

No. 63/65, Dabahena Road, Maharagama. 6. Nilantha Ruwan Satharasinghe,

No. 129/4, Dabahena Road, Maharagama.

PETITIONERS

2

Vs.

1. Maharagama Urban Council,

Maharagama.

2. N.T Aruna Dias,

Secretary, Maharagama Urban Council, Maharagama.

2A. Thilini Kalhari Nandasena,

Secretary, Maharagama Urban Council, Maharagama.

3. Nilmini Rawanaella,

Administrative Officer, Maharagama Urban Council, Maharagama. 4. Urban Development Authority,

6th, 7th and 9th Floors, Sethsiripaya, Battaramulla.

5. M.G Gamini Pinto,

Acting Assistant Commissioner of Local Government, Department of Local Government (Western Province), No. 204, Denzil Kobbekaduwa Mawatha, Battaramulla. 5A. Mrs. Rangika LakmaliPerera,

Acting Assistant Commissioner of Local Government, Department of Local Government (Western Province), No. 204,

3

Denzil Kobbekaduwa Mawatha, Battaramulla.

6. S.K Jayasundere,

Commissioner of Local Government, Department of Local Government (Western Province), No. 204, Denzil Kobbekaduwa Mawatha, Battaramulla. 7. Pradeeep Yasaratne,

Secretary, Ministry of Provincial Councils and Local Government, No. 330, Dr. Colvin R. de Silva Mawatha (Union Place), Colombo 02.

7A. S. Alokha Bandara,

Secretary, Ministry of Provincial Councils and Local Government, No. 330, Dr. Colvin R. de Silva Mawatha (Union Place), Colombo 02.

8. Sudheera Jayaweera,

No. 129/19D, 2nd Lane, Dabahena Road, Maharagama.

RESPONDENTS

4

Before: Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Counsel:

Sanjeewa Jayawardena,P.C. for the Petitioner.

R.A.P. Ranawaka with Panchali Ekanayake instructed by Madhaci Kiriella for the 1st and

2nd Respondents.

Dr.Peshan Gunaratne, S.C. for the 7th Respondent.

Shiral Lakthilaka with Sanjeewani Nawarathne instructed by N.J.P.Silva for the 8th

Respondent.

Argued on: 03.02.2026

Delivered on: 20.03.2026

5

Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Judgement

Introduction

The 1st to 6th Petitioners are residents of Dabahena Road, Maharagama. The 1st Petitioner is

residing at premises No. 2471 of Dabahena Road, and the other Petitioners are also residing on the

same road. The 1st Respondent is the Urban Council of Maharagama, while the 2nd Respondent is

the Secretary thereto. The 3rd Respondent is the Administrative Officer, and the 4th Respondent is

the Urban Development Authority, whose powers are now delegated to the 1st Respondent. The

5th and 6th Respondents are the Commissioners of the Local Government, the 7th Respondent is the

Secretary of the Provincial Council, and the 8th Respondent is a resident of the same road which

leads from the Dabahena Road to the houses of the Petitioners.

The 8th Respondent, having recently purchased a plot of land depicted as Assessment No. 129/19D

of the Plan marked as P2(a) annexed to the Petition, constructed three gates opening to the said

road, which the Petitioners complain affects their rights and is also an unauthorised construction.

As such, the Petitioners have complained to the 1st Respondent, and thereupon, the 1st Respondent,

having caused an inspection, directed the 8th Respondent to remove the same, which the 8th

Respondent has failed to comply with. Thereafter, the Petitioners have complained to several other

Respondents; nevertheless, none of the Respondents have taken steps to remove the alleged

unauthorised construction.

Thus, the Petitioners seeking to invoke the jurisdiction of this Court to obtain inter alia the

following relief;

6

“(b) Grant and issue a Mandate in the nature of a Writ of Mandamus, directing the 1st to

the 4th Respondents and/or any one or more of them and/or their successors in office and/or

their servants and/or agents, to forthwith to act in terms of section 28A(3) of the Urban

Development Authority Law No. 41 of 1978, as amended, and/or to institute action in the

Magistrate Court, having competent jurisdiction, against the 8th Respondent, to demolish

the two illegal entrances and/or gates and/or openings, at the Southern boundary of the

premises bearing assessment No. 129/19D, Dambahena road, Maharagama, in view of the

patent continuing failure of the 8th Respondent, to remove the said two entrances and/or

gates and/or openings;

(c) Grant and issue a Mandate in the nature of a Writ of Mandamus, directing the 2nd

Respondent and/or his successors in office and/or his servants and/or agents, to forthwith

comply with the directive given by the 5th Respondent in the letter dated 22/02/2024,

produced marked as P-12, against the 8th Respondent,

Or

(d) Grant and issue a Mandate in the nature of a Writ of Mandamus, directing the 1st to

the 3rd Respondents and/or anyone or more of them and/or his successors in office and/or

his servants and/or agents, to forthwith comply with the several directives issued by him to

the 8th Respondent produced marked as P-4 and/or P-5 and/or P-6 and/or P-7, wherein it

is inter alia stipulated that action will be instituted against the 8th Respondent, to close

and/or remove the 2 illegal entrances and/or gates and/or openings in the Southern

boundary of the premises bearing assessment No. 129/19D, Dambahena road,

Maharagama;”

7

After issuing notice, only the 8th Respondent has filed Objections while all other Respondents have

indicated through their counsel that they are not filing any Objections. Accordingly, this was fixed

for Arguments by this Court, and it came up before me on 03.02.2026, and argued by the counsel;

however, the 8th Respondent’s Counsel had taken two dates on personal grounds, including today

(03.02.2026). However, Junior Counsel for the 8th Respondent informed that written submissions

would be filed; accordingly, written submissions were filed. The following arguments were

advanced by Counsel in their respective submissions.

Arguments

It is the argument of Mr. Jayawardena, learned President’s Counsel for the Petitioner that the

Petitioners are entitled to obtain Writ of Mandamus, directing the Respondents to take action

against the 8th Respondent either to remove the illegal construction effected by him, or prosecute

an action in the Magistrate’s Court to prevent the 8th Respondent to continue violating the rights

of the Petitioners.

The Counsel, Mr. Shiral Lakthilaka for and on behalf of the 8th Respondent advanced two main

points in the course of his arguments. The first point is that the Petitioners have not made out a

case against the 8th Respondent to obtain a Writ of Mandamus because if the Petitioners have any

grievance based on any private dispute between the Petitioners and the 8th Respondent, they should

go before a relevant forum to assert their rights; they cannot make use of public law avenue to

obtain a Writ of Mandamus against the Respondents, particularly against the 8th Respondent, over

a private matter.

The second point of argument advanced on behalf of the 8th Respondent is that since the 8th

Respondent has already obtained a valid development permit from the 1st Respondent, the

8

Municipal Council, and constructed his house, he is entitled to possess the same, and as the outright

owner thereof, the 8th Respondent is entitled to enjoy the rights attributable to ownership; namely,

utendy, abutundy, and fruendi.

Petitioners Position

The 1st Petitioner has annexed and produced his title deed, which was executed in 1985, marked

as P1. It is the position of the Petitioners’ that the 8th Respondent has also purchased his property

identified as Lot No. B1 as depicted in the plan marked as P2(a) annexed to the Petition, by the

Deed marked as P2, executed in 2016. Thereafter, it is the Petitioners’ position that the 8th

Respondent, having put up a house in the premises belonging to him, has also kept three openings

in the parapet wall to be used as entrances, against which the Petitioners assert, causes hindrances

to their right of way over the said by-road which leads to the Dabahena Road and also causes

nuisance to the Petitioners.

Complaint

Accordingly, the 1st Petitioner has made a complaint to the 2nd Respondent, who is the secretary of

the 1st Respondent. Thereafter, as evident by the document marked and annexed to the Petition as

P4, the 1st Respondent had sent its technical officer for a site inspection, where it was revealed that

there are three openings used by the 8th Respondent as gates to have access or entrance to his

property in suit. Accordingly, the 8th Respondent was asked to close two openings and retain only

one opening as his gate.

Further, on complaints made by the other Petitioners, the 2nd Respondent, who has repeatedly sent

several letters to the 8th Respondent, directing him to close the said two opening, which is

evidenced by the documents marked as P5, P6, and P7 annexed to the Petition. Further, since there

9

was no action taken by the 1st Respondent or its officers, the 1st Petitioner has written to the 2nd

Respondent again, by the letters marked as P8, P8(a), P9, and P10 annexed to the Petition. In fact,

the farmers of the area also have written by the document marked as P11, stating that the said gates

of the 8th Respondent were a hindrance and nuisance to them since the 8th Respondent is using

three gates to use the said roadway.

Thereafter, on the said complaints, the Department of Local Government (Western Province) has

written to the Secretary of the Maharagama Urban Council (the 2nd Respondent), to take legal

actions against the 8th Respondent. The said gates are depicted in the photographs marked and

annexed to the Petition as P13, and several further requests have been made by the 1st Respondent

by the documents marked as P14 and P15; thereafter, the 1st Respondent has also further written

to the 1st Petitioner to establish his rights.

Objections

On the other hand, the 1st to 7th (7A) Respondents have not filed their respective Objections or any

documents; however, the 8th Respondent has filed his Objections along with several annexed

documents marked as 8V1 to 8V6. The document marked as 8V1 is the same as the document

marked as P2 annexed to the Petition; 8V2 is the same as the plan marked and annexed to the

Petition as P2(a); there is no document marked as 8V3, however, the document marked as 8V4 is

the development permit apparently obtained from the Maharagama Municipal Council. The

document marked as 8V5 is the partition plan depicting the larger land of which a portion of land

the 8th Respondent has purchased, which is evidenced by the document marked P2(8V1). The

document marked as 8V6 is the final decree of the said partition by which the said partition plan

8V5 is affirmed.

10

However, it is his position that his development permit has been approved; therefore, he is entitled

to use the three gates.

Now I will consider the arguments advanced by the counsel on both sides in relation to the facts

mentioned above.

Apparently, the Petitioners are owners of certain premises situated where a by-road that leads to

the Dabahena Road is used as their way of access to the main road to and from their residences;

the 8th Respondent has not disputed that fact.

The 8th Respondent has purchased a land in the said area in 2016, that he occupies presently, as

evidenced by the Deed marked as P2(a) annexed to the Petition or 8V1 annexed to the Objections;

and the said land is depicted in the plan marked as P3 or 8V2. The said parcel of land of the 8th

Respondent is a portion of a larger land for which there had been a partition case; the final plan of

the said partition is annexed as 8V5, with the same having been confirmed by the final decree of

the partition case marked as 8V6. Therefore, it is very clear that the 8th Respondent possesses a

land which he owns based on good title derived from a partition action.

Now the question arises as to whether the 8th Respondent is entitled to enjoy all the attributes that

he relies on as the owner of the said land depicted in the plan marked as P2(a) or 8V3 annexed to

the Petition and Objections of the 8th Respondent respectively.

It appears that the 8th Respondent has obtained a development plan to build his house, which is

marked as 8V4. On a perusal of 8V4, I found that except for the main house there is no permission

given to construct a parapet wall which separates the 8th Respondent’s land and the said road.

Therefore, it appears, as the Petitioners complain and as evidenced by P4, that there are three

openings used as entrances by the 8th Respondent. As such, the said entrances kept and maintained

11

by the 8th Respondent cause hindrances and nuisance to the people of the area; thus, the Petitioners

have complained to the 1st Respondent, the 3rd Respondent, as an officer of the 1st Respondent, and

other relevant authorities against the 8th Respondent’s conduct. Based on those complaints, the 1st

Respondent had sent a technical officer and obtained a report, according to which, there is

unauthorised construction by the 8th Respondent.

Therefore, by P4 and several other letters, the authorities (the 1st to 4th Respondents) have informed

and directed the 8th Respondent to close two of the said openings and use only one as the sole

entrance to his property, which the 8th Respondent has not complied with.

Therefore, it is my view that the 8th Respondent has put up some unauthorised construction for his

benefit and to the hindrance and annoyance of the Petitioners and other residents of the area,

including the farmers of the area as evidenced by P11. As such, it is my view that the Petitioners

have made out a case against the 1st to 4th Respondents to obtain a Writ of Mandamus directing

them to take legal actions against the 8th Respondent for his unauthorised construction.

The next question that arises is whether the Petitioners are entitled to such a Writ of Mandamus,

as argued by the 8th Respondent.

The UDA Act has been promulgated covering the entire Island, for the purpose of enhancing the

life of the citizenry depending on the area that such citizenry resides or live in; it is thus, also

required and expected by the UDA to create such conducive environment for the citizenry to live

a peaceful life. For that purpose, they can adopt and promulgate by-laws, or their powers can be

delegated to local authorities since the UDA cannot solely carry the responsibility of creating such

conducive environment for the citizenry. Once such a power is delegated to a local authority, the

local authority is responsible for regulating the environment as far as possible to create healthy

12

environments for the citizenry to live within their locality. Therefore, Section 28 empowers such

delegated local authority to act accordingly.

As such, it is my view that the 1st Respondent is under a statutory duty to create such environment

by regulating the actions and inactions of the citizenry who live within its local limits. If the 1st

Respondent and its officers, whose powers are derived from the UDA by the Act No. 47 of 1978,

fail to carry out its duties in that respect, then, any citizen affected by such action or inaction of

the local authority can compel them to carry out such duty. Accordingly, it is my view that a Writ

of Mandamus lies in this Application.

I rely upon Wade and Forsyth in the authoritative textbook “Administrative Law” to further

buttress my view;

“Originally the writ of mandamus was merely an administrative order from the sovereign

to his or her subordinates. However, the central government had little administrative

machinery of its own, which led to the mandamus quickly becoming generally available

through the Court of King's Bench. The writ would issue to enforce the terms of royal

charters and, by the seventeenth century, it was commonly used to compel the admission

or restoration of freemen or burgesses to their offices or rights in borough corporations

Another early use of the mandamus was to enforce the rights of members of universities.

The mandamus was used, for instance, in the time of Edward III to command the

University of Oxford to restore a member who had been banished. Lord Holt and Lord

Mansfield favoured the free use of the writ for the enforcement of public duties of all

kinds. Mandatory orders were thus issued against inferior tribunals which refused to

exercise their jurisdiction and against municipal corporations which did not duly hold

13

elections, meetings, courts and so forth. As Lord Mansfield said in sweeping terms, the

mandamus:

'was introduced, to prevent disorder from a failure of justice, and defect of police

Therefore, it ought to be used upon all occasions where the law has established no

specific remedy, and where in justice and good government there ought to be

one....The value of the matter, or the degree of its importance to the public police,

is not scrupulously weighed. If there be a right, and no other specific remedy, this

should not be denied. Writs of mandamus have been granted, to admit lecturers,

clerks, sextons, and scavengers,... to restore an alderman to precedency, an

attorney to practice in an inferior court..

This statement was made in a case where a writ of mandamus was issued for the admission

of a Presbyterian preacher whose only title was under a trust deed. It was clarified that

duty enforced did not need to be statutory or under royal charter. Furthermore, in that

case, the duty was public only in the sense that it was a duty to execute a charitable trust.

This was a departure from previous practice where mandamus used to be employed for

enforcing the admission of copyholders in manors only in cases where it was a matter of

private duty.”1 [Emphasis is mine]

Conclusion

In the above circumstances, it is my view that a Writ of Mandamus would certainly lie in favour

of the Petitioners, to compel at least the 1st to 3rd Respondents to carry out their official duties,

1Wade, W., & Forsyth, C. (12th Edition, Oxford University Press 2023). Administrative Law, Part 7 Chapter 16, pp. 493-494.

14

either by removing an unauthorized construction or by prosecuting the 8th Respondent before the

relevant forum. Further, order Rs. 31,500/- (Thirty-One Thousand Five Hundred Rupees) as cost

of litigation payable by the 8th Respondent to the 1st Petitioner.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL