1

I ! I j I

~

~ I I

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

CA Case No. 251 A-B/2009

In the matter of an application made in

terms of Section 331 (1) of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979

read with Article 138 (1) of the Constitution

of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

The Democratic Socialist Republic of

Sri Lanka.

COMPLAINANT

Vs

1. Hapugoda Arachchi Kankanamlage

Jayalath

2. Pinnagodage Danapala

ACCUSED

HC (Balapitiya) Case No. 421/1992 AND NOW BETWEEN

1

1. Hapugoda Arachchi Kankanamlage

Jayalath

2. Pinnagodage Dhanapala

ACCUSED - APPELLANTS

Vs

Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENT

y

< '

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

DECIDED ON

Oeepali Wijesundera J.

: Deepali Wijesundera J.

: L.U. Jayasuriya J.

: Anil Silva PC for the 1 st Accused-

Appellant.

N. Jayasinghe for the 2nd Accused-

Appellant.

A. Jinasena S.D.S.G. for the

Attorney - General.

: 13th November, 2017

: 29th November, 2017

The accused appellants were indicted in the High Court of 8alapitiya

for the murders of RA. Punyadasa and RA. Gunawathi under section 296

of the Penal Code read with section 32. They were also indicted under

section 317 read with section 32 of the Penal Code for voluntarily causing

hurt with dangerous weapons to RA. Sarath and RA. Hemalatha. After

trial both appellants were convicted on all the charges and sentenced to

death and 10 years RI, each for the second charges.

The case for the prosecution was that prosecution witness number

one Wijethilake who is the father of the deceased and injured persons was

2

I

/: I ! ! I ,

I I I i I I

seated in the verandah of their house on 07/08/1992 the day of the incident

when he heard some unfamiliar voices coming from inside of the house.

He had heard them ordering the people inside the house that they were

from the police and to sit down. He has recognized the voice of the first

appellant who had come to rob this house on a previous occasion and he

had gone round the house and peeped inside and seen the first appellant.

Then he had jumped over the parapet wall and raised cries that thieves

had come to his house, which made the villages to come to his house when

the witness came towards the house after raising cries his son Punyadasa

had come towards him saying he was stabbed. He had said "{f6~ @()

8tS3@~ {f(;eDt5):)" and dropped to the floor. The witness had gone to the

police station in his motorbike and while he was there heard that two of his

children had died in the incident.

At the time of the incident the house did not have an electricity

supply and was lit by chimney lamps. Prosecution witness number three

Sarath who was also injured had been studying with a chimney lamp near

the grill from where he could see the house. He had seen the first accused

coming with another person who carried a gun. His brother who died had

been eating rice seated close to him when these people entered the house

saying they are from the police. His brother Punyadasa had run towards

the hall and the witness had gone behind him and tried to go out and he

was stabbed and he had run behind the person who stabbed him and has

3

identified him. When he came inside again he had seen his brother and

sister fallen inside the house in a pool of blood. He has said he knew the

first appellant as the person who came to this house earlier and the second

appellant also he had identified as the person who came with a gun with

the first accused. Wijethilake testified that the villages who came after

hearing his cries had apprehended the first appellant on a previous

occasion when he came to rob his house.

Both appellants had denied the incident and said that they were

falsely implicated. The first appellant said that he was suspe~ted of having

committed this offence because of a previous incident. He had also taken

up the defence of alibi. A witness named Louisa has testified in the

Magistrates Court that he watched television at her house that night but

she was dead by the time the trial was taken up in the High Court and her

son was called to testify in the High Court.

The second appellant's counsel argued that to convict the second

appellant for murder the prosecution should prove that at the time of the

incident the second appellant had a common intention and that there is no

evidence to say the second appellant participated in the attack on the

dead. The counsel argued that the second appellant was convicted based

on Sarath's evidence. Sarath was stabbed from behind and he could not

4

I, :

I

have seen who stabbed him. Both counsels argued that there are

infirmities in the evidence and that the evidence on the number of people

who entered the house is inconsistent.

The appellants have taken up the argument that there was not

enough light to identify the appellants in the house, therefore it has been a

case of mistaken identity. Both Wijethilake and Sarath has stated they had

a clear view from the chimney lamps burning inside the house. The house

of the deceased is a house without electricity therefore the inmates would

have been used to the lights of the lamps in the night their eyes would have

been accustomed to the light from the lamps. Witness Sarath had been

studying with a chimney lamp therefore he would have easily seen the

people who came into the house with that light.

In Kalika Thiwani vs State of Bhihar 1997 AIR S.C. p2186 it was

held that "visibility capacity of urburn people should not be applied to

vii/age folk". Machhi Singh and others vs State of Punjab 1983 AR S.C.

957 it was held that "vil/agers where electricity has not reached as yet get

accustomed to seeing things in the light shed by the lantern. Their eye sight

gets conditioned and becomes accustomed to the situation". Therefore the

argument of not sufficient light to identify the appellants fails.

5

I \ J . I

Both Wijethilake and Sarath said that the first appellant was

apprehended by the villagers and was tied to the gate and subsequently

handed over to the police on a previous occasion. This shows that the first

appellant was a known party. Therefore the issue of mistaken identity does

not arise.

Witness Sarath has seen the second appellant coming with the first

appellant and he has testified he saw him with the light ofthe lamps clearly.

Later on he had run behind the people who came to the house and had

identified the second accused whilst running behind him. The appellants

counsel argued that these are contradictions in Sarath's evidence which

we find is not important since he was only a child of 17 years at the time

of the incident.

The counsel for the appellants argued that the names of the prison

officers were not recorded. The Magistrate who conducted the

Identification parade has given evidence in the High Court and he has

been cross examined. Therefore the question of not calling the prison

officers does not arise. Even if one disregards the identification parade

notes the second accused appellant was identified in the dock.

6

I,

IIIIIIt I!

fI

I

l

In Dayananda Lokugalappaththi and eight others vs The State

3 SLR 362 it was held that "Law relating to identification does not shut out

evidence of dock identification. The Trial Judge must examine clearly the

circumstances under which the identification by the witness came to be

Section 414 (2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act states

thus;

'7he depositions regarding an identification parade (or the

notes thereof) held by a Magistrate or Justice of the Peace

and the depositions of the witnesses who assisted the

Magistrate or the Justice of the Peace to hold the parade or

affidavits by them may be given in evidence in any inquiry,

trial or proceeding under this Code although the deponents

or the Magistrate or the Justice of the Peace or the witnesses

referred to are not called to testify as witnesses".

F or the afore stated reasons we are not inclined to set aside the

judgment dated 16/12/2009.

The judgment of the High Court is affirmed. Appeal is dismissed.

7

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

L.U. Jayasuriya J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

8