1 , I

\ I ,

, I

!

j

1 I I

f I ! I \ 1

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A. Case No. 1050/2000 F

D.C. Kalutara Case No. 630S/Partition

1. Madibae Ayrene de Soysa Rajapakse

2. Sandadura Nimal de Silva Gunasekara

3. Sandadura Anura de Silva

4. Sandadura Ramya de Silva Gunasekara

All of whom resident at,

Moragalla, Beruwala.

PIAINTIFFS

~Vs~

1. Najith Gunaratne Jayathilake

2. Sandadura Susilawathie Silva

3. Seneri ya Ranasinghe Chandralal Silva

4. Seneriya Ranasinghe Dayalal Silva

5. Seneriya Ranasinghe Amarawathie Silva

6. Seneriya Ranasinghe Ariyawathie Silva

7. Seneriya Ranasinghe Malani Silva

S. Seneriya Ranasinghe Amarasiri Silva

9. Seneriya Ranasinghe Pushpa Ranjanie Silva

10. P. Winnie Silva

11. Seneriya Ranasinghe Nandis Silva

12. Seneriya Ranasinghe Saralin Silva

13. Dinayadura Sally

14. Sandadura Dayaratne Silva

15. SandaduraJayaratne Silva

1

I

\ ! Ii

I I

I!

\

f!I1

~. ,,

I

16. Diyagaarachchige Premawathi Perera

17. Sandadura Susilawathie

18. Seneriya Ranasinghe Aidin Silva

19. Sandadura Chitra Lumbini Gunaratne Jayathilake

20. Sandadura Vineetha Rohini Gunaratne Jayathilake

All of whom resident at,

Moragalla, Beruwala.

DEFENDANTS

AND NOW BETWEEN

1. Najith Gunaratne Jayathilake

19. Sandadura Chitra Lumbini Gunaratne Jayathilake

20. Sandadura Vineetha Rohini Gunaratne Jayathilake

DEFENDANT, APPELLANTS

lAo Sandadura Nimal de Silva Gunasekara

IE. Sandadura Anura de Silva

lC.Sandadura Ramya de Silva Gunasekara

2. Sandadura Nimal de Silva Gunasekara

3. Sandadura Anura de Silva

4. Sandadura Ramya de Silva Gunasekara

All of whom resident at

2

I

BEFORE

COUNSEL

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

Moragalla, Beruwala.

PlAINTIFF ~ RESPONDENTS

Sandaclura Susilawathie Silva

Seneriya Ranasinghe Chandralal Silva

Seneriya Ranasinghe Dayalal Silva

Seneriya Ranasinghe Amarawathie Silva

Seneriya Ranasinghe Ariyawathie Silva

Seneriya Ranasinghe Malani Silva

8. Seneriya Ranasinghe Amarasiri Silva

9. Seneriya Ranasinghe Pushpa Ranjanie Silva

10. P. Winnie Silva

n. Seneriya Ranasinghe Nandis Silva

12. Seneriya Ranasinghe Saralin Silva

13. Dinayadura Sally

14. SandaduraDayaratne Silva

15. SandacluraJayaratne Silva

16. Diyagaarachchige Premawathi Perera

17. Sandadura Susilawathie

18. Seneriya Ranasinghe Aiclin Silva

All of whom resident at,

Moragalla, Beruwala.

DEFENDANT ~ RESPONDENTS

A.H.M.D. Nawaz,J.

Lasith Chaminda with Mihiri Abeyratne for the

1st, 19th and 20th Defendants~Appellants.

3

Argued on

Written Submissions on:

Decided on

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J.

Senany Dayaratne with Mrs. Eshanthi Mendis for the 2nd, 3rd and 4th, Plaintiff~Respondents

(also designated as lA, IB and lC Plaintiff~ Respondents)

Jayantha Daluwatte with Ayesha Peiris for the 10th, II th and 16th a Defendant~ Respondents.

12.05.2015

09.06.2015 (2nd, 3rd&: 4th Plaintiff~Respondents)

06.09.2013 (t\ 19th &: 20th Defendant~ Appellants)

1l.01.2016

'Thls appeal is preferred by the tt, 19th and 20th Defendant~Appellants (hereinafter 1 sometimes referred to as "the Appellants") against the judgment of the District

Court of Kalutara entered in this case on 19.09.2000.

The Plaintiff~Respondents (hereinafter sometimes referred to as "the Plaintiffs") filed

this action on 26.11.1993 to partition a land called Penpiriwatte alias Achchigewatte

situated at Aluthgambadde, Thotumana South, Kalutara, which was depicted as Lots

I, 2 and 3 in Plan No.346 dated 07.03.1994 made by K.D.L Wijanayake, Licensed

Surveyor, on a commission issued by the District Court of Kalutara in this case. The

said Plan and its report which are marked as X and Xl have been filed of record.

When the case was taken up for trial on 04.10.1996, the parties accepted Lots I and 3

shown in the said Plan No.346 as the corpus and Lot 2 should be used as a 6 ft. road

along the boundary and the balance land to be taken into the corpus.

It was recorded as an admission that except the client of Ms. Marie Fonseka,

Attorney~at~Law, all other parties would agree to accept the pedigree set out in the

plaint. Ms. Marie Fonseka's clients are the 15\ 19th and 20th Defendant~Appellants

4

before this Court. It is therefore to be noted that except the Appellants, all other

parties have accepted the pedigree of the Plaintiffs. Thus the dispute as to the

entitlement of the corpus is between the 1sr, 19th and 20th Defendants on one side and

all other parties including the Plaintiffs on the other.

Since no steps regarding the substitution of the deceased 16th Defendant~Respondent

had been taken and the Appellants were absent and unrepresented, the appeal abated

on 25.07.2012, but subsequently after a successful re~listing application, the case was

fixed for hearing. Thereafter both Counsel made oral submissions and the Counsel for

the Appellants stated that they wished to file written submissions. But on 26.05.2015

it was intimated to court that the 1st, 19th and 20th Defendants~Appellants would not

be filing their written submissions. Only the Plaintiff~Respondents have filed their

written submissions since the argument.

The main ground of appeal of the 1st, 19th and 20th Defendants~Appellants, as stated in

paragraph 5 of their petition of appeal dated 14.11.2000, is that the trial judge had not

gone on to investigate their title as shown in their statement of claims and not

considered Deed NO.5400 dated 26.02.1970 marked as IV3 tendered on their behalf.

Since the Court failed to accept IV3 and investigate their title, they moved that the

judgment entered in this case be set aside and trial de novo ordered.

Only the Plaintiff and the 1st Defendant gave evidence at the trial. Since there is no

dispute as to the corpus, the question arises as to title of the parties. As the plaintiffs'

pedigree has been accepted by all the parties except the Appellants, it is the duty of

the Appellants to prove their title according to their statement of claim.

According to the Plaintiff~Respondents, the 1st Defendant has been given 1/6th share to

which he became entitled by IVl. But the 1st Defendant also claims a further share

under one Sandradura Gunaratne Jayatillake Mahagurunnanse. In support of this claim he

sought to mark IV2 and IV3 but IV3 was rejected as it was objected to by other

parties. (See proceedings of 28.05.1998 page 5).

5

\

The evidence of the tt Defendant appears to be utterly unsatisfactory. He does not

profess to know his own pedigree. He was unable to establish his right to the share of

5/18 claimed by him. He has failed to give evidence in this regard. On the contrary he

has admitted that he does not know how he became entitled to his share in the corpus

(See page 140 of the Appeal Brief). The 1st Defendant has failed to prove his title to a

larger share except the 1/6th share allotted by the Plaintiff in her pedigree. The deed

1V3 is tom and tattered and its bits and pieces are pasted on a paper. Nothing is

apparent to the naked eye. The names of the transferor and the transferee and the

schedule of the land described in this deed are illegible. In this situation how can the

Appellants expect a court to investigate their title? Although there is a duty cast on

the Court to investigate title of the parties in a partition action, the Court cannot

investigate the title of the parties in the dark. The Court can do its investigation only

within the limits of pleadings, admissions, points of contests and evidence both

documentary and oral. In this case the Appellants have failed to discharge their duty

to assist court by prOviding clear evidence, oral and documentary, to enable the Court

to investigate their title. As Anandacoomaraswamy J. (PICA with Edussuriya ].

concurring) declared in Thilagaratnam v. Athpunathan & Others 1996 (2) Sri LR.

66 at 68;

"Court cannot go on a voyage of discovery tracing the title and finding the shares in the corpus

for them, otherwise parties will tender their pleadings and expect the Court to do their work

and their Attomey~at~Law's work for them to get title to those shares in the corpus."

On behalf of the Appellants, it was only the 1st Defendant who testified at the trial but

admitted in his evidence that he did not know the details as to the share he was

claiming. The 19th and 20th Defendants (two of the three appellants) had not given any

evidence. The evidence of the 1st Defendant is unsatisfactory and the deed 1V3 is

illegible and in these circumstances, the rejection of IV3 by the Court is not without

any foundation.

6

The deed marked IV3 was objected to by other parties on the ground that it was

neither pleaded in the statement of claim of the Appellants nor was it included in their

list of witnesses. This objection was upheld by the trial Judge (See page 132 of the

Appeal Brief).

I am of the view that the trial Judge has considered whatever evidence led in this case,

on behalf of the Plaintiffs and the Defendants, especially the evidence led on behalf of

the 1st Defendant and has come to a correct finding.

One more matter which I wish to mention is that the Appellants, having failed to

prove their entitlement to the shares claimed by them in the lower Court, are now

seeking to establish their rights in appeal. This procedure is impermissible having

regard to the fact that such an exercise involves an appraisal of facts that were not

properly led before the District Court. It is more often than not the case that questions

of law are raised in appeal on the facts that have already been led in the trial and fresh

evidence on facts cannot be raised unless the three conditions as postulated by

Denning, L.J in Ladd v. MarshaD(1954) 1 W.L.R 1489; (1954) 3 All E.R 745; (1954) 98

S.] 870, are satisfied. The three conditions of Lord Denning, L.] followed by a series of

cases in Sri Lanka inclusive of Ratwatte v. Bandara 70 N.L.R. 231 are worthy of

recapitulation. Lord Denning said,

"In order to justify the reception of fresh evidence or a new trial, three conditions must be

fulfilled: first, it must be shown that the evidence could not have been obtained with reasonable

diligence for use at the trial: second, the evidence must be such that, if given, it would probably

have an important influence on the result of the case, although, it need not be decisive: third, the

evidence must be such as is presumably to be believed or, in other words, it must be apparently

credible, although it need not be incontrovertible"

See the recent application of Lord Denning's criteria in Absolute Lofts South West

London Ltd v. Artisan Home Improvements Ltd [2015] EWHC 2632 (IPEC); Ch D;

17 September 2015.

7

The application of the above indicia does not arise in this case. In a partition action it

is the duty of every party to prove their title to the satisfaction of Court. As against the

pedigree of the Plaintiffs, which has been accepted by all the parties except the three

Appellants, the pedigree, the documents and the evidence led by the Appellants would

not require a trial de novo, which would be a needless waste of time, considering the

long lapse of time that ensued since the judgment was entered on 19.09.2000.

In these circumstances, I do not wish to interfere with the judgment of the trial Court

and affirm its judgment and dismiss this appeal but without costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

8

\ I