IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Francis Chaminda Perera,

No. 264/2,

Asokarama Road,

Aadiambalama.

Substituted 2nd Party

Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant

CA CASE NO: CA (PHC) 171/2012

HIGH COURT OF NEGOMBO CASE NO: HC/RA/106/10

MC NEGOMBO CASE NO: A 24323

Vs.

1. Officer in Charge,

MO Branch,

Police Station,

Negombo.

Complainant-Respondent-

Respondent-Respondent

2. Kurugamage Shelton Fernando,

1st Party Respondent-Respondent-

Respondent

3. Hon. Attorney General,

Respondent-Respondent-

Respondent

2

Before: K.K. Wickramasinghe, J. (Acting P/CA)

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Anslem Kaluarachchi for the 2nd Party

Appellant.

Sudarshani Cooray for the 1st Party

Respondent.

Decided on: 26.03.2019

Samayawardhena, J.

The 2nd party respondent-petitioner-appellant (appellant) filed

this appeal against the order of the learned High Court Judge

dated 08.11.2012, which affirmed the order of the learned

Magistrate dated 19.02.2010.

This is an application filed by the police under section 66 of the

Primary Courts Procedure Act, No. 44 of 1979. The learned

Magistrate relying on Mansoor v. OIC Avissawella [1991] 2 Sri LR

75 held that he had no jurisdiction to make a determination as

the dispute is in relation to tenancy rights of a paddy field. That

decision is based on the general principle that Where a statute

creates a right and, in plain language, gives a specific remedy or

appoints a specific tribunal for its enforcement, a party seeking to

enforce the right must resort to that tribunal and not to others.

The paddy field in dispute is alleged to have been cultivating by

the 1st party-respondent-respondent (respondent) as the ande

cultivator under the appellant when the latter as the owner tried

to disturb the possession of the former. Therefore the learned

Magistrate has ordered the parties to maintain status quo and

3

allowed the respondent to continue with the possession until the

matter is determined by a competent Court.

In my view, this should be amended to read as, by allowing the

respondent to continue with the possession until the matter is

determined by the Commissioner General of Agrarian Services in

terms of the scheme provided for by the Agrarian Development

Act, No. 46 of 2000, as amended. Even the District Court has

no jurisdiction to hear and determine this matter on the

aforesaid general principle.

The learned counsel for the appellant finds no fault with the

main finding of the order, i.e. the Magistrates Court/Primary

Court has no jurisdiction to determine this matter. His

objection is regarding the latter part of the order whereby the

learned Magistrate ordered the parties to maintain status quo,

which, according to the learned counsel, is contrary to his own

admission of lack of jurisdiction. To put differently, what the

learned counsel for the appellant says is that the learned

Magistrate has no jurisdiction to order to maintain status quo.

I regret I am unable to agree with that argument. The primary

objective of filing a section 66 application is to prevent breach of

the peace. Merely because the learned Magistrate does not have

jurisdiction to make the final order as the parties ought to go

before the special tribunal set up under the Agrarian

Development Act to seek relief, that does not and shall not

prevent the learned Magistrate to make an order to maintain

status quo until the parties go before the said

Tribunal/Commissioner of Agrarian Development. The Court

has inherent power to make such an order for otherwise there

will a breach of the peace between the Court deciding that it has

4

no jurisdiction to make a determination and the parties going

before the special Tribunal/Commissioner of Agrarian

Development seeking relief. Practically the parties cannot go

before the Commissioner on the same day on which the learned

Magistrate decides that he has no jurisdiction.

By way of analogy, the position under the Arbitration Act, No. 11

of 1995 can be considered. Section 5 of the Arbitration Act

states:

Where a party to an arbitration agreement institutes legal

proceedings in a court against another party to such

agreement in respect of a matter agreed to be submitted for

arbitration under such agreement, the Court shall have no

jurisdiction to hear and determine such matter if the other

party objects to the court exercising jurisdiction in respect of

such matter.

In short, when there is an arbitration clause in an Agreement

sought to be enforced, the ordinary Courts have no jurisdiction

to determine the matter. However our Courts have held that

such ousting of jurisdiction does not prevent the District Court

or the Commercial High Court as the case may be to make

interim orders to preserve the status quo until the matter is

taken over by the Arbitration Tribunal.

In Baksons Textile Industries Ltd v. Hybro Industries Ltd1,

Edussuriya J. in the Court of Appeal held:

As far as the Arbitration Clause is concerned there is no

doubt that the Arbitration Act provides for settlement of

1 CA No.51/97, argued and decided on 28.04.1997

5

disputes by Arbitration where the agreement sets out so. It

has been contended that the Petitioner has already referred

the dispute to Arbitration and also that the Arbitration Act

provides for interim order to be made. However it is my

considered view that until such time a final order resolving

any dispute or an interim order is made by the Arbitrator a

party is entitled to come before the District Court and obtain

interim relief to maintain the status quo.

In the Supreme Court case of Elgitread Lanka (Pvt) Ltd v. Bino

Tyres (Pvt) Ltd2, Marsoof J. observed at page 140:

A careful reading of section 5 of the Arbitration Act would

reveal that it merely provides that the court shall have no

jurisdiction to hear and determine such matter, but it does

not take away the power of court in appropriate

circumstances of making other orders supportive of or

incidental to the arbitral process, such as for the

constitution of the arbitral tribunal or for providing such

interim measures as may be necessary to protect or secure

the claim which forms the subject matter of the arbitration

agreement.

Appeal is dismissed. No costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

2 [2011] BLR 130

6

K.K. Wickramasinghe, J. (Acting P/CA)

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal