Page 1 of 13

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal under Section 331 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 as amended. The Attorney General, Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12. Complainant CA HCC 0194 /2023 Vs.

High Court of Colombo HC 392/2017 Mailappuge Ananda Karunarathna. Accused AND NOW BETWEEN Mailappuge Ananda Karunarathna. Accused-Appellant Vs.

The Attorney General, Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12. Complainant-Respondent

Page 2 of 13

Before: B. Sasi Mahendran, J. Amal Ranaraja, J.

Counsel: Sarath Jayamanne P.C, with Vineshka Mendis, Prashan

Wickramaratne, Sajeewa Meegahawaththa, Dakshin Abeykoon and Chathushi Vidushika for the Accused-Appellant.

Dileepa Pieris, A.S.G. for the State. Argued on: 14.05.2025 Judgment on: 13.06.2025

JUDGMENT

AMAL RANARAJA, J.

1. The Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Appellant)

has been indicted in the High Court of Colombo in case no. HC

392/2017.

2. The charges in the indictment are as follows;

Charge 01

Between the time period 25.06.2010 and 31.07.2010, by

placing the penis of the appellant between the thighs of

Dinuka Kiriella (PW 01) who was under the age of 16 years at

the time, committed an act of grave sexual abuse on PW 01,

Page 3 of 13

an offence punishable under section 365 B (2) (b) of the Penal

Code (as amended).

Charge 02

Between the above mentioned time period, on a different

occasion other than the occasion mentioned in Charge 01, by

inserting the penis of the appellant into the anus of PW 01

who was under the age of 16 years at the time, committed an

act of grave sexual abuse on PW 01, an offence punishable

under Section 365 B (2) (b) of the Penal Code (as amended).

3. At the conclusion of the trial the appellant has been convicted of

both charges referred to above and the appellant sentenced as

follows;

Charge 1 Term of 07 years simple imprisonment and a fine of

Rs. 10,000.00 with a term of 01 year simple

imprisonment in default of payment of the fine.

Charge 2

Term of 07 years simple imprisonment and a fine of

Rs. 10,000.00 with a term of 01 year simple

imprisonment in default of payment of the fine.

Page 4 of 13

And a sum of Rs. 100,000.00 as compensation to be paid to

PW01 with a term of 12 months simple imprisonment in default

of the payment of compensation.

4. Being aggrieved by the conviction and the sentencing order the

appellant has preferred the instant appeal to this Court.

5. When the matter was taken up for argument the Learned

Presidents Counsel for the appellant informed Court that he

intended to limit the ground of appeal to the following;

i. That the sentence is excessive, therefore, could

the Learned High Court Judge have applied the

principles laid down in SC Reference 3/2008?

6. The Learned Presidents Counsel for the appellant has contended

that the sentences imposed on the appellant were extreme, and the

sentences of 07 years simple imprisonment each imposed in

respect of the 1st and 2nd charges are mandatory sentences imposed

by statute. Additionally, the Learned Presidents Counsel for the

appellant has contended that the following mitigatory

circumstances be taken into consideration and variation of the

sentences be made in favour of the appellant.

Page 5 of 13

7. The following occurrences have been set out by the Learned

Presidents Counsel for the appellant in support of his contention;

That the appellant is currently facing stage four kidney disease, a

critical condition that significantly impairs the kidneys ability to

filter out toxic substances from the blood stream. Should the illness

progress to stage five, it could prove fatal.

Managing such a debilitating condition necessitates strict dietary

and lifestyle modifications, including a substantial reduction in salt

intake, limitation of protein consumption and careful regulation of

water intake. Additionally, controlling hypertension is crucial to the

health of the appellant.

8. However, if the appellant was to be incarcerated adhering to these

essential health guidelines would become exceedingly difficult, if

not impossible. The prison system may not provide the necessary

accommodation for a special diet tailored to meet the appellant's

medical needs.

9. Unlike an average inmate the appellant would face unique

challenges in maintaining his illness within the constraints of a

correctional facility. Consequently, the circumstances of the

appellant's incarceration would not only impede the maintenance

of his health but would also place him at a disproportionate

disadvantage compared to other inmates, who do not suffer from

Page 6 of 13

similar medical issues. This disparity raises significant concerns

regarding the treatment and care of the appellant with a chronic

health condition.

10. The Learned Additional Solicitor General has argued that the

matters presented before this Court by the learned Presidents

Counsel for the appellant were not brought to the attention of the

Learned High Court Judge during the mitigation of sentence.

Consequently, the Learned High Court Judge was not aware of the

arguments now being raised when issuing the disputed sentencing

order. That it is important to note that the Learned High Court Judge

has imposed the mandatory sentence prescribed by statute,

therefore the sentences handed down are not excessive in nature,

should this Court consider intervening in the disputed sentencing

order based solely on facts that were only introduced at this stage

there is a risk of unfair consequences for the Learned High Court

Judge. This could undermine the integrity of the judicial process and

set a concerning precedent, suggesting that Appellate Courts might

be compelled to reconsider a sentencing order based on information

not previously available to the original sentencing court.

11. At the time of the incidents referenced in the charges, PW 01 has

been a 15-year-old boy. The appellant, an adult male, has lived in

an old walawuwa type house" located adjacent to the hardware

store frequented by PW 01.

Page 7 of 13

The appellant has formed an acquaintance with PW 01 and on one

occasion, volunteered to take PW 01 to his house, as PW 01 was

interested in seeing the aesthetics of the property. When PW 01

taken to the appellants house, the appellant has offered PW 01 a

drink. After consuming the drink, PW 01 has begun to feel dizzy.

Seizing the opportunity, the appellant has then engaged in

intercrural sex with PW 01. Subsequently on another occasion the

appellant has engaged in sexual activity involving penetration of the

anus of PW 01.

12. The appellant has kept silent when he was called upon for his

defence.

To begin with, it is reasonable to consider the sentences prescribed

by law for the offences stated in the charges set out in the

indictment.

Section 365 B (1) and (2) of the Penal Code is as follows;

(1) Grave sexual abuse is committed any person who, for

sexual gratification, does any act, by the use of his

genitals or any other part of the human body or any

Instrument on any orifice or part of the body of any other

person, being an act which does not amount to rape

under section 363, in circumstances falling under any

of the following descriptions, that is to say-

Page 8 of 13

(a) without the consent of the other person;

(aa) with or without the consent of the other person

when the other person is under sixteen years of

age;

(b) with the consent of the other person while such other

person was in lawful or unlawful detention or where

that consent has been obtained, by use of force, or

intimidation or threat of detention or by putting such

other person in fear or death or hurt;

(c) with the consent of the other person where such

consent has been obtained at a time the other person

was of unsound mind or was in a state of intoxication

induced by alcohol of drugs.

(2) Whoever

(a) commits grave sexual abuse shall be punished with

rigorous imprisonment for a term not less than five years and not exceeding twenty years and with fine and shall also be ordered to pay compensation of an amount determined by court to the person in respect of whom the offence was committed for the injuries caused to such person; (b) commits grave sexual abuse on any person under

eighteen years of age shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term not less than seven years and not exceeding twenty years and with fine and shall also be ordered to pay compensation of an

Page 9 of 13

amount determined by court to the person in respect of whom the offence was committed for the injuries caused to such person.

13. Accordingly, mandatory sentence has been prescribed in respect of

those convicted of committing the offences set out in charges 1 and

2 in the indictment.

14. Mandatory sentences represent a significant shift in the criminal

justice system, establishing fixed penalties for certain offences

regardless of the individual circumstances, whereby Judges are

bound to impose predetermined sentences regardless of the specifics

of the case.

15. The Supreme Court of Sri Lanka in SC Reference No. 03/2008 has

determined that a trial Judge's discretion to reach to a conclusion

as regards to a sentence is not inhibited or controlled by a

mandatory sentence imposed by a statute.

16. In SC Reference No.03/2008, the Supreme Court has held,

"In the above circumstances we hold that the minimum

mandatory sentence in Section 364(2)(e) is in conflict with

Article 4(c), 11 and 12(1) of the Constitution and that the

High Court is not inhibited from imposing a sentence that it

Page 10 of 13

deems appropriate in the exercise of its judicial discretion

notwithstanding the minimum mandatory sentence.

17. In Warnakulasooriya Mudiyanselage Jayanth Warnasuriya

vs. Attorney General CA/HCC/169/2022 decided on 09.12.2024,

Kulathunga, J, discussing the connotations of the judgment in SC

Reference 03/2008 has stated as follows;

"Certainly, in view of SC Reference 3/2008 though a trial

Judge is neither shackled nor inhibited by the said minimum

mandatory sentence, is required to have regard to the fact that

a minimum mandatory sentence is so fixed. A court now has

the discretion to impose a sentence of imprisonment less than

the prescribed minimum. However, I am of the view that the

Judge should have and there should be some adequate

reason/s to go below the said minimum sentence. The court

should mention such reasons in the Judgment when awarding

a sentence less than the prescribed minimum. In order to

exercise the discretion to impose a sentence less than the

minimum prescribed there should be and the court has to

record such reason/s which is adequate. This to my mind

should necessarily be some tangible and good reason which

is not fanciful. Thus, to my mind it is necessary and prudent

to assign and give the reason if and when a Judge decides to

Page 11 of 13

impose a sentence below the minimum mandatory fixed by

law."

18. Grave sexual abuse is a horrific offence that not only violates an

individual's physical anatomy but also inflicts profound

psychological trauma leaving lasting scars on victims. The

seriousness of the offence necessitates a robust legal response that

serves not only to punish the offender but also to deter potential

future offences. Deterrent punishment aims to convey a strong

societal message that such behavior will not be tolerated, thereby,

fostering a sense of safety and justice.

19. In determining the appropriate punishment, the Court is required

to consider the same from the point of view of the convict as well as

the public.

In Attorney General vs. H. N. de Silva 57 NLR 121, Basnayake,

ACJ, explaining the matters that should be taken into

consideration in determining a sentence that should be passed on

a convict has stated as follows;

"In assessing the punishment that should be passed on an

offender, a Judge should consider the matter of sentence

both from the point of view of the public and the offender,

Judges are too often prone to look at the question only from

Page 12 of 13

the angle of the offender. A Judge should, in determining

the proper sentence, first consider the gravity of the offence

as it appears from the nature of the act itself and should

have regard to the punishment provided in the Penal Code

or other statute under which the offender is charged. He

should also regard the effect of the punishment as a

deterrent and consider to what extent it will be effective. If

the offender held a position of trust or belonged to a service

which enjoys the public confidence that must be taken into

account in assessing the punishment. The incident of crimes

of the nature of which the offender has been found to be

guilty and the difficulty of detection are also matters which

should receive due consideration. The reformation of the

criminal, though no doubt an important consideration is

subordinate to the others I have mentioned. Where the

public interest or the welfare of the State (which are

synonymous) outweighs the previous good character,

antecedents and age of the offender, public interest must

prevail."

20. Convictions for grave sexual abuse carries significant implications

not just for the victim but for the society as a whole. Ensuring that

individuals convicted of serious offences are dealt with appropriately

is crucial for justice and further deterrence of future offences. The

legal consequences imposed on individuals convicted of grave sexual

abuse are designed to reflect the seriousness of the crime.

21. It is seen that several aggravating circumstances are present in the

instant case. The fact that PW1 was of a very young age, the degree

Page 13 of 13

of pre-planning by the appellant and the repeated commission of the

offence, are some of those aggravating circumstances. Further, the

attention of Court is drawn to the fact that matters enumerate in

this Court have not been presented as mitigating factors before the

High Court. Public interest demands that a custodial sentence be

imposed on the appellant in this case.

22. Accordingly, I am not inclined to interfere with the conviction and

the disputed judgment, together with the sentencing order.

However, the term of 7 years simple imprisonment each imposed in

respect of the 1st and 2nd charges shall run concurrently beginning

March 10,2023, the date of conviction.

Subject to the above variation, the appeal stands dismissed.

I make no order with regard to costs.

23. The Registrar of this Court is directed to communicate this

judgment to the High Court of Colombo for compliance.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

B. SASI MAHENDRAN, J.

I agree,

Judge of the Court of Appeal