==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/232-236/2020

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of Section

331 (1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure

Act No. 15 of 1979, read with Article 138 of

the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Complainant

-Vs-

1. Koralage Darshana Priyankara alias Aju

alias Raju

2. Koaralge Karunarathne (deceased)

3. Koralage Susil

4. Koralage Nalin Ranjith

5. Koralage Kusum Nawaratne alias Rala

6. Jayasinghe Arachchige Ajith Sarath

Kumara alias Kaluwa

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

1. Koralage Darshana Priyankara alias Aju

alias Raju

2. Koralage Susil

3. Koralage Nalin Ranjith

4. Koralage Kusum Nawaratne alias Rala

5. Jayasinghe Arachchige Ajith Sarath

Kumara alias Kaluwa

Court of Appeal No: CA/HCC/232-236/2020

High Court of Homagama Case No: HC/07/2017

CA/HCC/232-236/2020

2 | P a g e

Accused-Appellants

-Vs-

The Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

Complainant-Respondent

Before : P. Kumararatnam, J.

Pradeep Hettiarachchi, J.

Counsel : Saliya Pieris, PC with Anjana Ratnasiri and Sudeshna

Rupasinghe for the 1st Accused-Appellant

: Anuja Premaratna, PC with Nayana Dissanayake for

the 2nd Accused-Appellant

: Shavindra Fernando, PC for the 3rd Accused-Appellant

: Neranjan Jayasinghe with Randunu Heellage and

Pravindika Kularatne for the 4th Accused-Appellant

: Nalin Ladduwahetty, PC with Kavithri Hirusha

Ubeysekera for the 6th Accused-Appellant

: Shanil Kularatne, ASG for the Respondent

Argued on : 23.01.2026

Decided on : 27.05.2026

CA/HCC/232-236/2020

3 | P a g e

Pradeep Hettiarachchi, J

Judgement

Background

1. The Accused-Appellants (hereinafter referred to as “the Appellants”) were indicted

before the High Court of Homagama on 08-09-2016 for the following counts;

(a) That on or about 09-10-2009, at Habarakada, the Accused, being members

of an unlawful assembly with the common object of causing hurt to Isanka

Sameera Silva, committed an offence punishable under Section 140 of the

Penal Code.

(b) At the same time, place, and during the course of the same transaction, one

or more members of the said unlawful assembly caused the death of Isanka

Sameera Silva, thereby committing an offence punishable under Section 296

read with Section 146 of the Penal Code.

(c) At the same time, place, and during the course of the same transaction, the

Accused caused the death of Isanka Sameera Silva, thereby committing an

offence punishable under Section 296 read with Section 32 of the Penal

Code.

2. When the indictment was read out, all six Accused pleaded not guilty to the charges

leveled against them and agreed to proceed with the trial without a jury.

3. Accordingly, the trial commenced on 05-01-2018, and 13 witnesses, including the

Judicial Medical Officer of the Homagama Base Hospital, gave evidence on behalf

of the prosecution.

CA/HCC/232-236/2020

4 | P a g e

4. After the close of the prosecution’s case, the defense was called. The 1st and 2nd

Accused had made dock statements, while the 3rd, 4th, 5th, and 6th Accused had given

evidence under oath and further called witnesses to give evidence on their behalf.

5. The 2nd Accused passed away during the pendency of the trial, and thereafter, the

indictment was amended on 04-09-2019 to reflect this change.

6. The Learned High Court Judge, at the conclusion of the trial, found the Accused

guilty of the charges contained in the indictment and convicted them. He imposed

six months rigorous imprisonment in respect of the 1st count, and all the Accused

were sentenced to death in respect of the 2nd and 3rd counts.

7. Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellants have

preferred this Appeal.

Evidence of the Main Eyewitness

8. It transpires from the evidence of PW1 that the deceased was known to him as he

lived in the same neighborhood, and it was his evidence that on the morning of 09-

10-2009, the deceased had come to PW1’s place and thereafter, both of them had

gone to meet one Jayalath in the deceased’s three-wheeler. According to PW1,

Jayalath is engaged in farming. On some days, they used to help Jayalath with the

work in the paddy field. On the day of the incident, they had met Jayalath, who was

working in the paddy field with two or three other people. One Shantha was also

working there in the paddy field.

9. After spending time at Jayalath’s place for some time, PW1 returned home with the

deceased. However, in the evening, he had gone to Jayalath’s place with the

deceased. As they reached Jayalath’s place, Jayalath had already finished his work

at the paddy field and asked them to buy a bottle of arrack. Accordingly, the

deceased and PW1 had gone to the junction to buy a bottle of arrack. According to

PW1, both he and the deceased had consumed alcohol. However, PW1 stated that

both of them had only one drink each.

CA/HCC/232-236/2020

5 | P a g e

10. PW1 testified that there were about four other people, namely, Shantha, Wasantha,

Tharanga, and PW1’s brother named Sampath, at Jayalath’s house that evening.

PW1 testified that they were at Jayalath’s place till 8.00-8.10 p.m. and then left

Jayalath’s place in the deceased’s three-wheeler. PW1’s brother, Wasantha,

Tharanga, and Shantha had also come with them in the same three-wheeler. They

had come near PW1’s house and parked the three-wheeler at a small plot of land

situated in front of PW1’s house. While others left, Shantha had asked the deceased

to drop him and his family.

11. After dropping Shantha and his family members at around 8.00-9.00 p.m., the

deceased had proceeded with PW1 towards PW1’s house in order to drop him.

According to PW1, he was seated in the rear seat. As per PW1’s testimony, in order

to reach PW1’s house from Shantha’s place, they had to go through a road across

the paddy fields. There are no street lamps or any kind of lighting on the said road.

12. The deceased had then suddenly stopped the three-wheeler in the middle of the said

road and had started reversing it. PW1 had then asked the deceased the reason as to

why he was reversing the three-wheeler, and the deceased had responded “ප ොඩි

වැඩක් තිපෙනවො බලලො ෙන්.” The said road was named Welikadayawatte Road. PW1

also confirmed that there were no electricity lamps at the place where they stopped

the three-wheeler. However, the lights of the three-wheeler were on.

13. When the deceased started reversing the three-wheeler, PW1 had put his head out

from the left side of the three-wheeler to look back. At the cross-examination, it was

suggested to PW1 that if they did not stop the three-wheeler, they would not have

met anyone. Thereafter, PW1 stated that he got to know the next day that the

deceased had stopped the three-wheeler as some coconut logs were across the road,

obstructing them from proceeding beyond that point.

14. PW1 stated that he saw one Nalin (i.e., the 3rd Appellant) and Susil (i.e., the 2nd

Appellant), who were known to him, approaching the three-wheeler in an aggressive

manner. He has observed them at a distance of about 5 feet. According to PW1, the

CA/HCC/232-236/2020

6 | P a g e

3rd Appellant was carrying a manna knife in his hand, and the 2nd Appellant was

carrying a wooden club.

15. PW1 further stated that when he was about to get down from the three-wheeler,

three other people came from the right side of the three-wheeler. PW1 had

recognized them as Aju (i.e., 1st Appellant), Rala (4th Appellant), and Kaluwa (5th

Appellant). PW1 stated that all three of them were known to him prior to the

incident, as they live close by. PW1 further stated that the 1st Appellant had a

wooden club in his hand.

16. When he was about to get down, the 1st Accused had struck him with a wooden club.

After a short while, PW1 had somehow managed to get out of the three-wheeler

from the right side and had started running towards the opposite direction. The 1st

and the 4th Appellants had then come chasing PW1 up to the place where there was

a bunt. PW1 had managed to escape by jumping onto the paddy field from the bunt.

Thereafter, PW1 had seen them running towards the deceased’s three-wheeler.

17. PW1 had then observed from the paddy field, as to what was happening at the place

where the deceased was. He stated that there was moonlight that day, and as a result,

he could see what was happening. He further stated that the road where the incident

took place was on an elevated level and there were no trees around. Therefore, even

a person who is on the other side of the paddy field could see what was happening.

18. PW1 had seen that the place was surrounded by the Accused persons, and he had

heard the deceased screaming, asking them what they were going to do to him. The

people who assaulted the deceased had dragged him on the ground towards the shop

belonging to the 5th Appellant. PW1 stated that the deceased was outside the three-

wheeler, and the Accused persons were gathered around him. He stated that, even

if he could not clearly identify how many and who were there at a distance, he had

identified the five of them earlier.

CA/HCC/232-236/2020

7 | P a g e

19. Thereafter, PW1 had run towards the house of a person known as “Malli,” and with

him he had gone to Jayalath’s house. PW1 had then informed Jayalath that the

deceased was being assaulted. A little later, PW1, Jayalath, and Malli had gone to

the crime scene in a three-wheeler driven by Jayalath’s friend. As per PW1’s

testimony, by the time they reached the place where the incident took place, the

deceased was already dead. PW1 stated that there was sufficient light to identify the

body of the deceased, as there was a street lamp nearby. As described by PW1, the

deceased had been wearing a short and a banian at the time. Furthermore, the

deceased’s leg had been severed and thrown away. His hand and head were also cut.

PW1 further testified that by the time they reached the crime scene, the Accused

persons had already left the place.

20. Upon seeing the horrific incident, Jayalath had suggested them go to the police.

Accordingly, PW1 had gone to Athurugiriya Police Station with Jayalath and Malli

and informed the police of the said incident. After giving the first statement, PW1

gave another statement to the police regarding the incident. He stated that at the time

of making the statement to the police, he mentioned the names of the Accused

persons to the police. However, PW1 also admitted that he couldn’t give a detailed

statement to the police in the first instance as he was disturbed by the incident.

21. At the trial, PW1 identified the 2nd Accused, who was the father of the 1st Accused.

PW1 further admitted that he did not see the 2nd Accused at the place where the

incident took place. When asked whether he could identify the manna knife and the

wooden clubs used to assault the deceased PW1 initially stated that he could not

identify them as there was no specific mark on them. However, at the trial, PW1

identified the manna knife (Production marked as “P1”), two black wooden clubs

(Productions marked as “P2 (a) and P2 (b)”) shown to him, and the black colored

three quarter size trouser (marked as “P3”) and the t-shirt (marked as “P4”) worn by

the deceased person. The butter colored three- wheel bearing the no WPQA 6195

was marked as “P5,” and it was admitted by both parties that it was the three-wheel

on which PW1 and the deceased travelled on the day in question.

CA/HCC/232-236/2020

8 | P a g e

22. PW1 also stated that a complaint had been made against the deceased for assaulting

the 1st Appellant, which had resulted in a rift between the deceased and the Accused

persons. He further admitted that, although he himself sustained injuries as a result

of the assault by the 1st Accused, he did not admit to the hospital for treatment. As

per his testimony, the deceased’s body was not taken to the hospital, but remained

at the scene until the Learned Magistrate arrived the following day to conduct the

inquest.

23. At the trial, PW1 admitted that there is a pending case in the Magistrate's Court

against the deceased for assaulting the 1st Appellant and that he is also named as an

accused in the said case. According to PW1, the said incident had happened about

3-4 months prior to the deceased’s death.

Grounds of Appeal

24. The common grounds of appeal advanced by the Appellants in their written

submissions are as follows;

(a) The Learned Trial Judge had convicted the Appellants based on the

uncorroborated testimony of the eyewitness.

(b) The Learned Trial Judge has not considered the fact that the eyewitness did

not mention the names of the Accused-Appellants apart from the 1st

Appellant when he narrated the incident for the first time to PW4.

(c) The Learned Trial Judge has failed to consider whether there was sufficient

light at the scene for the eyewitness to identify the Appellants.

(d) The Learned Trial Judge has failed to consider whether all six Accused who

allegedly formed an unlawful assembly were present together at the scene at

the commencement of the incident.

CA/HCC/232-236/2020

9 | P a g e

(e) The judgment of the High Court is devoid of the principles relating to

unlawful assembly, common object, and common murderous intention.

(f) The Learned Trial Judge has failed to consider the infirmities in the evidence

of the eyewitness.

(g) The Learned Trial Judge has failed to consider evidence of the Appellants in

a fair manner.

(h) The Learned Trial Judge has failed to give the benefit of the doubt to the

Appellants.

(i) The Learned Trial Judge has failed to consider the lapse on the part of the

police.

Consideration of Grounds of Appeal

25. Accordingly, one of the main grounds of appeal advanced by the Appellants is that

the Learned Trial Judge failed to consider whether PW1 was in a position to make

a proper identification, having regard to the lighting conditions that prevailed at the

time of the incident.

26. At the trial, PW1 testified that all the Appellants were known to him prior to the

incident, as they were from the same area. According to him, there were no street

lamps along the road situated between the paddy fields. However, he stated that he

was able to identify the 1st to 5th Appellants at the initial stage, as there was sufficient

moonlight and the lights of the three-wheeler were also on. He further stated that,

after being chased away by the 1st and 4th Appellants, he jumped into the paddy field

and observed the incident from the other side. According to him, the road where the

incident took place was at an elevated level, and there were no trees in the vicinity,

such that even a person standing on the opposite side of the paddy field could see

what was happening. He also stated that there was a half-moon on that night.

CA/HCC/232-236/2020

10 | P a g e

27. Based on the above factors, the Learned Trial Judge has arrived at the conclusion

that PW1 may have had sufficient light and time to make a proper identification of

the Accused.

28. However, it was submitted by the Learned President’s Counsel for the 2nd Appellant

that, given the fact that the full moon Poya day was one week prior to the date of

the incident, and the south west monsoon started in September, the nights are

generally cloudy and dark. Therefore, it would have been difficult, if not impossible,

for the only eyewitness to have identified the Accused. It was also submitted that

since PW1 was also in a hurry to leave the place so as to evade any attack by the

perpetrators, he may not have been able to make a proper identification of the

Accused. It is in evidence that PW1 was unable to state whether the deceased was

even able to get out of the three-wheeler or if he was assaulted by the 2nd Appellant,

as he was mostly concerned about his own escape.

29. The well-known decision of R vs. Turnbull [1977] QB 224 is based on the court’s

acknowledgement of the real risk of miscarriages of justice in visual identification

cases and can be distilled from the following passages in the judgment of Lord

Widgery CJ:

“First, whenever the case against an accused depends wholly or

substantially on the correctness of one or more identifications of the accused

which the defence alleges to be mistaken, the judge should warn the jury of

the special need for caution before convicting the accused in reliance on the

correctness of the identification or identifications. In addition he should

instruct them as to the reason for the need for such a warning and should

make some reference to the possibility that a mistaken witness can be a

convincing one and that a number of such witnesses can all be mistaken …

Secondly, the judge should direct the jury to examine closely the

circumstances in which the identification by each witness came to be made

… Recognition may be more reliable than identification of a stranger; but

even when the witness is purporting to recognise someone whom he knows,

the jury should be reminded that mistakes in recognition of close relatives

CA/HCC/232-236/2020

11 | P a g e

and friends are sometimes made. All these matters go to the quality of the

identification evidence … [P.228]

When, in the judgment of the trial judge, the quality of the identifying

evidence is poor, as for example when it depends solely on a fleeting glance

or on a longer observation made in difficult conditions, the situation is very

different. The judge should then withdraw the case from the jury and direct

an acquittal unless there is other evidence which goes to support the

correctness of the identification … The trial judge should identify to the jury

the evidence which he adjudges is capable of supporting the evidence of

identification. If there is any evidence or circumstances which the jury might

think was supporting when it did not have this quality, the judge should say

so.” The Turnbull guidelines were formulated in the context of visual

identification evidence. [P230]”

30. However, it is pertinent to state at this juncture that there are some authorities in

Indian jurisprudence that provide a different perspective when the issue of

identification arises under circumstances similar to those of the case in hand.

31. Following authorities consistently establish that eyewitness identification in low-

light or night-time conditions is reliable when the witnesses are familiar with the

accused and attentive, particularly in rural settings where the villagers’ eyesight and

perception are adapted to dim light from lanterns, earthen lamps, or starlight, and

that identification can be made by facial features, voice, silhouette, shadow, or gait.

32. Even minimal light is generally sufficient for recognition, especially when the

accused are known to the witnesses, and the proximity and attentiveness of the

witnesses at the time of the incident further support the credibility of their

identification. Thus, poor lighting alone does not render identification unreliable.

CA/HCC/232-236/2020

12 | P a g e

33. For instance, in the case of Kalilro Tiwari v State of Bihar, AIR 1997 SC 2186, the

Indian Supreme Court held:

"where the only source of light at place of occurrence which was village

where dacoit in question took place where an earthen lamp, the

identification of Accused even in such light would not be problem for

villagers especially when many of dacoits were direct relations of

complainant. The visibility capacity of urban people who are acclimatized

to fluorescent lights or in candescent lamps is not the standard to be applied

to villagers whose optical potency is attuned to country- made lamps. Their

visibility is conditioned to such lights and hence it would be quite possible

for them to identify men and matters in such light and for more than a

fortnight before the date of the offence he had met the accused on several

occasions in connection with the dispute, it cannot be said that the

identification of the assailant by the witness from what he heard and

observed was so improbable that the Supreme Court would be justified in

disagreeing with the opinion of the court which saw the witness and formed

its opinion as to his credibility and of High Court which considered the

evidence against the appellant and accepted the testimony."

34. In Nathuni Yadav and Others v State of Bihar and Another, AIR 1997 SUPREME

COURT 1808, it was held:

“We have considered the said contention from all its angles. Ever assuming

that there was no moonlight then, we have to gauge the situation carefully.

The proximity at which the assailants would have confronted with the

injured, the possibility of some light reaching there from the glove of stars,

and the fact that the murder was committed on a roofless terrace are

germane factors to be born in mind while judging whether the victims could

have had enough visibility to correctly identify the assailants. Over and

above those factors, we must bear in mind the further fact that assailants

were no strangers to the inmates of the tragedy bound house, the eye

witnesses being well acquainted with the physiognomy of each one of the

CA/HCC/232-236/2020

13 | P a g e

killers. We are, therefore, not persuaded to assume that it would not have

been possible for the victims to see the assailants or that there was possibility

for making a wrong identification of them. We are keeping in mind the fact

that even the assailants had enough light to identity the victims whom they

targeted without any mistake from among those who were sleeping on the

terrace. If the light then available, though meagre, was enough for the

assailants why should we think that same light was not enough for the injured

who would certainly have pointedly focused their eyes on the faces of the

intruders standing in front of them. What is sauce for the goose is sauce for

the gander.”

35. However, in evaluating the reliability of the evidence relating to the identification

of the Appellants, the aforementioned facts must be considered together with the

rest of the evidence. In other words, it would not be safe to base a conviction solely

on the ground that, since the Appellants were known to the eyewitness prior to the

incident, he may have been able to make a proper identification despite the poor

lighting conditions that prevailed at the time of the incident.

36. When considering such factors with the rest of the evidence given by PW1, it is

important to note that PW1, at a later point, has admitted that he was unable to

identify the number of the Accused persons or each of them separately at the time

of the attack due to the distance. At the trial, PW1 testified as follows;

“ප්‍ර: ඉසංක ත්‍රීවිල් එපකන් එළිපේ ඉන්නවො තමන් දැක්කද?

උ: ඔව්, කට්ටිෙ වට පවලො හිිපේ. කට්ටිෙ එතන ප ොදිෙට හිිපේ. කට්ටිෙ එක

ලඟ වපේ හිිපේ. හරිෙට ප න්පන් නැහැ ඈතට. එතැන ඉඳලො බැලුවම කට්ටිෙක්

ඉන්නවො වපේ පේනවො.

ප්‍ර: තමන් ඔෙ ත්‍රීවිල් එපකන් ඉස්පසල්ලොම එලිෙට බැහැලො එනපකොට තමන් දැකපු,

තමන් අධිකරණපේ හඳුනො ගත්ත විත්තිකරුවන් ස්පදනොම ඒ ඉසංක ඉන්න තැන

ඉන්නවො තමන් දැක්කද?

උ: මම සිිෙ තැනට පේන්පන් නැහැ පේ අහවලො අහවලො කිෙලො මම මුලින්ම

දැක්කො.

......

CA/HCC/232-236/2020

14 | P a g e

ප්‍ර: පකොයි විදිෙටද පේ ඇදපගන ෙනවො දැක්පක්?

උ: ගහලො ඇදපගන ෙනවො තමයි දැක්පක් මම. පකොපහොම අරන් ෙනවොද කිෙලො

මම හරිෙටම දැක්පක් නැහැ.

ප්‍ර: ඒ ඇදපගන ෙන පවලොපව් ඔබ පේ අඳුරො ගත්ත විත්තිකරුවන් ස් පදනොත් එතන

හිිෙොද?

උ: මම මුලින් දැක්ක ස්පදනො දැක්කො. මට ඈතට එතැන කීපදපනක් හිිෙද, කව්රු

හිිෙොද කිෙන්න මට ැහැදිලි නෑ.” (At pages 157 and 159 of the Appeal Brief)

37. Therefore, according to PW1’s own admission, it is clear that PW1 had not been

able to make a proper identification of the Accused at the time of the attack due to

the distance between the crime scene and the place where PW1 was observing the

incident from.

38. Furthermore, the unreliability of PW1’s evidence in relation to the identification of

the Appellants is further reinforced by the evidence given by PW4 at the trial before

the High Court.

39. While PW1 stated that he narrated the incident to PW4, PW4 stated that PW1 merely

informed him that some persons, including the 1st Appellant, had chased him and

that he had run away. According to PW4, PW1 did not disclose to him what had

happened thereafter, even when questioned by PW4. At the trial, PW4 testified as

follows:

“ප්‍ර: ජෙලත්පේ පගදරට ආ හු තුෂොර ආපව් ඇයි?

උ: කෑගහපගන දුවපගන ආවො.

ප්‍ර: පමොකක් කිෙලද කෑගහපගන ආපව්?

උ: අපි පවලො මැද්පද් නතර කළොම කට්ටිෙක් ආවො කිව්වො. ඊට ස්පස් මම ත්‍රීවිල්

එපකන් බැස්සො කිව්වො. එෙො ොපේ කට්ටිෙක් එපලව්වො කිව්වො. එෙො දිව්වො කිව්වො.

එෙොටත් ොරක් පබල්ල දිහොට ගැහුවො කිව්වො.

අධිකරණපෙන්

ප්‍ර: කවුද එපහම කිව්පව්?

උ: තුෂොර.

CA/HCC/232-236/2020

15 | P a g e

ප්‍ර:පේ නඩුපව් සොක්ි දුන් 1 වන සොක්ිකරු.

උ: ඔව්.

ප්‍ර: තුෂොර පකපස්ද කිව්පව්? කව්ද නතර කළො කිව්පව්?

උ: පකපනක් කිව්පව් නැහැ.

ප්‍ර: තුශොරල විසින්ම නතර කළො කිව්වද?

උ: නැහැ. කට්ටිෙක් ත්‍රීවිල් එක නතර කළො කිව්වො. මම ැනලො දිව්වො කිව්වො.

.....

ප්‍ර: තමන් ඇහුවද ඉසන්කට පමොකද වුපන් කිෙලො?

උ: ඔව්.

ප්‍ර: තුෂොර පමොකද කිව්පව්?

උ: දැක්ක පදෙක් මට කිව්පව් නැහැ. එෙො ැනල දිව්වො කිව්වො.

.......

ප්‍ර:ඇයි ැනලො දිව්පව් කිෙලො ඇහුවොද?

උ: ඔව්. මො ොපේ කට්ටිෙක් එලවොපගන ආවො කිව්වො ගහන්න.

ප්‍ර: කවුද ආවො කිව්පව්?

උ: ආජු” (At pages 307-308 and 310 of the Appeal Brief)

40. Interestingly, although PW4 was called by the prosecution to corroborate the

testimony of PW1, the evidence of PW4 has instead created a reasonable doubt

regarding the prosecution’s version. Had PW1 in fact witnessed the incident, there

appears to be no reason for him not to have mentioned the names of the other

Appellants.

41. However, notwithstanding the aforesaid inconsistencies in the evidence of PW4, the

Learned Trial Judge concluded that PW1 may have furnished additional information

to PW4 while they were proceeding to the crime scene (vide page 947 of the Appeal

Brief). In the absence of any evidence to substantiate such a finding, that conclusion

amounts to nothing more than conjecture and speculation.

CA/HCC/232-236/2020

16 | P a g e

42. In my opinion, the above-mentioned inconsistencies that exist in the evidence given

by PW1 and PW4 are not confined to minor or peripheral matters, but strike at the

very root of the prosecution's case, namely, the identity of the assailants and raise a

reasonable doubt as to whether PW1 in fact saw the incident.

43. Also, prior to PW1 making a complaint to the police regarding the incident, police

had already received an anonymous call, and the names of the suspects were given

to them (Vide pages 427 and 430 of the Appeal Brief). Therefore, there is a

possibility of including or even suggesting names of the other Appellants to PW1

by the police at the time of recording his statement, even if PW1 had not actually

witnessed the incident.

44. When these factors are considered cumulatively, the poor lighting conditions, the

inconsistencies between the evidence given by PW1 and PW4, and the fact that PW1

could be an interested witness, I am of the view that it would be unsafe to base a

conviction on such evidence without independent and reliable corroboration. Where

the evidence of identification is coupled with material inconsistencies, the court

must be slow to act upon such testimony unless it is corroborated by other reliable

evidence.

45. Furthermore, it is significant to note that the Learned Trial Judge, after analyzing

and evaluating the prosecution evidence, concluded that two possible inferences

could be drawn on the basis of the said evidence. Firstly, the Learned Trial Judge

observed that, as the deceased was a person of violent disposition and was also

addicted to drugs, he could have been killed by a person who bore animosity towards

him, and that the Appellants may have been falsely implicated for the murder.

Secondly, it was also inferred that, due to the existing animosity between the

Appellants and the deceased, the Appellants themselves could have committed the

murder. (Vide page 942 of the Appeal Brief).

46. However, having acknowledged the existence of these two competing inferences,

the Learned Trial Judge proceeded to accept the latter inference without any cogent

evidentiary basis upon which the former inference could be excluded beyond a

CA/HCC/232-236/2020

17 | P a g e

reasonable doubt, which, according to settled legal principles, is patently erroneous

in law and cannot be sustained. What is discernible from the findings of the Learned

Trial Judge is that he proceeded to accept the more probable version out of the two

possible inferences and accordingly found the Appellants guilty of the charges. This

approach is in total violation of the principles governing the burden of proof in

criminal trials, in particular where the prosecution relies on circumstantial evidence.

47. When considering a case on circumstantial evidence, the Court has to bear in mind

that the prosecution must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the circumstantial

evidence led at the trial must only be consistent with the guilt of the Appellant and

not with any other hypothesis. When two reasonable inferences are possible, the

inference favorable to the accused must prevail. Accordingly, the above conclusion

reached by the Learned Trial Judge is erroneous and is contrary to the established

principles of circumstantial evidence.

48. Following authorities would provide some important guidance in the evaluation of

circumstantial evidence.

49. In Don Sunny vs. Attorney General [1998] (2) Sri. L.R. 1, it was held that:

“1. When a charge is sought to be proved by circumstantial evidence the

proved items of circumstantial evidence when taken together must

irresistibly point towards the only inference that the accused committed the

offence.

On a consideration of all the evidence the only inference that can be arrived

at should be consistent with the guilt of the accused only.

2. If on a consideration of the items of circumstantial evidence if an inference

can be drawn which is consistent with the innocence of the accused, then one

cannot say that the charges have been proved beyond reasonable doubt.

3. If upon a consideration of the proved items of circumstantial evidence if

the only inference that can be drawn is that the accused committed the

offence then they can be found guilty.

CA/HCC/232-236/2020

18 | P a g e

4. The prosecution must prove that no one else other than the accused had the

opportunity of committing the offence, the accused can be found guilty only

and only if the proved items of circumstantial evidence is consistent with

their guilt and inconsistent with their innocence.”

50. In Krishantha De Silva vs The Attorney General [2003] (1) Sri. L.R, 162, it was

held inter alia that:

“Circumstantial evidence can be acted upon only if from the circumstances

relied upon the only reasonable inference to draw is the inference of guilt. If

the circumstances are consistent both with guilt and with innocence then the

case is not proved on circumstantial evidence.”

Per Edirisuriya, J.

“The hypothesis of innocence must be excluded by the circumstance

relied upon and the circumstances must point to one conclusion alone, i.e.

the guilt of the accused"

51. At this point, I wish to set out a set of rules outlined in the case of Junaiden

Mohamed Haaris v Hon. Attorney General (SC Appeal 118-2017) decided on

9.11.2018 by Justice Aluwihare, which are as follows,

“1) The inference sought to be drawn must be consistent with all the proved

facts, if it is not, then the inference cannot be drawn.

2) The proved facts should be such that they exclude every reasonable

inference from them, save the one to be drawn. If they do not exclude other

reasonable inferences, then there must be a doubt whether the inference

sought to be drawn is correct (per Watermeyer J. in R v Blom 1939 A.D.188)

The rule regarding the exclusion of every hypothesis of innocence before

drawing the inference of guilt was laid down way back in 1838 in the case

of R vs Hodges 1838 2 Lew, cc.227). The circumstances must be such as to

produce moral certainty to the exclusion of every reasonable doubt.” In the

same judgment further reference has been made to the definition of

circumstantial evidence in the book by E. R. S. R. Coomarswamy “The Law

CA/HCC/232-236/2020

19 | P a g e

of Evidence” where it has stated as follows, “The chain or strand of proved

facts and circumstances must be so complete that no link in it is missing. If

any vital factor which is necessary to make the chain or strand complete is

missing or has remained unproved, it must be held that the prosecution has

failed to establish its case. A vital link should never be inferred.”

52. In light of the above authorities, where the evidence adduced by the prosecution is

capable of giving rise to two possible inferences, the Learned Trial Judge could not

and should not have proceeded to convict the Appellants. It is apparent that the

Learned Trial Judge himself was satisfied that the prosecution’s evidence gave rise

to two competing inferences, one of which was favourable to the Appellants.

53. In those circumstances, the conclusion of the Learned Trial Judge that he would

accept the more probable inference would, in my opinion, by itself be sufficient to

warrant an acquittal of the Appellants, as such an approach is contrary to well-

established legal principles governing criminal trials.

54. It was also argued that the Learned Trial Judge had failed to consider the evidence

of the Appellants in a fair manner. It is pertinent to note that the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, and 5th

Appellants have taken up the position that they were not present at the time of the

incident and that they were elsewhere.

55. The position of the 2nd Appellant was that, on the night of 09-10-2009, he visited

the house of one Lalith Ravindra, on the direction of one dayakaya at the temple, to

get it written on the ‘kuwithansiya’ that two cows and two calves were handed over

to said Lalith. After visiting Lalith, the 2nd Appellant had gone to see his sister and

handed over some money to his mother. He had then gone to the bakery at the

Habarakada junction, bought a loaf of bread and came back home at around 9.30

pm. He further stated that when he was about to reach home, he saw that the road

was crowded and a person named Sampath told him that one Isanka had been killed.

The 2nd Appellant had returned home as his child was waiting for him till he brings

bread. On the following day, as he set out on his bicycle to tether the cow, one Upul

had come and asked for his bicycle, stating that he wanted to go to the nearby shop

CA/HCC/232-236/2020

20 | P a g e

to buy a cigarette. The 2nd Appellant had given him the bicycle and had been waiting

for Upul. While he was waiting, two persons claiming to be from the Athurugiriya

Police came to him and asked for his name and address, stating that they were

recording statements from persons in the area in connection with a murder case. The

2nd Appellant thereafter accompanied them to the police station and gave a

statement.

56. The said Lalith Ravindra testified on behalf of the 2nd Appellant and stated that on

the day of the incident the 2nd Appellant handed over a couple of cows to him and

on the same day around 7.30 pm, the 2nd Appellant came to his house and in order

to get a receipt. The said receipt obtained by the 2nd Appellant was marked as “3විX”

at the trial. As per his testimony, the 2nd Appellant left his residence around 9 pm.

The witness further stated that the 2nd Appellant’s brother Gamini requested him to

give evidence on behalf of the 2nd Appellant.

57. In analyzing the evidence of the 2nd Appellant, the Learned Trial Judge observed

that it was rather unusual for the 2nd Appellant to narrate, in such great detail, the

events that allegedly took place on the date of the incident, unless he claimed to

possess an extraordinary memory or had made contemporaneous notes thereof (Vide

page 957 of the Appeal Brief). The Learned Trial Judge further rejected the evidence

of the 2nd Appellant on the basis that the facts stated in the receipt, the testimony of

the 2nd Appellant, and the evidence of Lalith Ravindra were contrary to each other.

58. The 3rd Appellant stated that, on the day of the incident, he had worked in the paddy

field until about 6.00 p.m. and thereafter returned home. Upon his arrival, his wife

informed him that she wished to visit her mother, as her mother had applied knee

guards. Thereafter, the 3rd Appellant and his wife travelled on his motor bicycle to

his mother-in-law’s residence.

CA/HCC/232-236/2020

21 | P a g e

59. According to the 3rd Appellant, he left his in-laws’ residence with his wife at

approximately 9.15 p.m. Upon returning home, he observed that a number of people

had gathered in the vicinity and inquired as to the reason for the commotion. He

stated that one Thushara informed him that there had been a fight near Kaluwa’s

shop, namely the shop belonging to the 5th Appellant.

60. The 3rd Appellant further stated that, since his wife had expressed concern that it

would be troublesome if their child awoke from sleep, and suggested that they retire

for the night, he did not proceed to the scene of the incident but instead went to bed.

61. According to the 3rd Appellant, he became aware of the deceased’s death only on

the following night. In support of his defence, both his wife and his father-in-law

testified before the Court.

62. According to the evidence of the 3rd Appellant’s wife, they had gone to visit her

parents at around 7.00 p.m. and returned home at approximately 8.30 p.m. DW3,

the father-in-law of the 3rd Appellant, also confirmed that, on the day of the incident,

both his daughter and the 3rd Appellant had visited their residence and had left at

around 9.30 p.m.

63. The 4th Appellant is a brother of the 1st Appellant and the son of the 2nd Accused

(now deceased). His position was that, from the year 2007, he had been residing

with his mother-in-law, Siriyawathie, as he was not on good terms with his father

due to his marriage. According to him, on the night of the incident he was in

Deraniyagala.

64. The 4th Appellant further stated that he came to Homagama after receiving a

telephone call from his mother. His mother informed him about the incident and

further advised him that he should surrender himself to the Court. The 4th Appellant

also testified that, upon surrendering before the Magistrate’s Court, he submitted an

affidavit marked “4විX”, in which he stated that he had not been present at the scene

of the incident.

CA/HCC/232-236/2020

22 | P a g e

65. The mother-in-law of the 4th Appellant also gave evidence at the trial and stated that,

after the 4th Appellant came to reside at her house in Deraniyagala, he did not visit

his home in Habarakada except on the occasion of his father’s funeral.

66. The 5th Appellant also testified that he did not have any animosity towards the

deceased. According to him, on the day of the incident, he had gone out for a hire

in the evening and returned to the shop at around 7.30 p.m. Thereafter, he and his

wife returned home. The 5th Appellant further stated that he came to know about the

incident only on the following morning. His position was that PW1 had disclosed

his name to the police at the instigation of PW4, as the family had not accepted a

marriage proposal brought by him for their sister.

67. The wife of the 5th Appellant also testified and stated that, on the day of the incident,

the 5th Appellant returned to the shop at around 7.30 p.m., after which they closed

the shop and went home.

68. The Learned Trial Judge rejected the evidence of the 3rd, 4th, and 5th Appellants on

the basis that their defence of alibi was not raised at the earliest possible opportunity,

but was instead advanced for the first time at the trial stage as an afterthought. The

Learned Trial Judge observed that, in the affidavits tendered to the Magistrate’s

Court, they had merely denied their presence at the scene of the crime and had not

set out the particulars of their alleged alibi. Likewise, no such explanation had been

given during the non-summary proceedings before the Magistrate’s Court. The

Learned Trial Judge further noted that it is highly improbable that the Appellants

and their respective witnesses would be able to recall, in such detail, how they spent

the relevant day after the lapse of nine years (Vide pages 958–959 of the Appeal

Brief).

69. In this backdrop, it is pertinent to discuss the importance of furnishing the details

regarding the alibi at the earliest opportunity.

CA/HCC/232-236/2020

23 | P a g e

70. The importance of furnishing the details regarding the alibi at the first opportunity

was highlighted by Tilakawardane J. in Silva v. Silva [2002] 2 Sri LR 29 at 33:

“The plaintiff-appellant who gave evidence at the trial in the District Court,

denied his presence at the scene of the alleged incident and stated that at the

relevant time he was at the house of his brother which was situated some

considerable distance away. He averred that the defendant knowing this had

falsely implicated him deliberately and maliciously. The learned District

Judge had rejected this submission. Several reasons have been cited. He had

failed to set up this alibi promptly and it was therefore belated. In his

statement given to the Balapitiya Police on 24. 09. 1984 (P15) though he

denied being at home at the time of the incident, he never made mention of

the fact that he was at the relevant time at his brother’s house. Therefore, in

the absence of these facts being furnished to the Police, no contemporaneous

statement of his brother was recorded. The statement to the Balapitiya Police

was the first available opportunity given to the plaintiff to record his alibi,

and he had failed to do so. Even at the trial though his brother was a listed

witness he was not called to give evidence. Instead, he called his father who

did not even mention his alibi in his examination in chief, despite referring

to the Magistrate’s Court case. He only adverted to it under cross-

examination. The evidence of the father is pertinent in that whilst he

corroborated the case of the prosecution that an incident did occur on the

date as alleged by them, his testimony was only that his son the plaintiff was

not involved. He does not corroborate the alibi, that his son the plaintiff was

at his brother’s house during the relevant time. In all the circumstances there

appeared clearly a basis for the rejection of the evidence pertaining to alibi

by the District Judge.”

71. In considering the plea of alibi, the following authorities would be of much

relevance:

CA/HCC/232-236/2020

24 | P a g e

72. In Jayatissa v. Attorney General [2010] 1 Sri LR 279 at 283, J.A.N. De Silva C.J

suggested three postulates where an accused sets up a defence of alibi:

1. if the evidence is not believed the alibi fails;

2. if the evidence is believed the alibi succeeds

3. if the alibi evidence is neither believed nor disbelieved but would create a

reasonable doubt the accused should get the benefit of the doubt.”

73. Similar sentiments were expressed by Justice Dep (as he then was) In Ranasinghe

v. O.I.C, Warakapola Police Station (SC/APPEAL/39/2011, SC Minutes of

02.04.2014), as follows:

“(i) if the alibi is true the accused is entitled to an acquittal

(ii) it is probably true or probably untrue it raises a reasonable doubt in the

prosecution case and the accused is entitled to an acquittal

(iii) even if the alibi is rejected, the prosecution has to establish its case

beyond reasonable doubt.”

74. In Viswanathan vs Attorney General [2021] (1) Sri. L.R. 14 it was held inter alia

that:

1. A witness need not be disbelieved on the sole basis of having made a belated

statement to the police if the delay can be explained.

2. When an alibi is pleaded by the accused, there is no burden on the accused to

prove it. The burden is on the prosecution to establish the accused's presence

at the scene of the offence. It is a misdirection in law to conclude that the

accused did not prove the alibi.

3. If the accused takes up a plea of alibi, he shall put it to the witnesses of the

prosecution during cross-examination. If the plea of alibi is made for the first

time in the dock statement, the court can reject it as false.

CA/HCC/232-236/2020

25 | P a g e

75. In the present case, the 3rd, 4th, and 5th Appellants have raised the defense of alibi in

their joint affidavit tendered to the Magistrate Court of Homagama dated 11-11-

2009. While the said affidavit does not contain any details as to their whereabouts

that day, the police had not taken any steps to probe into their alibi. Needless to say,

once the plea of alibi is raised by an accused without any delay, there is a duty cast

on the police to inquire into and verify such a defense. However, far from

conducting any investigation into the alibi raised by the 3rd, 4th, and 5th Appellants,

the police failed even to record statements from them.

76. It is apparent from the trial proceedings that the High Court Interpreter was called

as a witness for the defence and testified that, during the non-summary proceedings,

the Learned Magistrate had specially directed the police to record statements from

the 3rd,4th, and 5th Appellants upon their surrender before the Court. Notwithstanding

such direction, the police failed to comply with the said order and omitted to record

statements from the Appellants. Had such a statement been recorded at the earliest

stage, the Appellants would have had an opportunity to place before the

investigating authorities particulars relating to their whereabouts at the time of the

alleged offence, thereby enabling the Court to properly consider and verify the plea

of alibi.

77. However, the learned High Court Judge rejected the defence of alibi on the basis

that it had not been specially put to the prosecution witnesses during the cross-

examination and had allegedly been raised for the first time at the trial. Such a

finding is clearly contrary to the material available before the Court. The affidavit

dated 11.11.2009 tendered before the Magistrate’s Court expressly disclosed the

plea of alibi, following which the Learned Magistrate directed the police to record

their statements. The subsequent failure of the police to do so cannot be attributed

to the Appellants nor used against them to discredit their defence.

78. The Learned High Court Judge further erred in concluding that no prejudice had

been caused to the Appellants by the failure of the police to record their statements

and, in fact, that such omission had operated to their benefit (Vide page 951 of the

CA/HCC/232-236/2020

26 | P a g e

Appeal Brief). With respect, such a conclusion is untenable in law and in fact. Had

the police recorded statements from the Appellants and properly investigated the

plea of alibi, the result of such inquiry could either have strengthened the defence

or further corroborated the prosecution’s case. If the Appellants had satisfactorily

explained their whereabouts, such material would have supported their plea of alibi.

Conversely, if they had failed to account for their whereabouts, the defence of alibi

would have collapsed, and the prosecution’s case would thereby have been

strengthened. Therefore, the failure of the police to record statements from the

Appellants and to investigate the plea of alibi has resulted in a serious lacuna in the

investigation and caused substantial prejudice to the Appellants.

79. In these circumstances, the Appellants were effectively deprived of the opportunity

to place before the Court material capable of establishing that they were elsewhere

at the time of the alleged incident. The omission on the part of the police to comply

with the direction of the Learned Magistrate and investigate the plea of alibi has

consequently impaired the Appellant's right to a fair trial. Accordingly, the benefit

of such doubt arising from the defective investigation ought to be extended in favour

of the Appellants.

80. Furthermore, the importance of conducting a fair investigation had been emphasized

by this Court in a long line of judicial authorities.

81. For instance, in the case of Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or

Corruption v Indikeiya Hewage Kusumadasa Mahanama and Another SC TAB

1A & 1B/2020 (Decided on 11-01-2023), the Supreme Court held that the lawful

investigation is a prerequisite for a fair trial and that investigative irregularities can

vitiate the entire prosecution. The Court held;

“As a lawful investigation is prerequisite for a fair trial, an entrapment gives

rise to the distinct possibility of the accused being deprived of a ‘fair

trial’…If detected during the appellate stage. … the responsibility of the

appellate judge is to... quash the conviction and acquit the accused, if the

CA/HCC/232-236/2020

27 | P a g e

reception of such evidence at the trial had deprived the accused of a ‘fair

trial’ resulting in a miscarriage of justice.”

82. Another ground of appeal advanced by the Appellants is that the judgment of the

High Court is devoid of the principles relating to unlawful assembly, common

object, and common murderous intention.

83. The Learned Trial Judge has convicted the Appellants for the first and second counts

on the basis of unlawful assembly. However, the judgment does not contain any

analysis as to whether each Appellant has acted in furtherance of the common

objects set out in counts one and two.

84. At this juncture, it is of much relevance to discuss the constituents of an unlawful

assembly.

85. Dr. Gour in Penal Law of India discusses the law in respect of unlawful assembly

as follows (Vol. I page 1296-11th Edition):

"Mere presence in an assembly does not make such a person a member of

an unlawful assembly unless it is shown that he had done something or

omitted to do something which would make him a member of an unlawful

assembly or unless the case falls under section 142 I. P.C If members of the

family of the appellants and other residents of the village assembled, such

persons could not be condemned ipso facto as being members of that

unlawful assembly. It would be necessary therefore for the prosecution to

lead evidence pointing to the conclusion that all the appellants had done or

been committing some overt act in prosecution of the common object of the

unlawful assembly. Where the evidence as recorded is in general terms to

the effect that all these persons and many more were the miscreants and were

armed with deadly weapons like guns, spears axes etc., this kind of omnibus

evidence has to be very closely scrutinized in order to eliminate all chances

of false or mistaken implication."

CA/HCC/232-236/2020

28 | P a g e

86. Dr. Gour at pg. 1299 further states that:

“The first thing to remember in cases of this nature is that where a large

number of persons has assembled and some of them resort to violence or

otherwise misbehaved it need not necessarily mean that every one of the

persons present actually shares the opinions, intentions or objects of those

who misbehave or resort to violence.

In fact, the possibility of some of the persons actually resenting or

condemning the activities of the misguided persons cannot be ruled out.

Caution should therefore be exercised while deciding which of the persons

present can be safely described as members of an unlawful assembly.

Although as a matter of law, an overt act on the part of a person is not a

necessary factor bearing upon his membership of an unlawful assembly, in

a case of this nature it will be safer to look for some evidence of participation

by him before holding that he is a member of the unlawful assembly"

87. Also, in Bandaranayake vs. Jagathsena [1984] 2 Sri LR 397 it was held as follows:

“The mere presence of a person in an assembly does not render him a

member of an unlawful assembly, unless it is shown that he said or did

something or omitted to do something which would make him a member of

such unlawful assembly. The prosecution must place evidence pointing to

each accused having done or said something from which the inference could

be drawn that each entertained the object which is said to be the common

object of such assembly. Omnibus evidence must be carefully scrutinized to

eliminate all chances of false or mistaken implication as the possibility of

persons in an assembly resenting or condemning the activities of

misguided persons cannot be ruled out and caution has to be exercised in

deciding which of the persons present can be safely described as members

of the unlawful assembly. Although as a matter of law an overt act is not

a necessary factor, bearing upon membership of an unlawful assembly,

yet, it is safer to look for some evidence of participation by each person

CA/HCC/232-236/2020

29 | P a g e

alleged to be a member before holding that such person is a member of the

unlawful assembly, lest innocent persons be punished for no fault of

their's. The common object of an assembly is an inference from facts to be

deduced from the facts and circumstances of each case. The common object

can be collected from the nature of the assembly, the arms used by them, the

behaviour of the assembly at or before the scene of occurrence, and

subsequent conduct. The common object must be readily deducible from the

direct as well as circumstantial evidence, including the conduct of the

parties. It is not sufficient for such evidence to be consistent with such an

inference, but must be the only conclusion possible. Merely because the

specific offence with which the unlawful assembly is charged is not proved,

it does not mean that the common object of the unlawful assembly should be

held to be non-existent. In order, to find the common object of an unlawful

assembly at the beginning, it is not a legitimate method merely to take all the

actual offences committed by it in the course of the riot and to infer that all

these were originally part of its common object. The conclusion must

normally be based on more evidence than the mere acts themselves.”

88. Notwithstanding the well-established legal principles set out in the aforesaid

authorities, the Learned Trial Judge has failed to consider and evaluate the acts of

participation attributed to the Appellants in light of the principles governing

unlawful assembly. In particular, the judgment does not examine whether the

respective acts of each Appellant were carried out in furtherance of the common

objects found in counts one and two of the indictment.

89. Also, this Court has consistently held that failure on the part of the Trial Judge to

give adequate reasons as to why he convicted all the accused on the basis of common

intention results in a miscarriage of justice.

90. In Banda v Attorney General [1999] 3 Sri. LR. 168, emphasizing the importance

of taking into account the acts of participation on the part of each one of the accused

CA/HCC/232-236/2020

30 | P a g e

separately to analyze their acts and relate them to the principles of law relating to

common intention, Jayasuriya J held that:

“The learned trial Judge has used the term common intention only in one

solitary passage in his judgment. He has culpably failed to consider the acts

of participation on the part of each one of those accused separately to

analyse those acts and relate them to the principles of law relating to

common intention and having regard to their respective acts to determine

whether they were actuated by a common intention.”

91. Also, in Rajadheera and Others v Attorney General [2008] 2 Sri LR 321 Ranjith

Silva J held as follows:

[…] Failure to give adequate reasons as to why he convicted all the accused

on the basis of common intention and the failure to consider the concept of

common intention, in my view, have resulted in a miscarriage of justice.

Therefore, we are unable to apply the proviso to Section 334 of the Criminal

Procedure Code and proviso to Article 138 of the Constitution. Further if we

are going to apply the proviso to Section 334 of the Criminal Procedure

Code, we have to rewrite the judgment which is not the function of the Court

of Appeal. (At pg 325)

92. In the present case, although the Learned Trial Judge convicted the Appellants for

the third count on the basis of common intention, the judgment is devoid of any

proper analysis or evaluation of the alleged common murderous intention said to

have been shared by the Appellants. I am of the opinion that such failure on the part

of the Learned Trial Judge has resulted in a serious miscarriage of justice to the

Appellants.

93. In the aforesaid circumstances, I conclude that it is not safe to affirm the conviction

against the Appellants.

CA/HCC/232-236/2020

31 | P a g e

94. For the reasons set out above, we allow the appeal and we proceed to quash the

convictions and sentences imposed on the Appellants by the Learned High Court

Judge of Homagama.

95. Accordingly, we acquit the Appellants of all the charges leveled against them.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P. Kumararatnam, J I agree,

Judge of the Court of Appeal