CA.883/97(F}

IN THE COURT OF AP

PPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALISTIC

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

D.G. Sobani, Kolongalla, Hiriwadunna.

Plaintiff.

DC Kegalle No. 4291/L Vs.

D.G. Siripala, Kolongalla, Hiriwadunna.

And

D.G. Siripala, Kolongalla, Hiriwadunna.

Vs.

D.G. Sobani, Kolongalla, Hiriwadunna.

Defendant.

Defendant-Appellant

Plaintiff-Respondent.

Rathna Banjanayalage Piyadasa, Kolongalla, Hiriwadunna.

Substituted Plaintiff- Respondent.

Before

Counsel

Decided On:

2

E.A.G.R. Amarasekara J.

Mr. Vidura Gunarathna for the Defendant Appellant.

Mr. Premachandra for the Plaintiff Respondent.

06.07.2018

E.A.G.R. Amarasekara J.

The original Plaintiff Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the Plaintiff) had

instituted the case No. 4291/L in the District Court of Kegalle against the Defendant

Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Defendant) by her plaint dated 02.08.1989

and inter alia had averred the following;

a) Unga, the father of both the Plaintiff and the Defendant owned undivided

portions of the lands more fully described in the schedules to the plaint.

b) The lands more fully described in the 1st and 2nd schedules were occupied by

Unga while the land described in the 3rd schedule was occupied by the

Plaintiff.

c) Unga died on 1st January 1985 leaving the Plaintiff and her two sisters and

the brother, the Defendant.

d) Since aforesaid two sisters had gone on 'Deega' marriages they are not

entitled to paternal inheritance.

e) Therefore, only the Plaintiff herself and the Defendant inherit the land

described in the schedules to the plaint.

f) The Defendant had fraudulently executed a deed of transfer bearing No.

4446 dated 31 December 1984 attested by I.H.H. Banda, Notary Public.

g) Unga was not in his proper senses and was in a critical condition for about 1

month preceding his death.

h) Unga had neither placed his thumb print nor his signature to the aforesaid

deed but some other person had placed his thumb impression to it

fraudulently.

3

i) The Plaintiff came to know about the aforesaid deed only after she received

summons in case No. 24882 filed by the Defendant in District Court of

Kegalle.

j) A cause of action has accrued to her against the Defendant to obtain a

declaration that the aforesaid deed No. 4446 is an invalid deed.

In her plaint the Plaintiff has prayed inter alia;

a) To obtain a declaration to the effect that the said deed is invalid.

b) To obtain a declaration that the Plaintiff is entitled to inherit Unga's property

c) For cost & other reliefs.

The Defendant filed his answer dated 06.06.1990 and pleaded inter alia;

a) The properties described in the schedules to the plaint belonged to Unga.

b) Said Unga transferred the said properties to the Defendant on deed No. 4446

dated 31.02.1984 attested by LM.H. Banda, Notary Public.

c) The Defendant and his predecessors were in occupation of these lands for

more than 10 years against the Plaintiff and the rest of the world and

acquired prescriptive title.

d) The Plaintiff had forcible occupation of the Defendant's land since

31.12.1984 causing damages.

The Defendant has vehemently denied any fraudulent involvement in executing the

deed No. 4446 and that it is an invalid deed. The Defendant in his original answer

has prayed inter alia;

a) for a dismissal of the Plaintiff's action.

b) for a declaration that he is the owner of the lands described in the plaint.

c) for an order to eject the Plaintiff from the said lands.

d) for damages and cost of the litigation.

After the filing of replication by the Plaintiff denying the Defendant's claim, the

Defendant had filed his amended answer dated 02.09.1991. In his amended

4

answer the Defendant had added a new stance to the original position he took up

in the original answer stating that the Plaintiff had gone on IDeega' marriage

forfeiting her rights of inheritance to her father's property.

The Decision on the dispute described as aforesaid depends on the answers that

the court can reach on the following questions.

1. Is the aforesaid deed No. 4446 a fraudulent deed or not, as contemplated in

issues No 4, 5, 7 and 8 raised at the trial?

2. Did the Plaintiff forfeit her rights to inherit her father's property by going on

a Deega marriage, as contemplated in issues no.9 and 10 raised at the trial?

As per the evidence led at the trial, Unga died on 01.01.1985 due to old age- (vide

death certificate marked as 153). As per the Defendant's evidence and his witness

the Notary Public the deed in question was executed on the previous day at Notary

Public's office in Kegalle. The Defendant has stated in evidence, that his father

Unga went to the Notary Public's office, which is about 3 Y2 miles away from his

house at Kolongalla, by bus, a mode of public transport. It is difficult to believe that

a person who died due to his old age on the following day, i.e. on 01.01.1985, was

strong enough to travel by bus on the day prior to his death to Kegalle Town to

execute a deed. The position of the Plaintiff and her witness Somawathie was that

Unga was critically ill for about 3 to 4 months and not in his proper senses prior to

his death. The aforesaid position of the Plaintiff and her witness is more probable

than the Defendant's version of Unga's visit to Notary Public's office by bus, if Unga

had died due to old age on 01.01.1985. On the other hand, this court observes that

Unga had placed his signature on P2 which indicates that he was a person who used

to sign instead of placing his thumb print. However, on deed No. 4446 the

purported thumb print of Unga is placed instead of the signature. If Unga was able

to travel to Kegalle by bus to execute the deed, it is questionable why he could not

place his signature as usual. In the attestation to the said deed the Notary has

stated that Unga who was not known to him but known to the witnesses placed his

thumb print as his hands were trembling due to old age. On the other hand, if Unga

was not known to the Notary Public he is not a suitable witness to prove that

Vendor of deed No. 4446 was Unga, who placed his signature before him. In such

a backdrop of factual matrix the Learned District Judge has come to the conclusion

5

that the deed No. 4446 is a fraudulent document. I cannot find fault with such a

conclusion or decide that such a conclusion is perverse or not based on facts before

him.

The entries in the Kandyan marriage register book, marked as 51, confirm that in

the year 1946 the Plaintiff went on a Deega marriage. Even the Plaintiff admitted

in evidence that she went to Mathawa, her husband's village on a Deega marriage.

Deega marriage generally deprives a daughter, who is subject to Kandyan law, of

inheritance to her father's estate. The essence of a Deega marriage is the

severance of the daughter from the father's family and her entry into that of her

husband and her consequent forfeiture of any share in the family property- {Vide

Punchimenika Vs Appuhamey (1917) 19 NLR 353}. This court is also aware that

entry in the marriage register shall be the best evidence of the marriage contracted.

At the same time this court is aware that on certain occasions, a Deega married

daughter can acquire Binna rights by cessation of the severance from father's

family and re-establishing the connection with father's family on its original basis.

Mere returning to Mulgedara (Father's house) or maintaining close connection

with Mulgedara after marriage will not be conclusive of the fact that the Deega

married daughter acquired Binna rights. It must appear that the father in his

lifetime, or the family after his death, has manifested an intention to admit the

daughter to Binna rights (See Kandyan Law and Buddhist Ecclesiastical Law by

Dissanayake and Colin de Soysa at Page 165 and 167 citing from Mudiyanse Vs.

Punhimenika (1933) 12 Cey. Law Rep 257, Mudiyanse Vs Punchi Menika (1993) 35

NLR 179).

The following are illustrative of acquisition of Binna rights by a Deega married

daughter.

1) By being recalled by the father and remarried in Binna,

2) By her father, on her return to his house along with her husband, assigning

to them and putting them in possession of a part of his house and a specific

share of his lands.

6

3) On her returning home along with her husband and attending on her father

and rendering him assistance until his death.

4) On her coming back and attending on and assisting her father during his last

illness, and the father on his death bed expressing his will that she should

have a share of his land- (vide Kandyan Law and Buddhist Ecclesiastical Law

by Dissanayake and Colin de Soysa at page 164 quoting Perera's Armour on

Kandyan Law).

5) Execution of a series of deeds by the brothers, together with the Sister

married in Deega indicating the waiver or forfeiture- {vide Banda Vs Ungurala

(1922) 50 NLR 276}.

6) Where a Kandyan permits his sisters in spite of their marriage in Deega to

possess their share of immovable property belonging to their father's estate

for a long period of time indicating the waiver of the forfeiture- {vide Appu

Naide Vs Hin Menika (1948) 51 NLR 63}.

Even in the case of Wick ram asing he Vs. Robert Banda (2005) 1 SLR at page 246, her

Ladyship Shirani Bandaranayake J (as she then was) mentioned the following

instances which may prove the acquisition of Binna rights by a Deega married

daughter.

a) having a close link with Mulgedara even after the marriage.

b) Bya subsequent marriage in Binna.

c) By leaving a child with the grand parents at Mulgedara.

d) By possessing shares of property in spite of marriage in Deega.

e) Any evidence to indicate the waiver of forfeiture of rights by the other

members of the family.

Thus, it is clear whether a Deega married daughter re-acquired the Binna rights

depends on the factual situation of each case. If the Deega married daughter can

prove the cessation of the severance from father's family and re-establishment of

connection with the same on its original condition or wavier of forfeiture of rights

by the father or other heirs to the father's estate, she can successfully establish

before a court of Law that she has re-acquired the Binna rights to her father's

estate.

7

The Plaintiff while giving evidence has admitted that she went on a Deega marriage

to Mathawa, the village of her husband but she has stated that she returned to her

paternal house after 3 days and stayed there for 3 to 4 years with her husband on

the request of her parents as they wanted one to attend on them-(vide her

evidence at page 55 and 56 of the brief). Thereafter her father executed a deed in

favour of her giving certain lands belonging to him. She has further stated that she

still lives there in a land given by her father and her husband too lived there till he

died. The deed marked as P2 also confirms that her father bequeathed several

lands to her. The Plaintiff has also said that the paddy land in the 3rd schedule to

the plaint, though no deed was written in her favour was given to her by her father

in 1948 and she has been in possession of the same from that date-(vide page 57

of the brief.) The Plaintiff's stance is that though she went on Deega, her parents

did not allow her to leave the paternal house- (vide page 57 of the brief). Even the

Defendant during cross examination has answered that the Plaintiff lived in

Kollongalla, he father's village since the time he could remember. He has not

denied the fact that their parents asked the Plaintiff to stay in the Mulgedara after

a few days of her Deega marriage and that her farther bequeathed certain lands

belonging to him to the Plaintiff. These facts on a preponderance of evidence show

that the Plaintiff, though she went on a Deega marriage as per her marriage

certificate, returned to Mulgedara and thereafter she continued to live with her

husband in the land given to her by her father. Even her father during his life time

had bequeathed his properties to her. These facts indicate the cessation of the

severance from father's family as well as the waiver of her forfeiture to paternal

property by her father himself. Therefore, on a preponderance of evidence one

can come to the conclusion that the Plaintiff has re-acquired her Binna rights. In

such a backdrop I am not inclined to hold that the final conclusion of the learned

District Judge is perverse or not supported by the facts that emerged in this case.

On the other hand, has the Plaintiff not re-acquired her Binna rights, the defendant

could have taken up the position even in his original answer itself that she had

forfeited her inheritance to paternal properties but he took up such a stance only

in his amended answer. That indicates that this stance with regard to Deega

marriage is most probably an afterthought.

8

For the foregoing reasons I dismiss the appeal with costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal