1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A.Writ Application No:

58/2019

(Ceased to hold office)

(Ceased to hold office) (Ceased to hold office) (Ceased to hold office) (Ceased to hold office) (Ceased to hold office) (Ceased to hold office)

In the matter of an application for a Mandate in the nature of Writs of Certiorari and Mandamus under and in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Nishantha Tilak Minuwangoda No. 92, Alahakoonwatta, Kanadulla, Kuliyapitiya

Petitioner

Vs.

1. National Police Commission

Building No. 9, Bandaranayake Memorial International Conference Hall, Bauddhaloka Mawatha, Colombo 07 1 (A) P.H. Manathunga

Chairman, National Police Commission 2. Professor S.T. Hettige 3. Savithri D. Wijesekara 4. Anton Jeyanathan 5. Y.L.M. Zawahir 6. Tilak Collure 7. Dr. Frank De Silva

(2nd 7th Respondents are the Members of the National Police Commission) 7(A). Public Service Comission, No. 1200/9, Rajamalwatta Road, Battaramulla 7(B). Hon. Justice Jagath Balapatabandi Chairman 7(C). Mrs. Indrani Sugathadasa Member

7(D). V. Shivagnanasothy Member

2

7(E). Dr. T.R.C. Ruberu Member

7(F). Ahamed Lebbe Mohamed Saleem Member

7(G). Leelasena Liyanagama Member

7(H). Dian Gomes Member

7(I). Dilith Jayaweera Member

7(J). W.H. Priyadasa Member

7(K). M.A.B. Dayasenarathna Secretary, All of the Public Service Commission, No. 1200/9, Rajamalwatta Road, Battaramulla

8. D.M. Samansiri

Secretary, National Police Commission Building No. 9, Bandaranayake Memorial International Conference Hall, Bauddhaloka Mawatha, Colombo 07 9. Hon. Justice N.E. Dissanayake

Chairman Administrative Appeals Tribunal No. 35, Silva Lane, Dharmapala Place, Rajagiriya 10(A). Gnanathasan P.C

Member, Administrative Appeals Tribunal No. 35, Silva Lane, Dharmapala Place, Rajagiriya

3

(Ceased to hold office)

Before: M.T. Mohammed Laffar, J.

S. U. B. Karalliyadde, J.

Counsel: P.K. Prince Perera instructed by N.H.S. Fonseka for the Petitioner

Dr. Chanuka Ekanayake S.C. for 12th and 13th Respondents

Argued on: 25.10.2021

Decided on: 07.04.2022

S.U.B. Karalliyadde, J.

The Petitioner joined the Police Department as a Reserve Sub-Inspector of Police and

later absorbed into the Regular post of Sub-Inspector. While he was working in the

Nikaweratiya Police Station, he was interdicted for an alleged Charge of soliciting and

accepting a bribe from a timber merchant in the area. He was then indicted and

prosecuted before the Colombo High Court under the Bribery Act and after the

11. G.P. Abey Keerthi

Member, Administrative Appeals Tribunal No. 35, Silva Lane, Dharmapala Place, Rajagiriya

12. Pujith Jayasundara

Inspector General of Police Police Head Quarters, Colombo 01 12(A). C.D. Wickremaratne

Inspector General of Police Police Head Quarters, Colombo 01 13. Hon. Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department, Hulftsdorp, Colombo 12

Respondents

4

prosecution case was concluded, he was acquitted and discharged from all 4 charges

against him. Thereafter, a formal disciplinary inquiry was held in the Departmental

level against him on two charges. Those two charges were based on the fact that by

accepting a bribe the Petitioner had violated Sections 1 and 7 (C) of Appendix B of the

Disciplinary Code of the Police Departmental Order A 7. While Section 1 deals with

the discreditable Conduct, Section 7 (C) deals with Corrupt Practices of the police

officers. At the formal disciplinary inquiry, the Petitioner was found guilty to the

charges and as a result, he was dismissed from the service with effect from 02.05.2015.

The Petitioner appealed against the decision of the inquiring officer. After considering

the appeal, the National Police Commission (the NCP) had rejected the appeal by letter

dated 21.11.2016 marked X6. Being aggrieved by the decision of the NPC, the

Petitioner appealed against that decision to the Administrative Appeal Tribunal (AAT).

The AAT, by its Order dated 15.10.2018 dismissed the appeal. By this writ application,

the Petitioner seeks reliefs inter alia, to issue writs of certiorari to quash the Orders of

the AAT dated 15.10.2018 marked P-5, the NPC dated 21.11.2016 marked X 6 and the

disciplinary inquiry dated 02.05.2015 and to issue a writ of mandamus directing the 1st

to 12th Respondents to reinstate the Petitioner in the service.

In the argument, the learned State Counsel appearing on behalf of the 12th and 13th

Respondents raised a preliminary legal objection to the jurisdiction of this Court to hear

and determine this writ application. The argument of the learned State Counsel is that,

in terms of Article 61 A of the Constitution, this Court has no power to consider the

decision of the AAT. Article 61 A of the Constitution provides thus;

61A. Subject to the provisions of Article 59 and of Article 126, no court or tribunal

shall have power or jurisdiction to inquire into, or pronounce upon or in any manner

call in question any order or decision made by the Commission (the AAT- emphasis

5

added), a Committee, or any public officer, in pursuance of any power or duty conferred

or imposed on such Commission, or delegated to a Committee or public officer, under

this Chapter or under any other law.

In terms of Article 140 of the Constitution, subject to the provisions of the Constitution,

the Court of Appeal has full power and authority to inspect and examine the record of

the AAT and issue, according to law, orders in the nature of writs of certiorari and

mandamus against the AAT.

Section 22 of the Interpretation Ordinance (as amended) reads as follows:

22. Where there appears in any enactment, whether passed or made before or after the

commencement of this Ordinance, the expression shall not be called in question in

any court or any other expression of similar import whether or not accompanied by

the words whether by way of writ or otherwise in relation to any order, decision,

determination, direction or finding which any person, authority or tribunal is

empowered to make or issue under such enactment, no court shall, in any proceedings

and upon any ground whatsoever, have jurisdiction to pronounce upon the validity or

legality of such order, decision, determination, direction or finding, made or issued in

the exercise or the apparent exercise of the power conferred on such person, authority

or tribunal:

Provided, however, that the proceeding provisions of this section shall not apply to

the Court of Appeal in the exercise of its powers under Article 140 of the Constitution

in respect of the following matters, and the following matters only, that is to say-

a) where such order, decision, determination, direction or finding is ex facie not within

the power conferred on such person, authority or tribunal making or issuing such order,

decision, determination, direction or finding; and

6

b) where such person, authority or tribunal upon whom the power to make or issue such

order, decision, determination, direction or finding is conferred, is bound to conform

to the rules of natural justice, or where the compliance with any mandatory provisions

of any law is a condition precedent to the making or issuing of any such order, decision,

determination, direction or finding, and the Court of Appeal is satisfied that there has

been no conformity with such rules of natural justice or no compliance with such

mandatory provisions of such law:

In the case of Peter Atapattu and Others V. People's Bank and Others1 Supreme Court

held that the language of Article 140 of the Constitution was broad enough to give the

Court of Appeal the authority to review even on grounds excluded by the ouster clause.

It was further held that the constitutional provisions being the higher norm, must prevail

over the ordinary statutory provisions. The words 'subject to the provisions of the

Constitution in Article 140 was necessary to avoid conflicts with other provisions of

the Constitution as Articles 18 (3), 120, 124, 125, and 126 (3).

According to the aforementioned legislative provisions and case law, ouster clauses do

not operate to exclude the constitutional jurisdiction conferred on the Supreme Court

by Articles 17 and 126 and the Court of Appeal by Article 140 of the Constitution.

Therefore, I hold that there is no merit in the above stated argument of the learned State

Counsel.

One of the arguments of the learned Counsel for the Petitioner is that the Order of the AAT is

against the rules of natural justice for the reason that it has not considered that the NPC, in its

Order has failed to adduce any reasons to dismiss the appeal of the Petitioner against the Order

of the Inquiring Officer who had conducted the formal disciplinary inquiry. Therefore, the

1 1997 (1) SLR 208.

7

learned Counsel argued that the Order of the AAT marked P 5 is arbitrary and capricious. When

perusing the impugned Order of the AAT marked P 5, it is clear that even though, it has been

brought to the notice of the AAT that the NPC has not adduced any reasons for its Order, the

AAT had not considered that fact. An administrative authority can only justify its actions

if, it is able to show reasons for its decisions. If it fails to give reasons for its decision,

a reasonable suspicion would arise in the minds of ordinary citizens as regards the

justifiability of the decision. If a decision maker fails to give reasons for a decision, that

decision could be viewed as procedurally flawed.

In the case of Regina v. Universities Funding Council, Ex Parte Institute of Dental

Surgery2, it was held that when considering whether a disciplinary board should have

given reasons, the court may find the absence critical where the decision appears

aberrant. The giving of reasons may, among other things concentrate the decision-

makers mind on the right questions; demonstrate to the recipient that this is so; show

that the issues have been conscientiously addressed and how the result has been

reached; or alternatively alert the recipient to a justiciable flaw in the process. A body

not giving reasons for its decision was not acting inherently unfair, and particularly not

where the decision was a collective one. It could be artificial to try to set out reasons

made by a body of people.

In the case of E. M. Wijerama and Others v. A. T. S. Paul3, it was held that even in the

absence of a legal requirement, it is desirable that any tribunal against whose decision

an appeal is available should, as a general rule, state the reasons for its decision, a course

of action which has the merit of being both fair to the petitioner and complainant

concerned and helpful to the appellate authority.

2 [1994] 1 WLR 241. 3 76 NLR 241.

8

Under such circumstances, the Court is of the view that the decisions of the NPC and

the AAT are arbitrary and capricious. Therefore, the Court decides to issue writs of

certiorari to quash the Orders of the AAT dated 15.10.2018 marked P-5, the NPC dated

21.11.2016 marked X 6 and the disciplinary inquiry dated 02.05.2015 and a writ of

mandamus directing the 1st to 12th Respondents to reinstate the Petitioner in the service.

No costs ordered.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

M.T. MOHAMMED LAFFAR, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL