1 1 l I \ l i

~ I I

! I I j I 1

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A Appeal No: 73/2011 High Court Badulla

Case No: HC 175/2003

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of Section 331(1) of the CPC read with Article 138 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Complainant

Vs.

Kamaldeen Faizal

Accused

And Now;

Vs.

Kamaldeen Faizal

Accused-Appellant

The Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

Page 1 of 6

II Ii

t

f

l 1

~

l I i ! j i

I ! I ! I

\

j i

BEFORE

COUNSEL

. .

ARGUEDON :

DECIDED ON :

L. U Jayasuriya J.

L.U Jayasuriya J .

Deepali Wijesundera J.

Faisz Musthafa P.C. for the Accused-Appellant.

Ayesha Jinasena Senior DSG for the A.G.

4th November, 2016

10th January, 2017

The Accused-Appellant (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the

Appellant) was indicted in the High Court of Badulla under section 296

of the Penal Code for murder of his wife Fathima Safaya. He was

convicted after trial and sentenced to death. Being aggrieved by the

conviction and the sentence the Appellant has appealed against the same.

The grounds urged by the Appellant's Counsel are;

1. That there is no analysis of the evidence placed before the

High Court.

11. That there is manifest evidence of intoxication which had not

been considered by the Learned High Court Judge.

The learned President's Counsel for the Appellant submitted that there is

no evaluation of evidence but only a narration of evidence Referring to

the evidence of the main eye witness, the daughter of the deceased

Page 2 of 6

!Ii!1

t

\!Irf ,! I !I !!I I, II

\I!

I ) I I

which states that the deceased doused herself with Kerosene oil and

asked for a match stick.

The learned President's Counsel argued that the main witness was seven

years of age at the time of the incident, she has seen the incident under

dim light and it was a fleeting moment. He further argued that it would

have been an accident. She was seventeen years of age when she

testified and her memory had to be prodded. The learned President's

Counsel submitted that this piece of evidence has not been properly

evaluated and therefore a retrial should be ordered.

The other ground urged by the learned President's Counsel is that there

was manifest evidence of intoxication on the part of the Appellant,

which had not been evaluated by the learned High Court Judge.

Citing the judgments in Jayathilake V. A.G. 2003 2SLR 110 and also

Udalagama V. A.G. 2002 2SLR 109, the counsel submitted that the

degree of voluntary intoxication has not been analyzed and assessed and

stated that the learned High Court Judge has failed to do so according to

the above authorities.

The learned D.S.G countered the argument of the learned President's

Counsel and stated that the learned High Court Judge has properly

evaluated the evidence and had reached her finding. The Counsel stated

that the incidents that the main witness has forgotten do not go into the

root of the case. The Counsel further submitted that the prosecution has

Page 3 of6

1I

\I,

t,:I,fl

tIII

I

presented both direct and circumstantial evidence to prove the charge.

The Counsel then referred to the evidence of the main eyewitness who

has seen the mother drinking Kerosene Oil and the Appellant setting fire

to the deceased. The mother of the deceased, Sulela, has corroborated

this piece of evidence. (Pages 52 and 53 of the brief)

Independent of the evidence of the sale eye-witness the learned D.S.G.

stated that there are dying declarations made by the deceased; one to the

neighbor Raheem and the mother of the deceased. The Counsel further

submitted that the defense had not challenged this dying declaration. The

Counsel referred to S.294, 3rd limb of the Penal Code, said that this

incident comes under this particular section, and referred to

Hapugasthanne Mamalage Chandrasena V. A.G. CA Application

No 34/2002 decided on 19.07.2002.

Referring to the subsequent conduct of the Appellant, the Learned A.S.G

argued that if the deceased set fire to herself, there has to be evidence to

say that the Appellant tried to save her. The main eyewitness however

has seen the Appellant setting fire to the deceased with a matchstick and

going out of the home. (Vide pages 50, 52 and 53 of the brief). There is

no evidence to infer that the Appellant tried to save her. The neighbour

Raheem had found the Appellant near the railway line, which was about

35 feet away from the house. Referring to pages 106 and 108 of the

judgment the learned D.S.G stated that the learned High Court Judge had

properly analyzed all the above-mentioned evidence.

Page 4 of 6

, , , l 1

1

~ I t

i

f II

I

This court finds that the maIn eyewitness's evidence has been

corroborated by Sulela's evidence and the learned High Court Judge has

analyzed such evidence properly. The main argument of the Appellant is

that there is no proper analysis of the evidence, which we find is

incorrect. The learned High Court Judge has properly evaluated the

evidence from pages 107 to 109, correctly analyzing evidence from all

the witnesses.

The learned High Court Judge (at page 106 of the brief) in her judgment

refers to the habitual drinking of the Appellant and therefore, this court

is not inclined to consider the degree of voluntary intoxication of the

Appellant considering the evidence given by the daughter, the mother

and the neighbor of the deceased.

We observe that the dying declaration of the deceased had not been

challenged in the High Court. The main investigating officer who

arrested the Appellant had observed burn injuries on the right-hand and

on the forehead of the Appellant. The Appellant had failed to explain

these injuries in his dock statement. The learned High Court Judge had

referred to the above in her judgment.

This court moves to decide that the learned High Court Judge has

carefully considered the evidence placed before her and arrived at her

final decision.

Page 5 of6

For the afore mentioned reasons, This court decides to affirm the

conviction and the sentence given by the High Court Judge of Badulla

Dated 28.09.2011.

The Appeal is dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Deepali Wiiesundera J. :

I Agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

t t \ I

t II

i

Page 6016 \

\

~