Page 1 of 5

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

Court of Appeal Case No:

CPA /82/2022

High Court of Gampaha Bail

Application No: 277/2021

Magistrates Court of Gampaha Case

No: B 491/2021

In the matter of an Application for

Revision under Article 138 of the

Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Officer in Charge

Police Station

Ganemulla.

Complainant

Vs.

1.Welambage Sudarshanie Nilanthi Perera.

2.Mohammed Asmadeen Safna.

3.Hewa Indikatiyage Nuwan Madusanka.

Suspect

AND THEN

Wattoru Thanthrige Dayawathie Fernando

No.157/15, Negombo Road,

Peliyagoda

Petitioner

Vs.

Page 2 of 5

1. Hon.Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department

Colombo 12.

2. Officer in charge

Police Station

Ganemulla.

Respondents

3. Welambage Sudarshanie Nilanthi Perera.

Suspect Respondent

(Presently in Welikada Remand

Custody)

AND NOW BETWEEN

Welambage Sudarshanie Nilanthi Perera.

(Presently in Remand Custody)

Suspect Respondent Petitioner

Vs.

1. Hon.Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department

Colombo 12.

2. Officer in charge

Police Station

Ganemulla.

Respondents Respondents

Page 3 of 5

Before: Menaka Wijesundera J.

Neil Iddawala J.

Counsel: Kasun Liyanage for the Suspect Petitioner.

Nishanth Nagaratnam, SC for the Respondents.

Argued on: 17.01.2023

Decided on: 15.02.2023

MENAKA WEJESUNDERA J.

The instant application for revision has been filed to set aside the order dated

6.7.2022 of the High Court of Gampaha.

The suspect namely Welambage Sudarshani Nilanthi Perera had been produced

before the Magistrate for allegedly possessing a substance suspected to be

heroin in her hand bag on 26.2.2021 along with two others.

The Government Analyst report had detected 31.03 grams of heroin in the said

substance taken in to custody.

The Counsel for the suspect alleges that the substance taken in to custody was

introduced to the suspect by the police and further allege that the police had

taken steps to send a second parcel to the Government Analyst subsequent to

the filling of the bail application in the High Court which is after one year after

the initial arrest.

Hence the Counsel for the suspect is alleging an inordinate delay in the due

administration of justice taking place against the suspect.

Page 4 of 5

The law pertaining to bail in the instant matter is that if a suspect is produced

and remanded under the provisions of the Poisons Opium and Dangerous drugs

act under section 54 (a) or (b) and if the alleged substance is confirmed to be

heroin and if it is over 10 grams the Court pf Appeal can consider bail upon

exceptional circumstances.

The term exceptional has not been defined in the act but in our legal literature it

has been held that exceptionality differs from case to case.

In the instant matter the exceptionality pleaded is the delay.

It has been held in the case of Q vs Liyanage 65 NLR 289 as to what should be

considered in a bail application and they are,

1)the nature of the crime,

2)the severity of the punishment .

3)the nature of the evidence and consequently the probability of a conviction.

But lately a contrary view has been taken up by their Lordships in the Supreme

Court in the case of SC Appeal 53/2022 that creditworthiness and morality

cannot be considered in an application for bail.

In the instant matter this Court has been urged to consider the delay in the

instant matter.

While appreciating the guidelines set out in the above mentioned cases this

Court also notes the several cases in which delay has been considered under the

instant act. They are,

1)Milroy Fernando vs Attorney General CA Bail 542/90

Page 5 of 5

2)OIC Narcotics Bureau vs Kanahala Gamage Suneetha CA REV3/2002

3)Gurusamy vs Ramalingum CA 119/200

and several more.

Hence in the instant matter the suspect had been in remand since 2021 and this

Court also notes that there is an unexplained delay in sending the productions to

the Government Analyst in totality which would further delay the institution of

proceedings.

But this Court also notes that the suspect has a similar pending case and one

previous conviction for a similar offence which the Respondents have failed to

state but the petitioner had stated in the petition.

Hence considering the nature of the offence and the suspect having a similar

pending and previous conviction we are of the opinion that the delay pleaded by

the suspect cannot be considered as an exceptional ground to overturn the order

of the learned High Court Judge.

As such the order of the learned High Court Judge is affirmed and the instant

application for revision is dismissed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal.

I agree.

Neil Iddawala J.

Judge of the Court of Appeal.