1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for a

mandate in the nature of Writ of Certiorari

under article 140 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka

Dassayanke Mudiyanselage Dulip Chameera

Adikari,

412/5/236, Ratmalgama, Galadivulwewa,

Nochchiyagama.

PETITIONER

CA/WRIT/134/2015 Vs,

Before:

1. Gagan Bulathsinhala,

(Air Marshal) Commander,

Sri Lanka Air Force,

Air Force Head Quarters,

Colombo 01.

2. Karunasena Hettiarachchi,

Secretary,

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J (PICA) & s. Thurairaja PC J

Ministry of Defence,

15/5, Baladaksha Mw,

Colombo 03.

And another

RESPONDENTS

Counsel: Pradeep Fernando for the Petitioner

Chaya Sri Nammuni SC for the Respondents

Argued on: 17.01.2017

Judgment on: 23.02.2017

Order

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J

2

Petitioner to the present application Dasanayake Mudiyanselage Dulip Chameera Adikari had come

before this court seeking inter alia,

3. Grant and issue a mandate in the nature of writ of Certiorari quashing P-3

4. Grant and issue a mandate in the nature of writ of Mandamus compelling the pI Respondent to

make/grant a service extension to the Petitioner in the Sri Lanka Air Force with effect from

2015.02.13 in keeping with his legitimate expectation for the same

The petitioner's main argument before this court was based on two documents produced before this

court, namely P-1 and P-2. As revealed before this court the Petitioner was serving in the voluntary

wing of the Sri Lanka Air Force (here in after referred to as SLAF) where he could serve up to the

maximum of 22 years, on periodic service extensions granted to him. As submitted by the Petitioner

he has received service extensions as follows,

1. 2002.01.04 up to 2007.01.04 5 years

2. 2007.01.04 up to 2008.02.13 1 year

3. 2008.02.13 up to 2010.02.12 2 years

4. 2010.02.12 up to 2014.02.13 4 years

5. 2014.02.13 up to 2015.02.13 1 year

; ! !

Ii ,

IlIl

f

~ ,,I

I

f$f

rI

~' I

1!

",} ti

3

In the year 2012 when the Petitioner was undergoing a routine training, he sustained an injury on a

knee. As a result of the said injury the Petitioner was categorized "Lowered Employment Standard"

and the Petitioner submitted that his service extension was not approved due to the said medical

condition. In this regard the Petitioner heavily relied on P-l and the pI paragraph of the said P-l reads

thus,

"The above named JNCO is on a Lowered Medical Employment Standard A4G4 (T) w.e.f. 13

October 2014 and his present engagement is due to complete on 13 February 2015. As per

above reference, he has not been approved a further extension of service by SLAF due to his

Lowered Employment Standard. Hence the authority is hereby granted to convene an assess

medical board prior to his discharge.

Subsequent to the said communication the Petitioner was referred to the Sl.AF Hospital Katunayake

and the said Hospital had referred him to Consultant Orthopedic Surgeon Dr. Ananda Perera of Sri

Jayewardenepura General Hospital. The Petitioner was seen by the Consultant Orthopedic Surgeon on

few occasions and during this period the Petitioner was undergoing treatment both by the said

Consultant and by the SLAF Hospital Katunayake. When the Petitioner was finally examined by the

said Consultant Orthopedic Surgeon on 05.01.2015 he made the following observation,

"This Pt. I have seen him today he is perfectly OK. Now he is fit for all duties." (P2-P)

However as submitted by the Petitioner the Petitioner's service extension was not approved and it was

communicated to him through his CO (P-3) and whilst challenging the said decision not to approve his

service extension in spite of the said independent observation by the Consultant Orthopedic Surgeon,

Petitioner had submitted that the said decision was taken against the legitimate expectations of the

Petitioner, that he would be considered for a service extension once he is fit to attend to his duties.

j III

Iif

!(

f,

fti

f

4

The Petitioner had further argued, that the Respondents are not entitled to take any decision not to

extend the service of the Petitioner, once the Respondents have put the Petitioner on notice that his

service extension would be decided on the categorization based on "Lowered Employment Standard."

When going through the submissions made by the Learned Counsel for the Petitioner and the

documents submitted on behalf of the Petitioner, it is observed by us that the contention of the

Petitioner was to establish that the Petitioner's service extension due on 13.02.2015 was totally

depending on the said categorization of "Lowered Employment Standard".

However as observed by this court, the service extension of a volunteer noncommissioned officer was

considered periodically and as indicated above, the Petitioner too was given service extensions ranging

from 01 year to 5 years on different intervals.

As submitted by the Respondents before us, the Petitioner had faced an additional requirement when

he met with the said accident and categorized as "Lowered Employment Standard" in addition to the

other routine approvals required for consideration of his service extension. In these circumstances the

Petitioner had to overcome an additional requirement and if he failed to do so, he would automatically

lose his job due to the said categorization. In this regard the Respondents have relied on the Air Force

Orders on Air Force Health Policy (lR2) and Sri Lanka Volunteer Air Force Regulations 1978

published in Government Gazette 304 on 10.02.1978 (lR3) and we see no reason to reject the said

argument. In the said circumstances, it is clear that the disciplinary issues pertaining to the conduct of

the Petitioner played a major role in deciding whether the services are extended or not.

In this regard our attention was drawn to the fact that the Petitioner was tried before the Magistrate's

Court Negombo for Sexual Harassment, which charge was later reduced to section 343 and was

compounded and the Petitioner was ordered to pay Rs. 10,0001- to the victim. The proceedings of the

i ! (

f !

f i I t ! , f

,

\ It I I ! " ,

said criminal case was submitted along with the statement of objection of the Respondents produced

marked lR9 and as observed by this court, the Petitioner had been apprehended by public on 10" July I

t t 1t ,

5

2013 and handed over to police when he molested a woman who was returning home from a shop after

buying some daily provisions around 8.30 pm at a lonely place in Negombo Road Katunayake, and

was prosecuted under section 345 of the Penal Code but settled the matter on a lesser offence after

paying compensation. As further observed by this court the said settlement was reached between the

parties on 3pt January 2014 and the case was concluded after the payment of compensation on

14.03.2014 and the said settlement was reached after the Petitioners last service extension on

13.02.2014.

As observed by this court, the above case too was referred to in the relevant papers submitted for the

consideration for his service extension which was due on 13.02.2015 as follows;

"A civil litigation has been filed against him at Magistrate's Court Negombo for the offence of an

assault and use of criminal force to a woman with the intent of outrage her modesty. The Hon.

Magistrate has released the suspect upon a payment of Rs. 10,000/- to the above party as

compensation. "

The said reference along with the Petitioner's record of conduct was forwarded for the consideration

for his service extension by Petitioner's Commanding Officer on 17.12.2014 and as observed by this

court, following are the observations made by the relevant officers with regard to the Petitioner's

service extension.

D Leg-Extension of service is not recommended please

DHS-Recommended only in limited extension considering medical condition (UACL tear).

DGO-One year (01) extension of service is recommended please

C ofS-Considering the nature of the last offence committed by the JNCO, extension of service

is not recommended

I

t 1I J

'" I !I1II [ I t f !

f ! t I

f t I

f t I

II I

6

CMDR-Not approved.

As revealed from the above recommendation submitted, it is clear that the final recommendation by

the Chief of Staff to the Commander was based on the conduct of the Petitioner and if not for his

conduct, as recommended by DHS he would have got a limited extension until his medical condition

was cleared. (as observed by this court the above minute was made on 23.12.2014 and the Medical

condition was cleared on 05.01.2015)

In these circumstances, we see no merit III the argument placed by the Learned Counsel who

represented the Petitioner to the effect that, the said decision not to approw the service extension to the

Petitioner was against the legitimate expectation of the Petitioner, i.e. P-1 refers only to his medical

conditions.

M.R. Mallick in his book on Writs Law and Practice had observed that "whether the expectation of the

claimant is reasonable whenever such a question arises it is to be determined not according to the

claimant's perception but in larger public interest, where in other more important considerations, may

outweigh what otherwise would have been the legitimate expectation of the claimant. A bona fide

decision of the public authority reached in fair manner would satisfy the requirement of non-

arbitrariness and withstand the judicial scrutiny" [Writs Law and Practice M.R. Mallick at page 790]

As observed by this court, the above passage clearly explains the situation under which the

Respondents have acted in this case.

With regard to the nature of the expectation, the courts have identified that the said expectation has to

be derived either,

a) An express promise or representation-

Attorney General of Hongkong V. Ng Yuen Shiu (1983) 2 AC 629

I

I

! i

7

b) A representation implied from established practice based upon the past action or the settled

conduct of the decision maker-

R.N. Secretary of Home Department (1987) 1 WLR 1482

As discussed above in this judgment, the expectation the Petitioner relied before us, which derived

from the document produce marked P-ldoes not come under any of the categories identified above. As

clearly identified by us, the said expectation is against the established practice of the Air Force and the

impugned decision was reached after following the correct practice.

In the said circumstance this court is not inclined to grant relief as prayed by the Petitioner. We

therefore dismiss this application but refrain from making any order with regard to cost.

Application dismissed.

President of the Court of Appeal

s. Thurairaja PC J

I agree,

Judge of the Court of Appeal

t! ! ,i !