,

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C A (PHC) / 04 / 2003

Provincial High Court of

Southern Province

holden at Matara

Case No. 205 / 1994

In the matter of an Appeal to Court of

Appeal under Article 154 P (6) read with

Article 138 of the Constitution against a

judgment of Provincial High Court

exercising its writ jurisdiction.

Uyana Hewage Upasena,

No. 3/7,

2nd Cross Street,

Polhena,

2

Matara.

PETITIONER - APPELLANT

-Vs-

1. Matara Multi Purpose Co-Operative

Society Ltd.,

Railway Station Road,

Matara.

2. Commissioner of .Co-operative

Development (Sothern Province)

And

Registrar of Co-operative

Societies,

Fort,

Galle.

RESPONDENT - RESPONDENTS

Before: K K Wickremasinghe J

P. Padman Surasena J

t!! It1

3

Counsel; Mahinda Nanayakkara for the Petitioner - Appellant.

S Jayawickrema for the 1st Respondent-Respondent

Udeshi Senasinghe SC for the 2nd Respondent-Respondent.

Decided on: 2017 - 08 - 31

JUDGMENT

P Padman Surasena J

Learned counsel for all the Parties when this case came up on 2017-07-03

before us, agreed to have this case disposed by way of written

submissions, dispensing with their necessity of making oral submissions.

They agreed that this Court could pronounce the judgment after

considering the written submissions they would file. Therefore, this

judgment is based on the material that has been adduced by parties in

their pleadings and the written submissions.

The Petitioner- Appellant (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the

Appellant) had filed an application in the Provincial High Court of the

Southern Province holden at Matara praying for a writ of Certiorari to

, .

\

! 1 I

I I

4

quash the decision contained in the document marked P 6 which appears

to be a decision made pursuant to an appeal.

It could be seen that the main basis upon which the Appellant had sought

a writ of certiorari was an alleged failure to observe the rules of natural

justice. However the learned Provincial High Court Judge had concluded in

his judgment dated 2002-09-25, that such an allegation cannot be

sustained in the light of the available material. Thus, the learned Provincial

High Court Judge had refused to issue a writ of certiorari and had

proceeded to dismiss the application. It is against that judgment that the

Appellant has filed this appeal in this Court.

This Court considered the judgment of the learned Provincial High Court

Judge with a view of ascertaining whether intervention of this court is

required in this case. However, this Court is satisfied after perusal of the

judgment of the learned Provincial High Court Judge that the conclusions

arrived at and the reasons given thereto by him are in order and thus

requires no intervention by this Court.

This Court had granted time for the parties to file written submissions

setting out their respective positions in this case. However, this Court is

rI ! !

j

5

unable to extract any valid ground for its consideration from the facts set

out in the said written submissions.

Thus, this Court has to proceed on the basis that the Appellant has failed

to put forward a single ground for his appeal. It would follow that this

Court has no basis to quash the conclusions arrived at by the learned

Provincial High Court Judge.

In these circumstances, this Court affirms the judgment of the learned

Provincial High Court Judge dated 2002-09-25 and proceed to dismiss this

appeal with costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K K Wickremasinghe 1

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL