1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal in terms of Section

331 (1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act

No.15 of 1979, read with Article138 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Complainant

CA - HCC 95-2020 Vs. High Court of Tangalle 1) Jayaweera Patabendi Arachchige Jayantha Case No: HC 51/2015

Accused And Now Between 1) Jayaweera Patabendi Arachchige Jayantha

Accused-Appellant

Vs.

The Honourable Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12

Complainant-Respondent

2

BEFORE : N. Bandula Karunarathna, J.

: R. Gurusinghe, J.

COUNSEL : Neranjan Jayasinghe with

Isansi Danthanarayana

for the Accused-Appellant

Shanaka Wijesinghe, ASG

for the Respondent

ARGUED ON : 23/05/2022

DECIDED ON : 30/05/2022

R. Gurusinghe, J.

The accused-appellant was indicted in the High Court of Tangalle under two

counts. However, the appellant was convicted for having committed grave

sexual abuse on a girl under 16 years of age, an offence punishable under

section 365(B)(2)(b) of the Penal Code, as amended by Act No. 22 of 1995, 29

of 1998 and 16 of 2006.

The appellant was sentenced to 15 years rigorous imprisonment with a fine of

Rs. 10,000.00 and also ordered to pay Rs. 500,000.00 as compensation for the

victim.

The counsel for the appellant makes an application to grant concession on the

sentence on the basis that the sentence imposed by the learned Trial Judge is

excessive. When this matter came up for the hearing, the counsel for the

appellant informed the court that she was not challenging the conviction. He

3

invited the court to consider only a reduction of the 15 years jail term on the

grounds he urged.

Section 365(B)(2)(b) reads as follows:

Commits grave sexual abuse on any person under eighteen years of age, shall be

punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term not less than seven years and

not exceeding twenty years and with fine and shall also be ordered to pay

compensation of an amount determined by court to the person in respect of whom

the offence was committed for the injuries caused to such person;

The counsel for the appellant points out the following facts as grounds for the

reduction of the sentence:

1. Counsel for the appellant informed the court prior to the commencement

of the trial that the appellant was willing to plead guilty to the charge

(Vide proceedings of 31/3/2016). He also offered to pay compensation for

the victim. State Counsel who appeared for the Attorney General on that

day wanted time to consider the application.

2. The appellant had the opportunity to rape the victim, which he did not

commit and he brought back the victim alive to the house where she

lived. Further he does not have any previous convictions.

The Learned Deputy Solictor General concedes the above facts. However, she

points out the impact of the incident on the victims life and how her marriage

life has become miserable after her husband came to know of this incident.

As the appellant was ready to plead guilty and pay compensation prior to the

commencement of the trial, and as he did not have any previous convictions,

4

the appellant is deserved to have some reduction of the jail term. Considering

the above mitigatory factors, I believe 10 years rigorous imprisonment would

meet the ends of justice. The term of 15 years of rigorous imprisonment is

reduced to 10 years rigorous imprisonment and to take effect from the date of

the conviction namely, 11th of September, 2020. The fine and compensation

awarded by the Learned High Court Judge will remain unchanged.

Subject to the above variation of sentence, the appeal stands dismissed.

The Registrar is directed to return the record to the High Court of Tangalle for

the Court to inform the accused of the new sentence imposed, and to issue a

new committal accordingly.

Appeal stands dismissed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

N. Bandula Karunarathna, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal