IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal in terms of the

Section 331 of the code of Criminal

Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 and in terms

of Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Complainant

Vs

1. Weligas Hethuge Pradeep Priyantha Bogaha

2. Weligas Hethuge Oliver Chandrathilake

3. Ediriweera Patabendige Chaminda

4. Ediriweera Patabendige Ranjith

Accused

CA Application Case No. 117118/2016

H.C. Tangalle Case No. 01/2004

AND NOW BETWEEN

1. Weligas Hethuge Pradeep Priyantha Bogaha

2. Weligas Hethuge Oliver Chandrathilake

Accused - Appellant

Vs

Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo 12.

Respondent

1

BEFORE : Deepali Wijesundera J.

: L.U. Jayasuriya J.

COUNSEL : Anil Silva P.C with Sahan Kulatunge

For the 1st Accused - Appellant

Saliya Peiris P.C with Thanuka

Nandasiri for the 2nd Accused -

Appellant.

Thusith Mudalige D.S.G. for the

Attorney General

ARGUED ON : 29th May, 2017

DECIDED ON : 30th June, 2017

Jf

Oeepali Wijesundera J.

The first and second appellants along with two others (third and

fourth accused respectively) were indicted in the High Court of Tangalle

under section 140, section 146 read with 296, section 196 read with

section 32 of the Penal Code for the murder of Arukuttu Jayasooriya

Patabendige Sujith and Arukuttu Jayasooriya Patabendige Sunil

respectively.

2

After trial first and second appellants were convicted on the fourth

charge for the murder of Sujith and Sunil. Third and fourth accused were

acquitted on the basis of not being identified.

On the day in question prosecution witness Malini wife of the

deceased Sunil has been feeding her 2 years old child around 11 in the

night and the deceased husband had been eating rice when they heard

gun shots from the beach and according to the witness they both have

rushed towards the beach. Sunil had rushed out saying that his brother

Sujith was on the beach. The witness has followed her husband about

ten feet behind and had seen first and second appellants coming towards

them armed with knives. She has said that both the appellants attacked

the deceased, the first had stabbed him with the knife and chased her

away and she has run from that place. The witness has later returned to

the place of the incident and found the husband lying on the beach with

injuries and rushed him to hospital. This witness has said that she did not

see the shooting taking place.

On perusal of the evidence of this witness I find that there was

another unknown person present at the scene of the crime. The learned

High Court Judge has acquitted all four accuseds on first, second and

3

I

IJ

f

i !

II

I' t

i I1I

I

third charges as there was no evidence to say there was an unlawful

assembly.

Geetha Shanthi wife of the deceased Sujith had testified before the

Magistrate and her evidence has been adopted under section 33 of the

Evidence Ordinance. She has testified that after attacking Sujith the first

appellant aimed a gun at her and Malani and threatened to kill, at which

point both of them had run away. On perusal of Malani's evidence she

doesn't refer to a gun been aimed at them. She has not seen Sujith been

shot. Malani's evidence and Geetha Shanthi's evidence differ therefore

the testimonial trustworthiness of both witnesses comes into doubt.

Witness Malani while testifying has stated that she was not sure

about the identity of the third and fourth accused therefore this should

apply to all the accused. The appellants have been convicted for the

murder of Sujith on circumstantial evidence which I find is not enough to

convict an accused.

The learned High Court Judge has delivered a 36 page judgment

and convicted the first and second appellants on the fourth charges and

acquitted them on first, second and third charges. She has failed to either

convict or acquit the appellants on the fifth charge.

4

It

Ifi~ I

I

t

I.

IIt, It ! (

There was no direct evidence placed before the High Court to

establish the fifth charge. Therefore the learned High Court Judge has

relied on the previous conduct of the first accused appellant and has

referred to an incident which happened seven months prior to the murder.

The High Court Judge has also observed that the first accused appellant

was absconding for a while, after deceased Sunil complaint to the police.

This item of evidence does not fall within the provisions of section 8 (2)

of the Evidence Ordinance.

Section 8 (2) reads thus;

"the conduct of any partyl or of any agent to any party I to

any suit or proceeding in reference to such suit or

proceedingl or in reference to any fact in issue therein or

relevant theretol and the conduct of any person an offence

against whom is the subject of any proceedingl is relevantl

if such conduct influences or is influenced by any fact in

issue or relevant factI and whether it was previous or

subsequent thereto. II

The learned High Court Judge has failed to apply the relevant tests

in analyzing the evidence placed before the especially the test of

contradictions inter - se.

5

I

~ [ Iii(

II

,

I

!

/ I

I

The learned Deputy Solicitor General submitted to court that

absconding after a complaint was made against him by the first appellant

and his previous conduct are not sufficient to establish the charges

levelled against him. He further submitted that the credibility of the eye

witness as far as Sujith's murder is concerned is in doubt. He further

stated that the identity of all the accuseds have not been established

beyond reasonable doubt. The learned Deputy Solicitor General

informed court due to the above reasons he's not contesting the

conviction.

We thank him for maintaining the high standard of the Attorney

General's Department.

For the afore stated reasons I decide to set aside the judgment and

conviction dated 28/09/2016.

Appeal allowed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

L.U. Jayasuriya J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

6