------- --IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA ,I L...---_ _ _ _ _ _ I

C.A. Case No.250/20l5 (Rev)

D.C. Colombo Case No.DDV 00054/2008

In the matter of an application for revision and/or

restitutio in illtcgrLIm made under Article 138 of the Constitution.

Dharman Sathanath Jayasinghe

No.8/S, Panasalhcna Road,

Kolonnawa.

PLAINTIFF

-Vs-

Don Bandumali Jayasinghe nee Welikala

No.49/19, Longden Place,

Colombo 07.

DEFENDANT

AND NOW BETWEEN

Don Bandumali Jayasinghe nee Welikala

No.49/19, Longden Place,

Colombo 07.

DEFENDANT-PETITIONER

-Vs-

HeeJung Kim alias Kim HeeJung

No.51A-23/2-23'" Floor,

1

BEFORE

COUNSEL

Decided on

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J.

Empire Tower,

Braybrook Place, Colombo 02.

And now No.47, Alexandra Placc,

Colombo 07.

RESPONDENT

A.H.M.D. Nawaz,J.

Ikram Mohamed, PC with Thisath Wijegunawardena PC instructed by Sanath Weeraratne for the Defendant-Petitioner

Kuvera de Zoysa, PC with Piume Kulatilake instructed by Sanjaya Fonseka for the Respondent

05.08.2019

T

his application for Revision ancl/or restitutio in il1tegnlm filed by the Defendant

Petitioner on 11th June, 2015 is to set aside the order absolute entered on 30th January,

2009 in the Divorce proceedings in Case NO.DDY0005412008 in the District Court of

Colombo, where there was a divorce dissolving the marriage between Dharman Sathanath

Jayasinghe (the Plaintiff, now deceased) and Don Bandumali Jayasinghe (nee Welikala)

the Defendant-Petitioner abovenamed.

The position of the Defendant-Petitioner (hereinafter sometimes referred to as "the

Petitioner") is that she and the Plaintiff above-named married on 07.04.1983 and out of this

wecUock they were blessed \Vith two sons, namely, Hiran Jayasinghe and Ashan

J ayasinghe, who are both now deceased. The first son died in a car accident and the

second committed suicide.

2

The Defendant-Petitioner pleads that they started a construction business under the

name Dinu COl1structiol1s (Private) Ltd., on a small scale and it later developed into a massive

income originating business with unlimited cash flow and new avenues of income. The

Plaintiff, in the meanwhile, had developed an affair with a Korean woman, who is the

Respondent abovenamed in this Application. Later, there were disagreements that

developed between the Plaintiff and the Defendant which resulted in both agreeing to an

amicable divorce.

Before going for a divorce, the parties entered into two agreements (R28) in respect of the

property owned by the Plaintiff and the Defendant and a decd of gift in favour of their

second son. There was also an agreement reached on cllsbursement of money, upon which

the Defendant agreed to obtain RS.25 million from the Plaintiff, i.e., Rs.l2.5 million before

the divorce and another Rs.l2.5 million after the divorce. As part of the said agreement, the

Defendant had resigned from the position of a Director of the company, and they were

living in separate abodes-vide pages 1849 and 1850 of the Brief.

Subsequently, the Plaintiff inst.ituted the cllvorce action against the Defendant on 1st

February, 2008 in the District Court of Colombo on the ground of constructive malicious

desertion on the part of the Defendant. The Petitioner, on summons being served on her,

filed her proxy and answer on 15,h May 2008 through her Attorney-at-Law Niduk Perera

(Vide paragraphs 8(a) and (b) of her Petition). It must be noted that in her answer, she

too had made a counter claim for cllssolution of their marriage on the ground of

constructive malicious desertion on the part of the Plaintiff. Therefore, it is crystal clear

that though the Defendant later had taken a different position that she was still Mrs.

Jayasinghe, quite contrary to this position she too had wanted a divorce from the Plaintiff.

Her answer Wed in the Divorce action attests to this fact.

At this stage it must be noted that the Defendant made a complaint dated 21.01.2014 to

the Supreme Court, against her Attorney-at-Law Niduk Perera for professional

misconduct etc., which the Supreme Court referred to the Bar Association for an inquiry

and the Bar Association appointed a Panel of Inquiry. The findings of the Panel of Inquiry

3

dated 27,01.2015 that has been filcd of record marked (XI4) arc totally against the

Defendant and the Defendant has been branded as an untruthful witness by the said Panel

and recommended to the Supreme Court to be arraigned on contempt ptoceedings for

making a false statement to the Supreme Court, Her Senior Counsel realizing that the

Defendant was not a truthful witness, apologized to the Attorney-at-law at the inquiry

and withdrew from the inquiry (Vide proceedings of the Inquiry Panel filed of record),

Under these circumstances, through fear of serious repercussions, one finds the Defendant

withdraw the complaint made to the Supreme Court against Niduk Perera by her letter

dated 26,01.2015 (one day prior to the findings of the Panel of Inquiry), She withdrew the

complaint against the Attorney-at law after a fully drawn out inquiry was over. Needless

to say, the fact that she withdrew the complaint against Niduk Perera a day before the

findings before the Panel of Inquiry were made known deserves serious consideration

about the bona fides of this application,

Since the allegations against the Attorney-at-Law Niduk Perera were not established, the

Panel of Inquiry recommended that no further action shall be taken against the Attorney-

at-law on the complaint of the Defendant and thus she was exonerated from the

allegations, This inquiry proceedings are relevant to the facts stated in the petition filcd in

this application and the reliefs claimed by the Defendant therein, W hen the Defendant

withdrew her allegations of professional misconduct made against her registered

Attorney in the said divorce casc, leave alone failing to establish her accusations made in

her petition to the Supreme Court, it would follow that the Defendant has no legs to stand

in this application, However, 1 wish to go further and see whether the Defendant's reliefs

could be be granted on its own merit,

The Defendant prays in paragraph (b) of the prayers of the Petition asking this Court "to

exercise the extraordinary jurisdiction of Revision and/or restitutio in integrum of this Court

and set aside the order datecl30,OL2009 making the order nisi absolute in Case No, DDV

00054/08 in the District Court of Colombo and/or to restore the Petitioner to the status quo

prior to the said Order dated 30,01.2009"; and she further prays in paragraph (c) "to grant

4

a declaration that the Petitioner is the lawful widow of the deceased Plaintiff abovenamed

as their marriage had not been lawfully dissolved in the said Case No.DDV 00054/0S".

As prayed for as above, the Defendant's only grievance is that the order dated 30.01.2009

making the decree nisi absolute be vacated and that she be declared as the widow of the

Plaintiff. There is no complaint about the Court entering the decree lIisi on 03.07.2008.

She says that it is only the entering of the decree absolute that was wrong, and that it

should be vacated.

The Defendant has admitted that summons was served on her and her proxy and answer

were filed on 15.05.200S, and the case was transferred to Court No.7 to be called on

2S.05.200S, on wWch day the case was fixed for trial all. 03.07.200S. According to Niduk

Perera, every step taken in the progress of the case was reported to the Defendant but the

Defendant never took serious notc of the case. On 03.07.200S, Niduk Perera had stated to

Court that the Defendant was not contesting the casc and it was re-fixed [or trial on

29.0S.200S. But on 03.07.2008 itself, the ex parte trial had been taken and dccree nisi was

entered. The entering of the decree nisi on 03.07.2008 might have been due to the reason

that the Defendant was not a contesting party and therefore the Court may have dispensed

with notice on her and taken up the ex parte trial. Section S4 of the Civil Procedure Code

provides, "in the event of the default of the Defendant as stated therein, for the Court to

proceed to hear the case ex parte forthwith, or on such other day as the court may fix". The

rxpmle judgment itself states the circumstances in which the rxparte trial was held.

The fact that the Petitioner was not interested in contesting the divorce is also brought

out by the fact that she herself counterclaimed for divorce which is quite evident in her

answer dated 15th May 2008.

Since the Defendant has not taken up the question of decree nisi in her petition, [ need not

go further on this issue.

As regards the decree absolute the position taken by the Registered Attorney Niduk Perera

was that she appeared in court on 10.10.2008 (the decree returnable date) and took notice

5

of the decree nisi and this was done on instructions from the Petitioner. iduk Perera

categorically states that she later informed the Defendant about taking notice of the

decree nisi. (This is further to service of the decree nisi by registered post by court-sec page

1779 of the Brief). It has to be noted that the decree Ilisi sent by registered post had not

returned undelivered.

The case was postponed for 30.01.2009, on which date the Registered Attorney, Niduk

Perera appeared and the decree nisi was made absolute. The Attorney-at-law states in her

affidavit that she obtained the copies and handed over to the Defendant.

When the Defendant became aware, through her Registered Attorney of the decree nisi

being made absolute, without foUowing the correct procedure, on 30.01.2009, she should

have filed proper papers in the District Court to vacate the same, but she did not take any

step. Instead, she had been conducting herself as if it made no difference to her. This is

consistent with the conduct of a person who wanted an expeditious divorce.

Subsequent Conduct of the Defendant

1. The Defendant filed a testamentary action No.DTS 134/2012 in respect of the

properties left by her second son Ashan J ayasighe, who committed suicide on

28.01.2011. In order file this action she had obtained Legal advice from the legal firm

"Varners". In this case, the Defendant has claimed an undivided l!.1 share only and

the other V2 share she had Left it to the Plaintiff's estate.

When the Plaintiff died on 15.03.2012, he had left movable and immovable

properties exceeding the administrable value. If the Defendant claims that she is yet

the widow of the deceased Plaintiff, she shouLd have filed a testamentary action.

'Nhereas she did not take this step, it was the Respondent to this application who

filed a Testamentary action No.l51/12/DTS, in which the Defendant filed papers to

intervene, which action was yet pending.

Together with the affidavit filed in the Testamentary case, the Defendant filed a

copy of the Decree absolute entered in the Divorce action No.DDV /00054/08 stating

that the marriage between the Defendant and late Dharman Jayasinghe (the

6

Deceased Plaintiff in the divorce action) had been dissolved. It is evidence before

the BASL inquiry that the Defendant represented herself and acted as a divorced

wife of the deceased Plaintiff.

2. She also made a complaint (R25) to the Police about the death of her second son

wherein she mentioned that she knew the Respondent as the deceased Plaintiff's

second wife.

3. A lease Agreement (R42) bearing 10.3284 and dated 04.07.2012 in respect of

Ashan Jayasighe's Apartment 'Empire' was leased out to Colombo International

Container Terminals Ltd by both the Defendant and Respondent, which act depicts

that the Defendant knew of the divorce and she acted qua a divorcee.

4. Again the same apartment 'Empire' was leased out to the same lessee for a further

period by a Lease Agreement bearing NO.3541 and dated 1806.2013 by both the

Defendant and tbe Respondent where the 2nd, y d, and 4th recitals of the Lease

Agreement clearly state that the Defendant was aware of the divorce and she acted

as a divorcee-sec page 1783 of the record.

All the above acts of the Defendant clearly indicate that the Defendant had been well aware

of the decree absolute entered in the said Divorce action NO.DDV/00054/08 and the

marriage between the Defendant and the deceased Plaintiff had long been dissolved, and

she conducted herself as a divorcee.

Having acted above as a divorcee, the Defendant cannot now say that the decree l1isi was

made decree absolute without a copy being served on her. Though the Process server of

Pugoda informed court that the copy of the decree l1isi could not be served on her, the

incontrovertible fact remains that the copy sent to her by registered post never returned

undelivered. This affirms the presumption that the copy of the decree l1isi bad reached her.

Her subsequent acts and conduct further affirm that it was received by her.

Having failed to take immediate steps to vacate the decree absolute entered in the Divorce

action No.DDV /00054/12 under the provisions of Chapter XI [ of the Civil Procedure Code,

the Petitioner took a belated step under Section 839 of the Civil Procedure Code, to set

7

aside the decree absolute and stated several averments whk h are nothing but fabrications

of truth. Later, w hen she realized that she could not maintain the application filed under

Section 839, she filed this application invoking [he jurisdiction of this Court for revision

and/or restitutio ill integnlm.

The primary object of the remedy under restitutio ill integrum is [0 undo a wrong that has

occurred in the order of the origi nal Court and [0 res [Ore the party affected by that order

in the position he had before the order. Further, this remedy cannot be granted unless the

order was given by fraud. The Supreme Court has held that the power of the Court to grant

relief by way of restitutio in illtegrum in respect of judgments of original courts, is a matter of

grace and discretion, and such relief may be sought only w hen there is fraud, false evidence,

non-disclosure of material facts, deception, mistake, fear and minority-see The remedy of

mtitutio has been invoked in early Ceylon [0 set aside such decrees as those obtained by

fraud, Obeysekera I'S. Gunaseker, Buyzer vs. Eckert," jayasuriya vs. KotaJawaJa,>

entered by mistake, Perera vs. Ekanayake,4 Sinnatamhy vs. NaJlatamby, 5 consented [0

under threat of dismissal of the action by the judge, Sabapathy vs. Duniop,6 or embodying

a compromise by a proc[Or acting contrary [0 his client's instructions, Silva vs. Fonseka,l

Narayan Cheety vs. Azeez, 8

Relief from the effect of judgments is granted on similar principles as in the cases contracts

as aforesaid, but regard must be had as well [0 the following additional factors: -

1. No other remedy such as appeal or review should be available for the purpose

obtaining redress. Abeyesekera vs. Harmanis AppU,9

2. Only [0 a party [0 legal proceedings may in general claim sLich relief.

I (1884) 6 S.C.c. 102

1 (1910)13 N.l.R. 371

1 (1922123 N.l.R. 51l (1897) 3 N.l.R. 21

~ (1908) 7 N.LR. 139 (F.B.) , (1935) 37 N.l.R. 113 (1922) 23 N.l.R. 447

I (1921) 23 N.l.R. 477 9 (1911) 14 N.l.R. 353

8

3. Relief will not be granted on grounds of error to a party who has failed ro place

before the court matter which was at his command if reasonable diligence had

been exercised. Phipps vs. Bracegyrdie, 10 Mapalathan vs. Elayavan,ll

[n the case of Kusumawathie vs. Wijesinghe.ll the Petitioner alleged that she was married

to one Wijesinghe and they lived as husband and wife. W ijesinghe died on 24.07.1996

while living with her at the matrimonial home. After the death of Wijesinghe, she applied

to the Department of Pensions, for her dues, where she was shown an ex parte decree

obtained by Wijesinghe dissolving the marriage. The Petitioner contended that there was

no such divorce and was unaware of the expartcdecree and sought relief by way of RestitLItio

in illtegrum to remedy the injustice caused to her by abuse and misuse of the legal process.

[t was held that relief by way of restitutio in integrum of judgment of original courts may be

sought where the judgments had been obtained by fraud by the production of false

evidence, non-disclosing of material facts or by force.

Per J ayasinghe J., "When a party appears and complains that she has been wronged by a

process of law, this Court would not helplessly watch and allow the fraud practised on

that party to be perpetuated. RestitLItio inintegnll!1 provides this Court the necessary

apparatus to step in and rectify any miscarriage of and failure of justice. If this is not the

case then there is a serious vacuum in the law, which can be made use of by designing

individuals as the Petitioner alleges had happened to her."

The above judgment was followed in a similar case of Pauiis vs. J oseph and Others,ll in

which too, a divorce had been obtained by fraud, but the Court of Appeal granted

restitution. (ibid).

!O (1933) 35 N.l.R. 302

II 41 N.l.R. 115

11 2001 {3) Sri l.R. 238

II 2005 (3) Sri L.R. 162

9

I n this application none of the above factors that led to rescission in those cases have been

established.

[t must be noted that the deceased Plaintiff and the Defendant mutually agreed to go for a

divorce and entered into a few pre-divorce agreements. No allegation of fraud or any other

misdeeds are alleged against the Plaintiff in prosecuting the divorce action. After the

decree absolute was entered only, the Plaintiff contracted his second marriage with the

Respondent.

In the divorce action, summons was duly served on the Defendant and an Attorney-at-Law

filed a proxy and answer and in the answer the Defendant also stated that she wanted a

divorce. The position of the registered Attorney Niduk Perera was that she had

consistently informed the Defendant of the progress of the action and she acted as

instructed by the Defendant.

Nevertheless, the Defendant made a complaint against her Attorney to the Supreme Court,

which she later withdrew. The Inquiry Panel also exonerated the Attorney from the

allegation made against her. The Defendant's conduct subsequent to the Decree Absolute

confirms that she was aware of the Decree Absolute and did not want to take any action

against it. She acted at all times as a divorcee. Her application to the District Court

invoking the inherent power of that court under Section 839 was also abandoned as it

could not be maintained. All these events unmistakably show that the Defendant has

herself to blame for all these infractions.

[n the present application the remedy prayed for can be given only when the Defendant

was unlawfully prejudiced by the order of the District Court in the Divorce action

NO.DDV /00054/12. But no such prejudice has been established. This application is belated

and the Defendant is guilty of laches, and in my view this application bears no merit.

Considering all the matters mentioned above, I take the view that the Defendant-

Petitioner is not entitled to the relief prayed for.

I am of the opinion that the Decree Nisi and the Decree Absolute in the Divorce action

NO.DDV /00054/12 have been entered correctly and cannot be vacated. I therefore hold that

10

the this Court should not allow its powers of revision and/or restitLItio ill integnlnl to be

invoked in respect of such orders as have been made in this case except in the exceptional

cases I have enumerated. TIns case falls outside the pale of those exceptional cases.

In the circumstances, the application is dismissed with costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

11