Page 1 of 12

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA.

Rajakaruna Wasala Mudiyanselage

Case No. CA PHC 130/2015 Nihal Rajakaruna

No. 112, Darmapala,

Walligalla.

Plaintiff/Informant

Vs.

01. Aditya Bahmana Ralalage Wijekoon

02. Aditya Bahmana Ralalage

Nawarathne Banda

03. Aditya Bahmana Ralalage Kuda

Banda

All are

110C, Kandy Road, Waligalla.

Respondents

AND

Rajakaruna Wasala Mudiyanselage

Nihal Rajakaruna

No. 112, Darmapala,

Walligalla.

Plaintiff/Informant-Petitioner

Vs.

Page 2 of 12

01. Aditya Bahmana Ralalage Wijekoon

02. Aditya Bahmana Ralalage

Nawarathne Banda

03. Aditya Bahmana Ralalage Kuda

Banda

All are

110C, Kandy Road, Waligalla.

Respondent-Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

Rajakaruna Wasala Mudiyanselage

Nihal Rajakaruna

No. 112, Darmapala,

Walligalla.

Plaintiff/Informant-

Petitioner Appellant

Vs.

01. Aditya Bahmana Ralalage Wijekoon

02. Aditya Bahmana Ralalage

Nawarathne Banda

03. Aditya Bahmana Ralalage Kuda

Banda

All are

110C, Kandy Road, Waligalla.

Respondent-Respondent-

Respondents

Page 3 of 12

Before : Prasantha De Silva J.

S.U.B Karaliyadde J.

Counsel: Mr. Nilantha Kumarage A.A.L for the Plaintiff-Petitioner-Appellant.

Mr. Thishya Weragoda A.A.L with Mr. Prathap Welikumbura A.A.L

for the Respondent-respondent-Respondent.

Written Submissions

tendered on: 09.09.2015 by the Plaintiff-Petitioner -Appellant

30.03.2021 by the Respondent-Respondent-Respondent.

Decided on: 29.04.2021

Prasantha De Silva J

Judgment

The Plaintiff instituted action bearing No 56970/12 against the Respondents in the Magistrate

Court of Kandy in terms of Section 66 of the Primary Courts Procedure Act No 44 of 1979,

by way of a Private Plaint.

It appears that the learned Magistrate acting as the Primary Court Judge granted interim relief

prayed in Prayer () of the Plaint under Section 67 (3) of the Primary Court Procedure Act.

The Respondents filed a counter affidavit and the Plaintiff filed a cross counter affidavit and

thereafter the Court allowed parties to file written submissions.

Page 4 of 12

The learned Primary Court Judge after hearing to both the Plaintiff and the Respondents,

dismissed the action of the Plaintiff and also dissolved the interim order issued by Court.

Being aggrieved by the said order, the Plaintiff-Petitioner had invoked the Revisionary

Jurisdiction of the Provincial High Court of the Central Province.

After filing the objections by the Respondent-Respondents and written submissions by both

the parties, the learned High Court Judge delivered the order dismissing the Plaintiff-

Petitioner application with cost on 06.10.2015.

The Plaintiff-Petitioner being dissatisfied with the said order has preferred this appeal seeking

to revise or set aside the orders made by the learned Primary Court Judge dated 03.09.2013

and the learned High Court Judge dated 06.10.2015.

Apparently, it was the contention of the Plaintiff-Petitioner-Appellant [hereinafter referred to

as the Appellant] that, whether both the learned Magistrate and the learned High Court Judge

have failed to consider the fact that the Appellant was in possession of the disputed land,

within a period of two months immediately before the date on which the information was

filed under Section 66 of the Primary Court Procedure Act.

It was submitted on behalf of the Appellant that the Appellant had been in possession of the

entire land called Bathalage Kotuwa depicted in 1 from the year 1998 and the

Respondents have no possession whatsoever to the same.

Page 5 of 12

Further, it was submitted that in terms of the averment 6 of the Affidavit dated 08.02.2013 by

the Respondents in the Magistrate Court of Kandy, has accepted that the Appellant is in

Possession of the subject matter. Paragraph 6 of the said Affidavit states that,

6. 10 11 , 3 13

1

603 1 ,

.

As such, it was the position taken up by the Appellant that at the time of instituting the action

in the Magistrate Court, the Appellant is the person who had been in possession of the

disputed premises for a period of two months immediately before the date on which the

information was filed under Section 66 of the Primary Court Procedure Act.

However, it was submitted on behalf of the Respondents that the Appellant has failed to

provide any evidence on the Appellant being dispossessed from the said land and when the

dispossession took place.

In this respect, it is to be noted that in view of the Complaint made by Widanelage Rohini

Thilaka Fernando, the wife of the Appellant against Wijekoon Banda the 1st Respondent that

their possession in respect of the residence No 112 Bathalagala Weligalla had been disputed,

disturbed and interrupted.

Page 6 of 12

As such, it is clear that the Appellant was in possession of the residence bearing No 112

which is in dispute on the 14.10.2012 and the Appellant was not dispossessed from the same

by the Respondents.

Apparently, the informant-Petitioner-Appellant has referred to the disputed land in the

schedule to the Plaint as follows;

, ,

: 630 - 01

, :

, : : . . .

585 ,

: . . .

, : ..

(: 1, : 1 : 26.0)

.

,

: 630 02

Page 7 of 12

, : .. .

:

: . .

.

The Court draws the attention to the Plan bearing No 630 marked and produced as

It is seen that the schedule referred in the Plaint described the same land depicted and

described in Plan 1.

Schedule of the said plan described the name of the land as ,

, .

It is pertinent to note that the description of Plan 1 states, ,

The Court observes that the said description indicates to ,

, thus it could be reasonable to presume that the

is the house occupied by the Appellant referred as No 112,

.

Furthermore, the said Plan 1 was prepared in January 1971, it described the trees on the

land. Since the Appellant has indicated in the Plaint that he had come into the

possession/occupation of the said Teachers Quarters in 1998, thus the Appellant cannot

Page 8 of 12

claim or said that he is entitled to the Plantation described in the said land in 1, since no

evidence placed before Court.

Moreover, in Plan 1, refers to the names of the claimants as K.W Wijeratne Banda and

Mrs. P.M Abeyratne, claiming rights jointly for the entire land which is 1 acre, 1 rood and 26

perches.

It is observable that the Appellant has established his possession/occupation to the premises

No 112 Bathalagala Weligalla by the documents 2, 3 - 10 and 11. Nevertheless,

the Plaintiff could not prove his possession to the entire land [1 acre 1 roods and 26 perches]

described in the schedule to the Plaint as lot 1 and

lot 2.

Nevertheless, it is reasonable to presume that the premises No 112, Bathalagala Weligalle is

situated within the said land Bathalage Koratuwa of Weligalle [ 1 acre, 1 rood and 26

perches] but the Appellant has not proved that he had been in exclusive possession of the

entirety of the land.

The Respondents have specifically mentioned in Paragraph 6 of their Affidavit that the

Appellant being a teacher was given teachers quarters and he is occupying the quarters in

official capacity in respect of residence bearing No 112, Bathalagala Weligalle

6. 10 11 , 3

13

1

Page 9 of 12

603 1 ,

.

In this instance, it is worthy to note that the Appellant has not mentioned in the Plaint how he

had come to the occupation of the premises No 112, Bathalagala, Weligalla and thereby

suppressed the same.

The Court observes that the Complaint made on 14.10.2012 to the Daulugala Police station

by the wife of the Appellant referred only to the residence () No 112, Bathalagala

Weligalla.

Similarly in the Complaint made on 29.01.2012 to the Daulugala Police station by the wife of

the Appellant specifically mentioned the which they occupy.

Therefore, it is clear that the Appellant being a teacher had come to occupy the Teachers

Quarters [ ] No 112, Bathalagala, Weligalla. But not proved that he was in

exclusive possession of the entire land of the extent of 1 acre 1 rood and 26 perches.

In view of the Judgment of Ramalingam Vs Thangamma [1982 2 S.L.R] when the evidence

about the possession is clearly balanced, the primary Court Judge could consider the evidence

about the title and come to the conclusion that the party who has the title to the property is

entitled to the possession of it until the rights of the parties are determined by a competent

Court.

Page 10 of 12

It was revealed that the Appellant had executed a deed of transfer bearing No 067 of

01.03.2013 [ 11] in his favour.

However, it appears that the said deed [ 11] was executed after filing the Plaint in this

action.

Similarly, the Respondents also produced documents marked as 1 to 3 claiming the title of

the lands and documents 4 to 7 to establish the possession of the said lands.

Apparently, the learned Magistrate acting as a Primary Court Judge had come to the findings

that none of the Parties have proved that they are entitled to the land in dispute and it has to

be determined by a Civil Court.

In this instance, it is submitted that in view of the aforesaid reasons, it is clear that the

Appellant was not dispossessed from the premises No 112, Bathalagala, Weligalla.

It is worthy to note that the Appellant through his Plaint claims an order under Section 68 (3)

of the Primary Court Procedure Act. However, such a relief can only be available when there

is forceful dispossession of a party concerned.

According to the Judgment of Punchi Nona Vs Padumasena and others [1994 (2) S.L.R

117], it was established that the application of Section 66 (1) (b) and Section 68 (3) becomes

applicable only if the Judge can come to a definite finding that some other party had been

forcibly dispossessed within a period of two months next presiding the date on which the

information was filed. The distinction in Section 69 is that it requires the Court to determine

the question as to which party is entitled to the disputed right preliminary to making an Order

under Section 69 (2) of the Act.

Page 11 of 12

However, when an information is filed by a Party to the dispute under Section 66 (1) (b) it is

left to the Judge to satisfy himself that there is a dispute affecting land owing to which a

breach of the peace is threatened or likely.

Since the Appellant was not provided any evidence as to the dispossession of the premises

and the land in dispute, the Appellant is not entitled to relief in terms of prayer () of the

Plaint.

It was held in Kayas Vs. Nazeer and others, [2004 (3) S.L.R 202], Section 68 (3) mandates

the Primary Court Judge directing restoration, if he is satisfied that any person who had been

in possession has been forcibly dispossessed within two months immediately preceding the

date of filing the information.

In the instant case, there is no forceful dispossession proved by the Appellant within two

months immediately before the date of filing the information. Thus, the learned Primary

Court Judge has not made a direction to restoration of possession.

As such, it is seen that the learned Magistrate, acting as a Primary Court Judge has correctly

dismissed the action of the Plaintiff-Petitioner-Appellant and also directed the Parties to

resolve their dispute pertaining to the subject land by a Competent Jurisdiction of a Civil

Court.

In view of the foregoing reasons, it is apparent that the Appellant has no exceptional

circumstances to invoke the Revisionary Jurisdiction of the Provincial High Court of the

Central Province against the Order of the learned Magistrate.

Hence, we are not inclined to interfere with the Order dated 03.09.2013 by the learned

Magistrate and the Order dated 06.10.2015 by the learned High Court Judge.

Page 12 of 12

Therefore, we affirmed the said orders and dismiss this appeal with cost fixed at Rs. 25,000/-.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

S.U.B Karaliyadde J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL