IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

Court of Appeal Case No: CAlPHCI APN/149/2017

HC Colombo Case No: HCRAl40/2014

MC Fort Case No: S175660/13

Page 1 of 16

>.

In the matter of an application made under and in terms of Article 138 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka seeking to revise and set aside the Judgement made in the Provincial High Court of Colombo.

Vs.

Consumer Affairs Authority

1st and 2nd Floors CWE Secretarial Building Vauxhall Street Colombo 02

Complainant

I. MIs. Ceylon Cold Stores PLC No.OI, Justice Akbar Mawatha Colombo 02

2. Ajit Damon Gunewardhane

No.09, Rotherfiled Place

Colombo 07

3. Susantha

Ratnayake No.4/10D, Gardens Colombo 05

Chaminda

Thalakotuwa

4. James Ronnie Felitus Peris,

No.02, Lakshapana Mawatha J anadhi pathipaura Battramulla

Page 2 of 16

5. Jitendra Romesh Gunaratne No.60, Pahalawela Road Battaram ulla

6. Dr. Uditha P Liyangae (deceased) No.14/1, St. Stephen's Mawatha Rajagiriya

7. Prasanna Sujeewa Jayawardena No.38/5, Lake Drive Rajagiriya Sri Jayawardhanapura - Kotte (Deceased)

8. Albert R. Rasiah No.52, Ward Place Colombo 07

Accused

AND BETWEEN

I . Aj it Damon Gunewardhane No.09, Rotherfiled Place Colombo 07

2. Susantha Ratnayake No.4110D, Gardens Colombo 05

Chaminda

Thalakotuwa

3. James Ronnie Felitus Peris,

No.02, Lakshapana Mawatha J anadhipathi paura Battramulla

4. Jitendra Romesh Gunaratne No.60, Pahalawela Road Battaramulla

Vs.

Page 3 of 16

5. Dr. Uditha P Liyangae (deceased) No.14/1 , St. Stephen's Mawatha Rajagiriya

6. Prasanna Sujeewa Jayawardena No.38/5, Lake Drive Rajagiriya Sri Jayawardhanapura - Kotte (Deceased)

7. Albert R. Rasiah No.52, Ward Place Colombo 07

Accused - Petitioners

Consumer Affairs Authority

1st and 2nd Floors CWE Secretarial Building Vauxhall Street Colombo 02

Complainant - Respondent

Mis. Ceylon Cold Stores PLC

No.OI, Justice Akbar Mawatha

Colombo 02

1 st Accused Respondent

Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

3rd Respondent

Page 4 of 16

"

AND NOW BETWEEN

Vs.

L Susantha Ratnayake NoAIlOD, Gardens Colombo 05

Chaminda

Thalakotuwa

[I, James Ronnie Felitus Peris, No,02, Lakshapana Mawatha JanadhipatlUpaura Battramulla

[[I, Jitendra Romesh Gunaratne No,60, Pahalawela Road Battaramulla

Accused Petitioners Petitioners

Consumer Affairs Authority 1st and 2nd Floors CWE Secretarial Building Vauxhall Street Colombo 02

Complainant - Respondent -

Respondent

Mis. Ceylon Cold Stores PLC

No.OJ, Justice Akbar Mawatha

Colombo 02

1 st Accused - Respondent-

Respondent

BEFORE

COUNSEL

Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

3'd Respondent - Respondent

I. Ajit Damon Gunewardhane No.09, Rotherfi1ed Place

Colombo 07

2. Prasanna Sujeewa Jayawardena No.381S, Lake Drive Rajagiriya Sri Jayawardhanapura -Kotte (Deceased)

3. Albert R. Rasiah No.S2, Ward Place Colombo 07

2nd 7th d 8th A d P "P .. , an ccuse -etltioners -etitioners

Hon. K. K. Wickremasinghe, J.

Hon. Devika Abeyratne, J.

Mr. Faiz Musthapha PC with Mr. Ranil

Samarasooriya AAL for Petitioners.

Ms. Nisasiri Dayananda AAL, Sar,jaya Seneviratne

AAL , Ms. Malsha Munasinghe, Ms. Priyangika

Hettiarachchi AAL, Mr. Aruna Jayathilake AAL

and Ms. Ayeshika Sirirathne AAL for

Complainant Respondent Respondent

Mr. Manohara Jayasinghe SSC with Mr. S.

Ahamed SC for Hon. Attorney General

Page 5 of 16

ARGUED ON

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS

DECIDED ON

K.K.WICKREMASINGHE, J.

26th June 2020 and 31 st July 2020

3,d 5th A d P . . P .. : -ccuse -ettttoners -etttlOners on

10th September 2018

Further Written Submissions on behalf Of),d _ 5th

Accused Petitioners Petitioners on 12th August 2020

Complainant Respondent Respondent on 30th August

2020

Further Written Submissions on behalf of Complainant

Respondent Respondent on 7th August 2020

18.09.2020

1. This is an application for Revision from an order dated 20.9.2017 by the Learned High

Court of Colombo on the case bearing the number HCRA 40/2014. The instant order is

concerned With, whether the Accused - Petitioners - Petitioners (hereinafter referred to as the

"Petitioners") aver exceptional circumstances to warrant this Court to intervene with the

order of the Learned High Court Judge of Colombo.

FACTS OF THE CASE

2. Consumer Affairs Authority, the Complainant - Respondent - Respondent (hereinafter

referred to as the "1st Respondent") instituted an action against the Mis. Ceylon Cold Stores

PLC (hereinafter referred to as the "2nd Respondent") alleging that the 2nd Respondent

committed an offence which is punishable under the Section 30 and 31 (a) read together with

Section 60 (5) (b) of the Consumer Affairs Authority Act, No.09 of2003.

Page 6 of 16

,.

3. It is alleged that the Respondent Company on or ,about 14th May 2011 committed the said

offences by manufacturing, distributing and selling a contaminated Elephant House Cream

Soda 1.5 Liter bottle which involved substances that are harmful for human consumption as

confirmed by the Government Analyst Report.

4. The action was institUted in the Magistrate's Court of Fort where the summons was issued

against the Company and the Directors. Being aggrieved by the order of naming of the above

cited petitioners as Accused, the instant application is lodged. The three orders of the Learned

Magistrate of Fort bearing number S 75660/13 were pronounced on 26th June 2013, 30th

August 2013 and 6th December 2013. The Petitioners filed a Revision application in the

Provincial High Court of the Western Province. The Learned High Court Judge dismissed the

revision application on the ground that Petitioners have failed to establish exceptional

circumstances.

5. Being aggrieved by the said Judgement of the Learned High Court Judge, the Petitioners

filed this revision application to invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of this Court in order to

set aside and revise the Judgement of the Learned High Court Judge of Colombo dated 20th

September 2017 and to set aside and revise the orders of the Learned Magistrate of Fort dated

26th June 2013, 30th June 2013 and 6th December 2013.

GROUNDS OF THE REVISION APPLICATION

6. The following grounds were submitted and urged as the exceptional circumstances to

invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of this Court by the Petitioners;-

I. The Complainant cannot on the strength of Section 60 (7) of the Consumer Affairs

Authority Act, No.09 of 2003 name the Directors of the body corporate as Accused of

that action at any stage of the trial prior to the said body corporate is convicted.

Page 7 of 16

II. As per Article 13(5) of the Constitution of,the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka every person is presumed to be innocent until proven guilty.

1I1. It cannot be presumed that the Directors at the stage of filing the Plaint could be

deemed to have committed the offence.

IV. The three orders of the Learned Magistrate of Fort bearing the number S 75660113

dated 26th June 2013, 30th August 2013 6th December 2013, affects the smooth

functioning of the Respondent Company.

LEGAL ANALYSIS

7. I wish to analyze ground I and III together and ground II and ground IV separately.

Ground I and III

8. Consumer Affairs Authority, the "lSI Respondent" instituted an action against the MIs.

Ceylon Cold Stores PLC alleging that they committed an offence which is punishable under

the Section 30 and 31 (a) of the Consumer Affairs Authority Act, No.09 of 2003. The

aforesaid Sections are reproduced as follows;

Section 30

"No trader shall, in the course of a trade or business, engage in any type of conduct

that is misleading or deceptive or is likely to mislead or deceive the consumer or any

other trader n,

Section 31 (a)

"Any trader who, in the course of a trade or business, in connection with the supply

or possible supply of goods or services or in connection with the promotion by any

means of the supply or use of goods or services-

Page 8 of 16

(a) falsely represents that goods or service} are of a particular standard, quality or

grade, or that goods are of a particular style or model"

9. As set out in Section 60 (7) of the Consumer Affairs Authority Act, No.09 of 2003 every

Director of a Body Corporate is deemed to be held liable for the offences committed under

the said Act. Section 60 (7) of the Act reads as follows;

"Where any offence under this Act is committed by a body of persons, then -

(a) if the body of persons is a body corporate, every director and officer of such body

corporate; and

(b) if the body of persons is a firm, every partner of that firm, shall be deemed guilty

of that offence:

Provided that no such director, officer or partner shall be deemed guilty of that

offence if he proves that such offence was committed without his knowledge or

that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence ".

I o. On a reading of the said provision, it is clear that if a person who commits an offence

under the Consumer Affairs Authority Act, No.09 of 2003, the company as well as every

person in charge of for the conduct of the business of the company at the time of the

commission of the offence is deemed to be guilty of the offence and the proviso carves out

under what circumstances the liability is exempted.

II. At this juncture I would like to refer to the case of H L Bolton (Engineering) Co Ltd v T

J Graham & Sons Ltd (1957)1 QB 159 where Lord Denning expressed that;

"A company may in many ways be likened to a human body. It has a brain and nerve

centre which controls what it does. It also has hands which hold the tools an act in

accordance with directions from the centre. Some of the people in the company are

mere servants and agents who are nothing more than hands to do the work and

cannot be said to represent the mind or will. Others are directors and managers who

represent the directing mind and will of the company and control what it does. The

Page 9 of 16

state 0/ mind o/these managers is the state Q/ mind o/the company and is treated by

law as such. So you will find that in cases where the law requires personal/ault as a

condition o/liability in tort, the fault o/the manager will be the personal/ault o/the

company .So also in the criminal law, in cases where the law requires a guilty mind

as a condition 0/ a criminal offence, the guilty mind o/the directors and managers

will render the company itself guilty. " (Lord Denning at page 172)

12. The submissions made by the Complainant Respondent Respondent highlighted the

importance of the interpretation of the words in a statute within the intention of the

Parliament. In light of the above submission the Complainant Respondent Respondent cited

Commissioner 0/ Elections v U. Amaradasa SC Appeal No. 75/2010 dated 12th February

2014. [n the aforecited case, Hon. Justice Sathyaa Hettige elaborated the necessity of

interpretation of a provision of a statute in light of the intention of the legislature as follows;

"Maxwell on the Interpretation 0/ Statutes (l2th Edi.) 1969 P.I says that" Statute law is the will o/the Legislature .. " (emphasis added)

It can be seen that In line 0/ authorities it has been decided that the function 0/ the court is to find out and declare the intention 0/ the legislature and not to add words to a statute. It is also not the function 0/ the court to drop the vital part 0/ the statutory provisions in the section but to obey the statutory provisions. It has to be given the true meaning intended by the legislature.

In R. vWimbletonlusticesEXP.Derwent (1953) I QB 380 Lord Goddard CJ at 384 observed that

" A court cannot add words to a statute or read words into it which are not there."

(emphasis added)

It was decided in an earlier case in the case 0/ R. v City 0/ London Court Judge(1892)/ QB 273Lopes U at page 310 said " 1 have always understood that If the words 0/ an Act are unambiguous and clear, you must obey those words however absurd the result may appear .. "

N. R.Bindra's Interpretation 0/ Statutes ( Tenth Edition 2007) at page 279 states that "The golden rule 0/ interpretation is that we must first try to

(!sr:~r!ai!1 !h~ infpnf;f')n n1 fJ,fP T pt7;" I n h,p'p (.."Wf ''''0 . - .... -.. ~J . ---0'- '-'-" -J' ...... .. -attaching the ordinary meaning 0/ the word on the grammatical

Page 10 of 16

construction adding nothing and olJ'litting nothing and give effect to the intention thus ascertained if the language is unambiguous, and no absurdity results .... "

Therefore in light of the above sources it is clear that the meaning of a provision of a

statute should be elicited from the intention of the Parliament and such interpretation

must not violate meaning of the words that are expressly used.

Thus, [ am of the opinion that the word "shall be deemed guilty" used in Section 60

(7) of the Consumer Affairs Authority Act, No.09 of 2003 has to be interpreted in

such a way that a body corporate and every director and officer of such body

corporate is guilty by operation of law until and unless they bring evidence as to lack

of knowledge and due diligence.

13. The Learned President's Counsel for the Petitioners submitted the following cases on the

basis that the order made issuing summons is ex facie bad in law and it violates the rules of

natural justice;

a) Malini Gunaratne, Additional District Judge, Galle vs Abeysinghe and another

[19941 3 Sri LR 196

b) Moses v State (1999) 3 Sri LR

c) Chanrasena and Others v Munaweera [1998) 3 Sri LR.

In the case of Malini Gunaratne, Additional District Judge, Galle vs Abeysinghe and

another (supra) where an allegation that the plea of the complainant was incorrectly

recorded as a plea of guilt was not borne out by the entries in the record. It was held that

no summons should have been issued in the above mentioned case. It is my view that the

aforecited case is materially different to the instant application, therefore it has no bearing

on the instant case and therefore not applicable.

Also, in the case of Moses v State (supra) it was held that a duty is cast upon the judges

to give reasons for their decisions as their decisions are subject to review by the superior

courts. In the case of Chanrasena and Others v Munaweera (supra) the Learned

Magistrate has found the accused guilty and the reasons were delivered belatedly. I find

these cases have no bearing on the case in hand and thus are not applicable.

Page 11 of 16

14. The Learned Counsel for the Complainant -~espondent - Respondent submitted the

ground on which the directors of the Company has to be summoned along with the Body

Corporate and I wish to reproduce that submission as follows;

" ... ... Moreover, there cannot be a provision to summon Directors after the Accused

Company being convicted. Because after conviction no one could be summoned but

only the convicted persons _. __ ..... _ .. .It is respectfully submitted that once that

accused company is found guilty by operation of law the Directors are also guilty

of the same offence."

15. It may be appropriate at this stage to notice the observations of S.K. Shukla vs The State

Of Madhya Pradesh dated 22 March 2018 decided by the High Court of India (Madya

Pradesh). The case concerned with a complaint made against a company carrying out the

business of manufacture of Soya Badi, Soya Flour and Soybean Oil. The food safety officers

inspected the company and the samples that were tested found to be of unsafe for human

consumption under the said Act. A case was filed against the Directors of the Company. The

State of India submitted that thus the directors are nominees of the Company and can be

prosecuted even in the absence of the Company. The defendants objected on the ground that

the company has to be named as an accused along with the Directors.

16. Section 66 which imposes liability under the said Act of India and Section 60 (7) of the

Consumer Affairs Authority Act, No.09 of 2003 of the case in hand is identical. Both the

provisions impose liability to the body corporate and every director and officer of such body

corporate in a deemed effect.

17. In S.K. Shukla vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh (supra) is analyzed as follows:

"We have referred to the aforesaid authorities to highlight that the company can

have criminal liability and further, if a group of persons that guide the business of

Page 12 of 16

corporate. In this backdrop, Section 141 of the Act has to be understood The said

provision clearly stipulates that when a person which is a company commits an

offence, then certain categories of persons in charge as well as the company would

be deemed to be liable for the offences under Section 138. Thus, the statutory

intendment is absolutely plain. As is perceptible, the provision makes the

functionaries and the companies to be liable and that is by deeming fiction. A

deeming fiction has its own signification. "

"From the aforesaid pronouncements, the principle that can be culled out is that it

is the bounden d!Jty of the court to ascertain for what purpose the legal fiction has

been created It is also the duty of the court to imagine the fiction with all real

consequences and instances unless prohibited from doing so. That apart, the use of

the term "deemed" has to be read in its context and further, the fullest logical

purpose and import are to be understood It is because in modern legislation, the

term "deemed" has been used for manifold purposes. The object of the legislature

has to be kept in mind"

18. It was held that for maintaining an action, placing the Company as an Accused is

imperative and the other categories of the offenders can only be brought in as accused when

the Company has been named as an Accused.

19. Therefore, my observation is that the fact in issue of the case in hand and the afore cited

case is different because in the cited case the plaint doesn't contain the name of the Company

as an Accused while in the instant case, it has already been named. Nevertheless, its raio

decidendi that it is imperative to name the alleged Company and the Directors as Accused is

commendable and thus it is espoused to the instant case as well.

Page 13 of 16

20. Also, my view is that if the Directors of the C9mpany are not named as Accused to the

action it shall be an inevitable bar to proceed with the matter.

21. In view of my aforesaid analysis, [ arrive at the irresistible conclusion after applying a

strict construction of the statutory provision that in light of Section 60 (7) of the Consumer

Affairs Authority Act, No.09 of 2003 naming the Directors of the body corporate as Accused

is correct in a deeming effect.

Ground II

22. As per Article 13(5) of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

every person is presumed to be innocent until proven guilty.

23. Article 13(5) of the Constitution is reproduced as follows;

"Every person shall be presumed innocent until he is proved guilty.

Provided that the burden of proving particular facts may, by law, be placed on an

accused person. "

24. I do not wish to analyze further on this ground since naming a person as an Accused

neither render a legal bearing nor act as a legal bar upon the presumption of innocence as

stipulated in Article 13(5) of the Constitution. Directors are open to face a fair trial where

they get an opportunity to defend themselves.

25. Therefore, the directors are liable to go through the trial when they are named as Accused

and at the stage of the trial they can act according to the Proviso to Section 60 (7) of the

Consumers Affairs Authority Act, No.09 of 2003.

Ground IV

26. As alleged by the Petitioners that the three orders of the Learned Magistrate of Fort

bearing the number S 75660113 dated 26th June 2013, 30th August 2013 and 6th December

2013, affects the smooth functioning of the Respondent Company.

Page 14 of 16

27. I wish to state that under the proviso to Section.60 (7) of the Consumer Affairs Authority

Act, No.09 of 2003, the Accused are given with an opportunity to exculpate themselves from

the liability after the proof of no knowledge or exercise oj due diligence to prevent the

commission oj such offence.

28. Therefore, my view. is that it has no bearing on the smooth functioning of the Company.

29. In view of the foregoing reasons, based on factual scenarios and legal concepts I decide

that the Petitioner is not entitled to any of the reliefs he has prayed for in his petition of

Revision. Accordingly, we affirm the order of the Learned High Court Judge of Colombo in

Case No. HCRA 40/2014 and the order of the Learned Magistrate of MC Fort in Case

No.75660113

30. The Revision Application is hereby dismissed without costs.

Devika Abeyratne, J.

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Page 15 of 16

Cases referred to:

I. H L Bolton (Engineering) Co Ltd v T J Graham & Sons Ltd [1957) 1 QB 159

2. Malini Gunaratne, Additional District Judge, Galle vs Abeysinghe and another (1994)

3 Sri LR 196

3. Moses v State (1999) 3 Sri LR

4. Chanrasena and Others v Munaweera [1998] 3 Sri LR.

5. S.K. Shukla vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh dated 22 March 2018

6. Cornrnissioner of Elections v U. Amaradasa SC Appeal No. 75/2010

Page 16 of 16