1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

In the matter of an Application for mandates in the nature of Writs of Certiorari and Prohibition under Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

CA (Writ) Application No: 289/2019

Maharagama Urban Council, Maharagama.

Petitioners

Vs.

1) Assistant Labour Commissioner, District Labour Office, Maharagama. 2) Labour Commissioer, Labour Department, Colombo 5. 3) A.A.D.Chandana, No. 98, Yahampath Mawatha, Maharagama. 4) C.D.Somasiri, 117/2, Abeyratne Mawatha, Makuludoowa, Piliyandala. 5) G.H.G.Samantha Rohana, 21/6, Samagi Mawatha, Depanama, Pannipitiya.

2

6) H.D.A.Malkanthie, 179/5, Temple Road, Thalapathpitiya, Nugegoda. 7) S.L.Ranaweera, 60, Gemunu Mawatha, Bangalawatte, Kottawa, Pannipitiya. 8) Hon. Attorney General, Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12. Respondents Before: Arjuna Obeyesekere, J Counsel: Ms. Chandrika Morawaka with Ms. Kumari Hettige for the Petitioner Ms. Madubashini Sri Meththa, State Counsel for the 1st, 2nd and 8th Respondents Supported on: 24th October 2019 Written Submissions: Tendered on behalf of the Petitioner on 14th February 2020

Tendered on behalf of the 1st, 2nd and 8th Respondents on 13th February 2020 Decided on: 18th June 2020

3

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J The Commissioner General of Labour had instituted Case No. 19594 against

the Petitioner in the Magistrates Court of Gangodawila in terms of Section

38(2) of the Employees Provident Fund Act No. 15 of 1958, as amended (the

Act), seeking to recover (a) a sum of Rs. 1,497,120 being the amount that the

Commissioner General of Labour claims the Petitioner ought to have

contributed to the Employees Provident Fund on behalf of the 3rd 7th

Respondents, and (b) a surcharge of Rs. 707,609.72, on the aforementioned

sum.

The learned Magistrate, after having afforded the Petitioner a hearing, had

allowed the application of the Commissioner General of Labour. A revision

application filed by the Petitioner against the Order of the learned Magistrate

has been dismissed by the Provincial High Court of the Western Province.

A few days prior to the judgment of the High Court being delivered, the

Petitioner filed this application seeking inter alia the following relief:

a) A Writ of Certiorari quashing the decision of the 1st Respondent to issue a

certificate in terms of Section 38(2) of the Employees Provident Fund Act

No. 15 of 1958, as amended;

b) A Writ of Prohibition preventing the 1st Respondent from continuing with

any proceedings against the Petitioner;

c) An interim order staying further proceedings in Magistrates Court,

Gangodawila Case No. 19594.

It is common ground that proceedings before the Magistrates Court,

Gangodawila have come to an end with the aforementioned Order of the

4

learned Magistrate delivered on 25th May 2016. In these circumstances, the

necessity for this Court to consider the prayer for interim relief does not arise.

This matter was supported for notice and interim relief on 24th October 2019.

In addition to the petition and the documents filed together with the petition,

this Court had the benefit of the limited Statement of Objections and

documents filed on behalf of the 1st and 2nd Respondents. At the conclusion of

the oral submissions of both learned Counsel, the learned Counsel for the

Petitioner moved for an opportunity to discuss a resolution of this dispute with

the 1st and 2nd Respondents. However, as this Court was informed on 20th

December 2019 that there was no resolution, the parties were directed to

tender written submissions, which has been complied with. When this matter

was mentioned on 14th February 2020, the learned Counsel for the parties

agreed to this Court delivering the Order on whether notices should be issued

on the Respondents.

It was the position of the learned Counsel for the Petitioner that even though

the 3rd 7th Respondents were rate collectors on behalf of the Petitioner, the

said Respondents were not its employees, but were independent contractors.

It was therefore the position of the Petitioner that it is not liable to contribute

towards the Employees Provident Fund on behalf of the 3rd 7th Respondents.

The substantive issue that arises for the determination of this Court therefore

would be whether the decision of the Commissioner General of Labour that

the 3rd 7th Respondents were employees of the Petitioner, and not

independent contractors, is illegal, irrational or unreasonable.

The Petitioner has also complained to this Court that the Department of

Labour did not afford the Petitioner an opportunity of explaining that it is not

liable for such contribution, and that it became aware of the finding by the

5

Department of Labour only when proceedings were instituted in the

Magistrates Court, in April 2014.

Together with the limited Statement of Objections, the learned State Counsel

has filed two letters marked R6 and R7. By the first letter dated 2nd May

2012, the Department of Labour has informed the Petitioner that it has failed

to contribute towards the Fund on behalf of the 3rd 7th Respondents, and had

requested that payments be made. By the second letter dated 13th September

2013, the Department of Labour had informed the Petitioner that legal action

will be instituted unless payments are made. The Petitioner claims that it never

received these two letters.

The learned State Counsel has submitted further that the Petitioner is guilty of

inordinate delay, in that this application has been filed five years after

proceedings were instituted in the Magistrates Court, and that this application

is liable to be dismissed in limine. This Court must observe that the said

submission has merit and that the Petitioner must explain its delay.

In Nallaperuma Thanthrige Leelawathie and another vs Divisional Secretary,

Karandeniya and others1 this Court, having referred to the judgments of the

Supreme Court in Biso Menika v. Cyril de Alwis2, Seneviratne v. Tissa Dias

Bandaranayake and another3 and Issadeen v. The Commissioner of National

Housing and others4, and to the judgment in Lindsey Petroleum Co., Vs. Hurd

referred to in Bisomenikes case5, held as follows:

1 CA (Writ) Application No. 218/2017; CA Minutes of 2nd December 2019. 2[1982] 1 Sri LR 368; at pages 377 to 379. This case has been followed by the Supreme Court in Ceylon Petroleum Corporation v. Kaluarachchi and others [SC Appeal No. 43/2013; SC Minutes of 19th June 2019]. 3 [1999] 2 Sri LR 341 at 351. 4 [2003] 2 Sri LR 10 at pages 15 and 16. 5 (1874) L.R., 5 P.C 221 at 239.

6

The above judgments clearly illustrate four important matters, although

not necessarily in a particular order. The first is that an application for a

Writ must be filed without delay. The second is that where there is, on the

face of the application, a delay, such delay must be explained to the

satisfaction of Court. The third is that delay can be ignored, if the act

complained of is manifestly illegal, such as a decision of a statutory

authority made in excess of jurisdiction. The fourth is the nature of the

acts that have taken place during the time period between the impugned

decision or act and the filing of the application. These factors are relevant

when determining whether an application should be dismissed on account

of the Petitioner being guilty of delay.

Thus, dismissal of an application on account of delay is not automatic,

especially where questions have been raised with regard to the legality of the

decision. In this application, the learned Counsel for the Petitioner has raised

three important questions of law. The first is that the Petitioner was not

afforded a hearing. The second is with regard to its liability to contribute to the

Employees Provident Fund on behalf of the 3rd 7th Respondents. The third is

that the procedure laid down in the Act has not been followed prior to the

institution of action. It is therefore the view of this Court that the question of

delay must be considered in the context of the above three questions of law,

at a full hearing with the participation of the 3rd 7th Respondents.6

This Court accordingly issues formal notice of this application on all

Respondents.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

6 See the judgment of the Supreme Court in Sebastian Fernando vs the Katana Multi Purpose Co-operative Society and others. [1990] 1 Sri LR 342.