IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A.Rev.1518/2006

Before : P.R. Walgama, J

Piyasena Hapuaratchi

4th Respondent - Petitioner

Vs.

1. Bulathsinghala

Plaintiff - Petitioner -Respondent

2. Baldsingho and 2 others.

Respondents - Respondents

Council : Navin Marapana for the 4th Respondent -

Petitioner.

: Rohan Sahabandu PC with Surekha Vithanage

Plaintiff - Petitioner - Respondent.

Argued on : 12.01.2016

Decided on: 28.10.2016

1

ftfIII

CASE-NO- CA /1518- 2006- JUDGMENT- 29.10.2016

P.R. Walgama, J

The facts germane to the instant application arose

thus;

The Plaintiff - Petitioner instituted action in the District

Court of Colombo 1n the case bearing No. 5037/ZL

and moved for the reliefs inter alia;

For a declaration that he 1S entitled to the land

described in the schedule thereto;

For an order of an ejectment of the Defendant and

everybody holding under him.

After the trial the Learned District Judge, by his

judgment dated 03.07.1990, has dismissed the

Plaintiffs action without costs.

Being

lodged

Court

aggrieved by

a appeal to

of Appeal by

the above judgment, the Plaintiff

the Court of Appeal, and the

the judgment dated 21.06.2000

had allowed the appeal and entered the judgment in

favour of the Plaintiff - Appellant.

Being dissatisfied with the said judgement of the

Court of Appeal the Defendant - Respondent, an

application of Special Leave to Appeal was made to

the Supreme Court, and Supreme Court has rejected

the same.

2

J

III

iI

~IiiffI IltiI

Thereupon the Plaintiff made an application to have

decree executed In terms of Section 325 of the Civil

Procedure Code to get the posseSSlOn of the subject

land. In pursuant to the said application the fiscal

has gone to execute the writ and the Defendant -

Respondent and 2nd and 4th Respondents had

obstructed the fiscal to perform the said duty.

The instant application In Revision arises out of an

order of the Learned District Judge dated 05.10.2006.

The said impugned order was made pursuant to an

inquiry held In terms of Section 325 of the Civil

Procedure Code.

The Plaintiff - Petitioner was the Judgment - Creditor in

Case bearing No. 5037/ZL ,and made an application

for the execution of a writ of possession and for the

restoration of the Plaintiff In peaceful posseSSlOn of

the subject land.

It is averred in the petition, when the fiscal went to

hand over the possession of the subject land to the

Plaintiff - Petitioner on 28.12.2001, the Defendant In the

said case and 2nd and 4th Respondents had obstructed

the Fiscal for handing over the posseSSlOn of the

land, to the Plaintiff - Judgment Creditor.

The 4th Respondent had opposed the above application

of the Plaintiff - Petitioner and stated the following;

3

That the fiscal, has tried to hand over the

posseSSlOn of a land by executing the writ, which

the 4th Respondent possessed.

That 4th Respondent became entitled to the subject

land by virtue of deed bearing No. 263 dated

.6.12.1920 and on prescriptive title.

It 1S the categorical position of the 4th Respondent

that he was 1n posseSSlOn of the said land from

06.09.1987, and had grun prescriptive title to the

above land.

In addition to the afore said as per plan 641 the

surveyor has mentioned the fact that the 4th

Respondent 1S 1n posseSSlOn 1n lot No.2 of the said

plan.

In the above setting the 4th Respondent urged that

he should not be dispossessed by the execution of

the said writ, as he has not gained title under the

judgment debtor.

The Learned District Judge after the . . 1nqu1ry 1n to

the Plaintiff - Petitioner's application under Section 325

has held 1n favour of the Plaintiff and ordered an

ejectment of the other Defendant- Respondents and the

4th Respondent - Petitioner accordingly.

Being aggrieved by the said order the 4th Respondent

- Petitioner has come by way of Revision to have the

said order vacated or set aside.

4

i

II"! I

The 4th Respondent - Petitioner, In addition to what has

been said above has In his petition stated the

following;

averred above merits the That basically the facts

intervention by this court

powers to set aside the

Learned District Judge.

exercIsIng

impugned

its revlslOnary

order of the

The threshold Issue for determination by this court

IS whether the 4th Respondent - Petitioner IS entitled

to seek the Revisionary jurisdiction of this Court. But

it IS contended by the Plaintiff - Respondent that the

proper course of action IS to institute action under

the regular procedure.

The said contention of the Plaintiff - Respondent IS

based on Section 329 of the Civil Procedure Code.

Section 329

" No appeal shall lie from any order made under

Section 326 or 327 or Section 328 against any

party other than the judgment debtor. Any such

order shall not bar the right of such party to

institute an action to establish his right or title

to such property".

In considering the above section our Superior Court

has glVen a wide in terpretation by recognIzIng the

5

power of the Court of Appeal to exerCIse the

Revisionary power to over come any miscarriage of

justice to a party who was not bound by the

decree.

In the case of DAMMALOKA THERO .VS. DR. CYRIL

ANTON BALASURIYA -SC. (APPEAL) NO. 9/2002-

decided on 02.03.2010

Their Lord ships had followed many decisions of the

Supreme Court and held that the Court of Appeal

could exercised its Revisionary powers when a

substantive miscarriage of justice has been caused by

executing a writ to dispossess the Petitioner.

The linchpin of the argument of the Plaintiff -

Respondent IS that there IS an alternate remedy

available to the petitioner VIZ a VIZ that the petitioner

could institute action to vindicate his title, in the

appropriate Court.

In invoking the Revisionary Jurisdiction of this Court

the Petitioner has asserted the following;

That he and his sister IS In possesslOn of this land

and if they are to be ejected by the execution of

the writ an irreparable loss will be caused to them

and more fully the Learned District Judge has failed

to consider their title and possession of the land in

Issue.

did

Further it

admit In

is salient

the above

to note that the Plain tiff . . Inquuy that the

6

if I It

!

~

I 1 i

j ! ,

Respondent - Petitioner IS In possesslOn of the land In

Issue.

Hence this court IS persuaded by the said judgment

and the above circumstances which warrant the

exercise of the Revisionary jurisdiction of this court.

Therefore In the said backdrop we set aside the

order of the Learned District Judge dated 05/10/2006

and allow the 4th Respondent - Petitioner's application

accordingly.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

7