IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A. Case No. 120/2012

H.C. Emhilipitiya No. 28/2009

BEFORE

COUNSEL

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka,

Complainant

v.

Sudath Danasiri,

Accused AND

Sudath Danasiri,

Accused-Appellant

v.

Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

Respondent

K.K. WICKREMASINGHE, J

K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J

Kalinga Indatissa PC with Sandeepani Wij esooriya, Samantha Premachandra, Rashmini Indatissa and Razana Saleek for the Accused-Appellant.

1

,

ARGUED ON

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS

FILED ON

JUDGMENT ON

K. PRIY ANTHA FERNANDO, J.

Chethiya Goonesekara DSG for the AG.

14.05.2019

13.01.2017 by the Accused Appellant 02.03.2017 by the Respondent

18.07.2019

01. The Accused Appellant (Appellant) was indicted in the High Court of

Embilipitiya on two counts. In count No.Ol, he was charged for being in

possession of an automatic weapon punishable under section 22(1) and 22(3)

of Fire Arms Ordinance, and on count No. 02 he was charged for being in

possession of 28 live cartridges, an offence punishable under Section 27(2)a

of the Explosives Act. After trial, upon conviction, the learned High Court

Judge imposed life imprisonment and imprisonment for 01 year for counts

Oland 02 respectively. Being aggrieved by the said conviction the Appellant

preferred the instant appeal. As settled by the learned President's Counsel

for the Appellant at the argument, the grounds of appeal urged are;

1. That the prosecution has failed to prove the case beyond reasonable

doubt.

2

,

\.

2. That the inward journey of the productions to the government analyst

was not proved, and that the learned Trial Judge failed to consider that

the chain of custody was not properly established.

3. That the learned Trial Judge failed to evaluate inconsistencies on major

matters between PWI and PW2.

4. That the statement of the Appellant made from the dock did not receive

proper judicial analysis by the learned Trial Judge.

Case for the Prosecution.

02. Case for the prosecution in brief was that PWI and PW2 were attached to

the Sevanagala Police Station and they were on duty at the road block at

Moraketiya junction when the vehicle (a white dolphin van) bearing

registration No. 254-1396 came from Moraketiya towards Embilipitiya.

When PWI signaled the van to stop, it had stopped further about 08 meters

away from them. PWI had asked PW2 to go and check the documents of the

vehicle. PW2 had gone towards the van and PWI had been checking the

other vehicles. In a little whilst time he had seen PW2 and the passenger

who was in the left front seat pulling a weapon from each other. He had

immediately gone towards the vehicle and he had seen the weapon coming

to the hand of PW2. PWI had identified the passenger who was in the left

front seat as the Appellant. As he went close to the vehicle, it had moved

fast. PW2 then had informed the Sevanagala Police Station over the phone

about the incident. It was also evident that Appellant had been arrested by

the Embilipitiya police and that PW 4 had taken over the Appellant and the

vehicle from the Embilipitiya Police Station and had brought to the

Sevenagala Police Station.

3

Defence case

03. Appellant giving a dock statement from the dock had said that when he was

at home, one Namal had come and asked him to drive the vehicle to go to

Embilipitiya, as Namal did not have the driving license. At the Moraketiya

Police road block, upon being signaled, he had stopped the vehicle. He had

gone to the OIC to show the license and insurance. Meantime another police

officer had gone towards the van. After opening the side door of the van, the

officer had said that "' 15),"'Z5f'2S) @~" and had shown a gun. Namal had

run away. He also had driven the van towards Embilipitiya where he was

stopped and arrested by the Embilipitiya police. He said that he was not

aware of any weapon being inside the van.

Ground No.02

04. Ground of appeal No.02 will be discussed first. It is submitted by the learned

President's Counsel for the Appellant that the prosecution has failed to

establish the chain of custody of the weapon from the time of detection until

it was examined by the Government Analyst.

05. In Perera V. AG [1998J 1 SLR at page 378, J.A.N. De Silva J held that;

"It is a recognized principle that in a case of this nature, the

prosecution must prove that the productions had been forwarded to the

Analyst from proper custody, without allowing room for any

suspicion that there had been no opportunity for tampering or

interfering with the production till they reach the Analyst. Therefore it

is correct to state that the most important journey is the inwards

journey because the final Analyst report will be depend on that. The

outwardjoumey does not attract the same importance."

4

06. It is important that the prosecution proves beyond reasonable doubt that the

weapon detected in this case was the weapon that was analyzed by the

Government Analyst who prepared and submitted the report to Court. In the

instant case, the Prosecution has called witnesses who detected the weapon,

the officer who was on reserve duty at the police station who took over the

weapon, officer who handed over the weapon to Magistrate's Court,

Production clerk in the Magistrates Court and the officer who took the

weapon to the Government Analyst.

07. On 16th November 2011, at the end of the proceedings the learned Trial

Judge has adjourned the proceedings to enable the Prosecution to add the

police officers who were on reserve duty under whose custody the weapon

was during the relevant period, to the list of witnesses. (Page 102 of the

brief). However, the Prosecution has failed to call the rest of the reserve

police officers under whose custody the weapon was. However, the learned

Trial Judge has addressed this issue sufficiently in pages 11 and 12 on his

judgment. As rightly said by the learned Trial Judge, the productions in this

case are not illicit liquor or illicit drugs like heroin that cannot be identified

by an identification mark or a number. In the instant case it is a weapon (T56

gun), which has an identification number engraved. Prosecution has proved

that the weapon taken into custody at the detection, and analyzed by the

Government Analyst is the same weapon (T56 gun) by the identification

number. Hence, the learned Trial Judge was right when he decided that the

chain of custody of the weapon was established by the prosecution and that

there is no doubt that the weapon analyzed by the Government Analyst was

the same weapon detected by the police officers.

5

Therefore, I find that the ground of appeal No.02 has no merit and should be

dismissed forthwith.

Grounds of appeal No. 01, 03 and 04.

08. These three grounds will be dealt together. It is the contention of the learned

President's Counsel for the Appellant, that the learned Trial Judge has failed

to analyze the evidence of the prosecution. It was further submitted that the

dock statement made by the Appellant was not considered by the learned

Trial Judge. There had been another person with the Appellant in the

vehicle, and as to what happened to him is not disclosed by the Prosecution.

Learned President's Counsel submitted that there is a doubt as to the person

with whom the weapon was, and that the dock statement in that regard was

not considered by the learned Trial Judge.

09. Evidence of PW1 was that he saw PW2 and the Appellant pulling the

weapon. PW2 had been outside the van and Appellant had been in the front

passenger seat. Just before the vehicle left, the weapon had come to PW2's

hand.

10. According to PW2, he had first gone to the driver. When asked for the

documents, driver had asked him to get it from the person in the passenger

seat. That shows that the owner of the vehicle had been the person in the

passenger seat and not the driver, as stated by the Appellant in his dock

statement. Then, PW2 had gone to the person in the front passenger seat

where he saw a weapon in between his legs. PW2 further said that the driver

switched on the light inside the vehicle, so that he could identify the

Appellant. It is highly improbable that the driver would switch the light

inside the vehicle on, on his own, if he knew that the passenger was keeping

6

a T56 gun in between his legs. It is important to note the evidence of PW2 in

cross examination on 16.11.2011 at page 71 of the Court record;

9: @~d lfl8",<;?

c: e)@tnE3

9: f!5 tfDeo"6J@D tntnZ)@C& e)2Sfd @2Ii)J@tnJ<; ?5l@~?

c: eOc>J~" e)@mi ?5l@~.

9: @~Jd @~Z) @2Ii)JO cIlZ1 tf5", tf2Sl0 tfJDJ 2S"'C 2SDDJ?

c: 58 2Ii)@J.

9: @2Ii)JtnJo<; 58 2Ii)@C?

c: ~eo"~o <;"LJ.

9: tn2Si"'J ~'" tntnZ)'" C.@~J.~. W~~Jc Z1cwJ8"'J ~5mi1!lJ 2li)CJ<;?

c: Z)"Ltn"L.

9: tn2Si"'J 2S",2Sf@2Sf @~Jd@~Z) tfDeo"dJ@D tn2Si2Sl"'J tf2Sl0 cIlZ1 tf!)'" tfJDJ 2S",c<;?

c: w~", tn2Si2Sl"'J ~D@G)Z) tfJD e)2Sl@2Ii)JO D"L2Sf e)2Ii) lfl~~DJ. f!5 @DCJ@D cIlZ1 tf5", tf2Sl0 tfJDJ.

9: tn2Si2Sl"'JO f!5 tfDeo"dJ@D DJtnZ)@C& D ~"L2Si@2Si 85 9~G)C"'J @tnJ<;o @oZ)D<;?

c: e)@tnE3.

11. It is clear that answering the questions posed by the defence counsel, he

contradicted himself as to how the weapon came to his hand. He initially

said that the Appellant threw the weapon to the back side and immediately

changing his version he said that when he pulled it came to his hand. The

position that was taken by the Appellant in his statement from the dock was,

that PW2 got the weapon that was in a bag after opening the side door of the

van. According to him, the passenger was one 'Namal' who owned the

vehicle.

7

,

12. Evidence of the PW1 and PW2 makes it clear that there was another person

in the van. Version of the Prosecution is that the 3rd person was the driver at

the time of the detection. Evidence of the PW2 suggests that the owner of

the vehicle was the person who was driving. PW2 said that when he asked

the driver for the documents, the driver asked him to get it from the person

who was in the front passenger seat. Although the Embilipitiya police

stopped the vehicle within few minutes, only the Appellant was arrested

with the van. Prosecution has failed to disclose the 3 rd person, nor has taken

any interest to investigate about him. Appellant says he was N amal who

owned the vehicle and that he did not know about a weapon being in the

vehicle. The learned Trial Judge has failed to take into consideration about

the presence of the 3rd person in the vehicle, with the dock statement of the

appellant. A clear doubt is created as to whether the weapon involved was in

the possession of the 3rd person referred to as 'Namal' by the Accused, and

the Prosecution has failed to exclude that doubt. Although their evidence

shows that the 3rd person was driving the vehicle, police have failed even to

investigate about him. The evidence of PW2 as mentioned in paragraph 10

of this judgment further creates doubts about the detection of the weapon,

especially as to who possessed the weapon. The evidence of the prosecution

witnesses was that the ammunition was attached to the weapon.

13. In case of The Queen V. D.G.De S. Kularatne and 2 others ([1968) 71

N.L.R. at page 529) Court of Criminal Appeal held;

( ... when the evidence led for the prosecution lends itself to a

reasonable inference that either of the two persons could have committed an

act, the burden is on the prosecution to exclude one person effectively if it

seeks to attach responsibility for that act to the other person; the best way-

8

r ' "

often the only way- in which this can be achieved is by the prosecution

calling as a witness the person sought to be excluded ... '

14. In the instant case, apart from calling the 3cd person, the Prosecution has

failed even to investigate into that person, knowingly that he was driving the

van, according to the PWI and PW2. Hence, the grounds of appeal 01, 03

and 04 taken together has merit.

15. In the above premise, I find that the learned Trial Judge has erred when he

found that the prosecution proved the charges beyond reasonable doubt.

Hence, the Appellant is acquitted on both counts Oland 02.

Appeal allowed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K.K. WICKREMASINGHE, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

9