. ..

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

C.A.(PHC)Appeal No. 65/2015

In the matter of an Appeal under

Article 154(P) and 138 of the

Constitution Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka read with

Provisions in High Courts of the

Provinces (Special Provisions) Act

No.19 of 1990.

Manadoowa Acharige Punyaratne

Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant

P.H.C. Colombo Case No. HCRA 135/2012

M.C. Mt. Lavinia CaseNo. 6070/S/11

Vs.

General Manager

National Housing Development

Authority

Sir Chittampalam A. Gardiner

Mawatha,

Clombo 01.

Applicant -Respondent-

Respondent

BEFORE

COUNSEL

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS

JANAK DE SILVA, J. & ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

Neranjan Jayasinghe with 5achitra

Harshana for the Respondent-Petitioner-

Appellant

H.P.Ekanayake instructed by K.P.

Ranaweera for the Applicant-

Respondent-Respondent.

TENDERED ON 09-07-2018( by both parties)

DECICED ON 21st September, 2018

*************

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, T.

The Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

"Appellant") invokes appellate jurisdiction of this Court, seeking to set

aside an order dated 26.02.3015 made by the Provincial High Court holden

in Colombo in Case No. HCRA 135/2012 and an order made by the

Magistrate's Court of Mt. Lavinia on 14.09.2012 in case No. 6070/5/11.

In instituting the case No. 6070/5/11 before the Magistrate's Court,

the Applicant-Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the

"Respondent") under Section 69D(1)(iv) of the National Housing

2

Development Act No. 17 of 1979 as amended (hereinafter referred to as the

"NHDA Act"), sought an order of ejectment, in respect of premises

bearing No. 39, Ranajayagama Housing Scheme, Waidya Road, Dehiwala.

After an inquiry, to which the Appellant also has participated, the

Magistrate's Court has issued an order of ejectment against him. The

Appellant has thereafter sought to canvass the said order of ejection before

the Provincial High Court in Case No. HCRA 135/2012, but his application

was dismissed by the Court with the pronouncement of the said impugned

order.

The ground upon which the Appellant seeks to challenge its validity

before this Court is that the learned Magistrate has failed to consider the

following facts and to make an order under Section 69E(8) of the NHDA

Act;

1. He was in possession of the disputed premises since 1987, as

he entered the said premises upon the invitation of one T.D.

Arthur who had a valid permit to occupy it.

ii. T.O. Arthur in his agreement with NHDA did not nominate

any heirs in respect of succession after him.

iii. T.O. Arthur was unmarried and has died in 1988 and since

then the Appellant continued to be in possession.

iv. Thushari Perera and Sanjeewa Perera who claimed that they

were the rightful heirs of said T.O. Arthur have founded their

3

claim on a mere letter issued by said T.D. Arthur under

suspicious circumstances, which is in violation of the statutory

provisions of Prevention of Frauds Ordinance.

v. The Appellant has already instituted action before the District

Court, challenging the said document, relied upon by Thushari

Perera and Sanjeewa Perera.

The Appellant therefore contended that, he is entitled to the relief as

prayed for in his petition of appeal.

Section 69E(8) of the NHDA Act reads as follows;

"Notwithstanding anything contained in the preceding provisions

where the Magistrate is of opinion that, having regard to the

manner in which the person on whom summons under subsection

(1) was served entered into occupation of the building or portion

thereof it would be unjust to order his ejectment therefrom, the

Magistrate may require such person and the Authority to enter

into an agreement on such reasonable terms as may be determined

by the Magistrate, with respect to such building or portion

thereof within a period of six months from the date of such

requirement:

Provided however where such person on whom summons under

subsection (1) was served fails to enter into an agreement within

the period of six months from the date of such requirement the

provisions contained in this Part shall apply mutatis mutandis."

4

Plain reading of this section, it becomes clear to the reader that the

Court could form an " opinion", having regard to the manner the

unauthorised occupier entered the premises and it would be "unjust" to

order his ejectment therefrom, it may require such person and NHDA to

enter into an agreement.

Upon perusal of the order made by the Magistrate's Court, it is

obvious that it had considered this provision and decided not to act on the

said Section.

Then the question to be decided by this Court is whether the

Magistrate's Court had exercised its discretion reasonably.

There was no challenge to the fact that the premises belonged to

NHDA and the Appellant had no legally valid written authority to be in

the possession of the said premises.

He has relied on his 23 years of occupation, and pleaded that he is

entitle to relief under Section 69E(8) of NHD A Act.

In refusing to exercise the discretion vested in the Magistrate's

Court, it had considered the facts that there had been a matter under

"Section 66" of the Primary Courts Procedure Act, for breach of peace and

the Appellant was placed in possession by the Primary Court.

According to the Respondent, both Thushari Perera and Sanjeewa

Perera claimed that the Appellant had entered the disputed premises, in the

pretext of assisting the permit holder and his unmarried sister in their last

stages of life, continued to occupy the premises without any lawful

authority. At the time of death of T.D. Arthur, they were minors and

5

.

therefore they had no opportunity to assert their rights against the

Appellant's unlawful occupation.

In these circumstances, the Magistrate's Court has rightly decided

against acting under Section 69E(8) as if it decided to act under the said

section, that would seriously prejudice the rights of Thushari Perera and

Sanjeewa Perera who were not named as a party. The case was instituted by

the Respondent seeking eviction of the Appellant from the disputed

premises and its jurisdiction is limited to Sections 69D and 69E(8).

Therefore, it is our considered view that the Magistrate's Court has

exercised its discretion under Section 69E(8) reasonably and the Provincial

High Court had correctly denied relief to the Appellant upon his failure to

establish any exceptional circumstances that could be considered as a

positive miscarriage of justice.

The appeal of the Appellant is without any merit and we accordingly

dismiss it with costs fixed at Rs. 5000.00.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

IANAK DE SILV A, I.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

6