==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/PHC/0032/2022

Page 1 of 9

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal against the

order dated 17.11.2021, made by the

learned High Court Judge of the Western

Province holden at Colombo in case

bearing No. 101/20 HCRA.

Belida Rachel Keegal

No. 93, W.A. Silva Mawatha,

Colombo 6.

APPLICANT

Vs.

Rajapakse Arachchige Sanjeewa

Subhasha Rajapakse,

No. 865A, Peradeniya Road,

Kandy.

RESPONDENT

And

Rajapakse Arachchige Sanjeewa

Subhasha Rajapakse

No. 865A, Peradeniya Road, Kandy.

REPONDENT-PETITIONER

Vs.

Belida Rachel Keegal

No. 93, W.A. Silva Mawatha,

Colombo 6.

APPLICANT-RESSPONDENT

And

Court of Appeal Case No: 32/22 CA/PHC APPEAL High Court Case No. HCMCA/101/20 MC Case No. 5720/8/19

CA/PHC/0032/2022

Page 2 of 9

Rajapakse Arachchige Sanjeewa

Subhash Rajapakse

No. 865A, Peradeniya Road, Kandy.

REPONDENT-PETITIONER-APPELLANT

Vs.

Belida Rachel Keegal

No. 93, W.A. Silva Mawatha,

Colombo 6.

APPLICANT-RESPONDENT-RESPONDENT

Before : D. THOTAWATTA, J.

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Counsel : Dhanushka Rahubadda for the

Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant.

Krishantha Kulathunga with Manohari

Perera for the Applicant-Respondent-

Respondent.

Written Submissions

of the Respondent

-Petitioner-Appellant

tendered on : 02.07.2025 and 24.03.2026

Written Submissions

of the

Applicant-Respondent

-Respondent

tendered on : 04.11.2025 and 24.03.2026

Judgement on : 03.07.2026

CA/PHC/0032/2022

Page 3 of 9

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

The Applicant-Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter called and referred to as

‘the Respondent’) had by way of jurisdictional objection, raised in the written

submissions, two preliminary legal objections as to the maintainability of the

instant appeal as it is presently, constituted, and they may be re-produced

verbatim the same as follows;

“a) The Appellant is not entitled to file this appeal to Your Lordships

Court against the order of the Learned High Court Judge.

b) Order is not a final order and thus, the Appellant has no right of

appeal.”

It is to be observed at this juncture that, the Counsel for the respective parties

desired this Court to give a ruling on the preliminary legal objections on the

jurisdiction on the strength of the written submissions and the written

submissions were thus, furnished to this Court by the respective parties as

directed by this Court. Hence, the order on the preliminary legal objections

on jurisdiction on the strength of the written submissions as desired by the

respective Counsel.

Since, the preliminary legal objection on jurisdiction b) as enumerated above,

appears to me to go to the root of the instant appeal, which would if upheld,

finally, and effectively, decide on the fate of the instant appeal, I would firstly,

deal with it and make a ruling thereon, on the strength of the written

submissions as desired by the respective Counsel.

b) Order is not a final order and thus, the Appellant has no right of appeal.

Let me briefly, set out the facts and circumstances relevant to the instant

appeal as is discernible from the petition of appeal.

Application dated 21.01.2019, had been made by the Respondent to the

Magistrate Court of Colombo praying for an order for maintenance for herself

and her conceived child (පිළිසිඳ ගෙන ඇති දරුවා) under section 2(1) of the

CA/PHC/0032/2022

Page 4 of 9

Maintenance Act No. 37 of 1999 (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the

Act’); and that the learned Magistrate of Colombo had by his order dated

12.06.2019 (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the MC Order’), made an

interim maintenance order directing the Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant

(hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the Appellant’) to pay Rs. 25,000/- for

the maintenance of his wife-the Respondent who being the applicant thereto,

from the date of the application so made to it; and that being aggrieved by the

MC order, application in revision dated 17.07.2020, had been preferred by the

Appellant to the High Court of the Western Province holden at Colombo

(hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the High Court of the Province’) seeking

inter-alia, to revise and set aside the MC order; and that the learned High

Court Judge of the Western Province holden at Colombo (hereinafter called

and referred to as ‘the learned High Court Judge of the Province’), had having

upheld the preliminary legal objection raised by the Respondent as to the

validity and/or legality of the affidavit filed by the Appellant in support of the

averments in the petition filed thereat, dismissed the application in revision

in-limine, in his order dated 17.11.2021 (hereinafter called and referred to as

‘the HC Order’), and hence, the instant appeal by the Appellant.

It is in this backdrop of the case, let me now, examine the preliminary legal

objection on jurisdiction b) as enumerated above, with special reference to

the law governing a preliminary legal objection on jurisdiction as such.

The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

(hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the Constitution’) in its Article

154P(6) provides for a right of appeal and it reads thus;

“(6) subject to the provisions of the Constitution and any law, any

person aggrieved by a final order, judgement or sentence of any such

Court, in the exercise of its jurisdiction under paragraphs (3)(b) or (3)(c)

or (4) may appeal there from to the Court of Appeal in accordance with

Article 138.”

CA/PHC/0032/2022

Page 5 of 9

In the light of the Article 154P(6) of the Constitution, appeal will lie from a

final order, judgement or sentence of a provincial High Court made in the

exercise of its jurisdiction under paragraphs (3)(b) or (3)(c) or (4) of Article

154P of the Constitution.

It is not in dispute that the HC order is one made by the learned High

Court Judge of the Province in the exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction

vested in it under paragraphs (3)(b) of the Article 154P of the Constitution.

Upon a plain reading of Article 154P(6) of the Constitution in conjunction

with Article 154(3)(b) of the Constitution, it becomes abundantly, clear that

appeal will lie only from a final order, judgement or sentence of a provincial

High Court made in the exercise of its jurisdiction under paragraphs (3)(b)

or (3)(c) or (4) of Article 154P of the Constitution.

Now, the pertinent question is whether the MC order which is sought to be

impugned in the instant appeal, can be construed as one falling within the

ambit of a “final order, judgement or sentence” of a provincial High Court

made in the exercise of its jurisdiction under paragraphs (3)(b) or (3)(c) or

(4) of Article 154P of the Constitution as envisaged by Article 154P(6)

thereof?

I would think it pertinent at this juncture to examine the criterion laid

down by a fuller bench of the Supreme Court comprising of seven judges

in SC Appeal No.41/2015 - decided on 04.08.2017 in determining

whether an order is a final judgment or not, and it may be re-produced

verbatim the same as follows;

“In order to decide whether a order is a final judgment or not. it

is my considered view that the proper approach is the approach

adopted by lord Esher in Salaman vs Warner (supra) which was

cited with approval by Lord Denning in Salter Rex vs Gosh

(supra). It stated:

CA/PHC/0032/2022

Page 6 of 9

“If their decision which ever way it is given, will if it stands

finally dispose of the matter in dispute, I think that for the

purpose of these Rules it is final. On the other hand, if their

decision, if given in one way, will finally dispose of the

matter in dispute, but, if given in the other, will allow the

action to go on, then I think it is not final, but

interlocutory”.”

Although the said criterion had been laid down by the Supreme Court under

section 754(1) and (2) of the Civil Procedure Code as amended, the criterion

so laid down therein, would in my view, be applicable to a situation arisen in

this case too, with equal force in determining whether an order sought to be

impugned is a final judgment or interlocutory order coming within the

meaning of Article 154P(6) of the Constitution.

In this instance, the learned High Court Judge of the Province had in the HC

order, dismissed the application in revision in-limine, by upholding the

preliminary legal objection so raised by the Respondent as to the validity

and/or legality of the affidavit filed by the Appellant in support of the

averments in the petition filed thereat.

Hence, it becomes abundantly, clear that the learned High Court Judge of the

Province had in the HC order, not in any manner, proceeded to finally,

determine and adjudicate upon the rights of the parties to the application

before it in revision upon its merits, instead he had merely, proceeded to

dismiss the application in revision in-limine, by upholding the preliminary

legal objection so raised by the Respondent as to the validity and/or legality

of the affidavit filed by the Appellant in support of the averments in the

petition filed thereat.

In the circumstances, the test to be applied in determining as to whether HC

order sought to be impugned in the instant appeal, is a final order or an

interlocutory order for all intents and purposes of Article 154P(6) of the

Constitution as laid down by the Supreme Court in the SC Appeal

CA/PHC/0032/2022

Page 7 of 9

No.41/2015 (Supra) would be; If the HC order sought to be impugned in the

instant appeal, whichever way it is given, will if it stands finally, dispose of

the matter in dispute, it will then, be final. On the other hand, the HC order

sought to be impugned in the instant appeal, if given in one way, will finally,

dispose of the matter in dispute but, if given in the other way, will allow the

application to go on, then it is not final, but interlocutory. [Emphasis is

mine]

If the HC order if, given in one way, namely; allowing the application to go on

by overruling the preliminary legal objection so raised by the Respondent as

to the maintainability of the same, the application in revision will go on to its

final adjudication on its merits thereby, finally, determining the rights of the

parties thereto, but, if given in the other, namely; dismissing the application

in revision by upholding the preliminary legal objection so raised by the

Respondent as to the maintainability of the same, as done in the instant

application in revision by the learned High Court Judge of the Province, it will

be dismissed without going to its final adjudication on its merits.

Hence, the HC order cannot in any manner, be construed as being a final

order within the meaning of by Article 154P(6) of the Constitution but, an

interlocutory order.

In the result, I would hold that, an appeal will not lie under Article 154P(6) of

the Constitution to this Court from the HC order but that, an appeal with

leave first had and obtained from this Court in terms of the procedure laid

down by section 331 of the Criminal Procedure Code as amended to be read

with section 340 thereof, will lie therefrom, as held by this Court in the

decision in CA/PHC/0108/2022 as recent as 19.06.2026.

Hence, the instant appeal is misconceived in law and therefore, cannot

sustain in law.

I would thus, uphold the preliminary legal objection on jurisdiction b) as

enumerated above.

CA/PHC/0032/2022

Page 8 of 9

In view of my findings as aforesaid with regard to the preliminary legal

objection on jurisdiction b) enumerated above, I would hold that the either

the contentions so advanced and/or the submissions so made in support

thereof, and/or the authorities so cited and relied on in the written

submissions by the Appellant in opposition to the preliminary legal objection

on jurisdiction b) enumerated above, are not entitled to succeed.

In the result, I would dismiss the instant appeal with costs in-limine.

Let me next, deal with the preliminary legal objection on jurisdiction a) as

enumerated above.

a) The Appellant is not entitled to file this appeal to Your Lordships Court

against the order of the Learned High Court Judge.

This is based on section 14(2) of the Act which provides for an appeal from an

order made by a High Court in the exercise of its appellate jurisdiction, and it

enacts thus;

“(2) Any person dissatisfied with an order made by a High Court in the

exercise of its appellate jurisdiction under this section, may prefer an

appeal therefrom to the Supreme Court, on a question of law. with the

leave of the High Court, and where such leave is refused, with the

special leave of the Supreme Court, first had an obtained.”

Hence, a plain and careful reading of section 14(2) of the Act, makes it

abundantly, clear without an iota of doubt that any person dissatisfied with

an order made by a High Court in the exercise of its appellate jurisdiction

thereunder, may prefer an appeal therefrom to the Supreme Court, on a

question of law. with the leave of the High Court, and where such leave is

refused, with the special leave of the Supreme Court, first had an obtained.

[Emphasis is mine]

In the light of the above, it becomes abundantly, clear that appeal to the

Supreme Court from an order made by a High Court of the Province

CA/PHC/0032/2022

Page 9 of 9

established by Article 154P(1) of the Constitution under section 14(2) of the

Act, will lie only in such instance where order had been made by a High Court

established by Article 154P(1) of the Constitution in the exercise of its

Appellate jurisdiction vested in it by Article 154P(3)(b) of the

Constitution from an order made by a Magistrate under sections 2 or 11 of

the Act, but not in such instance where order had been made by a High Court

established by Article 154P(1) of the Constitution in the exercise of its

revisionary jurisdiction vested in it by Article 154P(3)(b) of the

Constitution from an order made by a Magistrate under sections 2 or 11 of

the Act, as done by the learned High Court Judge of the Province in this

instance.

Hence, I would hold that the preliminary legal objection on jurisdiction a) as

enumerated above, is totally, misconceived in law and as such it cannot

sustain in law, and therefore, it should be over-ruled.

However, in view of my findings with regard to the preliminary legal objection

on jurisdiction b) as enumerated above, instant appeal is liable to be set aside

in-limine.

In the result, I would dismiss the appeal with costs subject however, to the

above.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL