IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Case No. CA. LA 0212014

Director General

Commission to investigate allegations of

Bribery or Corruption

36, Malalasekera Mawatha

Colombo 07.

COMPLAINANT - APPELLANT

HC (Colombo) Case No. B1818/09 VS

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

DECIDED ON

1

Hemasiri Bandara Thibbotumunuve

No. 110/4/4, Stratford Avenue

Colombo 06.

ACCUSED-RESPONDENT

: Deepali Wijesundera J.

: Achala Wengappuli J.

: Wasantha Perera S.S.C.

for the Appellant

Nagitha Wijesekera with Ayesha

Ginige for the Accused-Respondent

: 04th May, 2018

: 18th May, 2018

Deepali Wijesundera J.

The respondent was charged under section 23 (A) (3) of the

Bribery Act for illegal accumulation of wealth and after trial he was

acquitted by the High Court on 23/05/2014. This appeal is against the

said acquittal by the respondent appellant.

The appellant's counsel argued that before filing the indictment

against the respondent the appellant conducted a full inquiry and

obtained documents and the respondent's statement was also recorded

under section 23 A (4) of the said act and that the respondent failed to

show how he managed to purchase an apartment with the income he

had. He further submitted that although he had the opportunity to show

how he found the money to buy the apartment he failed to do so at the

inquiry.

At the trial the respondent has brought a witness to testify that he

gave the money to purchase the said apartment. He argued that the

learned High Court Judge can not accept such evidence without proper

investigations being conducted by the Bribery Commission.

2

The learned counsel cited the judgment in C.S.D. Swami vs The

State (1969) AIR (sc) page 7 and said that known sources of income

must have reference to source known to the prosecution. I find that the

facts stated in this case is not relevant to the instant case.

The learned counsel for the appellant further stated that for the

appellant to conduct a complete investigation the respondent has to

corporate with the appellant and reveal all the sources of income and if

the sources of income were established the indictment against the

respondent might not have been brought. This is a contradictory

statement by the learned counsel who earlier said the indictment was filed

after a full investigation was done. The counsel can not blow hot and cold

he has to specifically state his arguments.

The learned counsel for the respondent stated that the learned

High Court Judge has considered the documents V1 to V6 produced by

the respondent in the High Court through their witness who gave

evidence to show how the said apartment was purchased by the

respondent and delivered his findings. He argued that the findings offacts

can not be interfered with.

3

,

The learned counsel for the appellant cited the judgment in L.C.

Fernando vs The Republic of Sri Lanka 79 NLR vol II p.313 and D.W.

Wanigasekera vs The Republic of Sri Lanka 79 NLR 241 and said it

was held in these two judgments that contradicting positions have to

prove by balance of probability and that creating a reasonable doubt is

not sufficient and that the learned High Court Judge has not evaluated

the evidence accordingly. On perusal of the High Court Judge's judgment

we find that it is not so. The learned High Court Judge has properly

analysed the evidence and arrived at the findings.

In D.W. Wanigasekera vs The Republic of Sri Lanka it was

held;

(1). That the 'basic fact' to be proved was that the accused

acquired properly which could not have been acquired with

any part of his sources of income or receipts known to the

prosecution after investigation and that the prosecution is

not required to prove that the acquisitions were made with

income or receipts from bribery. An interpretation based on

the appellant's contention would defeat the very purpose

for which the section was included in the Bribery Act since

section 23A is designed against a person in respect of whom

there is no proof of the actual receipt of a gratification, but

there is presumptive evidence of bribery.

(2). That the presumption created by section 23A may be

rebutted by the accused by proving on a balance of

4

probabilities, that the property was acquired otherwise

than by bribery.

The respondent by his evidence has proved how the said

apartment was bought.

The appellant has failed to state a single legal argument to set

aside the High Court judgment. A well considered judgment of the High

Court can not be set aside on a mere statement on facts.

For the afore stated reasons we decide to refuse the application of

the appellant. Application is refused and the judgment dated 23/05/20214

is affirmed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Achala Wengappuli J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

5