1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal Case No.

CA/HCC/0182-184/2016 1. Perumal Mahalingam

High Court of Nuwara Eliya

Case No. HC/34/2009 2. Balakrishnan Suganeswaram alias

Puwaneswaran

3. Mahalingam Sivaneswaram

ACCUSED-APPELLANTS

vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : Sampath B.Abayakoon, J.

P. Kumararatnam, J.

2 | P a g e

COUNSEL : Nayantha Wijesundara for the Appellant.

Shanil Kularatna, SDSG for the

Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 19/07/2022

DECIDED ON : 01/08/2022

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam. J,

The above-named Accused-Appellants (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellants) were indicted for committing murder of Sandanam Michael on

06/08/2003 which is an offence punishable under Section 296 of the Penal

Code.

After a non-jury trial, the Learned High Court Judge has found the

Appellants guilty of the charge and sentenced them to death on 09/09/2016.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence the Appellants

preferred this appeal to this court.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellants informed this court that the

Appellants have given consent to argue this matter in their absence due to

the Covid 19 pandemic. Also, at the time of argument the Appellants were

connected via zoom platform from prison.

The Appellants first written submission was filed on 17/05/2018 raising two

grounds of appeal. Thereafter, with the leave of the court a further written

3 | P a g e

submission was filed on 09/09/2019.In that written submission the Counsel

for the Appellants had raised only one ground of appeal that the Learned

High Court Judge had not considered the defence of cumulative provocation.

Hence the Counsel for the Appellant has restricted his argument only on this

ground during the argument.

Background of the Case

According to PW1, she is the wife of the deceased and was blessed with six

children. On the day of the incident at about 7.45 am when PW1 and the

deceased were on their way to the estate where the deceased was employed,

the Appellants waylaid and attacked the deceased with swords and knife. At

that time the witness was about 30 feet away from the place of incident.

According to her the first appellants had used a pruning knife and the rest

had used swords to cut the deceased. The identity of the appellants was very

well established because 1st appellant is the brother of PW1 and the 3rd

Appellant is the son of 1st Appellant. The 2nd Appellant is a relation of 1st

Appellant. According to PW1 there is strong motive existed as on a previous

occasion the deceased was accused of cutting and inflicting injury to the leg

of the brother of 2nd Appellant. Although the deceased was removed

immediately to the estate medical centre, but the deceased had already

succumbed to his injuries.

PW3 had conducted the investigation, arrested the Appellants and recovered

two swords and a knife upon the statement made to the police by 1st

appellant and recovered a knife upon the statement of 2nd Appellant.

According to medical evidence three deep cut injuries were found on the head

of the deceased. Some bones had also been broken. The JMO opined that the

injuries could have been caused by sharp and heavy cutting weapons.

According to PW6, the death could have occurred due to haemorrhage as the

vein in the brain had been severed.

4 | P a g e

After the closer of the prosecution case, the defence was called and the

Appellants had made statements from the dock.

The first Appellant denied any involvement to the incident while other two

raised the defence of alibi.

As stated above the Appellants only argue that the evidence led at the trial

warrants the consideration of the exception of cumulative provocation, and

therefore, they should have been awarded the benefit under the said

exception. The Counsel had stressed following items of evidence to support

his argument.

The Counsel for the Appellant contended that according to PW1 there had

been a dispute between the deceased and the Appellants with regard to

watering the plant of the estate. PW1 further admitted that as the deceased

had cut the leg of the elder brother of the 2nd Appellant, another dispute also

existed among the parties. The counsel for the Appellants therefore argues

that these incidents had given rise to cumulative provocation which the

Learned High Court judge had not considered in his judgment.

Cumulative Provocation is an extension to the exception 1 of Section 294 of

the Penal Code which states:

Culpable Homicide is not murder if the offender whilst deprived of the

power of self-control by grave and sudden provocation, causes the

death of the person who gave the provocation, or causes the death of

any other person by mistake or accident

Cumulative Provocation as a special exception to a murder charge has been

discussed in several judgments in our courts.

In Premalal v Attorney General [2000] 2 SLR 403 Kulatilaka,J held that:

Until the judgment of Chief Justice H.N.G Fernando in

Samithamby v Queen (1) (de Krester,J-dissenting) our court

followed a strict view in applying Exception (1) set out in Section

5 | P a g e

294 of the Penal Code. Our judges following their counterparts in

England interpreted the phrase sudden provocation to mean

that provocation should consist of a single act which occurred

immediately before killing so that there was no time for the anger

to cool and the act must have been such that it would have made

a reasonable man to react in the manner as the accused did. Our

Courts were reluctant to take into consideration any special

circumstances which manifested in the particular offenders

case.

Kulatilaka, J. further held that:

Of late we observe a development in other jurisdictions where

Courts and juries have taken a more pragmatic view of the

mitigatory plea of provocation. In a series of cases in applying the

mitigatory plea of provocation Courts took into consideration the

prior course of relationship between the accused and his victim.

In R.W.M.Nandana Senarathbandara v Attorney General

SC/Appeal/32/2015 decided on 17/07/2020 His Lordship Jayantha

Jayasuriya C.J. has held that:

Jurisprudence referred to above demonstrate that in considering

the plea of grave and sudden provocation an accused is entitled

to rely upon a series of prior events that ultimately led to the

incident at which the death was caused. A court should not

restrict its focus to an isolated incident that resulted in the death,

in considering a plea of grave and sudden provocation. The

aforementioned jurisprudence has widened the scope of this plea

by expanding the limitations recognized in its statutory form.

Thereby, the concept of Continuing or Cumulative provocation

has been recognized as a plea coming within the purview of the

plea of grave and sudden provocation recognized under

6 | P a g e

Exception-1, section 294 of the Penal Code. Therefore, the

proximity of time between the actus reus of the accused and the

provocative act of the victim should be considered in the context

of the nature and circumstances in each case, in deciding whether

an accused is entitled to the benefit of the plea of Grave and

Sudden Provocation.

Guided by above cited judgments, it is pertinent to consider whether the

benefit of the plea of Grave and Sudden Provocation on the basis of

Cumulative Provocation could be awarded to the Appellants as claimed by

them under this ground of appeal.

During the trial PW1 was cross examined with regard to three incidents

which according to the Counsel for the Appellants constitute cumulative

provocation on the deceased. In the first incident canvassed by the

Appellants is that a dispute existed due to watering the plants of the estate

where deceased cultivated. The second incident which led to a dispute is that

the deceased had cut leg of the brother of the 2nd Appellant. The third

incident suggested is that the PW1 had eloped with the deceased even though

she had been given marriage to another person. But according to PW1 this

incident cannot be the cause as she had given birth to six children upon

living with the deceased up to his death.

As correctly pointed out by Learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General, in the

instant appeal, the plea of cumulative provocation was not specifically raised

by the defence when the cross examination of the prosecution witnesses took

place. Further, the Appellant had not raised the plea in their dock statements

too. Further it is not elicited from the evidence for the prosecution that

existence of plea of cumulative provocation.

Hence, considering the circumstances advanced by the Appellants in this

appeal and the series of incidents mentioned above cannot be considered in

7 | P a g e

favour of the Appellants benefit for a plea of cumulative provocation under

Exception-1 to Section 294 of the Penal Code. Therefore, the only ground of

appeal fails without any merit.

For the reasons stated above, I am of the view that there is no merit in the

appeal ground urged by the Counsel for the Appellants. The evidence

presented by the prosecution establishes beyond reasonable doubt that the

Appellants are guilty of the charge with which they have been convicted.

Accordingly, I affirm the conviction and the sentence imposed and dismiss

the appeal.

Appeal is dismissed.

The Registrar is directed to send a copy of this judgment to High Court of

Nuwara Eliya along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL