Page 1 of 4

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

Court of Appeal Case No:

CA / BAIL / 073 / 2021

Magistrates Court of Balapitiya Case

No: B 40283

In the matter of an Application for

Bail under and in terms of Section 10

(1) (a) of the Assistance to and

Protection of Victims of Crime and

witnesses Act No: 04 of 2015 read

along with Bail Act No 30 of 1997.

The Officer in Charge

Police Station

Bentota.

Complainant

Vs.

Hettimadda Vithanage Chaminda Susantha of Arachchimulla, Benthota.

(Presently at Galle remand prison)

Suspect

AND NOW BETWEEN

Madawala Madduwage Gnanalatha of Arachchimulla,

Bentota.

Petitioner

2. The officer in Charge

Police Station

Bentota

Page 2 of 4

2. The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department

Colombo 12

Respondent

Before: Menaka Wijesundera J.

Neil Iddawala J.

Counsel: Thanuka Nandasiri with Susil Wanigapura for the Petitioner.

SC Ridma Kuruvita for the State.

Argued on: 03.11.2022

Decided on: 01. 12..2022

MENAKA WIJESUNDERA J.

The instant application has been filed to obtain bail to suspect namely

Hettimadda Vithanage Chaminda Susantha under the Provisions of the

Assistance to and Protection of Victims of Crime and Witnesses Act, N of 2015.

The suspect was initially produced before the Magistrate for causing grievance

hurt on K.K. Roshani Madapulli who had complained against him in May 2021.

The Magistrate had enlarged him on bail. But on 31.07.2021 she had further

complained that the suspect had threatened her to withdraw the substantive

matter. The police had reported the fact to the Magistrate under the above

mentioned Act and he had been in remand since 31.07.2021.

Page 3 of 4

The Counsel for the suspect said that as the suspect had been in remand since

31.07.2021 without any case being filed against him that grave prejudice had

been caused to the suspect.

The State Counsel appearing for the Respondent objected to the application and

stated that the suspect had a pending case of triple murder and submitted that

investigations are over in the present matter but, forwarding of indictment has

not taken place.

The law pertaining to the instant Act is that bail can be considered under the

instant Act only upon exceptional circumstances by the Court of Appeal. The

term exceptional is not defined in the statute. But this Court has to be mindful of

the fact that the instant matter is before trial and not after trial. In many of our

cases so far decided our Courts have concluded that exceptionality differs from

case to case.

In the instant matter the suspect has been in remand since July 2021 without

any judicial proceedings taking place and the date of filling of the indictment is

not known there this Court considers that it is only but fair to allow the instant

application.

As such the instant application for bail is allowed and the Magistrate is

directed to enlarge the suspect on suitable conditions of bail on receipt of this

order.

Page 4 of 4

Judge of the Court of Appeal.

I agree.

Neil Iddawala J.

Judge of the Court of Appeal.