==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/403/2017

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka

COMPLAINANT

Court of Appeal No:

CA/HCC/403/2017 1. Imiyage Don Vipula Hemantha

High Court of Gampaha Kumara alias Wasantha

Case No: HC/07/2000 2. Imiyage Don Vijitha Saman Kumara

3. Karunawallaba Bodhipakshalage

Gunasekara Bodhipasha

4. Loku Hetti Arachchige Jayapala alias

Nilame

5. Imiyage Don Gunasekara alias Daniel

6. Semasinghe Mudiyanselage Sarath

Rajakaruna

7. Hewawasam Pallelage Gunarathne

ACCUSED

Vs.

CA/HCC/403/2017

2 | P a g e

AND NOW BETWEEN

Imiyage Don Vipula Hemantha

Kumara alias Wasantha

1st ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

COUNSEL : Shavindra Fernando, PC with Amanda

Imbulana for the 1st Accused- Appellant.

Tharaka Kodagoda, SC for the Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 30/03/2026

DECIDED ON : 09/06/2026

******************************

CA/HCC/403/2017

3 | P a g e

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused with some others unknown to the prosecution

were indicted in the High Court of Gampaha on following counts:

1. Being a member of an unlawful assembly having the common object

of causing hurt to Imiyage Don Rosalin Nona, an offence punishable

under Section 140 of the Penal Code.

2. Whilst being a member of the said unlawful assembly, committing the

murder of the said the said Imiyage Don Rosalin Nona an offence

punishable under Section 296 read with Section 146 of the Penal Code.

3. Whilst being a member of the said unlawful assembly, committing the

murder of Ratmalgodage Wimal Ranjith, an offence punishable under

Section 296 read with Section 146 of the Penal Code.

4. Whilst being a member of the said unlawful assembly, causing

grievous hurt to Imiyage Dona Karunawathi, an offence punishable

under Section 317 read with Section 146 of the Penal Code.

Count numbers 5,6 and 7 were the alternative counts for counts 2,3,4

under Section 32 of the Penal Code.

The trial commenced before the Judge of the High Court of Gampaha as the

Accused had opted for a non-jury trial. During the pendency of the trial, the

4th and 6th Accused had died and the trial had proceeded against the

remaining Accused. After the conclusion of the prosecution’s case, the

Learned High Court Judge had called for the defence and all the Accused

had made dock statements and denied their charges. The Appellant who is

the 1st Accused listed in the indictment called his wife, and PW11 and PW14,

who are both police officers listed as prosecution witnesses. After considering

the evidence presented by both parties, the Learned High Court Judge had

CA/HCC/403/2017

4 | P a g e

convicted only the 1st Accused (Hereinafter referred to as the Appellant) for

the charges 5,6 and 7 and sentenced him to death on the 5th and 6th counts

and had imposed two years rigorous imprisonment with a fine of Rs.5000/-

subject to a default sentence of 1 month simple imprisonment, for count

number 7 on 29/11/2017.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the Appellant

has given consent for this matter to be argued in his absence. At the time of

argument, the Appellant was connected via the Zoom platform from prison.

At the very outset it is pertinent to note that PW1 and PW2, who are said to

be eye witnesses had implicated all the Accused persons including the

Appellant in their statements to the police and at the non-summary

proceedings. Further, the prosecution had indicted the Accused along with

persons unknown to the prosecution. Hence, it is very clear that several

persons had participated in the incident.

The 6th Accused, who had died during pending the trial, was the husband of

a girl who had died due to a snake bite. The girl lived in the neighbouring

house of PW1. It was alleged by the deceased’s party that the girl died due to

black magic performed by the deceased Rosalyn Nona and PW1.

Background of the Case.

PW1, Karunawathie is the wife of the deceased Wimal Ranjith and the sister

of the deceased Rosalyn Nona. PW1 was running a praying house (Dewalaya)

adjoining to her house. She used to be the priest of the praying house.

According to her, on the day of the incident, when she was inside her house

with her deceased sister, at about 7.00pm, she had heard a noise similar to

falling trees coming from behind the praying house. The deceased sister of

PW1 opened the door and went out and walked towards the Devalaya and

PW1 had followed her. At that time the husband of PW1 was in the toilet

CA/HCC/403/2017

5 | P a g e

which was behind her house. According to PW1, she had seen the Appellant

standing in front of them with the other Accused, who had been acquitted

by the court, with arms. When PW1’s sister inquired about why they were

destroying the banana trees, the Appellant had cut her deceased sister with

a cutting instrument, either by a sword or a knife. Hearing the commotion,

when the deceased Wimal Ranjith came to the spot, the Appellant had cut

him as well using the same knife. Thereafter, he had cut PW1 as well. With

the cut injury, PW1 had rushed to the Nittambuwa Police Station using a

shortcut with PW2 and her children.

PW2, Chamila Ishanthi, too said that she witnessed the murder of Rosalyn

Nona when she followed PW1. After seeing the incident, she had run into the

house to save her children.

PW12, Sgt 19488 Sunil Premachandra had received the first complaint from

PW1 when she went to Nittambuwa Police. At that time, PW1 had only said

that the Appellant had cut him. As she was injured, this witness had advised

her to go to Hospital and had passed the message to PW11 SI/ Perera and

PW14 PC 9018 Ajith about the incident. Although PW11 and PW14 are listed

in the indictment as prosecution witnesses, they were not called by the

prosecution. As such, defence had called them as defence witnesses.

PW 09, IP/Samithasiri had visited the scene of crime and conducted the

investigation.

PW7, JMO Premaratne who conducted the post mortem examination of both

deceased opined that the deaths had been caused due to injuries caused by

a heavy sharp cutting object.

PW7 also examined PW1 and categorised the injury she sustained as a non-

grievous injury. PW1 in her history to the JMO, only mentioned that the

injury was caused by the Appellant.

Having been satisfied that the prosecution had made out a prima facie case

against the Appellant, the Learned Trial Judge had called for the defence and

CA/HCC/403/2017

6 | P a g e

the Appellant had made a dock statement, called his wife and two police

officers who were listed in the witness list in the indictment.

When PW12 received first information from PW1, he had passed the same to

PW11 and PW14 to conduct investigations. PW11 had gone to the house of

PW1 at 9.45pm with PW14 but had only observed some blood patches,

human hair and disturbed soil. Neither of them had witnessed any dead body

at that time. Since PW1 was hospitalized, he had gone to the hospital and

inquired from PW1 about the incident and had come to know about two

persons being missing. Hence, he had again gone to PW1’s house and had

made a search with the help of the villagers using his torch as no light was

available. Even at that time, he could not locate the dead bodies of the

deceased. PW14 who went along with PW11 too narrated the same.

The Appellant had filed following grounds of appeal.

1. Whether there was sufficient light as claimed by some of the

prosecution witnesses.

2. Whether PW1 Karunawathie is a reliable witness.

3. Whether PW2 Chamila Ishanthi has actually witnessed the incident.

4. Whether the defence version was unjustifiably rejected by the

Learned High Court Judge.

5. Did the Learned High Court Judge wrongly conclude that the

prosecution had proved the case beyond reasonable doubt.

6. Did the Learned High Court Judge fail to consider vital

contradictions in favor of the defence.

As the appeal grounds raised are interconnected, all grounds will be

considered together hereinafter.

In the first ground of appeal the learned President’s Counsel strenuously

contended that the identification of the Appellant has not been proved

CA/HCC/403/2017

7 | P a g e

beyond a reasonable doubt due to the poor light condition of the scene of

crime.

Proper identification of the accused persons is a fundamental point that

needs to be determined at the beginning of a criminal trial. In this case it is

very important to discuss whether the prosecution has established the

identity of the Appellant beyond reasonable doubt. If the identification is

compromised, the net result would be the acquittal of the accused person

from the case. Hence evidence of identification should be considered very

seriously due to its delicate nature. In this case an identification parade had

not been held in respect of the Appellant.

The following judgments are of utmost importance as they elaborate the

vitality of identification evidence and discuss how the fate of a case depends

upon it.

In Karunaratne Mudiyansege Madduma Bandara v. The Attorney General

CA/190-192/11 decided on 15/03/2013, the court acquitted the accused

on the ground that the identification of the accused persons have not been

proved beyond reasonable doubt because the prosecutrix failed to divulge

the names of the accused persons to the police who was known to her prior

to the incident.

Gorle S. Naidu v. State of A.P. [1997] Appeal (crl) 232-234. In this case the

facts related to the murder of two individuals. In the FIR, the prosecution

witness merely mentioned that the assailants were followers of one of the

appellants, but none were specifically named. However, later in court, they

stated the name of the assailants. The Court held that such an omission was

a vital omission.

In R v. Turnbull [1977] QB 224 the court held that:

“Where the case against an accused depends wholly or substantially on

the correctness of one or more identifications of the accused-which the

CA/HCC/403/2017

8 | P a g e

defence alleges to be mistaken-the judge should be cautious before

convicting the accused in reliance on the correctness of the

identification(s). The judge should take into consideration that:

• Caution is required to avoid the risk of injustice;

• A witness who is honest may be wrong even if they are convinced,

they are right;

• A witness who is convincing may still be wrong;

• More than one witness may be wrong;

• A witness who recognizes the defendant, even when the witness

knows the defendant very well, may be wrong.

In the case of Vinod @ Nasmulla v. State of Chhattisgarh [2025] INSC 220

it was noted that:

“The purpose of holding a test identification parade during the stage of

investigation is, firstly, to ensure that the investigating agency is

proceeding in the right direction where the accused is unknown and,

secondly, to serve as a corroborative piece of evidence when the witness

identifies the accused during trial. The evidence of identification merely

corroborates and strengthens the oral testimony in court which alone is the

primary and substantive evidence as to identity.”

In relation to identification in Court after a delay, in the case of Raj Kumar

@ Bheema v. State of NCT of Delhi, 2025 INSC 1322 it was held that:

“It is trite that the evidence of an eye-witness must be of sterling quality

and unimpeachable character. It should not only inspire the confidence of

the Court but must also be of such a nature that is acceptable at its face

value.”

In criminal trials such as this, lighting conditions are of utmost importance

as they are essential in determining the reliability of eyewitness

CA/HCC/403/2017

9 | P a g e

identification. As such, poor lighting would diminish the ability of a witness

to grasp visual details, resulting in an increased risk of false identification.

Such misidentifications being the leading cause of wrongful convictions have

resulted in courts carefully examining the quality, duration and source of

light at crime scenes.

According to PW1, she testified that she identified the Appellant with the aid

of a bulb fixed under the portico of her house and the light emanating from

the Devalaya. Although the house lights were on, all windows were covered

with curtains.

Page 165 and 238 of the brief.

m% ( ;ud fudk t,sfhka o oelafl @

W ( n,aí od,d ;snqKd'

m% ( flfi,a .ia j,g o n,aí od,d ;snqfKa @

W ( yqâ tl hg ;snqKd' u, f.or n,aí ;snqKd' foajd,h msámiafia ,hsÜ ;snqKd'

In the evidence of PW2, she too endorsed the evidence given by PW1 that she

identified the Appellant with the aid of the light under the hood of the house.

However, PW9 IP/Samithasiri had noted that there was no light fixed to the

hood of the portico and there was only a wire but no holder attached to the

hood.

Page 561 of the brief.

m% ( t;fldg fyda,avrfha n,anh ;snqfk ke;s tl .ek m%Yak l<d o @

W ( tal l,ska b`o,d ;snqfK keye lsh,d ug oekqï ÿkakd'

m% ( uy;auhd hk wjia:dfõ oS ksjfia wfkla úÿ,s nqnq¨ oe,afjñka ;snqKd o @

W ( Tõ'

CA/HCC/403/2017

10 | P a g e

The evidence given by the investigating officer clearly cut across the evidence

given by PW1 and PW2 with regard to the light condition as the incident had

happened between 7.30- 8.00pm on the date of the incident.

Although the prosecution had listed PW11 and PW14 as prosecuting

witnesses, the prosecution had not called them to give evidence on behalf of

them. As such, the defence had called them as defence witnesses. As stated

earlier, although these two witnesses rushed to the scene of the crime twice

after receiving information from the police, due to the poor light condition

they could not locate the bodies of the deceased persons. The investigation

officer, PW9, too could not locate the dead bodies during the said night. He

only located the dead bodies on the following day. It is very important to note

that a group of people with some who are unknown to the prosecution had

come there with arms at that time.

According to PW1, the incident had happened at the rear of the Devalaya

and her husband had fallen at a spot about 21 ½ meters from the house

doorframe. The deceased Rosalyn Nona was lying at a spot which was one

meter away from her husband’s body.

PW9 testified that when one observes from the portico of the house, the

locations at where the bodies were lying had been covered by bushes.

Defence had marked a very important contradiction of the evidence given by

PW1 and which was marked as 1V-21. The relevant contradiction was re-

produced below:

Page 239 of the breief.

m% ( ;ud fufyu lsõj o “ wlald l;d lrñka isáh me;a; l¨jr ksid yrshg uql=;a

fmkqfka keye @

fmd,siShg tfyu lsõj o@

W ( lsõfõ keye'

CA/HCC/403/2017

11 | P a g e

tu fldgi ‘ 1ú'21’ jYfhka ,l=Kq lr bosrsm;a lrkjd'

This means, that PW1 had not seen the incident because of the darkness. In

her evidence before court, she went on to say that she identified the incident

with the non-existing light under portico and with the aid of Devalaya light.

Although the Learned High Court Judge conceded that the said contradiction

had some bearing on the prosecution case, it was then disregarded and

simply stated that it was not a material contradiction. The relevant portion

of the judgment is re-produced below:

Page 904 of the brief.

hï;dla ÿrg wod, lr.; yels mriamr úfrdaO;djhla ú;a;slrejka y`ÿkd .ekSug wod,j

fuu idlaIsldrshf.ka wid we;s w;r th 1'ù'21 jYfhka ,l=Kq lr we;s mriamr

úfrdaë;djhhs' tkï “wlald l;d lrñka isáh me;a; l¨jr ksid fudl=;a fmkqfka keye”

lshd weh lS njg mriamr úfrdaë;djhla ,l=Kq lr ;snqK o th ia:dkfha ;snQ wdf,dalh

iïnkaOfhka fkdu. hjk iq¿ mriamr úfrdaO;djhla nj fmkS hhs' tkï fuu

idlaIsldrsh lshd we;af;a “wlald l;d lrñka isáh me;a; l¨jr ksid fudl=;a fmkqfka

keye” nj;a ta tlalu “wlafla wlafla” lshñka weh biairyg ÿjf.k .sh nj;a h'

This contradiction is very important in this case as when PW1 lodged her

first complaint to police nothing was mentioned about the deceased persons.

She only told PW12 that the Appellant had cut her with a knife-like

instrument. Further PW9 stated that at the hospital PW1 had told him she

was not aware as to what happened to the two deceased. Even to PW7, JMO,

PW1 had only stated that the Appellant had cut her. Nothing had been

mentioned about the incident nor about the two deceased.

Although, PW2 claimed to be an eye witness, she had only identified the

Appellant at that time. Although PW2 had said that she saw the Appellant

attacking the deceased Rosalyn with the light emanating from a bulb fixed

on the hood of the house, her evidence is doubtful, as PW9 had said that

there was no light seen on the hood. This contradiction contradicts the

CA/HCC/403/2017

12 | P a g e

prosecution evidence materially in this case. Further, PW2 had said that she

ran into the house to safeguard her children. Hence, she had not seen who

attacked PW1 and the two deceased.

Under cross examination, PW2 was confronted with the deposition she made

before the Magistrate Court of Attanagalle. A vital contradiction 1V-41 was

marked on her evidence to say that she did not see correctly about the

cutting. The relevant portion is re-produced below:

Page 472-473 of the brief.

m% ( Tn urK mrSlaIKfha oS msgq 44 ys fufyu lsõjd o" fldgkjd yrshg uu oelafla

keye" lsõj o tfyu @

W ( iuyr úg tfyu lshkak we;s" uu fndfydu nfhka isáfha'

m% ( fldgkjd yrshg uu oelafla keye lshd igyka fj,d ;sfnkjd @

W ( iuyr úg i`oyka fj,d we;s'

PW2 is a niece of the deceased Rosalyn Nona and is residing at a different

village. Although she went along with PW1 after the incident, she did not go

to Nittambuwa Police station with PW1. Instead, she had gone home and had

come only on the following day. But she never went to the police station to

give her statement. She only made her statement on 21.09.1995 at 3.30pm

when the police came after her and recorded her statement. Further,

although she went home immediately after the incident, she did not inform

about the incident to her husband. Hence, it is doubtful whether she had

witnessed the murder incident as testified in her evidence.

Considering the evidence given by PW1, PW2, PW9, PW12 and defence

witness PW11 and PW14 with regard to the identity of the Appellant, there

are contradictions and omissions which certainly affect the outcome of the

CA/HCC/403/2017

13 | P a g e

decision with regard to the Appellant committing the murder of the two

deceased.

The proof of contradiction is vital to destroy the credibility of the case of the

prosecution. Proved contradictions and omissions which can affect the case

of the prosecution plays a vital role in a criminal case.

PW1 is the most important witness in this case. The contradictions marked

in her evidence are vital and certainly affects her credibility. They also raise

doubts about the probability of the incident as described by the PW1. What

she told to the police at the very outset needs to be considered carefully as

group of people, some who are unknown to the prosecution had participated

in the incident. Further, as per PW1 and PW2, all had carried arms. Failing

to mention important facts which result in the failure to accurately identify

the accused certainly affects the prosecution case.

Further, in the first information to police, PW1’s omission in mentioning the

Appellant had cut the two deceased to the police affects her credibility in this

case. Further, she had mentioned nothing about committing murder in her

short history to the doctor. These omissions should not be considered lightly,

as it certainly affects the conviction of the Appellant in respect of committing

murder.

The contradictions and omissions marked on PW2’s evidence certainly have

a negative impact on the evidence given by PW1 as she had said that the

identity of the Appellant was established though the light emanating from

the hood of the house. Whereas, investigations had revealed that no such

light had existed on the hood. Although the Learned High Court Judge too

admitted that the contradiction marked 1V-21 is vital, he had not given it

due consideration as it affect the root of the case.

CA/HCC/403/2017

14 | P a g e

In the case of AG v. Sandanam Pitchai Mary Theresa (2011) 2 Sri L.R. 292

the court held that:

“Whilst internal contradictions or discrepancies would ordinarily affect

the trustworthiness of the witness statement, it is well established that

the Court must exercise its judgment on the nature of the inconsistency

or contradiction and should consider whether they are material to the

fact in issue”.

In the case of K. Padmathilaka alias Sergeant Elpitiya v. The Director

General of Commission to Investigate Allegation of Bribery and

Corruption [2010] BLR 67 the court held that:

“Credibility of prosecution witnesses should be subject to judicial

evaluation in totality and not isolated scrutiny by the judge. When witness

makes an inconsistent statement in their evidence either at one stage or

two stages, the testimony of such witness is unreliable……It is a cardinal

principle that unreliable evidence cannot be rendered credible, simply

because there is some corroboration material”.

In Jayaseelan V T.N. AIR 2009 SC 1091 the court held that:

“Normal discrepancies in evidence are those which are due to normal

errors of observation, normal errors of memory due to lapse of time, due to

mental disposition such as shock and horror at the time of occurrence and

those are always there however honest and truthful a witness may be.

Material discrepancies are those which are not normal, and not expected

of a normal person. Courts have to label the category to which a

discrepancy may be categorized. While normal discrepancies do not

corrode the credibility of a party's case, material discrepancies do so.”

CA/HCC/403/2017

15 | P a g e

In the case of Wickremasuriya vs. Dedoleena and Others [(1996) 2 Sri L.R

95] held that:

“After a considerable lapse of time, as has resulted on this application, it

is customary to come across contradictions in the testimony of witnesses.

This is a characteristic feature of human testimony which is full of

infirmities and weaknesses especially when proceedings are held long

after the events spoken to by witnesses; a judge must expect such

contradictions to exist in the testimony. The issue is whether the

contradiction or inconsistency goes to the root of the case or relates to the

core of a party's case. If the contradiction is not of that character, the court

ought to accept the evidence of witnesses whose evidence is otherwise

cogent, having regard to the Test of Probability and Improbability and

having regard to the demeanour and deportment manifested by

witnesses.”

The evidence of PW1 and PW2 as to the incident creates serious doubt with

regard to the identity of the Appellant. The contradictory positions taken by

witnesses are vital and certainly goes to the root of the case and is sufficient

to create a reasonable doubt in the prosecution’s case.

Under the landmark U.S. Supreme Court ruling in Brady v. Maryland 373

U.S. 83 (1963) a failure by the state to disclose evidence favourable to the

defence results in a legal violation that can invalidate a conviction.

In this case two police witnesses PW11 and PW14 were not called by the

prosecution, but was called by the defence. Although the Learned Trial Judge

summarily dismissed their evidence given, their evidence is vital to ascertain

the situation and the state of light condition prevailing at the scene of crime

in the night in question.

A trial judge is responsible for considering any evidence which is available in

the defence’s favour, provided it has been legally admitted into the trial. In

CA/HCC/403/2017

16 | P a g e

common law systems, the judge is responsible for evaluating all evidence;

which includes both for the prosecution and the defence, in order to

ascertain if the prosecution has in fact successfully discharged its burden of

proving the guilt of the Accused beyond a reasonable doubt.

The defence does not bear the weight of needing to prove anything; rather,

the judge must consider any favourable evidence available to ascertain

whether the prosecution has completely and accurately overcome the

presumption of innocence of the Accused. As such, where a judge entirely

ignores or fails to consider any admissible and credible evidence supporting

the defendant’s innocence, the verdict can very well be overturned on appeal

for failure of proper evaluation of trial evidence.

Thus, appellate courts would always require trial judges to act impartially

and consider the “totality of the circumstances”, which consists of

considering the defence’s perspective along with any rebutting evidence

brought forward.

The evidence led by the prosecution only established that the Appellant is

known to PW1 and that he had cut PW1. Further, PW1 had seen the

Appellant within a close proximity.

As stated earlier, there were several people with arms and the indictment has

vouched for that. According to both the Learned High Court Judge and the

Learned State Counsel, the contradiction marked 1V- 21 is very vital but was

not considered in favour of the Appellant. Considering the evidence given by

PW2, she is not a credible witness. Further, the police officers who went to

the scene of crime were not able to detect the dead bodies until the following

day. This clearly suggests the poor light condition that existed at that time.

Further, PW1 had mentioned in her first information to the police that she

did not know what happened to the two deceased and she had failed to

mention in her short history to the JMO about the incident.

CA/HCC/403/2017

17 | P a g e

As such the grounds of appeal considered above by the Counsel for the

Appellant is sufficient to affect the credibility of prosecution’s case with

regards to committing the murders of the deceased, as the doubt created

certainly disturbs the findings of the Learned High Court Judge with regard

to the murder of the two deceased.

Due to the aforesaid reasons, I set aside the conviction and the death

sentence imposed in respect of counts number 5 and 6. I affirm the

conviction and sentence imposed on count number 7. The fine imposed by

the Learned High Court Judge will remain same with the default sentence.

Considering all the circumstances of this case, I order the sentence imposed

on count number 7 to be operative from the date of conviction, i.e., from

29.11.2017.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgement to the High

Court of Gampaha along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL