IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRAIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

Court of Appeal case no : CA HC 46/2016

A.R.P.Kumara

125/2,

Sirinaga Mawatha

Thibolketiya

Colambage Ara

Complainant

Vs.

Hon Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department

Colombo 12

Respondents

CA 46/2016.

Before

Counsel

Decided on

s. Thurairaja, J.

1

High Court of Embilipitiya Case No:HC 106/2013

S.Devika De LTennakoon J & S.Thurairaja, PC J.

Nimal Muthukumarana for the Accused -Appellant.

H.I. Peiris D.S.G for the Respondent.

13.10.2017.

Accused -Appellant is present in Court produced by the Prison Authorities

and the counsel for the accused -appellant moves court that he has

instructions from the accused appellant to withdraw the appeal. On the

request of the counsel, we asked from the accused appellant of his stance.

He confirms, the instructions given to the counsel. The Learned Deputy

Solicitor General has no objection of withdrawal of the appeal. The learned

counsel for the accused appellant makes an application under Section 359

and 328 of the Criminal Procedure Code to the effect, that there is a

punishment for the first count three years and the second count ten years

rigorous imprisonment. Since, that it had happened in the same cause of

transaction, he move that the sentence to run concurrently. Further he

submits that the accused appellant was in remand from the date of

conviction therefore the sentence be implemented from the date of

conviction. Learned D.S.G has no objection for this application. Accordingly

the court orders as follows :-

Sentence imposed on the first and second counts to be implemented

together namely three years rigorous imprisonment and the 10 years

2

rigorous imprison to be operated concurrently. Since he is in remand from

the date of conviction the sentence to be operative from the date of

conviction. All the other conditions in the said order will remain as it is.

The Prison Authorities is hereby directed to implement the sentence imposed

on the first and the second counts simultaneously from the date of

conviction namely 28.04.2016.

Registrar is hereby directed to forward the case record to the Registrar of

High Court of Embilipitiya to implement the sentence.

Withdrawal is allowed and the appeal is dismissed.

S.Devika de L Tennakoon . J

I agree.

Vkgj-.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL.