IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application under Article

140 of the Constitution for Mandates in the

nature of Writs of Certiorari.

*******

1. Abeysirinarayana Lokuruge Somathilake,

Of Nai Veda Gedara, Angulmaduwa,

Beliatta.

2. Narayanage Hemalatha

Of Nai Veda Gedara, Angulmaduwa

Beliatta.

3. Watawana Badalge Lalani

4. Watawana Badalge Shantha

All ofSiri Veda Nivasa, Lower Beligalla,

Upper Beligalla.

5. Wattege Thisohamy

Of Elagawatte, Angulmaduwa,

Beliatta.

6. Lokuruge Sarath

7. Lokuruge Chandrika

Both of Elagawatte, Angulmaduwa,

Beliatta.

8. Ratnasinghe Arlishamy

Of Mahawatte, Angulmaduwa,

Beliatta.

9. Ginneliya Gam Athigei Sumanalatha

10. Ginneliya Gam Athigei Padmalatha

1

11. Ginneliya Gam Athigei Premalatha

12. Ginneliya Gam Athigei Sunil alias Sunil

Genneliya.

13. Bambarenda Badalge Ariyawathie

14. Ginneliya Gam Athigei Ayeshika Varuni

Gunathilleke

15. Ginneliya Gam Athigei Rasika Jayashantha

16. Ginneliya Gam Athigei Shaamika Dilraj

17. Ginneliya Gam Athigei Niluka Dilraj

18. Ginneliya Gam Athigei Nilushika Varuni

19. Ginneliya Gam Athigei Pemawathie

20. Ginneliya Gam Athigei Gunaseeli

21. Ginneliya Gam Athigei Sitha

22. Ginneliya Gam Athigei Amarasena alias

Ginneliya Gam Athigei Piyaratne

All of Angulmaduwa, Beliatta.

PETITIONERS

C.A. (writ) Application No.667/2009

Vs

1. Hon. Jeewan Kumaranatunga

Ministry of Lands AND Development

Govijana Mandiraya, Rajamalwatte

Road, Battaramulla.

lA Hon. Janaka Bandara Tennakoon

Ministry of Lands AND Development

"Govijana Mandiraya",

Rajamalwatte Road, Battaramulla.

lB Hon. M.K.D.S. Gunawardhana

Ministry of lands AND Development

2

"Govijana Mandiraya",

Rajamalwatte Road, Battaramulla.

2. Beliatta Pradeshiya Sabha

Office of the Pradeshiya Sabha, Beliatta.

3. Cyril Munasinghe

Chairman, Beliatta Pradeshiya Sabha

Office of The Pradeshiya Sabha, Beliatta.

5. Secretary

Ministry of Agriculture Development

And Agrarian Services,

Colombo.

6. Commissioner General of Agrarian

Development, Department of Agrarian

Development, No. 42, Sir Marcus

Fernando Mawatha, P.O.Box 537,

Colombo 07.

7. Assistant Commissioner of Local

Government, Hambantota

8. Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian

Development, Hambantota.

9. Secretary

Ministry of Local Government and

Provincial Councils,

of No. 330, Union Place, Colombo 2.

10. Secretary

Ministry of Lands and Land Development

"Govijana Mandiraya", Rajamalwatte Rd

Battaramulla.

11. Superintendant of Servey Office

Hambantota.

12. District Secretary of Hambantota District

Hambantota.

RESPONDENTS

3

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

DECIDED ON

Deepali Wijesundera J.

: Deepali Wijesundera J.

: Dr. Sunil Coorey for the

Petitioners.

W. Dayaratne PC with

P. Jayawardene and D. Dayaratne

For the 2nd and 3A Respondents

Nayomi Kahawita SC for the 1st,

11th Respondents.

: 1ih September, 2014

: 01 st April, 2016

The petitioners have filed this application by way of a writ of

certiorari seeking relief to quash a vesting order published in Gazette

Extraordinary No. 1609/10 dated 08/07/2009 marked A under section 38

of the Land Acquisition Act. The land in issue is situated within the

Beliatta Divisional Secretary's Division and it has been acquired for the

public purpose of constructing a playground for school children of Angul

Maduwa Kanishta Vidyalaya.

4

The petitioner's argument was that there was no urgency to

acquire a paddy land which was in cultivation to build a playground for a

school which had only 400 to 500 students and that the school had

classes only up to G.C.E. Ordinary Levels. The petitioners stated that

the said land was cultivated only once a year since there was a

scarecity of water but the land was continuously cultivated every year.

The petitioners in their submissions stated at length about a

District Court case where the subject matter was the land in suit. Since

this is a writ application to quash a vesting order the above argument is

not applicable to the instant case. The petitioners have filed a number of

letters written by various people including a Buddhist priest against the

acquisition order.

The petitioners stated after representations were made against

the proposed acquisition a meeting was held at the Hambantota District

Agricultural Committee on 23/11/2008 and a request was made to the

third respondent to reconsider the matter and to forward his

recommendations. Thereafter there has been several letters of protest

sent to the respondents.

5

The petitioners stated that so far no work has been done to

construct the playground and that to build a playground the land has to

be filled.

The petitioners stated first to ninth, eleventh, twelfth, twentieth

and twenty first petitioners who are co-owners and in possession of the

land were not noticed by the fourth respondent to hand over possession.

They stated that the first petitioner received a letter from the ninth

respondent dated 09/09/2009 stating that the protests against the

acquisition had been inquired into by the Commissioner of Local

Government and that he had recommended that the said land was

suitable to be acquired. The petitioners stated that Gazette marked A is

ultra vires, null and void and of no force or avail in law. The judgments in

Manel Fernando vs Jayawickrema 2000 1 SLR 126, D.F.A.

Kapugeekiyana vs J.B. Tennakoon S.C. no. 161/2010 were cited and

stated that a purpose that can become a reality only in the distant future

is not a public purpose, and that a public purpose must be real, definite

and present.

The petitioners stated that grave and irreparable loss and damage

will be caused to the petitioners if relief is not granted to them.

6

The respondents submitted that the acquisition of the land was

initiated on bona fide grounds at all material times, and that pursuant to

the vesting order being published in the Gazette in terms of Sec. 5 of

the Act the Minister had made a written declaration that the land in

question is needed for a public purpose (1 R9). The respondents went

on to discuss the effect of Sec. 5 citing the judgments in Gunasekera

vs Minister of Lands and Agriculture and others 65 NLR 119,

Gunawardena vs District Revenue Officer Waligama Korale 73 NLR

333 and Maria Indira Fernandopulle vs Minister of Lands and

Agriculture 79 NLR 116.

The respondents further stated that it is trite law that the vesting

order made by the Minister on grounds of urgency can be challenged

only if the petitioners had established that there was no urgency. The

respondents stated a decision made under Sec. 38 can only be opened

to judicial review only if a serious and apparent doubt exists with regard

to its procedural impropriety and existence of malice, and stated that the

petitioners have not alleged malice but alleged that there is no urgency

to acquire land and build a playground.

The land is issue had been acquired for a public purpose which is

to build a playground to a school. The petitioners stated that there are

7

only 400 to 500 students in the said school which only had class up to

G.C.E. Ordinary Level examination. This I find is a very weak argument

whether a school had class up to Ordinary Level examination or

Advanced Level examination it has to have a playground for the

children. A playground for a school is undoubtedly a public purpose. The

land acquired had not been cultivated for years according to the reports

called before the acquisition. Therefore factually it had been a suitable

land to do the said construction.

The petitioners stated there was no urgency for the public

purpose. A playground to a school which has to be developed for the

children of the area is a matter of great urgency and importance and

also it is a public purpose. Children are the future of a country and they

have to be properly educated.

An acquisition order published in the Gazette can only be

challenged if the public purpose is not disclosed or strong grounds of

procedural impropriety coupled with Mala Fides existed or if the land so

acquired had not been utilized for the purpose it was acquired. The

petitioners have not established any of these grounds.

8

Sec. 5 of the Land Acquisition Act reads thus;

(l)Where the Minister decides under subsection (5) of section 4

that a particular land or servitude should be acquired under

this Act, he shall make a written declaration that such land or

servitude is needed for a public purpose and will be acquired

under this Act and shall direct the acquiring officer of the

district in which the land which is to be acquired or over

which the servitude is to be acquired is situated to cause such

declaration in the Sinhala, Tamil and English languages to be

published in the Gazette and exhibited in some conspicuous

places on or near that land.

(2)A declaration made under subsection (1) in respect of any

land or servitude shall be conclusive evidence that such land

or servitude is needed for a public purpose.

(3)The publication of a declaration under subsection (1) in the

Gazette shall be conclusive evidence of the fact that such

declaration was duly made.

9

Once the Sec. 5 (1) declaration is done by the Minister Sec. 5 (2)

of the Act makes it conclusive and takes it out of the scope of judicial

review. Thus the question of whether the land forming the subject matter

of this instant application is required for a public purpose can not be

questioned in this court.

For the afore stated reasons the application of the petitioners is

dismissed with costs fixed at Rs. 50,0001=.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

10

i!Ir!I

~ I !

1