IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

c.A. Case No.377/2015 (Rev)

D.C. Kegalle Case No.2794I1P

In the matter of an application made under Article 138 of the Constitution by way of Revision.

Abdul Sameen MohamedJameel

and Others

PLAINTIFFS

-Vs-

Mohamed Zein Mohamed Shyam

and Others

DEFENDANTS

AND

K.S. Panditharatne,

No.l8, Kalupahanagama Road,

Kegalle.

PETITIONER

-Vs-

l. Pushpika Sanjeewa Samarakoon,

Kelani Valley Plantations Limited,

No.400, Deans Road,

Colombo 10.

1

BEFORE

COUNSEL

Decided on

2. Hariet Apponsu,

Kalupahana Estate, Kegalle.

RESPONDENTS

AND NOW BETWEEN

1. Pushpika Sanjeewa Samarakoon,

No.l70 F, Sumanasiri Place,

KandyRoad,

Yakkala.

2. Hariet Apponsu,

Kalupahana Estate, Kegalle.

RESPONDENT-PETITIONERS

-Vs-

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENT

A.H.M.D. Nawaz,j.

Ikram Mohamed, P.e. with Neomal Senathilake for the 1st and 2nd Respondent-Petitioners

Vikum de Abrew, DSG for the Attorney General

01.08.2019

2

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J. T

his application for revision raises the issue whether contempt proceedings initiated

in the District Court can proceed in the absence of the virtual complainant. The

virtual complainant who brought the complaint before court was a Surveyor called

Panditharatne who has since passed away in the course of the contempt proceedings.

A narrative of facts leading up to the institution of contempt proceedings becomes quite

relevant at this stage. It is common ground that Mr. Panditharatne was a Court

Commissioned Surveyor who was given the commission to conduct a preliminary survey

in relation to District Court Kegalle Case NO.27941/P which had been instituted in the

District Court of Kegalle for the partition of a land called "Kalupahanagamawatte" in the

Kegalle District.

The 1st Respondent-Petitioner, at all material times, was the manager of the Estate called

"Kalupahana Estate", which allegedly included the land sought to be partitioned. The

Kelani Valley Plantations Limited had become the lawful lessee of the land under the

Janatha Estates Development Board from June, 1992 for a period of 53 years.

The 2nd Respondent-Petitioner happens to be an employee of the said Kelani Valley

Plantations Limited and was, inter alia, in charge of a gate fixed to the entrance of the said

estate. In order to execute the commission, Mr. Panditharatne had gone to the land but

he reported to court by his report dated 17.07.2006 that he could not carry out the survey

as he was prevented from doing so and he pleaded in the said report to court that action

be taken against the Manager of the Estate. The report has been appended to the

application for revision as 'G'.

Thereafter the said surveyor filed a petition dated 10.10.2006 along with his affidavit,

praying that the rwo Respondents be punished for contempt of court for obstructing his

duties whilst he was executing his commission.

3

The two Respondent-Petitioners were served with separate charge sheets dated

22.11.2006, certified copies of which have been filed along with this revisionary

application as 11' and 12'.

Both the two Respondent-Petitioners pleaded not guilty to the said charges and the

inquiry into the said charges corrunenced on 16.08.2007.

After the evidence of the said Court Commissioner was concluded, evidence of R.A.

Jayaratne, S.K Weerasinghe, H.P. Siriwardene and M.Z.M. Shyam were adduced on his

behalf and the case of the Court Commissioner was closed on 30.11.2010. The 1

st

Respondent-Petitioner corrunenced his evidence on 26.10.2011 and was cross-examined

and finally re-examined on 25.09.2014.

The Respondent-Petitioners plead that after the preliminary plan was made by another

surveyor upon the survey of a part of Kalupahana Estate, the trial of the said partition case

was fixed for 03.10.2014 on which date the Plaintiffs moved to withdraw the said action

and accordingly the said action was dismissed without costs on 03.10.2014.

However, when the contempt matter was taken up for further inquiry on 16.12.2014, it

was brought to the notice of Court that the Petitioner in the contempt proceedings, the

Court Commissioner, had passed away. In the circumstances, the Court fixed the matter

to be mentioned on 19.02.2015 on which date the Court granted the Respondent-

Petitioners permission to tender written submissions on the question whether contempt

proceedings could proceed further since the complainant who had initiated the

contempt proceedings had passed away.

Accordingly, written submissions were tendered on 28.04.2015 on behalf of the

Respondent-Petitioners to the effect that the said inquiry could not be proceeded with

any further in view of the death of the Petitioner, the Court Commissioner.

The learned Additional District Judge delivered her order on 27.07.2015, holding that the

said application made against these Respondent-Petitioners for contempt could be

proceeded with. It is this order that is impugned in this revisionary jurisdiction.

4

The question before the Court is whether the contempt proceedings terminated ipso facto

upon the death of the complainant. The learned President's Counsel submitted that

when contempt proceedings were initiated by a person other than a court, the

proceedings would come to an end upon the demise of the accuser. The learned Depury

Solicitor General contended that the contempt of court proceedings could be proceeded

with notwithstanding the death of the Court Commissioner.

The argument urged on behalf of the Respondent-Petitioners was that now that the

Court Commissioner was dead, the cross-examination of the 2nd Respondent-Petitioner

and of any other wimesses would have to be done by the very Judge of the Court before

whom the inquiry is held and that it is the learned Additional District Judge who would

have to take over the prosecution in respect of the petition for contempt made by the

deceased Court Commissioner. Thus the trial Judge would become both the prosecutor

and the Judge. The learned President's Counsel cited the case of Abilian v. Davith

Singho 58 N.LR 566.

His Lordship Justice H.N.G Fernando (as he then was) set out the legal position as

follows:

""" ... .there was a more serious irregularity in the proceedings. After recording evidence in support

of the charge against the appellant, the learned Judge "called upon him"for his statement if any.

Thereafter the Judge questioned the appellant and recorded his answers. The

appellant was also permitted to be cross-examined. The order convicting the appellant

was based to an appredabJe extent on the answers given by him in the course of this interrogation by the Judge ...... "

Upon a careful consideration of this case I take the view that the appellant in Abilian v.

Davith Singho (supra) was convicted substantially on the evidence elicited from the

questions posed to him by the Judge and H.N.G. Fernando, J. quite rightly condemned

the procedure as irregular.

5

In this case no complaint is made against the proceedings had so far in the case and one

cannot be speculative as to how the 2nd Respondent-Petitioner is going to be cross-

examined in the future provided the 2nd Respondent-Petitioner chooses to give evidence.

It may so happen that the 2nd Respondent-Petitioner may not elect to give evidence at all.

As for the conduct of future proceedings a cautious judge who descends into the dusty

arena will know only too well about the petils of posing too many questions in view of

the imperative requirement to exercise judicial restraint and no Judge who knows the

import of Abilian v. Davith Singho (supra) will ever indulge in the overzealous

questioning as dd the judge in that case.

H.N.G. Fernando,]. (as His Lordship then was) sounded a caveat in the case of Abilian:

"Section 797 contemplates that the Court will hear the accused person's explanations, but that

obviously would mean hearing an explanation voluntarily given; the section cannot be

construed as authorizing procedure which the learned Judge has adopted in

this case. "

The tenor of the above passage is that the risk of prejudice to an accused person should

be reduced and the District Judge must ensure that due process is followed in contempt

proceedings.

Fundamental to the concept of a fair trial is that the Court must approach contempt

charges with complete impartiality. The jurisdiction of the District Court to try for

contempt of court any person who disobeys any order or obstructs or resists any person

acting under the authority of the court is given in Section 53 of the Partition Law No.21

of 1977 and in this regard Section 55 of the Judicature Act No.2 of 1978 states: "Every

District Court, Family Court, Magistrates Court and Primary Court shall, for the purpose of

maintaining its proper authority and efficiency, have a special jurisdiction to take cognizance of, and to

punish with penalties in that behalf as hereafter proVided, every offence of contempt of court committed in

the presence of the court itself and all offences which are committed in the course of any act or proceedings

6

in the said courts respectively, and which are dedared by any law for the time being in

force to be punishable as contempt of court. "

Thus it is not only contempt in the face of court (in facie curiae) but also contempt not in

the face of court (ex facie curiae) that becomes triable in the District Court by virtue of

Section 55 of the Judicature Act read with Section 53 of the Partition Law No.21 of 1977.

As regards procedure to try the offence of contempt of court H.N.G. Fernando,]. (as His

Lordship then was) had this to say in Abilian's case.

"In the absence of specific provision in the Act as to the procedure to be followed in cases falling

under section 53, the learned Judge rightly decided that the provisions of Chapter 65 of the Civil

Procedure Code would apply. Section 57 of the Courts Ordinance confers on a District Court a

special jurisdiction to punish inter alia offences "declared by any law to be punishable as contempt

of Court", and section 53 of the Partition Act is but one instance of a law contemplated in the

Courts Ordinance. Hence the procedure in the case of offences dedared by

section 53 of the Act would be the procedure "in that, behalf by law

provided': namely Chapter 65 of the Code. '

The contempt that is alleged against the Petitioners in this case took place not in the face

of court and evidently it fell to the lot of the court commissioner to initiate contempt

proceedings by a petition and affidavit as mandated by Section 792 of the Civil Procedure

Code. Before he crossed the great divide he had given evidence and the Respondent-

Petitioners had the opportunity to cross-examine him. The cross-examination would

have elicited defences or explanations for the alleged offence and no irregularity can be

complained of as regards the procedure adopted so far. Abilian's case is no authority for

the proposition that when the Petitioner-the virtual complainant in a contempt of court

proceedings passes away, the proceedings also extinguish themselves. Evidence has been

led and it is on record. As to how the case is going to proceed is a matter that is left to the

District Court to devise having regard to the fact that the ingredients of a fair trial are

maintained and followed and due process complied with.

7

In fact the learned Senior Deputy General read out a passage from Arlidge on Contempt

(3re! Edition 200S-sub note 220) on the Attorney-General's role in relation to contempt,

which sets out that the Court may, if he chooses to do so, refer the matter to the

Attorney General for action and that the Court wiD get involved only in exceptional

cases where there is dear contempt.

On an examination of Sub Note 2-236 in Arlidge, Eady &' Smith on Contempt 5th

Edition, I find the following:-

"Arlidge, Eady & Smith on Contempt 5'h Ed.,

Chapter 2 Contempt of Court : The Constitutional Dimensions

Section V The Role of the A ttorney General

F The Attorney's role in relation to civil con tempts

2-236

Where the contempt consists of a failure to comply with a court order, it is usual for contempt proceedings

to be initiated at the behest of the party in whose favour the order was made. Even where the party takes

the view that no further action is necessary, the court may, if it chooses to do so, draw the matter to the

attention of the Attorney General for action." The reasons for this were explained by Megarry v-c in Clarke v. Chadburn (1985) 1 All E.R 211 as follows:-

"The order is made so as to assist the litigant in obtaining his rights, and he may consult his own

interests in deciding whether or 'lOt to enforce it. If he decides not to, there may in some cases be a

public element involved, and the Attorney General will judge whether the public interest requires

him to intervene in order to enforce the order."

This is how the learned authors circumscribe the role of the Attorney-General in

contempt proceedings. When there is a public element involved, the Attorney General is

bound to playa role. Needless to say the Attorney-General is the dominus litis in cases

where there is a public element. The order made in this case was an issuance of a

commission to carry out a survey of a land that was sought to be partitioned. It was in

8

compliance with the order that the Commissioner repaired to the land in question where

he encountered unruly behavior, which, as the report made to Court indicates, prima facie

affords evidence of defiance or disobedience or obstruction to a court order. The 1st

Petitioner has cross-examined the Commissioner and must have provided an explanation

which remains on record for the trier to assay and evaluate. The 2nd Petitioner owes an

explanation if he was contemptuous of the order of court and the death of the principal

witness- the Court Commissioner cannot bring to an end the prospective unfolding of

the 2nd Petitioner's explanation in Court.

The rationale of both civil and criminal contempt is essentially the same: upholding the

effective administration of justice. If a court lacked the means to enforce its orders, and

its orders could be disobeyed with impunity, not only would individual litigants suffer,

the whole administration of justice would be brought into dispute.

As was pointed out in the Australian decision of Re Nash, ex parte Tuckerman (1970) 3

NSWR 23 (NSW, CA);

"The expression "interfere with the course of justice" is not confined to physical disturbance of

particular proceedings in the court....it comprehends as well an interference with the authority of

the courts in the sense that there may be a detraction from the influence of judicial decisions and

an impairment of confidence and respect in the courts and their judgments ... "

As such the Attorney General becomes the dominus litis to ensure that disrespectful

behavior which amounts to contempt is visited with sanctions bearing in mind that the

object of contempt is to protect the administration of justice and not to satisfy personal

feelings and peccadilloes.

I need not expatiate on the contours of contempts and in the Sri Lankan context several

precedents repay attention.

In the case of Reginald Perera v. The King 52 N.L.R 293, Basnayake, J. found Reginald

Perera, a member of the House of Representative, who had made some remarks in the

Prison Visitor'S Book on his visit to the Prison, guilty of contempt of Court, and he was

9

fined Rs.500, and in default to undergo six weeks rigorous imprisonment. When the

accused appealed against this order to the Privy Council, it set aside the order of the

Supreme Court and expressed the view that; "Their Lordships are unable to find

anything in his conduct that comes within the definition of Contempt of Court. That

phrase had not lacked authoritative interpretation. In a case of contempt of Court there

must be involved some act done or writing published calculated to bring a Court or a

Judge of the Court into contempt or to lower his authority, or something "calculated to

obstruct or interfere with the due course of justice or the lawful process of the courts".

In Croos and Another v. Dabrera (1999) 1 Sri L.R 205 the defendant against whom an

enjoining order was in force not to lease, let, mortgage, alienate or enter into any kind of

transaction of the land, entered into an agreement to sell the premises in question, was

charged for contempt of Court.

It was held:-

1. The offence of contempt of court under our law is a criminal charge and the burden

of proof is that of proof beyond reasonable dou bt.

2. Under Rule 31 of Old English Rules of the Supreme Court, an act of disobedience

would become an act of contempt only if it was 'wilful'. Wilful was taken to mean

that while, where the terms of an injunction were broken, it was not necessary to

show that the person was intentionally contumacious or not he intended to

interfere with the administration of justice. Yet where the failure or refusal to obey

the order of court was casual or accidental or unintended, it would not be met by

the full rigours of the law-see Borrie &' Lowe's The Law of Contempt 4th Edition

page 139 following Lord Russel, C,J in Fairdough and Sons v. Manchester Ship

Canal Co (No.2)-(1897) 41 SolJo 225-For a better report see (1966) 2 All ER 101.

3. There is a difference between disobedience to injunction and undertakings given to

court and disobedience to a declaratory order or a judgment or decree of court. Our

law therefore strictly does not need a proof of a willful mens-rea.

10

4. U the act was done after obtaining legal advice, it may be a mitigatory factor and

relevant to certain circumstances only to prove bona fides.

Shirani Tilakawardena, J. held: "Action taken with regard to acts of contempt is based on the

premises that a well regulated law of a civilized community cannot be sustained without sanctions being

imposed for such conduct. It is important to maintain the respect and dignity of the court and its officers,

whose task it is to uphold and enforce the law because without such respect, public faith in the

administration ofjustice would be undermined and the law itself would fall into disrepute."

In Dharmasena v. Sagarika Priyadharshanie Navaratne (2004) 2 Sri L.R 173 an

enjoining order had been issued restraining the defendant from constructing a building

in the subject-matter of the action. The plaintiff moved court to commence contempt

proceedings against the defendant alleging that even after the enjoining order was

served, the defendant continued the construction work violating the enjoining order. At

the inquiry an objection was raised on behalf of the defendant that the summons has not

been served in accordance with the provisions of the Civil Procedure Code. Then the

plaintiff moved to withdraw the charge with liberty to move Court again to commence

fresh contempt proceedings, but the Court refused to grant leave to bring a fresh charge

of contempt. The plaintiff sought leave to appeal against the said order. The Court of

Appeal considered the question whether the contempt proceedings come under the

phrase "civil action, proceeding or matter" appearing in Section 754(2). Gamini

Amaratunga,J. held:-

i. Jurisdiction to take cognizance of and to punish contempt is a special jurisdiction.

11. Although contempt is not a crime, contempt proceedings bear a criminal

character.

iii. The charge must be read out to the accused and plea shall be recorded. This is

imperative. Fernando v. Fernando 71 N.L.R 344.

iv. In order to find the accused guilty the charge must be satisfactorily proved, that is

beyond reasonable doubt.

11

v. In those circumstances the contempt proceedings cannot come within the phrase

"civil action, proceeding or matter" appearing in Section 754(2) of the code cannot

be invoked in respect of an order made in contempt proceedings.

vi. The word order in Section 798 of the Civil Procedure Code would include

discharge or an acquittal. See Thuraisingham v. Karthigesu 50 N.L.R 570. The

District Judge's order falls within the word 'order' appearing in Section 798 of the

Civil Procedure Code. The said order could be canvassed in accordance with the

provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.

I set out the above case since there arose in the course of arguments in Court what

characteristics the contempt proceedings partook of-whether it was criminal or civil-for

contempt proceedings that arose out of a surveyor's report-see U. de. Z. Gunawardana, J.

in Somindra v. Surasena (2000) 3 Sri L.R 159.

I have given my anxious consideration to all the issues immanent in this case and I take

the view that there are no irregularities or illegalities that I find in the proceedings that

have taken place in the District Court of Kegalle. In Kankanamage Chandana Geetha

Priya v. Don Martin Amarasinghe and Others CA R.I. Case NO.382/2014 (CA minutes

of 07.05.2019) I had occasion to observe in regard to the scope and ambit of revisionary

jurisdiction thus:-

"""It is axiomatic that the revisionary jurisdiction of this Court is available to rectify manifest

error or perversity. This pri nciple was explained by this Court succinctly in Chandraguptha v.

Gunadasa Suwandaratne c.A. L.A 508/2005 (CA minutes of 12.09.2017). In

Sinnathangam v. Meeramohaideen 60 N.LR 394-T.S. Fernando, J. (with Weerasooriya,J.

agreeing) opined that the Court possesses the power to set right, in revision, an erroneous decision

in an appropriate case even though an appeal has abated on the ground of non-compliance with

technical requirements. Jayawickrama, J. (with De Silva, J. agreeing) followed Sinnathangam

v. Meeramohaideen (supra) in Soysa v. Silva and Others (2000) 2 Sri LR 235 and

considered the case of a revision application that had been filed in the Court of Appeal 10 years

12

after the pronouncement of the judgment in the District Court. In fact the appeal filed against the

said judgment had failed in the Court of Appeal on a technicality namely the appellant had signed

the notice of appeal on his own when there was a registered Attorney on record. The appeal was

rejected as it was preferred contrary to Section 754 of the Civil Procedure Code. Not to be

outdone, the appellant in the case preferred a revisionary application. The argument was raised

that the petitioner could not move by way of revision after the appeal was rejected by the Court of

Appeal. The revisionary application was also resisted on the ground of long delay in that it was

after a lapse of 10 years from the pronouncement of the judgment that the petitioner moved by way

of revision. It was in those circumstances that this Court observed that the power given to a

superior court by way of revision is wide enough to give it the right to revise any order made by an

original court. Its object is the due administration of justice and the correction of errors

sometimes committed by the Court itselfin order to avoid miscarriage ofjustice ............ .

Revisionary jurisdiction of this Court under Article 138 of the Constitution is untrammeled by

delay in its invocation proVided there is irreparable damage, miscarriage of justice or perversity

in the judgment of the court a quo.

The underlying theory behind revisionary jurisdiction is that there must be a manifest error-see

Saheeda Umma and Another v. Haniffa (1999) 1 Sri LR 150 wherein JAN. de Silva, J.

(as His Lordship then was) held that the Court of Appeal should act in revision, when there is a

grave irregularity or a miscarriage of justice, even in a case where revisionary powers have not

been invoked by the Petitioner. In my view this case merits intervention by revision and

restitution-the two extraordinary remedies bestowed on this Court by virtue of Article 138 of the

Constitution. It is trite that in applications for revision, there must be circumstances that shock

the conscience of court-Wijesinghe v. Tharmaratnam 1 V Sri LR 47 ....... "

I do not find such countervailing and exceptional circumstances in this case. In my view

the contempt proceedings did not come to an end upon the demise of the Court

Commissioner and it must proceed to a close in the District Court provided the

13

Petitioners are afforded all opportunities to explain their conduct and expiate their

infractions if there were such acts that would be tantamount to contempt of court.

So I would affirm the order of the District Court of Kegalle dated 27.07.2015 and remand

the case to the District Court for an early disposal as expeditiously as expeditious could

be.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

14