Page 1 of 7

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

Court of Appeal Case No:

CA (PHC) 145 / 2016

High Court of Kuliyapitiya Case No:

HCR 07 / 15

Magistrates of Kuliyapitiya Case

No: 66568

An Appeal filed in terms of Article

154(G) and Article 138 of the

Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka read

with the Provisions of Provincial

High Court (Special Provisions) Act

No. 19 of 1990.

Officer in Charge,

Special Crime Investigation Bureau,

Police Superintendent Officer,

Kuliyapitiya.

Complainant

Vs.

1. Jayasinghe Arachchige Amila Nishantha

2. Pohorambage Chandi Sureka Perera

3. Wijesekarage Dona Ayesha Lasanthi

4. Pohorambage Nalin Chamilka Wijethunga

5. Lakshman Ananda Wijemanne

Accused

Page 2 of 7

AND NOW

Lakshman Ananda Wijemanne,

No.42/7, Koongahawatte Road,

Mount Lavinia.

5th Accused Petitioner

Vs.

Officer in Charge,

Special Crime Investigation Bureau,

Police Superintendent Officer,

Kuliyapitiya.

Complainant Respondent

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

Lakshman Ananda Wijemanne,

No.42/7, Koongahawatte Road,

Mount Lavinia.

5TH Accused Petitioner

Appellant

Vs.

Officer in Charge,

Special Crime Investigation Bureau,

Page 3 of 7

Before: Menaka Wijesundera J.

Neil Iddawala J.

Police Superintendent Officer,

Kuliyapitiya.

Complainant Respondent

Respondent

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondent Respondent

Counsel: Kapila Waidyaratne, PC with Asela Muthumudalige, Akila

Jayasundera and Nipuna Jagodarachchi for the Accused Petitioner

Appellant.

Maheshika Silva, DSG with Chathurangi Mahawaduge, SC and

Rangika Rajapaksha, SC for the state.

Argued on: 16.06.2022

Decided on: 19.07.2022

Page 4 of 7

MENAKA WIJESUNDERA J.

The instant appeal from 143/16 to 163/16 has been filed to set aside the

order dated 06.09.2016 of the High Court of Kuliyapitiya. Therefore it was

agreed by both parties that one judgment would be applicable to all the

appeals from 143/16 to 163/16.

The appellant in the instant matter has held the power of attorney for a land

belonging to his sister who had been residing in the United States of America.

The appellant is supposed to have obtained the services of the 1st accused of

the case in the magistrates Court of Kuliyapitiya by the number 66575 to

dispose the land. Several buyers had come forward to purchase the land and

the appellant had signed over the deeds pertaining to those plots. But, several

other persons had complained to the police against the first accused and

three others for taking over their money and not giving the land. Therefore,

Police had reported facts on numerous occasions against the said suspects.

The Magistrate on several occasions had taken steps to settle the matter, but

it had failed. Thereafter, the Magistrate had for some reason instructed the

police to add the appellant as the 5thaccused in the matter. The appellant had

surrendered himself to the Magistrate.

Therefore, the appellant alleges that he was added as an accused without

even his statement being recorded.

Therefore he further averred in Court that the matter in hand was not

properly investigated and the Magistrate did not have sufficient material to

frame a charge against the appellant. The Magistrate had charged the

appellant along with the four others under Section 389 and 403 of the Penal

Code.

Page 5 of 7

The appellant had made an application to discharge him but the Magistrate

had refused and the same had been made to the High Court but the High

Court also had refused.

The respondents averred that the Magistrate had ample ground to add the

appellant as an accused based on the statement of the watcher of the land in

question and the statement of the Notary who had executed the deeds

pertaining to the land in issue.

If one may go through the two statements referred to by the respondents the

watcher had stated that the appellant had told him that he has sold the land

to the 1st accused in the Magistrate Court and to facilitate him in dealing with

the prospective buyers, and he had seen some people giving money to the 1st

accused but he makes no other reference to the appellant.

The Notary who had executed some of the deeds pertaining to the sale of the

land had said that the appellant signed the deeds as he held the power of

attorney but the fees of the Notary had been paid by the 1st accused.

Therefore the material furnished before the Magistrate only reveals facts

which the appellant has also stated before this Court. But, the Magistrate

based on these two statements has proceeded to instruct the police to add

the appellant as an accused in the matter. This action of the Magistrate, this

Court notes with surprise because the above mentioned two statements does

not reveal any material constituting an offence. The most Magistrate should

have done in the opinion of this Court is to direct the police to investigate the

matter further and seek the advice of the Attorney General. This Court notes

with displeasure that the Magistrate had proceeded to instruct the police to

add the appellant as an accused even without recording a statement of his.

Page 6 of 7

At this point this Court draws its attention to the case of Victor Ivan vs.

Sarath Silva Attorney General and others 1998 1 SLR 340 in which Mark

Fernando J has held that A citizen is entitled to a proper investigation-one

which is fair competent timely and appropriate of a criminal complaint

whether it be by him or against him. The criminal law exists for the

protection of his rights of a persons property and reputation and lack of

due investigation will deprive him of the protection of the law.

Under chapter XXVII section 182 (1) of the Criminal procedure Code it is very

clearly stated how a Magistrate should act when an accused is produced

before him and it says very clearly that Where the accused is brought or

appears before the court the Magistrate shall if there is sufficient ground for

proceeding against the accused, frame a charge against the accused.

Therefore it is very clear that there has to be sufficient ground for the

Magistrate to frame a charge against an accused as stipulated under Section

182(1) of the CPC. At this point, this Court draws its attention to the case

Abdul Sameem v Bribery Commission CA No.1/90 decided on 09.10.1990 in

which Gunawardena J. has held that Furthermore whilst appreciating the

pressure on time and the large volume of work the Magistrates Courts are

called upon HANDLE, it is nevertheless important, that the rights of an

accused person are safeguarded and that he be brought to trial according to

accepted fundamental principles of criminal procedure.

Therefore as stated above every citizen has a right to be properly investigated

in to before being framed for a criminal offence.

Hence this Court is of the opinion that the learned High Court Judge has failed

to address his mind to the above legal principles before affirming the Order of

Page 7 of 7

the Magistrate. The learned High Court Judge has based his Order on the

delay of the appellant to file action before the High Court. But, this Court

notes that the delay referred to by the high Court Judge is minute in view of

the glaring violation of procedure adopted by the Magistrates Court.

As such the instant appeal is allowed and the order of the learned High Court

Judge dated 06.09.2016 is set aside. The instant judgment would prevail for

the appeals from 143/16 to 163/16.

Judge of the Court of Appeal.

I agree.

Neil Iddawala J.

Judge of the Court of Appeal.