==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

Orders in the nature of Writs of

Certiorari, Prohibition and

Mandamus under Article 140 of the

Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Ceylon Beverage Mart (Pvt) Ltd,

No. 215/9,

Ranthota Road, Kaludewala,

Matale.

CA (Writ) App. No. 667/2024

PETITIONER

Vs.

1. S. Sivaganga,

Divisional Secretary, Divisional Secretariat, Tellippalai. 1. Commissioner General of Excise,

Department of Excise, No. 353, Kotte Road, Rajagiriya. 2. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department, Hulfsdorp, Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

Before: M.C.B.S. Morais, J.

Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

2

Counsel:

Eraj de Silva, P.C., with Daminda Wijerathne, Nisith Abeysooriya and Naveed Ahamed

instructed by Dimuthu Kuruppuarachchi for the Petitioner.

Manohara Jayasinghe, D.S.G., and Medhaka Fernando, S.C., for the Respondents.

Argued on: 04.09.2026

Delivered on: 11.09.2026

3

Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Judgement

Introduction

This Application arose due to the refusal to issue licence by the Divisional Secretary (the 1st

Respondent), who carries out a duty under the Excise Ordinance, playing only an

administrative or ministerial role, and thus, has no authority to take a decision or exercise

discretionary power to withhold liquor licences, when the Commissioner General of Excise

(the 2nd Respondent) has directed him to issue such R.B.4/F.L.4 licence.

The Petitioner makes a serious complaint against the Respondents whose actions and inactions

not only affect the Petitioner, but also affects the entire environment, ecology, culture, and the

Nation in total.

After issuance of formal notice, the Respondents filed their Objections, and thereafter, this was

argued before me on 04.09.2026; hence, this judgement.

The Petitioner's complaint

The Petitioner, by his Petition, asserts that it is a body corporate incorporated under the

Companies Act, No. 07 of 2007 of Sri Lanka, and that it was incorporated for the purpose of

carrying on the business of wine stores at the address given in the caption; to establish its

Certificate of Incorporation and latest Form 1 and Form 20 for the registration of the company,

the said documents are annexed to the Petition and marked as P1(A) to P1(C).

The Petitioner further asserts that it became aware, in 2024, there had been notices published

by the Department of Excise calling for applications for the issuance of new liquor licences.

Upon becoming aware of the said advertisement and the calling for applications, the Petitioner,

having paid the due fees to obtain an application form from the Department of Excise, obtained

4

an application. The relevant Excise Notifications that laid down the regulations in relation to

the grant of such licenses are marked as P2(1) to P2(3).

Having duly filled the application and submitted the relevant supporting documents, the same

was submitted to the 2nd Respondent for the purpose of processing the application and issuing

the licence.

The Petitioner further asserts that along with the application, it submitted the Certificate of

Incorporation, the plan of the building where it proposed to carry on the business of the wine

store, and also the plan of the area to establish that there were no places of worship or schools

within a radius of 100 metres from the said place proposed for carrying on the business. It also

submitted certificates issued by the Police, the Excise Department and the Divisional

Secretariat to establish that none of the directors of the Petitioner had ever been convicted of

any offence under the Penal Code, the Excise Ordinance or any other law.

In addition to that, the Petitioner submitted the certificate of the Divisional Secretariat

certifying that the Petitioner was a suitable entity for the issuance of the licence.

However, after submitting the application to the 2nd Respondent, the 2nd Respondent called for

a report; while the report was called from the 1st Respondent by the 2nd Respondent, there had

been objections raised by certain parties.

Subsequently, the said objections were inquired into by an officer of the Excise Department,

who was a subordinate officer to the 2nd Respondent. After considering the objections and

conducting the inquiry, and since the objections were found to be baseless, the Petitioner was

cleared of any impediment. As such, the 2nd Respondent, having processed the application,

decided to issue the same accordingly. Thereby, he issued the letter marked as P4 to the 1st

Respondent, directing the issuance of the licence through the subordinate officer of the Excise

Department in charge of the area where the Petitioner intended to carry on his business and to

5

the officer in charge of the Police Station of the area where the proposed liquor shop was

situated. Additional correspondence by the 2nd Respondent to the Secretary to the Ministry of

Finance, Economic Stabilisation and National Policies, the Petitioner, and to a subordinate

officer of the 2nd Respondent in Jaffna are marked and annexed to the Petition as P5(1) to P5(3),

respectively.

However, following this, the Petitioner was informed by the 2nd Respondent to pay the relevant

fees. Accordingly, the Petitioner paid the licence fee and other relevant fees amounting to a

sum of Rs. 10,800,000/- (Ten Million Eight Hundred Thousand Rupees), and the Petitioner

annexed documents to establish the same, which are marked as P6(1) to P6(4). Following this,

the 2nd Respondent had sent another letter dated 25.09.2024, marked as P7 annexed to the

Petition, to the 1st Respondent directing the issuance of the relevant licence to the Petitioner.

However, the 1st Respondent thereafter refused to issue the licence.

Despite the attempts made by the Petitioner to obtain the licence, and having failed to do so,

the Petitioner sought the intervention of this Court.

Objections

The Respondents filed their Statement of Objections, along with the documents annexed as R1

and R3, in which certain circulars had been issued by the Secretary to His Excellency the

President.

Arguments

When this matter came up for argument on 04.09.2026, the Counsel for the Petitioner of this

Application, Eraj de Silva, P.C., was heard in support of the Application, and Mr. Manohara

Jayasinghe was heard in opposition thereto. Mr. Manohara Jayasinghe's view was that, since

licences had been issued in similar cases consequent to and Writs of Mandamus had been issued

in those cases by this Court compelling the authority to issue licences in similar circumstances,

6

the Respondents had no further objections to raise except to bring to the attention of Court the

mere fact of the stay order given in the Fundamental Rights case.

However, upon being questioned, Mr. Jayasinghe's observation was that the stay order issued

in the said Fundamental Rights application by His Lordship Justice Kodagoda was not an

impediment to the issuance of any licence if the law was properly followed.

Writs lie

In these circumstances, having considered the applications made by the Petitioner to obtain the

R.B.4/F.L.4 licence in response to the advertisements made in P2(1) to P2(3), the said

application, submitted along with the supporting documents, was accepted on the basis that it

was duly submitted.

The 2nd Respondent then followed the proper procedure by calling for objections. Thereby,

when objections were raised, the same were inquired into, and subsequently, the Petitioner was

cleared of the said objections.

Having decided to issue the licence to the Petitioner, the 2nd Respondent issued the document

marked as P4, a letter dated 13.09.2024, addressed to the 1st Respondent directing him to issue

the licence, as the person empowered as the licensing authority.

Thereafter, the Petitioner paid the relevant fees for the annual licence, including a one-time

payment for obtaining the R.B.4/F.L.4 licence, the security deposit, access fee, and the security

deposit for the AFL03 supplementary licence, as evidenced by the documents marked P6(1) to

P6(4).

The 1st Respondent is guilty

Nevertheless, the 1st Respondent has failed to issue the licence; as such, it is my view that, in

several cases, this Court itself has held that once the 2nd Respondent, being the final authority

7

under the Excise Department, decided to issue the licence, it has to be issued through the

Divisional Secretary of the area where the particular licence holder intends to carry on the

business.

Accordingly, in this case, the 1st Respondent is the one who should issue the physical licence.

In this instance, he cannot exercise any discretion as to whether to issue the licence or not, once

the direction is given by the final authority, namely, the 2nd Respondent, the Director General

of Excise. Thus, his role in the process is merely administrative, whereby he has only to carry

out the said duty entrusted to him by the 2nd Respondent, as the law requires him to perform.

Hence, refusing to perform such a duty amounts to a violation of the Act. Consequently,

because of his conduct, the whole legal process had to be activated by the Petitioner, involving

the expenditure of considerable money, time and resources, without obtaining the licence, for

at least the last two years.

In view of the above, it is my view that a Writ of Mandamus should be issued against the 1st

Respondent to issue the licence. I further hold that the 1st Respondent's decision and conduct

in not issuing and withholding the licence would constitute conduct that is ultra vires,

capricious and irrational.

It is also my view that the 1st Respondent is culpable of violating the duty entrusted to him and

empowered upon him to carry out as an administrative function. Therefore, by failing to

perform such duty, he has remained silent.

For the foregoing reasons, it is my view that he is responsible for such conduct and, as such,

costs should be charged against him.

Conclusion

For the reasons adumbrated above, I grant relief as prayed for in prayers (b) and (c) of the

Petition.

8

Accordingly, I order costs in the sum of Rs. 157,500/- (One Hundred and Fifty-Seven Thousand

Five Hundred Rupees) payable by the 1st Respondent to the Petitioner.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

M.C.B.S. Morais, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL