==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 9

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of Section 320 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 16 of 1979.

The Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12. Court of Appeal Complainant Case No. CA HCC 212/2023

Vs.

High Court of Mannar Case No. HC/MN/50/2019 Joseph Marin Jeromi Mark Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Joseph Marin Jeromi Mark Accused-Appellant Vs. The Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12.

Complainant-Respondent

Page 2 of 9

Before: B. Sasi Mahendran, J. Amal Ranaraja, J.

Counsel: U. R. De Silva, P.C. with Chathura Weeramantry, Thilini Atapattu, for the Accused-Appellant. Azard Navavi, A.S.G. for the Respondent.

Argued on: 03.12.2025 Judgment on: 19.01.2026

JUDGMENT

AMAL RANARAJA, J.

1. The accused appellant (hereinafter referred to as the “Appellant”) has

been indicted in the High Court of Mannar in High Court case number

HC/MN/50/19.

The charges in the indictment are as follows:

Charge 01

That on or about August 08, 2015, within the jurisdiction of this Court,

the appellant entered the house of Jesuraj Mary Anne Yalini Andrew

without her permission; and thereby committed the offence of house

trespass punishable under section 434 of the Penal Code.

Charge 02

During the same course of transaction as above, the appellant caused

injuries to one Jesuraj Mary Anne Yalini Andrew by hurting her with a

knife and under such circumstance with such intention or knowledge

Page 3 of 9

that the said act would cause death; and thereby committed the offence

of attempted murder punishable under section 300 of the Penal Code.

Charge 03

During the same course of transaction as above, the appellant caused

grave injury to one Jesuraj Guna Dushyanthini Andrew by attacking her

with a knife; and thereby committed an offence punishable under section

317 of the Penal Code.

2. At the conclusion of the trial, the learned High Court Judge has

convicted the appellant of the first, third together with the amended

second charge and sentenced the appellant as follows:

i. Sentenced to one year rigorous imprisonment in respect of the first

charge.

ii. Sentenced to four years rigorous imprisonment in respect of the

amended second charge and also imposed a fine of Rs. 15000.00 with

a term of three months simple imprisonment in default.

iii. Sentenced to two years rigorous imprisonment in respect of the third

charge and imposed a fine of Rs. 15000.00 with a term of three

months simple imprisonment in default.

iv. The appellant has been directed to pay a sum of Rs. 500000.00 and

100000.00 respectively as compensation to the injured named in the

amended second charge and the third charge with a term of six

months simple imprisonment each in default.

v. It has also been directed that the substantial terms of rigorous

imprisonment shall run concurrently.

3. The appellant aggrieved by the conviction, disputed judgment together

with the sentencing order has preferred the instant appeal to this Court.

Page 4 of 9

4. When the matter was taken up for argument, the learned President’s

Counsel for the appellant informed this court that the appellant was not

disputing the conviction but only the sentencing order.

5. In addressing the appellant’s personal circumstances, the learned

President’s Counsel has emphasized that the appellant is a 46 year old

first time offender. Crucially, the learned President’s Counsel has also

drawn the court’s attention to the appellant’s role as a father of two

dependent children.

6. Should the appellant be incarcerated, it has been contended that these

children would face significant and potentially irreparable challenges

including financial hardships, emotional instability and critical absence

of a parent to provide for their upbringing and well-being.

7. Furthermore, it has been argued that the appellant possesses specialized

expertise as a teacher in a crucial subject and his incarceration would

regrettably deprive the local student community of his unique and

essential knowledge.

8. The learned Additional Solicitor General has highlighted to this Court the

calculated cruelty of the offences, its meticulous planning and the

appellant’s vengeful motive that has driven him to commit those acts.

9. In such circumstances, it has also been argued by the learned Additional

Solicitor General that it is imperative for the Court to consider these

aspects when sentencing the appellant convicted of causing serious

offences.

10. In Asan Mohammed Rizwan v Attorney General, MC Pelamadulla Case

No. 33332, HC Ratnapura Case No. HC 25/2010, Court of Appeal

Page 5 of 9

Revision No. CA [PHC] APN 141/2013 decided on March 25, 2015,

Chitrasiri, J. has discussed a gamut of issues regarding sentencing,

stating the following:

“Sentencing is an important aspect in the administration of criminal

justice system. A sentence ranges from death penalty to the mere

censure in the form of good behavior bond or probation. There are

multiple considerations relevant to the determination of a sentence.

The most important consideration is the seriousness of the crime.

Jurisprudentially, this position is persuasive despite pragmatic

difficulties associated with matching the harshness of the sanction

to the severity of the crime…...”

“Therefore, it is necessary for the judges to keep in mind the

objectives of sentencing and also the sentencing guidelines, in order

to arrive at the correct and appropriate decision. Objectives of

sentencing include the following:

(i) To punish offenders to an extent and in a manner, which is just in

all the circumstances;

(ii) To protect the community from offender;

(iii) To deter offenders or other persons from committing offences of the

same or similar nature;

(iv) To establish conditions so that rehabilitation of offenders may be

promoted or facilitated;

(v) To signify that the court and the community denounce the

commission of such offences;

(vi) To maintain the required standards of societal expectations in

making decisions;

Page 6 of 9

(vii) To prevent overcrowding prisons also could be considered as one

such objective particularly when it comes to developing countries

such as ours.”

“I will now advert to the other aspects that are necessary to consider

before a sentence is determined. Those can be categorized as follows:

(a) The maximum and the minimum (if any) penalty prescribed for the

offence;

(b) The nature and gravity/seriousness of the particular offence.

(c) The offender's culpability and degree of his/her responsibility for

the offence;

(d) Mental state of the accused at the time the offence was committed;

(e) Evidence as to pre-arrangement for the commission of the offence;

(f) The impact of the offence on any victim and the injury, loss or

damage caused as a result of the offence committed;

(g) Whether the offender pleaded guilty to the offence and if so, the

stage in the proceedings at which the offender did so or the stage at

which it was indicated;

(h) The conduct of the offender during the trial as an indication of

remorse or the lack of remorse;

(i) Any action taken by the offender to make restitution of the injury,

loss or damage arising from the offence, including his or her

willingness to comply with any order for restitution that a court may

consider.

(j) The offender's previous character, good or bad;

(k) Imprisonment should be used when no other sentence is adequate;

(l) Proportionality between the crime and the sentence;

(m) Possibility of reforming the offender;

(n) To ensure consistency in deciding sentences;

Page 7 of 9

(o) Presence of any aggravating or mitigating factors concerning the

offender or any other circumstance relevant to the commission of

the offence.”

11. At the same time, there are statutory provisions that govern the

sentencing of a convicted individual. One such provision is section 303 of

the Criminal Procedure Code Act No. 15 of 1979 which allows for the

possibility of suspending a custodial sentence.

Matters that are to be considered prior to suspending a custodial

sentence are stipulated as follows:

(a) The maximum penalty prescribed for the offence in respect of which

the sentence is imposed

(b) The nature and gravity of the offence

(c) The offender's culpability and degree of responsibility for the offence

(d) The offender's previous character

(e) Any injury, loss or damage resulting directly from the commission of

the offence

(f) The presence of any aggravating or mitigating factor concerning the

offender

(g) The need to punish the offender to an extent in a manner, which is

just in all circumstances

(h) The need to deter the offender or other persons from committing

offences of the same or of a similar character

(i) The need to manifest the denunciation by the court of the type of

conduct in which the offender was engaged in

(j) The need to protect the victim or the community from the offender

(k) The fact that the person accused of the offence pleaded guilty to the

offence and such person is sincerely and truly repentant; or

Page 8 of 9

(l) A combination of two or more of the above

The instances where a custodial sentence cannot be suspended are also

stipulated as follows,

(a) A mandatory minimum sentence of imprisonment has been

prescribed by law for the offence in respect of which the sentence is

imposed; or

(b) The offender is serving, or is yet to serve, a term of imprisonment

that has not been suspended; or

(c) The offence was committed when the offender was subject to a

probation order or a conditional release or discharge; or

(d) The term of imprisonment imposed, or the aggregate terms of

imprisonment where the offender is convicted for more than one

offence in the same proceedings, exceeds two years.

12. The offences for which the appellant has been convicted are profoundly

serious. They have not been spontaneous acts but rather premeditated

offences deliberately planned by the appellant. The grave nature of these

offences is further underscored by the fact that they have resulted in

serious injuries to two individuals.

13. Moreover, the appellant’s actions have been driven by a clear motive of

vengeance. These factors, the inherent gravity of the offences, their

premeditated nature, the resulting severe injuries, and the vindictive

motive collectively constitute significant aggravating circumstances. It is

against this backdrop the learned High Court Judge has carefully

considered the mitigating factors presented by the appellant prior to

imposing the disputed sentencing order.

Page 9 of 9

14. In those circumstances, I proceed to affirm the disputed sentencing order

and dismiss the appeal.

Appeal dismissed.

I make no order regarding costs.

15. The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgment to the High

Court of Mannar for compliance.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

B. SASI MAHENDRAN, J.

I agree

Judge of the Court of Appeal