==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0057/2021

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979, read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal No: 1. Heethakage Asiri Prasanga Silva CA/HCC/ 0057/2021 alias Ranga High Court of Negombo 2. Warnakulasuriya Jude Napoleon Case No. HC/343/2006 Fernando

ACCUSED

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT NOW BETWEEN

Heethakage Asiri Prasanga Silva alias Ranga ACCUSED-APPELLANT Vs.

CA/HCC/0057/2021

2

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

COUNSEL : Delan De Silva for the Appellant.

Sudharshana De Silva, ASG, PC with

Shehan Mahaboob for the Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 05/12/2025 DECIDED ON : 16/01/2026 *******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) with the 2nd Accused were indicted by the Attorney General for

committing the offences as mentioned below.

1. On or about the 1st of January 2005 at Thaladuwa, the Accused

kidnapped Warnakulasooriya Nishan Sanjeewa Thamel from his

CA/HCC/0057/2021

3

lawful guardians and thereby committed an offence punishable under

Section 354 of the Penal Code.

2. In the course of the same transaction, the Accused committed the

murder of Warnakulasooriya Nishan Sanjeewa Thamel which is an

offence punishable under Section 296 of the Penal Code.

3. In the course of the same transaction, the Accused robbed a bracelet

worn by Warnakulasooriya Nishan Sanjeewa Thamel which is an

offence punishable under Section 380 of the Penal Code.

The trial commenced before the High Court Judge of Negombo as the

Appellant and the 2nd Accused opted for a non-jury trial. The prosecution

had led 06 witnesses and marked productions P1 to 8 and closed the case.

The Learned High Court Judge, being satisfied that the evidence presented

by the prosecution warranted a case to answer, called for the defence and

explained the rights of the accused. The Appellant had given evidence from

the witness box and the 2nd Accused had made a dock statement and called

a witness on his behalf. Thereafter, both had closed their case.

After considering the evidence presented by both parties, the learned High

Court Judge had convicted the Appellant and the 2nd Accused as charged

and sentenced them on 21/09/2011 as follows:

• For 1st count each had been sentenced to 7 years rigorous

imprisonment with a fine of Rs.10,000/-. This is subject to a

default sentence of 12 months simple imprisonment.

• For the 2nd count both had been sentenced to death.

• For the 3rd count each had been sentenced to 10 years rigorous

imprisonment with a fine of Rs.10, 000/-.This is subject to a

default sentence of 12 months simple imprisonment.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and the sentence, the Appellant

and the 2nd Accused had preferred an appeal to the Court of Appeal under

case No. 134/2011. After considering the said appeal, His Lordships of the

CA/HCC/0057/2021

4

Court of Appeal by their judgment dated 09.12.2016 had acquitted the 2nd

Accused and reverted the case back to the High Court for a re-trial against

the Appellant.

This appeal therefore, arises from the judgement of the re-trial held against

the Appellant. The re-trial had commenced on 17.07.2018. After reading the

indictment, the Appellant preferred a non-jury trial. The prosecution had led

7 witnesses and marked P1 to P7 and closed their case.

On 08.09.2020 the indictment was amended by removing the name of the

2nd Accused. The learned High Court Judge, after considering the evidence

led by the prosecution had decided to call for the defence. The Appellant

opted to give a statement from the dock and closed his case. The learned

High Court Judge, having considered the evidence presented by both parties,

convicted the Appellant as charged and sentenced him as follows:

• First Count – Five years rigorous imprisonment with a fine of Rs.

10, 000/-.This carries a default sentence of 6 months simple

imprisonment.

• Second count – Imposed death sentence.

• Third Count – eight years rigorous imprisonment with a fine of Rs.

10,000/-. This carries a default sentence of 6 months simple

imprisonment.

Further, the learned High Court Judge had ordered the sentence imposed to

run consecutively. The Learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this

court that the Appellant had given his consent to argue this matter in his

absence. At the hearing, the Appellant was connected via the Zoom platform

from prison.

CA/HCC/0057/2021

5

The Appellant had raised the following grounds of appeal:

1. The learned Trial Judge has erred in law on the principle relating

to Section 27(1) of the Evidence Ordinance with regard to the

recovery of the body of the deceased and his jewellery.

2. The learned Trial Judge has failed to consider the discrepancies in

the evidence of the prosecution.

3. The learned Trial Judge has erred in law in concluding that the

prosecution has proved its case beyond reasonable doubt.

The background of the case albeit briefly is as follows:

PW2, Joshila Fernando is the mother of the deceased. According to her on

the day of the incident, the deceased had gone to play wearing a gold bracelet

around 10.30am but had not returned home. As such, the entire village had

launched a search for the child. The Appellant had also joined them but the

deceased could not be found. Around 12.00 noon on the following day, the

dead body of the deceased was recovered by the police. Additionally, the

bracelet worn by the deceased had also been recovered. This witness had

identified the bracelet of the deceased. According to her the Appellant was

handed over to the police by the village people.

PW1, Anton Thamel, the father of the deceased also narrated the same.

According to PW4, Chaminda, the Appellant and the 2nd Accused had asked

him on the date of the incident around 2.00pm whether he knows a place to

pawn a bracelet. A bracelet was recovered upon the statement made by the

Appellant. Both PW1 and PW2 had identified the same.

PW7, IP Dharmadasa had been the investigating officer in this case.

According to him, the first complaint was received from PW1 on 01.01.2005

at 3.00pm. The Appellant was arrested at about 8.45pm on the same day

upon an information provided by an informant. His statement was recorded

CA/HCC/0057/2021

6

at about 8.00am on 02.01.2005. Upon his statement, the dead body of the

deceased and a bracelet were recovered by the police.

PW12, the JMO gave evidence upon the post mortem report prepared by the

Consultant JMO Priyanjith Perera who had gone abroad at the time of the

trial. The JMO had noted 14 injuries on the body of the deceased. The JMO

had opined that compression of the neck due to manual strangulation had

caused the death of the deceased. Injuries No. 5,6,7,8,9,10 and 11 on the

neck area are consistent with strangulation by hand.

In this case, the injuries sustained by the deceased play a decisive role in

the determination of this case as to whether the Appellant had actuated a

murderous intention or not. Hence, the circumstantial evidence pertaining

to the injuries found on the deceased’s body need to be discussed in detail.

According to the JMO, there were 7 oval and round faint bluish marks seen

on the front of the neck. 5 marks were seen over the left side of the body of

jaw bone between the point of the chin and left angle. They were 1 cm x 0.8

cm., 1.2 cm x 1.5 cm., and 0.6 cm x 0.6 cm, in size respectively from right

to left. There was a round contusion of the soft tissues under the skin and

above-mentioned marks over the left side body of the mandible, 2.5 cm x 2.2

cm in size. There were two marks on the right side of the neck immediately

below the angle of the jaw, 2.5 cm x 3.5. and 2 cm x 1.3 cm. in size

respectively from right to left. There was a contusion of the soft tissues

beneath the skin over the right ala of the thyroid 1 cm in diameter. The left

thyro-hyoid muscle was contused, 2.5 cm x 0.8 cm in size. The left superior

cornu of the thyroid was congenitally missing. There were no fractures of the

hyoid, cricoid or tracheal rings.

These injuries clearly indicated how the deceased had been strangled to

death.

It is trite law that the burden of proof is on the prosecution in all criminal

cases.

CA/HCC/0057/2021

7

In The Queen v. K.A. Santin Singho 65 NLR 447 the court held that:

“It is fundamental that the burden is on the prosecution. Whether the

evidence the prosecution relies on is direct or circumstantial, the burden

is the same. This burden is not altered by the failure of the appellant to

give evidence and explain the circumstances.

In this case no direct evidence is available but the case rests on

circumstantial evidence.

Circumstantial evidence is proof of a fact or even a set of facts from which

someone could infer the facts in question. It is a fact that somebody could

be convicted of a crime based on circumstantial evidence. Further, with the

relatively common occurrence of false testimony and mistaken identification,

circumstantial proof can be more reliable than direct evidence.

In Premawansha v. Attorney General 2009 [2] SLR 205 the court held

that:

“In a case of circumstantial evidence if an inference of guilt is to be

drawn, such an inference must be the one and only irresistible and

inescapable conclusion that the accused committed the offence”.

In AG v. Potta Naufer & others 2007 2 SLR 144 the court held that:

“When relying on circumstantial evidence to establish the charge of

conspiracy to commit murder and the charge of murder, the proved items

of circumstantial evidence when taken together must irresistibly point

towards the only inference that the accused committed the offence”.

In the case of King Vs. Gunaratne 47 NLR 145, it was held:

“In a case of circumstantial evidence, the facts given in evidence may,

taken cumulatively, be sufficient to rebut the presumption of innocence,

although each fact, when taken separately, may be a circumstance only

of suspicion. The jury are entitled to draw inferences unfavourable to an

accused where he is not called to establish an innocent explanation of

CA/HCC/0057/2021

8

evidence given by the prosecution, which, without such explanation,

tells for his guilt.”

In the first ground of appeal the Appellant contended that the learned Trial

Judge has erred in law on the principle relating to Section 27(1) of the

Evidence Ordinance with regard to the recovery of the body of the deceased

and his jewellery.

Generally, a statement made by an accused person is inadmissible against

him. An exception to this rule is the admissibility of statements under

Section 27 of the Evidence Ordinance where a portion of a statement made

to a police officer, which leads to the discovery of a fact can be led in evidence.

Section 27(1) of the Evidence Ordinance states;

“Provided that, when any fact is deposed to as discovered in consequence

of information received from a person accused of any offence, in the

custody of a police officer, so much of such information, whether it

amounts to a confession or not, as relates distinctly to the fact thereby

discovered may be proved”.

In Queen v Tennakoon 60 NLR 313 the Court held that:

“(i) that the discovery of a -witness is not the discovery of a fact within the

meaning of the section. A person is not a "fact" within the meaning of that

word in section 3 of the Evidence Ordinance. It is only when a " fact " has

been discovered in consequence of information given by an accused person

and when a witness has given evidence to that effect that so much of such

information as relates distinctly to the fact thereby discovered may be

proved”.

CA/HCC/0057/2021

9

In De Saram v The Republic of Sri Lanka [2002] 1 SLR 288 the Court held

that:

(2) The fact that the police learnt from the two witnesses Sanjeewa and

Piyalal where the body was buried did not take the same information given

by the accused out of the purview of section 27 (1) of the Evidence

Ordinance; for the basis of admissibility of the accused statement was not

that the accused confessed to the crime but the fact that he knew where

the deceased's body was buried. Evidence of the accused's information

was therefore admissible under section 27 (1) of the Evidence Ordinance.

In the case of R v Jinadasa (1950) NLR 529 it was held:

“The ‘information’ referred to in section'27 of the Evidence Ordinance is the

oral statement of the accused himself, whereas the document

contemplated in section 122 (3) of the Criminal Procedure Code is not a

statement by the accused but another person’s record of an oral statement

which is alleged to have been made by the accused. Therefore, the

conclusion which the majority of us reach is that there is nothing in section

122 (3) which acts as a bar to the full operation of the provisions of section

27 of the Evidence Ordinance or the admission of an oral statement made

by an accused person to a police officer for the ' purposes of section 27.

There is nothing in section 122 (3) which prohi bits oral evidence being

given of so much of the statement made by an accused which is relevant

under section 27 of the Evidence Ordinance as relates distinctly to a

relevant fad thereby discovered.”

The learned Counsel for the Appellant strenuously argued that the learned

High Court Judge should not have convicted the Appellant solely on the basis

of Section 27(1) recovery as the learned High Court Judge had held that the

pawning request of the bracelet does not implicate the Appellant with the

case. I think this is a clear misdirection as PW4 had clearly stated that the

Appellant had requested him to show a place to pawn a bracelet. A bracelet

CA/HCC/0057/2021

10

was recovered upon his statement by the police. PW1 and PW2 had identified

the bracelet worn by the deceased.

Hence, it is clearly manifest of the evidence led by the prosecution that this

is not a case that solely rests on Section 27(1) recovery, but also fortified with

incriminating evidence led against the Appellant. Therefore, it is incorrect to

say that this case was decided only with the evidence led under Section 27(1)

of the Evidence Ordinance against the Appellant.

In the second ground of appeal the learned Counsel for the Appellant contend

that the learned Trial Judge has failed to consider the discrepancies in the

evidence of the prosecution.

The legal provisions and various judicial precedents have made it clear that

that contradiction is one of the ways to shake the credit of a witness. Not all

contradictions could shake the prosecution case. Only those contradictions

which are significant and relevant in the context of the case are capable to

raise doubt regarding the prosecution case. It is a question of fact decided

upon by the courts.

In The Attorney General v. Sandanam Pitchai Mary Theresa [2011] 2 SLR

292 the court held that:

“Whilst internal contradictions or discrepancies would ordinarily affect the

trustworthiness of the witness statement, it is well established that the

Court must exercise its judgment on the nature of the inconsistency or

contradiction and whether they are true material to the facts in issue”.

Justice Thakkar in Bhoginbhai Hirigibhai v State of Gujarat 1983 AIR SC

753 stated:

“Discrepancies which do not go to the matter and shake the basic version

of the witnesses therefore cannot be annexed with undue importance. More

so when the all-important probabilities-factor echoes in favour of the

version narrated by the witnesses.”

CA/HCC/0057/2021

11

Although, PW1 had stated that the Appellant was handed over to the police

by the village people, PW7 the investigating officer had said that he was

arrested upon receiving an information from an informant. Acting on that

information the police had arrested the Appellant at 8.35pm on the date of

the incident. Hence, the learned Counsel for the Appellant argues that this

discrepancy certainly would affect the core of the case.

Next, the learned Counsel contends that as per the evidence given by PW1,

the Appellant had assisted the search of the victim until the evening. But

PW4 said that the Appellant had met him to discuss about pawning the

bracelet at about 2.00pm on the date of the incident.

Although, PW1 had stated that the Appellant had assisted the search of the

deceased, he was not sure as to what time the Appellant had left them.

Although, PW1 had stated that the 2nd Accused had indicated the location of

the deceased’s body and the bracelet, it was subsequently stated that both

the Appellant and the 2nd Accused had stated the location of the dead body

of the child and the bracelet.

In this case the inter se contradictions highlighted are not material and are

minor discrepancies which certainly are not going to affect the credibility and

the root of the case. The High Court Judge had correctly disregarded such

minor discrepancies when considering the evidence as a whole to arrive at

his decision. Further, it is to be noted that the prosecution witnesses had

given evidence after 13 years of the incident.

In the third ground of appeal, the learned Counsel for the Appellant

contended that the learned Trial Judge has erred in law in concluding that

the prosecution has proved case beyond reasonable doubt.

In this case the prosecution had led plausible evidence against the Appellant.

The learned Additional Solicitor General very correctly argued that although

the prosecution had led incriminating evidence against the Appellant, he had

failed to offer an explanation regarding the recovery of the dead body and the

CA/HCC/0057/2021

12

gold bracelet worn by the deceased at the time of disappearance from the

room where the Appellant lived on rent. Hence, I hold that there is no merit

in all grounds raised on behalf of the Appellant.

As discussed under the appeal grounds advanced by the Appellant, the

prosecution had adduced strong and incriminating circumstantial evidence

against the Appellant. The Learned High Court Judge had very correctly

analyzed all the evidence presented by both parties and had concluded that

all the circumstances are consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of

the Appellant and totally inconsistent with his innocence.

As the Learned High Court Judge had rightly convicted the Appellant for the

charges levelled against him in the indictment, I affirm the conviction and

dismiss the Appeal of the Appellant.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgment to the High

Court of Negombo along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL