1

~N THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE

DE~~JtOC~ATIC SQCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for mandates in the nature of Writs of Certiorari and Mandamus in terms of Article 140 of the constitution.

CA (vVrit) Application No. 228/ 2013

N H G Damith Saliya Nanayakkara,

No. 564/3,

Siyambalagaswadiya,

Polonnaruwa.

PETITIONER

1. Mr. Nimal Abeysiri,

District Secretary of Polonnaruwa,

District Secretariat,

Polonnaruwa.

2. E ~/1 0 5 Ekanayake,

Di'.fis:onal Secretary,

2

Divisional Secretariat,

Thamankaduwa.

3. R P R Rajapakshe,

Commissioner General of Lands,

Department of Commissioner General of

Lands,

No. 07,

Hector Kobbekaduwa Mawatha,

Colombo 07.

4. Nanayakkarawasam Hikkaduwa Gamage

Sarath Kumara

No. 558/2,

Aluthwewa,

Thamankaduwa,

Polonnaruwa.

5. Nanayakkarawasam Hikkaduwa Gamage

Hamlet,

C/O, N H H Jeewalatha,

No. 29,

3

Aluthwewa,

Polonnaruwa.

RESPONDENTS

Before: Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J (PICA)

P. Padman Surasena J

Counsel: Rasika Dissanayke for the Petitioner.

Suranga Wimalasena, SSC for the 1st to 3rd Respondents.

Sanjeewa Dassanayake for the 5th Respondent.

Argued on: 2016-06-15

Decided on: 2016-08-09

4

JUDGMENT

P Padman Surasena J

The permit marked and produced in this case as POI was originally issued

to Nanayakkara Hikkaduwa Gamage James Appuhami with regard to a

paddy land, the extent of which is 5 acres, 3 roods and 8 perches.

The said N H G James Appuhami had nominated one of his sons N H G

Wilson as his successor.

His Excellency the President, upon said N H G James Appuhami duly

complying with the conditions stipulated in the said permit, had issued a

grant in his name in the year 1982. The said grant is marked and produced

as P 02. The said N H G James Appuhami again nominated his son N H G

Wilson as the successor to the said paddy land allocated to him by the said

grant.

Said N H G James Appuhami, the owner of the said paddy land, died on

i990-06-22 leaving behind his nominee N H G Wilson.

The 2nd Respondent (the Divisional Secretary) had approved the transfer of

ownership of the said paddy land to the said nominee N H G Wilson by the

letter dated 2003-06-09 marked P 04. Said N H G Wilson nominated his

5

son who is the Petitioner in this case and his brother N H G Ranjan as the

successors of the said paddy land in terms of the provisions of the Land

Development Ordinance. These nominations have been duly registered on

2003-09-12.

Said N H G Wilson died on 2006-05-05 leaving the above 2 nominees as

successors to the said paddy land.

The complaint made by the Petitioner to this court is that this land has

been purportedly transferred in the name of one N H A Karunasena in

violation of the provisions of the Land Development Ordinance. It is the

position of the Petitioner that the 2nd respondent (Divisional Secretary)

completely disregarding the specific instructions given by the 3rd

Respondent (Commissioner General of Land) and knowing very well that

the Petitioner and the 4th Respondent are the lawful owners of the said

paddy land, acting in collusion with the 5th Respondent has illegally and

unlawfully transferred the said paddy land in the name of the 5th

Respondent without any notice to the Petitioner.

The original Permit holder N H G James Appuhami's eldest son is N H G

Francis who is the father of the 5th Respondent. It is to be noted that said

6

N H G Francis had died in the year 1991 (his death certificate is marked as

5 R 5 (ii). According to 5 R 2 (Marriage certificate) Godakande

Kankanamge Misinona is the wife of N H G James Appuhami. The said

Godakande Kankanamge Misinona had died in 1983 according to the death

certificate marked and produced as 5 R 5 (i).

It is the position of the 2nd Respondent that he gave the succession rights

to the 5th Respondent as he is the son of the eldest son of the original

permit holder. The 2nd Respondent has based his assertion that the 5th

Respondent is the rightful owner of this paddy land according to Section 72

of the Ordinance. That is the purported basis the 5th Respondent has put

forward to make a claim to this land.

According to Section 49 of the Ordinance, where a permit holder, or an

owner of a holding, has died leaving behind his spouse, upon the failure of

such spouse to succeed to the land or holding, or upon the death of such

spouse, a person nominated as successor by such permit holder or owner

shall succeed to the land or holding. Therefore it is clear in this instance

7

persons who shall succeed as the lawful ownersto this land are the

Petitioner and the 4th Respondent.

As has been mentioned above, the basis 5th Respondent is claiming the

land is section 72 of the Ordinance. However section 72 of the Ordinance

comes in to operation only if such permit holder or owner dies without

leaving behind his or her spouse, or if such permit holder or owner dies

leaving behind his or her spouse and such spouse fails to succeed to the

land or upon the death of such spouse. Since there is a nominated person

and the said nominated person has succeeded to the land, section 72 of

the Ordinance will have no application at this instance. Further, the 5th

Respondent does not state anywhere that either he or his father was in

possession of this land at any time.

For the above reasons we hold that in this instance it is the Petitioner and

the 4th Respondent who are the lawful owners of this land. Therefore the

action taken by the 2nd Respondent deciding that the 5th Respondent is the

successor to this land is illegal a'nd hence is ultra vires the powers vested in'

him by the Land Development Ordinance.

In these circumstances we issue:

II

fr

.

8

a) a writ of certiorari to quash the purported decision of the 1st to 3rd

Respondents to transfer the said paddy lands in the name of the 5th

Respondent as it is reflected in the extract marked P 14.

b) a writ of mandamus to compel the 1st, 2nd and 3rd Respondents to

cancel the said transfer of the paddy land in the name of the 5th

respondent which appears in the extract marked P 14.

No cost is ordered.

Application is allowed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J

I agree,

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL