==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

Orders in the nature of Writs of

Certiorari, Prohibition and Mandamus

under Article 140 of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Nalaka Indrajith Udugampola,

Former Sub-Inspector,

C/O S.A.K. Jayasinghe, Rathmatiya Road, Rikillagaskada.

PETITIONER

CA (Writ) App. No. 420/2023

Vs.

1. Justice Anil Goonaratne,

Chairman, Administrative Appeals Tribunal, No. 35, Silva Lane, Rajagiriya.

Hon. Justice K.T. Chistrasiri, Chairman, Administrative Appeals Tribunal, No. 35, Silva Lane, Rajagiriya.

SUBSTITUTED 1ST RESPONDENT

2

2. Mr. A. Gnanathasan, P.C.,

Member, Administrative Appeals Tribunal, No. 35, Silva Lane, Rajagiriya.

Mr. J.J. Rathnasiri, Member, Administrative Appeals Tribunal, No. 35 Silva Lane, Rajagiriya.

SUBSTITUTED 2nd RESPONDENT

3. Mr. G.P. Abeykeerthi,

Member, Administrative Appeals Tribunal, No. 35, Silva Lane, Rajagiriya.

Mrs. S. Nandasekaran, Member, Administrative Appeals Tribunal, No. 35, Silva Lane, Rajagiriya.

SUBSTITUTED 3RD RESPONDENT

4. Mr. K.B.D.M.P.B. Dissanayake,

Member, Administrative Appeals Tribunal, No. 35, Silva Lane, Rajagiriya.

Mr. P. Waduge, Secretary, Administrative Appeals Tribunal, No. 35, Silva Lane, Rajagiriya.

SUBSTITUTED 4TH RESPONDENT

5. Mr. E.W.M. Lalith Ekanayake

(Retd. High Court Judge), Chairman, National Police Commission, Block 9, BMICH Premises,

3

Bauddhaloka Mawatha, Colombo 07.

6. Mrs. D.K. Renuka Ekanayake

(Retd. Secretary to Ministeries), Member, National Police Commission, Block 9, BMICH Premises, Bauddhaloka Mawatha, Colombo 07.

7. Mr. Kanapathipillai Karunaharan

(Retd. District Secretary), Member, National Police Commission, Block 9, BMICH Premises, Bauddhaloka Mawatha, Colombo 07.

8. Mr. G.P. Sarath Gamini De Silva

(Retd. Senior Deputy Inspector General of Police), Member, National Police Commission, Block 9, BMICH Premises, Bauddhaloka Mawatha, Colombo 07.

Mr. Jayantha Jayasinghe (Retd. Deputy Inspector General of Police), Member, National Police Commission, Block 9, BMICH Premises, Bauddhaloka Mawatha, Colombo 07.

SUBSTITUTED 8TH RESPONDENT

9. Mr. Dilshan Kapila Jayasuriya

(Attorney-at-Law), Member, National Police Commission, Block 9, BMICH Premises, Bauddhaloka Mawatha, Colombo 07.

4

9A. Mr. A.A.M. Illiyas, P.C.,

Member, National Police Commission, Block 9, BMICH Premises, Bauddhaloka Mawatha, Colombo 07.

10. Mrs. Tharmara D. Perera,

Secretary, National Police Commission, Block 9, BMICH Premises, Bauddhaloka Mawatha, Colombo 07.

Mrs. Thanuja N. Fernando, Secretary, National Police Commission, Block 9, BMICH Premises, Bauddhaloka Mawatha, Colombo 07.

SUBSTITUTED 10TH RESPONDENT

11. Mr. C.D. Wickramaratne,

Inspector General of Police, No. 517, Police Headquarters, Colombo 01.

Mr. Priyantha Weerasooriya (Attorney-at-Law), Acting Inspector General of Police, No. 517, Police Headquarters, Colombo 01.

SUBSTITUTED 11TH RESPONDENT

12. Mr. Deshabandhu Thennakoon,

Senior Deputy Inspector General, Western Province, No. 517, Police Headquarters, Colombo 01.

Mr. Sanjeewa Dharmaratne,

5

Senior Deputy Inspector General, Western Province, No. 517, Police Headquarters, Colombo 01.

SUBSTITUTED 12TH RESPONDENT

13. Mr. P.G.R.C.A. Gamlath,

Senior Superintendent of Police, Purported Inquiry Officer – Formal Inquiry, C/O No. 517, Police Headquarters, Colombo 01.

AND/OR

No. 31, Ranawiru Gammanaya, Palamu Patumaga, Aluwiharaya, Mathale.

14. Mr. Pandula Weerasinghe,

Senior Superintendent of Police, Purported Inquiry Officer – Preliminary Inquiry No. 517, Police Headquarters, Colombo 01.

AND/OR

Office of the Senior Superintendent, Matara.

15. Mr. L.G. Kularathne,

Deputy Inspector General (Rtd.), C/O No. 517, Police Headquarters, Colombo 01.

AND/OR

No. 70, Bandara Watta, Batuhena, Hidellana.

6

RESPONDENTS

Before: Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Counsel:

Dr. Saranee Gunathilaka with Nithma Fernando instructed by Tharushika Fernando for the

Petitioner.

Zuhri Zain, D.S.G. for the 5th – 15th Respondents.

Argued on: 15.09.2025

Delivered on: 19.03.2026

7

Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Judgement

Introduction

The Petitioner is a sub-inspector who joined the Department of Police in 1990. In and around

February 2002, he served attached to the Biyagama Police Station situated within the Division of

Kelaniya in the range of Western Province. There had been a news item appearing in the newspaper

on 27.02.2002 stating that he was involved in a robbery of two vehicles committed in the Police

area of Hingurakgoda. Having initially inquired about it from the Headquarters Inspector

(hereinafter referred to as “HQI”) of Hingurakgoda over the telephone, later he had surrendered

himself through an Attorney-at-Law, where he was arrested and later produced before Magistrate’s

Court and incarcerated. The said incidents led to two summary trials before the Magistrate Court

of Hingurakgoda bearing Nos. 70096 and 70097. However, after trial, he has been exonerated from

all charges.

Thereafter, although he was reinstated, a disciplinary inquiry was held against him, under which

he was found guilty, and it was recommended to terminate his service. His subsequent appeal to

the Police Commission, was dismissed and later further appealed to the Administrative Appeal

Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as “AAT”), where Honourable Members of the AAT, having

affirmed the findings of guilt of the Petitioner, set aside the said punishment and recommended to

send him on compulsory retirement.

8

Being aggrieved by the decision of the AAT, the Petitioner has come before this Court seeking to

invoke its writ jurisdiction in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution, to set aside the same.

The 1st to 3rd Respondents are the Chairman and other members of the Administrative Appeal

Tribunal respectively, and the 4th Respondent is the Secretary to the said AAT. The 5th to 9th

Respondents are the Chairman and other members of the National Police Commission respectively,

and the 10th Respondent is the Secretary of the National Police Commission. The 11th Respondent

is the Inspector General of Police, the 12th Respondent is the Senior Deputy Inspector General of

Police of the Western Province, the 13th Respondent is the inquiring officer, the 14th Respondent

is the officer who conducted the preliminary investigation, and the 15th Respondent is the officer

who served as the Deputy Inspector General of Police (DIG) of the Western Province who ordered

the preliminary investigation.

After Support, this Court had issued formal notice, and the Respondents have also filed their

respective Objections and sought a dismissal of this Application.

This came up before me for Argument on 26.11.2025, and the following arguments were advanced

by the counsel; hence, this judgement.

Arguments

Dr. Gunathilake, the Counsel for the Petitioner, contended that the very disciplinary inquiry was

flawed as it was sanctioned by a senior officer who is not empowered to sanction, namely, that the

senior DIG of that area had not sanctioned the said disciplinary inquiry.

9

The second contention is that not only is the inquiry itself is flawed, but the proceedings are also

flawed.

The third contention of the counsel for the Petitioner is that the AAT has arrived at a finding of

wrong identification with regard to the Petitioner, followed by the argument that the AAT has also

made a wrong identification of the vehicle involved, which is totally irrelevant.

Further, the next contention of Dr. Gunathilake is that the standard of proof set out in Rule 14 of

the Establishment Code has also been flouted by the AAT.

Finally, the last argument is that the charges framed against the Petitioner for the disciplinary

inquiry are based on the very same charges from which he has already been exonerated.

On the other hand, Ms. Zain argued that the order of the AAT is justified on the facts of this case

as transpired in the course of evidence adduced before the Panel of Inquiry.

Further she argued that on sympathetic grounds, the Honourable Members of the AAT have set

aside the punishment and instead had permitted the Petitioner to retire from service.

Factual Matrix

On a perusal of the Petition, I found that the Petitioner had initially joined the Police Department

as a Sub-Inspector of the Reserved Service with effect from 04.08.1990. Thereafter, he was

absorbed into the Regular Service with effect from 14.06.1999; the relevant documents being

marked as P1(a) and P1(b) annexed to the Petition. The Petitioner was also issued a letter of

recommendation for his service dated 31.05.2013, which is marked as P1(c).

10

In 2002, the Petitioner had been attached to the Biyagama Police Station as a Sub-Inspector. On

or around 17.02.2002 as asserted by him, he had obtained leave from his work and visited his

mother, who was living in Hingurakgoda. Upon his return, on or around 27.02.2002, he learned

through the media that one Police Officer attached to the Biyagama Police Station had been

involved in a vehicle robbery in the Hingurakgoda area. Accordingly, he telephoned the HQI of

Hingurakgoda, and thereupon, the HQI informed him to come and make a statement.

Thereafter, he visited the Hingurakgoda Police Station with a lawyer on 15.03.2002 and

surrendered himself to the Police. Subsequently, the Police arrested him on the basis of the alleged

robbery of two vehicles and produced him before the Magistrate’s Court, and had him incarcerated,

as borne out by the document marked as P4 annexed to the Petition. Thereafter, the Petitioner was

interdicted pending the two Magistrate’s Court cases.

Thereafter, the Petitioner was charged before the Magistrate’s Court of Hingurakgoda in two cases

of alleged robbery, bearing Nos. 70096 and 70097. After the summary trial, the Petitioner was

acquitted from all charges in case bearing No. 70097 by the learned Magistrate. However, in the

connected case bearing No. 70096, the Petitioner was convicted by the learned Magistrate of

Hingurakgoda. Thereafter, the Petitioner appealed to the High Court of Polonnaruwa against the

conviction in the case bearing No. 70096, where the learned High Court judge had acquitted him

from all the charges. To establish the above, the Petitioner has marked and annexed the relevant

records as P6(a) and P6(b), and the judgment in case bearing number 70097 as P7 to the Petition.

11

Thereafter, the Petitioner made an appeal through the Senior Deputy Inspector General of Police

of the Western Province, as he was attached to the Biyagama Police Station at the time of his

interdiction in 2002, seeking reinstatement to his service.

Accordingly, the Petitioner was reinstated by the letter marked as P18 dated 02.07.2018. In

addition to the reinstatement by the said letter, the Petitioner was attached to Seeduwa Police

Station, which comes within the Police Division of Negombo.

However, after a few months, the Senior Superintendent of the Kelaniya Division requested the

Director, Personnel for Human Resource Management, by letter marked as P21(a) and dated

09.08.2018, to ascertain whether the Petitioner’s service had been terminated with effect from

19.02.2002 or whether he had only been interdicted from 15.03.2002.

Thereafter, by letter P22(a), the Petitioner wrote and informed that he had only been interdicted

and that his service had never been terminated.

Preliminary investigation

However, on a perusal of the record, I found that a preliminary investigation had been conducted

with regard to the commission of the offences, since it was alleged to have been committed by a

police officer within the Polonnaruwa Division. The said preliminary investigation had been

conducted on the orders of the Senior Deputy Inspector General of Police (North-Central), Mr.

Ravi Wijegunawardene, by his letter dated 12.07.2015, which is marked as P15 annexed to the

Petition.

12

The said letter was directed to the Deputy Inspector General of the Polonnaruwa Division.

Thereafter, the Senior Superintendent of the Polonnaruwa Division, having caused a preliminary

investigation, reported to the Senior DIG of Anuradhapura (North-Central Province) by the letter

dated 18.11.2015 and marked as X annexed to the Petition that the allegations against the Petitioner

were well-founded as there is sufficient evidence against him and accordingly, recommended to

have a charge sheet served on him in a disciplinary inquiry.

Disciplinary inquiry

Consequently, the Petitioner had been charge-sheeted by the Senior Deputy Inspector General of

Police of the Western Province by the letter dated 02.08.2016, which is marked as P14. The said

order is challenged by the Petitioner on the basis that it is ultra vires, which I will deal with now.

The said inquiry had been initiated by P14 issued by the Senior Deputy Inspector General of Police

(Western Province), and at the inquiry ordered by the Senior DIG by his order contained in the

letter dated 02.08.2016 (P14), the said inquiry was conducted by a Superintendent of Police, and

several witnesses have given evidence; on their evidence, the panel of inquiry found that the

Petitioner is guilty of the misconduct of his service, and therefore, recommended to take

disciplinary actions against him.

Vires of the disciplinary inquiry

Upon a perusal of the said charge sheet I found that the letter of appointment of the panel of inquiry

is dated 08.02.2016 (P14), issued by Mr. Pujith Jayasundara, who was then the Senior Deputy

Inspector General of Police of the Western Province within whose division the Petitioner had been

13

working at the time of the interdiction in 2002. Since the appointment is challenged on the basis

of ultra vires, I shall now proceed to consider the relevant Gazette Notification under which the

said panel of inquiry was appointed by the Senior DIG.

The said panel of inquiry had been appointed by the said letter P14 in accordance with the Gazette

Notification by which the disciplinary control applicable to Sub-Inspectors is published in the

Gazette No. 1965/37 dated 06.05.2016, which is marked and annexed to the Petition as P12(b).

According to the second row of the table at page 2A of the Gazette, disciplinary control with regard

to a person below the rank of Chief Inspector can only be initiated or directed by the Inspector

General of Police or the Senior Deputy Inspector General of Police of the Province to which he is

attached. Therefore, Mr. Pujith Jayasundera, who at that time was the Senior Deputy Inspector

General of Police of Western Province, ordered the said disciplinary inquiry. Therefore, it is my

view that the said order dated 23.09.2019 which has not been marked by the Petitioner but is

available in the file and identified as “B” is intra vires.

In addition to the above, the counsel for the Petitioner by way of her oral submissions and written

submissions, has challenged the propriety of the inquiry conducted against him. The initial

preliminary investigation, as stated above, had been conducted by an Assistant Superintendent of

Police attached to the Polonnaruwa Division on the orders of the Senior Deputy Inspector General

of Police of the North-Central Province, within whose range the alleged offence by a police officer

had been committed. However, such an officer is not empowered to charge-sheet a Sub-Inspector

who is not attached to a Police Station of his range, and his authority is limited to conducting a

preliminary investigation because the commission of the offence was alleged to have been

14

committed by a police officer in whose range it is said to have been committed. In any case, it is

only a fact-finding mission.

Therefore, based on the findings of the said preliminary investigation and the recommendation

thereof, the Petitioner had been charged-sheeted on the orders of the Senior DIG of Police of the

Western Province within whose range the Petitioner had been serving at the time of when the

alleged offences had been committed and been interdicted.

At the inquiry on the said charge sheet, several witnesses have given evidence. The witnesses have

identified the Petitioner as the person who went to the place where the offence of robbery of two

vehicles had taken place, in police uniform with a pistol in his hand, and threatened the inmates of

the two houses. Thereafter, although they made complaints, the Petitioner was never arrested.

When the Petitioner came to know of the news published in newspapers, he surrendered himself

through a lawyer to the Hingurakgoda Police Station. Upon his surrender, he was arrested and

produced before the Magistrate, and the Magistrate ordered that he be remanded; thereafter, he

was released on bail.

Acquittal not a bar to disciplinary inquiry

However, the two cases that had been instituted against him by the Police ended with the acquittal

of the accused. Nevertheless, it is my view that this does not prevent, as held by the AAT, the

departmental head or the disciplinary authority from taking disciplinary action against the officer

concerned, since he is attached to a very respected service, in order to ascertain whether he has in

fact compromised the dignity of his employment (post). In this case, as the facts transpired from

15

the evidence and the evidence adduced before the inquiring officer from the witnesses, it is

established that the Petitioner was present in the place of the commission of the robbery in police

uniform. He was later apprehended as the person in the police uniform with a firearm in possession

and had to face trial, from which he was subsequently acquitted.

Having considered all of the above, initially the Acting Inspector General of Police, by his order

dated P31(b) annexed to the Petition, recommended the termination of the Petitioner’s service.

Thereafter, on appeal to the Police Commission, the same order was confirmed. However, upon

consideration of the appeal made by the Petitioner, the AAT, on sympathetic grounds, decided by

its order to allow the Petitioner to retire with effect from the date of that order dated 06.04.2023,

which is marked as D annexed to the Petition.

Decision of the AAT

It must also be observed that the Honourable Members of the AAT considered the entirety of the

evidence given by several witnesses as per order marked and annexed to the Petition as D; the

following witnesses were called;

i. Witness No. 5 - Delanka Pedige Stephen, at whose residence the incident had taken place,

and who identified the Petitioner as a person who was present.

ii. Witness No. 7 - the son of Witness No. 5, D.P Sisira Chandana who had also identified the

Petitioner.

iii. Witness No. 9 – Thilakaratne, who has given evidence with regards to the instructions

obtained by the Chief Inspector of Police, Kamal Karunadasa.

16

iv. Witness No. 11 – Police Inspector, H.C.B. Welagedara, who arrested the suspect on

surrender.

v. Witness No. 13 - Sub-Inspector of Police, Ajith Senanayake who was in charge of the

Crime Branch and who was in charge of the robbery.

vi. Witness No. 12 – Chief Inspector of Police, N.B.R. Jayantha Dharmakeerthi, who

confirmed that after the robbery the number plate has been changed.

vii. Witness No. 10 – Chief Inspector of Police, P.R. Manawadu, who had also given evidence

with regard to the duties performed when overseeing the robbery case.

viii. Witness No. 14 - Superintendent of Police, Pandula Weerasinghe, who conducted the

preliminary investigation.

The above witnesses were called by the Prosecution Officer to give evidence against the Petitioner

before the Panel of Inquiry, who arrived at their determination upon such material placed before

them.

Based on the evidence adduced against the Petitioner, the Panel of Inquiry found that the Petitioner

is guilty of the charges levelled against him. The said finding was subsequently affirmed by the

National Police Commission. Upon the Petitioner preferring an appeal to the AAT, the Honourable

Members of the AAT decided to set aside the punishment imposed on the Petitioner on sympathetic

grounds. Instead of terminating his services, the Petitioner was permitted to retire.

It was further observed by the AAT that, in a disciplinary inquiry conducted against the Petitioner,

the standard of proof required is not that which is applicable in a criminal trial before a Magistrate’s

Court. Such proceedings are determined on the basis of the balance of probabilities, and the duty

17

of the panel of Inquirers is to determine whether it is highly probable that the Petitioner committed

the offence alleged.

According to the AAT, the evidence led before the Panel of Inquiry satisfied this standard. I do

not see any error in that conclusion. Accordingly, it is my view that, since the Petitioner had already

reached the age of retirement, he was allowed to retire with effect from 23.02.2019, and I see no

reason to interfere with that determination.

In the circumstances of this case, it is my view that, since there is strong evidence against the

Petitioner regarding the commission of the offence, even though he was acquitted in the two court

cases on various technical grounds, it is well established that he was present when the offence was

committed. Therefore, the Petitioner has compromised his position as a police officer, which

amounts to ‘discreditable conduct’ falling within Appendix B (“the Disciplinary Code”) of the

Ceylon Police Departmental Orders 2012.

Conclusion

In those circumstances, I am compelled to dismiss this Application, and accordingly, dismiss this

Application without costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL