IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Court of Appeal Case No. CA 09/2011

High Court of Panadura Case No. HC 3117/2006

In the matter of an appeal under and in terms of Section 331 of the Criminal Procedure Code Act No. 15 of 1979.

The Attorney General of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Complainant

Kannangara Koralalage Jagath Kannangara.

Accused Vs,

And Now Between

Kannangara Koralalage Jagath Kannangara.

Accused-Appellants

Vs,

The Attorney General of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Complainant-Respondent Before : S. Thurairaja PC, J & A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J

Counsel : Anil Silva PC for the Appellant.

Yasantha Kodagoda PC, ASG for the Respondent.

Written Submissions : Accused Appellant - 12th October 2017.

Complainant Respondent-not filed.

CA 09/2011 JUDGMENT Page 1 of 10

Argument on

Judgment on

: 13th March, 6th June, 25th June and 2nd July 2018.

: 20th July 2018

******************

JUDGMENT

s. Thurairaja, PC. J

Honourable Attorney General had preferred an Indictment against the Accused

Appellant Kannangara Koralalage Jagath Kannangara (Hereinafter sometimes

referred to as the Appellant) for possession and trafficking of 5129 grams of heroin.

After the trial the Appellant found guilty and sentenced to life imprisonment. Being

aggrieved with the said conviction and the sentence the Appellant submitted an

appeal to the Court of Appeal and forwarded following grounds of appeal;

I. The identity of the Appellant was not established.

II. Perusing the notes of the Police officers by the High Court Judge is wrong.

Prosecution led the evidence of Inspector of Police Hapuarachchige Gunaratne,

Assistant Government Analyst Kokawela Pathirage Chandrani, Police Constable 16187

Gamage Dhammika, Halgahawithanage Jagath Wasantha and Sub-Inspector of

Police Owitagala Hewage Gamini.

According to the prosecution witnesses on the 4th of September 2004 Police Officers

attached to Anguruwathota Police Station, PC 16187 Gamage, Reserve Police

Constable 24133 Manoj and Civil Defence Officer 2199 Silva were detailed to manned

road-blocks in the evening at around 1500 hours, they were stationed at

Keselhenawa, Kottangas-handiya. At that time they were watching for suspicious

movement of vehicles and people due to the prevailing security situation of the

country at that time.

CA 09/2011 JUDGMENT Page 2 of 10

At around 1555 hours, PC Gamage had observed a three-wheeler had come, stopped

it near a small kiosk which sells king-coconuts (thambili). The driver of the three-

wheeler got down from the vehicle and started drinking a king-coconut. PC Gamage

focused at the driver because he felt it was unusual. The driver also looking at the

officers at the road-block. After a while, PC Gamage thought fit to inquire the driver

and proceeded towards him. On seeing the Police Officer approaching, the Appellant

throw the king-coconut, got into the three-wheeler and started proceeding towards

Horana. Then PC Gamage alerted the other officers and they tried to apprehend the

three-wheeler. Suddenly the driver diverted the three-wheeler into a small road. PC

Manoj had a motor-cycle in which he and Civil Defence Officer Silva and him started

chasing the three-wheeler, PC Gamage called the Officer In Charge (OIC) IP

Gunaratne. At that time IP Gunaratne was proceeding to attend a meeting at the

Hospital and was a few metres away from the check-point. On receiving the message

on walkie-talkie he approached to the check-point took PC Gamage with him and

chased the three-wheeler. It was within 2 to 3 minutes from the fleeing off on the

three-wheeler.

When the three-wheeler reached to a hill, the driver stopped it and got out from the

three-wheeler, looked behind and ran down the praecipes. All officers who gathered

there, started chasing the driver. IP Gunaratne stood guard to the three-wheeler and

checked for any other passenger or suspicious material. There he found a black

coloured bag behind the seat rack. When he opened he found eleven parcels

wrapped in cellophane bags. On smelling the bags he suspected of heroin.

Thereafter the investigations were commenced.

The Appellant was absconds and he was never arrested by the Police. During the

investigations, the police found out from the Registrar of Motor Vehicles (RMV) that

the ownership of the three-wheeler was registered under the name of the appellant.

The address given was Sapugahawaththa, Dodangoda. Police got the assistance of

the Grama Sewaka (Village Officer) of that area and further investigated. There, they

CA09/2011 JUDGMENT Page 3 of 10

found the house of the Appellant at No.24, Himbutuwilalanda, Wilpatha, Dodangoda.

When they went to that house there, the house was locked. The Police Officers

entered the house through the windows. PC Gamage had found a photo album on a

teapoy (coffee-table). When he opened the album he found a photograph of the

Appellant with a woman and a child. He spontaneously identified that is the person

as whom he had seen from the road-block upto running away from the three-

wheeler on the Hills.

The substance recovered from the three wheeler was referred to the Government

analyst when it was found 10,984 grams of brown coloured powder on analysation

the Government Analyst had found 5129 grams of dicetyl morphine/heroine.

Regarding the identity, Evidence before the court, is that during the period of terror

in the country, as police officers who are manning a check point was more vigillant

than the others. In this case two police officers and a civil defence force officer had

seen the accused at a very close proximity, for a considerable period of time. The

Appellant was behaving in a disturbed manner and running away from the place, also

evidence, that the Appellant was driving the three-wheeler, stopped and looked at

the police officers before he ran away. When the police officers said they had a clear

look to identify the person, can be accepted. Immediately after the incident the

police officer had seen the photograph at the residence of the Appellant and

identified him as the person who ran away. The Grama-Sewaka and others had

identified and connected the photograph and Appellant. In my view there is a clear

identification of the accused-appellant by the witnesses, and it was established by

the prosecution beyond reasonable doubt.

Subsequent conduct of the appellant leaving the place of residence, wife and his

family and absconding for a considerable period create a doubt and warrants an

explanation.

Regina vs. Turnbull [1976 3 All E.R. 549, Cr. Ap. Reports 132] guidelines are,

----------- -------. __ ._---_.--------- ------CA09/2011 JUDGMENT Page 4 of 10

Where the case against an accused depends wholly or substantially on the

correctness of one or more identifications of the accused - which the defence alleges

to be mistaken - the judge should warn the jury of the special need for caution

before convicting the accused in reliance on the correctness of the identification(s).

The judge should tell the jury that:

caution is required to avoid the risk of injustice;

a witness who is honest may be wrong even if they are convinced they are

right;

a witness who is convincing may still be wrong;

more than one witness may be wrong;

a witness who recognises the defendant, even when the witness knows the

defendant very well, may be wrong.

The judge should direct the jury to examine the circumstances in which the

identification by each witness can be made. Some of these circumstances may

include:

the length of time the accused was observed by the witness;

the distance the witness was from the accused;

the state of the light;

the length of time elapsed between the original observation and the

subsequent identification to the police.

Purposely or accidently the appellant had surrendered at the Magistrate Court

openly prevented to hold an identification parade. Therefore argument of failure to

hold an identification parade by the prosecution and relying on the Regina vs.

Turnbull is untenable.

In Roshan vs. The Attorney General [2011 (1) SLR 364] Per Sarath de Abrew J. in

the case of Regina vs. Turnbull [1976 3 All E.R. 549, Cr. Ap. Reports 132] one of

----------------------------CA09/2011 JUDGMENT Page 5 of 10

the important guidelines set out was whether there was any material discrepancy

between the description of the accused given to the Police by the witness when first

seen by him and his actual appearance.

All the prosecution witnesses corroborate each other on their material evidence.

The Appellant had not challenged the chain of production, analysation of the

substance and other related issues. The main contention of the argument is identity

of the accused-appellant and the High Court Judge referring the Note Book.

Section 110(4) of the Criminal Procedure Code Act states as follows.

"Any criminal court may send for the statements recorded in a case under

inquiry or trial in such court and may use such statements or information, not

as evidence in the case, but to aid it in such inquiry or trial. save as otherwise

provided for in section 444 neither the accused not his agents shall be entitled

to call for such statements, nor shall he or they be entitled to see them merely

because they are referred to by the court but if they are used by the police

officer or inquirer or witness who made them to refresh his memory, or if the

court uses them for the purpose of contradicting such police officer or

inquirer or witness the provisions of Evidence ordinance, section 161 or

section 145, as the case may be shall apply:

provided that where a preliminary inquiry under Chapter XV is being held in

respect of any offence, such statements of witness as have up to then been

recorded shall, on the application of the accused, we made available to him

for his perusal in open court during the inquiry"

I refer to the reference made by the Learned Trial Judge in the relevant judgment.

"t)@b(J}tJ) fX)(5)eJf ~JCff$ @l!1)JeJelJ eoJaf qooJtJ eo@ t)t;)Jc!!D CJo~(S)C:J ofl'rJ($ai 110(4)

t)CSJeIftfuJ c:JC)@af (f)@@Cif aJIi)} qcf fX)(5)eJf e:Jot:ifttPJ &:DO tV@@

CA 09/2011 JUDGMENT Page 6 of 10

(i)~af @t:J)JtkJed ax:! ~:! @Jb(i) {/)]{;)CJ) Ox::!t:J5:! @aJ~ SCJeJ) tJD t:JJt!)aJO rN;,t:JD

@CJb 25t:D eJ@~ ~&f eDttZJ@ t:D5JaJ qa:J@ tJeJ)J!} lOd ~ eJX)aJ) (J){j)) ~ ~g

qaJO ~ 8C{/)t;,CJ t;XCJ) 8t:1)@ @) t:XJed ~(50k; OOaJ fi@ a:fC)Jc!!DaJD (i)&D CJ)0eJJ tJD

~f50k; O{):f qceJ.f8@ o~ aJeDCJ) q~ (!f)()CJ) aJJ@f) eDtt:Jf CJ)O CJteJ.f O{)aJd (X@~

qe;6JO 8JcJ) eJ)cCJaJ @(5)JO~ rN;,aJD r5tJ(i)~ (i)@eIf CJ)OeJJ @(: CiJ@~ ~(!f)(;Jf

CJ)O qtaJ. (5@~ ~r:J)CJ t;XC!JCJ)Oc OCJ(5aJeD {/)ct:J SCJ {j)CJ tJ@b~~ t:JD(!f)(;Jf CJ@

t:JD(!f)(;Jf tJ (5eJ)J@t(j eJ)Jt:Jf ~tJaJ aJaJoo~ aJ~OaJ t:JD(!f)t!J)' 60@BJf qtJOO~

{/)@Jf5e)Jf50)r:DqJ tJaJ (5eJ)}(5)Coo.

(The translation state as follows: inquiry notes are not admissible evidence

under section 770 4 of the Criminal Procedure Code Act but I will refer those

notes kept by Gamage in investigation.

Gamage had observed a three-wheeler had come from Kalutara side, stopped at

about 25 metres away from the road block of Kottangas handiya, near a king-

coconut kiosk at about ten minutes. I had a suspicion about the three-wheeler

and I proceeded towards him. Then started the Three-Wheeler and tried to

proceed but road has blocked by a van so proceed towards Horana. Here in this

Note book, it didn't mentioned that whether the driver had got down from the

three-wheeler or not and we never expect from the Police to describe the

incident step by step in their inquiry notes.)

It is revealed that the Learned Trial Judge had referred only a relevant portion for the

purpose stated and permitted in the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.

The Learned Counsel for the appellant even though mentioned this ground as the

second ground of appeal he did not emphasized in this issue.

After carefully considering the submission and the relevant law, I am of the view that

the Learned Trail Judge had acted within the ambit of the relevant law. Therefore I

have no reason to interfere with the findings of the Learned Trial Judge.

On perusing the entire case record I find that there is no illegal or inappropriate

evidence allowed in this case. The accused appellant had a fair trial and the Learned

Trial Judge had given adequate reasons for findings the appellant guilty.

CA 09/2011 JUDGMENT Page 7 of 10

Therefore I found that, the first and second ground of appeal fails on its own merits

accordingly the appeal fails on its own merits therefore I dismiss the appeal.

According to the Section 335(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of

1979, which reads as follows.

"On an appeal against the sentence, whether passed after trial by jury or without

jury, the Court of Appeal shall if it thinks that a different sentence should have

been passed, quash the sentence, and pass other sentence warranted in law by

the verdict whether more or less severe in substitution therefore as it thinks

ought to have been passed .. ::

Regarding the sentence this court invited both counsels to address. The counsel for

the appellant submits that the accused is innocent. Therefore he moves for an

acquittal and say question of sentencing will not arise. The Learned Additional

Solicitor General submits that the quantity is very high therefore considering the

society at large it will be reasonable to give maximum sentence.

In King vs. Rankira (42 NLR 145) held that,

"the Court of Appeal will not interfere with the judicial discretion of a judge in

passing sentence unless that discretion has been exercised on a wrong principle."

In AG vs. Mendis [1995 (1) SLR 138] held that,

" In assessing a punishment, the Judge should consider the matter of sentence

both from the point of view of the public and the offender. The Judge should first

consider the gravity of the offence as it appears from the nature of the act itself

and should have regard to the punishment provided in the Penal Code or other

Statute under which the offender is charged. He should also regard the effect of

the punishment, as deterrent act and consider in what extent it will be effective:

CA 09/2011 JUDGMENT Page 8 of 10

Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs Act says, if any person posses more than 2

grams will be either punished by life imprisonment or Death Sentence. That shows

the intention of the legislature is to protect the Society from the Drug menace. In this

case the Learned Trial Judge had considered the submissions made by the Counsels

and accepted that this is harmful to the society. He, specifically says the said quantity

if it had distributed/released to the society it would have ruined the families and the

society in extremely harmful manner.

But the Judge gives the reason that the Death Sentence are passed by the Courts, are

not executed and only rests on the papers. I disagree with the said statement.

In Dhananjay Chatterjee vs. State of West Bengal [1994 2 SCC 220] it was held

that,

''the measure of punishment in a given case must depend upon the atrocity of

the crime; the conduct of the criminal and the defenceless and unprotected state

of the victim. Imposition of appropriate punishment is the manner in which the

courts respond to the society's cry for justice against the criminals. Justice

demands that courts should impose punishment befitting the crime so that the

courts reflect public abhorrence of the crime. The courts must not only keep in

view the rights of the criminal but also the rights of the victim of crime and the

society at large while considering imposition of appropriate punishment:'

In Sevaka Perumal etc vs. State of Tamil Nadu (AIR 1991 SC 1463)

Undue sympathy to impose inadequate sentence would do harm to the justice

system to undermine the public confidence in the efficacy of law and society

could not long endure under serious threats. If the courts did not protect the

injured the injured would the resort to private vengeance. It is, therefore, the

duty of every court to awards proper sentence having regard to the nature of the

offence and the manner in which it was executed or committed etc.

CA 09/2011 JUDGMENT Page 9 of 10

By observing all of those circumstances, I am of the view that the Learned Trial Judge

should not have considered the duty of the executive. When the law provides a

sentence it is for the Judge to decide within the framework of the law.

In this case the gross quantity was 10984 grams and the pure Dicetyl Morphine

quantity was 5129 grams as the trial Judge observed, if it would have gone into the

society would have caused irreparable damages, especially the youngsters, who are

the backbone of the country.

Considering the law, I am of the view that sentences imposed are inadequate.

Therefore I vacate the sentence imposed by the Learned High Court Judge on the

first and second counts and impose Death sentence on each count. The High Court

Judge of Colombo is hereby directed to follow section 280 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act and to impose Death Sentence.

Appeal Dismissed.

Sentences enhanced.

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

-------------... -----------------------------------~-------------------------... -~-------------CA 09/2011 JUDGMENT Page 10 of 10