==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0145/2024

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal Case No. Mohamed Naseem Mohamed Nazar

CA/HCC/ 0145/2024 alias Mohamed Haseen Mohamed

High Court of Colombo Nazar alias Gowa Nazar

Case No. HC/2213/2020

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

CA/HCC/0145/2024

2 | P a g e

COUNSEL : Neranjan Jayasinghe with Randunu

Heellage for the Appellant.

Janaka Bandara, DSG for the Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 22/10/2025

DECIDED ON : 11/11/2025

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) was indicted by the Attorney General under Sections 54(A) (d) and

54(A) (b) of the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs Ordinance as amended

by Act No. 13 of 1984 for the Possession and Trafficking of 3.57 grams of

Heroin (Diacetylmorphine) on 07th of January 2016 in the High Court of

Colombo.

Following the trial, the Appellant was found guilty of both charges and the

learned High Court Judge of Colombo had imposed a sentence of life

imprisonment on both counts on 09th of October, 2023.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

The learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the Appellant

has given consent for this matter to be argued in his absence. During the

argument he has been connected via the Zoom platform from prison.

CA/HCC/0145/2024

3 | P a g e

The Appellant has raised the following grounds of appeal in this case:

1. Evidence of the prosecution witnesses face the test of credibility and

probability.

2. The learned High Court Judge had failed to adduce reasons for

rejecting the dock statement.

PW1/SI Sampath who was attached to the Slave Island Police Station, had

received information from his private informant that a person called Nazar

and Supur had gone to bring Heroin and that they are coming to Slave Island

in a lorry bearing the number (No. PU 026). Acting on that information, the

police team had gone to Slave Island in a van belonging to a friend of PW1.

At about 17.45 hours, PW1 had received a call from his informant about the

arrival of Nazar to Slave Island. The police team after spotting the lorry, had

blocked the lorry using the van and had arrested the Appellant after finding

some substance, suspected to be Heroin, concealed in the knot of the sarong

of the Appellant.

The substance was weighed at a jewellery shop and the gross quantity

weighed about 80 grams. The Appellant and the Heroin were brought to the

police station, sealed and handed over to the reserve police officer at 21.35

hours.

PW2, PC 70751 Udawatta was called to corroborate the evidence given by

PW1.

The Government Analyst confirmed that the substance sent for analysis

contained 3.57 grams of pure Heroin (Diacetylmorphine).

After closing the case for the prosecution, as the evidence led by the

prosecution warranted the presence of a case to be answered by the

Appellant, the learned High Court Judge called for the defence. The Appellant

made a dock statement denying the charges. The defence took up the

position that when they were returning to Kurunegala, he was arrested by

the police.

CA/HCC/0145/2024

4 | P a g e

In criminal cases, the prosecution bears the burden of proof in proving a

case beyond reasonable doubt against the accused in that respective case.

In such a situation, not only must the prosecution prove the case beyond a

reasonable doubt, but it must also be proved with clear cut evidence that the

offence was, in fact, committed by the Appellant.

As the 1st and 2nd grounds of appeal are interconnected, I will consider them

jointly hereinafter.

Firstly, the learned Counsel for the Appellant contended that the Learned

High Court Judge has failed to consider the credibility and the probability of

the prosecution version.

In the case of Wickremasuriya v. Dedoleena and Others 1996 [2] SLR 95

Jayasuriya J held that;

“A judge, in applying the Test of Probability and Improbability relies

heavily on his knowledge of men and matters and the patterns of conduct

observed by human beings both ingenious as well as those who are less

talented and fortunate.”

His Lordship further held that;

“If the contradiction is not of that character, the Court ought to accept the

evidence of witnesses whose evidence is otherwise cogent, having regard

to the Test of Probability and Improbability and having regard to the

demeanour and deportment manifested by witnesses. Trivial

contradictions which do not touch the core of a party’s case should not be

given much significance, specially when the probabilities factor echoes in

favour of the version narrated by an applicant”

In Iswari Prasad v. Mohamed Isa 1963 AIR (SC) 1728 at 1734 His Lordship

held that;

“In considering the question as to whether evidence given by the witness

should be accepted or not, the court has to examine whether he is, in fact,

CA/HCC/0145/2024

5 | P a g e

an interested witness and to inquire whether the story deposed to by him

is probable and whether it has been shaken in cross-examination. That is

-whether there is a ring of truth surrounding his testimony.”

Justice Mackenna “Discretion,” The Irish Jurist, Vol. IX (new series), 1 at 10

has said;

“When I have done my best to separate the true from the false by these

more or less objective tests, I say which story seems to me the more

probable, the plaintiff’s or the defendants, and If I cannot say which, I

decide the case, as the law obliges me to do in the defendant’s favour.”

Guided by the above cited judgments and academic literature, I shall now

consider the first ground of appeal advanced by the Appellant in this case.

According to PW1, he had used a van belonging to one of his friends. PW1

was unable to reveal the name of the friend at the trial. He admitted that a

statement was not recorded from his friend. The reason given by PW1 is that

the identity of his friend would be revealed to the Appellant.

However, PW1 had admitted that the Appellant was taken to the jewellery

shop and to the police station in the van belonging to his friend. The relevant

pages are re-produced below:

Pages 93-94 of the brief.

m% ( t;fldg Tn,d fï w;awvx.=jg .ekSug .sfha jEka r:fhka @

W ( tfyuhs'

m% ( ta jEka r:h ldf.a o @

W ( th uf.a ñ;=frlaf.a jEka r:hla'

m% ( ljqo ta ñ;=rd @

W ( ñ;=rd iïnkaOfhka uu igyka lr,d keye'

m% ( t;fldg idlaIslre ñ;=rdf.a jEka r:fha wxlh l=ulao @

CA/HCC/0145/2024

6 | P a g e

W ( wxlh igyka lr,;a keye'

m% ( ñ;=rdf.ka m%ldYhla ,shd.;a; o fï jeg,Sug wod,j fufyu jEka r:hla b,a,

.kakjd lshk ;;a;ajh iïnkaOfhka @

W ( keye'

m% ( t;fldg idlaIslre Th jEka r:hg bkaOk imhd .;af;a fldfykao idlaIslre @

W ( ta wjia:dfõ oS bkaOk ;snqKd'

m% ( bkaOk lShla ;síno lsh,d ne¨jo idlaIslre @

W ( ne¨fõ keye'

Although, PW1 stated that they had blocked the lorry by using the van and

the van had stopped face to face with the lorry, according to PW2, the van

was stopped 15-20 feet away from the lorry. The relevant portions are re-

produced below:

Pages 54 and 156 of the brief.

m% ( uy;auhd ta jdykh oelaldu Tn fudllao B,`.g .;a; mshjr @

W ( Bg miafia ux ñ;=rg lsõjd iajdóks jdykh yria lrkak lsh,d'

m% ( idudkHfhka o, jYfhka fldÉpr ú;r ÿrla ;sfhoaos o ta jdykh oelafla @

W ( idudkHfhka iajdóks óg¾ 50 la jf.a ÿrska'

m% ( oeka Tn Th ñ;=rdg jdykh yria lrkak lsh,d Wmfoia ÿkakdu th ms<smeoao o ta

ñ;=rd @

W ( tfyuhs iajdóks'

m% ( fldfyuo jdykh yria lsrSu isoaO lf,a @

W ( jEka r:fha uqyqK f,drs r:fha uqyqKg ;sh,d yria l,d iajdóks'

CA/HCC/0145/2024

7 | P a g e

m% ( oeka t;fldg Th úkdä ody; úiai we;=,; wr jEka tlhs f,drshhs fldfyao

;snqfka @

W ( jEka r:h kï mdfrka jï me;a;g fjkak whska lr,d ;snqfka" f,drs r:h wms

kj;ajmq ;eku ;ud ;snqfka iajdóKs'

According to PW1, the substance was wrapped in a white coloured paper

which was not marked by the prosecution. Contradicting this, PW2 had not

stated about a white paper in his evidence. The relevant pages are re-

produced below:

Pages 59 of the brief.

m% ( fudkj yrs wkdjrKhla jqKd o ta mqoa.,hd ika;lfha ;sì,d @

W ( tfyuhs iajdóks' f,drs r:h wi,oS Tyqj msg;ska mrSlaId l,d' tysoS Tyq weo isá

irfï .eghl ;nd rojd f.k isá iqÿ mdg fld<hl T;k ,o ,d ÿTqre meye;s

l=vq wvx.= lg .eg .ik ,o frdai mdg fiaf,dafmaka ljrhla ud úiska fidhd .;a;d

iajdóks'

The learned High Court Judge has also not considered whether there was a

white coloured paper with the production.

According to PW1, after sealing the production he with his team had returned

to the police at 19.00 hours. But according to PW2, who was called to

corroborate the evidence of PW1, they had returned to the police station at

18.25 hours. The relevant pages are re-produced below:

Pages 94 and 166 of the brief.

m% ( t;fldg kej; ia:dkhg meñKsfha lShgo idlaIslre @

W ( meh 19.00 g muK'

m% ( fmd,sia ia:dkhg hkfldg fj,dj lSho @

W ( 18.25 ú;r'

CA/HCC/0145/2024

8 | P a g e

The learned High Court Judge has not considered this time difference in his

judgment.

It is very important to consider at this stage whether the above-mentioned

discrepancy in drug related matters causes any reasonable doubt over the

prosecution case as claimed by the Appellant. To consider this issue it is very

important to discuss the approach adopted by Higher Courts in respect of

handling evidence pertaining to drug related matters.

In the case of Mohamed Nimnaz V. Attorney General CA/95/94 held:

“A criminal case has to be proved beyond reasonable doubt. Although

we take serious view in regard to offences in relation to drugs, we are

of the view that the prosecutor should not be given a second chance to

fill the gaps of badly handled prosecutions….”

The considered grounds of appeal have merit, which certainly disturb the

judgment of the learned High Court Judge.

The failure of the witnesses to pass the test of credibility and probability, as

well as the inter se contradictions of the prosecution witnesses are

substantial, which would vitiate the conviction.

In the second ground of appeal, the Appellant complains that the learned

High Court Judge had not given reasons for rejecting his dock statement in

his judgment. Although the dock statement of an accused has less evidential

value, our courts have never hesitated to accept the same when it poses a

doubt on the prosecution case. In this case I believe it is very important to

consider the dock statement of the Appellant.

In Don Samantha Jude Anthony Jayamaha v. The Attorney General

CA/303/2006 decided on 11/07/2012 the court held that:

“Whether the evidence of the defence or the dock statement is sufficient

to create a doubt cannot be decided in a vacuum or in isolation because

CA/HCC/0145/2024

9 | P a g e

it needs to be considered in the totality of the evidence that is in the light

of the evidence for the prosecution as well as the defence.”

In Kathubdeen v. Republic of Sri Lanka [1998] 3 SLR 107 the court held

that:

“It is settled law that an unsworn statement must be treated as

evidence. It has also been laid down that if the unsworn statement

creates a reasonable doubt in the prosecution case or if it is believed,

then the accused should be given the benefit of that doubt.”

In the case of The King Vs. W. P. Buckley 43 NLR 474, it was stated by

Howard, C.J.:

“In arriving at a verdict of guilty, the majority of the jury must have viewed

the evidence in sections accepted and convicted the appellant on those

parts that were satisfactory and disregard those facts that pointed to the

improbability of the story put forward by the Crown. The jury should have

viewed the evidence as a whole. If they had done so, we are of opinion

that they must have had a reasonable doubt as to the guilt of the appellant.

The verdict is in our opinion, unreasonable, in as much as taken as a whole

the evidence does not support the conviction.”

In Miller v. Minister of Pensions (1947) 2 All E.R. 372 the court held that:

“…the evidence must reach the same degree of cogency as is required

in a criminal case before an accused person is found guilty. That degree

is well settled. It need not reach certainty, but it must carry high degree

of probability. Proof beyond reasonable doubt does not mean proof

beyond the shadow of a doubt. The law would fail to protect the

community if it admitted fanciful possibilities to deflect the course of

justice. If the evidence is so strong against a man as to leave only a

remote possibility in his favour which can be dismissed with the

sentence, “of course it is possible, but not in the least probable,” the case

CA/HCC/0145/2024

10 | P a g e

is proved beyond reasonable doubt, but nothing short of that will

suffice”.

The position of the Appellant in the present case was that he was arrested

when he had come to Slave Island to load a mattress into the lorry. At that

time, he was taken into custody along with the lorry. I am of the opinion that,

not considering the dock statement of the Appellant in its correct perspective,

is a serious lapse in this case.

The learned DSG in keeping with the highest tradition of the Attorney

General’s Department, stated that the shortcomings highlighted by the

learned Counsel for the Appellant, go substantially into the core of the case.

As the grounds of appeal raised by the Appellant have merit, I set aside the

conviction and the sentence dated 09/10/2023 imposed on the Appellant by

the learned High Court Judge of Colombo. Therefore, he is acquitted from

the charges.

Accordingly, the appeal is allowed.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgment to the High

Court of Colombo along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL