IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

e.A.(PHC)Appeal No. 118/2012 P.H.C. /Uva/Badulla Revision Application No. 112/2011

In the matter of an Appeal against the judgment of the Provincial High Court of Uva Province holden in Badulla dated 29.08.2012 under and in terms of Article 138 read with Article 154 of the Constitution Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Dadamgodage Don Wijepala Wicramaratne of 114/1, "Sudu Medura", Mahiyanganaya Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant

M.e. Mahiyanganaya Case No. 79846

Vs. 1. Dissanayake Mudiyanselage Nimal Dissnayake Divisional Secretary, Mahiyanganaya Divisional Secretariat, Mahiyanganaya Substituted-Applicant -Respondent-Respondent 2. Hon. Attorney General Attorney General's Department Colombo 12. Respondent-Respondent

1

~-;:;=-..;=.==::.==:=:;;:=:;-= '=-' :.:-::.:-=====-=:=.=.=~;:;.;'=,.';:;:'. =====

. BEFORE ..

COUNSEL

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS

TENDERED ON

ARGUED ON

DECICEDON

JANAK DE SII.VA, J. & ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

Ashoka Fernando with A.R.R. Siriwardana

for the Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant

Nuwan Peiris S.C. for the Substituted-

Applicant- Respondent-Respondent and

Respondent-Respondent.

25-06-2018( by the Appellant)

31-01-2018

05th October, 2018

*************

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, T.

The Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

"Appellant") invokes the appellate jurisdiction of this Court, seeking to set

aside an order dated 29.08.2012 of the Provincial High Court of Uva

Province holden in Badulla, in PHC/Uva/Badulla/ Revision No. 112/2011

by which his application to revise an order of ejectment dated 17.11.2011,

issued by Mahiyangana Magistrate's Court bearing Case No. 79846, was

dismissed by the said Provincial High Court.

In an application to Mahiyangana Magistrate's Court, under Section 5

of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act No.7 of 1979 as emended

(herineafter referred to as the "Act"), the Applicant-Respondent-

2

Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the "Respondent") sought an order

of ejectment against the Appellant from the portion of State land described

in the schedule to his application.

At the inquiry before the Magistrate's Court, the Appellant tendered

a large number of documents (V1 to V23) seeking to satisfy Court that he

was in occupation of the said State land on "constructive possession", an

inference that should have drawn upon the contents of those documents.

The factual position as per those documents is as follows.

The Appellant is the Chairman of Edwin Wickramarathna Memorial

Foundation, an Organisation registt:red under Voluntary Social Service

Organisations (Registration and Supervision) Act No. 31 of 1980, since

2005.

On 30.05.2006, the Appellant was issued a Development Permit

(V16) under Section 8 of the Urban Development Authority Act No. 41 of

1978, with approval for construction of a building, in respect of the State

land in dispute. This permit was issued by the Chairman of Mahiyangana

Pradesheeya Sabha with a condition that it is valid for a period of one year

and could be renewed upon payment of Rs. 250.00 payable annually. The

estimated cost of the proposed building is about Rs. 22 Million (V14).

Presidential Fund released Rs. 500,000.00 for the construction (V20).

District Secretary of Badulla reported to the Auditor General that funds

would be allocated from the decentralised budget for the construction of

the said building (V21).

The Provincial Secretary of Mahiyangana informed the Chairman of

Mahiyangana Pradesheeya Sabha, by his letter dated 16.08.2005 (V8) that a 3

part of the land of public playground would be made available to the

Appellant's foundation on a long term lease.

On 10.03.2006, Director of Urban Development Authority for Uva

Province recomn1ended the release of the land for the foundation (also

marked as VB). The Land Commissioner, directed the Provincial Secretary

of Mahiyangana to tender certain documents to consider the proposed

grant of long lease to the Appellant's foundation (V6). Mahiyangana

Pradesheeya Sabha informed Provincial Secretary of Mahiyangana on

06.11.2006 that it had no objection to the proposed long lease of the

disputed State land in favour of the Appellant's foundation (V13). The

Appellant has authorised the release of the disputed land to himself as the

Minister of Lands of the Uva Provincial Council on 09.05.2007 (V11).

The Magistrate's Court, having considered these documents, made

the impugned order of ejectment on the basis that none of the documents

tendered by the Appellant indicate that he had a valid permit or other

written authority to be in possession of the disputed State land.

When the Appellant sought to revise the said order of ejectment by

the Magistrate's Court before the Provincial High Court, it dismissed his

application on the basis that there is no illegality of the said order of

ejectment. It particularly considered the fact that the document dated

05.09.2007 issued by the Ministry of Lands of the Uva Provincial Council

(marked V11), which had granted its approval to lease out the disputed

land to the Appellant's foundation, was signed by the Appellant himself as

the Minister of Lands of the Uva Provincial Council and therefore has no

legal validity.

4

In challenging both these orders, the Appellant contended that;

a. the order of ejectment is illegal on the basis that;

1. it failed to consider the "constructive possession" as

established by the documents tendered before it,

11. it failed to consider the fact that the quit notice and the

application for ejectment are "ex facie untenable in law

and void ab initio" upon the Respondent's failure to

comply with the mandatory provisions of the Forms of

the said Act,

111. it failed to consider the Respondent acted in "an

arbitrary and a bias manner" superseding his earlier

decisions,

IV. it had erroneously decided that the sole authority is the

Respondent, "without approval of the Minister in

charge of the UDA",

b. order of dismissal by the Provincial High Court is erroneous on

the basis that;

1. it failed to consider the "constructive possession" in

favour of the Appellant,

ii. V16 is a valid authority for the Appellant,

111. the Respondent cannot institute proceedings before the

Magistrate's Court without "revoking" the

" constructive

possession"

possession/ implied approval of

5

_._.=============================::::;,

IV. it failed to consider that there was no valid affidavit

before the Court supporting the application under

Section 5 of the Act,

v. it failed to consider the application before the

Magistrate's Court is bad in law since the Respondent is

not the sole authority,

vi. if failed to consider the Appellant had a valid written

authority,

Vll. it failed to consider that all parties are not before Court,

viii. if failed to consider the Respondent had no authority to

issue quit notice. -

IX. It has held there is an alternate remedy under Section 12

of the said Act,

It is evident from these grounds, on which the Appellant sought to

challenge the validity of the order of ejectment and order of dismissal, that

the Mahiyangana Magistrate's Court has the jurisdictional authority to

question the competency of the Respondent when he makes an application

under Section 5 of the said Act as the competent authority.

Once a Competent Authority claims in the application to the

Magistrate's Court that he is the Competent Authority in respect of the

State land under Section 6(1)(a)(i) of the State Lands (Recovery of

Possession) Act, that assertion had to be taken as /I conclusive evidence" as

per the provisions of Section 6(4). In view of these clear and unambiguous

statutory provisions, it is clear that the Magistrate's Court had not been

conferred with jurisdiction to inquire into the competency of the

6

Competent Authority. This limitation on the jurisdiction even extends to

the description of the land as State land in such applications.

In Farook v Gunewardene, Government Agent, Apmarai (1980) 2 Sri

L.R. 243, this Court has held that "the structure of the Act would also make it

appear that where the Competent Authority had formed the opinion that any land

is State land, even the Magistrate is not competent to question his opinion. /I

The Appellant's claim of "constructive possession" in relation to

provisions of State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act, is a totally an alien

and unknown concept. This Court had consistently held, when an

application under Section 5 is made, its jurisdiction is circumscribed to

Section 8 and 9(1) of the Act.

The only option available for a person, who is in unauthorised

possession of a State land in the opinion of the Competent Authority, is to . . satisfy Court in an inquiry conducted under Section 8 of the said Act. The

scope of such inquiry is limited by Section 9(1) to the following, as decided

by this Court in C.A.jPHC/41/2010 - C.A. Minutes of 31.01.2017;

"Under section 9 of the State Land (Recovery of Possession)

Act the scope of the inquiry is limited to for the person noticed

to establish that he is not in unauthorised occupation or

possession by establishing that;

1. Occupying the land on a permit or a written authority.

2. It must be valid permit or a written authority.

3. It must be in force at the time of presenting it into Court.

4. It must have been issued in accordance with any

written law."

7

Therefore, unless the person who is in possession of the State land,

establishes any of the above, the Magistrate's Court has no option but to

allow the application by the Competent Authority.

The Appellant placed heavy reliance on the "written authority"

issued to him by "himself" marked as VII. It would suffice merely to say it

is per se illegal. Even if a different individual were to sign the said letter as

the Minister of Lands of the Uva Provincial Council, yet it will have no

legal validity as such a decision is clearly a transgression of the powers of a

Provincial Council.

In Superintendent of Stafford-Estate and two Others v Solaimuttu

Rasu(20I3) 1 Sri L.R. 25, the Supreme Court held thus;

"Provincial Councils in exercising" rights in and over land, land

settlement, land tenure, transfer and alienation of land, land use,

land settlement and improvement "to the extent set out in

Appendix II (conferred by List 1) are limited to administering,

controlling and utilizing such State Lands as are given to them.

"In terms of article 1.2 State Land is made available to the

Provincial Council by the Government. In the background of this

Constitutional arrangement it defies logic and reason to conclude

that State Lands is a Provincial Council subject in the absence of

a total subjection of State Lands to the domain of Provincial

Councils. "

Another contention raised by the Appellant is that the quit notice

issued on him by the Respondent is "ex facie untenable in law and void ab

initio" and both Courts, particularly the Provincial High Court, had failed

to consider this position. 8

that;

In Dayananda v Thalwatte(2001) 2 Sri L.R. 73, this Court, observed

U an aggrieved person who is seeking to set aside an unfavourable

decision made against him by a public authority could apply for a

prerogative writ of certiorari and if the application is to compel an

authority to perform a duty he would ask for a writ of mandamus

and similarly if an authority is to be prevented from exceeding its

jurisdiction the remedy of prohibition was available" proceeded

thereafter to hold that "institution of proceedings in the

Magistrates Court in terms of the quit notice is not a

determination affecting lega~ rights." It further held that "it was

open for the Petitioner to seek to quash the quit notice by way of

certiorari when the determination was made ... or to move in

revision at the conclusions of the Magistrate's findings".

The Appellant soug11.t to revise only the order of ejectment as the.

substantial relief in his revision application filed before the Provincial

High Court. There was no challenge to the validity of the quit notice in

that application. Even if he did challenge it, the Provincial High Court

could not have determined the validity of the said quit notice as per the

above quoted judicial precedent.

Thus, it is seen that the selection of the best remedy from these

options had to be made by the Appellant at the appropriate juncture and

the Courts would employ different considerations in evaluating claims

under these separate legal remedies. The considerations that might assume

importance in an application for the issuance of a prerogative writ, might

not be useful in an application made for a discretionary remedy such as

9

revision. The Appellant misdirected himself in his failure to appreciate this

inherent distinction between the two distinct legal remedies.

The challenge by the Appellant to the affidavit that had been filed

by the Respondent in support of his application under Section 5 of the Act,

was mounted for the first time in this Court. In his revision application,

there was no mention of such a ground although he challenged the legality

of the order of ejectment. This being a mixed question of fact and law, the

Appellant cannot raise it before this Court for the first time. However, the

supporting affidavit of the Respondent sufficiently complies to the format

of Form C of the said Act.

In view of the forgoing, it is our considered opinion that the appeal

of the Appellant is devoid of any merit whatsoever. In the circumstances,

we affirm both orders sought to be impugned by the instant appeal.

The appeal of the Appellant is dismissed with costs fixed at Rs.

50,000.00.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JANAK DE SIL V At J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

10