IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

1. Gaspe Mudiyanselage

Kusumalatha alias

Liyanage Kusumalatha,

New Rest Inn, Thummodara,

Kuliyapitiya.

2. P.G.D.J. Samarawickrama,

1172, Dhammodaya Mawatha,

Baththaramulla.

Original Petitioners-Respondents-

Appellants in CA (PHC) 78A/2005

CA CASE NO: CA (PHC) 78/2005

CA (PHC) 78A/2005

HC KURUNAGALA CASE NO: HCR 133/2003

MC KULIYAPITIYA CASE NO: 6971/66

Vs.

1. H.M. Sriya Swarnakanthi,

83/5, Jaya Mawatha,

Kuliyapitiya.

2. H.M. Piyadasa Gunathilaka,

Thummodara, Kuliyapitiya.

3. W.A. Sudath Vijitha Weerakkody,

83/5, Jaya Mawatha,

Kuliyapitiya.

Original Respondents-Petitioners-

Appellants in CA (PHC) 78/2005

2

Before: K.K. Wickramasinghe, J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Manohara De Silva, P.C., with Imalka

Abeysinghe for the original Respondents-

Petitioners-Appellants in CA (PHC) 78/2005.

R. Wimalarathna for the original Petitioners-

Respondents-Appellants in CA (PHC)

78A/2005.

Decided on: 21.05.2019

Samayawardhena, J.

The two petitioners (G.M. Kusumalatha and P.G.D.J.

Samarawickrama) filed this application in the Magistrates Court

of Kuliyapitiya under section 66(1)(b) of the Primary Courts

Procedure Act, No. 44 of 1979, making three parties as

respondents (H.M. Sriya Swarnakanthi, H.M. Piyadasa

Gunathilake, W.A. Sudath Vijitha Weerakkody) seeking an order

under section 68(3) of the Act to restore them in possession on

the premise that they were forcibly dispossessed by the

respondents and their agents within two months prior to the filing

of the application in Court. After filing objections and counter

objections together with documents, the Court disposed of the

inquiry by way of written submissions. By order dated

31.10.2003, the learned Magistrate granted the relief prayed for

by the petitioners, and the order was executed through Fiscal and

the petitioners were restored in possession.

3

The respondents filed a revision application before the High Court

against this order, and the High Court by order dated 31.03.2005

set aside the order of the Magistrates Court.

The petitioners as well as the respondents have appealed against

that order to this Court. The appeal by the petitioners is

understandable. But the respondents also appealed, because,

after setting aside the Magistrates Court order, the learned High

Court Judge did not make the consequential order in restoring

the respondents in possession.

The learned counsel for both parties agreed to abide by a single

Judgment in respect of both appeals and invited the Court to

pronounce the Judgment on the written submissions tendered to

this Court long time ago.

It is common ground that the learned High Court Judge set aside

the order of the learned Magistrate on the sole basis that the

learned Magistrate has not, according to the journal entries of the

Magistrates Court case record, endeavoured to induce the parties

to arrive at a settlement before the matter was fixed for the inquiry

as required by section 66(6) of the Primary Courts Procedure Act.

The learned High Court Judge relied only on the Judgment of this

Court in Ali v. Abdeen [2001] 1 Sri LR 413 to come to that

conclusion.

Sections 66(6) and 66(7) of the Primary Courts Procedure Act read

as follows:

66(6) On the date fixed for filing affidavits and documents,

where no application has been made for filing counter-

affidavits, or on the date fixed for filing counter-affidavits,

whether or not such affidavits and documents have been

4

filed, the court shall before fixing the case for inquiry make

every effort to induce the parties and the persons interested

(if any) to arrive at a settlement of the dispute and if the

parties and persons interested agree to a settlement the

settlement shall be recorded and signed by the parties and

persons interested and an order made in accordance with

the terms as settled.

66(7) Where the parties and persons interested (if any) do not

arrive at a settlement, the court shall fix the case for inquiry

on a date which shall not be later than two weeks from the

date on which the case was called for the filing of affidavits

and documents or counter-affidavits and documents, as the

case may be.

In terms of section 66(6), after the counter-affidavits are filed, the

Court shall, before fixing the case for inquiry, make every effort to

induce the parties to arrive at a settlement of the dispute and if

the parties agree to a settlement, the settlement shall be recorded

and order made accordingly. If there is no settlement, in terms of

section 66(7), the Court shall fix the case for inquiry.

In Ali v. Abdeen (supra), Gunawardena J., sitting alone has held

that non-compliance with section 66(6) makes the final order of

the learned Magistrate invalid as It is the making of an effort to

induce parties and the fact that the effort was not attended with

success that clothe the Primary Court with jurisdiction to initiate an

inquiry with regard to the question as to who was in possession.

According to Gunawardena J. the Magistrates Court has no

jurisdiction to hold the inquiry and then make an order unless

the Court makes an effort to induce the parties to arrive at a

settlement of the dispute.

5

Gunawardena J. has further elaborated this at pages 415-416 in

the following terms:

Thus, it is to be observed that the Primary Court Judge was

under a peremptory duty to encourage or make every effort,

so to say, to facilitate dispute settlement, before assuming

jurisdiction to hold an inquiry into the matter of possession

and impose on the parties a settlement by means of the court

order. It was obligatory on the Primary Court as a condition-

precedent to holding an inquiry, to have made a conscious

endeavor to have composed or ironed out the differences

between the parties-a duty which, in this instance, had been

neglected. The making of an effort by the court was such a

duty as should have been done or performed before the court

could have validly embarked upon an inquiry in pursuance

of or rather in compliance with sec. 66(7) set out above. That

is a preliminary requirement which has to be fulfilled before

the jurisdiction of the Primary Court exists to hold an inquiry

under section 66(7). When Parliament has enacted that

provided a certain situation exists, then a tribunal may have

certain powers, it is clear that the tribunal will not have those

powers unless that situation exists. The making of an

endeavor by the court to settle amicably is a condition

precedent which had to be satisfied before the function of the

Primary Court under sec. 66(7) began, that is, to consider

who had been in possession. Since the Primary Court had

acted without jurisdiction in proceeding to determine the

question of possession, its decision is, in fact, of no force or

avail in law. Accordingly the decision dated 21. 11. 1990 is

hereby set aside. It is the making of an effort to induce

parties and the fact that the effort was not attended with

6

success that clothe the Primary Court with jurisdiction to

initiate an inquiry with regard to the question as to who was

in possession. The fact that the Primary Court had not made

an endeavor to persuade parties to arrive at an amicable

settlement fundamentally affects the capacity or deprives the

Primary Court of competence to hold an inquiry into the

question of possession. (emphasis added)

This Judgment of Gunawardena J. is extensively made use of in

appeals by the defeated parties in the Magistrates Courts as an

easy way of getting well-considered orders of the Magistrates

Courts set aside.

With respect, I am unable to agree with the above conclusion of

Gunawardena J. for several reasons.

Firstly, it is not clear from the Judgment on what basis

Gunawardena J. came to the conclusion that the learned

Magistrate in that case, did not endeavor to induce the parties to

settle the matter before fixing the case for inquiry. I presume it is

from the journal entries of the Magistrates Court case record, as

the learned High Court Judge did in the instant case. That is, in

my view, not a healthy practice.

Section 66(6) does not require the Magistrate to record his failure

to settle the matter. That section only requires the Magistrate to

record the settlement, if the attempt is successful. To put

differently, if the matter is settled, the settlement shall be

recorded and order be made accordingly; and if the matter is not

settled, case can straightaway be fixed for inquiry. Hence, merely

because there is nothing in the journal entries in the Magistrates

Court case record to show that the Magistrate took effort to induce

7

the parties to arrive at a settlement of the dispute, the Judge in

appeal, in my view, cannot, with a stroke of the pen, set aside a

well-considered order of a Magistrate. Failure to record of the

failure to settle does not amount to failure to comply with the law.

Secondly, notwithstanding the act of inducement on the part of

the Magistrate for a settlement under section 66(6), prima facie

suggests to be mandatory as the word used in the section is

shall, that step shall be construed as directory, especially in

view of the fact that, a party shall not be made to suffer for the

lapses of the Judge, over which he (the party) has no control.

It is interesting note that, except 66(8)(a), in all the sub-sections

from (1)-8(b) in section 66, which includes 66(6), although the

word shall has been used, the Superior Courts have not

considered those steps/acts as mandatory, but treated them only

as directory.

In Ramalingam v. Thangarajah [1982] 2 Sri LR 693 at 701-703,

Sharvanada J. (later C.J.) explained:

The question was raised as to what was the consequence of

the failure of the Judge to observe the time-limits prescribed

for the various acts and steps leading to the determination

and order under Section 68. It is significant that the

prescription of time is preceded by the word shall. The

obligatory nature of the requirement that the particular

step/act should be taken or done within a fixed time is

indicated by the word shall. This expression is generally

used to impose a duty to do what is prescribed, not a

discretion to comply with it according to whether it is

reasonable or practicable to do. Prima facie the word shall

suggests that it is mandatory, but that word has often been

8

rightly construed as directory. Everything turns on the

context in which it is used; and the purpose and effect of the

section in which it appears. It is to be noted that the statute

does not declare what shall be the consequence of

non-compliance by Court with regard to this requirement as

to time limit prescribed by the law. Are these procedural rules

to be regarded as mandatory, in which case disobedience

will render void or voidable what has been done or as

directory, in which case disobedience will be treated as an

irregularity not affecting what has been done? It is to be

observed that this obligation with regard to time limit is

imposed on court, over whose acts or omissions the parties

do not have any control. Maxwell on Interpretation of

Statutes 11th Edition, at page 369 appositely states-

Where the prescription of a statute related to performance

of a public duty and where invalidation of acts done, in

neglect of them would work serious general inconvenience or

injustice to persons who have no control over those entrusted

with the duty yet not promote the essential aims of the

legislature, such prescriptions seem to be generally

understood as mere instructions for the guidance and

government of those on whom the duty is imposed, or, in

other words, as directory only. Neglect of them may be penal,

indeed, but it does not affect the validity of the acts done in

disregard of them. It has often been held, for instance, when

an Act ordered a thing to be done by a public body or public

officers and pointed out the specific time when it was to be

done, then the Act is directory only and might be complied

with after the prescribed time.

9

In this context, one may also invoke the maxim Actus curiae

neminem gravabit (an act of Court shall prejudice no man).

In my opinion this maxim which is founded upon justice and

good sense may be appropriately applied to salvage a

determination and order made under section 68, where the

Judge has failed to observe the time-limits imposed by the

legislature for the various procedural steps prescribed by it.

The Judge is certainly to be blamed but a party in whose

favour such an order is made should not suffer for the

Judges default. (emphasis added)

In Officer-in-Charge, Police Station, Kotahena v. Dewasinghe

[1983] 2 Sri LR 149, Seneviratne J. at pages 152-153, in reference

to the said Judgment in Ramalingams case (supra) stated as

follows:

It is clear from the judgment of Sharvananda J. that though

that appeal was specifically related to section 67(1) of the

Act, the Supreme Court has considered the broader issue

whether the violation of the mandatory provisions of part 7

of the Primary Courts Procedure Act makes the proceedings

of the Primary Court null and void. Part 7 is the Chapter of

the Act which deals with inquiry into disputes affecting

land, and where a breach of peace is threatened or likely.

The mandatory provisions of this part 7 are section 66(3),

66(4), 66(5), 66(6), 66(7), 67(1) and 67(2). In dealing with the

question as to whether these provisions were directory or

mandatory, Sharvananda, J. stated as follows:- The

question was raised as to what was the consequence of the

failure of the Judge to observe the time limits prescribed for

various acts and steps leading to a determination and order

10

under section 68. It is to be noted that the statute does not

declare what shall be the consequences of non-compliance

by court with regard to this requirements as to the times

prescribed by law. Sharvananda. J, having considered the

provisions referred to above at length finally came to this

conclusion I am, therefore, of the view that the provisions

as to time limit in section 66 or 67 though the words shall

suggest that they are mandatory should be construed as

being directory and the non-compliance by Court of the

provisions of section 66 or 67 of the Act does not divest the

court of jurisdiction conferred on it by section 66(2) to make

determination and order under Section 68. This dictum cited

above from the said judgment clearly shows that the

Supreme Court has considered the nature of the provisions

of both sections 67(1) and 67(2). As such the judgment in

Ramalingams case cannot be restricted to a ruling only on

the nature and effect of section 67(1) of the Act. In view of the

judgment referred to above, I hold that the non-compliance

by the learned Magistrate of the provisions of section 67(1) of

the Primary Courts Procedure Act has not vitiated the

proceedings. (emphasis added)

Thirdly, and more importantly, the ratio of the Judgment in Ali v.

Abdeen (supra) is that the Court lacks jurisdiction to make a final

determination unless the Court makes an attempt to settle the

matter. I regret my inability to agree with it.

There is no dispute that the learned Magistrate had jurisdiction

over the subject to make a valid order. In other words, the matter

was within the plenary jurisdiction of the learned Magistrate, but

the question was whether he invoked it in the right way. If a party

11

to a case (such as the respondents in this case) asserts that the

Magistrate invoked the jurisdiction in the wrong way, he should

have objected to it at that time before the same Magistrate. The

respondents in the instant case did not do so. They kept silent

and allowed the Magistrate to fix the case for inquiry without the

Magistrate (according to the respondents) making an effort to

settle the matter. They cannot keep silent without objecting to

the jurisdiction and allow the Court to exercise the jurisdiction in

the wrong way and challenge the jurisdiction later when the order

is against him. That is prohibited in law. In such a situation, the

objection to jurisdiction is deemed to have been waived and the

party is deemed to have acquiesced in the wrong invocation of the

jurisdiction.

However the situation is different, if the Court had total or patent

want of jurisdiction over the subject, in which event, the objection

can be taken up at any time including for the first time in appeal,

and, if upheld, all the previous proceedings become a nullity as

there was coram non judice. By acquiescence or waiver, one

cannot convert nullity into validity. The situation under

consideration is not patent want of jurisdiction but latent want of

jurisdiction.

In Navaratnasingham v. Arumugam [1980] 2 Sri LR 1, Soza J. at

pages 5-6, citing both statutory and case law, lucidly explained

this principle in the following manner:

It is necessary to remember that an objection to jurisdiction

must be taken as early as possible. Section 39 of the

Judicature Act, No. 2 of 1978 (and prior to that section 43 of

the Administration of Justice Law, No. 44 of 1973) laid down

that-

12

Whenever any defendant or accused party shall have

pleaded in any action, proceeding or matter brought in any

Court of First Instance neither party shall afterwards be

entitled to object to the jurisdiction of such court, but such

court shall be taken and held to have jurisdiction over such

action, proceeding or matter. (cf. also sections 30 and 71 of

the old Courts Ordinance).

Further the failure to object to jurisdiction when the matter

was being inquired into must be treated as a waiver on the

part of the 2nd respondent-petitioner. It is true that

jurisdiction cannot be conferred by consent. But where a

matter is within the plenary jurisdiction of the Court, if no

objection is taken, the Court will then have jurisdiction to

proceed on with the matter and make a valid order. This

point has been well explained by Chandavakar, J. in the

case of Jose Antonio Baretto v. Francisco Antonio Rodrigues

(1910) 35 Bombay 24:

But it is urged that the parties cannot by consent give

jurisdiction where none exists. That is so where the law

confers no jurisdiction. Here the consent is not given to

jurisdiction where none exists.

In the case of Alagappa Chetty v. Arumugam Chetty (1920)

2 CL Rec 202, Bertram. C.J. on the same point cited with

approval a dictum of Mookerjee, J. in the case of Gurdeo

Singh v. Chandrikah Singh and Chandrikah Singh v.

Rashbehary Singh, I.L.R., (1907) 36 Cal. 193:

........where jurisdiction over the subject matter exists

requiring only to be invoked in the right way, the party who

has invited or allowed the Court to exercise it in a wrong

13

way, cannot afterwards turn round and challenge the

legality of the proceedings due to his own invitation or

negligence.

In the case of Pisani v. Attorney-General for Gibraltar (1987)

L.R. 5 P.C. 516, the Privy Council affirmed this same doctrine

that unless there is an attempt to give the Court a jurisdiction

which it does not possess, the Court can, in the absence of

objection, hear a case where it has jurisdiction over the

subject. These principles were followed also in the case of

Thevagnanasekeram v. Kuppammal (1934) 36 NLR 337

where Macdonell, C.J. held that a party was not entitled to

challenge the jurisdiction of the Court to give the decision

invited by such party, so long as the Court had jurisdiction

over the subject.

The distinction between elements which are essential for the

foundation of jurisdiction and the mode in which such

jurisdiction has to be assumed and exercised is of

fundamental importance. Non-compliance with the

prescribed mode in which a particular jurisdiction should be

assumed and exercised can be waived, provided there is

jurisdiction over the subject matter.

Therefore in the instant case as there was no objection to the

invocation of the jurisdiction of the Magistrate, he was

entitled to proceed on with the matter as it was within his

plenary jurisdiction. (emphasis added)

In David Appuhamy v. Yasassi Thero [1987] 1 Sri LR 253 at page

255, Wijetunga J., applied the said dicta of Soza J. to overrule the

jurisdictional objection:

14

The case of Navaratnasingham v. Arumugam (supra) is

again relevant to a consideration of this aspect of the matter.

That case too dealt with an application under section 62 of

the Administration of Justice Law No. 44 of 1973, which

corresponds to section 66 of the present Primary Courts

Procedure Act. There too it was submitted that the Magistrate

was not vested with jurisdiction to proceed in the matter as

he had failed initially to satisfy himself of the likelihood of a

breach of the peace. This court held that such an objection to

jurisdiction must be taken as early as possible and the

failure to take such objection when the matter was being

inquired into must be treated as a waiver on the part of the

petitioner. It was further held that where a matter is within

the plenary jurisdiction of the court, if no objection is taken,

the court will then have jurisdiction to proceed and make a

valid order. The dicta of Soza, J. in this regard too, which I

would adopt, apply to the instant case. (emphasis added)

Hence if a party has not objected to fixing the case for inquiry and

allowed the Magistrate to make an order according to law, without

the latter first making an effort to settle the matter as provided for

in section 66(6), such party cannot, when the order is against

him, take up the belated objection that the Magistrate did not

have jurisdiction to make that order as he did not comply with

section 66(6).

This conclusion is supported by the Divisional Bench decision of

this Court in Jayantha Gunasekera v. Jayatissa Gunasekera

[2011] 1 Sri LR 284 at 302.

When the determination of the matter is within the plenary

jurisdiction of the Court, objection to jurisdiction shall be taken

15

at the earliest possible opportunity for otherwise objection is

deemed to have been waived.

The decision in Ali v. Abdeen [2001] 1 Sri LR 413 does not, with

utmost respect, represent the correct position of law, and

therefore need not be followed.

As was held in Ponniah v. Sheriff (1966) 69 NLR 67 Court was not

bound by an earlier decision in which material cases and statutory

provisions were not considered.

In the circumstances, the order of the learned High Court Judge

cannot be allowed to stand.

There is no necessity to send the case back to the High Court 14

years after the impugned order of the High Court (and 16 years

after the order of the Magistrates Court) to hear the revision

application on merits. The learned Magistrate has given cogent

reasons acceptable to this Court for his conclusion that the

petitioners were entitled to the relief under section 68(3) of

Primary Courts Procedure Act. The petitioners have been

restored in possession since the order the Magistrate Court in

2003. The parties can go before the District Court to resolve the

dispute permanently, if they have not gone before so far, as the

order of the Magistrates Court is a temporary order made only to

prevent breach of the peace.

The order of the learned High Court Judge dated 31.03.2005 is

set aside and the order of the learned Magistrate dated

31.10.2003 is restored and the appeal of the original petitioners

is allowed.

16

The consideration of the appeal of the original respondents does

not arise and the appeal of the said respondents is therefore pro

forma dismissed.

Let the parties bear their own costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

K.K. Wickramasinghe, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal