IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Koswetiye Gedera Ajith Ananda

Weerathilaka,

Pasal Mawatha,

Beligamuwa,

Galewela.

Petitioner

CASE NO: CA/WRIT/107/2016

Vs.

1. Gagana Bulathsinghala,

Commander,

Sri Lanka Air Force,

Colombo 2.

2. Wing Commander,

N.K. Thanippuliarachchi,

Sri Lanka Air Force,

Colombo 2.

3. Air Commodore,

R.N. Thilakasinghe,

Commanding Officer,

Sri Lanka Air Force Base,

Ratmalana.

Respondents

2

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Jagath Abeynayaka for the Petitioner.

Suranga Wimalasena, S.C.C., for the

Respondents.

Decided on: 05.03.2019

Samayawardhena, J.

The petitioner, a warrant officer in the Sri Lanka Air Force, filed

this application seeking to quash, by way of a writ of certiorari,

the decision of the 1st respondent, the Commander of the Sri

Lanka Air Force, marked P2, to discharge him from service

under the clause Service No Longer Required.

This decision has been made following a summary trial whereby

the petitioner was found guilty for assisting a soldier by the

name of Passi of the Central African Air Force in stealing of some

aircraft fuel. This has happened in Central Africa whilst the

petitioner was serving in the Sri Lankan Aviation Unit deployed

in the Republic of Central Africa under the United Nations Peace

Keeping Forces.

As seen from R8 tendered by the respondents, summary trial on

the charge of Conduct Prejudicial to Air Force Discipline, has

been conducted by the Officer Disposing the Charge, Air

Commodore Payoe.

In R8, the Officer Disposing the Charge has come to the

following conclusion:

3

As per the evidence given by the two witnesses summoned

to the summary trial and the accused himself and as per

the inquiry report, it is clearly evident that this accused

Warrant Officer had assisted the Central African soldier to

remove Avtur (aircraft fuel) from aircraft which is an Air

Force property during the period mentioned in the charge.

Allowing outsiders to take Air Force properties intentionally

is an Air Force offence in the absence of any authority

regarding it. The availability of evidence herein established

the charge levelled against him and upon which the

accused was found guilty.

Then in R8, the Officer Disposing the Charge states as follows:

Committing such an offence by an Air Force serviceman

whilst performing duties in peace keeping mission in a

foreign country attributes disrepute to the Air Force before

foreigners which cant be condoned under whatsoever the

circumstances. The offenders of this nature should be

sentenced with exemplary punishment to arrest future

occurrence of such offences. Therefore, undersigned

awarded the following punishment to the accused

considering the gravity of the offence.

The punishment is as follows:

AWARD OF PUNISHMENT

Severe Reprimand

Sgd/ MDAP PAYOE

Air Commodore

OFFICER DISPOSING THE CHARGE

Date: 17 November 2015

4

Approval of the Commander of the Air Force

Agree with the award/amend the punishment as follows.

Sgd/ GP BULATHSINGHALA

Air Marshal

COMMANDER OF THE AIR FORCE

Date: 1 January 2015

Then it is clear that upon found guilty for conduct prejudicial to

the Air Force Discipline, as the punishment, the petitioner has

been severely reprimanded. Severe Reprimand is a punishment.

It is important to understand that this punishment was given

with the approval of the Commander of the Air Force. It is also

very important to note that, as seen from the above, the

Commander of the Air Force could amend the punishment, but

he deleted that part and agreed with the punishment suggested

by the Officer Disposing the Charge, i.e. Severe Reprimand.

After this punishment was meted out, the petitioner had

continuously served in the Air Force as a Warrant Officer until

he was served P2 dated 21.01.2016 whereby he has been

Discharged from Service under the clause Service No Longer

Required by the Commander of the Air Force.

The petitioner challenges only P2 in these proceedings. In my

view, the petitioner shall succeed on three grounds.

The first ground is that the petitioner cannot be punished for the

same offence twice. That is against the Doctrine of Double

Jeopardy. Upon found guilty he was punished by the

Commander of the Air Force by reprimanding severely. That

was not subject to any qualifications or conditions. If the

Commander wanted at that time, as I explained earlier, he could

5

have amended the punishment and substituted it with

Discharge from Service under the clause Service No Longer

Required. Whether a Warrant Officer can be discharged from

service after summary trial without a Court Marshal is another

matter, which need not be considered in these proceedings.

Once punishment of Severe Reprimand is given, the same

Commander after sometime cannot give another punishment by

sacking the petitioner from service under the clause Service No

Longer Required. What is the meaning of reprimanding an

officer if he is to be sacked from the service? Reprimanding as a

punishment is given to correct the officer as his services is

required by the Commander.

In Air Marshal G.D. Perera v. K.H.M.S. Bandara1, an officer cadet

of the Sri Lanka Air Force was tried summarily and found guilty

for entering one of the abandoned officers married quarters of

the Air Force without due authority, and committing criminal

trespass. He was imposed a punishment of 14-day detention for

the former offence and 30-day detention for the latter offence.

Later the officer has been exonerated on the latter charge and

only the punishment for the former charge was carried out.

After serving that sentence, when he reported for duty, he has

been informed that he has been discharged from service.

The Court of Appeal quashed that decision of discharge by

certiorari. In appeal to the Supreme Court, affirming the

Judgment of this Court except in respect of costs, Wanasundare

J. with the agreement of Ekanayake J. and Dep J. (later C.J.)

inter alia held as follows:

1 SC Appeal 104/2008 decided on 29.09.2014. This is also reported in Supreme Court Law Report Volume 2 by Atula Bandara Herath at pages 213-220

6

Furthermore, the appellants have not explained as to what

caused the respondent to be punished and discharged from

service. He was punished at the end of the inquiry. After

he completed the detention period, he was ordered to be

discharged. This is equal to a second sentencing which is

not allowed in law. No person can be punished twice over.

I hold that the discharge of the 1st respondent was ultra

vires.

The second ground why P2 shall not be allowed to stand is that

punishment should commensurate with the offence committed.

The petitioner has not stolen the Air Force property, but the

allegation is that he assisted a Central African soldier to steal

some aircraft fuel taken out from the aircraft for testing

purposes, which is meant to be destroyed, and thereby behaved

in a manner prejudicial to the Air Force discipline.

Is this attract complete dismissal from service? The petitioner

has joined the regular force of the Air Force on 05.07.1995.

That means, he had served the Air Force more than 20 long

years when he was sacked from the service, it appears, without

even pension. This punishment, after summary trial, even if it is

legally possible to award, is, in my view, ex facie excessive.

In the aforesaid Supreme Court case, the officer was still a

trainee when he was discharged from service for more serious

offences, and had, according to the Judgment, served about 3

years in the Air Force. Still, the Supreme Court took the view

that, after serving the punishment of 14-day detention,

dismissal from service was unreasonable. Wanasundara J.

stated:

7

It is blatantly clear that the discharge from service which

means losing his occupation was totally disproportionate to

the punishment of 14 days which he was subjected to,

which is unreasonable and cannot be justified and as such

arbitrary..The Regulations are made under the Air

Force Act and under no other Act of Parliament. Anyway

Regulation 126 does not confer an unfettered discretion to

the 1st appellant to discharge the respondent from service.

I am of the view that the second punishment meted out to the

petitioner in the case at hand, is clearly excessive and therefore

arbitrary.

The third ground is that the petitioner being a Warrant Officer

cannot be discharged from service under the clause Service No

Longer Required as seen from page 15 of R7.

The learned Senior State Counsel explains the basis of discharge

of the petitioner from service in the following manner:

The Ceylon Government Gazette No.10665 dated

23.04.1954 signed and published by the then Minister of

Defence and External Affairs stipulates the Regulations

made in terms of the Air Force Act No.41 of 1949, the

document marked R7.

The said Gazette provides provisions in respect of

discharging airmen under SNLR and it empowers the

Commander of Air Force to discharge an airman under his

Services being No Longer Required (SNLR) and accordingly,

8

the decision of the 1st respondent is in accordance with the

applicable regulationsvide top page 15 of R7.2

According to the page 15 of the Regulations marked R7,

discharge on Service No Longer Required Applies only to an

airman who cannot be discharged under any other item. The

learned Senior State Counsel for the respondents has also in the

above admitted that it applies to an airman. The petitioner is

admittedly not an Airman but a Warrant Officer above the rank

of an Airmanvide for instance R8 above referred to.

When the Regulations marked R7 is perused, it is clear that

Discharge from Service can be made on various grounds on

various categories of officers. Vide for instance page 14 of R7,

which says Discharge from Service can be made For

misconduct, which Applies to a Warrant Officer dismissed from

the service by sentence of court-martial.

The Discharge from Service under the Regulation (xii) (a)

appearing at page 15 of R7 is clearly ultra vires and has no force

or avail in law.

For the aforesaid reasons I quash P2 (also marked as R6) dated

21.01.2016 whereby the petitioner was discharged from service

on the clause Service No Longer Required.

Application allowed. No costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

2 Vide paragraphs 21 and 22 of the written submissions dated 30.10.2018.