IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRARIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIS OF SRI LANKA

CA Application No. 326/17 Writ

1.

2.

3.

A matter of an application for Writ of

Certiorari, Mandamus and Prohibition.

Sampath Priyantha Jayasundara

(The temporary Trustee of Dodamwala

Sri Natha Dewala of Kandy District)

ofNo.949/1, Peradeniya Road, Kandy

PETITIONER

-Vs-

D.N. Parakrama Jayawardane

The Commmissioner,

Department of Buddhist Affairs,

Regional Office, Divisional,

Secretariat Building, Kandy

Nimal Kotwalagedara,

The Commissioner General,

Department of Buddhist Affairs,

"Daham Paya", 135, Srimath

Anagarika Dharmapala Mawatha,

Colombo 07.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

Counsel

Before

4. H.M. Eranga Neelakantha Herath,

"Sandamali Niwasa"

9th Post, Dikyaya, Buttala.

5. H.W Janaka Saman Kumara,

No. 21, Siyambalagoda, Danture.

RESPONDENTS

: Sunil Abeyrathne for the Petitioner

Dilrukshi Dias Wickramasinghe PC DSG for the 1 S\ 2nd and

3 rd Respondents

L.T.B. Dehideniya J.

Shiran Gooneratne J.

Argued on : 12.10.2017

Decidedon : 13.10.2017

L.T.B.Dehideniya J. (P/C.A.)

The Petitioner was the Basnayake Nilame of the Sri Natha Devale at

Dodamwela and is a candidate for the same post at the upcoming election to

be held on the 16th of this month. Among the eligible voters for the election

of Basnayake Nilame, the non bhikku trustees of the temples of the area are

also included. The Petitioner has obtained a list of voters from the 1 st

Respondent on 18.09.2017 marked "C". In the said list there was only one

non bhikku trustee listed. Thereafter, the 1 st Respondent issued another list

on 04.10.2017 marked "E" including the names of the 4th and 5th

Respondents in the said category. The Petitioners argument is that when an

election is coming closer the Viharadhipathi bhikkus take steps to withdraw

the names of the bhikku trustees because they are not having the voting

rights and nominate non bhikku trustees to make them eligible to vote. After

the election, again they withdraw the names of the non bhikku trustees and

nominate bhikkus for the post of trustees. The Petitioner's contention is that

this practice has an adverse effect on the election. Therefore he is seeking to

quash the list marked as "E".

The Counsel for Petitioner further submits that under section 8(2) of the

Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance, (hereinafter sometimes called and

referred to as the BTO) the eligible voters shall be given one month notice.

From the date of the second list marked "E" there is no one month time

period to the date of election. Therefore the Counsel argue that the list

marked "E" is not valid in law.

The learned President's Counsel appearing for the 1 st Respondent submitted

that the nominating trustee vests solely on the hands of the Viharadhipati

Thero. Once the nominations are being forwarded to the 1 st Respondent, it is

mandatory for the 1 st Respondent to issue the appointment unless the

nominee is not unqualified under the provisions of the BTO. The learned

President's Counsel further submitted that the appointment of the additional

two persons named in the list marked "E" was a process started long before

the election was called. She tendered certain documents across the Bar table

where it shows that the process commenced in July, that is prior to the paper

notice calling for the election is being published.

Under section 8(2) of the BTO the voters must be informed one month prior

to the election. The section reads;

8. (1) The trustee for a dewale for which it has been customary to

appoint a Basnayake Nilame shall be the Basnayake Nilame thereof

The trustee for every other dewale shall be a person appointed by the

Commissioner of Buddhist Affairs.

(2) Whenever a vacancy occurs in the office of a Basnayake Nilame

the Commissioner of Buddhist Affairs shall within three months of

such occurrence summon to a meeting at a place within the

administrative district in which such dewale is situated"

(a)(i) in the case of a dewale situated in the Kandyan provinces,

the persons for the time being holding office in that district

as divisional Assistant Government Agents; or

(ii) in the case of any other dewale, the persons for the time

being holding office in that district as divisional Assistant

Government Agents and grama seva niladharis;

(b)the Basnayake Nilames of the dewales in the administrative

district in which the dewale is situated and in the case of a

dewale in the Kandy administrative district also the

Diyawadana Nilame; and

(c) the trustees not being bhikkhus of all temples situated within

the divisional Assistant Government Agent's division in which

the dewale is situated, to each of whom he shall send by

registered post not less than one month before the date fixed

for the said meeting a written notice thereof addressed to the

last known place of abode of such person.

Under this section the voters have a right to receive notice one month prior

to the election. The Petitioner does not complain as a voter that he has not

received the one month notice. His complaint is that the two persons named

in the list marked "E" have not received notices or there was no opportunity

to send notices to them. Petitioner has no right to complain about other

voters.

Under section 11 (2) of the BTO the 1 st Respondent has no option other than

issuing the appointment to the person nominated by the Viharadhipathi. The

section reads;

11. (1) ....... .

(2) Whenever a nomination is duly made under sections 9 or 10

and reported to the Commissioner of Buddhist Affairs it shall be

the duty of the Commissioner of Buddhist Affairs to forthwith issue

a letter of appointment to the person so nominated unless such

appointment would contravene the provisions of this Ordinance.

The 1 st Respondent is performing a ministerial act and he has no discretion

in appointing the trustee. On the other hand he cannot delay the appointment

for the reason that an election is called because the law provides that the 1 st

Respondent to issue the letter of appointment forthwith. If he delays to issue

the latter of appointment, he will be violating the duty entrusted upon him

by law. By operation of law the trustee so appointed becomes eligible to

vote at the election.

Under these circumstances the 1 st Respondent issuing an amended list of

voters marked "E" is within the law.

I refuse notice and dismiss the application.

President, Court of Appeal

Shiran Gooneratne J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal