==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application in terms of Section 331 of the Code of Criminal (Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979).

Hon. Attorney General. Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

COMPLAINANT Court of Appeal

Case No.CA/HCC/164-165/2024

HC-BADULLA-HC-36-2016

Vs. 1. Selva Dore Krishnakumar

Line No.1, Haputhale Estate, Haputhale.

2. Selva Dore Sivakumar

Line No.1, Haputhale Estate, Haputhale. ACCUSED AND NOW BETWEEN

1. Selva Dore Krishnakumar

Line No.1, Haputhale Estate, Haputhale. Currently: Remand Prison, Badulla. 2. Selva Dore Sivakumar

Line No.1, Haputhale Estate, Haputhale. Accused/Appellant Currently: Remand Prison, Badulla

Page 2 of 9

ACCUSED-APPELLANTS

Vs. Hon. Attorney General. Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT Before: A. Ranaraja J.

& Dr. Sumudu Premachandra J.

Counsel: Sandamal Rajapaksha for the Accused-Appellants.

Hiranjan Peiris, ASG for the State.

Accused-Appellant is produced via zoom platform by

the Prison Authorities.

Written Submissions: By the Accused-Appellants filed on 17/09/2025.

By the Respondents filed on 20/12/2024. Argument On : 01/06/2026. Judgement On : 03/07/2026.

Dr. Sumudu Premachandra J.

1] This criminal Appeal arises from a trial before the High Court of the Uva

Province held at Badulla, where the State preferred indictments against two

Page 3 of 9

Accused-Appellants for committing the offense of murder of Karuppan

Pushparaj, on 24/07/2009, an offense punishable under Section 296 read with

Section 32 (common intention), within the Jurisdiction of Badulla.

2] The Accused-Appellants pleaded not guilty, the case proceeded to trial, during

which the prosecution produced documentary and oral evidence marked P1 to

P6 and led the testimonies of nine witnesses. Following the prosecution’s case,

the Accused-Appellants gave statements from the dock, the defense concluded

its case and on 07/06/2024, the learned High Court Judge delivered a

judgement convicting both Accused-Appellants. The Accused-Appellants were

convicted of the murder does not amount to culpable homicide under Section

297 read with Section 32 of the Penal Code. The trial court sentenced both

Accused to 10 years of rigorous imprisonment with Rs. 5000 fine each. They

now challenge the conviction and sentencing.

3] I consider the grounds of Appeal. The Appellants contend that the Learned

High Court Judge failed to consider the core ingredients of the offense and failed

to properly evaluate the evidence relating to the charges. Furthermore, the

defense argues that the prosecution's evidence lacked credibility, contained

contradictions, and failed to prove the case beyond a reasonable doubt,

especially given that the defense’s case created a reasonable doubt that went

unconsidered. Finally, the Appellants assert that a definitive conclusion could

not be reached based on the evidence and sentencing guidelines, and that they

were severely prejudiced at the time of sentencing due to a lack of legal

representation, which deprived them of the opportunity to make submissions in

mitigation of their sentence. Since these grounds of Appeal are interwoven, those

are considered together.

4] The learned counsel for the Appellants contended that පෙ1, the lethal weapon,

which was marked at the trial, was identified by PW2 as it had a black handle;

however, PW2 had identified it as white in color at the trial, created a serious

contradiction. Further, he said that there is no forensic value, as the bloodstains

Page 4 of 9

of the knife, stains in the T shirt, were not sent to the Government analyst for

proper examination. It diminished the value of evidence, thus, lacks the

consistency of the prosecution witnesses. Further, the Statement of first

Accused was recorded in Sinhala, despite the said Accused is identified as a

Tamil speaker.

5] I now consider the merits of the case. PW1, Karupan Pradeep explained the

stabbing as follows;

“උ: ඊට ෙසුව මමයි මපේ අයියායි පෙන්නාම එලියට ගියා පමානවෙ පවන්පන් කියලා බලන්න.

ප්‍ර: එලියට කියන්පන් ප ාප ේටෙ ගිපේ?

උ: පොර ඇරපෙන එලියට ගියා.

ප්‍ර: ගියාට ෙසුව පමා ද්ෙ වුපන්?

උ: ගියාට ෙසුව සේවාමිණි, ෑ ෙ පෙන සිටියා සේවාමිණි. එ ොරටම කුමාර් ඇවිල්ලා අයියා

පිටුෙසින් බො ෙත්තා. සේවාමිණි, ශාන්තා කියන ප නා ඉපන් පිහියක් ෙ පෙන ආවා.

පිහිය එ ොරටම ඉපනන් ඇෙලා අරපෙන ඇන්නා සේවාමිණි.

ප්‍ර: ාටෙ ඇන්පන්?

උ: පුෂේෙරාජ්ට සේවාමිණි.

ප්‍ර: ෙැන් ඔය සිදුවීම තමා ෙැක් ාෙ?

උ: ෙැක් ා. ෙැක් ෙමන් භය පවලා එප ම්ම මම සිටියා. ඉන් ෙසුව තව අයියා ප පනකුට

තා ලා සේවාමිණි.

ප්‍ර: වුෙ ඔබ ඔය විදි ට තා ල අපනක් අයියා?

උ: සජි කුමාර්.

ප්‍ර: සජි කුමාර් කියන පුද්ෙලයා ඔබ ඳුනන්පන් ප ාප ාමෙ?

උ: ඔහු මපේ අයියා සේවාමිණි.

ප්‍ර: සජි කුමාර් ඔබ තා ලාට ෙසුව ඔය තැනට ආවෙ?

උ: ආවා සේවාමිණි.

ප්‍ර: ඔහු ආවට ෙසුව පමා ද්ෙ වුපන්?

Page 5 of 9

උ: සේවාමිණි, මියගිය අයියා කිව්වා ශාන්තා මට පිහිපයන් ඇන්නා කිව්වා. මම අයියා අල්ල

ෙන්න ගියා. අපනක් අයියා ශන්තාව අල්ල ෙන්න යන විට එයා පිිහිපයන් වැනුවා

සේවාමිණි. පිහිය වැනුවට ෙසුව ඒ අයියාපේ අපත්ත් තුවාලයක් ඇති වුනා.

ප්‍ර: වුෙ පිහිය වැනුපව්?

උ: ශාන්තා කියන පුද්ෙලයා.

ප්‍ර: ඔබ කිව්වා ඔපේ අයියා පුෂේෙරාජ් ඔබ සමඟ තා ලා කිව්වා?

උ: එප මයි.

ප්‍ර: තා රලා ඔබ කිව්වා, අයියා කිව්වා කියලා ශාන්තා පිහිපයන් ඇන්නා කියලා?

උ: ඔව් සේවාමිණි.

ප්‍ර: ෙැන් ඔය විදි ට ඔපේ සප ෝෙරයාට පිහිපයන් ඇන්නාට ෙසුව පමම පුද්ෙලයන් පෙපෙනා

පමානවෙ පල්?

උ: පම් පෙපෙනා පිහිපයන් ඇනලා දිව්වා. අපනක් අයියා පිටුෙස දිව්වා අල්ලෙන්න.

ප්‍ර: පිටුෙස දිව්වා කියලා අෙ සේ රපන්පන් සජි කුමාර් අයියාෙ?

උ: එප මයි සේවාමිණි.

ප්‍ර: ඔපේ සප ෝෙරයාට පමම පුද්ෙලයන් කී ොරක් අනිනවාෙ ඔබ ෙැක්පක්?

උ: පෙොරක් පිහිපයන් ඇන්නා ඒ ෙැක් ා මම.” [ Emphasis is added]

6] This is clear and cogent evidence by an eye witness. When the direct evidence

is produced by the prosecution with regard to the incident, the forensic

verification on the knife and T shirt is not sine qua non for conviction.

7] Under the Section 134 of the Evidence Ordinance1, single solitary witness is

enough for conviction, if the evidence is reliable. The Courts should consider the

quality over quantity, in Criminal Law, the Courts evaluate the weight and

credibility of evidence, not its volume or scientific variety. It should be noted that

1 Justice Jayasuriya in Sumansena V Attorney General [1999] 3 Sri L.R. at 137 observed that “In our law of evidence the salutary principle is enunciated that evidence must not be counted but weighed and the evidence of a single solitary witness if cogent and impressive could be acted upon by a court of law. Section 134 of the Evidence Ordinance sets out that no particular number of witnesses shall, in any case, be required for the proof of any fact”

Page 6 of 9

reliable, unimpeachable eyewitness testimony constitutes direct evidence of a

crime and that direct evidence is of dominance over the other evidence.

8] Forensic evidence is corroborative, used primarily to support weak or

contested oral evidence. This needs corroboration as a safeguard to the direct

evidence. As noted above, there is no need for corroboration, despite minor

contradictions, the PW1’s evidence stands strong and confirms by the evidence

of PW2 and PW3.

9] The forensic verification becomes necessary if:

• The eyewitness, PW1’s testimony contains major, irreconcilable

contradictions, or;

• The visibility, identity, or presence of the witness at the scene is

reasonably doubted and;

• The medical evidence completely contradicts the oral version of how the

injury occurred.

10] In the case in hand, there are no such discrepancies. In the case of Bhojraj

v Sita Ram [1935] AIR, 193 PC 60 at 62 Lord Roche drew the real test for

accepting and rejecting a testimony of a witness based on testimonial

trustworthiness stating that “How consistent is the story with itself (consistency

per se). How does it stand the test of cross-examination? (Stability under cross-

examination) How far it fits in with the rest of the evidence and the circumstances

of the case (inconsistency inter se).” It is important to note that PW1 has

maintained the same position in his testimony throughout the trial and the

learned trial judge had believed the evidence. Moreover, the evidence of

prosecution is supported and proved by the medical evidence.

11] When considering the contradictions and errors, I am guided with the case

of Karunartne v Attorney General [2005] 2 Sri L R. 236, where Justice Jagath

Page 7 of 9

Balapatabendi noted that “Where evidence is generally reliable, much importance

should not be attached to the minor discrepancies and technical errors”. In this

case following contradictions were marked;

1. එවිට ශාන්ත වපේ හිටිය ැපමෝටම පිහිපයන් ඇන්නා. එවිට සජි කුමාර් අේයාට , අම්මා, බාප්ො

වන වවතයලිිංෙම් ට තුවාල සිදුවුනා. (වි1 from PW1)

2. මීට පෙර ශාන්ත ප වත් ක්‍රිෂේණ කුමාර් සමෙ කිසිඳු අමනාෙයක් පනාතිබුණූ බව ( වි1 from

PW2)

Omission

පොලුවලින් ෙසද්ී ( through PW8-Police witness)

12] These contradictions and omissions do not go to the root of the prosecution.

I consider that the learned trial judge had considered the consistency of the

prosecution’s version and held despite the long cross examination, their

evidence is intact.

13] It is seen that the learned trial judge had considered the dock statements

carefully and concluded those do not create any reasonable suspicion on the

prosecution version. The 1st Accused starts the dock statement as "සේවාමීනි, මල්ලිත්

සමෙ තමයි ආරවුල තිබුපන්. ඔහුපේ අේයා සමෙ කිසිම ආරවුලක් තිබුපන් නැ ැ. ඔහුපේ අේයා මැරුවා

කියලා ඒපොල්පලෝ තමයි කියන්පන් සේවාමිනි". This shows that there was an animosity

between the party irrespective “අේයා” or “මල්ලි”. The mere assertion that the 1st

Accused is handicapped cannot be treated to exonerate him from the charge

when strong case was made by the prosecution.

14] Where the strong case is made by the prosecution, the Accused must create

a doubt of the version of the prosecution. In Seetin v The Queen [1965] 68 NLR

316 at 322, Justice T. S. FERNANDO, held;

Page 8 of 9

“Where probable proof is brought of a statement of facts tending to

criminate the accused, the absence of evidence tending to a contrary

conclusion is to be considered though not alone entitled to much weight,

because the burden of proof lies on the accuser to make out the whole case

by substantive evidence. But when pretty stringent proof of circumstances

is produced tending to support the charge, and it is apparent that the

accused is so situated that he could offer evidence of all the facts and

circumstances as they exist, and show, if such was the truth, that the

suspicious circumstances can be accounted for consistently with his

innocence and he fails to offer such proof, the natural conclusion is

that the proof, if produced, instead of rebutting, would tend to

sustain the charge” [Emphasis is added]

15] Considering the nature of evidence, the learned trial judge has convicted

both Accused under Section 297 of the Penal Code. it says;

“297. Whoever commits culpable homicide not amounting to murder

shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which

may extend to twenty years, and shall also be liable to fine, if the act by

which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing death,

or of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death; or with

imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten

years, or with fine, or with both, if the act is done with the knowledge that

it is likely to cause death, but without any intention to cause death, or to

cause such bodily injury as is likely to cause death.”

16] It is noted that the evidence presented by the prosecution establishes and

justify the conclusion of the trial judge. The King Vs. Bellana Vithanage

Eddin (41 NLR 345) Chief Justice Howard highlighted that it is the trial judge's

duty to consider alternative findings of culpable homicide if a sudden fight is

Page 9 of 9

supported by the record. Therefore, the final judgement was heavily aligned with

the evidence, leaving no basis for Appellate intervention.

17] Lastly, the contention that the Accused were not represented by an Attorney

At Law at the sentencing stage cannot be considered that the Accused were

prejudiced by the sentence as the learned trial judge had considered the lesser

sentence. Therefore, the Appellants' sentences of 10 years of rigorous

imprisonment and Rs. 5,000 fines are reasonable, non-excessive, and fully

compliant with the statutory parameters of Section 297 of the Penal Code for

the offense of culpable homicide not amounting to murder, given the gravity of

the offense and the evidence from a thorough trial.

18] On the above circumstances, I find that there is no merit in the Appeal hence

I dismiss the Appeal and affirm the conviction and the sentence. However,

sentence should be run from the date of conviction, that is 07/06/2024.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

AMAL RANARAJA J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL