IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

W.A.R. Don Dharmawardena,

No. 84,

Yatiyanthota Road,

Avissawella.

Petitioner

CA CASE NO: CA/WRIT/406/2016

Vs.

1. D.M. Nalinasekera,

No.4/4,

Galle Road,

Dehiwala South,

Dehiwala.

2. J.A.P. Jagath Kumara,

Galdora Road,

Boralugama,

Kosgama.

3. Anusha Dewapriya,

Assistant Commissioner of

Agrarian Development,

Kegalle.

Respondents

Website Copy Website Copy

2

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Dr. Sunil Cooray for the Petitioner.

Harith De Mel for the 1st and 2nd Respondents.

Kanishka De Silva Balapatabandi, S.S.C., for

the 3rd Respondent.

Decided on: 13.12.2019

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

This case has a chequered history.

The 1st and 2nd respondent farmers complained to the

Commissioner of Agrarian Development against the petitioner

regarding an obstruction to an agricultural road.

The Commissioner held an inquiry, and, in terms of section

90(1) of the Agrarian Development Act, No.46 of 2000, as

amended, made the decision dated 19.03.2010, which is against

the petitioner.

The petitioner filed writ application No. 475/2010 against the

said decision, and this Court, by order dated 23.02.2012, whilst

quashing that decision, further directed the Commissioner to

reconsider the evidence led at the inquiry and make a fresh

decision.

Pursuant to the order of this Court, the Commissioner held

another inquiry and made a fresh decision dated 25.09.2013

Website Copy Website Copy

3

again against the petitioner, directing the petitioner to remove

obstructions of the agricultural road of 12 feet wide.

The petitioner again filed a writ application No. 75/2014 against

the second decision, and this Court, by order dated 23.03.2016,

quashed the said second decision predominantly on the basis

that the Commissioner had taken fresh evidence in coming to

that decision, which was not mandated by the first order of this

Court.

The Commissioner then held a third inquiry and made the

decision dated 07.11.2016, directing the petitioner to remove

obstructions and reopen the agricultural road of 10 feet wide.

The petitioner has come before this Court for the third time by

way of this writ application No. 406/2016 against the said third

decision, mainly on the ground that no proper inquiry was held

and no reasons were given for the said order.

The document marked W6 tendered by the petitioner proves

that the petitioner has participated in the third inquiry.

The document marked R1 tendered by the Commissioner,

together with his statement of objections, goes to prove that

reasons have been given for the aforesaid third order.

The position taken up by the petitioner in the counter affidavit

that R1 is an afterthought conceived subsequent to the filing of

this application in Court, cannot be investigated into in this writ

application. There is no reason for the Commissioner to favour

one party over the other. In fairness to the petitioner, I must say

that the petitioner does not allege mala fides on the part of the

Commissioner.

Website Copy Website Copy

4

The petitioner further states that if the 10-foot-wide road is to be

reopened, he has to uproot some rubber plantation. That cannot

be a good excuse or defence in view of the documents marked

RR1, RR2, RR3 and RR4 tendered by the 1st and 2nd

respondents, together with their statement of objections,

whereby the petitioner has agreed to remove the rubber

plantation when the necessity arises.

For the aforesaid reason, I take the view that the petitioner

cannot succeed on merits.

After the aforesaid second decision of the Commissioner, the

petitioner, as seen from RR6 tendered by the 1st and 2nd

respondents, filed a civil case in the District Court against the

1st and 2nd respondents, with regard to the same dispute,

seeking inter alia the relief that the said respondents have no

right to use the disputed road. In the plaint filed in the District

Court, the petitioner set out the history of the dispute together

with the decisions made by the Commissioner of Agrarian

Development in terms of section 90 of the Agrarian Development

Act, and very correctly stated in paragraph 17 of the said plaint

that the said orders made by the Commissioner against the

petitioner are provisional orders, which have no bearing or effect

to the substantive rights of the petitioner.

The petitioner has not mentioned this pending District Court

case in his petition. Nor has he divulged it, at least verbally,

when he successfully supported the application for interim relief

ex parte preventing the implementation of the Commissioners

order, which is in force to date. This, in my view, is a grave

suppression of material fact, which alone warrants dismissal of

the petitioners application in limine.

Website Copy Website Copy

5

Until the substantive rights of the parties are decided by the

District Court in the pending action referred to above, the

decision of the Commissioner of Agrarian Development dated

07.11.2016 marked W7 shall be implemented.

I dismiss the application of the petitioner with costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Website Copy Website Copy