==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA(PHC)0115/2017

Page 1 of 21

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made in terms of

Article 138, Article 154 P (6) of the Constitution

of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

read together with the Court of Appeal

(Procedure for Appeals from High Court) Rules

1988.

Divisional Secretary,

Medadumbara Divisional Secretariat

Office,

Medadumbara.

Applicant

Vs

S. M. R. Samarakoon,

No: 265,

Bomure,

Medamahanuwara.

Respondent

AND NOW

Divisional Secretary,

Medadumbara Divisional Secretariat

Office,

Medadumbara.

Applicant-Petitioner

Court of Appeal Case No: CA(PHC) 0115/2017 Provincial High Court Case No: Rev/86/2011 Theldeniya Magistrate Court Case No:1512

CA(PHC)0115/2017

Page 2 of 21

Vs

S. M. R. Samarakoon,

No: 265,

Bomure,

Medamahanuwara.

Respondent-Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

Divisional Secretary,

Medadumbara Divisional Secretariat

Office,

Medadumbara.

Applicant-Petitioner-Appellant

Vs

S. M. R. Samarakoon,

No: 265,

Bomure,

Medamahanuwara.

Respondent-Respondent-Respondent

Before : D. THOTAWATTA, J.

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Counsel : Dr. Peshan Giunaratne, S.C for the

Applicant-Petitioner-Appellant.

CA(PHC)0115/2017

Page 3 of 21

Sameera Silva instructed by Chamindee C.

Perera for the Respondent-Respondent-

Respondent.

Argued on : 09.10.2025

Written Submissions

of the

Applicant-Petitioner-Appellant

tendered on : 05.09.2022

Written Submissions

of the Respondent

-Respondent-Respondent

tendered on : 29.05.2023

Decided on : 23.01.2026

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

This is an appeal filed before this Court by the Applicant-Petitioner-Appellant

(hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the Appellant’) against the order of the

learned High Court Judge of the Central Province holden at Kandy dated

05.07.2017 made in an application in revision bearing No. Rev/86/2011.

The facts relevant to the instant appeal as can be gathered from the petition of

appeal, may be briefly, set out as follows;

The Appellant had made an application to the Magistrate Court of Theldeniya in

case bearing No. 1512 under and in terms of the provisions of Section 5 of the

State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act No. 07 of 1979 (as amended)

(hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the Act’) for the eviction of the Respondent-

CA(PHC)0115/2017

Page 4 of 21

Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the Respondent’)

from a State Land as morefully described in the schedule to the application

(hereinafter called and referred to as the ‘State Land’). The Respondent who

appeared before the Magistrate Court of Theldeniya on summons, had raised a

defence to the application that the land-the subject matter of the application is

not a state land but a private land belonging to him in terms of the chain of title

recited in his showing cause and therefore, he is not in unauthorized occupation

or possession thereof, and hence, the Respondent is not liable to be ejected from

the land belonging to him and therefore, it should be dismissed in-limine.

The learned Magistrate of Theldeniya in his order dated 15.07.2011 had having

upheld the defence so raised by the Respondent to the application, proceeded to

dismiss the application while refusing to grant an order for eviction of the

Respondent from the State Land by inter-alia, holding that the land in question

had been acquired by the State for the Kandy-Mahiyanganaya Road widening

project and therefore, the Appellant should take steps under section 42 of the

Land Acquisition Act to eject the Respondent therefrom and not under the

provisions of the Act as held by this Court in Edwin Vs. Thillakaratne 2001 [3]

SLR 34.

Being aggrieved by the said order of the learned Magistrate of Theldeniya dated

15.07.2011, the Appellant had invoked the extra-ordinary revisionary

jurisdiction of the High Court of the Central Province holden at Kandy seeking

to revise and set aside it. The learned High Court Judge of the Central Province

holden at Kandy had by the order dated 05.07.2017, dismissed the application

in revision by holding that the basis upon which the Appellant claims it to be

State Land, was not clear and therefore, the order of the learned Magistrate is

more accurate; and that the Appellant had decided to pay compensation to the

Respondent for the land in question treating it as a private land; and that a civil

action is already, pending in Court and therefore, necessity does arise for the

CA(PHC)0115/2017

Page 5 of 21

Appellant to invoke the extra-ordinary revisionary jurisdiction of the High Court

for relief since an alternative remedy is available to the Appellant.

As can be seen from a careful scrutiny of his showing cause, the position so

adverted to by the Respondent in the Magistrate Court of Theldeniya is that the

land in question is not a state land but, a private land belonging to him in terms

of the chain of title recited in his showing cause.

It may now, be examined.

Land in question is not a State Land but, a private land belonging to him in

terms of the chain of title recited in his showing cause.

It is in this context, I would think it expedient at this juncture to examine the

structure and/or the scheme embodied in the Act and the provisions contained

therein with regard to an application that may be made to a Magistrate Court by

a competent authority under section 5 thereof for the eviction of a person who

in his opinion, is in unauthorized possession or occupation of a state land and

for the recovery of the same.

Section 3 of the Act enacts thus;

“3. (1) Where a competent authority is of the opinion

(a) that any land is State land; and

(b) that any person is in unauthorized possession or

occupation of such land, the competent authority may serve

a notice on such person in possession or occupation thereof,

or where the competent authority considers such service

impracticable or inexpedient, exhibit such notice in a

conspicuous place in or upon that land requiring such person

to vacate such land with his dependants, if any, and to deliver

vacant possession of such land to such competent authority

or other authorized person as may be specified in the notice

on or before a specified date. The date to be specified in such

CA(PHC)0115/2017

Page 6 of 21

notice shall be a date not less than thirty days from the date

of the issue or the exhibition of such notice.

(1A) No person shall be entitled to any hearing or to make any

representation in respect of a notice under subsection (1).

(2) Every notice under subsection (1) issued in respect of any

State land is in this Act referred to as a "quit notice ".

(3) A quit notice in respect of any State land shall be deemed

to have been served on the person in possession or occupation

thereof if such notice is sent by registered post.

(4) Every quit notice shall be in Form A set out in the Schedule

to this Act.”

Section 4 of the Act deals with the obligation to comply with a quit notice and it

enacts thus;

“4. Where a quit notice has been served or exhibited under section 3

(a) the person in possession or occupation of the land to whom such notice

relates or any dependants of such person shall not be entitled to possess

or occupy such land after the date specified in such notice or to object to

such notice on any ground whatsoever except as provided for in section 9,

(b) the person in possession or occupation shall together with his

dependants, if any, duly vacate such land and deliver vacant possession

thereof to the competent authority or person to whom he is required to do

so by such notice.”

Section 5 of the Act deals with the effect of non-compliance with a quit notice

and it enacts thus;

5. (1) Where any person fails to comply with the notice provisions of section

4 (b) in respect of any quit notice issued or exhibited or purporting to have

CA(PHC)0115/2017

Page 7 of 21

been issued or exhibited under this Act, any competent authority (whether

he is or not the competent authority who issued or exhibited such notice)

may make an application in writing in the Form B set out in the Schedule

to this Act to the Magistrate's Court within whose local jurisdiction such

land or any part thereof is situated

(a) setting forth the following matters

(i) that he is a competent authority for the purposes of this

Act.

(ii) that the land described in the schedule to the application

is in his opinion State land,

(iii) that a quit notice was issued on the person in possession

or occupation of such land or was exhibited in a conspicuous

place in or upon such land,

(iv) that such person named in the application is in his opinion

in unauthorized possession or occupation of such land and

has failed to comply with the provisions of the aforesaid

paragraph (b) of section 4 in respect of such notice relating to

such land, and

(b) praying for the recovery of possession of such land and for an

order of ejectment of such person in possession or occupation and

his dependants, if any, from such land.

(2) Every such application under subsection (1) shall be supported by an

affidavit in the Form C set out in the Schedule to this Act verifying to the

matters set forth in such application and shall be accompanied by a copy

of the quit notice.

CA(PHC)0115/2017

Page 8 of 21

(3) Every application supported by an affidavit and accompanied by a copy

of the quit notice under the preceding provisions of this section shall be

referred to as an " application for ejectment ".

(4) No stamp duties shall be payable for any application for ejectment.

Section 6 of the Act deals with the role of a Magistrate upon receipt of an

application made under section 5 thereof and it enacts thus;

“6. (1) Upon receipt of the application made under section 5, the Magistrate

shall forthwith issue summons on the person named in the application to

appear and show cause on the date specified in such summons (being a

date not later than two weeks from the date of issue of such summons)

why such person and his dependants, if any, should not be ejected from

the land as prayed for in the application for ejectment.

(2) The provisions contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure Act shall,

mutatis mutandis, apply to the issue of summons referred to in subsection

(1) and the service thereof and other steps necessary for securing the

attendance of the person summoned.”

Section 7 of the Act, makes provisions for an order for ejectment where no cause

is shown and it reads thus;

“7. If on the date specified in the summons issued under section 6 the

person on whom such summons was issued fails to appear or informs the

Court that he has no cause to show against the order for ejectment, the

Court shall forthwith issue an order directing such person and his

dependants, if any, to be ejected forthwith from the land.”

Section 8 of the Act, makes provisions as to the inquiry if cause is shown and it

enacts thus;

“8. (1) If a person on whom summons has been served under section 6

appears on the date specified in such summons and states that he has

CA(PHC)0115/2017

Page 9 of 21

cause to show against the issue of an order for ejectment the Magistrate's

Court may proceed forthwith to hear and determine the matter or may set

the case for inquiry on a later date.

(2) Where any application for ejectment has been made to a Magistrate's

Court, the Magistrate shall give priority over all other business of that

Court, to the hearing and disposal of such application, except when

circumstances render it necessary for such other business to be disposed

of earlier.”

Section 9 of the Act deals with the scope of inquiry and it reads thus;

“9. (1) At such inquiry the person on whom summons under section 6 has

been served shall not be entitled to contest any of the matters stated

in the application under section 5 except that such person may

establish that he is in possession or occupation of the land upon a

valid permit or other written authority of the State granted in

accordance with any written law and that such permit or authority is

in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered invalid.

(2) It shall not be competent to the Magistrate's Court to call for any

evidence from the competent authority in support of the application

under section 5.” [Emphasis is mine]

Section 10 of the Act makes provisions for order of ejectment and it reads as

follows;

“10. (1) If after inquiry the Magistrate is not satisfied that the person

showing cause is entitled to the possession or occupation of the land he

shall make order directing such person and his dependants, if any, in

occupation of such land to be ejected forthwith from such land.

(2) No appeal shall lie against any order of ejectment made by a Magistrate

under subsection (1).”

CA(PHC)0115/2017

Page 10 of 21

Upon a careful analysis of section 3 of the Act in conjunction with sections 9(1)

which enacts that “At such inquiry the person on whom summons under

section 6 has been served shall not be entitled to contest any of the matters

stated in the application under section 5 except that such person may

establish that he is in possession or occupation of the land upon a valid

permit or other written authority of the State granted in accordance with

any written law and that such permit or authority is in force and not

revoked or otherwise rendered invalid” and 9(2) thereof, which enacts “It shall

not be competent to the Magistrate's Court to call for any evidence from

the competent authority in support of the application under section 5.”, it

would become manifest that where the competent authority is of the opinion

that; a) any land is state land, and b) that any person is in unauthorized

possession or occupation of such land, the competent authority may serve a

notice by any of the modes set out therein on such person in possession or

occupation thereof, requiring such person to vacate such land with his

dependents if any, and to deliver vacant possession of such land to competent

authority or any other authorized person as may be specified in the notice on or

before a specified date to be specified therein; and that at such inquiry the

person on whom summons under section 6 has been served shall not be

entitled to contest any of the matters stated in the application under

section 5 except that such person may establish that he is in possession or

occupation of the land upon a valid permit or other written authority of the

State granted in accordance with any written law and that such permit or

authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered invalid; and that

It shall not be competent to the Magistrate's Court to call for any evidence

from the competent authority in support of the application under section

5. [Emphasis is mine]

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in Farook vs. Gunewardene-Government

Agent, Amparai 1980 (2) SLR 243, at pages 245 and 246 that, “Section 9(2) is

to the effect that the Magistrate cannot call for any evidence from the competent

CA(PHC)0115/2017

Page 11 of 21

authority in support of the application under section 5, which means that the

Magistrate cannot call upon the competent authority to prove that the land

described in the schedule to the application is a State Land (Section

5(1)(a)(ii))......The structure of the Act would also make it appear that where the

competent authority had formed the opinion that any land is state land, even,

the Magistrate is not competent to question his opinion. Alternative relief is given

by section 12 which empowers any person claiming to be the owner of a land to

institute action against state for the vindication of his title within 6 months from

the date of the order of ejectment and section 13 is to the effect that where action

is instituted by a person, if a decision is made in favour of that person, he will

be entitled to recover reasonable compensation for the damage sustained by the

reason of his having been compelled to deliver possession of such land...”.

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA/PHC/41/2010 decided on

31.01.2017 that, “The party noticed is not entitled to challenge the opinion of

the competent authority on any of the matters stated in the application....By this

amendment, the opinion of the competent authority in relation to the state land

was made unquestionable....”.

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA (PHC) APN 29/2016-decided on

09.07.2018 that, “....He cannot contest any of the matters stated in the

application made under section 5 of the Act. One of the matters required to be

stated in the application is that the land described in the schedule to the

application is in the opinion of the competent authority state land. This fact

cannot be contested by the person summoned....Hence, a dispute on the identity

of the land cannot arise for consideration of the learned Magistrate. The identity

of the land can arise for consideration only to the extent of examining whether

the valid permit or other written authority produced by the party summoned is

in relation to the state land described in the application. Where it is not, the

Magistrate must issue an order of eviction in terms of the Act...”

CA(PHC)0115/2017

Page 12 of 21

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA(PHC)48/2016-decided on

02.09.2025 that, “Under section 9 of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession)

Act, as amended in 1983, the competent authority’s opinion that land is a ‘state

land’ is conclusive and not open to judicial challenge at the ejectment stage and

the only permissible defence available to an occupier is to prove possession or

occupation under a valid permit or written authority issued by the state with the

burden of proof resting on the occupier, whose failure to establish such authority

would necessitate an order of ejectment.”

Upon a plain reading of section 5(1) of the Act together with sections 9(1) and

9(2) thereof and the judicial precedents referred to above, it becomes abundantly,

clear that, where the competent authority had formed an opinion that any land

is state land, even, the Magistrate is not competent to question his opinion and

therefore, not open to judicial challenge at the ejectment stage in an application

made to Court by a competent authority under section 5 of the Act.

In the light of the law set out in section 5(1) of the Act to be read with sections

9(1) and 9(2) thereof and in the light of the law established by the judicial

precedents as referred to above, it is my considered view that a dispute as to the

identity of the land-the subject matter of the application under section 5 of the

Act, is wholly, foreign and utterly alien to a proceedings that may be

initiated before a Magistrate Court by a competent authority for eviction

of a person who in his opinion, is in unauthorized possession or occupation of

a land which in his opinion, is state land and therefore, such a defence to an

application made to Court by a competent authority under section 5 of the Act

is wholly, untenable in law, and therefore, not in any manner available to such

a person who in his opinion of the competent authority, is in unauthorized

possession or occupation of a state land for; the Legislature in enacting section

9 of the Act had never intended a defence as such to be made available to a

person as such except only, for the defence expressly, and explicitly, made

available therein.[Emphasis is mine]

CA(PHC)0115/2017

Page 13 of 21

There is a further point which would in my opinion, fortify and strengthen my

view taken as aforesaid and let me now, examine it.

Upon a careful analysis of the Act, it becomes abundantly, clear that “Urgency”

appears to be the hallmark of this Act as observed by this Court in Farook vs.

Gunewardene-Government Agent, Amparai (Supra). Under section 3, 30 days

notice shall be given. Under section 4, the person in possession is not entitled to

object to notice on any ground whatsoever except as provided for in section 9

and the person who is in possession is required to vacate the land within the

month specified by the notice. Under section 6, the Magistrate is required to

issue summons forthwith to appear and show cause on a date not later than two

weeks from the date of issue of such summons. Under section 8(2) the Magistrate

is required to give priority over all other business of that court. Under section 9,

the party noticed can raise objections only on the basis of a valid permit issued

by the State. Under section 10, if the Magistrate is not satisfied, “he shall make

order directing ejectment forthwith and no appeal shall lie against the order of

ejectment. Under section 17, the provisions of this Act have effect

notwithstanding anything contained in any written law.

Besides, it was inter-alia, held by the Supreme Court in Senanayake Vs.

Damunupola-1982 (2) SLR 621 that, “The scope of the State Land (Recovery of

Possession) Act was to provide a speedy or summary mode of getting back

possession or occupation of ‘State Land’ as defined in the Act”, which was cited

with approval by this Court in case bearing No. CA (PHC) 140/2013-decided

on 10.10.2019.

Hence, it becomes abundantly, clear upon a careful analysis of sections 9(1) and

9(2) of the Act in particular that the Legislature in enacting this special piece of

legislation, had never intended for a protracted trial to be held by a Magistrate

in an application made to it by a competent authority under section 5 of the Act

when it had enacted section 9 thereto expressly, and explicitly, setting out in

unambiguous terms the scope of such an inquiry.

CA(PHC)0115/2017

Page 14 of 21

In the light of the above, the scope of the State Land (Recovery of Possession) Act

is to provide a speedy or summary mode of getting back possession or occupation

of ‘State Land’ as defined in the Act as explicitly, observed by the Supreme Court

in the decision in Senanayake Vs. Damunupola (Supra).

The learned Counsel for the Respondent sought to contend by relying on the

decision of this Court in Edwin Vs. Thillakaratne (Supra) that the land in

question had been acquired by the State for the Kandy-Mahiyanganaya Road

widening project and therefore, the Appellant should take steps under section

42 of the Land Acquisition Act to eject the Respondent therefrom and not under

the provisions of the Act and the learned Magistrate of Theldeniya had proceeded

to uphold it. However, this Court in CA(PHC) APN 29/2016-Decided on

09.07.2018 had while overruling the decision in Edwin Vs. Thillakaratne

(Supra), held that the procedure in the Act can be invoked even where a person

is in unauthorized possession or occupation of a state land which was acquired

under the Land Acquisition Act for; the intention of the legislature on the issue

is clear, as the Hon. Minister of Land, Land Development and Mahaweli

Development, during the second reading of the State Land (Recovery of

Possession) (Amendment) Bill specifically, stated that recourse to existing law to

recover possession of state land was time consuming.

Hence, it clearly, appears to me that such a contention was advanced by the

Respondent upon a total misconception of the law as set out above and therefore,

it ought to have been rejected in-limine by the learned Magistrate of Theldeniya,

however, it is regretful to observe that, the learned Magistrate of Theldeniya had

instead, proceeded to uphold it and rejected the application of the Appellant on

this totally, erroneous premise.

Moreover, the contention so advanced by the learned Counsel for the Respondent

and the decision of the learned Magistrate of Theldeniya based on the said

premise, is not entitled to succeed in law on several other reasons too; one being

that the decision in Edwin Vs. Thillakaratne (Supra) relied on by the learned

CA(PHC)0115/2017

Page 15 of 21

Counsel for the Respondent and upheld by the learned Magistrate of Theldeniya

was a decision made by this Court in Writ applications and the key

considerations in Writ jurisdiction are totally, different from the key

considerations in an application under section 5 of the Act and therefore, the

facts of the case relied on by the learned Counsel can be clearly, distinguishable

from the facts of the instant case and therefore, the said decision relied on by

the learned Counsel for the Respondent has if I may say so respectfully, no

bearing on the facts of the instant application made to Court by the Appellant

being the competent authority under section 5 of the Act; and the other reason

being that the opinion of the competent authority that the land in dispute is

State Land, cannot in any manner, be questioned by a person summoned to

show cause under section 6 of the Act, in view of the provisions in section 5,

sections 9(1) and 9(2) of the Act and in view of the binding judicial precedents

cited above.

In the light of the above, I would find myself unable to agree with the contention

so advanced by the learned Counsel for the Respondent and the decision of the

learned Magistrate of Theldeniya based on that premise for; they cannot sustain

in law and as such they ought to have been rejected in-limine.

In view of the law set out above, the Respondent in the instant appeal cannot in

any manner, contest any of the matters stated in the application made under

section 5 of the Act by the Respondent to the Magistrate Court of Theldeniya.

One of the matters so required to be stated in the application under section 5 of

the Act is that the land described in the schedule to the application, is in the

opinion of the Appellant being the competent authority, State Land. Opinion so

formed by the Appellant being the competent authority, that it is in his opinion,

State Land, cannot in any manner, be contested by the Respondent who was

summoned under section 6 of the Act in view of sections 9(1) and 9(2) of the Act.

Hence, dispute on the identity of the land morefully described in the schedule to

the instant application made to Court by the Appellant, being the competent

CA(PHC)0115/2017

Page 16 of 21

authority under section 5 of the Act, namely; whether the land stated in the

instant application is not state land but a private land as raised by the

Respondent in his showing cause before the Magistrate Court of Theldeniya,

cannot in law, be raised by him for consideration of the learned Magistrate of

Theldeniya for; he has expressly, been prevented and precluded by section 9(1)

and 9(2) of the Act by raising a contest as such inasmuch as this is an issue to

be adjudicated upon in appropriate proceedings by a Court of competent

jurisdiction for; such a dispute as to the identity of the land in question, is

utterly, foreign and alien to proceedings as such initiated by the competent

authority under section 5 of the Act. [Emphasis is mine]

Hence, I would hold that the contention advanced by the Respondent in the

Magistrate Court that the land in question is not State Land but, a private land,

ought to fail in law, but, however, to my regret, the learned Additional Magistrate

of Theldeniya had erroneously, proceeded to uphold the same by relying on the

decision of this Court in Edwin Vs. Thillakaratne (Supra) for the reasons as

stated above, if I may say so respectfully.

The question that would next, arise for our consideration is as to the scope of

the inquiry in proceedings that may be initiated by a competent authority under

section 5 of the Act in a Magistrate Court and section 9 of the Act sets out the

scope of the inquiry and it may be reproduced verbatim the same as follows;

“9. (1) At such inquiry the person on whom summons under section 6 has

been served shall not be entitled to contest any of the matters stated

in the application under section 5 except that such person may

establish that he is in possession or occupation of the land upon a

valid permit or other written authority of the State granted in

accordance with any written law and that such permit or authority is

in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered invalid.

CA(PHC)0115/2017

Page 17 of 21

(2) It shall not be competent to the Magistrate's Court to call for any

evidence from the competent authority in support of the application

under section 5.” [Emphasis is mine]

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in Farook vs. Gunewardene-Government

Agent, Amparai (Supra) that, “At the inquiry before the Magistrate, the only plea

by way of defence that the Petitioner can put forward is that he is in possession

or occupation of the land upon a valid permit or other written authority of the

State granted in accordance with any written law and that such permit or

authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered invalid.”

It was inter-alia, held in Muhandiram v. Chairman, No. 111, Janatha

EstateDevelopment Board 1992 (1) SLR 110 at page 112 that, “Under section

9(1) of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act No. 7 of 1979, the person on

whom summons has been served (in this instance, the Respondent-Petitioner)

shall not be entitled to contest any of the matters stated in the application under

section 5 except that such person may establish that he is in possession or

occupation of the land upon a valid permit or other written authority of the State

granted in accordance with any written law and that such permit or written

authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered invalid...... The said

section clearly reveals that at an inquiry of this nature, the person on whom the

summons has been served has to establish that his possession or occupation is

upon a valid permit or other written authority of the State granted according to

the written law. The burden of proof of that fact lies on that particular person on

whom the summons has been served and appears before the relevant Court.”.

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA/PHC/41/2010(Supra) that, “Under

section 9 of the State Land (Recovery of Possession) Act, the scope of the inquiry

is limited to the person noticed to establish he is not in unauthorized occupation

or possession by establishing that;

1. Occupying the land on a permit or a written authority.

2. It must be a valid permit or a written authority.

CA(PHC)0115/2017

Page 18 of 21

3. It must be in force at the time of presenting it to Court.

4. It must have been issued in accordance with any written law.”

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA (PHC) APN 29/2016(Supra) that, “A

person who has been summoned in terms of section 6 of the Act can only

establish that, he is in possession or occupation of the land upon a valid permit

or other written authority of the State granted in accordance with any written

law and that such permit or authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise

rendered invalid. He cannot contest any of the matters stated in the application

under section 5 of the Act.”

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA(PHC)48/2016 (Supra) that, “.... the

only defence available is to prove possession is upon a valid permit or written

authority, issued in accordance with law, and which should be in force....”.

In the light of the law set out in section 9 of the Act and the judicial precedent

referred to above, at an inquiry of this nature, the person on whom the summons

has been served (in this instance the Respondent) has to establish that his

possession or occupation is upon a valid permit or other written authority of the

State granted according to the written law and that such permit or written

authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered invalid.

It is significant to observe that, it had never been the position of the Respondent

taken up in the Magistrate Court that his possession or occupation of the land

in dispute which in the opinion of the Appellant being the competent authority

is State Land, is upon a valid permit or other written authority of the State

granted according to the written law and that such permit or written authority

is in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered invalid, but, a private land

which belongs to him in terms of the chain of title recited in his showing cause.

It is to be observed that, although there is no duty as such cast upon a competent

authority by the provisions of the Act, nonetheless, the Appellant being the

CA(PHC)0115/2017

Page 19 of 21

competent authority had proceeded to identify the State Land by furnishing

relevant material to the Magistrate Court.

Hence, the Respondent’s argument that the land is not a state land but, a private

land claimed by him by virtue of the chain of title recited in his showing cause

filed before the Magistrate Court of Theldeniya, cannot sustain at least, for two

reasons; one being that, he is precluded by section 9(1) and 9(2) of the Act from

raising such a contest on the land-the subject matter of the application made to

Court by the Appellant being the competent authority; the other being that

although, the Appellant-being the competent authority does not have any burden

in an inquiry before the Magistrate so to do, nevertheless, the land in dispute

had been properly, identified by the Appellant being the competent authority

with reference to a plan, made and prepared by the Surveyor-General.

On the other hand, the Appellant being the competent authority had already,

formed an opinion that the land-the subject matter of the application, is a State

Land and that the Respondent is in unauthorized possession or occupation

therein.

However, as observed by me elsewhere in this judgment, it is significant to note

that, not an iota of evidence had been adduced by the Respondent to establish

that he is in possession or occupation of the State Land upon a valid permit or

other written authority of the State, granted in accordance with any written law

and that such permit or authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise

rendered invalid as required by section 9 of the Act. Hence, the Respondent did

not have semblance of such a permit or authority as envisaged by section 9 of

the Act.

In view of the above, it clearly, appears to me that the Respondent had adduced

not even an iota of evidence to satisfy the learned Magistrate of Theldeniya that

he was entitled to the possession or occupation of the State Land, nevertheless

the learned Magistrate of Theldeniya had proceeded to reject the application

relying on a totally, erroneous basis as enumerated above.

CA(PHC)0115/2017

Page 20 of 21

Hence, I would hold that, the contention advanced by the learned Counsel for

the Respondent that, the land in dispute is not a state land but, a private land

belonging to the Respondent as asserted by him in his showing cause, is not

entitled to succeed, both in fact and law and as such, it should inevitably, fail.

Hence, I would hold that the learned Magistrate of Theldeniya was in grave error,

both in fact and law in rejecting the application preferred to it by the Appellant

under section 5 of the Act.

I would therefore, hold that the order of the learned Magistrate of Theldeniya

cannot in any manner, sustain both in fact and law and as such it should be set

aside

For the reasons stated above, I would further, hold that the order of the learned

High Court Judge of the Central Province holden in Kandy based on the findings

arrived at by him as enumerated above, dismissing the application in revision

preferred to it by the Appellant from the order of the learned Magistrate of

Theldeniya rejecting his application, cannot in any manner, sustain both in fact

and law and as such it too, should be set aside.

Hence, I would hold that, the instant appeal is entitled to succeed both in fact

and law.

Hence, I would proceed to allow the instant appeal with costs of this court and

the courts below.

In the result, I would set aside the orders of both the learned High Court Judge

of the Central Province holden in Kandy and the learned Magistrate of

Theldeniya.

In view of my findings as aforesaid, I would acting under section 10(1) of the Act,

proceed to grant the application made by the Appellant to the Magistrate Court

of Theldeniya under section 5 of the Act thus, directing the Respondent and his

dependents, if any, in occupation of the State Land as morefully, described in

CA(PHC)0115/2017

Page 21 of 21

the schedule to the application made to Court by the Appellant being the

competent authority, be ejected forthwith therefrom.

I would direct the learned Magistrate of Theldeniya to act according to the law.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL