IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Punchi Patabendige

Chandraratne,

Godigamuwa,

Tangalle.

Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant

CA CASE NO: CA (PHC) 5/2014

HIGH COURT TANGALLE CASE NO: 12/2012/REV

MAGISTRATES COURT OF TANGALLE CASE NO: 8470

Vs.

Punchi Patabendige Premadasa,

No. 10B, Godigamuwa,

Tangalle.

Petitioner-Respondent-

Respondent

Before: K.K. Wickramasinghe, J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Buddhika Gamage for the Respondent-

Appellant.

Shihan Ananda Hewa Dewage for the

Petitioner-Respondent.

Argued on: 04.04.2019

Decided on: 05.04.2019

2

Samayawardhena, J.

The petitioner respondent (respondent) instituted these

proceedings in the Magistrates Court against the respondent-

appellant (appellant) under section 66(1)(b) of the Primary

Courts Procedure Act, No.44 of 1979, alleging forcible

dispossession from Lots 2 and 3 of Plan No. 2000/11 within two

months before filing the application in the Magistrates Court.

The learned Magistrate after inquiry has accepted that position

and ordered in terms of section 68(3) of the Act to restore the

respondent in possession. That order has been affirmed by the

High Court in revision. The appellant has come before this

Court against the said Judgment of the High Court.

There had been a partition action No.2948/P filed by the

respondent (as the plaintiff) to partition the larger land, which

included the disputed portion in this case. The appellant is the

7th defendant in that case. According to the plaint filed in the

partition action, the appellant is not a co-owner of the land. In

the said partition action, an interim injunction has been issued

by the District Court at the instance of the respondent

preventing the appellant from converting the hut put up by the

appellant to a permanent building, making any development

work, cutting trees, separating the land by making fences in the

corpus. This partition action has been dismissed on 14.02.2012

due to failure to identify the corpus. No appeal has been

preferred against that Judgment. According to the respondent,

dispossession took place 11 days after the dismissal of the

partition actioni.e. on 25.02.2012. The respondent filed the

case in the Magistrates Court on 30.03.2012. By photographs

P16 and P17, the respondent has amply satisfied the imminent

3

breach of the peace over this dispute. What seems to have

happened is, soon after the dismissal of the partition action, the

appellant has attempted to forcibly enter the disputed portion of

the land on the basis that the appellant has lost the partition

action. According to the Preliminary Plan No.891021 and its

Report marked by the appellant as V2 and V6 in the Magistrates

Court, the hut which the appellant has put up falls outside the

disputed portion of the land. That hut is in Lot 6 of the

Preliminary Plan No.891021. The disputed portion of land in the

section 66 application is Lots 2 and 8 of the said Preliminary

Plan. It is that portion which is depicted as Lots 2 and 3 in Plan

No. 2000/11another Plan prepared in the Partition case. Even

though the appellant has also claimed Lot 8 of the Preliminary

Plan before the surveyor, the respondent by documentary

evidence has convinced the learned Magistrate that the

respondent was in possession of the disputed portion until he

was forcibly dispossessed soon after the dismissal of the

partition case.

At the argument, the only point stressed by the learned counsel

for the appellant before this Court is that the averments in the

respondents plaint in the partition action alone confirms the

appellants possession in the land since 1988. The learned

counsel thereby alludes to the interim injunction application

made in the partition case to say that the interim injunction was

sought because he was in possession. That possession has been

stopped by the interim injunction. Moreover, as I have already

stated, the portion where the hut has been put up falls outside

the disputed portion. There is no evidence to show that the

appellant possessed the disputed portion of the land (Lots 2 and

4

3 in Plan No.2000/11 or Lots 2 and 8 in Plan No.891021) by

some means after the interim injunction was issued.

I see no reason to interfere with the Judgment of the High Court,

which affirmed the Magistrates Court order.

Appeal dismissed without costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

K.K. Wickremasinghe, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal