IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Employees Trust Fund, P.O. Box 807,

1 st Floor, Labour Secretariat, Colombo 05.

Applicant - Petitioner

CASE NO: CA (PHC) 40/2003

Before

Vs. Ceylon Agro Industries Limited~ No:346, Negombo Road, Seeduwa.

Respondent - Respondent

And Now Ceylon Agro Industries Limited, No:346, Negombo Road, Seeduwa.

Vs.

Respondent - Respondent -Appellant

Employees Trust Fund, P.O. Box 807,

1 st Floor, Labour Secretariat, Colombo 05.

Applicant - Petitioner-Respondent

: W.M.M.Malinie Gunarathne, J

: P.R.Walgama, J

1

I tI

Counsel : ANURA MEDDEGODA with ANDRIA RANASINGHE

For the Respondent - Respondent - Appellant.

: N. UNAMBUWA - DSG for the Applicant -Petitioner

- Respondent.

Argued on : 05.08.2015

Decided on: 26.02.2016

CASE- NO- CA (PHC)- 40/2003- JUDGMENT- 29.02.2016

P.R.Walgama, J

The instant appeal has been lodged by the Respondent

- Appellant (in short the Appellants) to assail the order

of the Learned High Court Judge, dated 25.11.2002, by

which order the Appellant was ordered to pay the EPF

and ETF as stated in the Certificate filed 1n terms of

Section 28(3) of the Employees Trust Fund Act No. 46

of 1980.

In order to appreciate the 1ssue involved 1n this

appeal, which lies 1n a narrow compass, it 1S

necessary to set out the relevant facts in brief, infra.

The Applicant - Respondent instituted action 1n the

Magistrate Court of Negambo to recover a sum of Rs.

490,232 as the ETF and the surcharge thereto.

Pursuant to the above application by the Applicant the

Learned Magistrate has released the Respondent-

Appellant on the basis that the so called three

2

complainant - employees

Understanding by gIvIng

thereto.

It was the categorical

Appellant that the three

as per Agreement the

had signed

effect to

position

employees

they had

any non payment

of the Respondent-

were foreigners, and

with them which

embodied the matters vis a vis the salary paid

Lanka and the other being the payment of

and other benefits paid outside Sri lanka.

In Sri

gratuity

The relevant Section that deals with the present

situation states thus;

Section 28(3) of the Employees Trist Fund reads as

follows;

"where an employer makes default In the payment of

any sum which he IS liable to pay under this Act,

and the Board IS of opInIOn that it IS impracticable

or inexpedient to recover that sum under subsection

(1) or subsection (2) or where the total amount due

has not been recovered by seizure and sale, then the

Board may Issue a certificate containing particulars of

the sum so due and the name and place of residence

of the defaulting employer to the Magistrate having

jurisdiction over the place of such employer.

Therefore it IS contended for the Respondent that the

above Section does not enVIsage the particulars of the

employee as contested by the Appellant.

3

It 1S also the position of the Respondent that the

Appellant was aware of the liability as per document

marked P3, and as such the AppellanL IS esi.upped

from taking any objection as to the correctness of the

certificate filed there to.

The relevant Section 28(4) of the ETF Act reveals

thus;

"the correctness of any statement 1n a certificate issued

by the board for the purpose of this section shall not

be called 1n question or examined by the court 1n

any proceedings under this section and accordingly

nothing in this section shall authorize court to consider

or decide the correctness of any statement 1n such

certificate of the Board shall be sufficient evidence that

the amount due under this Act from the defaulting

employer has been duly calculated and that such

amount is in default"

The Respondent had adverted Court to the documents

marked A,B, and C purported to be the Memorandum

of Understanding which were signed by the Appellant

and the complainant employees after taking

appoin tmen ts in Sri Lanka.

It is the position of the Respondent that the Appellant

has failed to established the fact that the said

employees had

payment outside

been paid

Sri Lanka, In

gratuity or any other

deed it is said that the

Memorandum of Understanding is against the Public

4

Policy and IS a nullity in law, as it circumvent the

prOVlSlOns of the Employees Trust Fund Act No. 46 of

1980.

It IS seen from the order of the Learned r~1agistratc

that he was overwhelmed by the fact that existence of

Memorandum of Understanding by which they have

renounced to receive any gratuity payment.

But The Learned High Court Judge by his order dated

25.11.2002 has pronounced that by private agreement

the prOVlSlOns of the Employees Trust Fund Act No.

46 of 1980, cannot be interpreted to avoid the

payment due by the employer.

The above principle was articulated in the case of

BLANK DIAMONDS (PVT) LIMITED .VS. EMPLOYEES TRUST

FUND BOSRD S.C. APPEA NO. 120/97-DECIDED ON

06.05.1998. It IS intensely relevant to note what

stemmed from the said case.

"It had been written to the Chairman/ Managing

Director of the appellant company over two years prior

to the termination of the first Respondent's services

and acknowledges inter alia the receipts of all the

dues from the appellant's company for services rendered

by the 1 st Respondent and seeks to exempt the

Appellant Company from making contributions to the

EPF / ETF in Sri Lanka. This is implicit acknowledgement

of the fact that the Appellant Comp~"1Y T.YUS the

employer of the 1st Respondent and was obliged in

5

law to make EPFjETF on behalf of the 1 st

Responden t."

"As regards the liability to make contribution to the

ETF, there can be no Willver of con tri bu tions by

agreenlent between employer and el11ployc:e &6

i"'I ,. 0cCL.iOil

16(1) of the ETF Act provides that "the employer of

every employee to whom this Act applies shall In

respect of every month during which such employee IS

employed by such employer, be liable to pay In

respect of such employee, to the fund on or before

the last day of the succeeding month, a contribution

of an amount equal to 3% of the total earnIngs of

such employee from his employment under such

employer during that month."

Therefore the threshold Issue In the instant matter IS

to decide whether the Appellant was thp. emnlover of ... v the alleged workman- claimants'

The Learned High Court Judge In the impugned order

had observed thus; that the Learned Magistrate has

dismissed the Clamant- Respondent's application on the

basis that the Respondent has sought to recover

EPF j ETF In respect of three Foreign nationals, and

the said Foreign nationals had entered In an

agreement with the Respondent- Appellant regarding the

Gratuity and salary payable to the said employees.

Further it was agreed after the termination of their

services In the said company that they will not claim

6

within or outside Sri Lanka. In addition any

the

money,

said employees

and had

had signed the above said

documents admitted the fact that the

Respondent- Appellant

to the employees.

has no payment to be remitted

The Learned High

In terms of Act

Court Judge was

No. 46 of 1980

of the VIew that

ETF Act that no

party should be allowed to enter in to any agreement

that will stultify or override the provisions of the said

Act. Besides the Learned High Court Judge has also

considered the case cited above and was of the VIew

that the Respondent- Appellant cannot absolve from the

liability to pay EPF jETF as stated in the above Act.

It IS apparent from the documents tendered by the

Appellant that the claimants were employees of the

Appellant and therefore the Appellant IS liable to make

the payment In terms of Section 28 (3) of the said

Act.

Further it IS brought to the notice of Court that the

employment of foreign nationals had not been approved

by B.O.I. which a contravention of the law of the land.

The stance of the Appellant IS that the workmen-

complainants are not employees of the Appellant's

Company, but independent contractors In terms of the

above Act. Nevertheless it is intensely relevant to note

the MOU marked as A,B, and C do not indicate, the

nature of their employment, and the work they will be

7

t

\

, ! j

~ If , r t

handling In the business concerned. Therefore this

Court IS compelled to arnve at the irre sisti ble

conclusion that the said workmen -claiman ts are

employees under the Appellant's Company.

In the teeth of the above, this Court see no reason

to set aside the order of the Learned High Court

Judge, and as such the appeal should stand dismissed

subject to a cost of Rs.I0,OOOj.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

W.M.M.Malinie Gunarathne, J I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

8

II I !

I, t

! I

t I

~ I