==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

Orders in the nature of Writs of

Certiorari, Prohibition and Mandamus

under Article 140 of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Herath Mudiyanselage Dulanjali

Dinesha Kumari Herath,

No. 03/2A/260,

Isurupura, Nidahas Mawatha,

Anuradhapura.

CA (Writ) App. No. 288/2023

PETITIONER

Vs.

1. W.R.A.N.S. Wijayasinghe,

Registrar General, Department of Registrar General, No. 234/A3, Densil Kobbekaduwa Mawatha, Battaramulla. 2. Nilakshi Liyanage,

Registrar of Lands, Land and District Registry, Kandy.

2

3. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department, Hulfsdorp, Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

Before: Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Counsel:

Indula Hewage and Vindya H. Wadanambi with Nalin Amarajeewa for the Petitioner.

Sachitha Fernando, S.C. for the Respondents.

Argued on: 27.01.2026

Delivered on: 27.02.2026

3

Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Judgement

Introduction

The Petitioner is a mother of a minor named P.M.A.Omindu Hansaja Premarathna, and the said

minor had received a Deed of Gift bearing No. 5494/013, dated 13.10.2023 and attested by Kushan

Hettiarachchi Notary Public; the protocol of the Deed of Gift is annexed to the Petition as P1. The

said Notary had sent it for registration to the Land Registrar of Kandy. However, the Land

Registrar had first registered it and later cancelled the registration; therefore, later, he refused to

register the original deed.

Thereafter, the Petitioner has appealed to the Registrar General, who had refused the said appeal

and notified the same to the Land Registrar of Kandy with a copy of the Attorney-at-Law through

whom the Petitioner had made the appeal. The refusal of the said appeal is that there is a pending

case before the Kandy Magistrate’s Court, which inquires into the allegations of fraud in the

preparation of the said deed.

Subsequently, having notified the Registrar General and the Land Registrar of Kandy, the

Petitioner seeks to invoke the writ jurisdiction of this Court to quash the decision of the Land

Registrar of Kandy refusing to return the said original deed, and also compelling the Respondents

to return the same to the Notary through a Writ of Mandamus.

This has been supported on 07.08.2025, and after issuance of formal notice on support, the

Respondents have filed their respective Objections.

4

According to their Objections, they have admitted that they did not return the said deed because it

was handed over to the Special Crime Investigation Division (SCID) of Kandy, to investigate the

allegations of fraud. In addition to that, since there is such an allegation against the perpetrators,

they are unable to register the same and return the original to the Notary.

Thereafter, this was argued before me on 27.11.2025, and in addition to the oral arguments, the

Written Submissions were filed, elaborating their respective arguments further.

Arguments

It is the Petitioner’s contention that the refusal to return the original deed for registration is illegal

since the 2nd Respondent has refused to register the same without any proper cause or reason.

Therefore, it is irrational.

The thrust of the argument made by Mr. Amarajeewa is that the Registrar cannot simply reject the

registration of a document submitted for registration to the Registrar of Lands merely on suspicion

that the recipient (donee), a minor, has not accepted the donation by placing his signature; whereas,

in fact, the guardian has accepted the donation by placing her signature. Therefore, in view of

Section 38 of the Registration of Documents Ordinance, No. 23 of 1927 (as amended), read with

Section 31 of the Notaries Ordinance, No. 1 of 1907 (as amended), the Registrar could not have

rejected or refused to register the impugned document marked as P2.

The second argument advanced by the Petitioner is that it is illegal for the simple reason that when

a deed is sent for registration, unless the deed is not in contravention with the Notaries Ordinance,

No. 1 of 1907 (as amended), the Land Registrar is bound to register the same and return the original

to the Notary. Therefore, failure on the part of the Respondents to return the said deed is illegal

and, thereby, capricious.

5

Thus, it is argued that a Writ of Certiorari lies to quash the decision refusing to return the said

deed, and to retain the same. A Writ of Mandamus also lies, compelling the Respondents to return

the same to the Notary.

On the other hand, Ms. Sachitha Fernando argued that the Registrar has merely refused to register

the deed of donation on the basis that the minor, the donee, had not accepted the donation by

placing his signature. In addition to that, there is a pending case in the Magistrate Court; the said

deed has been handed over to the SCID of Kandy; therefore, the Respondents are unable to return

the same to the Notary.

Their second argument is that since the said deed has been prepared and attested, violating the

Notaries Ordinance as well as the Registration of Procurements Ordinance, the 1st and 2nd

Respondents are not bound to return the same, unless and until the investigations are completed.

Refusal is justified

I will now consider the arguments, and the supporting evidence exhibits before me, along with

pleadings before me and the arguments. It is very clear that the Petitioner is aware that there is a

pending case before the Magistrate courts of Kandy, and the registrar was required to handover

the deed to Kandy Police station for the purpose of investigation by the officers of the Special

Crimes Division.

Therefore, the very same deed sent for registration has been handed over to the police by the Land

Registrar, and the matter is now before the Magistrate court; therefore, there is reason known to

the Petitioner as to why the said deed was not handed back to the person who submitted it for the

registration, there is a legal bar with regards to that.

6

In addition to that, the Registrar General has now been informed by the police about the pending

investigations into the said deed, and the very act of attesting the said deed is under investigation.

Therefore, the Registrar General is unable to perform his duties as expected or required by law. In

such a scenario, he cannot be compelled to perform a duty, even though he is normally required or

expected to carry out, when there is a legal impediment. In this case, there is a clear legal

impediment for him to register such a deed, which is already required for investigation purposes

in connection to a criminal matter pending before the Magistrate Court. The exercise of criminal

jurisdiction in the Magistrate Court would also be impeded if a Writ of Certiorari were issued by

a higher court, compelling the Registrar General to register that deed and return it.

Such a refusal is further justified since there is an allegation of fraud in execution of the said deed;

and if such a fraud is proven in execution of the said deed, it will definitely violate the Penal Code

as well as the Notaries Ordinance; as such, such refusal is justified in terms of Section 36(1)(b) of

the Registration of Documents Ordinance. Therefore, it is my view that the Petitioner can still go

before the relevant forum and assert his rights, if any.

In addition, the Petitioner has not sought registration of the deed; he has only asked for the mere

return of the originals. Therefore, such a duty cannot be performed. Accordingly, it is my view

that no writ lies at present in this Application unless and until the Magistrate Court proceedings

are concluded.

7

Conclusion

For the reasons adumbrated above, this Application is dismissed without costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL