==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/CPA/0073/2025

Page 1 of 23

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for Revision under and in terms of Article 138 of the Constitution read with Article 154 P(6) of the Constitution and the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No.19 of 1990.

Kospalage Don Kapila Lankaratne, 291, Obesekarapura Rajagiriya.

Petitioner Vs.

1. Wanni Arachchi Kankanamge Siriyalatha,

No. 198/1, Bediganthota, Suriyawewa.

2. Rathnayake Mudiyanselage Jayasena,

No. 198/1, Bediganthota Suriyawewa.

Respondents AND BETWEEN

Kospalage Don Kapila Lankaratne, 291, Obesekarapura, Rajagiriya.

Petitioner-Petitioner Vs.

Court of Appeal Case No: CA/CPA/0073/2025 Hambantota High Court Case No: HC/RA/21/25 Hambantota Magistrate Court Case No: 2425/25

CA/CPA/0073/2025

Page 2 of 23

1. Wanni Arachchi Kankanamge Siriyalatha,

No. 198/1, Bediganthota, Suriyawewa.

2. Rathnayake Mudiyanselage Jayasena,

No. 198/1, Bediganthota Suriyawewa.

Respondent-Respondents AND NOW BETWEEN

1. Wanni Arachchi Kankanamge Siriyalatha,

No. 198/1, Bediganthota, Suriyawewa.

2. Rathnayake Mudiyanselage Jayasena,

No. 198/1, Bediganthota Suriyawewa.

Respondent-Respondent-Petitioners Vs.

Kospalage Don Kapila Lankaratne, 291, Obesekarapura, Rajagiriya.

Petitioner-Petitioner-Respondent Before : D. THOTAWATTA, J. K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J. Counsel : Darshana Kuruppu with Tharushi Gamage

and Rajitha Kulatunga for the Respondent-Respondent-Petitioner.

CA/CPA/0073/2025

Page 3 of 23

Sapumal Bandara with Vishmi Yapa Abeywardana for the Petitioner-Petitioner-Respondent instructed by Tharisha Hettiarachchi. Argued on : 24.09.2025 Written Submissions of the Respondent-Respondent -Petitioners tendered on : 10.10.2025 Written Submissions of the Petitioner-Petitioner -Respondent tendered on : 10.10.2025 Decided on : 31.10.2025 K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J. Instant application in revision has been preferred to this Court by the

Respondent-Respondent-Petitioners (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the

Petitioners”) seeking to revise and set aside the order dated 18.07.2025, made

by the learned High Court Judge of the Southern Provincial High Court holden

in Hambantota in an action bearing No. HCRA 21/2025 in the exercise of the

revisionary jurisdiction vested in it by Article 154P(3)(b) of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka (hereinafter called and referred

to as ‘the Constitution”) to be read with Article 138 of the Constitution, a

certified copy of which was annexed to the petition furnished to this Court by

Petitioners marked as P3 (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the HC order”)

whereby, he had revised and set aside the order of the learned Magistrate of

Hambantota (P2), directing him to take up the case for inquiry and make an

appropriate order under chapter VII of the Primary Court Procedure Act No.44

of 1979, and to affirm the order dated 21.04.2025 made by the learned

CA/CPA/0073/2025

Page 4 of 23

Magistrate of Hambantota in the case bearing No. 2425/25, a certified copy of

which was annexed to the petition furnished to this Court by Petitioners

marked as P2 (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the MC order”) whereby, he

had refused to issue notices on the Respondents named in the information

furnished to Court by the Petitioner-Petitioner Respondent (hereinafter called

and referred to as ‘the Respondent”).

When this matter came on before us on 24.09.2025 for support for notice,

learned Counsel for the Respondent raised a jurisdictional objection by way of

a preliminary legal objection in relation to the maintainability of the instant

application in revision on the premise that the Petitioners cannot invoke the

revisionary jurisdiction of this Court against the HC order (P3) made by the

learned High Court Judge of the Southern Provincial High Court holden in

Hambantota in the exercise of the parallel or concurrent revisionary

jurisdiction vested both in the Provincial High Court and in this Court.

On the other hand, relying particularly, on the decision in SC/APPEAL No.

111/2015-decided on 27.05.2020, the Petitioners sought to resist the said

jurisdictional objection on the premise that the revisionary jurisdiction vested

in this Court is sufficiently, broad to empower it to revise any other made by an

original Court.

Hence, the pivotal question that would arise for our consideration is whether

this Court can exercise its revisionary jurisdiction in relation to an order made

by the High Court of the Provinces established under Article 154P of the

constitution enacted by the 13th Amendment thereto, in the exercise of its

revisionary jurisdiction under and in terms of Article 154P(3)(b) of the

Constitution to be read with Article 138 thereof.

At the hearing into the jurisdictional objection, Counsel for the respective

parties sought an order on the jurisdictional objection on the strength of the

written submissions and the written submissions were thus, tendered to this

Court by the respective parties.

CA/CPA/0073/2025

Page 5 of 23

Jurisdictional objection so raised by the Respondent may now, be examined.

Before the 13th Amendment, Article 138 of the Constitution reads thus;

‘The Court of Appeal shall have and exercise subject to the provisions of

the Constitution or of any law, an appellate jurisdiction for the correction

of all errors in fact or in law which shall be committed by any Court of

First Instance, tribunal or other institution and sole and exclusive

cognizance, by way of appeal, revision and restitutio in integrum, of all

causes, suits, actions, prosecutions, matters and things of which such

Court of First Instance, tribunal or other institution may have taken

cognizance:”

Proviso-not reproduced.

In the light of the Article 138 of the Constitution as it existed before the 13th

Amendment, appellate and revisionary jurisdiction was solely, and exclusively,

vested with the Court of Appeal (Vide-Weragama v. Eksath Lanka Wathu

Kamkam Samithiya and Others 1994[1] SLR 329, at page 295).

After the 13th Amendment, Article 138 of the Constitution reads thus;

“(1)The Court of Appeal shall have and exercise subject to the provisions

of the Constitution or of any law, an appellate jurisdiction for the

correction of all errors in fact or in law which shall be [committed by the

High Court, in the exercise of its appellate or original jurisdiction or by

any Court of First Instance], tribunal or other institution and sole and

exclusive cognizance, by way of appeal, revision and restitutio in

integrum, of all causes, suits, actions, prosecutions, matters and things

[of which such High Court, Court of First Instance], tribunal or other

institution may have taken cognizance:”

Proviso-not reproduced

(2)-not reproduced.

Article 138 of the Constitution was amended by the Thirteenth Amendment to

the constitution by the substitution for the words “committed by any Court

CA/CPA/0073/2025

Page 6 of 23

of First Instance” of the words “committed by the High Court in the

exercise of its appellate or original jurisdiction or by any Court of First

Instance.”[Emphasis is mine]

The Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution enacted Article 154P(1) to the

Constitution and it reads thus;

“There shall be a High Court for each Province with effect from the date

on which this Chapter comes into force. Each such High Court shall be

designated as the High Court of the relevant Province.”

Article 154P(1) of the Constitution so enacted by the Thirteenth Amendment,

made provisions for the establishment of the High Courts in the provinces.

Article 154P(3)(b) of the Constitution enacted by the Thirteenth Amendment to

the Constitution, reads thus;

“Every such High Court shall –

(b) notwithstanding anything in Article 138 and subject to any law,

exercise, appellate and revisionary jurisdiction in respect of convictions,

sentences and orders entered or imposed by Magistrates Courts and

Primary Courts within the Province;” [Emphasis is mine]

Hence, Article 154P(3)(b) conferred upon the High Court so established under

Article 154P(1) the appellate and revisionary jurisdiction in respect of

convictions, sentences and orders entered or imposed by Magistrates Courts

and Primary Courts within the Province notwithstanding anything in Article

138 and subject to any law. [Emphasis is mine]

Article 154P(6) of the Constitution enacted by Thirteenth Amendment to the

Constitution confers upon any person aggrieved by a final order, judgment or

sentence of any such High Court so established under Article 154P(1) of the

Constitution made in the exercise of its jurisdiction under paragraphs (3)(b) or

(3)(c) or (4) a right of appeal to the Court of Appeal in accordance with Article

CA/CPA/0073/2025

Page 7 of 23

138 of the Constitution subject to the provisions of the Constitution and any

law and it reads thus;

“(6) subject to the provisions of the Constitution and any law, any

person aggrieved by a final order, judgment or sentence of any such

Court, in the exercise of its jurisdiction under paragraphs (3)(b) or (3)(c)

or (4) may appeal there from to the Court of Appeal in accordance with

Article 138.” [Emphasis is mine]

However, no provision was made with regard to the procedure to be followed in

such High Courts. With a view to providing for the lacuna in the law with

regard to the procedure to be followed in the High Court of the Provinces, so

established under Article 154P(1) of the Constitution which enacted by the

Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution, the High Court of the Provinces

(Special Provisions) Act, No. 19 of 1990 (hereinafter called and referred to as

‘the Act”) was enacted making provision “regarding the procedure to be followed

in, and the right to appeal to, and from, the High Court established under

Article 154P of the Constitution”.

The Act also made provision for the appeals to be brought in before the Court

of Appeal as well as the Supreme Court from the High Court. While section 9 of

the Act provides for the appeals to Supreme Court from High Court, section 11

thereof provides for appeals to Court of Appeal from the High Court established

under Article 154P of the Constitution.

Section 9 of the Act reads thus;

“9. Subject to the provisions of this Act or any other law, any person

aggrieved by

(a) a final order, judgment, decree or sentence of a High Court

established by Article 154P of the Constitution in the exercise of the

appellate jurisdiction vested in it by paragraph (3) (b) of Article 154P of

the Constitution or section 3 of this Act or any other law, in any matter

CA/CPA/0073/2025

Page 8 of 23

or proceeding whether civil or criminal which involves a substantial

question of law, may appeal therefrom to the Supreme Court if the High

Court grants leave to appeal to the Supreme Court ex mero motu or at

the instance of any aggrieved party to such matter or proceedings :

Provided that the Supreme Court may, in its discretion, grant special

leave to appeal to the Supreme Court from any final or interlocutory

order, judgment, decree or sentence made by such High Court, in the

exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in it by paragraph (3) (b) of

Article 154P of the Constitution or section 3 of this Act, or any other law

where such High Court has refused to grant leave to appeal to the

Supreme Court, or where in the opinion of the Supreme Court, the case

or matter is fit for review by the Supreme Court:

Provided further that the Supreme Court shall grant leave to appeal in

every matter or proceeding in which it is satisfied that the question to be

decided is of public or general importance; and

(b) a final order, judgment or sentence of a High Court established by

Article 154P of the Constitution in the exercise of its jurisdiction

conferred on it by paragraph (3) (a), or (4) of Article 154P of the

Constitution may appeal therefrom to the Court of Appeal.”

Section 11 of the Act reads thus;

“(1) The Court of Appeal shall have and exercise, subject to the

provisions of this Act or any other law, an appellate jurisdiction for the

correction of all errors in fact or in law which shall be committed by any

High Court established by Article 154P of the Constitution in the exercise

of its jurisdiction under paragraph (3) (a), or (4) of Article 154P of the

Constitution and sole and exclusive cognizance by way of appeal,

revision and restitution interim of all causes, suits, actions,

prosecutions, matters and things of which such High Court may have

taken cognizance :

CA/CPA/0073/2025

Page 9 of 23

Provided that, no judgment, decree or order of any such High Court,

shall be reversed or varied on account of any error, defect, or irregularity

which has not prejudiced the substantial rights of the parties or

occasioned a failure of justice.

(2) The Court of Appeal may in the exercise of its jurisdiction, affirm,

reverse, correct or modify any order, judgment, decree or sentence

according to law or it may give directions to any High Court established

by Article 154P of the Constitution or order a new trial or further hearing

upon such terms as the Court of Appeal shall think fit.

(3) The Court of Appeal may farther receive and admit new evidence

additional to, or supplementary of, the evidence already taken in any

High Court established by Article 154P of the Constitution touching the

matters at issue in any original case, suit, prosecution or action, as the

justice of the case may require.”

Section 10 of the Act deals with the powers of the Supreme Court on appeal

and it reads thus;

“(1) The Supreme Court shall, subject to the Constitution be the final

Court of appellate jurisdiction within Sri Lanka for the correction of all

errors in fact or in law which shall he committed by a High Court

established by Article 154P of the Constitution, in the exercise of the

appellate jurisdiction vested in it by paragraph (3) (b) of Article 154P of

the Constitution or section 3 of this Act, or any other law and the

judgments and orders of the Supreme Court shall, in such cases, be final

and conclusive in all such matters.

(2) The Supreme Court shall, in the exercise of its jurisdiction, have sole

and exclusive cognizance by way of appeal from any order, judgment,

decree or sentence made by a High Court established by Article 154P of

the Constitution, in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in

such High Court by paragraph (3) (b) of Article 154P of the Constitution

CA/CPA/0073/2025

Page 10 of 23

or section 3 of this Act or any other law and it may affirm, reverse or vary

any such order, judgment, decree or sentence of such High Court and

may issue such directions to such High Court or Court of First Instance

or order a new trial or further hearing in any proceedings as the may

require and may also shall for and admit fresh or additional evidence if

the interests of justice so demands and may in such event, direct that

such evidence be recorded by such High Court, or any Court of First

Instance.”

Both the Sections 5 and 12 of the Act would in my opinion, be significantly,

important for the proper resolution of the jurisdictional objection before us and

therefore, it would for clarity and convenience, be useful to reproduce both of

them verbatim the same as follows;

Section 5 of the Act makes provisions for the procedure for appealing to High

Court so established under Article 154P(1) of the Constitution and it reads

thus;

“The Provisions of written law applicable to appeals to the Court of Appeal,

from convictions, sentences or orders entered or imposed by a Magistrate's

Court, and to applications made to the Court of Appeal for revision of any such

conviction, sentence or order shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to appeals to the

High Court established by Article 154P of the Constitution for a Province, from

convictions, sentences or orders entered or imposed by Magistrate's Courts,

Primary Courts and Labour Tribunals within that Province and from orders

made under section 5 or section 9 of the Agrarian Services Act, No. 58 of 1979,

in respect of land situated within that Province and to applications made to

such High Court, for revision of any such conviction, sentence or order.”

Section 12 of the Act makes provisions where appeal or application in respect

of same matter is filed in Court of Appeal and in High Court and it reads thus;

“(a) Where any appeal or application is field in the Court of Appeal and

an appeal or application in respect of the same matter has been filed in a

CA/CPA/0073/2025

Page 11 of 23

High Court established by Article 154P of the Constitution invoking

jurisdiction vested in that Court by paragraph (3) (b) or (4) of Article 154P

of the Constitution, within the time allowed for the filing of such appeal

or application, and the hearing of such appeal or application by such

High Court has not commenced, the Court of Appeal may proceed to hear

and determine such appeal or application or where it considers it

expedient to do so, direct such High Court to hear and determine such

appeal or application:

Provided, however, that where any appeal or application which is within

the jurisdiction of a High Court established by Article 154P of the

Constitution is filed in the Court of Appeal, the Court of Appeal may if it

considers it expedient to do so, order that such appeal or application be

transferred to such High Court and such High Court shall hear and

determine such appeal or application.

(b) Where the Court of Appeal decides to hear and determine any such

appeal or application, as provided for in paragraph (a), the proceedings

pending in the High Court shall stand removed to the Court of Appeal for

its determination.

(c) No appeal shall lie from the decision of the Court of Appeal under this

section to hear and determine such appeal or application or to transfer it

to a High Court.

(d) Nothing in the preceding provisions of this section shall be read and

construed as empowering the Court of Appeal to direct a High Court

established by Article 154P of the Constitution to hear and determine

any appeal preferred to the Court of Appeal from an order made by such

High Court in the exercise of the jurisdiction conferred on it by

paragraph (4) of Article 154P of the Constitution.”

Upon a plain reading of Article 138 of the Constitution as amended, Article

154P(1), Article 154P(3)(b), and Article 154P(6) in conjunction with sections 5

CA/CPA/0073/2025

Page 12 of 23

and 12 of the Act, it makes it abundantly, clear that both Courts namely; the

Court of Appeal as well as the High Court established by Article 154P(1) of the

Constitution which enacted by the Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution,

now, enjoy and exercise concurrent or parallel or coordinate appellate and

revisionary jurisdiction on matters referred to in Article 154P(3)(b) of the

Constitution as quoted above that the Court of Appeal had solely, and

exclusively, exercised before the Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution.

In the result, I am of the view that the revisionary jurisdiction that was solely,

and exclusively, vested with the Court of Appeal before the Thirteenth

Amendment to the Constitution, would after Thirteenth Amendment to the

Constitution, now, be exercised by a High Court established by Article 154P(1)

of the Constitution which enacted by the Thirteenth Amendment to the

Constitution, concurrently or parallel or coordinately with the Court of Appeal.

The view taken by me as aforesaid is fortified and well supported by a plethora

of authorities of the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal and they may

now, be examined.

Supreme Court in dealing with the Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution

and the Provincial Councils bill, had determined on page 323(In RE

Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution and the Provincial Councils

Bill-1987 [2] SLR 312) as follows;

“The Bills do not effect any change in the structure of the Courts or

judicial power of the People. The Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal

continue to exercise unimpaired the several jurisdictions vested in them

by the Constitution. There is only one Supreme Court and one Court of

Appeal for the whole Island, unlike in a Federal State. “The 13th

Amendment Bill only seeks to give jurisdictions in respect of writs of

Habeas Corpus in respect of persons illegally detained within the

Province and Writs of Certiorari, Mandamus and Prohibition against any

person exercising within the Province any power under any law or statute

CA/CPA/0073/2025

Page 13 of 23

made by the Provincial Council in respect of any matter in the Provincial

Council list and appellate jurisdiction in respect of convictions ‘and

sentences by Magistrate’s Courts and Primary Courts within the

Province to the High Court of the Province, without prejudice to the

executing jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal. Vesting of this

additional jurisdiction in the High Court of each Province only

brings justice nearer home to the citizen and reduces delay and cost

of ligation. The power of appointment of Judges of the High Court

remains with the President and the power of nominating them to the

several High Courts remains with the Chief Justice. The appointment,

transfer, dismissal continue to be vested in the Judicial Service

Commission. Thus, the centre continues to be supreme in the judicial

area and the Provincial Council has no control over the judiciary

functioning in the Province.” [Emphasis is mine]

The question before Court in Abeywardene vs. Ajith de Silva 1998[1] SLR

134-a bench of five judges of the Supreme Court was whether a direct

appeal lies to this court from an order of the High Court in the exercise of

its revisionary jurisdiction without first preferring an appeal to the Court

of Appeal, wherein, Supreme Court had on page 137, inter-alia, held that,

“After the 13th Amendment, section 5 of the High Court of the Provinces

(Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990 read with Article 154P (3)(b) of the

Constitution (enacted by the 13th Amendment) entitled him to file such

application in the High Court of the province. The jurisdiction of the High

Court in the matter is concurrent. In Re the 13th Amendment to the

Constitution. In the result, he may file an application in the Court of

Appeal or in the High Court.”[Emphasis is mine]

It was inter-alia, held by the Supreme Court in Gunaratne v. Thambinayagam

and Others 1993 [2] SLR 355 at pages 357 and 358, which was cited with

approval by a bench of five judges of the Supreme Court in Abeywardene vs.

Ajith de Silva(Supra), that, “In each of these cases a dispute relating to land

CA/CPA/0073/2025

Page 14 of 23

had been referred to a Magistrate (exercising the powers of the Primary Court)

in terms of S. 66 (1) (b) of the Primary Courts Procedure Act No. 44 of 1979.

After due inquiry, the Magistrate made his determination, the object of which is

to maintain the status quo until final adjudication of the rights in a civil suit.

S. 74 (2) of the Act provides that an appeal shall not lie against such

determination. Prior to the 13th Amendment to the Constitution, a party

aggrieved with such a determination used to apply to the Court of Appeal to

have it set aside by way of revision in the exercise of the power of that Court

under Article 138 of the Constitution read with Article 154. S. 5 of the High

Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act, No. 19 of 1990 read with Article

154 P (3) (b) of the Constitution (enacted by the 13th Amendment) entitled him

to file such application in the High Court of the Province. The jurisdiction of the

High Court in the matter is concurrent. In Re the Thirteenth Amendment to the

Constitution. In the result, he may file his application in the Court of Appeal or

in the High Court……S. 12 of Act No. 19 of 1990 makes provision for resolving

some of the anomalies arising by reason of the provisions of Article 154P which

vested new jurisdictions in the High Court, but concurrently with the existing

jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal in the same sphere.”.

It was further held by Court in the decision in Gunaratne v. Thambinayagam

and Others (Supra) at page 362 that, “(a) that in the light of the concurrent

jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal and the High Court which still exists, which

fact is confirmed by S. 12 of Act No. 19/1990, the identical dispute may be

decided by the Court of Appeal or by the High Court. A decision in the High

Court would permit two appeals whilst a decision in the Court of Appeal would

permit one more appeal;”

It was inter-alia, held by Supreme Court in Weragama v. Eksath Lanka Wathu

Kamkam Samithiya and others (Supra) at page 296 that, “These amendments

affected the appellate, revisionary and writ jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal

only in two respects. Firstly, Article 154P (3) (b) conferred appellate and

revisionary jurisdiction (but not writ jurisdiction) in respect of Magistrate’s

CA/CPA/0073/2025

Page 15 of 23

Courts and Primary Courts (but not Labour Tribunals, or other courts and

tribunals); this was “notwithstanding anything in Article 138” (and that Article

was in any event “subject to the provisions of the Constitution"), and so either

the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal was pro tanto transferred to the High

Courts or the Court of Appeal and the High Courts had concurrent

jurisdiction.”

It was further held at pages 299 and 300 that, “….However, the jurisdiction of

the Court of Appeal under Article 138 is not an entrenched jurisdiction,

because Article 138 provides that it is subject to the provisions “of any law";

hence it was always constitutionally permissible for that jurisdiction to be

reduced or transferred by ordinary law (of course, to a body entitled to exercise

judicial power). That is the reason why I held (in Swastika Textile Industries

Ltd. v. Dayaratne, that section 3 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special

Provisions) Act, No. 19 of 1990, conferred concurrent, appellate and revisionary

jurisdiction on the High Courts in respect of Labour Tribunals, and that

thereafter section 31D3 of the Industrial Disputes Act, as amended by Act No.

32 of 1990, made that jurisdiction exclusive, thereby taking away the

jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal in that respect).

It was inter-alia, held by the Supreme Court in SC/Appeal/65/2025-Decided

on 10.10.2025 at page 32 that, “In this context, it would be legally

impermissible and institutionally unsound for the Court of Appeal, in pari

materia, to sit in appeal over judgments and orders pronounced by a Provincial

High Court in the exercise of its appellate or revisionary jurisdiction. A party

cannot pursue successive appeals before two courts of coordinate jurisdiction

in respect of the same matter. This strikes at the very root of the issue. Such a

practice is inimical to legislative intent, imposes unnecessary burdens on the

judicial system, and undermines the principle of finality in litigation. These

considerations make clear that concurrent jurisdiction was intended to provide

an alternative forum for appellate review, not to create an additional tier in the

appellate hierarchy.”.

CA/CPA/0073/2025

Page 16 of 23

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in Ramalingam Vs. Parameswary and

Others 2000 [2] SLR 340 at pages 347 and 348 that, “It is to be noted that the

power given under Article 138 of the Constitution to the Court of Appeal to

hear and determine applications in revision against orders made by Primary

Courts was not in any way taken away by either the Thirteenth Amendment or

Act No. 19 of 1990. In effect both Courts were conferred concurrent

jurisdiction in respect of these matters……Further, the alleged equation of a

Superior Appellate Court to the High Court of a Province need not be

considered demeaning or debasing. The whole purpose of the Thirteenth

Amendment establishing a High Court in every province was to confer

jurisdiction in respect of certain matters in the High Court granting it

concurrent jurisdiction with the Court of Appeal. When concurrent or parallel

jurisdiction is given by Law to two Courts the question of a superior and

inferior Court would not arise. As far as the jurisdiction granted to the two

Courts in certain matters goes, they are equal……”[Emphasis is mine]

In Sharif and Others Vs. Wickramasuriya and Others 2010 [1] SLR 255, it

was inter-alia, held by this Court at pages 265, 268 and 269 that, “It is thus

clear that both Courts enjoy concurrent jurisdiction on matters referred to in

Article 154P (3)(b). The jurisdiction enjoyed by the Court of Appeal had not

been disturbed by Articles of the Constitution or by the Acts of

Parliament…..Thus both Courts enjoy concurrent jurisdiction with regard to

judgments and orders of the Magistrate/Primary Courts and District Courts.

The powers enjoyed by the Court of Appeal had been given to the High Court of

the Provinces to facilitate the litigants in the provinces and also to reduce the

work load of the Court of Appeal.”.

In Seylan Bank PLC v. Christobel Daniels (CA/PHC/APN/58/2014, CA

Minutes of 14.12.2016), it was inter-alia, that “The structure of Article 138

would also prevent this Court exercising revisionary jurisdiction when the sole

and exclusive jurisdiction has been vested in the Supreme Court. The

revisionary jurisdiction is bestowed in the Court of Appeal thus in Article 138

CA/CPA/0073/2025

Page 17 of 23

of the Constitution. “.....and sole and exclusive cognizance by way of appeal,

revision and restitutio in integrum, of all causes, suits, actions,

prosecutions, matters and things which such High Court, Court of First

Instance, tribunal or other institution may have taken cognizance”. It is

crystal clear beyond any scintilla of doubt that the revisionary power of

this Court lies only against orders made by such High Court, Court of

First Instance, tribunal or other institution when they have taken

cognizance of causes, suits, actions, prosecutions, matters and things.

The words “such High Court, Court of First Instance, tribunal or other

institution” must be read ejusdem generis and such collocation of words

read together with the words causes, suits, actions, prosecutions, matters

and things clearly indicates that these Courts exercise original

jurisdiction. Only when the High Court of First Instance, tribunal or other

institution has exercised original jurisdiction, revision lies to this court.

In other words, only when the High Court has exercised original

jurisdiction, the revisionary jurisdiction of this Court can be invoked. In

my view Article 138 intentionally suggests such a deliberate intendment

of Parliament and when the High Court has sat in its appellate

jurisdiction as has happened in this case, no revision lies to this Court.”

[Emphasis is mine]

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA/MC/RE Application No. 04/2017-

Decided on 08.06.2018 at page 5 that, “The petitioner had filed revision

applications in Gampaha High Court seeking revision of the said orders made

by the learned magistrate and the said high court has dismissed the

applications. (Vide paragraph 8 of the petition). It must be noted that high

courts now exercised the same revisionary jurisdiction once this court

exercised over magistrate courts. As he has filed revision applications on

the same orders previously in the High Court of Gampaha he has

exhausted his remedy. His position is that his lawyers have not brought to

the notice of High Court the facts averred in this petition. A party to an action

CA/CPA/0073/2025

Page 18 of 23

cannot be given a chance to have a second bite of the same cherry. If this

court allows this application it may create a bad precedent to allow a party who

fails to present his case properly file another application.” [Emphasis is mine]

In the decision in SC/Appeal/65/2025(Supra), the Supreme Court cited with

approval the following observations of this Court made by it in the case in

Malwatta v. Softlogic Finance PLC and Others (CA/CPA/152/2022, CA

Minutes of 31.08.2023). which inter alia, identified several practical

difficulties that would arise if the Court of Appeal were permitted to review

judgments and orders of the Provincial High Courts made in the exercise of

their appellate jurisdiction. The said case concerned a party who, being

dissatisfied with a judgment of the Provincial High Court of Civil Appeal

delivered in the exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction, sought once again to

invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal against the judgment

of the Provincial High Court. In practical terms, this amounted to two

successive applications in revision being pursued in respect of the same

judgment of the District Court, although the second application was formally

directed against the judgment of the Provincial High Court as observed by the

Supreme Court in the said case in SC/Appeal/65/2025(Supra).

“Moreover, if litigants are allowed to file a revision application in the

Court of Appeal against a judgment or order given by the Provincial High

Court exercising revisionary jurisdiction it would lead to unnecessary

duplication of court proceedings. This could result in a revision

application being filed in the Court of Appeal while an appeal is pending

in the Supreme Court. It would also have the effect of the Court of Appeal

being given an opportunity to overrule a judgment of the Supreme Court

if the revision application is successful while the appeal to the Supreme

Court is not, which is an unintended absurdity. is highly unlikely that

Parliament or the legislative draftsmen intended to manifestly complicate

the appeal process when the Provincial High Courts have been

introduced to reduce and simplify the court process not to complicate it

CA/CPA/0073/2025

Page 19 of 23

even further. According to the legal maxim ‘Boni judicis est lites dirimere,

ne lis ex lite oritur, et interest republicae ut sint fines litium’, it is the

duty of a good judge to prevent litigations, that suit may not grow out of

suits, and it concerns the welfare of the State that an end be put to

litigation. It would be contrary to the practice of a good judge to interpret

statutes in a manner that would give rise to unnecessary complications

in the judicial process. I would also mention here that allowing an appeal

or a revision application from a judgment or order from the Provincial

High Court would also lead to, the Court of Appeal having revisionary

jurisdiction over an instance where the Provincial High Court exercises

its revisionary jurisdiction as is requested for in the instant case. In

effect, the Court of Appeal would lie in revision of a revision application.

Seeing as Revisionary jurisdiction is to be exercised in exceptional

circumstances, allowing a revision application on a revision application

would be conceptually contradictory to the spirit of a revision

application. In the instant case, for example, this court is invited to lie in

revision of a revision application filed in the Provincial High Court.”

The cumulative effect of the provisions of Articles 138, 154P(3)(b), 154P(6) and

sections 5 and 12 of the Act and of the authoritative and biding judicial

precedent cited above, in my opinion, is that when the High Court established

by Article 154P(1) of the Constitution (enacted by the Thirteenth Amendment to

the Constitution) exercises revisionary jurisdiction, it exercises revisionary

jurisdiction hitherto exclusively, vested in the Court of Appeal before the

Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution and therefore, it exercises

concurrent or parallel jurisdiction with the Court of Appeal; and that, the High

Court established by Article 154P(1) of the Constitution (enacted by the

Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution) when it exercises revisionary

jurisdiction, is not subordinate to the Court of Appeal for; when concurrent or

parallel jurisdiction is conferred by law upon two Courts, the question of a

CA/CPA/0073/2025

Page 20 of 23

superior and inferior Court does not arise; and that, as far as the jurisdiction

granted to the two Courts in certain matters goes, they are equal.

The Petitioners sought to heavily, rely particularly, on the decision in

SC/APPEAL No. 111/2015(Supra) in support of the contention so advanced

by the Petitioners to resist the jurisdictional objection so raised by the

Respondent that the revisionary jurisdiction vested in this Court is sufficiently,

broad to empower it to revise any other made by an original Court.

The question of law that arose for determination by the Supreme Court in the

decision in SC/APPEAL No. 111/2015(Supra) as manifest from paragraph 3

thereof, is as follows;

“Having failed to exercise the right to file an appeal in terms of Section 9

of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990

as amended, could a person invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of the

Court of Appeal referred to in Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Republic of Sri Lanka in order to canvass a decision made by a Provincial

High Court exercising its appellate powers?”

On the other hand, the question of law that arose for determination by this

Court in the instant action as manifest from paragraph 8 of the written

submissions of the Respondent, is as follows;

“the Petitioners cannot invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of this Court

against the HC order (P3) made by the learned High Court Judge of the

Southern Provincial High Court holden in Hambantota in the exercise of

the parallel or concurrent revisionary jurisdiction vested both in the

Provincial High Court and in this Court.”

Hence, it clearly, appears to me upon a careful scrutiny of the question of law

arose before the Supreme Court and this Court, the question of law that arose

for determination by this Court in the instant action is totally, different from

CA/CPA/0073/2025

Page 21 of 23

the question of law that arose for determination by the Supreme Court in the

decision in SC/APPEAL No. 111/2015(Supra) for; the question of law that

arose for our determination in this case is; Can the Petitioners invoke the

revisionary jurisdiction of this Court against the HC order (P3) made by

the learned High Court Judge of the Southern Provincial High Court

holden in Hambantota in the exercise of the parallel or concurrent

revisionary jurisdiction vested both in the Provincial High Court and in

this Court? whereas, the question of law that arose for determination by the

Supreme Court in the decision in SC/APPEAL No. 111/2015(Supra) is;

Having failed to exercise the right to file an appeal in terms of Section 9

of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990

as amended, could a person invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of the

Court of Appeal referred to in Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Republic of Sri Lanka in order to canvass a decision made by a Provincial

High Court exercising its appellate powers?. [Emphasis is mine]

Hence, I would hold that the facts and circumstances of the case in

SC/APPEAL No. 111/2015(Supra) can be clearly, distinguishable from the

facts and circumstances of the instant application and therefore, the decision

in SC/APPEAL No. 111/2015(Supra) has if I may say so with all due respect,

no bearing on the question of law arose before us in the instant application for

our determination.

There is another vital aspect of the jurisdictional objection which I think, I

should deal with before I depart from this judgment and it may now, be

examined.

It was emphatically, delineated by a bench of five judges of the Supreme Court

in Abeywardene vs. Ajith de Silva (Supra) at page 139 that, “The cumulative

effect of the provisions of Articles 154P (3)(b), 154P(6) and section 9 of Act No.

19 of 1990 is that, while there is a right of appeal to the Supreme Court from

the orders, etc., of the High Court established by Article 154P of the

CA/CPA/0073/2025

Page 22 of 23

Constitution in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in it by Article

154P (3) (b) or Section 3 of Act No. 19 of 1990 or any other law, there is no

right of appeal to the Supreme Court from the orders in the exercise of the

revisionary jurisdiction. An appeal from an order of the High Court in the

exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction should be made to the Court of Appeal.

An appeal to the Supreme Court from the decision of the Court of Appeal would

lie, with leave;” [Emphasis is mine]

It was further held by the bench of five judges of the Supreme Court in

Abeywardene vs. Ajith de Silva (Supra) at page 140 that, “……a direct appeal

does not lie to the Supreme Court from the order of the High Court in the

exercise of the revisonary jurisdiction. An appeal from the order of the High

Court in the exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction should be made to the

Court of Appeal. Where a party is dissatisfied with the order of the Court of

Appeal, the party may, with leave of the Court of Appeal or when such leave is

refused by the Court of Appeal, with leave of the Supreme Court, appeal to the

Supreme Court” [Emphasis is mine]

In the light of the principle enunciated by the bench of five judges of the

Supreme Court in Abeywardene vs. Ajith de Silva (Supra), an appeal from the

order of the High Court in the exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction should be

made to the Court of Appeal.[Emphasis is mine]

In view of the law set out above, I would hold that, the Petitioners cannot

invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of this Court against the order dated

18.07.2025 made by the learned High Court Judge of the Southern Province

holden in Hambantota (P3) in the exercise of concurrent or parallel revisionary

jurisdiction vested in it by Article 154P(3)(b) to be read with Article 138 of the

Constitution and section 5 and 12 of the Act for; the Petitioners have already

exhausted the remedy available by the law as enumerated above, and therefore,

the Petitioners are now, debarred from invoking the concurrent or parallel

revisionary jurisdiction of this Court against the said order of the learned High

CA/CPA/0073/2025

Page 23 of 23

Court Judge of the Southern Province holden in Hambantota made in the

exercise of concurrent or parallel jurisdiction, as rightly, contended by the

Respondent.

In the result, I would hold that the jurisdictional objection so raised by the

Respondent as to the maintainability of the instant application in revision, is

entitled to succeed in law.

I would thus, uphold the same.

Hence, I would dismiss the instant application in revision in-limine with costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL