Page 1 of 7

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

Don Sarath Rajapaksha of Dinuka Wattegema South, Dickwella.

Petitioner

Vs.

1. Susantha Aththanayake

Divisional Secretary, The Divisional Secretariat, Dickwella. 2. Hon. Attorney General

The Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12.

Respondents Before : Sobhitha Rajakaruna J.

Dhammika Ganepola J.

Counsel : Nagitha Wijesekera for the Petitioner.

Rajika Aluwihare, SC for Respondents. Supported on : 22.11.2022

Decided on : 29.11.2022

In the matter of an application for mandates in the nature of Writs of Certiorari and Prohibition in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

CA/WRIT/374/2022

Page 2 of 7

Sobhitha Rajakaruna J.

A writ of Certiorari is sought by the Petitioner to quash the quit notice (P2) issued under

the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act No. 7 of 1979, as amended, (Act) against

the Petitioner in reference to the land morefully described in the schedule to the said quit

notice (Land). Additionally, the Petitioner seeks a writ of Prohibition to restrain the

Respondents from taking steps to eject him and also an interim order is sought to stay the

proceedings in the Magistrates Court of Matara bearing case No. 52049 filed against the

Petitioner under the said Act in respect of the same land.

The Petitioners alleged ground of challenge is that he was in occupation of the Land for

a long time and accordingly, he has prescriptive tittle to the land. The Petitioner further

contends that the 1st Respondent is duty bound to establish the fact that the Land belongs

to State.

The Petitioner heavily relies on the judgement in Senanayake vs. Damunupola (1982) 2

Sri. L.R. 621 where Victor Perera J. held that a.) the said Act was not meant to obtain

possession of land which the State had lost possession of by encroachment or ouster for, a

considerable period of time by ejecting a person in such possession; b.) the Section 3 should

not be used by a competent authority to eject a person who has been found by him to be

in possession of a land where there is doubt whether the State had title or where the

possessor relies on a long period of possession.

Significantly, this judgement was delivered prior to the amendment to the said Act brought

into by way of the Amendment Act No. 29 of 1983. When discussing the judicial

precedent, generally, the ratio decidendi of a judgement can be overruled by an appellate

court in the hierarchy. Also, it is seen that the Parliament enact laws giving the same effect

of overruling a judgement. The above Damunupola case is a unique instance where the

legislature brought an amendment to the said Act to overcome the effect of the said

judgement in the Damunupola case. I must draw my attention to the Hansard dated

09.08.1983 of the Parliament of Sri Lanka which reflects the speech made by the then

Minister of Lands, Lands Development & Mahaweli after the order for second reading of

the bill in reference to the said Amendment Act No. 29 of 1983. The said Minister

submitted to House the purpose of introducing the said Amendment and categorically

referred to the said Damunupola case identifying the same as the reason to which the

Page 3 of 7

Government has been compelled to introduce the said Amendment Act No. 29 of 1983.

The following passage of the said speech illustrates the above position;

,

. . . 1082

.

By the said amendment Act No. 29 of 1983 the section 3 of the principal enactment was

amended and accordingly, Section 3 (i) has been repealed and a new sub section has been

substituted. Before the above amendment, the old Section 3 (iii) of the principal enactment

stipulated that where a competent authority is of opinion that any person is in

unauthorized possession or occupation of any state land the competent authority may take

steps to evict such person. Anyhow the said new Amendment enhanced immensely the

powers of the competent authority whereby if the competent authority is of the opinion;

a) that any land is a state land

b) that any person is in unauthorized or occupation of such land

he may take steps to evict the unauthorized occupants.

Furthermore, in term of Section 9 of the Act, it shall not be competent for the Magistrates

Court to call for any evidence from the competent authority in support of the applications

under Section 5. There is plethora of judgments where the scheme of the Act has been

illustrated.

Among many of such decisions, in Farrook vs. Gunawarden Government Agent

Ampara (1980) 2 Sri. L.R. 243 it was held that,

Urgency appears to be the hallmark of this Act. Under section 3, 30 days notice shall be

given. Under section 4, the person in possession is not entitled to object to notice on any ground

whatsoever except as provided for in section 9 and the person who is in possession is required

to vacate the land within the month specified by the notice. Under section 6 the

Magistrate is required to Issue summons forthwith to appear and show cause on a date not

later than two weeks from the date of issue of such summons. Under section 8(2) the

Page 4 of 7

Magistrate is required to give priority over all state business of that court. Under section 9,

the party notice can raise objections only on the basis of a valid permit issued by the State.

Under section 10, if the Magistrate is not satisfied, he shall make order directing ejectment

forthwith and no appeal shall lie against the order of ejectment. Under section 17, the

provisions of this Act have notwithstanding anything contained in any written law.

When the Legislature has made express provision for any person who is aggrieved that he

has been wrongfully ejected from any land to obtain relief by a process described in the Act

itself, it is not for this Court to grant relief on the ground that the petitioner has not been

heard. Where the structure of the entire Act is to preclude investigations and inquires and

where is it expressly provided (a) the only defence that can be put forward at any stage of the

proceedings under this Act can be based only upon a valid permit or written authority of the

State and (b) special provisions have been made for aggrieved parties to obtain relief, I am of

the opinion that the Act expressly precludes the need for an inquiry by the competent authority

before he form the opinion that any land is State land.

In Mohandiram vs. Chairman Janatha Estate Development Board (1992) 1 Sri. L.R.

110, it was held that:

"in an inquiry under the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act, the onus is on the person

summoned to establish his possession or occupation that it is possessed or occupied upon a

valid permit or other written authority of the State granted according to any written law. If

his burden is not discharged the only option open to the Magistrate is to order ejectment.

In the case of Muttuvelu vs. Dias and another (2004) 2 Sri. L.R. 335, it was held by

Wijeratne J.,

Provisions of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act reveal that it is a special

enactment providing for the speedy recovery of State Lands from unlawful occupiers. The

State continued to be the owner of the estates leased"

In Ihalapathirana vs. Bulankulama Director General U.D.A (1988) 1 Sri. L.R. 416,

S.N. Silva J. has held that:

"the phrase "unauthorized possession or occupation" is defined in Section 18 of the Act, as

amended by Act No. 29 of 1983 to mean the following;

Page 5 of 7

Every form of possession or occupation except possession or occupation upon a valid permit

or other written authority of the State granted in accordance with any written law, and

includes possession or occupation by encroachment upon State Land"

This definition is couched in wide terms so that in every situation where a person is in

possession or occupation of State land, the possession or occupation is considered as

unauthorized unless such possession or occupation is warranted by a permit, or other written

authority granted in accordance with any written law. Therefore, I am unable to accept the

contention of the Counsel for the Petitioner that a land which is a subject matter of an

agreement in the nature of the document marked P1 comes outside the perspective of the State

Land (recovery of Possession) Act."

The rights and liabilities under the agreement could be the subject matter of a civil action

instituted by either the U.D.A or the petitioner. The mere fact that such a civil action is

possible does not have the effect of placing the land described in the notice marked P3, outside

the purview of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act. Indeed, in all instances where a

person is in unauthorized occupation or possession of State land, such person could be ejected

from the Land in an appropriate civil action. The clear object of the State Lands (Recovery

of Possession) Act, is to secure possession of such land by an expeditious machinery without

recourse to an ordinary civil action. The dicta of the Supreme Court in the case of Weerakoon

vs. Ranhamy and the passage of the Canadian judgement quoted by Professor Wade,

therefore do not have a bearing on this case. Accordingly, the application of the Petitioner is

dismissed with costs.

The Court of Appeal held in M. I. Fernando vs. J. M. C. Priyadharshani, Authorised

Officer/Competent Authority and others, CA/Writ/484/2021 decided on 10.06.2021;

Section 3 of the Act is made up of several components. Firstly, prior to initiating the process

described under Section 3, the Competent Authority must form an opinion that the land in

question is State land, and that the person against whom the quit notice is being issued is in

unauthorized possession or occupation of such land.1 In forming that opinion, the Competent

Authority is not required to afford anyone a hearing or conduct an inquiry. (emphasis

added)

1 Vide-Section 18 of the Act

Page 6 of 7

His Lordship Justice Arjuna Obeyesekara after analyzing the precedence laid down in

related judgements has taken an advanced approach in a recent case Udagedara Waththe

Anusha Kumari Nikaathagoda vs. Jayasinghe Mudiyanselage Chamila Indika

Jayasinghe, Divisional Secretary and others, CA/Writ/293/2017 decide on 18.11.2019

where His Lordship has held;

The strict regime for the expeditious recovery of State land stipulated in the Act only provides

a person served with a quit notice, the limited remedies under Section 9, and a person against

whom an Order of ejectment has been issued, an opportunity to vindicate her title under

Section 12 of the Act. It is the view of this Court that the legislature could not have intended

for the Competent Authority's opinion, which can have far reaching consequences on one' s

proprietary rights, to be baseless. The Competent Authority's opinion must thus be formed on

a rational basis. What constitutes a rational basis must be ascertained case by case. In the

present application, this Court is of the view that a Surveyor General's Plan confirming that

the land acquisition process had been completed, would amply satisfy the test for

rationality.2

This Court wishes to emphasise, for the avoidance of any doubt that the Competent

Authority is not required in terms of the Act to carry out an inquiry of the title of the person

who is in unauthorized possession of such land.

The principle then is that while no inquiry is needed to form an opinion, there should be a

rational basis to form the opinion that the State is lawfully entitled to the land. The rational

basis should satisfy the Wednesbury test of reasonableness. Thus, a Competent Authority

would be acting reasonably if he were acting on the basis of a Surveyor General's plan, even

if the occupant is claiming prescription. The Competent Authority is not expected to, and

indeed is precluded from, carrying out an inquiry. (Emphasis added)

Now I advert to the facts and circumstances of the instant Application. The land described

in the Schedule to the impugned quit notice is in extent of 0.623 Hectares (1.5394665

2 See Section 83 of the Evidence Ordinance reads as follows: 'The court shall presume that maps, plans, or surveys purporting to be signed by the Surveyor General or officer acting on his behalf were duly made by his authority and are accurate; but maps, plans, or surveys not so signed must be proved to be accurate.'; Section 21 of the Survey Act No. 17 of 2002 provides as follows: "Any cadastral map, plan, or any other plan or map prepared in accordance with the provisions of this Act or any written law, purported to be signed by the Surveyor General or officer acting on his behalf and offered in evidence in any suit shall be received in evidence, and shall be taken to be prima facie proof of the facts stated therein." Similar provision was found in Section 6 of the Land Surveys Ordinance, which has since been repealed by the Survey Act.

Page 7 of 7

Acres) and has been described as Lot No. 1 of Surveyor Generals preliminary plan 13211.

The said preliminary plan No. 13211 is annexed to the Petition, marked P3, and the

tenement list therein clearly enumerates that the claimant to its Lot No.1 is the Crown.

The extent of Lot No.1 is also approximately same as described in the Schedule to the

Quit notice. This clearly emphasizes that the 1st Respondent has considered primary

evidence on the title of the State in reference to the Land and accordingly, I take the view

that it can be assumed that the 1st Respondent has taken a rational decision before issuing

the quit notice. Also, I have drawn my attention to the alleged reasons, which are reflected

in the document, marked P5, given by the 1st Respondent for issuing the quit notice.

Thus, I take the view that the Petitioner has failed to submit a prima facie case or an

arguable question of law upon which this Court could issue formal notice of this

application to the Respondents. This order should not be an impediment for the Petitioner

to maintain any claim in the District Court under section 12 of the Act. Furthermore, this

Order should not be construed as a special license for any authority to demolish any

religious monuments on the Land unlawfully in a manner which leads to an unrest among

any religious group.

In the circumstances, I proceed to refuse this Application.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Dhammika Ganepola J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal