I j 1 I ) 1 J j I I I , I I ! I t I i , I i I i

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Revision

under and in terms of Article 138 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri lanka.

*******

1. W.O. Nandawathie Sumanasekera

2. O. Wijesooriya

3. W.O.A. Kanthi

All of Sethsevana, Gonagala

Gonagalpura, Induruwa.

Plaintiffs

C.A. Application No.CA (REV) 67/2007

D.C. Avissawella Case No. SOS/l

1

Vs

A.S.M. Nizam

No. 290, Kegalle Road

Anguruwella.

Defendant

AND

I I l j

1 ! I i I I 1 f f , I 1 I I I I I I j I I I

I 1 I I !

I I

2

A.S.M. Nizam

No. 290, Kegalle Road

Anguruwella. (deceased)

Defendant - Petitioner

lA. Shahul Hameed Hamsathul

Maleena

lB. Mohammed Nisham Fathima

Nisham

lC. Mohommed Nisham Mohammed

Fasil

lD. Mohammed Nisham Salmiya

Nisham

All of No. 290, Kegalle Road,

Anguruwella.

lE. Mohammed Nisham Fathima

Farhana (Minor)

No. 290, Kegalle Road

Anguruwella.

Mohammed Sehim Mohammed

Hamim, (Guardian of the Minor)

Kegalle Road, Anguruwella.

Substituted-Defendants

-Petitioners

Vs

1. w.o. Nandawathie Sumanasekera

2. O. Wijesooriya

3. W.O.A. Kanthi

All of Sethsevana, Gonagala

Gonagalpura, Induruwa.

Plaintiffs - Respondents

, '

3

AND NOW

lA. Shahul Hameed Hamsathul

Maleena

lB. Mohammed Nisham Fathima

Nisham

lC. Mohommed Nisham Mohammed

Fasil

10. Mohammed Nisham Salmiya

Nisham

All of No. 290, Kegalle Road,

Anguruwella.

lE. Mohammed Nisham Fathima

Farhana (Minor)

No. 290, Kegalle Road

Anguruwella.

Mohammed Sehim Mohammed

Hamim, (Guardian of the Minor)

Kegalle Road, Anguruwella.

Substituted - Defendants-

Petitioners - Petitioners

Vs

1. W.O. Nandawathie Sumanasekera

2. O. Wijesooriya

3. W.O.A. Kanthi

All of Sethsevana, Gonagala

Gonagalpura, Induruwa.

Plaintiffs - Respondents

-Respondents.

I j i I I j { 1 I I j

BEFORE : Deepali Wijesundera J.

M.M.A. Gaffoor J.

COUNSEL : Harsha Soyza P.C. with

Anuruddha Dharmaratne for

The Substituted-Defendants

Petitioners-Petitioners

Rohan Sahabandu P.C. with

Sureka Withanage for the

Plaintiffs-Respondents-

Respondents.

ARGUED ON : OSth September, 2015

DECIDED ON : 23m February, 2016

Deepali Wijesundera J.

The petitioners have filed this application to revise and set aside

the order of the District Court of Avissawella in case No. SOS/l delivered

on 1S/10/2006 (marked P16) and also to set aside and revise the

judgment and Decree entered in the said case delivered on 02/10/1996.

The plaintiffs-respondents-respondents have filed an action in the

District Court of Avissawella seeking a declaration of title and eviction of

4

ifIi

."III~ aJ

~

~ ~"rIii

I

the defendant from the premises described in the schedule to the plaint.

The trial was commenced and evidence was given by one witness and

he was cross examined by the defendant-petitioner counsel and trial

was postponed to 04/07/1996. On this date the defendant was absent

and the counsel who appeared for the defendant-petitioner has informed

court that he has no instructions to appear and that he is not appearing

for the defendant. The plaintiff has proceeded with his case and

concluded the same. The leaned District Judge had fixed the judgment

for 09/09/1996. On this date the District Judge had observed that the

plaintiff had not produced the documents to prove his title and granted a

date to tender the said documents. The plaintiff had filed a motion to call

the case on 02/10/1996 with notice to the defendant who had accepted

notice subject to his objections. On 02/10/1996 when the case was

taken up though notice had been given defendant had been absent and

unrepresented. The plaintiff has informed court tendering document P1

that he is restricting his claim to prayer (b) (c) and (d) in the plaint and

court has delivered judgment as prayed for in prayers (b) (c) and (d) in

favor of the plaintiff. The defendant did not appeal against this order

until he filed the instant application eleven years later to revise a

subsequent order given by the District Court refusing to correct an order

given by another District Judge on the principle of per incuriam.

5

I l I !

The learned counsel for the defendant-petitioner argued that the

plaintiff's action should have been dismissed for failure to prove title and

cited the judgment in Dharmadasa vs Jayasena 1997 3 SLR 327,

Wanigaratne vs Juwanis Appuhamy 65 NLR 167, Loku Manika and

others vs Gunasekera 1997 2 SLR 287. He further stated that the

plaintiff is not entitled to any relief without proving his title.

The defendant-petitioner stated that the proceedings in the

District Court after 04/07/1996 are ex parte since the counsel informed

court that he no longer appeared for the defendant since the case

proceeded ex parte the judgment and decree had to be served on the

defendant to afford him an opportunity to purge his default and cited the

case of W.Johanis Appuhamy vs Carlin Singho 67 NLR 144. The

counsel for the petitioner stated the District Judge has not acted in

conformity with Sec. 85 (4) of the Civil Procedure Code.

The petitioner's counsel further submitted that the order of the

District Judge where he has stated if the plaintiff does not prove his title

by producing the marked documents his application will be rejected, was

never vacated, therefore the subsequent order is not valid.

6

The learned counsel for the plaintiffs-respondents submitted that

on 09/09/1996 the court observed that the plaintiff had not produced the

documents to prove his title and a date was granted to do so and has

said if he failed to do so his action will be dismissed, and that on his own

motion the case was taken up on 02/10/1996 though defendant was

given notice he did not come to court. The respondents stated that on

this day the prayer to the plaint was restricted to (b) (c) and (d) and the

relevant document P1 was tendered to court and judgment was

delivered allowing prayers (b) (c) and (d).

The plaintiffs-respondents stated that the petitioner has not

explained why he waited eleven (11) years to file a revision application

against this judgment. He cited the judgment in Don Levis vs

Dissanayake 70 NLR 8 where it was said that it was not the function of

the Supreme Court to relieve parties of their own folly, negligence and

laches.

The respondents further stated that when the defendant's counsel

informed court that he has no instructions on a resume date of the trial

and the District Court by order dated 09/09/1996 had observed it was an

interparte order which was not challenged by the petitioner.

7

The respondents further submitted that the petitioner is seeking to

challenge the procedural steps but had not shown that he has a right in

respect of the land in question and that he is under a duty to show in the

revision application the right title and interest that he has, but failed to

do so.

The trial in the District Court can not be considered as an exparte

trial since the defendant-petitioner was present when the trial

commenced. The defendant-petitioner had been in court when evidence

was led and cross examined and the trial was re fixed to be resumed,

on another date. The defendant-petitioner was aware of the District

Court case therefore there was no necessity to act under Sec. 85 (4) of

the Civil Procedure Code and serve decree on the defendant-petitioner.

The defendant had been given notice by the plaintiff on the

amendment of the prayer to the plaint but he has not come to court.

Defendant-petitioner can not say the learned District Judge did

not vacate the earlier order which is not necessary since the District

Judge has accepted document marked P1 on the plaintiffs title when

the case was called on the plaintiffs motion with notice to the defendant.

8

l i ,j 1

~ I ! I , , j i

The petitioner who has been sleeping on his rights can not get

any relief from this court regarding a judgment given eleven years ago.

The consequent order which he moves to set aside by way of revision

can not be set aside since it is a perfectly legal order. The learned

District Judge has given reasons as to why he is refusing the petitioner's

application.

For the afore stated reasons the application of the petitioner is

refused with costs fixed at Rs. 50,0001=.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

M.M.A. Gaffoor J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

9