Page 1 of 7

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

In the matter of an appeal in terms of Article 154G of the Constitution read together with Section 11 (1) of High Court of the Province (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 pf 1990.

Officer-in-Charge Police Station, Karandeniya

Complainant

Vs.

1. Kaluwadeva Ruwan Handapangoda, Denagoda,

Dakunu Magala, Karandeniya.

2. Ranepurahewa Mulin,

No.06, But Kalla, Kakiris Kanda, Karandeniya.

Respondents AND

Ranepurahewa Mulin, No.06, But Kalla, Kakiris Kanda, Karandeniya.

2nd Respondent-Petitioner Vs.

Kaluwadeva Ruwan Handapangoda, Denagoda, Dakunu Magala, Karandeniya.

1st Respondent-Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

Ranepurahewa Mulin, No.06, But Kalla, Kakiris Kanda, Karandeniya.

2nd Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant Vs.

Kaluwadeva Ruwan Handapangoda, Denagoda, Dakunu Magala, Karandeniya.

1st Respondent-Respondent-Respondent

Court of Appeal Case No: CA (PHC) 38/2016

High Court Balapitiya Case No: HCRA/895

Magistrates Court Balapitiya Case No: 24668

Page 2 of 7

Before: Prasantha De Silva, J. K.K.A.V. Swarnadhipathi, J.

Counsel: Mahinda Nanayakkara with Manoj Sanjeewa and Wasantha

Vidanage for the 2nd Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant.

No appearance for the 1st Respondent-Respondent-

Respondent.

Since there is no appearance for the Respondent, Counsel for the Appellant wishes the Court to deliver Judgment on the written submissions already filed. Written submissions : 04.09.2020 by the 2nd Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant. tendered on

Judgment delivered on : 06.02.2023

Prasantha De Silva, J.

Judgment

The 2nd Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Appellant) has

preferred this appeal seeking to set aside the Order dated 24.05.2016 pronounced by the

learned High Court Judge of Balapitiya.

The facts of the instant case are as follows:

The Officer in charge of Police Station Karandeniya had filed an information under Section

66 of the Primary Courts Procedure Act No. 44 of 1979 in the Magistrates Court of

Balapitiya in case bearing No.24668. The Learned Magistrate acting as the Primary Court

Judge having followed the procedure stipulated in Section 66 of the Primary Courts

Procedure Act No. 44 of 1979 had allowed 1st and 2nd Respondents to file affidavits, counter

affidavits and written submissions in order to conclude the inquiry. Thereafter, the learned

Magistrate had delivered the Order on 03.08.2010 in favour of the 1st Respondent.

Being aggrieved by the said Order, the 2nd Respondent-Petitioner had invoked the

revisionary jurisdiction of the Provincial High Court of Southern Province Holden at Galle,

seeking a direction from the learned High Court Judge for learned Magistrate to have a re-

inquiry and decide the matter in dispute a fresh.

It is seen that the learned High Court Judge allowed the application of the 2nd Respondent-

Petitioner and referred the matter for inquiry.

Page 3 of 7

The learned Magistrate having inquired the matter for the second time had held against

the 2nd Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant and decided that 1st Respondent had been in

possession of the disputed land on the date on which the information was filed.

The 2nd Respondent-Petitioner being dissatisfied with the said Order of the learned

Magistrate dated 13.06.2014, had again invoked the revisionary jurisdiction of the High

Court of Balapitiya.

However, the learned High Court Judge had dismissed the said application of the 2nd

Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant on the basis that there is no such illegality noticed in the

impugned Order dated 13.06.2014 of the learned Magistrate. Being aggrieved by the said

Order, the 2nd Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant had invoked the jurisdiction of this Court.

The learned Counsel for the Appellant urged Court to observe that learned Magistrate had

not taken into consideration the facts contained in the complaints made to Police Station

and the facts contained in the affidavits marked 12, 13,14, and 15 filed on behalf of the

1st Respondent.

In this instance, Court draws the attention to the Judgment in the case Nandawathie and

others Vs. Mahindasena [(2009) 2 SLR 218]

When an Order of a Primary Court Judge is challenged by way of revision in the

High Court, the High Court can examine only the legality of that Order and not the

correction of that Order.

It was emphasized by Ranjith Silva J;

I am of the opinion that this particular right of appeal in the circumstances should

not be taken as an appeal in the true sense, but in fact as an application to examine

the correctness, legality or the propriety of the Order made by the High Court Judge

in the exercise of revisionary powers. The Court of Appeal should not under the guise

of an appeal attempt to re-hear or re-evaluate the evidence led in the main case.

Therefore, in view of the aforecited Judgement, it is apparent that Court of Appeal is not

expected to consider this as an appeal preferred against the Order of the Magistrates

Court. It is a duty of Court to consider whether this appeal originates from an Order of the

Provincial High Court exercising its revisionary jurisdiction. The Provincial High Court also

considers applications made against the Orders of the Magistrates Court which are revision

Page 4 of 7

applications and not appeals. The Court of Appeal is empowered to evaluate the

correctness of the revisionary jurisdiction exercised by the Provincial High Court.

It is worthy to draw the attention of Court to Judgment in the case of Bandulasena and

others Vs. G.K.Chaminda Kushantha [CA PHC 147/2009 C.A.M 27.09.2017] where

Surasena J emphasized:

It would be relevant to bear in mind that the appeal before this Court is an appeal

against a judgment pronounced by the Provincial High Court in exercising its

revisionary jurisdiction. Thus, the task before this Court is not to consider an appeal

against the Primary Court order but to consider an appeal in which an order

pronounced by the Provincial High Court in the exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction

is sought be impugned.

Section 74(2) of the Primary Courts Procedure Act No. 44 of 1979 does not provide a right

of appeal against the Order of the Primary Court.

Section 74(2) - An appeal shall not lie against any determination or order under this

part.

However, in terms of Article 154(3) (b) read with Article 138 of the Constitution, the

revisionary jurisdiction of the High Court can be invoked in a situation where a miscarriage

of justice or any injustice is caused by the Order of the Primary Court Judge to the

aggrieved party

The intention of the Legislature is introducing Part VII of the Primary Courts Procedure

Act No. 44 of 1979, is to prevent a breach of peace and not to embark on a protracted trial

investigating title. Thus, if an aggrieved party wishes to establish his legal rights to the

disputed portion of land, the Provincial High Court or the Court of Appeal is not the forum

to have the legal rights of parties relating to the land in dispute adjudicated.

By operation of law, an aggrieved party before the Provincial High Court is allowed to

prefer an appeal to the Court of Appeal. The Court of Appeal has to look into the matter

whether the learned High Court Judge has properly exercised his duty when ascertaining if

any injustice was caused to a party or whether a miscarriage of justice has occurred by

Order of the learned Magistrate. However, the Court of Appeal is not empowered to correct

the errors made by the learned Magistrate.

Page 5 of 7

Therefore, preferring an appeal to the Court of Appeal will not serve the purpose intended

in Primary Courts Procedure Act No. 44 of 1979. The intention of the Legislature in

introducing Part VIII of the Primary Courts Procedure Act No. 44 of 1979 is to prevent a

breach of peace and not to have prolonged or protracted hearings when determining civil

rights of parties pertaining to the disputed portion of land. Since the Legislature in its

wisdom specified a 3-month time frame for a matter to be concluded before the Primary

Court, the said position is clearly reflected.

Obeysekara J. opined in the case Aluthhewage Harshani Chandrika and another Vs.

Officer-in-Charge and another CA PHC 65/2003 [C.A.M 21.09.2020];

The rationale behind this principle is that the conferment of the special jurisdiction

on a Judge of the Primary Court under Chapter VII of the Act is quasi-criminal in

nature and is intended to facilitate the temporary settlement of the dispute

between the parties so as to maintain the status quo until the rights of the parties

are decided by a competent civil Court. Subject to this, every other concern however

much prominent they may appear to be, will have to be placed next to the

imperative necessity of preserving the peace.

In the instant case, the 2nd Party-Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant had frittered 13 years

litigating the dispute arisen between parties on 2010.02.21.

In view of Section 74(1) of the said Act:

74(1) An order under this Part shall not affect or prejudice any right or interest in

any land or part of a land which any person may be able to establish in a civil suit;

and it shall be the duty of a Judge of a Primary Court who commences to hold an

inquiry under this Part to explain the effect of these sections to the persons

concerned in the dispute.

In this respect, it is worthy to note the original order of the Magistrate of Balapitiya dated

03.08.2010. It appears that the learned Magistrate has determined the matter under

Section 68(3) of the Act in favour 1st Respondent-Respondent-Respondent in this appeal.

Furthermore, the learned Primary Court Judge had directed parties to resolve their dispute

by invoking the competent civil jurisdiction of court.

Page 6 of 7

However, the 2nd Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant had not instituted civil action in the

District Court but had invoked the revisionary jurisdiction of the Provincial High Court

instead.

The learned High Court Judge had directed the Magistrate to re-inquire into the matter

and the learned Magistrate had held against the 2nd Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant. Even

after the said Order, the 2nd Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant had not resorted to civil

legislation but invoked the revisionary jurisdiction of the Provincial High Court of the

Southern Province Holden at Balapitiya instead.

Therefore, at this juncture, the Court of Appeal is inclined to determine if the learned High

Court Judge has properly exercised his duty in ascertaining whether any grave injustice was

caused to a party or whether a serious miscarriage of justice had occurred by the Order

pronounced by the Magistrate exercising jurisdiction under Section 66 of the Primary

Courts Procedure Act No. 44 of 1979.

Thus, the Court of Appeal needs to ascertain the legality and propriety of the Order of the

learned High Court Judge and not correct the errors made by the learned Magistrate.

Since the 1st Respondent-Respondent-Respondent was absent and unrepresented on the

date of argument, the Counsel for the 2nd Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant moved to

dispose the matter by way of written submissions already filed.

Perusing the written submissions of the Appellant, it is observable that it was the

contention of the Appellant that learned Magistrate had not considered the facts contained

in the complaints made by parties to the Police Station and the facts contained in the

affidavits marked 12, 13, 14, and 15.

Furthermore, it was contended by the Appellant that although attention of the High Court

Judge was drawn to complaint [21] dated 10.11.2009 made to the Police Station

Karandeniya by 2nd Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant upon which an impertinent question

of law pertaining to patent lack of jurisdiction of court was formulated, this had escaped

the attention of the learned High Court Judge.

The learned High Court Judge had considered the complaint dated 10.11.2009 of Sunil Jayaratne,

a person who was not a party to the proceedings before the Magistrates Court. However, it

was revealed in evidence that the said Sunil Jayaratne is the husband of Appellant. It

Page 7 of 7

appears that the said Sunil Jayaratne had not intervened in the Magistrates Court case

after the notice was affixed on the disputed land.

According to the said complaint [21], it does not reveal whether the said Sunil Jayaratne

or his wife, the Appellant, was dispossessed from the land in dispute.

It is pertinent to note that the information filed in the Magistrates Court was based on the

complaint made on 21.02.2010. Apparently, the said complaint was made after 3 months

from the date of making the complaint 21.

Jurisdiction was conferred on the Primary Court in terms of Section 66(1) (a) of the Act,

with the information based on the complaint dated 21.02.2010 being filed by the

Karandeniya Police. Thus, the objection taken up in respect of patent lack of jurisdiction

is untenable in law.

The learned High Court Judge has analyzed and evaluated the evidence placed before the

learned Magistrate and come to the correct finding of fact and law and determined that

there is no illegality or irregularity in the impugned Order of the learned Magistrate.

Hence, it is seen that a failure of justice does not exist for 2nd Respondent-Petitioner-

Appellant to invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of the High Court of Balapitiya. Thus, we

see no reason to interfere with the Order of the learned High Court Judge dated

24.05.2016.

Thus, the appeal is dismissed with cost.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K.K.A.V. Swarnadhipathi, J. I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL