Page 1 of 12

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

An Appeal against the Order of a Revision

Application filed in the High Court under

Article 154P (3) (b) of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

CA Case No: Officer-in-Charge,

CA/PHC/216/2017 Police Station,

Alawwa.

HC Kurunegala COMPLAINANT

Case No: HCR/126/2014 Vs.

MC Polgahawela 1. Arachchilage Pubudu Dhammika Thennakoon

Case No: 13766/MISC Pothupitiya, Dambadeniya

2. Maliga Rangage Samantha Gamini Jayalath

Midellagolla, Wennoruwa

3. Basnayaka Ralalage Sunil Basnayaka

Galoliyawa, Maharachchimulla

4. Athapattu Mudiyanselage Kalum Sampath

Athapattu

Dundeniya, Maharachchimulla

ACCUSED

Page 2 of 12

AND BETWEEN

Jayakodi Mudiyanselage Ranjith Kumarasiri

Jayakodi

Bulugahawatta, Kurunegala/Bopitiya

AGGIEVED PARTY-PETITIONER

Vs.

1. Officer-in-Charge,

Police Station,

Alawwa.

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

2. The Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12

02nd RESPONDENT

3. Mercantile Investment Finance PLC

236, Galle Road

Colombo 03

03rd RESPONDENT

Page 3 of 12

AND NOW BETWEEN

Jayakodi Mudiyanselage Ranjith Kumarasiri

Jayakodi

Bulugahawatta, Kurunegala/Bopitiya

AGGRIEVED PARTY-PETITIONER-APPELLANT

Vs.

1. Officer-in-Charge,

Police Station,

Alawwa.

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT-RESPONDENT

2. The Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12

02nd RESPONDENT-RESPONDENT

3. Mercantile Investment Finance PLC

236, Galle Road

Colombo 03

03rd RESPONDENT- RESPONDENT

Before : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

: P. Kumararatnam, J.

Page 4 of 12

Counsel : Duminda de Alwis with Charuni de Alwis for the

Aggrieved Party-Petitioner-Appellant.

: Indika Nelummini, SC for the State.

Argued on : 29-07-2022

Written Submissions : 29-08-2022, 20-05-2022 (By the Aggrieved Party-

Petitioner-Appellant)

: 29-07-2022 (By the Respondents)

Decided on : 30-09-2022

Sampath B Abayakoon, J.

The aggrieved party petitioner appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

appellant) preferred this appeal on being aggrieved by the judgment of the

learned High Court Judge of Kurunegala, where his application in revision was

dismissed.

At the hearing of this appeal parties agreed to accept a judgment based on the

written submissions filed by the parties, and the parties were allowed an

opportunity to file reply written submissions as well, it they so wish.

The facts that led to the application by the appellant by way of revision are as

follows.

The Officer-in-Charge of Alawwa Police filed a plaint and a chargesheet before

the Magistrate of Polgahawela against four persons for illegally transporting

Jak timber logs in the vehicle bearing No- NW JI 4871 on 27-04-2014, an

offence punishable in terms of the Forests Ordinance.

The first accused, namely, Pubudu Dhammika Thennakoon was the driver of

the vehicle.

Page 5 of 12

When charged, all the accused pleaded guilty to the charge and accordingly

they were sentenced and the illegally transported logs were confiscated to the

state.

Thereafter, the learned Magistrate of Polgahawela, as he should have, held an

inquiry allowing the owner of the vehicle that was used in the commission of

the offence to show cause as to why his vehicle should not be confiscated as

required by law.

At the inquiry, as the vehicle was subjected to a finance leasing agreement, a

representative of the respective Finance Company has given evidence, to

confirm the fact that in the finance leasing agreement itself, the lessee has

agreed to prevent the vehicle being used in any illegal activity. The appellant,

who is the registered owner of the vehicle and the claimant before the Court

has given evidence, and another person as well.

The appellant in his evidence has stated that he is a businessman who has a

business of selling glass and mirrors in the Giriulla town, and the vehicle,

which is a Canter Lorry, was primarily used for his business activities. He has

admitted that in addition, the vehicle was used for hiring purposes and the

driver was the first accused in the action. He has been under his employment

for about two years by the time this incident has happened.

He has explained the precautionary measures he took to ensure the vehicle

was not being used for any illegal activity and the advice he had given to the

driver in that regard.

It was his position that the vehicle was used to be parked in the town during

the day time and in the night, it was parked at his house in Bopitiya area.

However, on the day in question, namely, on 27-04-2014, his vehicle was not

taken to the town and was parked at his house.

While in his shop, around 1.30 in the afternoon, he has received a request from

one of his friends to transport a Backhoe machine from Maholawa to Pangolla.

Page 6 of 12

As he has transported the machine previously as well, he has agreed to the

request and had instructed his driver to engage in the job.

He has called the driver around 4.00 p.m. to inquire as to the transportation,

and had been told that a hire fee of Rs. 5000/- was paid, the Backhoe was

loaded, and they were about to leave the place to the intended destination.

The appellant has come home around 9.00 p.m., after closing his business for

the day to find the lorry was not in his house as expected. When inquired from

the person who hired the vehicle, he had been told that the lorry left his house

after delivering the Backhoe around 6.00 p.m. The appellants attempt to

contact the driver has not been successful. Thereafter the appellant has gone

in search of the vehicle and has come to know that the vehicle had been taken

into police custody. At the police station he has found the lorry, the driver and

several other persons who are unknown to him in police custody.

It had been his position that he was unaware of the illegal activity of the driver

and although he has taken measures to prevent such activity, the driver has

committed the offence of transporting timer without a valid permit unknown to

him.

Other than claiming that the appellant was lying and was in the habit of

engaging in illegal activity in order to earn money for the payment of his leasing

facility, the prosecution has not materially challenged his evidence.

The appellant has called Nalaka Dharmasiri Bandara in support of his version

of events. He is said to be the person who hired the vehicle belonging to the

appellant for the purpose of transporting of his backhoe machine. It was his

evidence that he was using a backhoe machine and used to take it for the

purpose of working on his sisters private property. It was his position that

during the time relevant to this incident, he transported his machine from his

village to the land of his sister in a tractor, and in order to transport it back to

his village, he engaged the services of the appellant who had a lorry that can

Page 7 of 12

transport his backhoe machine. Accordingly, the transportation was done and

it was brought to his area around 6 p.m. on that day and he settled the vehicle

hire as well and released the lorry was his evidence. Around 8 p.m. in the

night, he has received a call from the owner of the lorry, who was the appellant,

asking whether the lorry left his place, for which he has answered affirmatively.

After about 2 days, he has come to know that the lorry has been taken into

custody by police for illegal transportation of timber. Under cross-examination,

it appears that the prosecution has asked very few questions from the witness.

I would now reproduce the questions relevant for the purposes of this appeal

asked by the prosecution in the cross-examination.

. ?

. .

. ?

. .

At the conclusion of the inquiry and by his Order dated 10-11-2014, the

learned Magistrate of Polgahawela has decided to confiscate the vehicle on the

basis that the appellant has failed to prove that he took all necessary measures

in order to prevent such an offence being committed.

It appears from the reasoning of the learned Magistrate that it has been

determined that the registered owner of the vehicle and the witness called by

him has given evidence contradictory to each other in relation to the alleged

hire to transport the backhoe machine and that they have concocted evidence

in order to suppress the real facts and had been uttering falsehood before the

Court.

On that basis the learned Magistrate has refused to accept the evidence of the

registered owner as well as the witness called in support of his version of

Page 8 of 12

events, and had thereby decided that the registered owner had failed to show

cause as to why the vehicle should not be confiscated.

It is clear from the Order, that the learned Magistrate has come to this

conclusion solely on the basis of what the two witnesses said as to from where

to where the transportation of the backhoe machine was done. It was the view

of the learned Magistrate that the registered owners evidence was that the

transportation was done from Maholawa to Pangolla area and he permitted the

driver only to do the transportation as such. However, it was the view of the

learned Magistrate that the evidence of the witness called by the appellant to

support his evidence, namely, Nalaka Dharmasiri Bandara has stated the

backhoe was transported from his village in Dundeniya to Maholawa. The

learned Magistrate has determined that even under cross-examination, the

witness Dharmasiri Bandara has confirmed this position as I have earlier

reproduced.

I find that if this was the correct analysis of the evidence, the learned

Magistrate was totally justified in determining that the evidence of the

appellant and the witness called on his behalf are contradictory to each other

and they have attempted to create a story which is false.

However, I find that the learned Magistrate was totally misdirected as to his

analysis of the evidence which he used in order to come to his findings and to

confiscate the vehicle.

As I have stated before, the position of the registered owner had been that he

allowed the vehicle to be used to transport a backhoe machine from Maholawa

to Pangolla area. The prosecution has not challenged his stand in a material

way to suggest that his version of events could not be believed.

The witness Nalaka Dharmasiri Bandara in his evidence-in-chief has narrated

the background under which he requested the vehicle belonging to the

Page 9 of 12

appellant for the transportation of his backhoe machine in the following

manner:

. .

. .

. .

. .

. .

.

. .

. . 6 .

Even under cross-examination, he has not deviated from this position. When

asked, where the backhoe was, his answer had been that it was in his house at

Dundeniya and was taken to Maholawa for work.

It is therefore clear that if one takes care to read the evidence as a whole, there

was no contradiction between the evidence of the appellant and Nalaka

Dharmasiri Bandara who has hired the vehicle. It is abundantly clear that the

hire was from the Maholawa area to the area where the witness Nalaka

Dharmasiri Bandara lived.

I find that the learned Magistrate was misdirected as to the facts when he

determined that there was a material contradiction in that regard which was

the basis upon which the evidence of the appellant as well as Nalaka

Dharmasiri Bandara was rejected.

When the appellant filed his application in revision before the High Court of

Kurunegala, it appears that the learned High Court Judge, has agreed with the

learned Magistrate as to the mentioned contradiction in the evidence. By the

judgement dated 08-08-2017, it has been determined that there were no

exceptional circumstances to intervene into the Order of the learned

Page 10 of 12

Magistrate, and accordingly, the application in revision has been dismissed on

that basis.

I find that the learned High Court Judge too has misdirected herself as to the

evidence led at the inquiry in agreeing with the findings of the learned

Magistrate. I find that if viewed correctly, there was sufficient basis to disagree

with the findings of the learned Magistrate, as I have stated before.

It is correct to state that the power of revision is an extraordinary discretionary

power that can be exercised only upon exceptional circumstances as

considered by the learned High Court Judge.

However, the question here is whether the learned High Court Judge was

correct in dismissing the application of the appellant on the basis that there

were no exceptional circumstances to act upon. I am of the view that earlier

considered misdirections as to the evidence led by the appellant provides a

sufficient basis to consider that as an exceptional ground upon which the

discretionary remedy of revision should have been granted. If considered in the

correct perspective, the evidence given by the appellant as well as the witness

called to corroborate his version of events are not contradictory to each other

and are evidence that can be considered cogent and truthful as to what really

happened on that day. I do not find any valid basis for the rejection of that

evidence if considered in the correct perspective.

It is to be noted that the burden of proof in an inquiry of this nature is in the

balance of probability, and if the owner is able to satisfy the Court that he has

taken due precautions and that the incident happened without his knowledge,

that needs to be considered in favour of the owner of the vehicle in a case of

this nature.

Page 11 of 12

Interpreting the term, the balance of probability Lord Denning, in the case of

Miller Vs. Minister of Pensions (1947) 2 AER 372, observed that:

If the evidence is such the tribunal can say we think it more probable

than not the burden is discharged.

At this juncture, I would like to reproduce the judgement cited by the learned

Counsel for the appellant, pronounced in the Court of Appeal by A.W.A.

Salam, J. in Case No. CA/PHC/108/2010 dated 26-08-2014, which refers to

the mode of proof that is required in an inquiry under the Forest Ordinance:

Even assuming that the owner of the vehicle was under a duty to show

cause against a possible order of confiscation, I find it difficult to accept

the basis on which the learned Magistrate has entered an order for

confiscation on the merits of the inquiry. It was the evidence of the owner

that he had given instructions to the employee (driver) not to engage the

lorry for any other purpose other than to transport items which do not

require a permit. The testimony of the owner has not been discredited

under cross-examination. There has been no previous instance where the

driver has been charged for similar offences.

When someone is under a duty to show cause that he has taken all

precautions against the commission of similar offences, I do not think that

he can practically do many things than to give specific instructions. The

owner of the lorry cannot be seated all the time in the lorry to closely

supervise for what purpose the lorry is used. In an order of confiscation of

the vehicle, then however much the owner comes forward and says that he

gave instructions not to make use of the vehicle for illegal purposes, by

reason of the fact that he is on the monthly payment, the vehicle has to be

confiscated. This approach does not appear to be reasonable and

acceptable in law. In an inquiry of this nature, what the owner has to

Page 12 of 12

prove is that he took every measure to ensure that the vehicle is not used

for illegal purposes.

For the reasons adduced as above, I am of the view that the Order of the

learned Magistrate of Polgahawela cannot be allowed to stand and also the

dismissal of the application for the revision of that Order by the learned High

Court Judge of Kurunegala.

Therefore, I set aside the judgement dated 08-08-2017 by the learned High

Court Judge of Kurunegala and allow the application in revision by the

appellant. In consequent to that, the Order dated 10-11-2014 by the learned

Magistrate of Polgahawela is also hereby set aside.

I direct the learned Magistrate of Polgahawela to make necessary orders to

release the subject matter of this action which is the motor lorry numbered

WP-JI-4871 to its registered owner forthwith.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to forward copies of this judgement to

the High Court of Kurunegala and Magistrate of Polgahawela along with the

original case records, if available, without any further delay.

Appeal allowed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P. Kumararatnam, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal