==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

Orders in the nature of Writs of

Certiorari, Prohibition and Mandamus

under Article 140 of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

The Anuradhapura Vivekananda

Society Limited,

No. 519/C, Jayanthi Mawatha,

Anuradhapura.

CA (Writ) App. No. 224/2020

PETITIONER

Vs.

1. E. M. R. P. B. Ekanayake,

Divisional Secretary of Nuwaragam Palatha East Anuradhapura, Dharmapala Mawatha, Anuradhapura.

And Now Sampath Rohana Dharmadasa, Divisional Secretary of Nuwaragam Palatha East Anuradhapura, Dharmapala Mawatha, Anuradhapura.

2. W. M. Ruwan Wijesinghe,

2

Former Divisional Secretary of Nuwaragam Palatha East Anuradhapura, Dharmapala Mawatha, Anuradhapura.

Then at The Commissioner of Municipal Council, Anuradhapura.

Now at The Commissioner of Provincial Council North Central Province, Anuradhapura.

3. S. M. Saman Bandulasena,

Former Divisional Secretary of Nuwaragam Palatha East Anuradhapura, Dharmapala Mawatha, Anuradhapura.

Then at Government Agent, Wawunia

Then at Chief Secretary, Northern Province Provincial Council, Jaffna.

Now at Senior Additional Secretary to the President, Presidential Secretariat, Galle Face, Colombo 01.

4. Mr. S. M. S. Sampath Rohana

Dharmadasa, Provincial Land Commissioner, North Central Province, Ground Floor (Right Wing),

3

Provincial Council Administrative Building Complex, Dharmapala Mawatha, Anuradhapura.

And Now Mr. G.A. Keethsiri, Provincial Land Commissioner, North Central Province, Ground Floor (Right Wing), Provincial Council Administrative Building Complex, Dharmapala Mawatha, Anuradhapura.

5. R.M.C.M. Herath,

Land Commissioner General, "Mihikatha Madura", Land Secretariat, No.1200/6, Rajamalwatte Road, Battaramulla.

G.D. Keerthi Gamage, Land Commissioner General, "Mihikatha Madura", Land Secretariat, No. 1200/6, Rajamalwatte Road, Battaramulla

And then K.D.B. Jayasinghe, Land Commissioner General, "Mihikatha Madura", Land Secretariat, No. 1200/6, Rajamalwatte Road, Battaramulla

And Now R.A. Chandana Saman Ranaweera, Land Commissioner General, "Mihikatha Madura", Land Secretariat, No.1200/6, Rajamalwatte Road, Battaramulla.

[Substituted 5th Respondent]

6. S. M. Chandrasena,

4

Minister of Lands and Land Development, Ministry of Lands and Land Development, "Mihikatha Medura", Land Secretariat, No. 1200/6, Rajamalwatta Avenue, Battaramulla. And Then Harin Fernando, Minister of Tourism and Lands, Ministry of Tourism and Lands, "Mihikatha Medura", Land Secretariat, No. 1200/6, Rajamalwatta Avenue, Battaramulla. And Then Anura Kumara Dissanayake, Minister of Agriculture, Lands, Livestock, Irrigation, Fisheries and Aquatic Resources, Ministry of Agriculture, Lands, Livestock, Irrigation, Fisheries and Aquatic Resources, "Mihikatha Medura", Land Secretariat, No. 1200/6, Rajamalwatta Avenue, Battaramulla. And Now K.D.Lal Kantha, Minister of Agriculture, Livestock, Lands and Irrigation, No. 80/5, "Govijana Medura", Rajamalwatta Lane, Battaramulla.

[Substituted 6" Respondent]

7. Mahinda Amaraweera,

Minister of Petroleum Resources Development, Ministry of Petroleum Resources

5

Development, No. 80, Sir Ernest de Silva Mawatha, Colombo 07. Udaya Prabath Gammanpila, No. 80, Sir Ernest de Silva Mawatha, Colombo 07. And then Kanchana Wijesekara, Minister of Power & Energy, Ministry of Energy, No. 80, Sir Ernest De Silva Mawatha, Colombo 07. And Then Anura Kumara Dissanayake, Minister of Energy, Ministry of Energy, Then at No. 80, Sir Ernest De Silva Mawatha, Colombo 07. And then at No. 437, Galle Road, Colombo 03. And Now Kumara Jayakody, Minister of Energy, Ministry of Energy, No.80, Sir Ernest De Silva Mawatha, Colombo 07.

[Substituted 7th Respondent]

8. Shanmugam Sivagnanam,

No. 351/3, Galle Road, Wellawatta, Colombo 06.

9. M. Prasad Mangala Perera,

No. 74B, Depot Road, Jayanthi Mawatha, Anuradhapura.

6

10. Seylan Bank PLC.,

Seylan Towers, No. 90, Galle Road, Colombo 03.

11. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department, Hulfsdorp, Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

Before: Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Counsel:

Charaka Jayaratne with Pasiduni Fernando instructed by Purnima Gunasekara for the

Petitioner.

Dilantha Sampath, S.C. for the 1st -7th and 11th Respondents.

Primal Rathwatte with Usha Kannangara for the 8th Respondents.

Argued on: 09.02.2026

Delivered on: 26.03.2026

7

Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.,

Judgement

Introduction

The Petitioner claims to be a society registered under the Societies Ordinance, No. 16 of 1891,

which claims that it runs a religious institution, a Hindu shrine called “Vivekananda Temple”. And

it had initially been in possession of certain Government land within the sacred city of

Anuradhapura. However, later in the 1950s, with the revival of the Buddha Jayanthi era, the said

Hindu Temple had been relocated by giving a land outside the Anuradhapura Sacred City.

Accordingly, the Petitioner had been given a permit marked as P9, in respect of certain land where

the Petitioner was conducting a school as well. However, with the acquisition of all private schools

run by various missions, the said school and land were also vested with the Government. Later,

the Petitioner claims in lieu of the land held by the society belonging to the said religious body,

the Petitioner was placed in possession of certain other land without a permit or grant; the

Petitioner continued to be in possession thereof.

In the meantime, the Petitioner has placed certain people in possession of certain parts of the said

land where the Petitioner was placed in possession, including the 8th, 9th, and 10th Respondents; in

fact, the 8th Respondent has been given the consent to obtain license to carry on a business of a

petrol shed by the Petitioner, and thus, the 8th Respondent has obtained a license to carry on a

petrol shed in a part of the said land of which the Petitioner was initially placed in possession; this

has been gazetted as well.

However, disputes have arisen between the Petitioner and the 8th to 10th Respondents, and then the

Petitioner wanted to have its possession regularised or legalised by obtaining a permit or grant.

8

Then the Provincial Land Commissioner, having inquired into the disputes, have made certain

recommendations by P83, which the Petitioner challenges in this Application.

After issuance of formal notice, the 1st to 7th and 12th Respondents and the 8th to 10th Respondents

have filed their respective Objections, and this came up before me on (09.02.2026) for Arguments,

and the following arguments were advanced by the counsel; hence this Judgement.

Arguments

Mr. Charaka Jayaratne, Counsel for the Petitioner contended that the Petitioner has a legitimate

expectation in view of P35 since it was his land that had been initially acquired by the Government

with the vesting of the missionary schools with the Government and placed the Petitioner in

possession of the land in suit. So far, the Petitioner’s possession remains unregularized by the

Government; therefore, he has a legitimate expectation to have it regularised or legalised.

The second contention advanced by Mr. Jayaratne is that the 8th Respondent had come under the

Petitioner’s land, and P34 establishes that; therefore, now he cannot deny the Petitioner’s rights.

Thus, Mr. Jayaratne argues that he challenges the adverse findings of the Provincial Land

Commissioner contained in P83.

On the other hand, Mr. Dilantha Sampath, the learned State Counsel contended that P47 is a

document that establishes collusion between the Petitioner and the other Respondents; therefore,

the land that the Petitioner claims to be in possession of cannot be treated now as a the Petitioner

has developed or has given such land and placed in possession by the Government expecting him

to develop it; instead what the Petitioner has done was to block it out and give it to various people,

including the 8th to 10th Respondents. Now, disputes have arisen between them; therefore, now the

9

Government needs to consider who has effected improvements. Thus, this action cannot be

maintained by the Petitioner.

In addition to that, he argued that P83 is self-explanatory since the Provincial Land Commissioner

has gone into all aspects and made certain recommendations but not taken any decisions. Therefore,

no writ lies against P83.

On the other hand, the learned Counsel for and on behalf of the 8th Respondent, Mr. Rathwatte

argued that the Petitioner has no status to maintain this Application since he is not representing the

Vivekananda Temple.

His next contention is that P57 establishes that the 8th Respondent has independent permission

obtained to run a petrol shed without the Petitioner’s permission or involvement; therefore, the

Petitioner cannot maintain this Application against the 8th Respondent.

Factual matrix

I will first deal with the facts as presented by the Petitioner, including his complaint to this Court.

The Petitioner asserts that the Petitioner Society was established in 1925 and was registered as a

society under the Societies Ordinance, No. 16 of 1891 in 1995; in addition, it claims that it is

registered as a Hindu religious institution with the Department of Hindu Religious and Cultural

Affairs. To establish that, the Petitioner has annexed two documents to the Petition, marked as P1

and P2 respectively.

In addition to the religious activities conducted, it is the Petitioner’s position that it had operated a

school known as “Vivekananda Vidyalaya”, in a premises in the vicinity of the Anuradhapura

Sacred City. However, with the dawn arrival of Buddha Jayanthi era of 1956, the Government had

10

decided to relocate certain institutions which were situated in the sacred city of Anuradhapura, to

other areas. Accordingly, there had been inter-departmental correspondence with regard to that. In

addition to that, the Petitioner had also correspondence with the relevant departments. To establish

that, the Petitioner has annexed certain documents marked as P3 to P8 to the Petition.

Thereafter, the Petitioner had been relocated in a place where the Petitioner was given a land of

Six Acres and Two Rood. Accordingly, the Government has issued an annual permit dated

17.05.1957, after relocation, marked and annexed to the Petition as P9. The Petitioner asserts that

in 1961, with the vesting of certain Government-assisted schools in terms of the Assisted Schools

and Training Colleges (Supplementary Provisions) Act, No. 8 of 1961, the said school run by the

Petitioner in the given land was also vested with the Government. Thus, the Petitioner lost the land

of Six Acres and Two Rood; as such, the Government decided to relocate the Petitioner’s Society

by giving certain other premises of One Acre, in lieu of the vested property to the Petitioner.

Accordingly, the Petitioner was given the land as identified in the plan marked and annexed to the

Petition as P12. Thereafter, the Petitioner claims that the present land of which it is in possession

had been given to it by the Anuradhapura Town Planning Council by way of a lease marked as

P15, for which the Petitioner claims it had paid a sum of Rs. 5,133/- (Five Thousand One Hundred

and Thirty-Three Rupees) by the document marked P16.

According to the Petitioner, it has erected certain buildings, including a pilgrims’ rest vegetarian

restaurant and a hall and a shrine room and a temple for various religious and cultural activities,

in the said new land allocated to it. The Petitioner asserts that, consequent to the terrorist attack on

the Sri Maha Bodhiya that took place in 1985, there had been riots, and certain office bearers of

the Petitioner’s Society and the kurkul of the Temple run by the Society in the said premises were

11

also killed. Thus, the congregation belonging to the Hindu Temple that was run by the said Society

started migrating, particularly to the Northern area of the country, after the riots in the year of 1985.

After 2000, with the peace brought back, the congregation and the officials of the Society re-

commenced the operations of the Society, and accordingly, the religious activities in the Temple

and the restaurant also started to function. However, since the Petitioner had lost its financing

sustainability due to the ongoing war and loss of its devotees of the congregation, the Petitioner

had to finance its religious activities including the business of the Society. As such, the Petitioner

had to lease out certain parts of the property so given to the Petitioner on lease to raise funds.

Accordingly, the Petitioner asserts that it entered into a ten-year lease agreement with the 8th

Respondent in 2006, for him to build certain shops on an identified portion of the land possessed

by the Petitioner under the lease. The said lease bond is marked and annexed to the Petition as P19.

However, the Petitioner states that later, another lease was entered into between the Petitioner and

the 8th Respondent, for the 8th Respondent to establish a petrol filling station, as a dealer under the

Petroleum Corporation; accordingly, the Petitioner has entered into a further lease agreement for

twenty-five years with the 8th Respondent, which is marked and annexed to the Petition as P22.

Thereafter, in 2012, the Government has taken a decision, on the recommendation of the Provincial

Land Commissioner, to directly lease out the portion of land on which the 8th Respondent had set

up the said petrol station, including an adjacent land belonging to the Government.

Be that as it may, finally, since the officials who are cited as Respondents to this present

Application have decided that the 8th Respondent is an independent individual who carries on a

lucrative business in the said premises and had developed the land while occupying the same, had

also decided to lease out the premises by thirty (30) years; thus, by the lease marked and annexed

12

to the Petition as P72, the Government has leased out a portion of land including the land leased

out by the Petitioner to the 8th Respondent, for a period for 30 years under the State Lands

Ordinance, No. 8 of 1947 (as amended), to the 8th Respondent.

However, there had been several correspondence between the Petitioner, who vehemently objected,

with the recommendation of the Grama Sevakas and certain other people, and inter-Governmental

correspondence which the Petitioner has obtained under the Right to Information Act, No. 12 of

2016, and annexed to the Petition.

Complaint of the Petitioner

Thereafter, the Petitioner has complained to the relevant officers; however, after inquiry, by the

Provincial Land Commissioner prepared a report marked as P83 annexed to the Petition, stated

that the Petitioner, without developing or utilising the land that had been given to it had leased it

out to various other people who have developed and utilised the same as lessees; under the

Petitioner; therefore, it is feasible for the Government to lease out the said portions of land

including to the 8th Respondent. Therefore, the Petitioner challenges the said report by this

Application.

Accordingly, the Petitioner has sought inter alia the following reliefs;

“(c)Grant and issue the order in the nature of a Writ of Certiorari quashing the

Recommendation or the Provincial Land Commissioner General contained in the letter

marked "P83" hereto;

(d) Grant and issue an order in the nature of a Writ of Certiorari quashing "p83";

(e) Grant and issuance of an order in the nature of a Writ of Certiorari quashing the

recommendation contained in the letter marked "P83" hereto to allocate portion of land

13

denoted by no. 04 in tracing plan bearing no. 2019/කැනපු /07 marked "PI3(b)" hereto to

illegal occupants therein;

(f)Grant and issuance of an order in the nature of a Writ of Certiorari quashing the

recommendation contained in the letter marked "P83" hereto to allocate portion of land

denoted by no. 05 in tracing plan bearing no. 2019/කැනපු /07 marked "P13 (by" hereto

to illegal occupants therein;

(g) Grant and issue an order in the nature of a writ of Mandamus directing the 1st to 5th

Respondents or any one or more of them conduct a comprehensive inquiry afresh, in

accordance with the law and principles of natural justice, taking to consideration the

relevant factors, to arrive at a finding as to whether granting of a long term lease for a

portion of the Petitioner's land to the 8th Respondent was in accordance with the State

Lands Ordinance and the regulations made thereunder.

(h) Grant and issue a mandate in the nature of a Writ of Mandamus directing the 1st to 5th

Respondents and/or any one or more of them to submit an appropriate recommendation

to the President of the Republic, based on the findings of the inquiry held in terms of

prayer (e), in respect of the long term lease granted to the 8th Respondent.

(í) Grant and issue an order in the nature of Writ of Prohibition prohibiting the 1st to 5th

Respondents or anyone or more of them and/or anyone acting under them from taking

any step to grant a lease or permit to the 8th Respondent, in respect of the balance

portion of the land;

14

(j) Grant and issue an order in the nature of Writ of Prohibition prohibiting the 1st to 5th

Respondents or anyone or more of them and/or anyone acting under them from taking

any further step based on P83;”

Objections

The 1st to 7th and 12th Respondents have filed their respective Objections, while the 8th Respondent

has filed separate Objections.

According to the 1st to 7th and 12th Respondents’ Objections, the Petitioner’s Application is belated.

In addition to that, since there is a long-term lease already executed under the State Lands

Ordinance by the Government in favour of the 8th Respondent, the document marked as P83 is a

subsequent report prepared after an inquiry long after the execution of the said lease marked as

P72. Therefore, it is a rather futile exercise indulged by the Petitioner in challenging the said

document and sought a dismissal of this Application.

In addition to that, the Objections of the 8th Respondent is that he is an independent developer

though he had come under the Petitioner, who had not developed or utilised the land given out by

the Government to the Petitioner; he had taken, occupied, possessed, and developed a portion of

the Petitioner’s land, and now running a lucrative business thereon, creating employment

opportunities in addition to contributing to the economy. Therefore, the 8th Respondent also moves

for a dismissal of this Application.

As an ancillary matter, the 8th Respondent has also placed that it is a belated Application, and in

practice, the lease had been issued under the State Lands Ordinance as way back as in 2016.

Nevertheless, the Petitioner has sought to challenge this lease in the year 2020. Therefore, there is

a delay on the part of the Petitioner.

15

In this case, on a perusal of the impugned document marked as P83 annexed to the Petition, I found

that it has been prepared by the Provincial Land Commissioner as a report addressed to the

Commissioner General of Lands. The said report has been prepared subsequent to an inquiry by

the Provincial Lands Commissioner with regard to the claims and complaints made by several

parties; this includes the Petitioner, the 8th Respondent, and several other parties referred to in the

said report, who are the 9th to 10th Respondents.

It is clear as the way the Petitioner’s complaint was presented that it is claiming a Four and a Half

Acre land on the basis that it had been given to it by the Government. However, there is no

document to show that it possesses the larger land in suit on a valid lease, except the document

marked as P15, which is a document issued by the Anuradhapura Town Planning Council, and not

the Government. Admittedly, the said land is State land; therefore, on that basis, the following

several questions arise for my consideration to decide on the issues relating to this Application;

(i) Whether the Petitioner holds or possesses the land on a valid title document or whether the

Petitioner can claim on valid title

(ii) If not, whether the Petitioner can entertain Legitimate expectation

(iii) Whether the Petitioner’s locus standi under consideration

(iv) Whether the Petitioner is entitled to lease out Government land to private parties and make

a profit out of it

(v) Whether the private personnels, namely the 8th Respondent or any other than the 9th to 10th

Respondents, are entitled to regularise or legalise their possession by entering into a

contract with the State

The question on the Petitioner’s valid title

16

The Petitioner has apparently relied on upon the document marked as P15 to claim title. However,

though the land claimed by the Petitioner was given to it by the Government when the relocation

was done as way back as in the 1960s after the acquisition of the said school, there is no document

to that effect to establish that the lease was issued by the Government or any other responsible

authority to the Petitioner, who is holding the land under a valid title document, even under the

State Lands Ordinance or Land Development Ordinance. The only title document marked as P15

issued by the Town Planning Authority, which is not representing the Government to issue permits

to the Petitioner.

The Petitioner has failed to establish any nexus between the State land and the Land Development

Ordinance, or that the author of P15 has derived its powers under those two Ordinances or any

other law. Therefore, it is my view that the Petitioner does not have any title to claim.

In such event, it is my view that the Petitioner has not so far, until this dispute arose between the

Petitioner and the 8th Respondent and any other Respondent to this Application, apparently taken

any steps to regularise or legalise the possession of the Petitioner. Therefore, the Petitioner cannot

claim that it has a legitimate expectation in respect of the property for which he claims to have

possession.

The Petitioner’s legitimate expectation

Next, the Petitioner’s identity or authority is now challenged in a District Court case by another

fraction of the Petitioner Society, who claims to be the legal authority of the Petitioner Society and

claims that the Petitioner does not have any legal authority to hold any offices or claim any

property under the Vivekananda religious institute. Therefore, unless and until it is resolved, the

17

Petitioner may not be able to claim any legal status. As such, it is my view that no legitimate

expectation can be entertained by the Petitioner Society.

The Petitioner’s authority over the land in suit

The next question that I have to decide on as raised above, is that when a government land is given

out to various private individuals, whether the Petitioner has obtained authority.

Apparently, the Petitioner does not have any legal status to claim or possess the land because the

Petitioner’s possession is not regularised or legalised. Even if the Petitioner’s possession is

regularised or legalised under the Land Development Ordinance or State Lands Ordinance, without

prior approval of the ‘title paramount’, namely the State, the Petitioner cannot give or lease out

any portion of the land claimed by the Petitioner. Therefore, the Petitioner has entered into

unlawful lease bonds with the 8th Respondent and several other individuals, including those

mentioned in the report marked as P83.

The Petitioner’s illegal profit

In addition to that, the Petitioner has only paid about Rs. 5,133/- (Five Thousand One Hundred

and Thirty-Three Rupees) for the purpose of the so-called lease in 1961 as indicated by P16.

Thereafter, no money is apparently paid by the Petitioner. However, the Petitioner is making a

profit by leasing out the property to various individuals, in the land which the Petitioner claims

that it is entitled to.

If the Government directly leases out the said land to the said individuals, who have in fact

developed their respective portions of land independently of the Petitioner, the Government which

holds the land for and on behalf of the sovereign people of this country, could receive an income

to the Government coffers, which the Petitioner by its illegal acts, has deprived.

18

Secondly, the Petitioner is making a profit out of the said illegal leases. In addition to that, the said

individuals including the 8th Respondent, have developed different portions of the said larger land

claimed by the Petitioner, independently and separately, after having taken leases from the

Petitioner, and occupying the same for a long period. Therefore, it is high time for the Government

to regularise and legalise their possession and occupation without disturbing their businesses, so

that in turn the Government can receive an income independent of the Petitioner and allow private

ownership and entrepreneurship to in turn contributing to the development of the economy by

creating employment opportunities, providing services to the people of the area, and the

contribution to Government revenue including income tax and other revenue including rentals.

Therefore, the Petitioner cannot benefit from its own illegal activity; as such, no writ lies 1.

Therefore, the maxim “nullus commodum capere potest de injuria sua propria” should apply in

this instance2.

As such, allowing this Application of the Petitioner by quashing the document marked as P83

cannot be done on several bases.

One is that the Provincial Lands Commissioner has made certain recommendations after inquiring

into the disputes to the Land Commissioner, for him to take necessary decisions in respect of the

land in suit. The Land Commissioner is exercising certain authorities under the Land Development

Ordinance or State Lands Ordinance, as far as State land is concerned; therefore, on his directions,

the Provincial Land Commissioner has prepared P83, and he has not taken any decisions as such,

except for making certain recommendations as decisions can only be taken by the Commissioner

1 Union Industrial Washing (Private) Limited v. Ministry of Industries and Others [2026] CA (WRT) 418/2023 (CA Minutes 23.02.2026). 2 Seelawathie Mallawa v. Millie Keerthiratne [1982] 1 Sri LR 384; Kariyawasam v. Sujatha Janaki [2013] 1 Sri LR 176; Piliyandala Tharuna Bauddha Samithiya v. Satharasinghe Achchige Don Chaminda [2026] SC Appeal 96/2025 (SC Minutes 10.02.2026).

19

General of Lands. As such, this subject is reserved for the State and thus, the Provincial Land

Commissioner cannot take any decisions3; therefore, the Writ of Certiorari that the Petitioner

sought does not lie.

Secondly, by the document marked as P72 a long-term lease dated 27.06.2017 has already been

executed in favour of the 8th Respondent in respect of the portions of land he is possessing and is

part of the land leased out to the 8th Respondent by the Petitioner. This lease has been executed by

the ‘title paramount’, namely the Head of the State for and on behalf of the sovereign people of

the country.

Therefore, the Petitioner cannot have any claim, and in fact it has been done as way back as in

2017. The Petitioner has instituted this Application in 2020. Even if by a Writ of Certiorari, P83

is quashed, it will not affect the lease P72. Thus, as argued by the 1st to 7th and 12th Respondents

and the 8th Respondent, it is a futile exercise, which itself is a ground for me to dismiss this

Application.

Another ground for me to dismiss this Application is that the Petitioner has not come with clean

hands as it does not have any title and has entered into several unlawful leases of which it is trying

to benefit from through the process of Court, which cannot be done.

3 Schedule Appendix II of the Constitution instituted by the 13th Amendment.

20

Conclusion

Accordingly, this application is dismissed subject to costs of Rs. 26,250/- (Twenty-Six Thousand

Two Hundred and Fifty Rupees) shall be paid by the Petitioner to the 1st to 7th and 12th Respondents.

A further sum of Rs. 26,250/- (Twenty-Six Thousand Two Hundred and Fifty Rupees) shall be

paid by the Petitioner separately to the 8th Respondent.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL