==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/139/2022

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal No: Nagarasa Ketheeswaran

CA/HCC/0139/2022

High Court of Mannar

Case No: HC/MN/29/2017 APPELLANT

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

COUNSEL : Amila Palliyage with Sandeepani

Wijesooriya,Savini Udugampola Lakitha

Wakishta Arachchi, Subaj De Silva and

Gayathrika De Silva for the Appellant.

Azard Navavi, PC, ASG for the Respondent.

CA/HCC/139/2022

2 | P a g e

ARGUED ON : 18/05/2026

DECIDED ON : 02/07/2026

******************************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) with another were indicted jointly in the High Court of Mannar for

committing attempted murder on Balasingham Janarthanan punishable

under Section 300 read with Section 32 of the Penal Code and punishable

under Section 44(a) of the Firearms Ordinance No.33 of 1916 as amended.

In the second count the Appellant was charged for the possession of an

unlicensed firearm which is an offence punishable under Section 22(3) of the

Firearms Ordinance No.33 of 1916 as amended.

In the third count the Appellant was charged for the possession of six live

cartridges without licences in violation of Section 9(2) of the Explosives Act

which is an offence punishable under Section 27(1) of the Explosives Act No.

21 of 1956 as amended.

CA/HCC/139/2022

3 | P a g e

The trial commenced before the High Court Judge of Mannar as the

Appellants had opted for a non-jury trial. The prosecution had called 08

witnesses and marked productions P1-P12. After the conclusion of the

prosecution’s case, the Learned High Court Judge had called for the defence

and the Appellant and the other person had made dock statements and

closed their case. After considering the evidence presented by both parties,

the Learned High Court Judge had convicted the Appellant as charged and

had sentenced him as follows:

• For the 1st Count the Appellant was sentenced to life imprisonment

with a fine of Rs.10,000/-. In default 06 months simple imprisonment.

• For the 2nd Count Rs.10,000/- fine was imposed with a default

sentence of 06 months simple imprisonment.

• For the 3rd Count Rs.10,000/- fine was imposed with a default

sentence of 06 months simple imprisonment.

• Additionally, a compensation of Rs.100,000/- was imposed to be paid

to PW2, with a default sentence of 01-year simple imprisonment.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and the sentence, the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

The other person who was named as the second Accused was acquitted from

all the charges.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the Appellant

has given consent to argue this matter in their absence. Also, at the time of

argument the Appellant was connected via the Zoom platform from prison.

Background of the Case.

According to PW2, Janarthanan, the injured person in this case, in the year

2005, he was residing in Kalkadantha Kulam Camp, in the Murunkan area.

On the day of the incident at about 7.00pm, the victim had heard two people

talking to his mother regarding a money matter. As the way they spoke to

CA/HCC/139/2022

4 | P a g e

her was not decent, he had intervened and asked why they were arguing with

his mother. At that time when he asked to reveal their identity and to show

their identity cards, the Appellant had shown a pistol which was in his waist.

When the argument escalated, the Appellant had slapped him once and

opened fire at him which had struck his thigh area. As a result, he had fallen

down with bleeding. Although the place was dark, he had identified the

Appellant and the other person clearly. But he admitted it was the first time

he had seen the Appellant and the other person.

Under cross examination, PW2 had admitted that he was a child soldier of a

proscribed organisation but was relieved due to his tender age from the

proscribed organisation.

PW5, Kirubakaran, the brother of the victim also narrated the same

recollection that the victim, PW2, gave. He too identified the Appellant as the

shooter.

According to PW1, Thangathurai, he was the President of the camp where

the incident had taken place. When he went to the place of incident after

hearing a report of a gun, he had seen that the victim was lying fallen with a

bleeding injury. The witness claimed that he then took steps to transport the

victim to the hospital. According to him, at the time of the incident, visibility

was very poor.

According to PW4, Thiyagarajah, he had seen the incident and he had shown

the other person as the shooter. He did not say that the Appellant had shot

the victim.

PW10, IP/Kumara had conducted the investigation and visited the scene of

the crime immediately after receiving the 1st complaint. When he went there,

the victim was there with bleeding injuries. As the other person (2nd Accused)

had also sustained injuries, both had been dispatched to the Murunkan

Hospital. Thereafter, he had conducted the investigation at the scene and

had arrested the Appellant (1st Accused) who was tied to a tree. Nothing was

CA/HCC/139/2022

5 | P a g e

recovered from him. The witness had only recovered a spent bullet from the

scene of crime at that time.

After interrogation, a short statement was recorded from the Appellant in

Sinhala language and proceeded to Kadhalkatha Kulam Camp where the

said incident had happened. According to him, a pistol was recovered from

the camp upon his statement. The witness further said that he got assistance

from PS 32346 Kaliyugawaraden.

The Medico Legal Report and the Government Analyst Report was admitted

under Section 420 of the Code of the Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of 1979.

The Government Analyst had expressed an opinion that the cartridge which

was found at the scene of crime could be fired from the pistol recovered by

the police under Section 27 of the Evidence Ordinance.

PW14, PC 32346 Kaliyugawaraden vehemently denied that he assisted

PW10, as a translator when the Appellant’s short statement was recorded.

When giving evidence, he said he helped to interpret the statement of the

injured person. He said that he did not know how to read or write the Sinhala

language and that he carried out the duty of interpretation after learning the

language from speaking with his colleagues. He stated that since the

statement that he interpreted was found in Sinhala language, he was unable

to say correctly as to whose statement it was that had been interpreted.

In his dock statement, the Appellant told Court that he went to Kalkadantha

Kulam Camp with two others to meet PW2, the injured person. At that time,

all three who went to the camp were the members of a proscribed

organisation. PW2 was also a member of the same organization but was

relieved due to his tender age. As PW2 started providing information to the

army, they had gone to meet PW2 to inquire about it. The Appellant was

asked to stay near the gate while the 2nd Accused and another person had

gone inside the camp. After hearing the gun fire, people started to run here

and there. He too ran but was caught by the people, who had tied him to a

CA/HCC/139/2022

6 | P a g e

tree. The victim had showed them that the Appellant had shot him. He denied

shooting the victim.

The Appellant has raised the following grounds of appeal:

1. The Learned Trial Judge erred in law by amending the indictment in

terms of Section 177 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act on the

basis that the Court can convict the Appellant for a lesser offence

when, the charge under Section 44(A) of the Firearms Ordinance as

amended by Act No.22 of 1996, is not a cognate offence.

2. The prosecution failed to prove the ingredients under the first count of

the indictment.

3. The Learned Trial Judge erred in law by convicting the Appellant for

the charges in the indictment, even having decided that there are

serious infirmities in the evidence led by the prosecution in terms of

Section 27(1) of the Evidence Ordinance.

As the grounds of appeal raised by the Appellants are interconnected, all

grounds will be considered together hereinafter.

The Appellant was arrested by the police when people had tied him to a palm

tree. Nothing was recovered from his possession nor had any firearm been

recovered from the place of incident except an empty cartridge. After the

arrest, a brief statement was recorded in Sinhala from the Appellant which

he denied. Although PW10 stated that he got the assistance of PW14 to

translate Tamil into Sinhala, PW14 in his evidence categorically denied that

he acted as a translator. PW14, further said that he is not conversant in

Sinhala. Therefore, it is clearly revealed that translation is a made-up story

by the investigation officer.

Section 27 of the Evidence Ordinance is notably an important exception to

the general rule that confessions made to the police are inadmissible.

Accordingly, in situations where an accused person in police custody

provides information which would lead to the discovery of a material fact

(such as a hidden weapon), only such specific information strictly on that

CA/HCC/139/2022

7 | P a g e

discovery can be admitted into evidence. In other words, only the exact

portion of the statement which specifically leads to the recovery is

admissible. Entire confessions cannot be marked and oral evidence of

contents will not be permitted – only the written document can be allowed.

Courts would interpret the “fact discovered” to be not the object itself but as

the place of concealment and the exclusive knowledge that the accused has

regarding that location. The accused must have been in the formal custody

of a police officer for such information to fall under this exception.

The discovery would be the confirmation of the statement, as it would then

guarantee that the specific information resulting in the recovery is reliable.

However, the mere recovery of an object would not be considerable if no

independent proof which links it directly to the crime, exists.

In Samson Atygala v Attorney General [1986] 1 Sri LR. 390 the Court held

that:

“(1) Section 27 of the Evidence Ordinance when it relates to confessional

statements operates as, a proviso to ss. 25 and 26 of the Evidence

Ordinance.

(2) For the purposes o f s. 27 of the Evidence Ordinance the person

making the statement should be a person accused of an offence, and be

in police custody. For requirement;(a) the test is the position &. the

maker when the statement is sought to be adduced in evidence and not

his position when he made it. For the requirement (b) the words "police

custody" do not necessarily mean detention or formal arrest. It includes

police surveillance and restraining of the movements of the person

concerned by the police. The term "custody" has to be interpreted within

wide limits.

In the case of De Saram v. The Republic [2002] 1 Sri LR 288 it was noted:

“The rationale of the proviso in section 27 (1) is that even a confessional

statement to a police officer, which is outside the pail of evidence, could be

CA/HCC/139/2022

8 | P a g e

proved where it contains information that is confirmed by the discovery of

a fact. The word “fact" appearing in the section should be construed in the

light of the definition in section 3 which states, " 'Fact' means and includes

(a) anything, state of things, or relation of things capable of 350 being

perceived by the senses;

(b) any mental condition of which any person is conscious".

It is seen that a fact is not mere object or article but something that is

capable of being perceived by the senses or a mental condition of which a

person is conscious.”

As stated earlier, the location where the recovery was made must be

established in order to accept the evidence led under Section 27 of Evidence

Ordinance. According to PW10, when he arrested the Appellant, he was tied

to a tree by the people of the area. Nothing was recovered from him nor

recovered from the place of incident except an empty cartridge. The Appellant

was taken to the police station by PW10. The recovery of the gun was done

when he was brought back to the place of incident after recording a brief

statement from the Appellant in Sinhala language. Although, PW10 stated

that a gun was recovered upon his statement, the place where the same was

recovered was not elicited from him. Hence, it renders such a recovery as

doubtful.

Although the Learned High Court Judge had very correctly disregarded the

Section 27(1) recovery upon the statement of the Appellant, it is clear that

he misdirected himself by holding that that the Appellant had shot the victim

by using the gun recovered in this case. The Learned High Court Judge

further stated that the Government Analyst had confirmed that the empty

cartridge recovered from the scene of crime could be fired from the gun that

was recovered by PW10. The portion of the relevant English translation of

the judgment is re-produced verbatim as follows:

CA/HCC/139/2022

9 | P a g e

Page 237 of the translated brief.

Accordingly, the point of view of this Court is that the evidence had

not been put forward in an acceptable manner under Section 27(1) of

the Evidence Ordinance in order to make the claim that the pistol had

been taken into custody based on the statement of the 1st accused,

since the 1st Accused is a Tamil speaking person.

However, as already mentioned in the judgment, the view point of this

Court is that the pistol put forward in this case had been used to injure

Balasingham Janarthan during the particular incident which had

been confirmed by the evidence of the prosecution witnesses that had

been put forward.

Particularly, Balasingham Janarthanan and Balasingham Kirubakaran had

given clear evidence stating that the 1st Accused in this case had carried out

the firing with the pistol.

The report of the Government Analyst confirmed that the empty cap of the

bullet recovered from the place of incident had been fired from the particular

pistol that had been produced.

Hence, this Court decides that the 1st Accused of this case had shot and

injured the person Balasingham Janarthan with the pistol that had been

produced in this case, which had been confirmed by the prosecution

witnesses.

Once the Learned Judge finds that the recovery made under Section 27(1) of

the Evidence Ordinance cannot be accepted and rejected, he cannot act on

the recovery evidence to convict the Appellant.

In a criminal case, a single judge cannot simultaneously have two conflicting

opinions on the exact same point of law or fact, as it would go against the

principle of consistency which is required in such cases.

A “dock statement” refers to when an accused person makes an unsworn, in

court statement from the dock, without being subjected to cross examination

and without taking the witness stand. Although courts consider such

CA/HCC/139/2022

10 | P a g e

statements as evidence, such statements would not hold as much weight as

they are not made under oath and would not be subjected to cross

examination. If such an unsworn statement is believed, or if it raises a

reasonable doubt regarding the prosecution’s case, it must be considered in

the defence’s favour. Moreover, it is important to note that dock statements

cannot be viewed in isolation. Rather, they must be evaluated together with

the entire evidence of the prosecution.

In the case of Sarath Vs. Attorney General (2006) 3 Sri L.R. 96 the

evaluation of dock statements was discussed:

“One must bear in mind that when a dock statement is considered

anywhere in the judgment, the judge who heard the evidence is aware

of the prosecution case and would always consider the dock statement

while considering the prosecution story. One cannot consider the dock

statement in isolation.”

In Mannar Mannan v. The Republic of Sri Lanka (1990) 1 Sri LR 280 the

court held that:

“The learned trial Judge has failed to direct the Jury on the impact of

the dock statement on the prosecution evidence. It is settled law that the

Jury must be directed that if the dock statement raised a reasonable

doubt in their minds about the case for the prosecution, the accused is

entitled to an acquittal.”

In Ehelepola v. Officer-in-Charge, Police Station, Kandy and Another

[1998] 1 Sri LR 295 the Court held that:

“On this matter the learned Magistrate has clearly misdirected himself.

It is indeed well settled law that when an unsworn statement is made

by an accused from the dock, that such statement must be looked upon

as evidence subject however to the infirmity that the accused had

CA/HCC/139/2022

11 | P a g e

deliberately refrained from giving sworn testimony. Though there is no

statutory provision for it, the right of an accused to make an unsworn

statement from the dock has been recognized by our Courts for many

years. (The King v. Sittamparam) and is now part of the established

procedure in our Criminal Courts. If such statement is believed, it must

be acted upon, if it raises a reasonable doubt in their minds about the

case for the prosecution, the defence must succeed.”

In the judgment of SC Appeal No: 03/2024, dated 17.03.2026 it was

observed:

“This formulation affirms that although a dock statement is unsworn, it

nevertheless constitutes evidence which must be judicially evaluated. It

is not to be disregarded merely because the accused has chosen not to

testify on oath; rather, its probative force depends upon the weight to be

attached to it upon a consideration of the totality of the evidence.”

The Appellant in his dock statement stated that he had gone to the victim’s

camp with two others in order to take the victim back to a LTTE Camp as

per the direction of the Liberation of Tigers. When two people had gone into

the camp, he had waited near the gate. He denied that he shot at PW2

Janarthanan.

In my view, the dock statement has created a doubt on the prosecution’s

case as the evidence transpired that the Appellant was apprehended by the

village people near the gate and he was tied to a tree. PW2 Janarthanan had

admitted that he was a member of a proscribed organization for a certain

period of time. Nothing was recovered from the Appellant when he was

apprehended by the people. Further, the Section 27(1) of the Evidence

Ordinance recovery has been rejected by the Court. The second Accused was

acquitted by the Court, who was arrested by the police at the scene of crime.

CA/HCC/139/2022

12 | P a g e

Considering all the circumstances along with the evidence presented by the

prosecution, I conclude that the prosecution has failed to prove the case

against the Appellant beyond a reasonable doubt. Hence, I set aside the

conviction and sentence imposed on the Appellant by the Learned High Court

Judge of Mannar. The appeal is allowed.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgement to the High

Court of Mannar along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL