IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA C.A. (Writ) 296/2015

Murugan Kumaravel Group Leader - Rejected Independent Group Jaffna Electoral District Parliament Elections -2015 Sanguveli South, Manippai Jaffna

Petitioner Vs. Mahinda Deshapriya Commissioner of Elections Department of Elections Sarana Road Rajagiriya And 9 others

Respondents

, I ,

1 i 1 I I I I

1

C.A. (Writ) Application No. 296/2015

BEFORE VIJITH K. MALALGODA PCJ (PICA) &

H.C.J. MADAWALA, J.

COUNSEL Rushdhie Habeeb with Shafraz Hamza the

Petitioner.

Janak de Silva DSG for the A.G.

SUPPORTED ON 22nd July, 2015.

**********

VIJITH K. MALALGODA PCJ (PICA)

Heard Counsel for the petitioner in support of this

application and also learned Deputy Solicitor General appearing for the

Attorney General in this matter.

The petitioner has come before this Court seeking a Writ of

Certiorari and Mandamus with regard to the nominations they have

submitted to contest 2015 General Election from the Jaffna District.

The petitioner alleged that the decision by the 2nd respondent to reject

their nominations was made in violation of the provision of the

Parliamentary Elections Act. However, the learned Deputy Solicitor

2

General appearing for the Attorney General has submitted before us, the

nomination paper tendered by the independent group who are the

petitioners before this Court where the leader of the said group had failed

to place his signature at the column where he has to submit his

consent. The position taken by the petitioner was that the group leader

has placed his signature on two other places namely, as the group leader

he has placed his signature at the bottom of the nomination paper and

also he has placed his signature at a place where a correction had been

made but he has not placed his signature on the column where he

supposed to give his consent. The petitioner submits that by looking at

this nomination paper the consent given by the leader of this group is

apparent and therefore rejection of their nomination paper was illegal.

However, it is brought to the notice of this Court by the learned Deputy

Solicitor General the relevant provision of the Parliamentary Elections

Act which clearly states that the each candidate will have to place his

signature giving his consent to contest for this General Election in the

nomination paper itself. The requirement of the group leader's signature

at the bottom of the nomination paper is a different requirement under

the Parliamentary Election Act. Therefore, it is wrong to conclude that,

for the fact that he has placed his signature as the group leader will not

indicate that he has consented to contest in the said Election. It is also

submitted by the learned Deputy Solicitor General that the acts of the

~ tt!

rf

f

I!f!

f!1!

t

!II

i I

II

II!,I!! I!

~ IIIII

f

, 3

Returning Officer is purely a ministerial nature and this Court on several

decided cases has confirm this position. Considering all these issues,

we see no reason for us to interfere with the decision of the Returning

Officer at this stage. Therefore, we refuse to issue notices in this

application.

Application is accordingly dismissed.

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

H.C.J. MADAWALA. J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Kwk/=