==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of

Section 331 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979

Democratic Socialist Republic of

Sri Lanka

Complainant

CA HCC 250/24 Vs.

High Court of Chilaw

Case No. HC/94/19

Gurusinghe Devage Somasiri alias

Somasiri Mama

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Gurusinghe Devage Somasiri alias

Somasiri Mama

Accused-Appellant

Vs.

The Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12

Respondent

2

Before: B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

Amal Ranaraja, J.

Counsel: Venuka Cooray, Kifsiya Banu and Hilma Munas with

Rikasha Rasik instructed by Cooray & Cooray Associates for

the Accused-Appellant

Anoopa De Silva, DSG, for the Respondent.

Argued on: 26.05.2026

Judgment on: 11.06.2026

Judgment

Amal Ranaraja. J,

1. The accused-appellant (hereinafter referred to as ‘appellant’) has been

indicted in the High Court of Chilaw in case No. HC 94/19. The charge

in the indictment is as follows;

01. That on or around the 18th of September, 2014, within the

jurisdiction of this Court, in Lihiriyagama, you in order to gain

some sexual gratification have used a certain part of your

body, on the certain body part of one Hewawitharanalage

Dulakshi Sandareka, a person under 16 years of age, by

placing your male genitalia on her female genitalia; thereby

you have committed an offence of “Grave Sexual Abuse”

punishable under Section 365B (2)(b) of the Penal Code of Sri

Lanka as amended by Penal Code (Amendment) Act No.22 of

3

1995, Penal Code (Amendment) Act No.29 of 1998 and Penal

Code (Amendment) Act No.16 of 2006.

2. At the conclusion of the trial, the learned High Court Judge has

convicted the appellant of the charge and sentenced him as follows;

i. Sentenced to 8 years rigorous imprisonment, also fined Rs.

50,000.00 with a term of 6 months simple imprisonment in

default of the payment of the same.

ii. The appellant has also been directed to pay a sum of Rs.

300,000.00 as compensation to PW01, with a term of 12

months simple imprisonment in default of the payment of

the same.

Further, it has been directed that the terms of

imprisonment shall run consecutively.

3. The appellant aggrieved by the conviction, the disputed judgement,

together with the sentencing order has preferred the instant appeal to

this Court.

Case of the Prosecution

4. On the day of the alleged incident, PW01 has been alone at her house,

engaged in the task of sweeping the sitting room area. During this time,

the appellant has reportedly gained entry into the house. The appellant

has then escorted PW01 from the sitting room to a separate room within

the premises. While in this room, the appellant has allegedly positioned

one of his legs against the wall, subsequently placed PW01 onto that

elevated leg and then proceeded to abuse PW01 as detailed in the

charge.

4

Case of the Appellant

5. The appellant has maintained that PW01 pilfered provisions from his

house. Following this, he has confronted PW01’s elders regarding the

alleged incident, which then has led to a verbal dispute. The appellant

has further contended that he was subsequently, falsely implicated,

resulting in a formal complaint being made to the police.

6. In the legal sense, ‘probability’ evaluates evidence by weighing it against

specific thresholds of certainty. It relies on how logically, consistently

and reliably the evidence supports competing versions of an event. In

the case of the inherent probability of a narrative, a court assesses

whether the disputed facts conform to reason and common human

experience. If the narrative contradicts established physical laws or

common sense, its probability drops significantly

7. In the case of Wickramasuriya v Dedoleena and Others [1996] 2 SLR 95,

F.N.D. Jayasuriya J, has held,

“A judge, in applying the test of Probability and Improbability,

relies heavily on his knowledge of men and matters and the

patterns of conduct observed by human beings both ingenious as

well as those who are less talented and fortunate.”

8. In The Law of Evidence Vol. II (Book 2) Page 1052, E.R.S.R.

Coomaraswamy refers to the observation of Justice Mackenna

which reads as follows;

“When I have done my best to separate the truth from the false

by these more or less objective tests, I say which story seems to

me the more probable, the plaintiffs or the defendant's, and if I

5

cannot say which, I decide the case, as the law requires me to do

in the defendant's favour”

9. Further, in the case of Kamal Addaraarachchi v State [2000] 3 SLR 393,

Yapa J, has held,

In our view there is no other way to apply the test of probability

and improbability except by considering the yardstick of

accepted and expected behaviour of women in society. In other

words, it is the application of the test of normal human conduct.”

10. PW01 has testified as follows;

ප්‍ර:- ප්‍රධාන ද ාදෙන් ඇතුල් දෙච්ච ගමන් ද ාද ේ තිදෙන්දන් දුලක්ෂි දග ෙ. දග ෙ දමාන ාමදේ ම්බ දෙන්දන් ප්‍රධාන ද ාදෙන් ඇතුල් දෙච්ච ගමන්ම? උ:- ෙම් පැත්දත් ාමදේ. ප්‍ර:- එතද ාට සාලෙ ද ාද තිදෙන්දන්? උ:- සාලදෙන් ෙන්න පුළුෙන් ාමෙ ද ට. ප්‍ර:- සාලදෙන් ාමෙ ද ට ෙන්න පුළුෙන්? උ:- එද මයි. ප්‍ර:- එතද ාට දුලක්ෂිෙ දසෝමසිරි මාමා අෙදගන ගිෙයි කිෙන ාමදේ ද ායි ාමදේ ? උ:- ෙම් පැත්දත් ාමදේ. ප්‍ර:- ඒ කිෙන්දන් ප්‍රධාන ද ාදෙන් ඇතුල් වුනාම ෙම් පැත්තට තිදෙන ාමදේ? උ:- එද මයි ප්‍ර:- ඒ ගිහිල්ලා දුලක්ෂි කිව්ො බිත්තිෙ ගාෙදි දසෝමසිරි මාමාදේ කුලට දුලක්ෂිෙ ගත්තා කිෙලා?

6

උ:- එද මයි ප්‍ර:- දමා ක්ෂ ඒද න් දුලක්ෂි අ සේ දේ දපාඩ්ඩක්ෂ පැ ැදිලි ෙන්න? උ:- එොදේ කුල බිත්තිෙට තිෙලා මාෙ එොදේ කුල උඩින් තිො ගත්තා. ප්‍ර:- ඒ දෙලාදව් දසෝමසිරි මාමා දමාන විදිෙට හිටිදේ? උ:- දත්රුදන් නැ ැ. ප්‍ර:- මම ඇහුදව් ැන් ඔෙ දුලක්ෂි ඉසේදසල්ලා කිව්ෙදන් කුල උඩට ගත්තා කිෙල දුලක්ෂිෙ? උ:- එද මයි.

ප්‍ර:- ඒ දෙලාදෙ දසාමසිරි මාමා හිටපු ඉරිෙව්ෙ දමා ක්ෂ ? ඒ කිෙන්දන් හිටදගන හිටිදේ, ොඩිදෙලා හිටිදේ, දමාන විදිෙ ට හිටිදේ ද ාද ාම හිටිදේ? උ:- හිටදගන තමයි හිටිදේ ප්‍ර:- හිටදගන? උ:- හිටදගන හිටිදේ. කුල බිත්තිෙට තිෙලා තමයි කුල උඩින් මාෙ තිොදගන හිටිදේ. ප්‍ර:- එද ම තිොදගන දසෝමසිරි මාමා දමා ක්ෂ ද ේ? උ:- පිළිතුෙක්ෂ නැත ප්‍ර:- ැන් දුලක්ෂිෙ දසෝමසිරි මාමාදේ කුලට ගත්තයි කිෙනොදන්? උ: එද මයි ප්‍ර:- ඊට පසේදසේ දසෝමසිරි මාමා දමානෙ රි ා ? උ:- එද මයි ප්‍ර:- දමා ක්ෂ ද ේ? උ:- මම ඇඳන් හිටපු ෙට ඇඳුම පාත් ෙලා එොදග චූ ෙන එ මදේ චූ ෙන එ ට තිෙලා දමානෙ ා ප්‍ර:- ඒ දෙලාදව් දුලක්ෂි ඇඳදගන හිටිෙ ඇඳුම් දමානෙ කිෙලා මත ?

7

උ:- සාෙකුයි, ටී ෂේ් එ කුයි ප්‍ර:- ෙටට දමානෙත් ඇඳදගන හිටිෙ දුලක්ෂි? උ: එද මයි ප්‍ර:- දමානෙ ඇඳදගන හිටිදේ? උ:- ටී ෂේ් එ ක්ෂ ප්‍ර:- මම ඇහුදෙ දුලක්ෂිදගන් ටී ෂේ් එ ටයි සාෙටයි ෙටින් ඇඳුමක්ෂ ඇඳදගන හිටිෙ කිෙලා?

උ:- එද මයි ප්‍ර:- දමා ක්ෂ ඇඳදගන හිටපු ෙට ඇඳුම? උ:- ලිසමක්ෂ ප්‍ර:- එතද ාට දුලක්ෂි ලින් කිෙපු විදිෙට දසෝමසිරි මාමා ලිසම පාත් ා එද ම ? උ:- එද මයි ප්‍ර:- ඒ ෙලා දමා ක්ෂ ද ේ? උ:- එොදේ චූ ෙන එ මදේ චූ ෙන එ ට තිෙලා දමා ක්ෂ ා ප්‍ර:- ඒ දෙලාදව් දසෝමසිරි මාමා දමානෙ ඇඳදගන හිටිදේ කිෙලා මත යි ? උ:- සෙමක්ෂ ප්‍ර:- දුලක්ෂිදේ ලිසම පාත් ලයින් පසේදසේ දසෝමසිරි මාමා එොදේ ඇඳුම්ෙලට දමා ද ේ කිෙලා මත ? උ: එොදේ සෙම උසේ ෙ ගත්තා ප්‍ර:- ඔෙ දෙලාදෙ දම් සිදුවීම දෙන දෙලාදෙ දුලක්ෂි දමාන විදිෙට හිටිදේ? දමාන ඉරිෙව්දෙන් හිටිදේ? උ:- පිළිතුෙක්ෂ නැත ප්‍ර:- ප්‍රශේනෙ දත්රුදන් නැද් ?

8

උ:- නැ ැ ප්‍ර:- ැන් මම ලින් ඇහුො දසෝමසිරි මාමාදේ ඉරිෙව්ෙ ගැන. එතද ාට ඒ ට දුලක්ෂි උත්තෙෙක්ෂ දුන්නා. ැන් මම අ න්දන් දුලක්ෂි දමාන විදිෙට හිටිදේ. දමාන ඉරිෙව්ෙට හිටිදේ? උ:- එොදේ කුල උඩ කුල් ද ද පැත්තට ද ාලා. ප්‍ර:- ඒ දෙලාදෙ දුලක්ෂිදේ මූණ දමාන පැත්තට ැරිල තිබුදේ? උ: දසෝමසිරි මාමාදේ මූණ පැත්තට ැරිලා ප්‍ර:- ඒ කිෙන්දන එතද ාට දසාමසිරි මාමාදේ මූණ දමාන පැත්තට ැරිලා තිබුදේ? උ:- ඉසේසෙ පැත්තට ැරිලා තිබුදේ ප්‍ර:- එද ම නම් දුලක්ෂිදේ මූණ දමාන පැත්තට ැරිලා තිබුදේ? උ: දසෝමසිරි මාමාදේ පැත්තට

Vide Pages 76 – 79 of Case Brief

11. The description lacks specific detail regarding PW01’s exact placement

on the leg whether it was below the knee, or on the thigh of the

appellant.

12. Considering the male anatomy, it is not clear how the appellant could

have reached/placed his penis on PW01’s female genitalia when she

was positioned on one of the appellant’s legs, with her own legs placed

on either side. Also, in such circumstances the female genitalia would

have been positioned parallel to the appellant’s leg. There would likely

be no sufficient space between the bodies for the appellant to achieve

penile placement on the female genitalia. The close alignment in such

position would inherently restrict the necessary angle and access.

Furthermore, PW01 has stated that the appellant lowered her

underpants, and a whitish substance was later found on them. This

raises a question about the practicality of lowering the underpants

9

effectively in such a compressed position, as there would typically not

be enough space between the crotch area and the leg to manoeuvre

them downwards.

13. PW06, Dr. Wijewardene’s medical examination of PW01 has not found

direct physical signs of penetration sex. However, the doctor has also

stated that “labial penetration” could not be ruled out. The medico-legal

report marked පැ02 also acknowledges that this type of act might not

always leave visible medical evidence. This means that from a medical

standpoint, the doctor has not said that the act definitely did not

happen.

14. Though the doctor has not medically ruled out the possibility of the act,

he has not considered whether, the act could have actually happened,

in the specific way PW01 has described it. In other words, the doctor

has not looked at the practical details of PW01’s narrative, to see if it

was even physically likely or possible for the appellant to have done

what was alleged under those circumstances. The focus of the doctor’s

testimony has been on physical findings, not on the step-by-step

likelihood of the event as described by PW01.

15. Given the preceding discussions, PW01’s narrative lacks reliability due

to its inherent improbability. The narrative is improbable or highly

unlikely to be true based on common sense, logical expectations or

established facts. The significant discrepancies observed directly

undermine the fundamental aspects of her testimony. Consequently,

the account is not cogent and should not be relied upon.

16. In those circumstances, I am inclined to interfere with the conviction

and proceed to set aside the same together with the disputed judgement

and the sentencing order.

10

17. I further proceed to acquit the appellant of the charge.

Appeal allowed.

18. I make no order regarding costs.

19. The Registrar of this Court is directed to send a copy of this Judgement

to the High Court in Chilaw for compliance.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

I agree

Judge of the Court of Appeal