-~ -~n i1 IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA II '----_____ -------'IJ

c.A. Case No. 750/2000 (F)

D.C. Avissawella Case No.

1B170/P

1. Hendeson W ijesinghe

No. 170, Paraswella,

Yatiyantota.

2. Gode Kankanamge Karnolis

No. 170, Paraswella,

Yatiyantota.

PLAINTIFFS

-Vs-

1. P.D.S. Piyadasa

No. 55, Ginigaththena,

Yatiyantota,

2. Dissanayake Mudiyanselage Gunapala

Dissanayake

No. 55, Ginigaththena,

Yatiyantota,

3. MohanmedJalaldeen Mohamed Rifai

No. 55, Ginigaththena,

Yatiyantota,

4. P.G. Sirisena

No. 101, Ginigaththena,

Yatiyantota,

DEFENDANTS

AND NOW BETWEEN

1

P.D.S. Piyadharshani

No. 55, Ginigaththena,

Yatiyantota,

1st Substituted DEFENDANT-APPELLANT

-Vs-

lAo Akuretiye Gamage Asoka Wijesinghe

lB. Akuretiye Gamage Thanuja Roshini Wijesinghe

Ie. Akuretiye Gamage Nadeeka Chandanee

Wijesinghe

lD. Akuretiye Gamage Hitani Disna Wijesinghe

IE. Akuretiye Gamage Sandun Priyankara

Wijesinghe

All of No. 567, Arachchimulla,

Bentota.

1st Substituted PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENTS

2A. Gode Kankanamge Rasika Rishantha

No. 170, Magammana Stores,

Nandarama Temple Mawatha,

Yatiyantota.

2nd Substituted PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT

3. Dissanayake Mudiyanselage Gunapala

Dissanayake

No. 55, Ginigaththena,

Yatiyantota,

4. Mohanmed Jalaldeen Mohamed Rifai

No. 55, Ginigaththena,

Yatiyantota,

2

BEFORE

COUNSEL

Decided on

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J.

5. P.G. Sirisena

No. 101, Ginigaththena,

Yatiyantota,

3r<!, 4th and 5,hDEFENDANT-RESPONDENTS

A.H.M.D. Nawaz,j.

Rohan Sahabandu, PC for the 1" Defendant-Appellant

A.M.E.B. Atapattu for the lA to IE Substituted Plaintiff-Respondents and 2nd Substituted Plaintiff-Respondent

06.05.2019

The Plaintiff-Respondent sought to partition the land by the plaint dated 24.06.1992

amongst the 1" Defendant-Appellant and the 2nd Defendant-Appellant.

The preliminary survey Plan is No.216/14/14/1O/1994.

The land surveyor in his report observed that the Plaintiff-Respondent was not able to

identify the corpus and it was the 1" Defendant-Appellant who showed the boundaries.

The 1" Defendant-Appellant claimed rights on prescription and moved for the dismissal

of the action and further moved that they be declared the owners of the land in question.

However, in his amended statement of claim the 1" Defendant-Appellant stated that he is

entitled to 2/3 share and the balance 1/3 share was owned by one Wanigaratne.

At the trial the 1" Plaintiff-Respondent and one official gave evidence (from the

Pradeshiya Sabhawa) in support of the Plaintiff.

The properry in suit business premises and the main contest berween the parties was

centered on PI Deed No.2/12/7/1979.

3

The original owners of the corpus Perera and Raja Karuna died leaving 16 heirs and all of

them signed Deed No.8 by that Deed the Plaintiffs along with the Defendant-Appellant

got 2/3 share and the balance 1/3 had been given to one Wanigaratne.

The Plaintiff's position was that at the time of execution of the deed PI consideration in a

sum of Rs.33,OOO/- was paid out of the said consideration Rs.ll,OOO/- was paid by

Wanigaratne and the balance RS.220001- was paid out of the money of the business

called Wijaya Stores which was carried out by the Plaintiff-Respondent and the

Appellant during the said period.

The Appellant's position was that the Plaintiff-Respondent did not pay any part of the

consideration towards the purchase and the entire consideration was paid by the

Appellant and Wanigaratne.

The Appellant's further position was that he and Wanigaratne divided the property in

the ratio of 1/3 and 2/3 and possessed those areas.

After the trial learned District Judge held with the Plaintiff-Respondent as prayed for in

the amended plaint.

It was contended that an examination of the documents filed reveal that possession of

the disputed portion of the building had been with the 1st Defendant and before

purchasing the property he had been a tenant since 1979. It is in evidence that it was the

1

st Defendant who as a tenant had negotiated the purchase of the porrety-lD3-lD4. This

has not engaged the attention of the learned District Judge.

It has been established that the 1st Defendant was in sole and exclusive possession of the

2/3 share possessed as a distinct and separate unit while the balance 1/3 was possessed

by Wanigaratne and the 2nd Defendant. The Plaintiff did not enjoy the beneficial interest

of this property this the learned District Judge failed to appreciate.

The learned District Judge has failed to examine in the correct perspective documents

lD?, lDS, lD9, lDIS, lDIS-lDSO which shows that the 1st Defendant was using the

premises as his own this the learned District Judge failed to appreciate.

4

Documents IDS, ID6, IDl-lD32A provide proof of the use and possession of premises by

the 1st Defendant this the learned District Judge failed to appreciate.

The learned District Judge failed to address his mind to the evidence which showed that

the 1st Defendant had been dealing with this property since 1979 because, the Plaintiffs

were aware that they had no right to interfere with him because they did not pay for the

purchase of the property.

There was absolutely no proof of the fact of the Plaintiff providing the consideration for

the purchase.

The evidence of the 1st Defendant has not been dented at all.

The learned District Judge failed to address his mind to the evidence led in the case in the

correct perspective and not considered evidence that was favouable to the 1st Defendant

espeCially when there was evidence of possession by the 1st Defendant which was not

controverted by the Plaintiff. The learned District Judge has placed reliance on a plan P4

and not on the evidenced led. The learned District Judge has not considered the

principles involved in "Ouster" and adverse possession where case law lays down that 10

years undisturbed and uninterrupted possession will displace the rights of ownership

relied on by a person on paper title. The Defendant relied on this provision of the

Prescription Ordinance.

The learned District Judge did not appreciate this principle and the evidence led and had

not considered the evidence of prescription by the 1st Defendant and Wanigaratne in the

correct perspective, but acted on surmise and conjecture.

In the circumstances, I would allow the appeal of the 1st Defendant and set aside the

judgment of the learned District Judge.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

5