IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A.L.A No. 20/2007

In the matter of an application for Leave

to Appeal in terms of Section 754 (2) of

the Civil Procedure Code.

Mohamed Imthiyaz Zakriya

Of No. 85, Dummaladeniya,

Warakapola.

Plaintiff-Respondent-Petitioner

D.C. Kegalle Case No. 7023/L Vs

1

Warakapola Multi-Purpose

Co-Operative Society Limited

Of Warakapola.

Defendant,.Respondent-

Respondent

Roshan Salinda Paranagama

Basnayake Nilame

of Sri Paththini Devalaya,

Sri Paththini Devalaya,

Kandy.

Added Defendant - Respondent ,

f I , I

t I

1 I I j

1 !

I I

\ I I

I I I I

I i ! I i

/

BEFORE : Deepali Wijesundera J.

M.M.A Gaffoor J.

COUNSEL : Rohan Sahabandu PC for the

Petitioner.

Manohara De Silva PC for the

Defendant - Respondent.

H.Withanachchi for the

Added- Defendant - Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 28th October, 2015

DECIDED ON : 29th July, 2016

Oeepali Wijesundera J.

The plaintiff respondent petitioner (hereafter referred to as

petitioner) instituted an action against the defendant respondent

(hereafter referred to as the defendant) seeking a declaration of title to

the land in suit. The defendant had denied the petitioners title. In the

meantime the petitioner defendant respondent the Basnayake Nilame of

Paththini Devale Kandy has made an application to intervene in the said

action under Sec. 18 of the Civil Procedure Code. The petitioner has

objected and after hearing all parties the learned District Judge has

allowed the said application of the Basnayake Nilame to intervene in the

action by order dated 12/01/2007. This application has been filed by the

plaintiff petitioner against the said order of the learned District Judge.

2

I

t [

fr tIIIl

Ii I! I

I.

/ The learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the petitioner is

the owner of the premises in suit and that his predecessor in title had

given the premises on rent to the defendant respondent and that he paid

rent to the petitioner. By letter dated 28/04/2003 the defendant

respondent had denied petitioner's title and continued to be in wrongful

possession the petitioner stated. The petitioner's argument was that this

case is a dispute between him and the respondent and that the defendant

respondent Basnayake Nilame is not a necessary party to this action.

The petitioner stated that the application of the respondent had

been made in collusion with the defendant respondent for the defendant

respondent to be in wrongful occupation of the said premises, for a longer

period. The petitioner stated that if the District Judge's order is affirmed

by this court a tenancy action will be confused by an application for a

declaration of title. The petitioner citing the judgment in Weerapperuma

vs De Silva 61 NLR 481 and Arumugam Coomaraswamy vs Andiris

Appuhamy 1985 2 SLR 219 stated no question arises on the title of the

petitioner to the premises given on rent and that a tenant can not deny

the title of the land lord. He also stated that it has been decided in the

above case that the question to be settled must be a question in the action

which can not be effectually and completely settled unless he is a party.

This judgment in Commaraswamy's case stated that a necessary party

3

r

has to be added for a question to be settled. This judgment is not relevant

to the petitioner's argument.

The defendant respondent's learned counsel argued that under

Sec. 18 (1) of the Civil Procedure Code the addition of the Basnayake

Nilame to the case is most appropriate to determine the legal question of

ownership of the land in suit. Citing the judgment in Arumugam

Coomaraswamy vs Andiris appuhamy he stated that the action can

not be decided without adding the defendant respondent. He cited the

judgment in Erid Perera vs Somawathie Lokuge 2000 3 SLR 200 and

stated that in order to avoid multiplicity of actions and to lower the cost of

litigation addition of a party is necessary.

The defendant respondent stated that the defendant respondent

had filed documentary evidence to show that the Paththini Devale is the

legal owner of the subject matter of the action but the petitioner persisted

to proceed with the case without the participation of the Devale~ The

defendant respondent further stated that documents produced by them

to the District Court showed that the legal rights relied by them are prima

facie rights acquired long before the District Court case was filed by the

petitioner.

4

The defendant respondent stated that the petitioner continued to

be silent on the documents produced by the Paththini Devale and

continued to say that the action should be argued between him and the

defendant respondent co-operative society without making the Devale a

party which fact castes a doubt over the credibility of the petitioner.

The petitioner has filed action in the District Court to eject the

defendant respondent and also for a declaration of title to the premises

in suit, the defendant respondent intervenient petitioner has made an

application to intervene in the said case. The learned District Judge after

hearing the plaintiff petitioner's objections has allowed the 8asnayake

Nilame to intervene. The petitioner's argument that it is a matter between

him and the defendant co-operative society and that the 8asnayake

Nilame is not a required party is baseless. The application was made

under Sec. 18 (1) of the Civil Procedure Code where all the necessary

parties have to be added to avoid duplicity in litigation. As stated by the

petitioner if the 8asnayake Nilame is not added as a party there will be

another action for the same property later on.

I

In Arumugam Coomaraswamy vs Andiris Appuhamy it has

been decided that "Whenever a court can see in the transaction brought

before it that the rights of one of the parties will or may be so affected that

5

I I

I 1 I

I I I

I

actions may be brought in respect of that transaction the court has the

power to bring all the parties before it and determine the rights of all in

one proceeding". If the intervenient respondent is not added as a party

he will have to file a separate action for the same property on the same

issues. Therefore the learned District Judge has very correctly allowed

the application for intervention. Documents marked with the petition by

the 8asnayake Nilame shows that there has been a transaction between

the Devale and the defendant respondent therefore the District Judge has

taken the correct decision when he allowed the defendant petitioner's

application.

For the afore stated reasons I decide to affirm the order of the

learned District Judge dated 12.01.2007. The petitioner's application is

dismissed with costs fixed at Rs. 50,0001=.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

M.M.A.Gaffoor J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

6

I IIJ ! i I! ~ i 1Ii II

Ij t

r

I