+

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

L.N.D de Silva,

121 I 1 ,J ambugasmulla

Mawatha,Nugegoda.

Plaintiff- Appellant

C.A.No.74/96 (F)

D.C.Colombo No.78551RE

Before

Counsel

C.H. Thomas,

AssessmentNo.91 ,(Postal

No.60/2),Kandy, Kiribathgoda.

DefendantiRespondent

M.M.A.Gaffoor,J. and

S.Devika de L.Tennekoon,J.

Harsha Soza P.C with Anurddha

Dharmaratne for the Plaintiff-Appellant

Rohan Sahabandu P.C. for the Defendant-Respondent

1

i ! 1 1

t I, I

J ! I I I j j I

I

Written submissions filed on Plaintiff - Appellant on 12/03/2012

Defendant-Respondent on 06.07.2017

Decided on 11.10.2017

M.M.A.Gaffoor,J.

This appeal arises from an order given by the District Judge of

Colombo case No. D.C. 78551RE. The matters urged in the original

plaint was that by the act of the tenant the condition of the premises had

deteriorated. Both parties had made their oral submissions and tendered

written submissions.

At the trial both parties admitted that the premises in suit are

business premises. Plaintiff raised issues Nos.1 S\ 2nd and 13th to 16th and

the Defendant raised issues Nos.3 rd to Ith. Plaintiff gave evidence on

behalf of the Plaintiff. It is submitted that Court has to judge the

credibility and veracity of the evidence given by these witnesses.

Rent Act No.7 of 1992 and its amendments are applicable to the

suit in question. This act is applicable to premises which include the

buildings together with lands. It will be seen that all of the lease and

rental transactions are governed by Roman Dutch Law which is known

and common law subject to laws made by statutes. Prior to the enactment

2

'"

are governed by Roman Dutch Law which is known and common law subject to

laws made by statutes. Prior to the enactment of the present Rent Act No.29 of

1948 and No.9 of 1972 were in operation.

The main ground of this appeal by the defendant Appellant is that

ejectment is sought on the basis of deterioration of the premises. This ground of

ejectment has been incorporated into the Act by Section 22 (l) D and Section 22

(2) D of the Act.

It is trite law that if the condition of any premises has been deteriorated

owing to the acts committed by the tenant neglect of default of the tenant it

gives rises to the cause for the landlord to ejectment of the tenant on that

ground. According to the Rent Act the burden of proof is on the Plaintiff

landlord to satisfy Court by documentary and oral evidence regarding the cause

of action, that is deterioration of the premises. This burden lies with the

plaintiff. This has been decided in the case of Vanderbona Vs. Justin Perera-

1985 2 SLR 62. It is in evidence that the tenant had constructed an additional

part to this building with wooden planks. This matter had not been

contemplate by the Plaintiff-Appellant. This construction cannot be construed

as a permanent alteration. The ground that had been urged by the Plaintiff-

Appellant that by constructing the section with wooden planks had deteriorated

the condition of the premises.

3

'.

Under the common law a tenant is entitled to carry out alteration which

involve superficial or surface changes as opposed to permanent alterations.

In the case in point the deterioration that had been urged and the evidence

to substantiate a position of deterioration the witnesses called by the Plaintiff -

Appellant specifically state that deterioration had been caused to the building

by fixing of racks and drilling wire nails. We observe that the changes are

superficial or surface changes as opposed to permanent alterations which had

caused deterioration to the existing premises.

This has been decided in the case of State Bank of India vs. Rajapaksha

2002 1SLR 138. The evidence adduced in this case by the plaintiff- appellant is

that of Public Health Inspector and a Chartered Engineer. The evidence of the

Public Health Inspector had been challenged in pages 88 to 90. The Public

Health Inspector is a person without technical experience. He had visited this

place with a Technical Officer but this Technical Officer had not been called to

give evidence. According to the evidence of the Public Health Inspector what

he had done was 'held the tapes for the Technical Office'. Furthermore, the

Kelaniya Pradeshiya Sabha had not taken any action as regard to alterations

made to this existing building.

4

I1I!I!If!fII!

!I,r I f

I I I I I' !

I I I

I I

'.

The witness for the Plaintiff-Appellant had not tendered the approved

plan and therefore was not in a position to prove any new construction to the

property in question. It should be noted that the matter urged is not alteration

but deterioration of the premises. The Charted Structural Engineer was called

for the plaintiff had tendered a report 7 A. This report does not specifically

refer to the building as an unauthorized structure.

Further, the engineer who was called for the plaintiff has tendered a

report 7 A states as follows " In this report, the only report as regard

deterioration is that fixing of racks and drilling of wire nails" .

The question as regard to the fire that was caused in 1982 and the

removal of the toilet and the stair case had not been dealt in the engineer's

report. Therefore, the evidence called by the plaintiff-appellant cannot be

considered as expert evidence on the matter in question.

It will be further seen the structural alteration envisages by the legislature

by bringing an amendment to Section and new Subsection (IE) may be

considered at this juncture, the amending Act of 1992 Section 22 IE stipulates a

ground for ejectment as structural alterations done to the main building.

Regarding this section 1 to C making alteration does not refer to a situation of

deterioration. But it is only an another limit for grounds of ejectment.

5

1 1 ! ! , i I j I I I ! I !, I

I

I I I

I I i

i i'

The main issues in this appeal are not questions of law but questions of

fact. It will be seen that a plethora of authorities coming from Fradd Vs Brown

22 NLR 282 to Wicklkramasinghe Vs Dedolina 1996 2 SLR 95 underline the

principle that Court of Appeal is to reluctant to interfere with the observations

of the original court where the original court had the priceless advantage of

observing the demeanour and then facts brought before him. It is on a very rare

occasions that the Court the Court of Appeal will venture in to a question of fact

which deals with a decision court of first instance.

In 64 NLR 217 HNG Fernando J had enlightened this position and had

enumerated certain guidelines where a Court of Appeal will interfere with the

findings of an original court (1) where inadmissible evidence had been

considered as relevant evidence. (2) Where the original court had come to

conclusion of facts unsupported by legal evidence. While concluding it is

pertinent to quote from the judgment of the District Judge where she had

specifically stated that page 194 (quote the Sinhala passage)

~clQ)O) C)@cC) 0)0 06<9 c530 ~C)a), G3~~cl ~C)a), (iE)~cltD

S~f' lfzti Q)E)C3. (iC)(iC (iE)Q)a) (i(iC SOG5 S~f' cC3 c53c~(i~ ~~

(i~qE)cl ~Q)~ C)dC) ~@Q)OC)(i(5)~ 9~~ C)@ f'C) ~ w~ c53c)

6

I,I

ff I!

I J i I 1

1

I I !

I, I I I ! I ! ! ! I I

I I I ,

i

I'

SDCid, OldtD (3)zS ~Cl, ~ OOG)l~Ct5). Ci OOG)l~C CiC)z~

.!D~C)tD E)ai'O)tD0ZCiC)ti ~C)ai' t5)OC) (DOS glS9C)ai' OOG)l~Cti c zC3

In the circumstance taking into consideration cumulative fact and the

laws, mention in this appeal, we see no reasons to interfere with the judgment of

the Learned District Judge.

Accordingly, this appeal is dismissed with costs. fixed at Rs.10,OOO/-.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

S.Devika de L. Tennekoon,J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

7

J,