I

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

CA Appeal No. CA(PHC) 37/2007 High Court of Ampara Revision Application No. HCI AMlREV 1294/2006 Magistrate's Court of Ampara Case No. 19315/S

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of the Provisions of the Rules 2 (1) (a) of the Court of Appeal (Procedure for Appeals from High Court) Rules 19 read with Provisions of Section 9 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of

1990 to set aside the order of the Learned High Court Judge of Ampara dated 06.03.2007 in Case No.

HCI AM/REV 1294/2006

The Range Forest Officer, District Forest Office, Ampara.

Complainant

VS.

1. Herath Mudiyanselage Karunasundara 2. Sudu Hakuralage Chaminda Pushpakumara Senaretna,

I I j t l i I

2

3. Suraweera Mudiyanselage Amarasiri

Accused

AND

Mohamed Y oosuf Raufudeen No.430, Main Street, Maruthamunai.

Claimant

AND BETWEEN

Mohamed Y oosuf Raufudeen, No.430, Main Street, Maruthamunai.

Claimant - Petitioner

vs

1. The Range Forest Officer, District Forest Office, Ampara.

Com plainant-Respondent

i ! I I

3

I

2. Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General's Department,

I Colombo 12.

I Respondent , I I I

I I

f AND NOW BETWEEN II ~! !

Mohamed Y oosuf Raufudeen No.430, Main Street, I I Maruthamunai. i, I ! I Claimant-Petitioner-Appellant I !

II

I I , II I Vs. I ! ! 1. The Range Forest Officer, i II I! District Forest Office,

I

! II Ampara. I II ! , I Complainant-Respondent-! Respondent ! I 2. The Hon Attorney General, I Attorney General's Department I I Colombo 12.

I I I

Respondent-Respondent. I ! I l I ,,

1 !I I ! ,,I

i

1

* I

~

5

Herath Mudiyanselage Karunasundara, Sudu Hakuralage Caminda

Pushpakumara Senarathne, and Suraweera Mudiyanselage Amarasiri who

were the accused in Case No. 19315/S were charged in the Magistrate's

Court of Ampara for transporting timber in a lorry bearing No. 26 Sri 5790

without a valid permit. All three accused pleaded guilty to the aforesaid

charge leveled against them and accordingly the Magistrate imposed a fine

ofRs.50001- each.

In addition to the fine imposed, the learned Magistrate has proceeded

to confiscate the vehicle after an inquiry which was held under Section 40(a)

of the Forest Ordinance, on the basis that the Appellant had not been able to

prove and satisfactorily convince that he had taken all precautions to prevent

the use of the vehicle for the commission of the offence.

Being aggrieved by the said Order the Appellant invoked the High

Court of Ampara in revision but the learned High Court Judge, by his

Judgment dated 06.03.2007, dismissed the Petition and affirmed the Order of

the learned Magistrate.

This Appeal has been preferred by the Appellant against the said

Judgment.

The learned Magistrate by his decision dated 17/08/2006 made Order

in terms of Section 40 of the Forest Ordinance confiscating the aforesaid

vehicle which bears the number 26 Sri 5790, that was used to commit the

offence.

Aforesaid Section 40 in the Act No.65 of 2009 reads thus:-

40 (1) Where any person is convicted of a forest offence;

6

(a) All timber or forest produce which is not the property of the State

in respect of which such offence has been committed; and

(b) all tools, vehicles, implements, cattle and machines used In

committing such offence;

shall in addition to any other punishment specified for such offence be

confiscated by Order of the convicting Magistrate.

Provided that in any case where the owner of such tools,

vehicles, implements and machines used in the commission of such

offence, is a third party, no order of confiscation shall be made if such

owner proves to the satisfaction of the Court that he had taken all

precautions to prevent the use of such tools, vehicles, implements,

cattle and machines, as the case may be, for the commission of the

offence.

It is relevant to note by the use of the words "all precautions",

the legislature expects the registered owner to take each and every

necessary step / precaution to ensure that the vehicle is not being used

to commit any offence under the Forest Ordinance. Accordingly,

when an application is made to Court in order to have the vehicle

released, it is the burden of the owner of the vehicle, which was used

to commit an offence under the Forest Ordinance to establish that he

had taken all necessary precautions to prevent the use of the said

vehicle for the commission of the offence.

It is settled law that before an order for confiscation is made the

owner should be given an opportunity to show cause. If the owner on

balance of probability satisfies the Court that he had taken all

7

precautions to prevent the commission of the offence or the offence

was committed without his knowledge nor was he privy to the

commission of the offence then the vehicle has to be released to the

owner.

In order to establish the aforesaid precautionary measures, in

this case the Appellant has given evidence before the Magistrate. The

Appellant in his evidence has stated that, on 20.10.2005 the Accused

driver informed him that there is a hire to transport cement and sought

his permission to take the lorry and he allowed the Accused driver to

take the lorry.

It is significant to note that the Appellant had not inquired from

the Accused driver, any details such as, the name of the hirer, the

place from which the cement is to be transported and up to which

point the cement is to be transported, the time period, the amount for

the hire that was agreed upon etc. Without asking any of these

questions the Appellant had just allowed the Accused driver to take

the lorry.

Further he has stated, the Appellant was informed over the

phone that the lorry was seized by the Forest Officers of the Forest

Conversation Office. Further, he has stated that he had given

instructions not to perform any illegal activities but the Accused

driver had used the vehicle without his knowledge to transport the

timber without a permit. It is important to note, that the Appellant has

not stated even a single word, that he had taken as to the necessary

8

precautions, to prevent an offence being committed by usmg his

vehicle.

In the oral and written submissions of the learned Counsel for

the Appellant, it was contended that, the learned Magistrate had failed

to consider the fact that there are no evidence placed before him to

establish that the Appellant had the knowledge of the commission of

the offence by his driver or that the Appellant had participated in the

commission of the offence and thus misdirected himself.

It is the contention of the learned Counsel, that in evaluating the

evidence placed before the learned Magistrate, he has misdirected

himself and come to a wrong conclusion that the Appellant had not

shown sufficient reasons against the forfeiture of the said lorry.

The learned State Counsel has been stressed that the mere

verbal claim is vague and uncertain that he had instructed the Accused

driver especially not to perform any illegal activity that would cease

to come within the requirements of Section 40 (1) of the Forest

Ordinance. She further submitted that, giving mere instructions is not

sufficient to discharge the said burden.

Is it sufficient for the owner merely to say that he was not

aware or that he had no knowledge that the vehicle was used in the

commission of the offence and instructions had been given to the

Accused driver not to use the vehicle for illegal purposes? The

answer to this question is purely in the negative. The Appellant

cannot escape liability by stating that he was not aware or that he had

any knowledge that the lorry was used in the commission of the

9

offence. He must show that he had taken all precautions available to

prevent the use of the vehicle for the commission of the offence. The

view of this Court is, giving mere instructions or stating that the

vehicle had been used for the commission of the offence without his

knowledge is not sufficient in order to discharge the burden embodied

in the proviso to Section (40) (1) of the Forest (Amendment) Act.

Accordingly, when I consider the facts of this case and the

evidence given by the Appellant, I am of the view that the Appellant

has not established in a balance of probability any of the following

matters:

(i) that he had taken necessary precautions to prevent an

offence being committed by using the vehicle;

(ii) that the vehicle has been used for the commission of the

offence without his knowledge.

The other ground on which the Appellant relied was the manner

in which the learned Magistrate had come to a finding based on his

own inspection of the vehicle that was confiscated.

The Counsel for the Appellant contended that, the learned

Magistrate on his own discretion had decided to inspect the lorry at

the conclusion of the inquiry and this has resulted in the appellant

being denied the opportunity to show cause of the observation made

by the learned Magistrate. It is the contention of the Counsel that,

forming opinion based on inspection had completely prejudiced the

learned Magistrate's mind in making his final conclusion.

10

The learned State Counsel has drawn the attention of this Court

that, right throughout the case the Appellant was at all times

represented by a Counsel, and even at the time of the inspection of the

vehicle, the Appellant was represented by a Counsel.

It is to be noted, while inspecting the vehicle, the learned

Magistrate has questioned the Appellant regarding certain repairs and

additions done to the vehicle. The Appellant has failed to give any

explanations. As the Appellant being represented by a Counsel, was

in a position to make any submissions or even to call for further

evidence. But the Appellant has not made any effort to do so.

It is to be noted that the burden is on the Appellant to establish

that he had taken all necessary precautions to prevent the use of the

vehicle for the commission of the offence.

Hence, I am not agreeable with the submissions made by the

Counsel that the Appellant did not have the opportunity to show cause

of the observations made by the learned Magistrate.

For the above mentioned reasons I am of the view that the

Order of confiscation had correctly been made by the learned

Magistrate and therefore I see no basis to set it aside. Hence, it is not

necessary to interfere with the Judgment of the learned High Court

Judge who affirmed the Order of the learned Magistrate.

Accordingly, no ground exists which justifies the intervention

of this Court to set aside the Judgment of the learned High Court

Judge dated 06.03.2007 and the Order of the learned Magistrate dated

17.08.2006.

I

\ ,

! I J i I I ! ! I

11

Accordingly, I dismiss the Appeal.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

P.R. Walgama, J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL