1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

In the matter of an Application in the nature of Writs of Certiorari and Prohibition in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

CA (Writ) Application No: 403/2019

1) U.A.A.J. Ukwatte. 2) U.A.K.L. Ukwatte.

Both of F60, Government Flats, St. Anthonys Road, Colombo 3. PETITIONERS Vs. 1) Akila VIraj Kariyawasam, Hon. Minister of Education. 1A) Dallas Alahapperuma,

Hon. Minister of Education. 2) N.M.Ranasinghe, Secretary, Ministry of Education. 2A) Padmasiri Jayamanne,

Secretary, Ministry of Education.

3) Director, National Schools. 1st 3rd Respondents at Isurupaya, Ministry, of Education, Battaramulla.

2

4) B.A. Abeyratne, Principal, Royal College. 5) C.V. Gunatilleke, Vice Principal, Royal College. 6) Channa Gunasekara.

7) Thilakshi. 8) Dulani Bandara. 9) Tharanga Peiris. 10) Dilruk De Silva.

4th 10th Respondents at Royal College, Rajakeeya Mawatha, Colombo 7. RESPONDENTS Before: Arjuna Obeyesekere, J Counsel: Saliya Peiris, P.C., with Pulasthi Hewamanne and Ms. Harindhi Jayawardhana for the Petitioners Vikum De Abrew, Senior Deputy Solicitor General with Sachintha Dias, State Counsel for the Respondents Argued on: 13th, 17th and 19th December 2019 Written Submissions: Tendered on behalf of the Petitioners on 6th December 2019, 7th February 2020 and 17th February 2020 Tendered on behalf of the Respondents on 14th February 2020 Decided on: 12th June 2020

3

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J

This application relates to the non-admission of the 2nd Petitioner to Grade

One of Royal College, Colombo 7, for the year 2020.

The complaint of the Petitioners arises from an amendment that was effected

to Clause 7.2.1.3 of Circular No. 22/2017, annexed to the petition marked P31,

when preparing the Circular for admission of children for the years 2019 and

2020, with the Petitioners complaining that the said amendment is illegal,

irrational and unreasonable, and is a violation of their legitimate expectation.

Circular relating to the admission of children to Grade 1 P7

It is common ground that admission of children to Grade One, and to other

grades of Government schools, is extremely competitive, with the number of

applicants far outnumbering the number of vacancies that are available. The

application and selection procedure for admission to Grade One is therefore

regulated by the Government, through Circulars issued by the Ministry of

Education.

Admission of students to Grade 1 of Government Schools for the year 2020 is

governed by Circular No. 29/2019, annexed to the petition marked P7, issued

by the Ministry of Education. According to P7, for the year 2020, the

maximum number of students that can be admitted to a single class is limited

to 36. Of this 36, a maximum of 5 slots are reserved for the children of those

serving in the Armed Forces and the Police Force. After making provision for

1 P3 was the Circular that was applicable for admission to Grade One for 2018.

4

the said reservation, the vacancies are allocated under six categories in the

following manner:

Category Percentage of the vacancies 1 Children of residents in close proximity to the school 50%

2 Children of parents who are Past Pupils of the school 25%

3 Brothers /sisters of students who are already studying

in the school

15%

4 Children of persons belonging to the staff in

Institutions directly involved In school education

05%

5 Children of officers in Government/ Corporations/

Statutory Boards/ State Banks receiving transfers on

exigencies of service

04%

6 Children of persons arriving after living abroad with the

child

01%

In terms of P7, under the category of Children of residents in close proximity

to the school, a total of 100 marks are allotted under the following four sub-

categories.

Sub-Category No. in the Circular

Description of the Sub-Category Maximum marks

7.2.1.1 Main Documents in proof of the place of

residence2

20

2mosxpsh ;yjqre lrk m%Odk f,aLk

5

7.2.1.2 Additional documents to confirm the place of

residence3

05

7.2.2 Number of years that the names of the

applicant and his spouse have been included

in the Electoral Register4

25

7.2.4 Number of schools located closer to the

place of residence than the school applied5

50

Total 100

To be eligible to apply under the said category of Children of residents in close

proximity to the school6, which is the category under which the admission of

the 2nd Petitioner is sought, the primary requirement is that the parents must

be resident within the feeder area to which the school belongs.

Feeder area is defined in Clause 4.7 of P7 as follows:

fmdaIs; m%foaYh hkq mdi, msysgs mrsmd,k osia;%sla n, m%foaYh ...... fjs.

The above definition practically allows any person living within the

administrative district of Colombo to apply for any Government school situated

within the administrative district of Colombo, under the aforementioned

category.

3mosxpsh ;yjqre lrk w;sfral f,aLk 4mosxpsh ikd: lsrSu ioyd Pkao ysus kdu f,aLkfha ,shdmosxpsh 5mosxps ia:dkfha isg mdi,g we;s wdikak;dj 6mdi,g wdikak mosxps lrejkaf.a orejka.

6

Priority for those living closest to a school

The fact that 50% of the vacancies available in Grade One of a particular

Government school are allocated to children of those resident in close

proximity to that school, demonstrates the policy of the Government in

providing a child with a school that is closest to his or her place of permanent

residence. Permanency is considered as having been resident at the same

address for a period of five years. The above marks structure is therefore

weighted in favour of those who reside:

(a) closest to the school; and

(b) for a minimum period of five years at one address.

The maximum 50% marks due under sub-category 7.2.4 would be allotted to

those who have no other school closer to their residence other than the school

applied for, with five marks being deducted for each school that is closer to the

residence of the applicant than the school applied for.

Proof of residence by way of registration as an elector of the parents of the

child for a period of five years preceding the date of the application,7 entitles

an applicant to a maximum of 25 marks under category 7.2.2, with a pro-rata

reduction where the period is less than five years.

Further recognition is given to those who live close to a particular school in a

house of their own, for a period of minimum five years. This is borne out by the

7 Vide Clause 7.2.2.1 of P7 - Pkao ysus kduf,aLkfha ,shdmosxpshg ,l=Kq ,nd osfusoS weheoqus lrk jraIhg fmr jraIh isg wdik miq.sh jraI myla i,ld ,l=Kq ,efnS'

7

fact that a person who has been the owner of any premises situated within a

feeder area for a period of five years or more and who is desirous of having his

or her child admitted to a school within the feeder area, would receive the

maximum mark of 20 under sub-category 7.2.1.1. Where the period is less than

five years, the marks given under sub-category 7.2.1.1 are reduced on a pro-

rata basis. Similarly, a person who does not own a property but has taken on

lease or rent, any premises five years prior to the closing date of the

applications, would receive a maximum of 10 marks. This too is reduced on a

pro-rata basis, where the period is less than five years. A similar approach is

adopted with the marks given for additional documents in support of residence

under sub-category 7.2.1.2.

Marks are allotted for residence based on the current address

A significant feature of the marking structure contained in the aforementioned

circular (and the circulars prior to that) is that marks are allotted based on an

applicants residence at the time of the application. This Court has examined

the Circular P7 and observes that if an applicant changes his residence two

years prior to the closing date of applications, under sub-categories 7.2.1.1,

7.2.1.2 and 7.2.2, he would be entitled for marks only for the two year period

after the change of residence. Thus, an applicant who changes his residence

during the period of five years preceding the closing date of applications

stands to lose out, as it runs contrary to the aforementioned objective that is

sought to be achieved of providing a child with a school that is closest to his

residence for a period of five years. A change of residence, deliberate or

otherwise, while being to the detriment of an applicant, can also prevent an

applicant gaining an unfair advantage over others who have been resident at

the same address for a period of five years. Therefore, the said provision, while

8

recognizing the principle of five years of residence at the same address, gives

priority to those who have remained at the same address for the period of five

years preceding the closing date of applications, in the feeder area.

Exception to the rule

There is however one exception to the above rule that marks shall be allotted

based on the residence of the parent at the time of the application, and which

exception is the bone of contention in this application.

According to the Respondents, that exception was introduced for the first time

by Circular No. 19/2012 and reads as follows:

mosxpsh i|yd ,l=Kq ,ndfokafka oekg mosxps js isgsk ia:dkfha ,sms f,aLk u.sks'

tfy;a oekg mosxps jS isgsk ia:dkfha mosxps jSug fmr fmdaIs; m%foaYh ;=, ;j;a

ia:dkhl mosxps js isgs whoquslrejl= ;u wju jir 05l mosxpsh ikd: lsrsu

i|yd Pkao ysus kdu f,ALk ia:dk foflka u bosrsm;a lrk jsg" my; mrsos

lghq;= l, hq;= h'

b,a,qus lrkq ,nk mdi,g jvd wdikakfha wod, orejdg we;=,;a jSug yels mdi,a

i|yd wvq lrkq ,nk ,l=Kq fkd fjkia jkafka kus muKla ia:dk foflka u

bosrsm;a lr we;s Pkao kduf,aLk" oekg mosxps ia:dkfha Pkao ysus kduf,aLkh

fia i,ld ,l=Kq ,nd osh hq;=h.

The Respondents have stated that due to representations made by various

parties, it was decided when issuing Circular No. 19/2012 to give a concession

to residents who had moved within the feeder area, but had been resident in

the same feeder area for 5 years continuously.8 This being the reason for the

introduction of the above clause, an applicant could change his residence

8 Vide paragraph 6 of the affidavit dated 24th January 2020 of Ms. Kamani Perera, Director of Education.

9

within the feeder area during the period of five years preceding the date of

application, and yet get marks for registration as an elector for the full period

of five years, provided the number of schools between each of the residences

and the school applied for, remained the same.9 The above amendment

introduced by Circular No. 19/2012 is in line with the policy of the Government

to give priority to children who live closest to a particular school as the number

of schools remaining the same would essentially place a student in the same

position he or she would have been if not for the change in residence, in

respect of Clause 7.2.2.

This Court must observe that Circular No. 23/2013 which replaced Circular

No.19/2012 also contained the above clause. Circular No. 23/201310 continued

to be applicable for admission to Grade One11 until it was replaced by Circular

No. 22/2017, marked P3, which is the Circular applicable for admission of

children for the year 2018. Clause 7.2.1.3 of P3 reads as follows:

mosxpsh i|yd ,l=Kq ,ndfokafka oekg mosxps js isgsk ia:dkfha ,sms f,aLk u.sks'

tfy;a oekg mosxpsjs isgsk ia:dkfha mosxps jsug fmr fmdaIs; m%foaYh ;=, ;j;a

ia:dkhl mosxps js isgs whoquslrejl= ;u wju jir 05l mosxpsh ikd: lsrSu

i|yd Pkao ysus kdu f,aLk ia:dk foflka u bosrsm;a lrk jsg" b,a,qus lrkq

,nk mdi,g jvd wdikakfha wod, orejdg we;=,;a jsug yels mdi,a i|yd wvq

lrkq ,nk ,l=Kq fkd fjkia jkafka kus muKla ia:dk foflka u bosrsm;a lr

we;s Pkao ysus kduf,aLk" oekg mosxps ia:dkfha Pkao ysus kduf,aLkh fia i,ld

,l=Kq ,nd osh hq;=h'

Thus, the position that even where there has been a change of residence

during the five year period preceding the closing date of applications, marks

9 This concession would only apply to Sub-category 7.2.2 and does not apply to Sub-category 7.2.1 10 Circular No. 23/2013 has been marked P17A. 11 Subject to amendments introduced by Circulars annexed to the Counter Affidavit, marked P17B P17D.

10

will be given for the entire period that the names of the parents appear on the

electoral register, on the condition that the number of schools between each

of the residences and the school remain the same, continued in respect of

admission of children for the year 2018 as well. As observed earlier, this is the

only exception to the rule that marks are allotted based on an applicants

current residence.

Amendment to the exception

The above clause continued to be applicable for admission to Grade One until

the said clause was amended when the Circular was issued in 2018 for

admission of children to Grade One in 2019. The amendment is reflected in

Clause 7.2.2.3 of Circular No. 24/2018, marked R1, and reads as follows:

mosxpsh i|yd ,l=Kq ,ndfokafka oekg mosxps js isgsk ia:dkfha ,sms f,aLk u.sks'

tfy;a oekg mosxpsjs isgsk ia:dkfha mosxps jsug fmr fmdaIs; m%foaYh ;=, ;j;a

ia:dkhl mosxps js isgs whoquslrejl= ;u wju jir 05l mosxpsh ikd: lsrSu

i|yd Pkao ysus kdu f,aLk ia:dk foflka u bosrsm;a lrk jsg" tu ia:dk

foflys u oSu b,a,qus lrkq ,nk mdi,g jvd wdikak j msysgs <uhdg we;=,;a

jsh yels mdi,a" tlu mdi,a jkafka kus muKla ia:dk foflka u bosrsm;a lr

we;s Pkao ysus kduf,aLk" oekg mosxps ia:dkfha Pkao ysus kduf,aLk fia i,ld

,l=Kq ,nd osh hq;=h'

The above clause appears as Clause 7.2.2.3 in Circular P7 as well. Thus, with

the amendment introduced by R1, not only should the number of schools

remain the same, the schools should also remain identical, if an applicant who

has changed residence within the feeder area during the five years preceding

the closing of applications is to receive marks for being on the electoral list

under both residences.

11

The complaint of the learned Presidents Counsel for the Petitioner is that the

shift from the same number of schools to identical schools is irrational,

unreasonable and violates the legitimate expectation of the Petitioners.

The background facts

This Court shall now consider the facts of this application.

The 1st Petitioner states that desirous of obtaining a suitable residence to suit

the Petitioners family, he took on lease premises No. 532/3C, Galle Road

Kollupitiya, Colombo 3 on 1st July 2014. At that time, the 1st Petitioners wife

was expecting the 2nd Petitioner, who was subsequently born on 6th October

2014. It is clear from the pleadings that the above choice of residence was

actuated by the intention of the 1st Petitioner and his wife of gaining admission

of their child to a Government School situated in the area, with Royal College,

Colombo 7 being high in the order of preference.

The lease agreement relating to the above premises had been notarially

executed only on 11th June 2015. This Court has examined the copy of the said

lease agreement annexed to the petition marked P2A and observes that the

said premises has been leased to the 1st Petitioner for a period of five years,

with effect from 1st July 2014. This Court must note that the above address has

been inserted on the following documents:

a) The Birth Certificate of the 2nd Petitioner dated 5th January 2015;12

12 Vide P1.

12

b) The National Identity Card issued to the 1st Petitioner on 22nd December

2016;13

c) The Child Health Development Record of the 2nd Petitioner, dated 2nd July

2015;14and

d) The Certificate of Registration of a motor vehicle belonging to the 2nd

Petitioner which had been registered on 19th October 2015.15

While the residence of the 1st Petitioner at the above address has been

certified by the Grama Niladhari, Bambalapitiya,16 it is not in dispute that the

names of the 1st Petitioner and his wife were entered under the above address

on the electoral register for the year 2015, and continued to be on the

electoral register under that address for the years 2016 and 2017.17

The 1st Petitioner states that even though the lease agreement P2A was valid

until 30th June 2019, by a letter dated 31st March 2017, the lessor had issued a

notice of termination of the lease agreement with effect from 1st July 2017.18 It

appears that the 1st Petitioner, while being compelled to find a new residence,

was alive to the reality that his chances of getting his son admitted to Royal

College was now in peril. The 1st Petitioner states further that in view of his

desire to seek admission of his son to Royal College, it was important that he

found a suitable residence close to Royal College. The 1st Petitioner states that

he made inquiries and found that according to Circular No. 22/2017 marked

13 A copy of the National Identity Card has been annexed to the petition, marked P14a. 14 A copy of the Child Health Development Record has been annexed to the counter affidavit, marked P14b. 15 A copy of the Certificate of Registration has been annexed to the counter affidavit, marked P14c. 16 Vide P15. 17 Vide Certificate of Residence issued by the Grama Niladari annexed to the counter affidavit, marked P12. 18 P2B

13

P3, which was the Circular relating to the admission of children to Grade One

of Government schools that was applicable at that time, a change of residence

would not be to his disadvantage, at least as far as the marks allotted for

having his name on the electoral register was concerned, provided the number

of schools between his present and future residence, and Royal College

remained the same. The 1st Petitioner states that he accordingly made a

diligent survey and found premises which were situated just 500 metres from

his current address, and which was within the aforementioned criteria laid

down in Clause 7.2.1.3 of the 2017 Circular (P3). The two residences were

therefore situated not only in the same feeder area but also within the same

Divisional Secretariat (Thimbirigasyaya) and even the same Grama Niladhari

Division (Bambalapitiya No. 191) and the number of schools between the two

residences and Royal College, Colombo 07, remained the same.

The 1st Petitioner states that he accordingly took on lease premises bearing

Assessment No. F60, Government Flats, St. Anthonys Road, Kollupitiya,

Colombo 3, for a period of three years commencing 1st July 2017. The

Petitioner has produced with the petition, marked P5, a notarially executed

lease agreement dated 22nd September 2017, in respect of the said premises. It

is not in dispute that the name of the 1st Petitioner and his wife had been

entered in the electoral register under the new address, for the year 2018.19

The new address also appears on the Insurance Policy obtained by the 1st

Petitioner on 4th December 2017, and on the bank statement issued to the 1st

Petitioner for the month of January 2018.20

19 Vide document annexed to the Counter Affidavit marked P12f. 20 Vide documents annexed to the Counter Affidavit marked P12d and P12e, respectively.

14

It is admitted between the parties that there are three schools that are closer

to the Petitioners first residence than Royal College. They are Thurstan

College, Mahanama College and St. Marys College. Even though the

Petitioners second residence is only 500m away from the first residence, and

the number of schools between the Petitioners second residence and Royal

College remains the same as with the first residence, the identity of one of the

three schools are different, with St. Marys College being replaced by St.

Michaels College.

Application of the 2nd Petitioner

Pursuant to the publication of the Circular P7, the 1st Petitioner states that he

submitted an application seeking admission of the 2nd Petitioner to Grade 1 of

Royal College, Colombo 7 under the aforementioned category of Children of

residents in close proximity to the school.

The 1st Petitioner states that he presented himself for an interview on 19th

August 2019 at Royal College. The interview panel had examined his

documents and allotted him the following marks:

Sub-category 7.2.1.1 8 marks

Sub category 7.2.1.2 0.7 marks

Sub-category 7.2.4 35 marks

However, the Interview Panel had informed him that the schools that were

closer to his first residence are different to the schools that are closer to his

second residence, even though the number of schools were the same, and that

15

he could only be given five marks for having his name on the electoral register

for the year 2018 under the second residence.

Aggrieved by the said decision of the Interview Panel to allocate only 5 marks

under sub category 7.2.2 of P7, the Petitioners filed this application, seeking

inter alia the following relief:

a) A Writ of Certiorari to quash the Circular P7;

b) In the alternative, a Writ of Certiorari to quash the decision reflected in

Clause 7.2.2.3 of Circular P7;

c) A Writ of Prohibition preventing the Respondents from applying Clause

7.2.2.3 of Circular P7 to the Petitioner;

d) A Writ of Mandamus directing the Respondents to recalculate the marks

allotted to the Petitioner, ignoring Clause 7.2.2.3 of P7.

As noted earlier, the learned Presidents Counsel for the Petitioners challenged

the said amendment in Circular P7 on two grounds. His first argument was

that the amendment is irrational and unreasonable. His second argument was

that the amendment violates the legitimate expectations of the Petitioners.

Tests for unreasonableness

In Council of Civil Service Unions v Minister for the Civil Service21 (the GCHQ

Case), Lord Diplock stated that a decision which is so outrageous in its

defiance of logic or of accepted moral standards that no sensible person who

21[1985] AC 374 at 410-411.

16

had applied his mind to the question to be decided could have arrived at it is

an irrational decision. The standard adopted by Lord Diplock in the GCHQ case

is intrinsically linked to Lord Greenes dicta in the case of Associated Provincial

Picture Houses, Limited v. Wednesbury Corporation22 which was the birth of

Wednesbury unreasonableness and one of the first instances where English

Courts recognised that there was no requirement to justify judicial

intervention on the basis of a mistake of law, inferred or otherwise, where the

decision was something so absurd that no sensible person could ever dream

that it lay within the powers of the authority. The famous example of the red-

haired teacher who was dismissed because of the colour of her hair, illustrates

the threshold for unreasonableness that was expected.

A common feature in these two cases is that for Courts to intervene, the

decision of the public authority in question must not just be unreasonable, but

must be manifestly unreasonable, which emphasises the fact that judicial

scrutiny of decisions of public authorities, in the absence of illegality or

procedural impropriety, should only be in exceptional circumstances.

However, there is growing precedence to show that English Courts have

attempted to broaden the scope of Wednesbury Unreasonableness,

particularly in light of the European Convention on Human Rights, to allow

Courts to monitor and ensure a better quality of decisions by public

authorities. In doing so, English Courts have adopted varying standards of

Wednesbury Unreasonableness which demonstrates that Courts are concerned

22 1948 1 KB 223.

17

about ensuring that a correct decision is taken with due regard to the context,

and that the Wednesbury standard is not monolithic.23

In Secretary of State for Education and Science v Tameside Metropolitan

Borough Council24 (the Tameside case), Lord Diplock described

unreasonableness as follows:

In public law unreasonable as descriptive of the way in which a public

authority has purported to exercise a discretion vested in it by statute has

become a term of legal art. To fall within this expression it must be

conduct which no sensible authority acting with due appreciation of its

responsibilities would have decided to adopt.

The test used in Tameside was cited with approval in the case of R v Chief

Constable of Sussex (Ex parte International Traders Ferry Ltd)25 (ITF Case),

where it was held as follows:

Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd. v. Wednesbury

Corporation [1948] 1 KB 223, an apparently briefly--considered case,

might well not be decided the same way today; and the judgment of Lord

Greene M.R. twice uses (at 230 and 234) the tautologous formula "so

unreasonable that no reasonable authority could ever have come to it."

Yet judges are entirely accustomed to respecting the proper scope of

administrative discretions. In my respectful opinion they do not need to be

warned off the course by admonitory circumlocutions. When, in Secretary

of State for Education and Science v. Tameside Metropolitan Borough

23Wade and Forsyth page 304. 24[1977] AC 1014. 25[1998] UKHL 40.

18

Council, the precise meaning of "unreasonably" in an administrative

context was crucial to the decision, the five speeches in the House of

Lords, the three judgments in the Court of Appeal and the two judgments

in the Divisional Court all succeeded in avoiding needless complexity. The

simple test used throughout was whether the decision in question was

one which a reasonable authority could reach. The converse was

described by Lord Diplock as "conduct which no sensible authority acting

with due appreciation of its responsibilities would have decided to

adopt." These unexaggerated criteria give the administrator ample and

rightful rein, consistently with the constitutional separation of powers.

In a previous judgment of this Court26, it was held that the standard adopted

in Tameside appears to be more realistic, and balanced as opposed to

adopting the tortuous Wednesbury standard as required in the GCHQ case.

The Petitioners have cited the case of Sirimal v Board of Directors of the

CWE27 where it was held as follows:

The grounds enumerated above have to be assessed in the light of the

principle of unreasonableness expounded in the judgment of Lord Greene,

M.R. in Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd. v. Wednesbury

Corporations. Two meanings have emerged of the term 'unreasonable'

from this judgment. These relate to deviation from purpose and deviation

from fundamental principles. Unreasonableness in the first sense is used

as a synonym for a host of more specific grounds of attack such as taking

into account of irrelevant considerations, acting for improper purposes 26Colonel U.R. Abeyratne v. Lt. Gen. N.U.M.M.W. Senanayake and Others, CA (Writ) Application No. 239/2017; CA Minutes of 7th February 2020. 27[2003] 2 Sri LR 23 at 32.

19

and acting mala fide. The second meaning is the substantive sense which

would include a decision so unreasonable that no reasonable body could

have made it. (Administrative Law P.P. Craig - 4th Edition 1999 Edition

page 537).

Having laid out the test for determining reasonableness, this Court shall now

consider whether the decision to amend Clause 7.2.1.3 of Circular P3, would

meet the threshold set out in Tameside, as well as in Wednesbury and GCHQ.

The position of the Respondents

At the time this Court issued formal notice of this application, this Court

informed the learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General that the Respondents

would have to apprise this Court of the rationale for the above amendment

and the manner in which the said amendment was effected. This was done

particularly in view of the fact that the requirement of the same number of

schools that had been introduced in 2012 had remained without any

amendment until 2018, and as the effect of the amendment was to negate the

concession granted since 2013.

This Court shall now consider the position of the Respondents, which has been

set out in (a) the limited Statement of Objections filed at the time this Court

considered the application for interim relief, (b) the Statement of Objections

supported by an affidavit of Ms. Kamani Perera, Director of Education, dated

29th November 2019, and (c) the affidavit of Ms. Kamani Perera, dated 24th

January 2020, which was filed after the conclusion of the oral submissions.

20

In its limited Statement of Objections, the Respondents have stated as

follows:28

a) The said clause, Clause 7.2.2.3 was introduced by Circular No. 24 of 2018

in order to facilitate a minor change of residence, for instance, within the

same compound, without losing the marks allocated for being registered

in the electoral register for five years;

b) The reason for this change in Circular No. 24 of 2018 is that, were it to be

the number of schools that were considered when regarding two

addresses as one for the purposes of marks given for the electoral register,

a significant change in address within the feeder area would still have to

be considered as one address.

This Court is unable to accept the above explanation, for two reasons.

The first is, any person changing residences within the same compound can

probably arise only if the applicant is living in an apartment complex. That

certainly was not the intention when the clause was first introduced in 2012,

as borne out by the following paragraph of Ms. Kamani Pereras affidavit filed

on 24th January 2020: due to representations made by various parties, it was

decided when issuing Circular No. 19/2012 to give a concession to residents

who had moved within the feeder area, but had been resident in the same

feeder area for 5 years continuously.

The second is, the definition of feeder area encompasses the entire

administrative district within which a school is situated, and it is open to an

28 Vide paragraphs 3(ii) and (v) of the Limited Statement of Objections.

21

applicant to change his residence within the feeder area, although such change

can be to his or her detriment. Such change can be significant on paper, but in

view of the safety mechanism that the number of schools remains the same if

marks are to be allotted for being registered as an elector under both

residences, in reality the change will not be significant.

Procedure followed when amending Clause 7.2.1.3 in P3

This Court shall now consider the affidavit of Ms. Kamani Perera annexed to

the Statement of Objections of the 2nd and 3rd Respondents, which (a) seeks to

explain the procedure that was followed when the amendment was introduced

for the first time in the 2019 Circular, and (b) seeks to demonstrate that the

amendment was well considered, and has a rational basis.

Ms. Perera states that the then Secretary, Ministry of Education, by an internal

memorandum dated 9th March 2018 titled rcfha mdi,a j,g m,uq fY%aKshg isiqka

we;=<;a lsrSfuSoS Ndjs;d jk 22/2017 pl%f,aLh ixfYdaOkh lsrSu ioyd uQ,sl lusgqjla

m;a lsrSu29 had appointed a Committee for the following purpose:

2018 jraIfha oS m,uq fY%aKshg isiqka we;=<;a lr .ekSu ioyd n, mj;ajk

22/2017 pl%f,aLh g iy tys ixfYdaOk j,g wkql=,j lghq;= lsrSfuSoS u;= jQ

huS huS .eg,q wju lsrSu ioyd 2019 jraIfha oS isiqka we;=,;a lr .ekSfuSoS

we;s l, hq;= ixfYdaOk ioyd fhdackd bosrsm;a lrk f,i wod, mdraYjhka fuS

jk jsg oekqj;a lr we;. ta wkqj jsjsO mdraYj fj;ska bosrsm;a jk fhdackd yd

woyia ms,sn|j i,ld ne,Su ioyd

29 Vide document marked A annexed to the Statement of Objections of the 2nd and 3rd Respondents.

22

There are two observations that this Court wishes to make with regard to the

purpose for which the above Committee was formed. The first is that the

Committee was required to consider clauses that had given rise to problems in

its implementation (tys ixfYdaOk j,g wkql=,j lghq;= lsrSfuSoS u;= jQ huS huS

.eg,q wju lsrSu ioyd), and not interfere with clauses that had not posed an

issue, unless of course the Committee was of the view that an amendment was

required to reflect the policy of the Government. The second is the Committee

was a preliminary Committee and was required to submit its proposals, which

means that the recommendations of this committee were not meant to be

final, and that the decision whether to accept the changes so proposed was to

be taken by another body or person.

Ms. Perera states that proposals of interested parties including the Ministry of

Defence, the Elections Commission, Members of Parliament, Teachers Unions,

and Principals of different Schools were received by the Committee. She states

further that at a meeting of the Committee held on 19th April 2018, the

contents of paragraph 7.2.1.3 of Circular No. 22/2017 was discussed based on

the proposals submitted by the Principal, Richmond College.30 This Court has

examined the said proposals of the Principal, Richmond College and finds that

the said proposals do not contain any reference to Clause 7.2.1.3, nor to the

marks given for being registered as an elector.

The only instance where the Principal, Richmond College has referred to wdikak

mdie,a is when he referred to the situation where marks are deducted for

schools that are situated closer to the residence of an applicant than Richmond

30 Vide document marked B dated 9th April 2018, annexed to the Statement of Objections of the 2nd and 3rd Respondents.

23

College (being the school applied for), even though such schools may not have

the same facilities or stature as Richmond, and the unfairness that would be

caused by deducting marks in such situations. His concern has been that marks

must be deducted only where the school applied and the school that is closer

to the residence can be classified as a iudk mdie,a (or similar schools) in the

context of facilities and not otherwise. This is an issue that affects the marks

that are given under the sub-category of number of schools located closer to

the place of residence than the school applied, and has no nexus to the marks

given for being on the Electoral Register. This Court is therefore at a loss to

understand how the issue raised by the Principal, Richmond College could have

led to a discussion to amend Clause 7.2.1.3.

A copy of the draft Circular for 2018 on which the amendments discussed at

the meeting held on 19th April 2018 have been effected, has been produced

marked D2. This Court has examined D2 and observes that even though the

words, tlu mdie,a have been written by hand next to Clause 7.2.1.4, the fact

that no clear decision to amend the clause was taken is evident by the

inclusion of the words orejdg we;=,q jSh yels mdie, iudk mdi,a jkafka kus.

The next meeting of the Committee has been held on 4th May 2018 where this

matter was discussed once more. Ms. Perera has submitted a document

marked E2 which is said to be a document containing the matters discussed at

the said meeting.31 This Court has examined E2 and notes that it does not

contain any reference to Clause 7.2.1.4. However, the following words have

been inserted by hand against Clause 7.2.2.2 mosxpsh oqr ia:dkhg fjkia jQ jsg

31 Vide paragraph 9 of the affidavit of Ms. Kamani Perera.

24

uq,q pkao ,l=Kq osh yelso? (;j oqrg;a idlpspd l, hq;=h) Thus, even on 4th May

2018, no finality has been reached on amending the relevant clause.

Ms. Perera has submitted another document marked E2a which is said to be

the decision reached on the proposal submitted by the Principal of Richmond

College, Galle. This Court has examined E2a and it appears that E2a contains

the list of matters that was agreed at the meeting held on 4th May 2018. The

decision that relates to the clause in question is re-produced below:

fhdackdlrefhdackdjwod,

j.ka;sh

fhdackdji,ld

n,k ,oafoAo?

rspsukavs

jsoqy,am;s

mosxpsh ia:dk 2lska we;s jsg iudk

mdi,a j,g ,l=Kq wvq jkafka kus mukla

Pkao f,aLK ioyd ia:dk 2g iu ,l=Kq

,enSu

_ _ _

pl%qf,aLhg

we;=<;a lrkak

This Court must note that even though E2a contains the above decision, the

rationale for introducing this amendment has not been set out in E2a. Be that

as it may, it was the position of the learned Presidents Counsel for the

Petitioner that there is a significant difference between iudk mdi,a which are

the words used in E2a and tlu mdi,a which are the words that finally

appeared in Circular R1. The Respondents have not clarified whether iudk

mdi,a is a reference to similar schools in the context of being similar in

facilities etc, which was the proposal of the Principal, Richmond College, or

whether it is a reference to identical schools (tlu mdi,a) as in the identity of

the schools concerned being the same. This Court takes the view that the best

evidence on this matter could have come from the Principal, Richmond

College, which was not to be.

25

According to Ms. Perera, several other meetings had taken place thereafter.

While details of such meetings have not been provided to this Court, Ms.

Perera states that at the meeting held on 14th May 2018 the change from

paragraph 7.2.1.3 in Circular No. 22/2017 to paragraph 7.2.2.3 in Circular No.

24/2018 was confirmed along with the rationale for the change. Annexed to

her affidavit is a document marked F2, which Ms. Perera describes as being

the proposals confirmed at the said meeting with relevant justifications. An

extract of F2 is re-produced below:

wxlh yd mej;s j.ka;sh

wxlh yd kj j.ka;sh idOdrKSlrKh

7.2.1.1 Pkao ysus kdu

f,aLKfha ,shdmosxpsh tla

wfhl=g tla jraIhlg -

,l=Kq 3 Wmrsu ,l=Kq 30

(wdikak .Kh)

7.2.1.2 Pkao ysus kdu

f,aLKfha ,shdmosxpsh tla

wfhl=g tla jraIhlg ,l=Kq

2.5 Wmrsu ,l=Kq 25

mosxpshg jevs ,l=kq ,nd

oSu ksid

7.2.1.3 iudk mdi,a mukla

jkafka kus uq,q ,l=kq ,nd

osh hq;=h

Thus, even though F2 contains the new clause, the rationale for introducing

such clause has not been set out in F2. Here too, the reference is to iudk

mdi,a and not to tlu mdie,a.

Ms. Perera has produced another document marked F2a, which is said to

contain the change material to this application along with the justification for

the same.

An extract of the said document is re-produced below:

26

wxlh yd mej;s j.ka;sh wxlh yd kj j.ka;sh idOdrKSlrKh

7.2.1.3Pkao ysus kdu

f,aLK ia:dk follska

bosrsm;a lrk jsg

wdikak mdi,a ioyd

wvqfjk ,l=Kq fkdfjkia

jkafka kus mukla ia:dk

foflkau bosrsm;a lrk

f,aLk oekg mosxps

ia:dkfha f,aLk f,i

ie,lSu

7.2.2.3 Pkao ysus kdu f,aLK

ia:dk follska bosrsm;a lrk

jsg wdikakfha orejdg

we;=,;a jsh yels mdi,a

tlu mdi,a jkafka kusa i:dk

foflkau bosrsm;a lrk

f,aLk oekg mosxps ia:dkfha

f,aLk f,i ie,lSu

tlsfklg b;d wdikakj

mosxpsh fjkia jSu ksid

mukla isoqjk wjdish

i,ld ne,Su

Thus, the only explanation that has been offered so far for the amendment is

that the concession granted since 2012 shall now be limited to situations

where the change of residence is between places situated close to each other

i.e. tlsfklg b;d wdikakj mosxpsh fjkia jSu, or, as set out in the limited

Statement of Objections, to facilitate a minor change of residence. The

irrationality and the unreasonableness of the above explanation in F2a

however is evident when one considers the argument of the Petitioners that

the identity of the schools would have been different even if the 1st Petitioner

had changed his residence by 100m, as opposed to the real difference of

500m. A change in residence of 100m and for that matter, even 500m would,

in the view of this Court qualify under tlsfklg b;d wdikakj mosxpsh fjkia jSu,

but if the effect is to shut out the Petitioner whose shift in residence would fall

within tlsfklg b;d wdikakj mosxpsh fjkia jSu, that by itself demonstrates that

the amendment is unreasonable and contrary to the policy of the Government,

and has not been considered by the Committee.

27

However, what concerns this Court is not only the lack of a rationale behind

the amendment set out in F2a. Annexed to Ms. Pereras affidavit after the

above document is an unmarked draft copy of the 2018 circular with the words

weuskqus 10 g wod, igyk and 2018.05.14 written on top of it. Clause 7.2.1.4

appears at the bottom of page 9 and is carried over to page 10. Written by

hand on the left corner of the said clause are the words, fuu fhdackdjg lusgqj

tl. ke;, which means that the Committee was not agreeable to what was

set out in F2a.

This Court shall now summarise the several issues that it has with the

explanation of the Respondents, which demonstrates that there has not been

a proper deliberation and/or consideration of the amendment. To start with, a

suggestion to amend Clause 7.2.1.3 did not emanate from the Principal of

Richmond College, as claimed by Ms. Perera. Even if it did, the said document

has not been produced to this Court. Even though the mandate of the

Committee was to discuss clauses that had given rise to problems and to

minimise same, no material has been placed before this Court to establish that

Clause 7.2.1.3 of P3 had given rise to problems in implementation. The

discussion on Clause 7.2.1.3 of P3and the re-numbered Clause No. 7.2.1.4

appears to have come mid-stream, during the discussions, and the explanation

for the amendment does not appear to this Court to have any rational basis.

The last mentioned document states that the Committee is not agreeable with

the proposed amendment, thus adding to the confusion, and amply

demonstrating the lack of coherence in decision making by the Committee.

This Court has in fact examined the attendance sheets of the three meetings

and observes that the Co-Chairmen of the Committee had not even

participated at the first two meetings held on 19th April 2018 and 4th May 2018,

28

thus demonstrating the lack of seriousness on the part of at least some of the

members of the Committee.

Admission of children to Grade One of Government Schools is a significant

event for parents who have a child between the ages of five and six, as at the

closing date of applications. As the Respondents themselves have submitted,

there are an estimated 300,000 applications that are received each year.

Formulating guidelines and implementing these guidelines is not an easy task.

This Court recognises the fact that the necessity to amend a particular clause

or to increase or decrease the marks that are given for a particular clause may

arise, and that the guidelines cannot remain static or inflexible. This Court is

therefore of the view that the Government must be free to amend the

provisions of the said Circular, where necessary. It is certainly not the intention

of this Court to fetter the power of the Respondents to amend the Circular in

order to cater to an abnormality that has arisen or in order to make the

provisions clearer, or for any other similar reason. However, this Court is of the

view that such amendments must be done after proper deliberation, and that

the underlying rationale for the amendments must be reasonable and

justifiable.

It is admitted that the Committee was appointed to minimize the issues that

had arisen when implementing the applicable Circular.32 This Court has been

told that the proposal to amend Clause 7.2.1.3 of P3 emanated from the

Principal, Richmond College. This Court has already observed that the detailed

proposals of the Principal do not have any reference to this issue. Assuming

32 Vide document marked A - 22/2017 pl% f,aLhg iy tys ixfYdaOk j,g wkql=,j lghq;= lsrSfuSoS u;= jQ huS huS .eg,q wju lsrSu ioyd.

29

the said issue was raised during deliberations, it was open to the Respondents

to have annexed an affidavit from the Principal, Richmond College setting out

the rationale for proposing such amendment. This has not been done. This

Court has not been presented with a report of the said Committee, nor has any

material been presented to this Court to explain the action taken by the

Secretary, Ministry of Education. Even though it is said that the Committee

agreed to the amendment, the Respondents own document, (i.e. the

document that appears after F2a) contradicts this position.

Where do all these concerns leave this Court with? Firstly, this Court takes the

view that Clause 7.2.1.3 of P3 has not given rise to any issue in its

implementation. Secondly, there has not been a proper deliberation of the

amendment. Thirdly, an acceptable rationale for the said amendment has not

been placed before this Court. Fourthly, it appears that even the Committee

has not agreed to the said amendment. In these circumstances, it is the view of

this Court that the decision to amend Clause 7.2.1.3 in P3 and replace it with

Clause 7.2.2.3 in R1 (and P7) is unreasonable and irrational, and is therefore

liable to be quashed by a Writ of Certiorari.

Further justification by the Respondents

After the conclusion of the oral submissions, the Respondents tendered to this

Court a further affidavit of Ms. Perera dated 24th January 2020, seeking to

explain the reasons for the said amendment. Although belated, and although

the explanation now offered does not bear any reference to the deliberations

of the Committee, this Court nonetheless wishes to consider the said

explanation.

30

It is the position of Ms. Perera that33:

(a) The core principle underlying the circular for admission of students to

Grade One under the proximity category is to give priority to children of

permanent residents within close proximity to the school;

(b) Under the proximity category, marks are awarded by considering

documents relevant to the current place of residence;

(c) Due to representations made by various parties, it was decided when

issuing Circular No. 19/2012 to give a concession to residents who had

moved within the feeder area, but had been resident in the same feeder

area for five years continuously;

(d) The sole exception to the principle that marks are awarded for the current

place of residence is found in the provision under consideration in this

case, namely Section 7.4.2.3 in Circular No. 22/201734 and Section 7.2.2.3

in Circular No. 24 of 2018, where marks are given for the parents names

appearing on the electoral register, even if there has been a change in

residence, provided the change is within the feeder area;

(e) The formula for awarding such marks for the electoral register under a

previous address within the feeder area in Circular No. 22/2017 was if the

number of schools which are closer to the applicant than the school

applied to, and for which marks will consequently be deducted, remains

the same at both addresses.

This Court is in agreement with the above explanation. 33 Vide paragraphs 4-8 in affidavit dated 24th January 2020. 34 It is assumed that this is a reference is to Clause 7.2.1.3 of P3.

31

Ms. Perera then goes onto state, with reference to a map of the area where

Royal College is situated, as follows:

This concession has been disadvantageous to the permanent residents as

demonstrated in the example below:

The map depicts as P a permanent resident and as H1 and H2, the

current residence and prior residence, respectively, of a person who has

moved within the feeder area. As per the attached map, a person resident

at H2 would have marks deducted for School No. 7, 30, 6 and 14. When

the person moves to H1, marks will be deducted for school No. 23, 29, 16

and 32. Thus, the number of schools for which marks will be deducted will

be the same and such person will obtain the marks for the electoral

register at the previous address despite moving more than 2.5km from the

previous residence. The permanent resident at P meanwhile will have

marks deducted for school No. 2, 11, 23, 31, 29, 16 and 14 when

preferring an application to Royal College.

The breakdown of marks for a person resident at P and a person who has

moved from H2 to H1 can be illustrated as follows. The person resident

at H1 (assuming she was resident for 2 years at H2 and 3 years at H1

on a lease) will receive a maximum of 6 marks for residence, 25 marks for

the electoral register, 3 marks for additional documents and 30 marks (50-

4 schools x 5 marks) for proximity to the school, amounting to a total of 64

marks. The person who was resident permanently for five years at P

would receive 15 marks for residence, 25 marks for the electoral register,

5 marks for additional documents and 15 marks for proximity to the

school (50 7 schools x 5 marks) amounting to 60 marks.

32

In order to minimize such disadvantage, it was decided to restrict this

concession to movements within an extremely small area to give the

advantage to genuine residents who had moved, for instance, within the

same compound.

Therefore, in order to retain the awarding of marks for the electoral

register at the previous address only in instances of a minor change of

residence, the basis for awarding marks for the electoral register for a

previous residence was changed to situations where the schools for which

marks would be deducted remained the same upon the change of

residence (Section 7.2.2.3 in Circular No. 24/2018 marked R1).

The underlying principle of giving priority to permanent residents living

within close proximity to the school and allocating marks for the current

place of residence is given weight by limiting the scope of the exception to

the same and that no representations had been made to further change

the circular. This section has remained unchanged in Circular No.

28/201935.36

This Court has several concerns with the above explanation. The first is, the

Respondents have not challenged the genuineness of the application of the

Petitioners nor have the Respondents submitted any material that would

create a doubt regarding the genuineness of the application or the documents

submitted by the Petitioners. This is in spite of this Court having allowed the

Respondents an opportunity of filing a further round of pleadings pertaining to

the genuineness or otherwise of the information included in the application 35 The reference should be to 29/2019. 36 Vide paragraph 9 of affidavit dated 24th January 2020.

33

submitted by the Petitioner to Royal College.37 Furthermore, the interview

panel has not raised concerns with regard to the authenticity of the documents

submitted by the 1st Petitioner, even though the marks allocated at the

interview were adjusted after the filing of this application, for different

reasons.

The second concern that this Court has with the above explanation is that the

position of resident P is not affected by the change in residence from H2 to

H1. P continues to remain in the same position, as far as the marks that he

or she is entitled to under Category 7.2.2, are concerned.

The third concern that this Court has is that the comparison is wrong. One

must compare H with an equal, which means that P in the above example

must be a person who only has three schools that are closer to his residence

than Royal College. If that is done, the marks would be as follows:

Category P H (where he has not changed residence)

H (where he has changed residence) - Aggregate of H2 and H1 7.2.1.2 10 (all five years) 10 06 (only three years) 7.2.1.2 05 (all five years) 05 03 (only three years) 7.2.2 25 (all five years) 25 25 (all five years) 7.2.4 35 35 35 Total 75 75 69

37 Vide proceedings of 19th December 2019.

34

Thus, as a result of the change in residence from H2 to H1, H has lost 6

marks when compared to P. Thus, the change in residence has affected H

but P remains where he is.

This Court shall now take the case of P as presented by the Respondents, and

compare it with an applicant whose application has been produced by the

Respondents marked 4Rb1. The latter applicant has been a resident of

Colombo 5, for a period of five years. The number of schools that are closer to

the residence of the applicant than Royal College is eight. Thus, five marks are

deducted for each of the eight schools, and the applicant would only get 10

marks for sub-category 7.2.4. The applicant has been allotted 25 marks for five

years on the electoral register. Together with the marks given for the other

two sub-categories (15 marks for 7.2.1.1 and 3.3 for 7.2.1.2), the applicant has

received a total of 53.3 marks. Supposing the said applicant changes his

residence to Cambridge Place, situated opposite Royal College, one year prior

to the closing date of applications, he would receive full marks under sub-

category 7.2.4, as there are no other schools that are situated closer to his new

residence at Cambridge Place, than Royal College. This would take his

aggregate marks to 93.3, subject to a deduction of 12 marks under sub-

category 7.2.1.1 and a further 2.6 marks under sub-category 7.2.1.2, as a result

of not having five years of residence at the new address, leaving him with 78.7

marks.

If not for the condition stipulated in Clause 7.2.1.3 of P3 that to receive full

marks for the electoral register in the event of a change in residence

midstream, the number of schools must be the same, the applicant in 4Rb1

would receive full marks for registration on the electoral register, and an

35

aggregate of 78.7 marks, which would guarantee admission to Royal College.

However, such an abuse of the marking scheme cannot take place in view of

the limitation placed in Clause 7.2.1.3 that the number of schools remain the

same.

Thus, the applicant in 4Rb1 changing his residence to Cambridge Place one

year prior to the closing date of applications 30th June - would not get any

marks under sub-category 7.2.2 (for the reason that electoral registers are

amended on 1st June of each year), and his total marks would be marginally

higher at 53.7. Thus, the protection that the Respondents say they need to

afford to P can be achieved by the requirement that the number of schools

remain the same. If that be so, on the Respondents own explanation, there is

no rationale for amending the requirement of the same number of schools to

identical schools.

Nexus between failure to give reasons and irrationality

The reasons provided for a decision would allow Courts to effectively scrutinize

the decision and detect what factors have influenced the decision maker. In

the present application, it is clear that the reasons provided by the

Respondents do not justify their actions. In De Smiths Judicial Review38 it is

observed that Irrationality may also sometimes be inferred from the absence

of reasons.39 When reasons are required, either by statute or by the growing

common law requirements, or where they are provided, even though not

strictly required, those reasons must be both adequate and intelligible. They

38Harry Woolf, Jeffery Jowell, Catherine Donnelly, Ivan Hare, De Smiths Judicial Review [8th Edition, 2018] Sweet Maxwell, page 605. 39Padfield v. Minister of Agriculture Fisheries and Food [1968] AC 997 at 1032.

36

must therefore both rationally relate to the evidence in the case40, and be

comprehensible in themselves41.

It is the view of this Court that the reasons provided by the Respondents for

the amendment, do not rationally relate to the Policy of the Government in

providing admission to children who live in close proximity to the school they

are applying for. The exception that was brought in by Circular 19/2012 was to

give a concession to residents who had moved within the feeder area, subject

to the number of schools being identical. The amendment in R1 fails to

distinguish and credit those who shifted residences within the feeder area and

those who shifted residences from a different administrative district, thereby

negating the concession granted in 2012.

As explained above, the requirement that the number of schools remain the

same, in order to be awarded marks for the number of years that the names of

the applicant and his spouse have been included in the Electoral Register prior

to moving to the present place of residence, is considered to act as a safeguard

to abuses of process and to protect bona fide applicants.

In the case of Padfield v Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food42 Lord

Pearce opined:

If all the prima facie reasons seem to point in favour of his taking a

certain course to carry out the intentions of Parliament in respect of a

power which it has given him in that regard, and he gives no reason what-

40 Re Poyser and Mills Arbitration [1964] 2 QB 467 at 478. 41 R v. Hammersmith and Fulham LBC Ex parte Earls Court Ltd, The Times. 42[1968] AC 997.

37

ever for taking a contrary course, the Court may infer that he has no good

reason and that he is not using the power given by Parliament to carry out

its intentions.

In the above circumstances, it is the view of this Court that the decision of the

Respondents to amend Clause 7.2.1.3 of P3 is not only a decision which no

sensible authority acting with due appreciation of its responsibilities would

have decided to adopt, it is a decision which is so outrageous in its defiance of

logic that no sensible person who had applied his mind to the question to be

decided could have arrived at. This Court is therefore of the view that the

aforementioned decision to amend Clause 7.2.1.3 is liable to be quashed by a

Writ of Certiorari.

In view of the above finding, this Court is of the view that the necessity for this

Court to consider the second ground urged before this Court by the learned

Presidents Counsel for the Petitioners, namely that the amendment of the

Circular P3 is contrary to his legitimate expectation, does not arise.

Does the conduct of the 1st Petitioner disentitle the Petitioners to relief?

The next matter that this Court must consider is the prayer of the Petitioners

for a Writ of Mandamus. Prior to doing so, this Court would like to consider

three matters that the learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General has placed

before this Court.

The first is the claim that the Petitioner is guilty of suppression of a material

fact, in that the Petitioner did not divulge to this Court that the above

amendment was in fact effected by R1 and was applicable for admission of

38

children to Grade One in the year 2019. The position of the 1st Petitioner is that

he became aware of the amendment only when the Interview Panel refused to

allot marks under Clause 7.2.2.3 for both residences. This explanation is

acceptable when one considers the fact that a person who wishes to admit his

son or daughter to Grade One in 2020 does not have a need to examine the

Circulars of the previous year. In the absence of any material to contradict this

position, the Petitioners cannot be faulted for not divulging the existence of

R1. Furthermore, this Court is of the view that the amendment having taken

place in 2018 is not a material fact, as the said clause appeared in the 2019

Circular without any further consideration thereof by the Respondents. Hence,

this Court does not agree with the submission that the Petitioners have

suppressed R1.

The second is the submission of the learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General

that there are several inconsistencies in the narration of events by the 1st

Petitioner with regard to the manner in which the Petitioner has changed his

residence, and that the 1st Petitioner has misrepresented material facts. The

reference here is to the fact that the first lease agreement was executed

almost a year after the Petitioner claims he took on lease the premises at No.

532/3C, Galle Road, Colombo 3, and to the purported discrepancies in the

invoices issued by Sri Lanka Telecom.

Quite apart from the fact that the Interview Panel has not had an issue with

the genuineness of the application of the 1st Petitioner, a matter which this

Court has already addressed, this Court must observe that the 1st Petitioner

has not presented the impugned invoices with his application. While it is true

that the first lease agreement was executed eleven months after the date that

39

the Petitioner claims he took on lease the said premises, that by itself does not

taint the hands of the 1st Petitioner, especially when this Court considers the

fact that this address had been used at the time the birth of the 2nd Petitioner

was registered in January 2015.

Is proceeding with this application futile?

The third matter that this Court would like to advert to is the submission of the

learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General that this application is futile. He has

pointed out that (a) quashing the entire Circular P7 would jeopardise the

admission of children to Grade One of Government Schools for the year 2020

and that it would have catastrophic results; (b) quashing paragraph 7.2.2.3 of

P7 or the decision to amend Clause 7.2.2.3 in P7 would mean that the

Petitioners would receive only 5 marks under Sub category 7.2.2. The learned

Senior Deputy Solicitor General therefore submitted that this Court cannot

grant any relief prayed for and therefore, proceeding with this application is

futile.

In support of his argument, the learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General has

cited the judgment of this Court in Surangi vs Rodrigo43 where this Court had

held that No court is entitled or has jurisdiction to grant reliefs to a party

which are not prayed for in the prayer to the plaint. In that case, during the

trial before the District Court, the plaintiff had sought to raise an issue relating

to permanent alimony, although the prayer in the plaint did not contain such a

relief. This Court, while agreeing that issues are not restricted to pleadings, had

arrived at the above conclusion for the specific reason that Section 40(e) of the

43 [2003] 3 Sri LR 35.

40

Civil Procedure Code enacts that the plaint shall contain a demand of the relief

which the plaintiff claims.

While this Court cannot grant relief where none has been prayed for,44 this

Court has the power to issue a Writ which has been prayed for, albeit in a

modified form. In Premachandra and Dodangoda vs Montague Jayawickrema

and Bakeer Markar45 the relief sought had been inter alia a Writ of Mandamus

compelling the Governor to appoint the Petitioner as Chief Minister. It had

however been conceded that appointment of the Chief Minister must be done

by the Governor according to law and that Court cannot compel the

appointment of any particular person. This Court had accordingly issued a Writ

of Mandamus on the Governor to appoint a Chief Minister of the Province

according to law, which was not the prayer of the Petitioner.

This Court is in agreement with the learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General

that quashing the entire Circular would be catastrophic, and that quashing the

decision to amend Clause 7.2.2.3 will not by itself entitle the allotment of

marks for the electoral register under both residences. However, this Court

does not agree with the submission that proceeding with this application is

futile, and is of the view that this Court can nonetheless consider the prayer for

the other reliefs prayed for by the Petitioner. In Paudgalika The Kamhal

Himiyange Sangamaya v. Mr. H.D. Hemaratna and 5 Others46 the Supreme

Court held that the reasonable price formula for tea leaves was unreasonable.

However, the Court acknowledged that the quashing of older circulars setting

out the said reasonable price formula would lead to serious consequences, and

44 Vide Dayananda vs Thalwatte (2001) 2 Sri LR 73. 45 [1993] 2 Sri LR 294. 46 SC Appeal No. 47/2011; SC Minutes of 9 March 2015.

41

as such declined to quash the said circulars. However, the Court proceeded to

issue a Writ of Certiorari to quash the letters by which compliance with the

said circulars were sought to be enforced. Thus the Supreme Court declined to

take an overly technical view on the issuance of prerogative writs and was

willing to tailor the relief to remedy the injustice in a particular case.

In Ranjanee Pathirana vs Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Natural

Resources and Others47, the Supreme Court held that, In the field of public

law the writ of mandamus is a powerful weapon the Courts use freely to

prevent breach of duty and injustice.

It is trite law that a Writ of Mandamus would issue where an applicant has a

legal right to the performance of a legal duty by the parties against whom the

mandamus is sought.48 The requirement that the number of schools remain

the same, having been introduced in 2012, has survived without any issues

until 2018. This Court has no reason to believe that the said position would not

have continued, if not for the irrational and unreasonable decision of the

Respondents to amend the reference to the same number of schools to

identical schools.

The effect of this Court holding that the decision to amend the clause is

irrational and unreasonable, would be to restore the status quo that prevailed

prior to the amendment. The 2nd Petitioner would therefore be entitled to

receive 20 marks on the strength of his parents names being on the electoral

register under both residences, and it is the duty of the Respondents to

allocate such marks to the 2nd Petitioner. That is the legal entitlement of the 47 SC Appeal No. 78/2006; SC Minutes of 5th March 2000. 48 See Credit Information Bureau of Sri Lanka v. Messrs Jafferiee & Jafferjee (Pvt) Ltd [2005] 1 Sri. L.R. 89 at 93

42

2nd Petitioner and it is the legal duty of the Respondents to allocate marks that

the 2nd Petitioner is entitled to, in the absence of the impugned amendment. In

these circumstances, this Court is of the view that the Petitioners are entitled

to a Writ of Mandamus, directing the Respondents to allocate marks for the

period that the 1st Petitioner and his wife had their names on the electoral

register under both residences.

Certiorarified Mandamus

This Court is of the view that even if the Petitioners had not prayed for a Writ

of Certiorari at all, and had limited their relief to the Writ of Mandamus, that

would not have prevented this Court from issuing the Mandamus without

formally quashing the impugned decision.

This Court in Dr. Lokuge vs Dr. Dayasiri Fernando and Others49 having traced

the development of what is now known as Certiorarified Mandamus has

quoted the following passage from De Smith on Judicial Remedies:50

In some situations, however, mandamus has been granted to undo what

has been done; the courts merely treat the unlawful act as a nullity and

order the competent authority to perform its duty as if it had refused to

act at all in the first place.

Administrative Law by Wade and Forsyth,51 explains in the following manner

how a Certiorarified Mandamus would operate:

49 CA (Writ) Application No. 160/2013; CA Minutes of 16th October 2015. 50 Judicial Review of Administrative Action; 5th Edition page 699-700. 51 H.W.R. Wade, C.F, Forsyth, Administrative Law [11th Edition, 2014] Oxford University Press; page 527.

43

Defective decisions are frequently quashed by a quashing order without

any accompanying mandatory order. Once the decision has thus been

annulled, the deciding authority will recognise that it must begin again

and in practice there will be no need for a mandatory order. If on the other

hand a mandatory order is granted without a quashing order, the

necessary implication is that the defective decision is a nullity, for it is only

on this assumption that a mandatory order can operate. A simple

mandatory order therefore does the work of a quashing order

automatically.

This Court had thereafter held in Dr. Lokuge that, This gladsome development

has to be welcome and it has to be said that certiorarified mandamus would be

available in Sri Lanka to quash an invalid exercise of power. The view

expressed in Dr. Lokuge vs Dr. Dayasiri Fernando and Others, which this Court

is in agreement with, has since been followed by this Court in Sunil Anthony

Embuldeniya and Others vs Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development and

Others.52 In these circumstances, this Court is of the view that the effect of

issuing a Writ of Mandamus would be to quash the impugned decision to

amend the said clause.

Quite apart from legal niceties, where this Court agrees with a petitioner that a

decision is irrational or unreasonable, and very importantly, where the

petitioner has invoked the jurisdiction of Court at the first available

opportunity, then, this Court will have the power to quash that decision and

ensure that the ends of justice are met. This Court shall not allow itself to be

hampered or obstructed by any technicalities placed in its path in the pursuit

52 CA (Writ) Application No. 314/2016; CA Minutes of 10th October 2018.

44

of justice. As the Supreme Court has stated, Mandamus is a powerful weapon

available to the Courts to be used freely to prevent a breach of duty and

injustice.

Conclusion

This Court issued formal notice of this application on 8th November 2019, after

hearing the submissions of the learned Presidents Counsel for the Petitioner

and the learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General. On that date, this Court, with

a view of preserving the entitlement of the 2nd Petitioner to gain admission to

Grade One of Royal College for the year 2020, should the Petitioners be

successful at the end of the hearing of this application, directed the 4th

Respondent to notify the 5th 10th Respondents (the members of the Interview

Panel) to provisionally allot 20 marks under Category 7.2.2 for the application

presented by the 1st Petitioner (as opposed to the 5 marks that the Interview

Panel had allotted), and to continue to process the application of the

Petitioners and all other applications.53

The 4th Respondent, the Principal of Royal College, by an affidavit dated 24th

January 2020, has tendered to this Court a copy of the final list of applicants

selected under the Close Proximity Category, marked 4RA. This Court has

examined 4RA and observes that 123 candidates have been selected, with the

cut off mark being 54.15. In the said affidavit, the 4th Respondent has informed

this Court that one place has been reserved for the 2nd Petitioner. Together

with the additional 15 marks that the Petitioner is entitled to receive, the 2nd

53 This Court must note that the Respondents have reduced six marks allotted to the 2nd Petitioner under category 7.2.1.1 but there is no complaint from the Petitioners that the said deduction is wrong.

45

Petitioner would be entitled to be allotted a total of 57.6 marks, which is above

the cut off mark for admission to Grade One of Royal College for the year 2020.

This Court accordingly issues a Writ of Mandamus, as prayed for in paragraph

(g) of the prayer to the petition, directing the 4th 10th Respondents to allocate

20 marks to the 2nd Petitioner under sub category 7.2.2 of P7.

In his affidavit filed on 24th January 2020, the 1st Petitioner has complained to

this Court that there has been a delay in the implementation of the above

interim order. Hence, this Court directs the 4th Respondent to admit the 2nd

Petitioner to Grade One of Royal College, Colombo 7, within 42 days of the

date of this judgment.

This Court makes no order with regard to costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal