IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Rajapakse Mudiyanselage

Somaratne,

No. 48,

Jayathi Gramaya,

Saliyapura,

Anuradhapura.

And 2 Others

Petitioners

CASE NO: CA/WRIT/395/2015

Vs.

General Manager of Railways,

Railways Department,

General Managers Office,

P.O. Box 355,

Olcott Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

And 6 Others

Respondents

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Thishya Weragoda for the Petitioner.

Manohara Jayasinghe, S.C.C., for the

Respondents.

Decided on: 28.05.2019

2

Samayawardhena, J.

The petitioners are bamboo gate operators at unprotected

railway crossings commenced work in that capacity from early

1990s for a monthly allowance of Rs.1000/= which was

increased up to Rs.3000/=. Thereafter, as seen from P5(a)-(l),

they were given substitute appointments ( ) from

01.07.2005 for a daily allowance in a sum of Rs.262/= or

Rs.287/=.

They say that by Public Administration Circular marked P2 the

Government has decided to confirm the temporary, casual,

substitute and the like employees of labour grades etc. in public

service in their posts effective from 01.10.2001; and then by

Public Administration Circular marked P3 the Government has

made a similar decision to be effective from 01.07.2005; and

then by Public Administration Circular marked P4 it was made

to give effect to that decision from 01.11.2006; but they were

never made permanent in their posts according to those

Circulars.

Thereafter at last by Public Administration Circular marked P6,

they have been made permanent effective from 24.10.2014

subject to a probationary period of three years. These

appointments are pensionable as seen from the appointment

letters.

In terms of the applicable Pension Minutes, the petitioners in

paragraph 23 of the petition say that, they are mandatorily

required to complete ten years of permanent employment to be

eligible to receive a pension and as such they would not be

3

receiving a pension upon their retirement since they would be

retiring before the completion of the requisite period of ten years.

The petitioners in their petition specifically state that they seek

relief from Court for the sole purpose of securing their pension

entitlement and nothing else.

To achieve that objective, the petitioners seek to compel the

respondents by way of writ of Mandamus to grant them

permanent appointments from the date mentioned in Circulars

marked P2 or P3 or P4 so that they have 10 year permanent

service in order to become eligible for the pension.

In this regard I must straightaway say that assuming they are

public servants governed by the Establishment Code, A public

servant has no absolute right or legal right to a pension

enforceable by Mandamus. (Wilson v. Ceylon Electricity Board

[1997] 3 Sri LR 174, Dheerasena v. Post Master [2008] 1 Sri LR

349)

It is well settled law that Mandamus lies to compel the

performance of a statutory duty, which the petitioner has a legal

right to demand. In the facts and circumstances of this case,

neither of them seem to exist. There is no statutory duty on the

part of the respondents to ante-date the petitioners

appointments. Nor do the petitioners have a legal right to

demand such a thing.

There is a special procedure to be followed in ante-dating

appointments and it cannot be done in the manner the

petitioners expect it to be donevide inter alia section 1:10 of

Chapter II of the Establishment Code.

4

The petitioners further state that they hold a pensionable

position and thus have a legitimate expectation of receiving a

pension. This argument lacks merit. The fact that the post is

pensionable does not automatically make them entitled to

receive the pension. He needs to fulfil other requirements such

as 10 year service to become so eligible.

Application of the petitioners is dismissed, but without costs.

Before I part with this Judgment I must, subject to correction,

make the following observation. The petitioners have filed this

application on the premise that, according to the applicable

Pension Minutes, they are mandatorily required to complete ten

years of permanent employment to be eligible to receive a

pension. The said Pension Minutes appears to have been

amended from time to time by various Public Administration and

Pension Department Circulars. For instance, it appears to me

(subject to correction) that, according to Pension Department

Circular No.9/2004 dated 30.06.2004 read with Pension

Department Circular No.2/2013 dated 18.04.2013, non-

pensionable service, such as, daily paid, casual, substitute,

temporary, training can also be calculated for the purpose of

pension provided the employee has been recruited to the service

before 45 years of age. These petitioners have been recruited

before 45 years of age.

Hence, the said dismissal of the application shall not prejudice

the right of the petitioners to make a suitable application to the

proper authorities, if so advised.

Judge of the Court of Appeal