IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRAIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

Court of Appeal Case No. CA (PHC) 15/2016

High Court of Rathnapura Case No. HCRIRA 53/2005

Magistrate Court of Rathnapura Case No. 30720

Before : P.R.WIgama J.

: L.T.B. Dehideniya J.

Jayasinghe Kodithuwakkulage Nuwan

Patirana,

25212, Thannawatta Mawatha, Rathnapura.

1 st Party Petitioner Respondent

Vs.

Sujith Harshana Manamperi

Goonawardena,

Palmgarden Estate, Rathnapura.

2nd Party Petitioner Respondents

Tiran Dimuth Koralage,

Palmgarden Estate, Rathnapura.

3rd Party Petitioner Respondent

Officer in Charge,

Police Station, Rathnapura

Appellant Respondent Respondent

Counsel : Appellant is absent and unrepresented.

Maithree Wickramasinghe PC with Rakitha Jayathunga for the 2nd and 3rd Party Petitioner Respondents

Argued on : 12.02.2016

Decided on : 14.07.2016

L.T.B. Dehideniya J.

This is an appeal from an order of the Learned High Court Judge of

Rathnapura refusing notice in a revision application filed against an order of the

learned Magistrate in a case filed under part VII of the Primary Court Procedure

Act. The Counsel for the 2nd Party Respondent (hereinafter called and referred

to as the 2nd Respondent) and the 3rd Party Respondent (hereinafter called and

referred to as the 3rd Respondent) raised a preliminary objection that no appeal

lies against the impugned order.

His argument is that under Article 154 (6) of the Constitution, an appeal

from a Provincial lies to the Court of Appeal only against a "final order,

judgment or sentence" of that Court. The Counsel relies on the judgment of a

Divisional Bench of the Supreme Court in the case of Chettiar v. Chettiar SC

Appeal No. lOlA and 101B/2009 SCM 10.06.2010, and submits that the

refusing to issue notice in a revision application is not a final order and

therefore, no appeal lies.

Article 154 P (3) b of the Constitution conferred revisionary and appellate

jurisdiction in respect of convictions, sentences and orders entered of imposed

by Magistrate Courts and Primary Courts to the Provincial High Court. In this

Article the appellate or revisionary jurisdiction of the Provincial High Court is

not limited to final orders, but an appeal or a revision lies from any order

imposed or entered by Magistrate Court or Primary Court. The Article reads

thus;

154P (3) Every such High Court shall

tIftIIII

(a) exercise according to law, the original criminal jurisdiction of

the High Court of Sri Lanka in respect of offences committed

within the Province,

(b) notwithstanding anything in Article 138 and subject to any

law, exercise, appellate and revisionary jurisdiction in respect

of convictions, sentences and orders entered or imposed by

Magistrates Courts and Primary Courts within the Province,

(emphasis added)

(c) exercise such other jurisdiction and powers as Parliament

may, by law, provide.

Article 154 P (6) of the Constitution conferred appellate and revisionary

jurisdiction on the Court of Appeal from the Provincial High Court only on final

orders, judgments or sentences of that Court. The Article reads thus;

154P (6) Subject to the provisions of the Constitution and any law, any

person aggrieved by a final order, judgment or sentence of any

such Court, in the exercise of its jurisdiction under paragraphs

(3)(b) or (3)(c) or (4), may appeal therefrom to the Court of Appeal

in accordance with Article 138 (emphasis added)

The words used in 154 P (3) (b) is "convictions, sentences and orders"

and the words used in 154 P (3) is ''final order, judgment or sentence". Any

order of a Primary Court or Magistrate Court is made appealable to the

Provincial High Court but only the final orders of the Provincial High Court are

made appealable to the Court of Appeal.

Similar categorization of orders and final orders is available in section

754 of the Civil Procedure Code. An appeal is available to a person dissatisfied

with any judgment and a person who is dissatisfied with an order has to obtain

1 I I I i I I

leave of the Court of Appeal (Provincial High Court) and present the appeal.

Order and the judgment are defined in the section itself. The section reads;

754. (1) Any person who shall be dissatisfied with any judgment

pronounced, by any original court in any civil action, proceeding

or matter to which he is a party may prefer an appeal to the Court

of Appeal against suchjudgmentfor any error infact or in law.

(2) Any person who shall be dissatisfied with any order made by any

original court in the course of any civil action, proceeding, or

matter to which he is or seeks to be a party, may prefer an appeal

to the Court of Appeal against such order for the correction of any

error in fact or in law, with the leave of the Court of Appeal first

had and obtained.

(3) '" ....... .

(4) '" ....... .

(5) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Ordinance, for

the purposes of this Chapter -

''judgment'' means any judgment or order having the effect of a

final judgment made by any civil court; and

"order" means the final expression of any decision in any civil

action, proceeding or matter which is not a judgment.

There was a conflict of views taken by the superior courts in determining

whether a pronouncement of Court is a final judgment or' an order. This issue

has been finally decided by a Divisional Bench consisting of five judges of the

Supreme Court including the Chief Justice. In the case of Chettiar v. Chettiar

SC Appeal No. lOlA and 101B/2009 SCM 10.06.2010 Dr. Shirani

Bandaranayake CJ. cited the case of Salaman v Warner (1891) I Q.B. 734

where Fry, L.J. observed;

I think the true definition is this. I conceive that an order is "final" only

where it is made upon an application or other proceeding which must,

whether such application of other proceeding fail or succeed, determine

the action. Conversely I think that an order is "interlocutory" where it

cannot be affirmed that in either event the action will be determined.

Her Ladyship Dr. Bandaranayake CJ. held that "Considering all the

decisions referred to above, the aforesaid statement clearly has expressed the

true meaning that could be given to a judgment and an order in terms of section

754(5) of the Civil Procedure Code."

In the present case, the Learned High Court Judge has refused to issue

notice in a revision application. This appeal is against that decision. If the Court

decided to issue notice, it will not determine the case. The action/proceeding has

to be proceeded. Therefore, according to the principle of law pronounced in the

case ofChettiar v Chettiar (supra) the decision of the High Court not to issue the

notice is not a final order. Accordingly no appeal lies.

I like to place on record the fact that we did not have the opportunity of

hearing the Appellant in this case. The Appellant was absent and unrepresented

at the argument.

Under these circumstances, I uphold the preliminary objection and

dismiss the appeal.

Judge of the Court of.Appeal

P.R. Walgama J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal