IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRAIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

1

In the matter of an application for Revision in terms

of Article 138 of the Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Court of Appeal case no. CAIPHC/APN/I0/2014

H.C. Colombo case no. Revision 155/2011

M.C. Nugegoda case no. B.3704/09

The Officer in Charge,

Special Crimes Investigation Unit,

Mirihana.

Plaintiff

Vs.

Abuthahir Mohammad Iqbal

Accused

And,

1. Gihan Jayanath Gamage

2. Thalarambage Umendra Lanka Dharmadasa

3. Sadeesh Kamalanadan

Aggrieved Parties

And Between

Thalarambage Umendra Lanka Dharmadasa

Aggrieved Party Petitioner

Vs.

1. The Officer in Charge,

Special Crimes Investigation Unit,

Mirihana.

Plaintiff Respondent

2. Gihan Jayanath Gamage,

17/2, Mahamegawatta Road,

Before

Counsel

Maharagama.

Aggrieved Party Respondent

3. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondent

And Now Between,

Gihan J ayanath Gamage,

17/2, Mahamegawatta Road,

Maharagama.

Aggrieved Party Respondent Petitioner

Vs.

Thalarambage Umendra Lanka Dharmadasa

Aggrieved Party Petitioner Respondent

1. The Officer in Charge,

Special Crimes Investigation Unit,

Mirihana.

Plaintiff Respondent Respondent

2. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondent Respondent

: H.C.J.Madawala J.

: L.T.B. Dehideniya J.

: Razik Zarook PC with Rohana Deshapriya and C.Liyanage

for the Aggrieved Party Respondent Petitioner.

2

3

: Nalin Ladduwahetti PC with Lalani Silva for the Aggrieved

Party Petitioner Respondent.

Argued on : 21.07.2016

Written submissions filed on: 19th and 29th September 2016

Decided on : 05.12.2016

L.T.B. Dehideniya J.

The Aggrieved Party Respondent Petitioner (the Petitioner) states that

he was the owner of the vehicles bearing the registration No. 325-3865 and

32-4261. He has published several paper advertisements to sell these two

vehicles giving his mobile telephone number. A person called Iqbal has

called him and offered to exchange the two vehicles to a Toyota car bearing

registration no. w.P.K.D. 9396. After discussions, the vehicles were

exchanged and the Petitioner has paid Rs. 250,000.00 in addition to match

the value of the car to the person called Liyana Arachchilage Wasantha

Samarasinghe alias Sarathchandra who pretended to be the owner of the

Toyota car.when he made the application to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles

to register the Toyota car in his name it was reveled that the documents

handed over to the Petitioner by Iqbal and Liyana Arachchilage Wasantha

Samarasinghe alias Sarathchandra were counterfeited documents and the

said Liyana Arachchilage Wasantha Samarasinghe alias Sarathchandra was

not the real registered owner of the car. The Petitioner made a complaint to

the police and after investigations, the police recovered the Toyota car and

the two vehicles that were exchanged when the transaction was done and

produced them before the Magistrate.

The issue in the present application IS m relation to the vehicle

bearing registration no. 32-4261 which is a Isuzu Jeep. (Hereinafter called

-, 4

and referred to as the Jeep) the petitioner has handed over the Jeep and the

other vehicle to Liyana Arachchilage Wasantha Samarasinghe alias

Sarathchandra in exchange to the Toyota car. The police recovered the Jeep

from the Aggrieved Party Petitioner Respondent (the Respondent). The

Respondent has purchased this vehicle from L.A.W.Samarasinghe who was

introduced to him by Iqbal.

The Petitioner and the Respondent both claimed the vehicle at the

vehicle inquiry held by the Magistrate. The learned Magistrate after inquiry

released the Jeep to the Petitioner on a bond. Being aggrieved by the said

order the Respondent moved in revision in the High Court of Colombo. The

learned High Court Judge set aside the order of the learned Magistrate and

ordered to release the Jeep to the Respondent on a bond. The Petitioner

moved in revision against the order of the learned High Court Judge.

In an inquiry under section 431 of the Criminal Procedure Code the

Magistrate has to decide who is entitle to the vehicle if it is not necessary to

keep the vehicle in official custody. If no criminal element is involved in

recovering the vehicle, the Magistrate has no option other than releasing the

vehicle to the person from whom it was recovered. In the case of De Alwis

v. De Alwis [1979] 1 Sri L R 17 the Supreme Court held that;

That for an order to be made for disposal of this property under

section 102 of the Administration of Justice Law (which was based on

section 419 of the Criminal Procedure Code) the car must have been

property alleged to be stolen or suspected to have been stolen or

found in circumstances which created the suspicion of the

commission of any offence. As the vehicle did not fall into any of these

categories the Magistrate had no jurisdiction to make an order for its

disposal under this section and had no alternative but to order its

return to the possession of the person from whose custody the police

had apparently taken it.

.0 , 5

In the present case the criminal element of cheating is involved. In

such a situation the Magistrate has the authority to release the vehicle to a

person other than the person from whom it was recovered as it is stated in

the case of Silva and another v. Officer in Charge, Police Station,

Tambuttegama and another [1991] 2 Sri L R 83 where it has been held that;

There are limitations to the principle that property must be delivered

to the person from whose possession it was seized, since it may result

in the property being delivered to a person who may have obtained

possession through criminal means. In such an event the Magistrate

may have to consider the question oftitle.

If the vehicle has come in to the hands of the person who is having

the possession by means of a criminal act, the Magistrate has to decide who

is entitled for the vehicle.

The Jeep in issue in this case was originally owned by the Petitioner.

It was registered in the name of Chilaw Plantation but they have auctioned it

and through a series of transactions the ownership has come to the

Petitioner. These facts were not in dispute. The Petitioner, when buying the

Toyota car, has paid the consideration by two vehicles and cash. The Jeep is

also a part of the consideration paid. It came to the hand of

L.A.W.Samarasinghe, who sold the Jeep to the Respondent, at the

transaction he had with the Petitioner, as a part of the consideration. The

Respondent, as a bona fide buyer, purchased the Jeep from

L.A. W.Samarasinghe.

If the Petitioner was cheated by the said Samarasinghe and Iqbal, he

has a cause of action against them in a Civil Court, but the Respondent

being a bona fide purchaser, is entitle to retain the property that he

purchased.

-, 6

The Respondent has led evidence in the Magistrate Court to establish

that the vehicle was in his custody and the revenue license and the insurance

was in his name. The Counsel for the Petitioner questioned the genuineness

of the said documents. It is an admitted fact that the Jeep was recovered

from the Respondent. As I have pointed out earlier, the ownership of the

Jeep was surrendered to Samarasinghe by the Petitioner himself and the said

Samarasinghe sold it to the Respondent on a valuable consideration. These

facts were reveled in the report filed by the police. There is no necessity for

the Court to consider the license and insurance to ascertain who is entitled to

posses the Jeep. The Respondent, from whom the Jeep was recovered,

possessed it as a bona fide buyer, who purchased it on a valuable

consideration, is entitle to possess it until it is proved that the ownership was

not shifted from the Petitioner to the said Samarasinghe at the transaction of

buying the Toyota car.

Accordingly, I see no reason to interfere with the order of the learned

High Court Judge.

The application dismissed subject to costs fixed at Rs. 10,000.00

Judge of the Court of Appeal

H.C.J.Madawala J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

1,