1

`IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A. Appeal No:

CA (PHC) 180/2004

HC Kegalle No:

1805/R

MC Warakapola No:

940/2003

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of Article 154 P (6) of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka read with section 11(1) of the Provincial High Court (Special) Provisions Act, No. 19 of 1990 and section 66 of the Primary Courts Procedure Act, No. 44 of 1979. Officer-In-Charge, Police Station, Alawwa.

Plaintiff VS.

1. Solanga Arachchige Karunarathne,

Othara, Kiriwanpola.

1st Party-Respondent

2. Subasingha Arachchige Thilakasiri

Subasingha, Madawala, Keppetiwalana.

2nd Party-Respondent

And between

1. Solanga Arachchige Karunarathne,

Othara, Kiriwanpola.

1st Party Respondent-Petitioner

VS.

1. Officer-In-Charge, Police Station, Alawwa.

Plaintiff-Respondent

2. Subasingha Arachchige Thilakasiri Subasingha, Madawala, Keppitiwalana.

2nd Party Respondent-Respondent

2

Before: M. T. Mohammed Laffar, J.

S. U. B. Karalliyadde, J.

Counsel: Amarasiri Panditharatne for the 2nd Party Respondent- Respondent-

Appellant.

Thanuka Nandasiri with P. Gunasinghe for 1st Party Respondent-

Petitioner-Respondent.

Written submissions tendered on:

19.06.2018 by 2nd Party Respondent-Respondent-Appellant.

24.10.2019 by the 1st Party Respondent-Petitioner-Respondent.

Argument on: 18.03.2022 (concluded by way of written submissions)

Decided on: 03.08.2022

And now between Subasingha Arachchige Thilakasiri Subasingha, Madawala Keppitiwalana.

2nd Party Respondent-Respondent-Appellant VS.

1. Officer-In-Charge,

Police Station, Alawwa.

Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent

2. Solanga Archchige Karunarathna,

Othara, Kiriwanpola. 1st Party Respondent-Petitioner-Respondent

3

S.U.B. Karalliyadde, J.

This Appeal is against the Order dated 26.07.2004 of the learned Provincial High Court

Judge of Kegalle in the revision application bearing No. Rev/1805. The said revision

application has been filed against the Order dated 04.06.2003 made by the learned

Magistrate of Warakapola in a case filed under section 66 (1) (a) of the Primary Courts

Procedure Act, No. 44 of 1979 (hereinafter referred as the Act). The dispute reported

to the Magistrates Court by the OIC of Wrakapola Police Station under section 66(1)

(a) of the Act was over a right of way. The 1st party Respondent-Petitioner-Respondent

(the Respondent) made a complaint to the Police that the 2nd Party Respondent-

Respondent-Appellant (the Appellant) obstructed the right of way used by him and his

predecessors on the land possessed by the Appellant initially by felling a tree and

thereafter by erecting a barbed wire fence. The Appellant has denied the fact that the

land he possesses is subject to a right of way. The learned Magistrate on 04.06.2003

held against the Respondent, consequent to which he filed a revision application in the

Provincial High Court of Sabaragamuwa holden at Kegalle. The learned High Court

Judge, by the impugned Order dated 26.03.2004 set aside the Order of the learned

Magistrate.

Before considering the merits of this appeal, it is worth to consider as to what is the

duty cast upon the Court of Appeal in hearing an appeal against an order made by a

High Court Judge in a revision application which stems from an order of a Magistrate

under Part VII of the Act. In the case of Nandawathie and Others Vs. Mahindasena1

the Court of Appeal has taken the view that the right given to an aggrieved party to

appeal to the Court of Appeal in a case file under Part VII of the Act should not be

taken as an appeal in the true sense, but in fact an application to examine the correctness,

legality or propriety of the order of the High Court in exercising its revisionary

jurisdiction.

In the case of Bandusena and others Vs. Gallakankanamge Chaminda Kushantha and

Others2 it was emphasized by Surasena, J. that;

1 (2009) 2 Sri LR 218. 2 CA (PHC) No. 147/2009; CA Minutes of 27th September 2017; per P. Padman Surasena, J.

4

It would be relevant to bear in mind that appeal in this court (Appeal Court) is an

appeal against the judgment pronounced by the Provincial High Court in exercising its

revisionary jurisdiction. Thus, the task before this Court is not to consider an appeal

against the Primary Court order but to consider an appeal in which an order

pronounced by the Provincial High Court in the exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction

is sought be impugned (emphasis added).

According to the above stated observations, this Court ought to examine the

correctness, legality and propriety of the Order made by the learned High Court Judge.

Bearing that in mind, I will now consider the instant appeal. On 10.03.2021, both parties

agreed to abide by any judgement delivered by this Court on the written submissions. I

will briefly mention here some relevant and important facts of this appeal elicited before

the Magistrates Court. There had been a partition action for the land which the

Respondent claims the right of way. Final degree had been entered in that partition

action on 27.03.2000. The Respondent made the police complaint about the dispute on

12.08.2002 which led the Police to file the Information report in the Magistrates Court

under section 66 (1) (a). The position of the Respondent before the Magistrates Court

was that he and his predecessors used the road in dispute over decades. Nevertheless,

they had not claimed it before the District Court in the partition action consequent to

which their alleged rights to the road had been wiped off after the judgement of the

partition action. The dispute regarding the road arose in the year 2002, i.e., before lapse

of ten years from the judgment of the partition action. Since the Respondent has not

used the disputed road for 10 years to acquire prescriptive rights, the learned Magistrate

has concluded that the Respondent is not entitled to the road he is claiming.

In the impugned Order, citing the authority of Somarathne Vs Munasinghe3 it has been

held by the learned High Court Judge that even if the Respondent has failed to establish

his prescriptive rights to the road he claims, in the light of that authority, he could claim

it as a right of a servitude by way of necessity. The argument of the learned Counsel

appearing for the Appellant is that the impugned Order of the learned High Court Judge

should be set aside for the reason that the authority relied upon by the learned High

Court Judge is not relevant to a case filed under Part VII of the Act but it is relevant to

a case filed in the District Court in deciding the civil rights of parties.

3 (74 NLR 14).

5

Since the dispute reported to the Magistrates Court is regarding the use of a road, the

determination of the Magistrate should have been made under section 69(1) of the Act.

The learned Magistrate has made her determination under that section and there is no

dispute between parties about that fact. In terms of section 69(1) of the Act, the Primary

Court Judge should determine as to who is entitled to the right, which is the subject

of the dispute and make an order under subsection (2) of section 69. Now I will consider

whether the conclusion of the learned High Court judge that in a case filed under Part

VII of the Act, if a party who seeks for a right of way fails to satisfy the Court that he

has acquired prescriptive rights to the right of way, could the Magistrate decide that he

is entitled to a right of way by way of necessity. In the case of Ramalingam Vs.

Thangarajaha4 the Court observed as to what connotes the word entitled in section

69(1) of the Act and the question which the Court has to determine under that section.

In that case Sharvananda, J. (as he then was) observed that;

The word entitle" here connotes the ownership of the right. The Court has to

determine which of the parties has acquired that right, or is entitled for the time being

to exercise that right. In contradistinction to section 68, section 69 requires the Court

to determine the question which party is entitled to the disputed right preliminary to

making an order under section 69(2) (at page 699) (emphasis added).

In the case of Ananda Sarath Paranagama Vs. Dhammadhinna Sarath Paranagama5

Salam, J. explaining as to what connotes the phrase for the time being in

Ramalingams decision observed thus;

The phrase "for the time being" as used in the decision in Ramalingam's case connotes

the exercise of right by one party, temporarily or for the moment until such time such

person is deprived of his right by virtue of a judgment of a Court of competent

jurisdiction. If you describe a party as being entitled to enjoy a right but for the time

being, it means that it will be like that for a period of time, but may change in the future.

This is exactly in keeping with legislative wisdom embodied under Part VII of the Act.

The rationale behind this principle is that the conferment of the special jurisdiction on

a Judge of the Primary Court under Chapter VII of the Act is quasi-criminal in nature

and is intended to facilitate the temporary settlement of the dispute between the parties

4 (1982) 2 SLR 693. 5 CA (PHC) APN 117/2013.

6

so as to maintain the status quo until the rights of the parties are decided by a competent

civil Court. Subject to this, every other concern however much prominent they may

appear to be, will have to be placed next to the imperative necessity of preserving the

peace.

As has been emphasized in the case of Ramalingam (supra) at an inquiry under Chapter

VII, the action taken by the Judge of the Primary Court is of a purely preventive and

provisional nature, pending the final adjudication of the rights of the parties in a civil

Court and the proceedings under this Section are of a summary nature. Moreover, it is

essential that they should be disposed of as expeditiously as possible. In the

circumstances, although it is open to a party to prove the right he claims to be entitled

to as is required under the substantial law dealing with a particular right, it is not

impossible for him to be content with adducing proof to the effect that he has the right

to enjoy the entitlement in dispute for the time being.

Even in a civil action when the plaintiff had failed to prove a clear case of servitude

there had been instances where the Courts have issued restraining orders against the

right of way being obstructed. One such case is Perera Vs. Gunatilleke where Bonsor,

C. J. observed as follows:

It seems to me that, where a person establishes that he has used a way as of right openly

and continuously for a long period and is forcibly prevented from using it, he is entitled

to an injunction to restore him to the quasi possession of the way, irrespective of

whether he can establish the existence of a servitude. We will treat this action as a

possessory action and grant an injunction which will restore the status quo ante" [4

NLR 181].

As per the above stated observations of the Apex Courts, the duty cast upon the

Magistrate in an action filed under Part VII of the Act is to facilitate a temporary

settlement of the dispute between the parties to preserve peace and to maintain the status

quo until the rights of the parties are decided by a competent civil court. In the instant

action, considering the evidence adduced before the learned Magistrate that the

Respondent has used a right of way on the land possessed by the Appellant to the date

of the dispute, in view of preserving peace and maintaining the status quo the learned

High Court Judge has decided that the Respondent is entitled to use that right of way

for the time being until the rights of the parties are decided by a competent civil court.

7

Therefore, I hold that the impugn decision of the learned High Court Judge is in

conformity with the provisions of section 69(1) of the Act and the authorities mentioned

above. Therefore, I affirm the impugned Order of the learned High Court Judge and

dismiss the Appeal with costs. The Appellant will pay Rs. 50,000/= as costs of this

appeal to the Respondent.

Appeal dismissed with costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

M.T. MOHAMMED LAFFAR, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL