==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/21/25

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made

under Section 331 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of

1979

Court Appeal Case No. Ajith Chandana Hewavitharana

CA/HCC/0021/2025

High Court of Galle

Case No. 3487/2010

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

CA/HCC/21/25

2 | P a g e

COUNSEL : Neranjan Jayasinghe with Randunu

Hellage for the Appellant.

Dishna Warnakula, DSG for the

Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 24/03/2026

DECIDED ON : 06/07/2026

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam J

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) was indicted by the Attorney General for committing the murder

of Medavakandage Chandrapala on or about 06/02/2000 an offence

punishable under Section 296 of the Penal Code.

The trial commenced before the High Court Judge of Galle as the Appellant

elected for a non-jury trial. The prosecution had called 09 witnesses in

person, two witnesses’ official duties were admitted under Section 420 of the

Code of Criminal Procedure Act, PW1’s evidence was marked under Section

33 of the Evidence Ordinance and marked production P1 to P5, and closed

CA/HCC/21/25

3 | P a g e

their case. When the defence was called, the Appellant electing to make a

statement from the dock, denied the allegation levelled against him.

The Learned Trial Judge, believing the evidence presented by the

prosecution, convicted the Appellant on the count of murder and sentenced

him to death on 16/10/2024.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court seeking to set aside the conviction and

sentence imposed on him.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the Appellant

had given consent to argue this matter in his absence. During the argument

he was connected via the Zoom platform from prison.

Background of the case

PW3, Amarasiri, was a neighbour of both the deceased and the Appellant.

On the day of the incident he, the deceased and some others had finished

their work at about 10.30pm. After having a wash, the deceased had dinner

at PW3’s house and went to his house wearing a wet sarong. On the next day

morning, at about 6.00am PW5, Chandrapala had informed him that the

deceased had been electrocuted and was lying fallen in the beetle cultivation

of the Appellant. Although there was an access road to the deceased’s house,

there was a shortcut which existed over the beetle cultivation of the

Appellant.

According to PW5, Chandrapala who got married to the sister of the

deceased, told court that at about 12 midnight his father-in-law and mother-

in-law had come to his house in search of the deceased. When he got ready

to go to Matin’s house, the Appellant called him and informed that the

deceased had been electrocuted and was lying fallen in his beetle cultivation.

Further, he had taken him to the spot where the deceased was lying fallen.

At that time, he had noticed that the wires had been installed around the

Appellant’s house. The Appellant had told him to inform the incident to the

CA/HCC/21/25

4 | P a g e

police. There was a dispute that had existed between the Appellant and his

brother over taking unauthorised power from the Appellant’s house.

PW2, Chandra the wife of PW5 also corroborated what her husband told the

court. When she went to see the deceased, the Appellant had allowed her to

visit the place of incident. He had only allowed PW5 to see the deceased. She

too confirmed that wires had been installed around the Appellant’s house.

PW7, DIG/Ranasinghe had conducted the investigation when he was the

Officer-in-Charge of the Yakkalamulla Police Station. Upon receiving a

complaint from PW1, Dayawathie about the death of her son, he had

commenced investigation and visited the scene. He had noted that wires had

been installed around the house of the Appellant. Additionally, two wire

meshes covering the doors of the house too connected electricity from the

third room of the Appellant.

This witness had noticed that the deceased was lying fallen among the beetle

cultivation only wearing a sarong, and that the deceased had struck on the

wire and died. When he searched for the Appellant, he was informed that he

had disappeared from his house. This witness had taken all wires and

ligaments made of metal and other instrument used to pass electricity as

productions in this case.

PW12, the JMO who held the post-mortem opined that the death of the

deceased was caused due to electrocution and externally noted two burn

marks on the body.

PW1, Dayawathie, the mother of the deceased, whose evidence was admitted

under Section 33 of Evidence Ordinance corroborated the evidence given by

PW5. PW5 had told her that the Appellant was yelling filth and told him that

he would like to go to jail. She had come to know about the death of the

deceased from PW5. She confirmed that the Appellant had fortified his house

with illegally laid down electric wires and ligaments made of metal.

CA/HCC/21/25

5 | P a g e

The Appellant made a dock statement and closed his case. In the dock

statement he had denied installing electric wires and ligaments made of

metal around his house. Additionally, he had said a dispute had existed

between him and his brother regarding his brother taking electricity illegally

from his house.

On behalf of the Appellant the following Grounds of Appeal are raised:

1. The High Court Judge had failed to take into consideration that the

items of circumstantial evidence are not sufficient to arrive at the one

and only inference that the Appellant had committed the offence.

2. The Learned High Court Judge has erred in law in coming to the

conclusion that the Appellant had committed an offence punishable

under Section 294(4) of the Penal Code.

3. The Learned High Court Judge had rejected the dock statement of the

Appellant on unreasonable grounds.

In criminal law, the presumption of innocence is a fundamental principle

mandating that the prosecution must establish the guilt of the accused

beyond a reasonable doubt.

In the first ground of Appeal, the Learned Counsel for the Appellant contends

that the High Court Judge had failed to take into consideration that the items

of circumstantial evidence are not sufficient to arrive at the one and only

inference that the Appellant had committed the offence.

Circumstantial evidence refers to indirect evidence that would point to a fact

or possibility without direct proof. In order to connect the available pieces of

information to the conclusion, a logical deduction or inference is necessary.

Any inference of guilt reached on the basis of circumstantial evidence must

be a necessary and strong inference that points to the accused being the

perpetrator of the crime and no one else. As such the chain of events or

circumstances being submitted as circumstantial evidence must be complete

CA/HCC/21/25

6 | P a g e

and clear. Any such circumstantial evidence must prove the guilt of the

accused beyond a reasonable doubt.

In the case of Jayaratne Bandage Senaka Kumara Herath vs. The Hon.

Attorney General [SC/APPEAL/118/2022] decided on 16. 05. 2025 it was

noted:

“When considering a case on circumstantial evidence, Court has to bear in

mind that the prosecution must prove beyond reasonable doubt that the

circumstantial evidence led at the trial must only be consistent with the

guilt of the appellant and not with any other hypothesis.”

In the case of Junaiden Mohamed Haaris v Hon. Attorney General (SC

Appeal 118-2017) decided on 9.11.2018 it was held as follows, regarding

circumstantial evidence:

“The two basic principles are-

1) The inference sought to be drawn must be consistent with all the proved

facts, if it is not, then the inference cannot be drawn.

2) The proved facts should be such that they exclude every reasonable

inference from them, save the one to be drawn. If they do not exclude other

reasonable inferences, then there must be a doubt whether the inference

sought to be drawn is correct (per Watermeyer J. in R v Blom 1939 A.D.188)

The rule regarding the exclusion of every hypothesis of innocence before

drawing the inference of guilt was laid down way back in 1838 in the case

of R vs Hodges 1838 2 Lew, cc.227). The circumstances must be such as

to produce moral certainty to the exclusion of every reasonable doubt.”

CA/HCC/21/25

7 | P a g e

In the case of Dissanayake Appuhamilage Amarasiri Dissanayake v.

Attorney General, SC Appeal 232/14, (2017) (Decided on 11.07.2017) it was

noted:

“I am mindful of the fact that where a case rests squarely on circumstantial

evidence, the inference of guilt can be justified only when all the

incriminating facts and circumstances are found to be incompatible with

the innocence of the accused or the guilt of any other person.

The circumstances from which an inference as to the guilt of the accused

is drawn have to be proved beyond reasonable doubt and have to be

shown to be closely connected with the principal fact sought to be inferred

from those circumstances.”

Assessing evidence in a criminal trial is a vital task for a judge. Evidence may

take different forms, including testimonies, documents, physical items, or

digital records. However, not all evidence carries the same level of reliability,

relevance, or persuasiveness. To evaluate the quality and weight of evidence,

the presiding judge must employ critical thinking skills and take into

account several factors such as credibility, consistency, adequacy, standard,

relevance, and strength of the prosecution's case.

According to PW5, PW2 and PW1, they got to know the incident at about

12.30am. When they came to the Appellant’s house, the Appellant only

informed about the incident to PW5 and had shown the place where the

deceased was lying fallen. He had not allowed the others to see the deceased.

Although, the incident had happened in his premises, the Appellant had not

taken any endeavour to inform about the incident to the police or to dispatch

the deceased to the hospital. Instead, he had disappeared from the scene

until he was arrested by the police on the following day. According to PW2,

the Appellant had not allowed them to take the deceased to a hospital or to

see him at that time.

CA/HCC/21/25

8 | P a g e

According to the evidence, no dispute had existed between the deceased and

the Appellant. A dispute had existed between the Appellant and his brother,

regarding taking power illegally. The investigating officer had very clearly

observed as to how the Appellant had fortified his house with electricity using

wires and ligaments made of metal. This clearly shows that the Appellant

had knowingly installed electricity around his house.

In the second ground of appeal, the Learned Counsel contended that the

Learned High Court Judge has erred in law in coming to the conclusion that

the Appellant had committed an offence punishable under Section 294(4) of

the Penal Code.

294. Except in the cases hereinafter excepted, culpable homicide is murder-

Firstly- if the act by which the death is caused is done with the intention

of causing death; or

Secondly- If it is done with the intention of causing such bodily injury as

the offender knows to be likely to cause the death of the person to whom

the harm is caused; or

Thirdly- If it is done with the intention of causing bodily injury to any

person, and the bodily injury intended to be inflicted is sufficient in the

ordinary course of nature to cause death; or

Fourthly- If the person committing the act knows that it is so imminently

dangerous that it must in all probability cause death, or such bodily

injury as is likely to cause death, and commits such act without any

excuse for incurring the risk of causing death or such injury as aforesaid.

In this regard the illustration (d) to Section 294 is very important. The said

illustration is reproduced below:

(d) A, without any excuse, fires a loaded gun into a crowd of persons and

kills one of them. A is guilty of murder, although he may not have had a

premeditated design to kill any particular individual.

CA/HCC/21/25

9 | P a g e

In Chandrasena alias Rale v Attorney General [2008] 2 SLR 255 the court

held that:

(4) The victim in the instant case died due to septicaemia following infected

ulcers, infected ulcers caused as a result of the burns infected by an act of

the appellant - there is direct nexus between the burns and the cause of

death. In a case of murder even if the death of the victim was not directly

due to the injuries inflicted by the accused but due to other conditions such

as septicaemia occurred a result of the injuries inflicted by the accused, it

is justifiable to conclude and should conclude that it was the act of the

accused that caused the death of the victim.

Per Sisira de Abrew, J.

"The victim was in her boutique at the time of the incident. The prosecution

case was that the appellant threw an object like a bottle. Immediately

thereafter the victim was in flames and the boutique was engulfed in

flames. Thus, the appellant knew that it was imminently dangerous that it

must in all probability cause death of the inmates of the boutique by his

act and bodily injuries have been caused to the victim which were not only

likely to cause death but are sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to

cause death. This act was done by the appellant without any excuse. Thus,

in my view the appellant was guilty of murder under the fourth limb of

Section 294.”

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant strenuously argued that since there

was no enmity reported, the Appellant had no intention or knowledge to

commit the murder of the deceased. The Learned Counsel further argued

that there was no necessity for the deceased to walk through the Appellant’s

beetle cultivation at the night. Hence, he argued that the Appellant had no

intention of committing the murder of the deceased.

PW2 had revealed that there was a short cut used by the Appellant and the

deceased as they were neighbours. Hence, it is not unusual for the deceased

CA/HCC/21/25

10 | P a g e

to use that shortcut. The Appellant had not denied the existence of a short

cut. Therefore, the Appellant ought to have been conscious of the people who

use the said shortcut.

In Somapala v The Queen 72 NLR 212 the Court observed:

“Knowledge that an act is so imminently dangerous that it must in all

probability cause death or such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, is

knowledge, not merely of the likelihood of causing death, but of the high

probability of causing death or injury likely to cause death; so that many

case which fall within the third clause of section 293 will not be murder

within the meaning of the fourth limb of section 294”.

H.N.G. Fernando C.J. quoted with approval the following sentence from

an Indian judgment;

“If death is a likely result, it is culpable homicide: if it is the most probable

result, it is murder.”

In King v Rengasamy 25 NLR 444 Bertram C.J said:

Dr. Gour expresses the opinion that though the enactment was designed

to meet this particular class of case, its application ought not necessarily

to be confined thereto, and instances the case of a mother exposing her

infant child as a case to which the words of the enactment appropriately

extend. I quite agree. Another case which has recently come within my own

experience, and to which the words of the enactment appropriately apply,

is that of a man, who without any definite intention to injure, but out of

pure bravado and insolence discharges a gun in the direction of a man

with whom he is engaged in altercation.”

The learned High Court Judge in her judgement at pages 327-328 states:

flfia jQjo oKav kS;s ix.%yfha 294 jk j.ka;sfha y;rjk wjia:dj f,i igyka jkafka

;ud úiska isÿ lrk ,o l%shdj u`.ska isÿ úh yels wka;rdh fldmuK wdikako lsjfyd;a

tu l%shdfõ m%;sM,hla f,i iEu w;skau urKhla isÿ úh yels njg fyda urKh isÿ úh

CA/HCC/21/25

11 | P a g e

yels YdrSrsl mdvqjla úh yels njg oek oeku isÿ lrk ,o l%shdjla iïnkaOfhka jk

w;r fmr fuu ;Skaÿfõ igyka lrk wdldrhgu b;du m%fõiï iy.;j iQlaIu ;udf.a

ksji jfÜg pQos; úiska úÿ,sh iïnkaO l< yels jh¾ iy lïì weo ksji ;=<ska tu jh¾

iy lïì j,g rd;%Ss ld,fha oS úÿ,sh iïnkaO lsrSu hk l%shdj,sh i<ld ne,Sfï oS tu

úÿ,sh iïnkaO ù we;s jh¾ fyda lïì j, fyda iam¾Y jk mqoa.,fhl=g úh yels tlu

m%;sM,h jkafka urKh njg pQos; meyeos,sju oek isáh hq;=j we;s njg fuu wêlrKh

ksrSlaIKh lrkq ,nk w;r ;udf.a tu l%shdfõ wka;rdodhl ;;a;ajh fkdf;afrk

wdldrfha udkisl ;;a;ajhlska fyì mqoa.,fhl= f,i pQos;j y`ÿkd .ekSula isÿ l<

fkdyels ;;a;ajh hgf;a fukau úfYaIfhkau ksjig w;=,a úh yels bosrs iy miqmi

fodrj,a j,g fjku oe,a .id tu oe,a j,g o úÿ,sh iïnkaO lr ;sîu ;rï b;d

wka;rdodhl l%shdj,shla pQos; úiska isÿ lr we;s ;;a;ajh hgf;a pQos;f.a by; olajk

,o úÿ,sh iïnkaO lsrSfï l%shdj,sh u.ska fuu kvqjg wod< urKlref.a urKh isÿ ù

we;s njg fuu wêlrKhg lsisÿ .eg¿jlska f;drj ;srKh lsrSug yelshdjla we;s w;r

tf,i úÿ,sh iïnkaO lsrSug idOdrK lsisÿ fya;=jla ;udg ;snQ njg fmkajd oSug pQos;g

lsisÿ yelshdjla ,eî fkdue;s ;;a;ajh hgf;a pQos; úiska lrk ,o úÿ,sh iïnkaO lsrSfï

l%shdj u`.ska fuu kvqfõ urKlref.a urKh isÿùu ñkSuereula njg ;SrKh lrk njg

igyka lrñ'

Considering the brutality of the offence, the gravity, as well as the

seriousness of injuries sustained by the deceased, I conclude that the

Learned High Court Judge had very correctly considered the liability under

the fourth limb of the Section 294 of the Penal Code.

In the final ground of appeal, it was contended that, the Learned High Court

Judge had rejected the dock statement of the Appellant on unreasonable

grounds. Appreciation of the contents of a dock statement is considered in

number of cases by our court.

A dock statement refers to an unsworn statement made by an accused from

the courtroom dock rather than giving sworn testimony. The evaluation of

such statements would be extremely important, as they would be legally

considered to be evidence, and as such, must be carefully assessed to protect

the defendant’s right to a fair trial. Therefore, although a dock statement

would lack the full probative weight as cross-examined evidence would, it

still remains important to the case at hand. Further, even if the statement is

CA/HCC/21/25

12 | P a g e

not fully believed, if its content is sufficient to create a reasonable doubt

regarding the prosecution’s case in the perspective of the jury or judge, the

accused would then legally be entitled to an acquittal.

In Queen V. Kularatne 71 NLR 529 at page 531 it was held that:-

“when an unsworn statement is made by the accused from the dock,

the jurors must be informed that such statement must be looked upon

as evidence, subject however to the infirmity that the accused had

deliberately refrained from giving sworn testimony. But the jury must

also be directed that,

(a) if they believe the unsworn statement, it must be acted upon,

(b) if it raises a reasonable doubt in their minds about the case for

the prosecution, the defence must succeed, and

(c) that it should not be used against another accused.”

In the case of Sarath v. Attorney General [2006] 3 SLR 1:

“There is no rule that particular item/evidence should be considered first

in the judgment. There is no prescribed sequence in analysing evidence.

The judgment analysed the entire evidence at the same time. Therefore,

the fact of considering the dock statement at the beginning of the judgment

would not make any difference as the prosecution evidence was

considered at the same time.

One must bear in mind that when a dock statement is considered

anywhere in the judgment, the judge who heard the evidence is aware of

the prosecution case and would always consider the dock statement while

considering the prosecution story. One cannot consider the dock statement

in isolation”.

CA/HCC/21/25

13 | P a g e

In this case, the Learned High Court Judge had very correctly considered the

dock statement of the Appellant in her judgment. She has also given reasons

as to why she disregards the same in her judgment. Hence, it is incorrect to

say that the Learned High Court Judge had not considered the dock

statement of the Appellant in her judgment.

Considering all the evidence presented against the Appellant, I conclude that

the prosecution had succeeded in adducing highly incriminating evidence

against the Appellant and thereby has established the charge beyond a

reasonable doubt. As such we conclude that this is not an appropriate case

in which to interfere with the findings of the Learned High Court Judge of

Galle dated 16/10/2024. Hence, I dismiss the Appeal.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgement to the High

Court of Galle along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL