Page 1 of 3

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

Court of appeal Case No:

CA (BAIL) 11/2022

Magistrates Court of Matara Case No:

BR 2663/21

In the matter of an application for bail

under section 10 (1) (a) of the

Assistance to and Protection of Victims

of Crime and Witnesses No. 4 of 2015.

Randoge Asanthi Iresha Priyadarshani.

Petitioner

Vs.

1. Officer in Charge

Police Station

Gandara.

2.Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondents

Randoluge Dinoj Theshan De Silva.

Accused Currently in remand

Page 2 of 3

Before: Menaka Wijesundera J.

Neil Iddawala J.

Counsel: Sabdhika Wellappili and Waijanthi Nandadasa for petitioner.

Panchali Witharana, SC for the Respondent.

Argued on: 04.10.2022

Decided on: 05.10.2022

MENAKA WIJESUNDERA J.

The instant matter has been filed to obtain bail for Randombage Dinoj Theshan De

Silva, under the Provisions of the Assistance to and Protections of Victims of Crime and

Witnesses Act. The Accused has been arrested for the instant matter on 21/12/2021

and remanded for a complaint made against him by Ajith Prasnna Senevirathne who

was an eye witness in the murder case which had concluded 5 years ago.

The other Accused in the same case who had been in remand under the instant Act had

been enlarged on bail by this Court.

The state Counsel appearing on behalf of the Respondents vehemently objected to the

application on the basis that the Accused has not completed 01 year in remand. This

Court sees no merit in the submission because the instant Act has been enacted to

safe guard the rights of victims and witnesses, but in the same Act it is stated that

matters coming under this Act should be given precedence over others. But if an

accused person is to remain in Prison for an exact period of 01 year when in fact the

substantive matter has been concluded five years ago, it is we believe is a definite

violation of his liberty to freedom.

Page 3 of 3

Therefore, we see no reason why this Accused should be kept in remand any longer.

As such the Accused namely, Randombage Dinoj Theshan De Silva, is enlarged on bail

on following conditions,

01. A cash bail of Rs. 25,000/-

02. Two sureties to the value of 50,000/- each.

03. The suspect to report to the relevant Police Station on every last Sunday of the

month.

04. The suspect is hereby severely warned not to interfere with the victim or the

family members. If it is reported, the instant bail order would be cancelled.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to inform the Registrar of the Magistrates

Court of Matara regarding the instant order.

The instant application for bail is hereby allowed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal.

I agree.

Neil Iddawala J.

Judge of the Court of Appeal.