==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA(PHC)0053/22

Page 1 of 16

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Writ

of Certiorari and Mandamus under

Article 140 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic or Sri

Lanka.

Rohitha Nandalal Jayawardena,

No 06, Kudagama, Hatton.

Petitioner

Vs

,

1. S.Balachandran (Chairman),

2. A.P.M Palms (vice Chairman),

3. M.D.K.Karunasiri (Member),

4. A.Nandakumar (Member),

5. R.Rameswari (Member),

6. K.Balasubramaniyam (Member),

7. A.P. Anura De Silva (Member),

8. M.Gunasundaram (Member)

9. A. Keshawa Murthi (Member)

10. S.Ratnakumar (Member)

11. M.R. Wijayanandan (Member)

12. Chandiramathi (Member)

13. Girty Somapala (Member)

14. S. Shiwadharshani (Member)

15. R.M.S. V. Ratnayake (Member)

16. P.Subramaniyam (Member)

Hatton Dikoya Urban Council,

Hatton.

17. The Secretary,

Court of Appeal Case No. CA (PHC) 0053/22 High Writ Application No. HC/NE/01/2020(Writ)

CA(PHC)0053/22

Page 2 of 16

Hatton Dikoya Urban Council,

Hatton.

18. Hatton Dikoya Urban Council,

Hatton.

19. Assistant Commissioner of Local

Government,

Assistant Commissioner of Local

Government' Office, Bambarakale,

Nuwaraeliya.

20. Commissioner of Local Government,

Commissioner of Local Government'

Office, Department of Provincial

Council, Central Provincial Council

Complex,

Pallekele Kundasale.

21. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12

Respondents.

AND NOW

In the matter of an Appeal under

section 9(b) of the of High Court of the

Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No.

19 of 1990 against the order of the

Provincial High Court of the Central

Province held in Nuwara Eliya dated

17/12/2021 in exercise of Writ

Jurisdiction under Article 140 and

154P(4)(b) of the Constitution of the

CA(PHC)0053/22

Page 3 of 16

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Rohitha Nandalal Jayawardena, No 06,

Kudagama,

Hatton.

Petitioner-Appellant

Vs.

1. S.A. Ashoka Karunarathna

(Chairman),

2. P. Surendran (vice Chairman).

3. A.Nadakumar (Member)

4. Mrs. K.A.Kanchana Sandamali

Siriwardana

(Member)

5. Anthony Elmo (Member)

6. M.Y. Mohamed Mawjood (Member)

7. S. Logeshwaran (Member)

8. S.A.Nuwan Priyadarshana Mendis

(Member)

9. P.K.C. Jayantha Dharmapriya

(Member)

10. P.H. Kumudini (Member)

11. S. Kesavamoorthy (Member)

12. S. Prabaharan (Member)

13. E.J.W.G.Kahawattage (Member)

14. A. Chandrakala (Member)

15. A.R.M. Niyas (Member)

16. ------

Hatton Dikoya Urban Council,

Hatton.

CA(PHC)0053/22

Page 4 of 16

17. The Secretary, Hatton Dikoya Urban

Council, Hatton.

18. Hatton Dikoya Urban Council,

Hatton.

19. Assistant Commissioner of Local

Government,Assistant

Commissioner of Local Government'

Office, Bambarakale, Nuwaraeliya.

20. Commissioner of Local Government,

Commissioner of Local Government'

Office, Department of Provincial

Council, Central Provincial Council

Complex, Pallekele Kundasale.

21. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondent-Respondents.

Before : D. THOTAWATTA, J.

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Counsel : P. Peramunugama instructed by

Ranganath Peiris for the Petitioner-

Appellant.

Dilantha Sampath, S.C. for the 19th, 20th

and 21st Respondents-Respondents.

Janajith De Silva with Roshini

Rathnayake for the Respondents-

Respondents.

CA(PHC)0053/22

Page 5 of 16

Argued on : 16.03.2026

Written Submissions

of the Petitioner- Appellant

tendered on : 08.09.2025

Written Submissions

of the Respondents-Respondents

tendered on : 16.01.2026

Decided on : 11.09.2026

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

The Petitioner-Appellant(hereinafter called and referred to as “the Appellant”)

seeks in the instant appeal, to set aside the order dated 17.12.2021

(hereinafter called and referred to as “the HC order”) made in the exercise of

the writ jurisdiction vested in her by Article 154P(4)(b) of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka (hereinafter called and referred

to as “the Constitution”) by the learned High Court Judge of the Central

Province holden at Nuwara Eliya (hereinafter called and referred to as “the

learned High Court Judge”) dismissing the application preferred by the

Appellant to the High Court of the Central Province holden at Nuwara Eliya

(hereinafter called and referred to as “the High Court”) for a mandate in the

nature of a writ of mandamus compelling the 17th and 18th Respondents-

Respondents (hereinafter called and referred to as “the 17th and 18th

Respondents”) to grant the Appellant the lease-hold rights of the boutique

room bearing No. 16(9) situated in the Old Public Market, Hatton (hereinafter

called and referred to as “the boutique room”) and also a mandate in the

nature of a writ of certiorari to annul the lease agreement if any, that had

already, been granted by the 17th and 18th Respondents to Solomon

Munasinghalage Tanuja Priyadarshani in respect of the boutique room.

The facts relevant to the instant appeal may be briefly, set out as follows;

CA(PHC)0053/22

Page 6 of 16

The Petitioner had instituted the instant writ application in the High

Court seeking inter-alia, mandates in the nature of a writ of mandamus and

a writ of certiorari of kind as prayed for in prayer to the petition filed thereat

against the 17th and 18th Respondents on the premise that the Petitioner had

after having obtained possession of the boutique room from one Ekanayake

Munasighe, been in possession of the boutique room since 01.07.1993,

initially, carrying on the business of a welding workshop and thereafter, a

grocery shop therein, paying monthly rentals due thereon, to the 18th

Respondent in the name of the said Ekanayake Munasighe without any

obstruction and also paying monthly rental to the said Ekanayake Munasighe

due thereon, until he was asked by the 17th Respondent in his letter dated

23.01.2020 (පෙ9) to vacate the boutique room and surrender the possession

thereof; and that the Appellant had in pursuant to the letter addressed to the

Ekanayake Munasighe dated 22.06.2017 (පෙ6)requesting him to come along

with the lease agreement entered between himself and the Hatton Dickoya

Urban Council (18th Respondent) in proof thereof, on the day specified therein,

and that; the Appellant upon receipt of the said letter (පෙ6) had informed the

Hatton Dickoya Urban Council that the said Ekanayake Munasighe had not

come to the boutique room for a number of years; and that the Appellant had

afterwards, sent a letter dated 22.07.2017 (පෙ7), to the 19th Respondent-

Assistant Commissioner Local Government of Nuwara Eliya requesting him

to issue a lease agreement in his name to the boutique room in terms of the

Circular bearing No. 2016/3 dated 17.03.2016 (පෙ8) thus, granting him the

lease-hold rights thereof, in view of the fact that the said Ekanayake

Munasighe had not come to see him for a number of years; and that the

Appellant had paid monthly rental due on the boutique room for the year 2019

without any arrears to Hatton Dickoya Urban Council; and that however, the

17th Respondent acting maliciously, and illegally, had in his letter dated

23.01.2020 (පෙ9), asked the Appellant to vacate the boutique room and

surrender the possession thereof although, lease-hold rights of the boutique

room ought to have been granted to him in terms of section 19 of the said

Circular; and that as evident from report of the monthly meeting of the Hatton

Dickoya Urban Council-18th Respondent (පෙ15), the Hatton Dickoya Urban

CA(PHC)0053/22

Page 7 of 16

Council-18th Respondent had made a decision to transfer the lease-hold rights

of the boutique room to the said Solomon Munasinghalage Tanuja

Priyadarshani in respect of the boutique room.

The relief prayed for in prayer ‘ඈ’ of the petition furnished by the Appellant to

the High Court in the instant writ application reads thus;

“17 හා 18 වන වග උත්තරකරුවන් විසින් දැනටමත් ස ාලමන් මුණසිිංහලාසේ තනූජා

ප්‍රියදර්ශනී සවතබදු ඔප්පුවක් ලබා දී ඇත්නම් එය අවලිංගු කර බල රහිත කර ර්ිසයෝරාරී රිට්

ආඥාවක් ලබා සදන සල ත්”

What has thus, been asked for by the Appellant in prayer ‘ඈ’ of the petition

as quoted above, was a mandate in the nature of a writ of certiorari to annul

the lease agreement if any, that had already, been granted by the 17th and

18th Respondents to Solomon Munasinghalage Tanuja Priyadarshani in

respect of the boutique room only and not to quash the decision that had

admittedly, been made by the Hatton Dickoya Urban Council at its monthly

meeting held on 11.11.2019, and contained in පෙ15, to amend the lease-

hold rights of the boutique room that had originally, been in the name of the

said Solomon Munasinghalage Ekanayake Munasighe-the lawful lessee

thereof, in the name of his daughter the said Solomon Munasinghalage

Tanuja Priyadarshani, by virtue of which (පෙ15) the purported lease

agreement had came into being which clearly, and unequivocally, shows that

the Appellant had not in any manner, sought in the instant application a

mandate in the nature of a writ of certiorari to quash the purported decision

in the first place, that had admittedly, been made by the Hatton Dickoya

Urban Council at its monthly meeting held on 11.11.2019, and as contained

in පෙ15, to amend the lease-hold rights of the boutique room that had

originally, been in the name of the said Solomon Munasinghalage Ekanayake

Munasighe-the lawful lessee thereof, in the name of his daughter the said

Solomon Munasinghalage Tanuja Priyadarshani before the Petitioner has

asked for a mandate in the nature of a writ of certiorari to annul the lease

agreement if any, that had already, been granted by the 17th and 18th

Respondents to Solomon Munasinghalage Tanuja Priyadarshani in respect of

CA(PHC)0053/22

Page 8 of 16

the boutique room only and hence, it clearly, appears that the purported

decision (පෙ15) would still, remain intact and unaffected even if the High

Court decides to grant a mandate in the nature of a writ of certiorari to annul

the purported lease agreement as prayed for in prayer ‘ඈ’ of the petition as

quoted above.

Hence, it clearly, appears that the mere issuance of a mandate in the nature

of a writ of certiorari to annul the lease agreement if any, that had already,

been granted by the 17th and 18th Respondents to Solomon Munasinghalage

Tanuja Priyadarshani in respect of the boutique room only as asked for by

the Appellant in prayer ‘ඈ’ of the petition as quoted above, would certainly,

serve no meaningful purpose in law in the absence of an order in the nature

of a writ of certiorari quashing the purported decision (පෙ15) in the first place,

and therefore, the mere issuance of a mandate in the nature of a writ of

certiorari to annul the lease agreement if any, that had already, been granted

by the 17th and 18th Respondents to Solomon Munasinghalage Tanuja

Priyadarshani in respect of the boutique room only as asked for by the

Appellant in prayer ‘ඈ’ of the petition as quoted above, without first quashing

the purported decision (පෙ15) by way of a mandate in the nature of a writ of

certiorari would be futile for; the said decision (පෙ15) would remain intact and

unaffected notwithstanding the order of the High Court granting a mandate

in the nature of a writ of certiorari of kind as asked for in prayer ‘ඈ’ of the

petition as quoted above.

I would therefore, hold the Appellant’s application for a mandate in the nature

of a writ of certiorari of kind as asked for in prayer ‘ඈ’ of the petition as quoted

above, is not entitled to succeed in law in view of the doctrine of futility and

therefore, the Appellant’s application ought to have been rejected on this

ground alone.

There is a further point why the Appellant’s application for a mandate in the

nature of a writ of certiorari of kind as asked for in prayer ‘ඈ’ of the petition

as quoted above, is not entitled to succeed in law.

It may now, be examined.

CA(PHC)0053/22

Page 9 of 16

As stated above, what has thus, been asked for by the Appellant in prayer ‘ඈ’

of the petition as quoted above, was a mandate in the nature of a writ of

Certiorari to annul the lease agreement if any, that had already, been granted

by the 17th and 18th Respondents to Solomon Munasinghalage Tanuja

Priyadarshani in respect of the boutique room only.

However, it is significant to observe that the said Solomon Munasinghalage

Tanuja Priyadarshani had not been made a party to the instant application

preferred to the High Court by the Appellant praying inter-alia, for a mandate

in the nature of a writ of certiorari to annul the lease agreement if any, that

had already, been granted by the 17th and 18th Respondents to Solomon

Munasinghalage Tanuja Priyadarshani in respect of the boutique room only.

What then, is the effect that would derive in law by not making the said

Solomon Munasinghalage Tanuja Priyadarshani a party to the instant

application, viewed in the light of the relief prayed for in prayer ‘ඈ’ of the

petition as quoted above?; In other words, Is the instant application bad in

law for want of necessary parties? As rightly, observed by the learned High

Court Judge. [Emphasis is mine]

It may now, be examined.

It was held in Hatton National Bank PLC Vs Commissioner General of

Labour and Others. [CA (Writ) Application No. 457/2011; CA Minutes of

31st January 2020; that, “It is trite law that any person whose rights are

affected by an order that a petitioner is inviting a Court of law to make in his

favour is entitled to be named as a party and is entitled to be heard, before

Court makes any order adverse to such person. The rule is that all those

who would be affected by the outcome of an application should be made

respondents to such application.” [Emphasis is mine]

It was held in Gnanasambanthan v Rear Admiral Perera and others [1998]

3 SLR 167 at 172 that “it is both the law and practice in Sri Lanka to cite

necessary parties to applications for Writs of Certiorari and Mandamus”.

CA(PHC)0053/22

Page 10 of 16

In the decision in Wijeratne (Commissioner of Motor traffic) Vs. Ven, Dr.

Paragoda Wimalasena Thero and 4 others, [2011] (2) SLR 258 at page 267,

the following two rules were laid down by Court with regard to naming of

necessary parties;

1. The first rule regarding the necessary parties to an application

for a writ of certiorari is that the person or authority whose

decision or exercise of power is sought to be quashed should be

made a respondent to the application. If the act sought to be

impugned had been done by one party on a direction given by

another party who has power granted by law to give such direction,

the party who had given the direction is also a necessary party and

the failure to make such party a respondent is fatal to the

validity of the application. [Emphasis is mine]

2. The second rule is that those who would be affected by the outcome

of the writ application should be made respondents to the

application.

It was held in Dominic V. Minister of Lands and Others, (2010) 2 SLR 398,

that, "In the context of writ applications, a necessary party is one without

whom no order can be effectively made. A proper party is one in whose

absence an effective order can be made but whose presence is necessary to a

complete and final decision on the question involved in the

proceedings.….Persons vitally affected by the writ petition are all necessary

parties. If their number is very large, some of them could be made respondents

in a representative capacity (vide Prabodh Derma v. State of Uttara Pradesh

also see Encyclopedia of Writ Law By P.M. Bakshi )In view of the above

authorities it is clear that the failure to name the necessary parties….as

parties in this application is fatal.”

In the case of Abeywardane and 162 others vs. Stanley, Wijesundara, Vice

Chancellor, University of Colombo and Another [1983] 2 Sri LR 267 at

291 it was held that, “The whole petition is directed against the 115 students

CA(PHC)0053/22

Page 11 of 16

of the North Colombo Medical College. Both the final relief and the Interim

order asked for by petitioners are intended to achieve one object, namely, the

exclusion of the 115 students from the 2nd MBBS examination. According to

the affidavit of Dr. Ratnavale, who is the Director of the North Colombo

Medical College, the 115 students have followed the approved courses of

study, have applied to the University of Colombo to sit the 2ndMBBS

examination, have paid the requisite examination fees, and have received their

admission cards from the University of Colombo for the said examination.

There is no doubt then, that if this Court were to issue a Mandamus as prayed

for by the petitioners, the 115 students would be adversely affected. If as

contended by learned Counsel for the petitioners, the 115 students have no

legal right to sit the 2nd MBBS examination, this is all the more reason we

should have them before us and hear them, before we make an order against

them. To use the words of Cayley, C. J. in effect we are asked by the petitioners

to pronounce an opinion upon a disputed examination, without large section

of the students, who propose to sit the examination, being parties to the

proceedings or having had any notice on them. This we cannot do."We hold

that the 115 students of the North Colombo Medical College are necessary

parties and the failure to make them respondents is fatal to the petitioners'

application”.

It was held in Rawaya Publishers and Others v. Wijedasa Rajapaksha and

Others, [2001] (3) SLR 213, at page 216, that, “In the context of writ

applications, a necessary party is one without whom no order can be

effectively made. A proper party is one in whose absence an effective order can

be made but whose presence is necessary to a complete and final decision on

the question involved in the proceedings. In the case of Udit Narayan Singh

v. Board of Revenue it has been held that where a writ application is filed in

respect of an order of the Board of Revenue not only the Board itself is

necessary party but also the parties in whose favour the Board has

pronounced the impugned decision because without them no effective

decision can be made. If they are not made parties then the petition can be

dismissed in limine. It has also been held that persons vitally affected by the

CA(PHC)0053/22

Page 12 of 16

writ petition are all necessary parties. If their number is very large, some of

them could be made respondents in a representative capacity (vide Prabodh

Derma v. State of UttaraPradesh also see Encyclopedia of Writ Law By P. M.

Bakshi)” [Emphasis is mine].

See also; Jayawardena_and Another Vs. Pegasus Hotels Of Ceylon Ltd.

And Others [2004] 2 Sri. LR 39.

It is trite law that, in the context of writ applications, a necessary party is one

without whom no order can be effectively made; and that, a proper party is

one in whose absence an effective order can be made but whose presence is

necessary to a complete and final decision on the question involved in the

proceedings and hence, persons vitally affected by the writ petition are all

necessary parties; and that, if their number is very large, some of them could

be made respondents in a representative capacity.

It is thus, well established that any person whose rights are affected by an

order that a petitioner is inviting a Court of law to make in his favour is

entitled to be named as a party and is entitled to be heard, before Court makes

any order adverse to such person. The rule is that all those who would be

affected by the outcome of an application should be made respondents

to such application and the failure to make them respondents is fatal to

the petitioners' application [Emphasis is mine]

The said Solomon Munasinghalage Tanuja Priyadarshani whose rights are no

doubt, going to be seriously prejudiced and affected by an order that the

Appellant in the instant application invited the High Court to make in his

favour in the instant application as enumerated above, for the reason that the

kind of the order asked for by the Appellant would if granted by the High

Court annul the lease agreement that had already, been granted by the 17th

and 18th Respondents to Solomon Munasinghalage Tanuja Priyadarshani in

respect of the boutique room and as such the said Solomon Munasinghalage

Tanuja Priyadarshani is entitled to be named as a party and is entitled to be

heard, before the High Court makes any order adverse to her for; the

established rule is that all those who would be affected by the outcome of

CA(PHC)0053/22

Page 13 of 16

an application should be made respondents to such application and the

failure to make them respondents is fatal to the petitioners' application

[Emphasis is mine]

It clearly, appears upon a careful examination of the averments in the petition

filed in the High Court by the Appellant on its totality that the Appellant had

been fully, and totally, aware even at the time of the preferring the instant

application to the High Court that the lease agreement had already, been

granted by the 17th and 18th Respondents to Solomon Munasinghalage Tanuja

Priyadarshani in respect of the boutique room and as such the said Solomon

Munasinghalage Tanuja Priyadarshani had been the lawful tenant of the

boutique room even at the time of the institution of the instant application

before the High Court for kind of relief as enumerated above, by the Appellant.

Furthermore, the Respondents had clearly, and unequivocally, confirmed in

their respective statement of objections filed before the High Court that it was

so.

However, it is significant to observe that at no stage of the proceedings before

the High Court, had the Appellant made an iota of an attempt to make the

said Solomon Munasinghalage Tanuja Priyadarshani a party to the instant

application knowing fully well aware that her right is going to be seriously,

affected by a kind of the order sought by him in prayer ‘ඈ’ of his petition as

enumerated above and therefore, she was indeed a necessary party to the

action brought before the High Court by him.

Nonetheless, the Appellant had not made any endeavour to make the said

Solomon Munasinghalage Tanuja Priyadarshani a party to the instant

application filed by him before the High Court thereby, clearly, depriving of

her right to be heard against the instant application and hence, his failure to

make her a party to the instant application filed by him before the High Court,

is fatal to the instant application and as such it ought to have been dismissed

by the High Court in-limine for want of necessary parties.

I would therefore, hold that the instant application filed before the High Court

by the Appellant for the specific relief as prayed for in prayer ‘ඈ’ of his petition

CA(PHC)0053/22

Page 14 of 16

as enumerated above, ought to have been rejected by the High Court on the

grounds so enumerated by me as aforesaid in-limine.

The resultant position being that, the Appellant is not entitled to the relief

sought by him in the prayer ‘ඇ’ of his petition filed in the High Court too,

namely; “17 හා 18 වන වග උත්තරකරුවන් සවත 2016/3 යටසත් මධ්‍යම පළාසත් පළාත් පාළන

සදපාර්තසම්න්ුසේ චක්‍ර සේඛසේ නියම කර ඇති පරිදි සපත් ම්කරුහට හැටන් සපාදු සවළඳ ැසේ

අිංක 16 (9) දරණ පැරණි සවළඳ ිංකීර්ණසේ බදු අයිතිය ලබා සදන සල ට මැන්ඩාමු ් රිට් ආඥාවක්

නිකුත්කරන සල ත්.”; for the reason that the granting of the relief as prayed for in

prayer ‘ඇ’ of the petition is solely, dependent upon the granting of the relief

as prayed for in prayer ‘ඈ’ of his petition as enumerated above in the first

place.

Nowhere in the petition filed in the High Court, had it been averred by the

Appellant that he had made an application during the period material to the

instant application filed before the High Court by the Appellant, to the Hatton

Dickoya Urban Council-the 18th Respondent requesting it to grant him the

lease-hold rights of the boutique room under and in terms of section 19 of the

said Circular (පෙ8).

Besides, the Appellant had adduced no material to the High Court to show

that the said Ekanayake Munasighe had failed to prove before the Hatton

Dickoya Urban Council-18th Respondent that he had been the lawful tenant

of the boutique room as required by the said Circular (පෙ8). Instead, the

Hatton Dickoya Urban Council-18th Respondent had acted on the basis that

the said Ekanayake Munasighe had been the lawful tenant of the boutique

room as evident from his own document annexed to his Petition marked as

(පෙ15) by the Appellant as rightly, observed by the learned High Court Judge.

Hence, I would see no illegality and/or irrationality and/or procedural

impropriety in the decision made by the Hatton Dickoya Urban Council-18th

Respondent which is contained in (පෙ15), to amend the lease-hold rights of

the boutique room that had originally, been in the name of the said Solomon

Munasinghalage Ekanayake Munasighe-the lawful lessee thereof, in the name

CA(PHC)0053/22

Page 15 of 16

of his daughter the said Solomon Munasinghalage Tanuja Priyadarshani as

rightly, held by the learned High Court Judge.

I would therefore, hold that the Appellant is not entitled to the relief as prayed

for in prayer ‘ඈ’ of his petition as enumerated above even on the factual matrix

of the instant application as enumerated above, as rightly, held by the learned

High Court Judge.

As laid down by Supreme Court in the case in Credit information Beaure of

Sri Lanka Vs. Messrs Jafferiee and Jaferjee 2005[1] SLR 89, at page 93,

there is rich and profuse case law on the mandamus on the conditions to be

satisfied by the applicant and that one of the conditions precedent to the issue

of mandamus appear to be that an application must be preceded by a distinct

demand for the performance of the duty.

Even, if it is to be assumed for the sake of the argument for a moment without

conceding that the Appellant had a legal right to compel the Hatton Dickoya

Urban Council-18th Respondent to grant him a lease-hold rights of the

boutique room yet, the Appellant is not entitled to succeed in his application

for writ of mandamus as prayed for in prayer ‘ඇ’ of his petition as enumerated

above in the absence of proof of a legal demand made by him to the Hatton

Dickoya Urban Council-18th Respondent thereon, and the refusal of it by

Hatton Dickoya Urban Council-18th Respondent for; the Appellant had

adduced no material to the High Court to show that he had made a demand

to that effect and the Hatton Dickoya Urban Council-18th Respondent had

refused it.

I would therefore, hold that the instant application for a writ of mandamus as

prayed for in prayer ‘ඇ’ of his petition is not entitled to succeed on this further

ground too, as enumerated above, in addition to the ground already,

enumerated above by me.

For the reasons stated above, I would hold that the Appellant was not entitled

both in fact and law to any of the relief as prayed for in prayers ‘ඇ’ or ‘ඈ’ of

his petition filed before the High Court as rightly, held by the learned High

Court Judge.

CA(PHC)0053/22

Page 16 of 16

In the circumstances, I would see no legal basis whatsoever, to interfere with

the HC order.

I would thus, affirm the HC order.

In the result, I would dismiss the appeal with costs fixed at 50,000/- to be

payable by the Appellant to the Hatton Dickoya Urban Council-the 18th

Respondent only.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL