IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA CA. No. 184/2009 H.C Vauniya Case No:1955/07

Susei Sudarshan Murukkan.

Appellant Vs. Hon. Attorney-General Attorney-General's Department, Colombo 12.

Respondent

1

C.A 184/2009 H.C Vauniya Case No:1955/07

Before Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J. (P / CAl & H.C.J. Madawala, J.

Counsel Indika Mallawarachchi for the Accused-Appellant.

Argued &

Decided on

H.I. Peiris S.S.C for the Respondent.

04.08.2015.

Accused-Appellant is present in Court produced by the

Prison Authorities.

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J (PICA).

In this matter the Accused -Appellant Soosai Sutharasan was indicted in

the High Court of Vauniya on two counts namely kidnapping a girl by the name

of Arogyanadan Anusha below the age of 16 years on 12.06.2004 an offence

punishable under Section 354 of the Penal Code and also for committing rape

on her on the same day. The Accused-Appellant was absent at the trial and the

trial had proceeded in absentia. The learned Trial Judge after hearing the

prosecution evidence being satisfied with the said evidence had convicted the

accused in the year 2004 and sentenced him to seven years rigorous

imprisonment for the 1st count and 15 years rigorous imprisonment on count

2

No:02 with a fine of Rs. 10,000/-with default SIX months ngorous

imprisonment and also compensation of Rs. 20,000/ in default of one year

rigorous imprisonment. The learned High Court Judge has further ordered for

the above sentences to run consecutively.

The said accused was later apprehended and produced before the High

Court of Vauniya in December 2009. When the matter was taken up before the

learned High Court Judge on 16.12.2009 the learned High Court Judge had

held a 241 (3) inquiry and concluded that he is not satisfied with the material

placed before the Court and therefore pronounced the judgment which has

already been made by the learned High Court Judge on the accused.

Counsel appearing for the Accused-Appellant submits that she will

not be canvassing the conviction before this court but only be canvassing the

sentence. She submits that suspect was only 17 years of the age at the time

when the offence committed and also submits that the victim who is a

neighbour of the suspect, used to visit the suspect's house very often. The day

in question the victim visited the house of the accused and at that time the

suspect had requested the victim to make an egg for him and thereafter while

she was making the egg he had raped this girl. Counsel submits that both the

offences referred to in the indictment are interwoven and therefore if the court

can make the said two orders to run concurrently that will meet the ends of

justice.

3

Learned Senior State Counsel appearing for the Attorney General

has no objection considering the age of the accused when committed the

offence. We agree with the view taken up by the Learned Senior State Counsel

and therefore make order that the sentences imposed on Count No: 1 and 2 to

run concurrent. However the fine already imposed by the High Court Judge

and the compensation ordered, remain unchanged. The counsel for the

Accused-Appellant further requests to implement the said sentence from the

date on which the sentence was pronounced on the accused i.e. with effect

from 16.12.2009. We make order to operate the sentence with effect from

16.12.2009, subject to the above variation the appeal is dismissed.

H.C.J. Madawala, J. I agree.

Vkgj-

PRESIDNET OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL.

)

!l