==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

Orders in the nature of Writs of

Certiorari, Prohibition and Mandamus

under Article 140 of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Sinnaiha Kamalakumar

No 838/11 Aluthmawatha Road

Colombo 15.

CA (Writ) App. No. 532/2024

PETITIONER

Vs.

1. Director General of Customs.

2. Deputy Director of Customs Central Disposal Directorate. 3. Senior Deputy Director of Customs

Central Disposal Directorate. 4. Additional Director General of Customs

Enforcement, Sri Lanka Customs. 5. Chief Accountant

Sri Lanka Customs.

2

All of Them Customs House, No. 40 Main Street, Colombo 1. 6. Secretary To the Treasury.

7. Director General of Public Finance.

All of Them Ministry of Finance, Economic Stabilization And National Policies The Secretariate, Colombo 01. 8. Honourable Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department, Hulfsdorp, Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

Before: Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Counsel:

Harishke Samaranayake for the Petitioner.

Vikum de Abrew, ASG with Ishara Madarasinghe, SC for the Respondents.

Argued on: 15.12.2025

Delivered on: 29.01.2026

3

Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.,

Judgement

Introduction

The Petitioner by this Application challenges the higher rate of Value Added Tax (VAT) charged

on the final sale price of items auctioned by way of a tender on the basis that the items were

imported to Sri Lanka. The said sale was conducted by the 2nd Respondent on behalf of the Sri

Lanka Customs (hereinafter referred to as “the Customs”).

The Petitioner is a businessman engaged inter alia in the business of purchasing various items at

auctions held by the Sri Lanka Customs and selling the same in turn and making a profit. According

to him, he has successfully participated in more than 500 such business transactions with the

Customs. The 1st Respondent is the Director General of the Customs, while the 2nd Respondent is

the Deputy Director of Customs who is in-charge of the Commodity Disposal Directorate; the 3rd

Respondent is assisting the 2nd Respondent. The 4th Respondent is the Additional Director General

of Customs. The 5th Respondent is the Officer-in-charge of the Finance of Customs while the 6th

and 7th Respondents are responsible for the financial and economic management of the Republic

of Sri Lanka. The 8th Respondent is the Honourable Attorney General.

When the Petitioner had successfully bid at a tender sale submitted on the 29.06.2024 to purchase

66 gold biscuits (yellow) which had been confiscated by the Customs, and the same was awarded

to him. According to the Petitioner, since the Customs has charged a higher VAT in addition to

the other taxes, the Petitioner challenges the same in this Application.

After issuance of formal notice, the Respondents have filed their respective Objections. It is their

position that the Petitioner is liable to pay higher rate of VAT as the items purchased at the tender

by the Petitioner is not exempted from the VAT, on the basis of locally produced goods, since the

4

items had been imported to Sri Lanka. Further it is the position of the Respondents that, anomaly

created under the earlier regulations were corrected by the document marked 1R2. Accordingly,

new rate of VAT was charged. As such, sought a dismissal.

This was argued before me on 15.12.2025; hence, this judgement.

The following arguments were advanced by the counsel at the hearing.

Arguments

The first contention of Mr. Samaranayake, Counsel for the Petitioner, is that the goods (gold) sold

by Sri Lanka Customs cannot be considered or categorized as imported goods, as the Petitioner is

not responsible for the importation, and the Petitioner has merely purchased some forfeited goods.

Therefore, once the forfeiture is completed, the goods cannot be considered as imported goods for

the purpose of VAT.

The second contention is that, therefore, since the Respondents have charged an additional 10% of

the value of the goods on the basis that it is imported, in terms of Section 6 of the VAT Act, it is

wrong, and only Section 5 should be applied. However, when the Court questioned him as to how

any good or item is categorized as an imported item or a product of Sri Lanka, and whether it is

based on the country of origin or not, Mr. Samaranayake did not give a clear answer to that.

On the other hand, Ms. Madarasinghe S.C. argued that imported goods depend on the country of

origin of the product. Therefore, whether it is forfeited or not, if the country of origin is a different

country other than Sri Lanka, and if such a good has passed through border security, it becomes

imported goods for the purpose of the Value Added Tax Act, No. 14 of 2002 (hereinafter referred

to as the “VAT Act”).

5

Secondly, she argued that Section 2(1)(b) of the VAT Act applies to the situation; therefore, the

Petitioner is liable to pay the additional tax.

However, Mr. Samaranayake replied that, as the Respondents, in their Objections, annexed

document 1R2, the Cost, Insurance, and Freight (CIF) value of the goods cannot be added as goods

imported; therefore, Section 2 does not come into play in this situation.

Now I will deal with the factual matrix in detail since it is also common ground as some of the

facts are not disputed by the parties, and also for the purpose of avoiding repetition of the same.

Factual matrix

The Petitioner is a businessman who is engaged in business inter alia making bids on Customs’

seized items at auctions and tender sales. In fact, according to his own showing, he is a very

seasoned bidder who has purchased items at auction sales and tender sales at Customs. Among the

items that he has so purchased are gold items, perishable items, electronic items, ready-made

garments and vehicles. The Petitioner has asserted that he makes a profit out of the transactions on

resale of the same, after purchasing the same from the Customs.

According to the Petitioner, he had come across an advertisement for a tender sale, and the tenders

had to be submitted 28.06.2024 before 10.30 a.m. He has submitted his tender to purchase 66

pieces of yellow gold biscuits of 24 carats; the tender guideline is also marked and annexed to the

Petition as P1. Accordingly, he was a successful bidder for the said gold items and was awarded

the tender the same.

To submit the tender, he had to initially deposit Rs. 2,000,000/- (Two Million Rupees) for the

purpose of purchasing the said items that he had purchased at the tender sale. The sale price of the

said tender was Rs. 156,613,156/- (One Hundred and Fifty-Six Million Six Hundred and Thirteen

6

Thousand One Hundred and Fifty-Six Rupees) and in total he was required pay Rs. 187,622,560.89

(One Hundred and Eighty-Seven Million Six Hundred and Twenty-Two Thousand Five Hundred

and Sixty Rupees and Eighty-Nine Cents); a voucher had been issued to that effect as reflected in

P3. A tender award letter was also issued by the Customs as reflected in P4 marked and annexed

to the Petition.

However, he has found that in addition to the general Custom duties, he had to pay 19.8% as VAT

on the said items purchased. Accordingly, it is his complaint that the bid value is only Rs.

156,613,156/- plus 18% tax, which should amount to Rs. 184,803,524.08 (One Hundred and

Eighty-Four Million Eight Hundred and Three Thousand Five Hundred and Twenty-Four Rupees

and Eight Cents). However, the Customs has charged 19.8% tax including the VAT; therefore,

increasing the total to Rs. 187,622,560.89; thus, an additional charge of VAT of Rs. 2,819,036.81

(Two Million Eight Hundred Nineteen Thousand and Thirty-Six Rupees and Eighty-One Cents)

is claimed to have been charged.

As such, the Petitioner has appealed to the 1st Respondent; however, it was turned down by

document marked as P7 annexed to the Petition, and consequently, a portion of his deposit was

also forfeited as marked and annexed to the Petition as P6. The reasons given in P6 is that VAT

has to be paid in addition to the other Custom duties since the items purchased are not products of

Sri Lankan origin.

The Petitioner’s contention is that he is only liable to pay VAT at 18%, on the basis that he has not

imported the said gold biscuits, but he has purchased the same from the Customs, neither has the

Custom imported it on its own for the Petitioner to be liable to pay 19.8% VAT on the basis that

the items purchased by the Petitioner are imported goods. He relies on Sections 2 of the VAT Act.

7

It is the contention advanced on behalf of the Petitioner that once the goods cross the border

security and are sold, whether imported or smuggled into Sri Lanka by a smuggler, once such

goods are forfeited and sold at a Customs warehouse, they become local goods.

Further, his contention is that on the CIF value, neither Customs nor the Government can charge

any VAT, since the CIF value had already been incurred or paid by the smuggler.

However, on the other hand, it is the contention on behalf of the Respondents that, since there was

an anomaly with regard to the charge of VAT on goods sold at auction, hence the annexed

document marked 1R2 was issued, and further VAT was charged on the goods sold and purchased

by the Petitioner in the instant case as imported goods. Although the goods had been forfeited,

they had been imported by a smuggler without a license or against the regulations; therefore

forfeited at the border security by Sri Lanka Customs. Though the goods were sold at a warehouse,

the fact of importation cannot be denied, since the CIF value is already attributable.

Higher VAT on imported goods

The learned State Counsel for and on behalf of the Respondents, in support of her submissions,

heavily relies on the Import and Export Control Act of 1969, where a distinction is clearly drawn

between imported goods and locally manufactured goods. Although there is no such distinction in

other statutory provisions, since the said provisions apply to the case in hand because the

importation has in fact taken place, whether viewed from the perspective of the Respondents,

Customs, or the Petitioner, the fact of importation cannot be removed or denied from the goods,

as the country of origin is not Sri Lanka.

8

In the course of oral arguments, when I posed the question to the learned Counsel for the Petitioner,

no particular answer was given as to how it should be ascertained whether goods are locally

manufactured or imported, whether it depends on the country of origin. Admittedly, the 66 gold

biscuits purchased by the Petitioner at the tender of sale were forfeited items, which had been

imported or smuggled into Sri Lanka by a third party and thereafter forfeited by Customs.

Therefore, the goods belong to the State and had crossed the border security.

Though the goods were sold at a warehouse within the territory of Sri Lanka, the fact that the

country of origin is not Sri Lanka is very clear. In fact, the country of origin should have been

mentioned in the commercial invoice, if available.

As contention was advanced on behalf of the Respondent that Regulation 1R2 was issued to correct

the anomaly created by the provisions of 1R1, and that such anomaly was corrected by 1R2 in

terms of the Imports and Exports (Control) Act, 1969, the distinction is clearly drawn between

goods originating from another country and those produced in Sri Lanka. Value Added Tax is

imposed on imported items for several reasons, one being to discourage importation and to

encourage local production. However, as far as gold biscuits are concerned, since no gold is

produced in Sri Lanka at present, the importation of gold is discouraged. Therefore, whether it is

brought into Sri Lanka with a licence or without a licence, a higher rate of tax is imposed.

Section 6 of the Value Added Tax Act, No. 14 of 2002 reads as thus;

“6. (1) The value of goods imported, other than the goods as prescribed by regulation shall

be the aggregate of –

(a) the value of the goods determined for the purpose of custom duty increased by

ten per centum; and

9

(b) the amount of any custom duty payable in respect of such goods with the

addition of any surcharge, cess, any Port and Airport Development Levy payable

under the Finance Act, No. 11 of 2002, and any excise duty payable under the

Excise (Special Provisions) Act, No. 13 of 1989 on such goods.

(2) The Minister may, from time to time, prescribe by regulation, the manner by which the

value of goods specified in the regulation made under subsection (1) is to be determined.

Any such regulation made by the Minister shall be approved by the Cabinet of Ministers

and published in the Gazette. Such regulation shall be placed before the Parliament for

approval and shall be effective only upon it being approved by the Parliament.”

In the instant case, it is the tax to be imposed according to law on the sale of the product which is

already confiscated and remains the property of the Government. Even if that is so, the distinction

still remains, as it is an imported good, particularly as it has crossed the borders of the country,

despite it being smuggled or brought with a licence. Therefore, it is my view that since the law has

not been changed, Parliament, in its wisdom, has enacted it in the manner it stands, and I am bound

to follow it. It is also my view that imported goods have a different connotation from local products.

Accordingly, the Petitioner is liable to pay the higher VAT.

However, since the Petitioner had delayed in collecting the items by paying the entirety of the

amount of VAT charged by the Customs; nevertheless, the latter on a bank guarantee recovered

all the items from Customs. However, as a part of the initial deposit was forfeited, according to

law is justifiable since it is Government policy, whether one likes it or not; hence, I see no reason

to interfere.

10

Therefore, the Petitioner’s argument on the basis that once goods cross the border security, they

become local goods cannot be sustained. Since the country of origin is not Sri Lanka, the goods

sold at the auction and purchased by the Petitioner must be treated as imported goods, and on that

basis VAT at the higher rate was correctly charged, accordingly the 19.8% of the VAT.

Conclusion

For the reasons adumbrated above, the higher rate of 19.8% of VAT charged on goods sold by the

2nd Respondent on behalf of the Government and purchased by the Petitioner is in accordance with

the rules contained in 1R2, read with Section 6 of the Value Added Tax Act, No. 14 of 2002 (as

amended). Therefore, I see no reason to interfere with the same, and accordingly, dismiss this

Application, but without costs as the Petitioner has already incurred sufficient costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL