IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Pallaniappan Mohammed Irfan,

No. 224, Badowita 3rd Stage,

Mount Lavinia.

Petitioner

CASE NO: CA/WRIT/291/2018

Vs.

1. National Housing Development

Authority,

No. 34, Sir Chitampalam A.

Gardiner Mawatha,

Colombo 02.

2. L. S. Palansuriya,

Chairman,

National Housing Development

Authority.

3. Karunaratne Athukorala,

Vice Chairman,

National Housing Development

Authority.

4. K. G. Wickrama,

Working Director,

National Housing Development

Authority.

2

5. Shantha Jayawardhana,

Board Member,

National Housing Development

Authority.

6. R. A. Choolananda,

Board Member,

National Housing Development

Authority.

7. Amal Wickramathunga,

Board Member,

National Housing Development

Authority.

8. N. M. D. Nawarathne,

Board Member,

National Housing Development

Authority.

Above 2 to 8, all c/o

National Housing Development

Authority,

No. 34, Sir Chitampalam A.

Gardiner Mawatha,

Colombo 2.

9. A. Sendil Nathan

10. S. Suresh

11. A. L. Tiron

12. S. Pradeep Kumara

13. M. Abraham Lingan

14. D. Karthik

3

15. M. Ilangowan

16. T. Ranjinikantha

17. K. Welayudan

18. V. Jeewan

19. K. Selwaraj

20. D. Suresh

21. M. Sandanarajah

22. P. Selvanathan

23. Raj Gopal Krishna Kumar

24. R. Deepan

25. A. Amurdhalingam

26. S. Selvanayagam

27. Perumal Punniyamoorthi

28. Arumugam Nithyananthan

29. Nallu Balakrishnan

30. Rajalingam Mahendran

31. Ponniah Ramasamy

Above 9 to 30, all c/o

Badowita Sri Sakthi Karumari

Amman Temple,

No. 32/74B, 3rd Stage, Badowita,

Mount Lavinia.

Respondents

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J.

Counsel: Boopathy Kahathuduwa for the Petitioner.

Maithree Amarasinghe, S.C., for the 1st-8th

Respondents.

4

Lasitha Kanuwanaarachchi with Jessica

Mathiasz for the 9th, 11th, 16th, 23rd, 25th-31st

Respondents.

Argued on: 02.06.2020

Decided on: 23.06.2020

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The Petitioner filed this application against the National Housing

Development Authority (NHDA) and the members of the Board of

Trustees of the Siva Shakthi Karumari Amman Kovil, seeking (a)

to quash by certiorari the Lease Agreement marked P7 entered

into by the NHDA with the Kovil; (b) to compel the NHDA by

mandamus to evict illegal occupiers from Lot 353 of the Plan

marked P3A; and (c) to compel the NHDA by mandamus to

demolish any structure in Lot 353.

The Badowita housing scheme was initiated as a low-income

housing scheme to accommodate those who were displaced in

the implementation of the Greater Colombo Flood Control and

Canal Development project. The Petitioner is a beneficiary of the

project and received Lot 360 in the said Plan from the NHDA by

deed marked P2B. On to the right of Lot 360 lies Lot 354, which

is a vacant strip of land, possibly demarcated for sewerage

facilities, ventilation etc. Next to Lot 354 is Lot 353, which has

been given by the NHDA on a long-term lease to the Siva

Shakthi Karumari Amman Kovil for religious activities. This

Kovil, as seen from 1R4 and 1R5, is registered as a Hindu

5

Religious Temple with the Department of Hindu Religious and

Cultural Affairs. There are several other documents, including

1R3(a), 1R3(b), R1(a), R3(i)-(iv), R4, R10, R11, R12, R16, R17,

R20(i) and (ii), R21(i) and (ii) which tend to give credence to this

Kovil as a bona fide Hindu Religious Temple.

Learned Counsel for the Petitioner submits the leasing of Lot

353 to the Kovil is unreasonable, arbitrary, malicious, illegal and

ultra vires on four grounds.

The first argument is, given its stated objectives, the NHDA can

only dispose of lands for housing development and not for

religious purposes as was done in this case.

Section 4 of the NHDA Act, No.17 of 1979, as amended, sets out

the objectives of the Authority.

The objects of the Authority shall be

(a) to directly engage itself in the construction of flats,

houses and other living accommodation or buildings;

(b) to formulate schemes to establish housing development

projects in order to alleviate the housing shortage;

(c) to cause the clearance of slum and shanty areas and the

re-development of such areas;

(d) to promote housing development;

(e) to develop or re-develop land for the carrying out of any

of the objects of the Authority;

(f) to make land available to any person for housing

development;

6

(g) to provide financial or other assistance to persons

engaged in any activity which is similar to any of the

objects of the Authority;

(h) to conduct, promote and co-ordinate activities in relation

to all aspects of housing development; and

(i) to do all such other acts as may be necessary or

conducive to the attainment of any or all of the above

objects.

The phrase housing development cannot be given a narrow

interpretation to mean only the construction of houses. Learned

Counsel for the Petitioner does not contend the NHDA cannot

undertake or initiate housing schemes such as the Badowita

housing scheme. Housing development includes the provision of

infrastructure facilities and related amenities to the housing

units in a scheme. Learned Counsel for the Board of Trustees of

the Kovil draws the attention of the Court to section 5(e) of the

Act, which says the Authority shall have power to establish new

housing estates and to encourage self-help housing projects and

the provision of amenities for the inhabitants of such estates or

projects including transport and other services.

There is no definition given in the Act for amenities in section

5(e). But the National Housing Policy, revised in January 2017,1

states the provision of public amenities, including community

facilities which can be taken to encompass religious facilities

is part of the NHDAs role in regulating and managing housing

developments. Page 43 of the said Policy, under the sub-heading

Planning and Management, states as follows:

1 http://www.nhda.lk/index.php/en/about-usa/housing-policy.

7

Land use for private or public housing developments are

also regulated as to optimizing of densities, provision of

infrastructure, environmental services such as waste

disposal, drainage, sewerage, etc. and provision of public

amenities such as playgrounds, community facilities, public

spaces etc. At the same time, access to education and

health facilities is also insisted on. The object is to ensure

that the management and use of land fulfills the

expectations of citizens without compromising on the urban

environment of the cities, especially due to transport-related

activities.

There is no necessity to go further, as the Plan marked P3A

relied upon by the Petitioner himself goes to show several lots in

the Plan have been reserved for common amenities or as

common areas for the greater benefit of inhabitants of the

housing scheme for instance, Lot 24 for a Church, Lot 217 for

a Bo tree and possibly a Buddhist shrine, Lot 177 for a

playground, Lots 117 and 372 for septic tanks. Some other

larger lots have been left vacant, without an indication in the

Plan of their purpose. Lot 353, the disputed lot, is one such lot.

As the Petitioner received Lot 360 shown in the Plan, he must

also have got a copy of the Plan along with his deed. This means

he was aware there were provisions for common amenities in the

scheme, including for different religious purposes. It is arguable

that selective, religion-based reservations on the part of the

NHDA may not be in the best interests of communal harmony.

But when certain lots have been reserved for other religions,

ruling out the request of followers of Hinduism may be

discriminatory. I cannot accept the argument that the NHDA

8

cannot lease out Lot 353 to the Kovil to conduct religious

activities on the contention that to do so is obnoxious to the

objectives of the NHDA.

The second argument of learned Counsel for the Petitioner is

due process has not been followed in this instance. Learned

Counsel referring to section 8(1) of the Act, which requires the

Ministers approval for a lease to be granted, states that in terms

of paragraph 13 of the statement of objections of the NHDA,

such approval has not been obtained prior to the execution of

the Lease Agreement. Counsel took up this position for the first

time at the argument and therefore the NHDA was unable to

tender proof of the approval, if any, at that stage. However, as

learned Counsel for the Board of Trustees of the Kovil points

out, the documents marked 1R3(a) and (b), referred to in the

said paragraph 13, make it clear Cabinet approval has been

given to lease Lot 353 to the Board of Trustees of the Kovil.

Hence this argument fails.

According to the Lease Agreement, the lessor is the NHDA and

the lessee is the Board of Trustees of the Siva Shakthi Karumari

Amman Kovil. As the third argument, Counsel for the Petitioner

submits the lessee being neither a natural nor legal person

could not have entered into a Lease Agreement with the NHDA,

and therefore, the said Agreement is void ab initio. Counsel

contends in such circumstances there is no legally enforceable

agreement in the eyes of the law. It is the submission of

Counsel for the Petitioner that the Lease Agreement should

have been entered into by the trustees personally on behalf of

the Siva Shakthi Karumari Amman Kovil.

9

The main relief sought by the Petitioner is to quash the Lease

Agreement by certiorari. Learned State Counsel for the NHDA is

technically correct when she states what shall be prayed for is

not to quash the Lease Agreement per se but the decision of the

NHDA to lease the land to the Board of Trustees of the Kovil,

which has not been challenged in these proceedings. The Lease

Agreement, which is a by-product of the decision of the NHDA to

lease the land, is not the central issue but a peripheral one.

The question whether there is a legally enforceable Agreement or

not is a matter of concern to the parties to the Lease Agreement,

not to any others. If it is legally unenforceable, one party to the

Agreement is bound to suffer. But there is no such dispute

between the two parties to the Lease Agreement. Hence, the

said issue raised on behalf of the Petitioner will not address the

main grievance of the Petitioner, i.e. the decision of the NHDA to

give Lot 353 to the Kovil on a long lease in furtherance of the

latters religious activities.

As learned Counsel for the Board of Trustees of the Kovil points

out, if the Court holds the Lease Agreement is void for the

reason all the trustees have not signed, the trustees can enter

into a fresh Lease Agreement with the NHDA. The NHDA, I

suppose, is ready to do so, if required. Then it is clear the

answer to this issue is not crucial but maybe academic.

This is a writ application and writ is a discretionary relief. The

role of the writ Court is different to that of the District Court. If

there is an issue regarding the establishment of a charitable

trust, it shall be decided by the District Court under the Trusts

10

Ordinance. Whether the Lease Agreement is legally enforceable

shall also be decided by the District Court, predominantly under

the principles of the law of contract. The writ Court is not the

proper forum to canvass these matters.

Having said so, let me state the following. As I said before, the

contention of Counsel for the Petitioner is the Lease Agreement

ought to have been entered into between the NHDA and the

trustees on behalf of the Kovil.

According to R1, the Board of Trustees of the Kovil comprises 11

trustees. According to page 1 of the Lease Agreement R2, the

lessee is the Board of Trustees of Siva Shakthi Karumari Amman

Kovil. Page 3 of the Lease Agreement reveals two trustees,

namely the President and the Secretary of the Board of Trustees,

have signed the Lease Agreement for the lessee. By the

corresponding affidavit dated 04.04.2019, tendered with the

statement of objections of the Respondent trustees, it is clear

the said two trustees signed the Lease Agreement on behalf of all

the trustees. In my view, in the facts and circumstances of this

case, the requirement of the Lease Agreement being signed by all

the trustees is satisfied.

Hence I am not inclined to agree with that submission.

The last argument of Counsel for the Petitioner is, permission to

construct a Kovil in the middle of a housing scheme would cause

nuisance to the other households and degrade the quality of life

in the surrounding area. Perhaps the Petitioner is referring to

the likely sound of religious activities taking place in the Kovil.

Occasional sound emanating from a place of worship is common

11

to any religion. I am not impressed by this argument. One

might argue instead that providing for such facilities enhances

the quality of life.

The application of the Petitioner is dismissed without costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal