Page 1 of 7

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA.

In the matter of an Application for Revision

and or Restitutio in Integrum to set aside the

ex parte Judgment and decree of divorce

entered in case No:16279/D in District Court of

Colombo in terms of Article 138(1) of the

Constitution of the said Republic.

CA/RI/14/2018

DC of Colombo

Case No: 16279/D Kurukulasooriya Pearl Benita Perera

No: 368/91, Ganemulla Road,

Hapugoda, Kandana.

Petitioner

Vs.

Horanakkara Hemasinghelage Manel Ashoka,

No: 94/01,

Pulinathalarama Road, Magammana,

Ragama

Respondent

Before : D.N. Samarakoon, J.

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

Counsel : Newille Abeyratne, PC with Kaushalya Abeyratne Dias for the

Petitioner

Pathum Navaratne Bandara for the Respondent

Page 2 of 7

Written 19.07.2022 (by the Petitioner)

Submissions : 20.05.2020 (by the Respondent)

On

Argued On : 25.05.2022

Decided On : 05.08.2022

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

The Petitioner, by Petition dated 01st August 2018, is seeking to invoke this Courts

restitutionary jurisdiction in terms of Article 138 of the Constitution, to set aside the ex

parte judgment of the District Court of Colombo in Case No. 16279/D, the decree nisi dated

7th December 1993, and the decree absolute dated 30th June 1994 of the same.

The question before this Court is whether summons had been duly served on the

Petitioner in the Divorce case filed by her late husband. If it is found that summons had

not been duly served, the consequence of such a failure which goes to the root of the

jurisdiction of the Court will warrant this Court having to set aside the entire proceedings

of the divorce case.

The Petitioner married the late Francis Luxshman Perera on the 06th of October

1980. On 07th January 1993, the late Francis Luxshman Perera presented a plaint to the

District Court of Colombo praying for his marriage to be dissolved on the ground of

adultery and/or malicious desertion and seeking custody of their three children.

Subsequent to the decree nisi being made absolute, the late Francis Luxshman Perera

married the Respondent on the 03rd of August 1995. The late Francis Luxshman Perera

passed away on 08th February 2016. The clash over succession to his estate commenced

when the Petitioner filed a testamentary action in the District Court of Negombo on 05th

May 2016 to administer the intestate estate of the deceased and the Respondent filed a

testamentary action in the District Court of Gampaha on 07th June 2016 to obtain probate

of the Last Will of the said Francis Luxshman Perera and duly administer the estate as

per the provisions of his Last Will.

Page 3 of 7

It must be noted that the inquiry on the creation and validity of the Last Will,

which was purportedly made on the 22nd of January 2016, is ongoing in the District Court

of Gampaha. Thus, it must be stressed that this judgment does not make any finding or

determination as to the validity of the Last Will and Testament of the deceased. This

judgment is solely concerned with determining the lawfulness of the divorce proceedings

between the Petitioner and her late husband.

The Petitioner contends that their divorce was not lawful because summons had

not been duly served on her. This is because as evidenced by her passport she had been in

the United Arab Emirates from 28th May 1993 to September 1996 (marked P7). The

Petitioner alleges that her late husband gave false information in the divorce proceedings

and obtained an ex parte judgment and divorce decree.

It is seen that the original address of the Petitioner in the Divorce plaint is No.

175, Dippitigoda Road, Kelaniya. The Fiscal Report states that the Petitioner was not to

be found at that address. By a motion dated 3rd August 1993 Court was informed by her

late husbands Attorney that the Petitioner was residing at A5/F1, Bloemendhal Road,

Kotahena, Colombo 13. The Petitioner denies the same and states that she was residing

at No. 94/1 Pulinathalarama Road, Magammana, Ragama before she left abroad and that

her late husband had misled the court by giving wrong addresses.

However, the Fiscal Report states that summons had been served to the Petitioner

on the 23rd of August 1993 and the decree nisi was served on 22nd March 1994, both during

the period in which the Petitioner was abroad.

His Lordship Sansoni C.J. in Siriwardena v. Jayasumana 59 NLR 400 found that

due service of summons on a party is an essential step. His Lordship quoted the following

dictum of Lord Greene M.R. in Craig v. Kanseen (1943) 1 AER 108:

Failure to serve process where service of process is required is a failure which goes

to the root of our conceptions of the proper procedure in litigation. Apart from proper ex

parte proceedings, the idea that an order can validly be made against a man who has no

intimation of any intention to apply for it is one which has never been adopted in England.

To say that an order of that kind is to be treated as a mere irregularity and not something

Page 4 of 7

which is affected by a fundamental vice, is an argument which, in my opinion, cannot be

sustained "

In Ittepana v. Hemawathie [1981] 1 SLR 476, his Lordship Sharvananda J. (as he

then was) famously held:

Failure to serve summons is a failure which goes to the root of the jurisdiction of

the Court to hear and determine the action against the defendant. It is only by service of

summons on the defendant that the Court gets jurisdiction over the defendant. If a

defendant is not served with summons or is otherwise notified of the proceedings against

him, judgment entered against him in those circumstances is a nullity. And when the

Court is made aware of this defect in its jurisdiction, the question of rescinding or

otherwise altering the judgment by the Court does not arise since the judgment concerned

is a nullity. Where there is no act, there can be no question of the power to revoke or

rescind. One cannot alter that which does not exist. The exercise of power to declare such

proceedings or judgment a nullity is in fact an original exercise of the power of the Court

and not an exercise of the power of revocation or alteration. The proceedings being void,

the person affected by them can apply to have them set aside ex debito justitiae in the

exercise of the inherent jurisdiction of the Court.

Abdul Majeed in his treatise A Commentary on Civil Procedure Code and Civil

Law in Sri Lanka (Volume 1 Revised Second Edition) at p. 337 states that:

The purpose of issuing and serving summons on the defendant is to give him

notice of the action filed against him and to call upon him to answer the plaint. Until the

summons is served on the defendant, the Court cannot exercise its jurisdiction on the

defendant. Until summons is served on the defendant he is not expected to know a

pending case against him. It is, therefore, imperative to serve summons on the defendant

in a case.

In Leelawathie v. Jayaneris [2001] 2 SLR 231 his Lordship Wigneswaran J. held:

Unless summons were served on them, all the consequences of default in

appearance would not apply to them. There is no question of implying or presuming that

the Defendants were aware of the case filed, since statutory provisions apply to service of

Page 5 of 7

summons and unless the summons are duly served the other statutory consequences for

non-appearance on serving of summons, would not apply to Defendants.

The question arises whether the Petitioner can invoke this Courts restitutionary

jurisdiction without having first applied to the District Court concerned to purge that

default?

In the instant action, had the Plaintiff been alive then invoking this Courts

restitutionary jurisdiction in the absence of an application to the District Court to set

aside the decree nisi and decree absolute would not be permitted.

This was discussed in Andradie v. Jayasekera Perera 1985 2 SLR 204. His

Lordship Siva Selliah J. held:

All these are questions of fact as is the question of fraud on which evidence will

appear necessary and the petitioner herself should be made available for cross-

examination and consequently the judge must make his findings on questions of fact

before this court can be invited on inferences and conduct to hold that there has been

fraud. I am also of the view on the long line of cases quoted by the learned counsel for

respondent that the practice has grown and almost hardened into a rule that where a

decree has been entered ex parte in the District Court and is sought to be set aside on any

ground, application must in the first instance be made to that very court and that it is

only where the finding of the District Court on such application is not consistent with

reason or the proper exercise of the judge's discretion or where he has misdirected himself

on the facts or law will this court grant extraordinary relief by way of Revision or

Restitutio in Integrum which are extraordinary remedies.

However, as the Plaintiff in the divorce action is now deceased the only method of

remedying this injustice is an application to this Court to exercise its restitutionary

jurisdiction.

Recently, his Lordship Samayawardhena J. in CA RI 12/2016 decided on

29.05.2019 on an analysis on the authorities held:

Page 6 of 7

The cases cited by the learned counsel for the respondent, including Andradie v.

Jayasekera Perera, to say that the petitioner shall first make the application in the

District Court divorce action itself to have the ex parte decree vacated, are inapplicable

and distinguishable, because in those cases, unlike in the instant case, the plaintiffs were

alive when the defendants straightaway came before this Court to get the ex parte decrees

vacated on fraud.

The Respondent has objected to this application on the ground that the Petitioner

had delayed in filing the instant action. The decree was made absolute on 30th June 1994.

We cannot accept this contention because when a fraud has been committed it

cannot be said that the Petitioner is guilty of laches in instituting an application.

In Biso Menika v. Cyril de Alwis [1982] 1 SLR 368, his Lordship Sharvananda J.

(as he then was) held:

When the Court has examined the record and is satisfied the Order complained

of is manifestly erroneous or without jurisdiction the Court would be loathe to allow the

mischief of the Order to continue and reject the application simply on the ground of delay,

unless there are very extraordinary reasons to justify such rejection. Where the authority

concerned has been acting altogether without basic jurisdiction, the Court may grant

relief in spite of the delay unless the conduct of the party shows that he has approbated

the usurpation of jurisdiction.

In Kusumawathie v. Wijesinghe [2001] 3 SLR 128 his Lordship Jayasinghe J. held:

Where a party appears before Court and complains that she has been wronged by

process of law this Court would not helplessly watch and allow the fraud practiced on that

party to be perpetuated. Restitutio - In - Integrum provides this Court the necessary

apparatus to step in and rectify any miscarriage or failure of justice. If this is not the case

then there is a serious vacuum in the law which can be made use of by designing

individuals as the Petitioner alleges has happened to her.

In view of the fact that the Petitioner was abroad during the relevant time, we hold

that the decree of divorce obtained by the Petitioners late husband by fraud without

summons being served on the Petitioner is a nullity.

Page 7 of 7

We are of the view that she is entitled to succeed in this application. The following

reliefs prayed for will be granted:

(a) Order dated 14th October 1993 fixing to hear the case ex-parte

(b) Ex-parte judgment and decree nisi dated 07th December 1993

(c) Decree absolute dated 30th June 1994

We make no order as to costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. N. SAMARAKOON, J.

I AGREE

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL