.. -IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

CA. MISC/ 03/2019

University Appeals Board No: UNIVOTEC/UBA 01/2018/01

In the matter of an appeal from the decision of the University Appeals Board in Appeal No. UNIVOTEC! UBA01/ 2018/01 under and in terms of section 37 of the University of Vocational Technology Act, No. 31 of 2008.

P.R.S.S. Wijaratna

No. 3/44,

Manimmulla,

Ambalangoda.

APPELLANT

-Vs-

1. University of Vocational Technology

No.lOO,

Kandawala,

Ratmalana.

2. Present Board of Governors of the University of

Vocational Technology

(i) Prof. G.LD. Wickramasinghe (President)

(ii) Mr. P. Raneperuma (member)

(iii) Mr. D.C. Dissanayake

(iv) Mr. LW.S. Kularatne

(v) Dr. D.D.D. Suraweera

(vi) Mr. C. J ayasooriya

(vii) Mrs. P.N.K Malalasekara

(viii) Dr. lionel Pinto

(ix) Mr. Shehan Senerviratne

(x) Mr. Rahula Senanayake

(xi) Mr. LR. Waidyaratne

(xii) Mr. S. Kulasinghe

(xiii) Mrs. Rifha Musthafa

(xiv) Mrs. T.K. Malwatta

(xv) Mr. S.GAR.S. Jayathilake

(xvi) Mr. Jayavilal Meegoda

(xvii) Mr. WAU. Gunawardena

(xviii)

(xix)

Mr. Chandrarathne Withanage

Representative of the Board Investments of Sri Lanka

RESPONDENTS

AND NOW BETWEEN

1. University of Vocational Technology

No.lOO,

Kandawala,

Ratmalana.

of

2. Present Board of Governors of the University of Vocational Technology

(i) Prof. G.LD. Wickramasinghe (President)

(ii) Mr. P. Raneperuma (member)

(iii) Mr. D.C. Dissanayake

(iv) Mr. LW.S. Kularatne

(v) Dr. D.D.D. Suraweera

(vi) Mr. c.Jayasooriya

(vii) Mrs. P.N.K Malalasekara

(viii) Dr. lionel Pinto

(ix) Mr. Shehan Senerviratne

(x) Mr. Rahula Senanayake

(xi) Mr. LR. Waidyaratne

(xii) Mr. S. Kulasinghe

(xiii) Mrs. Rifha Musthafa

(xiv) Mrs. T.K. Malwatta

(xv) Mr. S.GAR.S.Jayathilake

(xvi) Mr.Jayavilal Meegoda

(xvii) Mr. W.A.U. Gunawardena

(xviii) Mr. Chandrarathne Withanage

(xix) Representative of the Board of Investments of Sri Lanka

RESPONDENT -APPELLANTS

-Vs-

P.H.S.S. Wijaratna

No. 3/44,

Manimmulla,

Ambalangoda.

APPELLANT -RESPONDENT

AND --

1. Mr. Piyasena Wijesinghe University of Vocational Technology, No. 100, Kandawala, Ratmalana.

2. Mr. Sanath Weerakoon University of Vocational Technology, No. 100, Kandawala, Ratmalana.

BEFORE

COUNSEL

Decided on

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J. (PICA)

3. Mr. Rasanga Harischandra University of Vocational Technology, No. 100, Kandawala, Ratmalana. ADDED RESPONDENTS

A.H.M.D. Nawaz,J. (PICA)

&:

Sobhitha RajakarunaJ.

M. Sri Metta S.c. for the Respondent-Appellant.

Chandana Wijesuriya for the Appellant Respondent

30.11.2020

When this matter was taken up for argument along with CA Misc 05/2019 and CA Misc

06/2019 Mr. Chandana Wijesuriya, Counsel for the Appellant-Respondent (the

Respondent) raised a preliminary objection that the University of Vocational Technology

(the UNIVOTEC -the Appellant) cannot maintain this appeal, as there is no right of

appeal bestowed on it.

I have already dealt with this issue in a judgment delivered in both CA 05/2019 and CA

06/2019 in which the same objection was raised. I have overruled the objections and held

in the two judgments delivered in those cases to the effect that the UNIVOTEC enjoys

the right of appeal to have and maintain this appeal before this court. The reasoning that

I have adopted in the two judgments applies with equal force in this case as well.

However, the learned Counsel for the Appellant-Respondent took up an objection to the

maintainability of this appeal on another basis namely time bar. The objections of the

learned Counsel for the Respondent could be set out in this manner. The decision of the

University Appeals Board in this matter was read out in the well of the tribunal on

05.04.2019 and a copy of the decision was handed over to the Vice Chancellor and the

Director General of the University of Vocational Technology on 08.04.2019. In other

words, it was received by the Board of the University on 08.04.2019. However, the

lodgment of the instant appeal in the Court of Appel took place only on 24.04.2019. It was

thus argued that even if the University of Vocational Technology enjoys a right of appeal,

they had not come within the prescribed period of 14 days prescribed in section 37 of the

University of Vocational Technology Act, No 31 of 2008. Therefore it is this question of

time bar that remains to be answered by this court.

Mr. Chandana Wijesuriya, the learned Counsel for the Respondent pleaded for a rejection

of this appeal based on time bar. His contention was that the decision was read out in the

open by the University Appeals Board on 05.04.2019 and it was handed over subsequently

on 08.04.2019. Even if the Appellant had the right of appeal, the 14 day period allowed

by Section 37 of the University of Vocational Technology Act would expire on 21.04.2019,

which was a Sunday. But the petition of appeal was filed in the Court of Appeal on

24.04.2019 and it was out of time. This was the crux of the argument of the Counsel for

the Respondent on 23.07.2020.

Both Counsel were given time to file written submissions but an affidavit deposed to by

the Director General of the Appellant has been filed without having obtained the prior

permission of this Court. This deponent makes a valiant attempt by way of this affidavit

to proffer an explanation, rather belatedly, as to why she could not prefer the appeal on

time. In other words the delay in filing the appeal, which is admitted in the affidavit, is

sought to be explained by the deponent without having obtained the prior permission of

this Court, long after the pleadings had closed. The Petition of Appeal, although it is

dated 23rd April 2019, has been filed in this Court only on 24th April 2019 as the date stamp

indicates but the affidavit contradicts this fact by a self serving assertion in paragraph 11

of the affidavit that the appeal was filed on the 23rd April 2019.

Even legal advisers have to bear in mind that deponents cannot seek to introduce

explanations for their delay in a manner that is unauthorized and anticipate that this

Court should place reliance on such self serving affidavits however true such

explanations could be, long after the opportunity for offering a credible explanation had

long passed. The Petition of Appeal filed in this Court on 24th April 2019 does not contain

any explanation that has now found its way in the evidence sought to be introduced by

the unauthorized affidavit.

This Court only wanted to ascertain the exact date on which the reasons for the decision

of the University Appeals Board came to the knowledge of the Appellant, because the

Petition of Appeal speaks of 5th April 2019 as the date on which the reasons were

pronounced. The Petition of Appeal only speaks of the date of pronouncement of the

decision by the University Appeals Board and it is quite silent as to the date on which the

University came to know of the reasons. What this Court wanted to find out was the date

on which the University received the decision and reasons and in the guise of offering this

information an affidavit cannot be introduced, long after arguments had concluded, to

explain the delay in filing the appeal. If at all, the reason should have been proffered at the

first available opportunity namely the Petition of Appeal.

Section 37 of the University of Vocational Technology Act, No.31 of 2008 -the provision

that enables a person to appeal against the decision of the University Appeals Board

imposes a time limit of 14 days of the date of the decision, within which the appeal could

be preferred, goes as follows:-

"A person aggrieved by the decision of a University Appeals Board in respect of any appeal made under

paragraph (a) of subsection (1) of Section 16, many appeal against such decision to the Court of Appeal

within fourteen days of the date on which the decision and the reasons therefore were sent to that person

by registered post, under Section (4) of Section 36"

.,.

The pragmatic view I would take of Section 37 is that the period of 14 days has to be

computed from the date on which the Appellant acquired knowledge of the reasons for

the decision, notwithstanding the fact that the provision refers to the 14 day period to

begin from the date of posting of the decision and the reasons. I would hold that though

Section 37 speaks of a date on which the decision and reasons were sent, the pivotal

question is on which date the Appellant acquired the contents of the decision and the

reasons. It has to be noted that the Section does not fix the commencement date of the

appealable period from the date of pronouncement of the decision but rather from the

date of communication of the decision and reason. No doubt the section speaks of a

registered post as the mode but if an equally efficacious method or even a speedier method

is available, that method could be employed to communicate the decision and the reason.

In this case admittedly a document which is numbered Annex 03 and has been filed on

28th September 2020 conclusively establishes that the decision and reasons were handed

over to the Appellant University on 08.04.2019. This was the date of receipt of the

decision and reasons and it is axiomatic that the substantive right of appeal is facilitated

with the receipt of the decision and reasons on 08.04.2019.

In the circumstances I hold that the 14 day period prescribed in Section 37 would begin

from 09.04.2019 because by virtue of section 14 (a) of the Interpretation Ordinance the

date 08.04.2019 would have to be excluded. Whether the phraseology used is "within 14

days from" or "within 14 days of", the appealable period would commence to run after

08.04.2019.

Then Section 8 (1) of the Interpretation Ordinance would come into play since the

prescriptive period of 14 days is contained in a written law. Section 8 (1) is to the

follOwing effect:

"Where a limited time from any date or from the happening of any event is appointed or allowed by

any written law for the doing of any act or the taking of any proceeding in a court or office, and the

last day of the limited time is a day on which the court or office is closed, then the act or proceeding

shall be considered as done or taken in due time if it is done or taken on the next day thereafter on

which the court or office is open."

I find no provisions for excluding the two intervening Sundays in the period of 14 days

which commenced on 09.04.2019. If one computed the appealable period from 09.04.2019,

the 14 day period would expire on a Monday namely 22nd April 2019. There is no averment

in the Petition of Appeal that was received by the Court of Appeal to the effect that the

office of the Court of Appeal was closed on 22nd April 2019. I have observed in an anterior

part of this judgment that the Appellant has dated its Petition of Appeal on 23rd April

2019. There is no averment anywhere in the Petition of Appeal that the office of the

Registry of the Court of Appeal was closed on 23rd April 2019, which was in fact the lS'h

day from 09.04.2019. It is apparent from the date stamp on the Petition of Appeal that

the Petition of Appeal was not filed even on 23rd April 2019-the lS'h day. The date stamp

clearly indicates that that the appeal was filed only on the 16th day namely 24th April 2019.

Justice Mark Fernando went to the extent of stating in The Ceylon Brewery Ltd vs.Jax

Fernando, Proprietor, Maradana Wine Stores (2001) 1 Sri.LR 270

"It is settled law that provisions which go to jurisdiction must be strictly complied with".

Section 37 is jurisdictional in that it confers jurisdiction on the Court of Appeal to

entertain and hear an appeal provided the jurisdictional requirement of 14 days is

satisfied. When an essential step in regard to the exercise of the substantive right of

appeal is to be taken, the time limit is mandatory and I would therefore proceed to reject

the Petition of Appeal and dismiss the appeal.

Sobhitha Rajakaruna J.

I agree

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL