IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

. REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for under Article 138 of the Constitution of the Republic of Sri Lanka.

The Attorney General of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Complainant

Hettiarachchige Kaushali Perera

Court of Appeal Accused Case No. CA (PHC) APN 18/2017. Vs,

And Now Between

Hettiarachchige Kaushali Perera

High Court of Colombo

Case No. 615/2001. Vs,

Petitioner

The Attorney General of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Respondent Before : S. Thurairaja PC, J &

A.l. Shiran Gooneratne J

Counsel : Tenny Fernando Attorney-at-Law for the Appellant.

N.T. Wickramasekera sse for the Respondent.

Written Submissions : Petitioner - not filed.

Respondent- 01 st November 2018.

Argument on

Judgment on

: 19th October 2018.

: 14th November 2018.

******************

ORDER

s. Thurairaja, PC. J

The Accused -petitioner, Hettiarachchige Susantha Kaushali Perera alias singi

(Hereinafter sometimes referred to as the Petitioner) was indicted in the High Court

of Colombo by the honourable Attorney General for possession of 13.7 grams of

heroin (dicetyl morphine) which is punishable under Section 54 A (d) of the Poison,

Opium and Dangerous Drugs Act. After the trial the Appellant was found guilty and

sentenced to life imprisonment.

Initially she was remanded and granted bail. Indictment was served on the 2nd April

2002. Initially, she was appearing before the Court and subsequently absconded from

the Court appearance. The Police Narcotic Bureau (PNB), according to the evidence

made attempts to apprehend her but it was not successful because she had gone

abroad. It appears that she had travelled to Sri Lanka on few occasions for her

marriages and on the last occasion she was arrested at the airport. In the meantime

the inquiry was held under Section 241 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act and

the trial held in absentia. Anyhow she was represented by her Attorney-at-Law. After

a fully contested trial she was found guilty and sentenced to life imprisonment.

After she was apprehended at the airport she was produced before the High Court

and an inquiry was held under Section 241 (3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.

After the inquiry the Learned High Court Judge ordered by his order dated 25th

January 2016 refusing to re-open the case. Petitioner had filed a revision application

on the 2th February 2017 seeking to revise the order made under Case

1 1

1 I I 1 I

1

~ 1 I I ! j i I

1 I

No.1928/2004 dated 25th January 2016. Further she had sought an order to send this

case for are-trial.

The Senior State Counsel who is appearing for the Respondent takes up following

preliminary objections.

1) The Accused is guilty of contumacious conduct and as such is not entitled to

invoke revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal.

2) The delay of one year and one month in filing a revision.

3) No Exceptional circumstances averred in the petition.

It is observed by us in the caption the Counsel has cited Case No. HC Colombo:

615/2001. But in the prayer under 'b)' states as follows.

"Revise and set aside the order dated 25/07/2076 of the Learned High Court

Judge of Colombo, in the HC Colombo Case No. 7928/2004."

It appears either the Counsel is confused with the Case in which he submitting the

revision application or attempting to confuse the Court.

Considering the preliminary objections taken by the Counsel for the Respondent, the

Accused is guilty of contumacious conduct and as such is not entitled to invoke

revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal.

The Counsel submits that the revision is discretion and it cannot be claimed as a

right. In this case the Petitioner was properly represented by an Attorney-at-Law of

her choice. She was found guilty on the 19/03/2008 and sentenced to Life

Imprisonment and there is no appeal or revision filed. When she was arrested in 2015

she moved to re-open the case. The order was made 25th January 2016. She filed a

revision application on 27/02/2017. Considering the time since the original

judgment, she had filed a revision application after 8 years 11 months and 8 days.

Considering the Section 241 (3) order, the order was delivered on the 25th January

2016. It has filed after 1 year 1 month and 2 days. We carefully perused the petition

and affidavit of the Petitioner.

~ i t

~ 1 I J l

I I I I

j I

J

She had not submitted any reasonable reason for this long delay.

In Sudarman De Silva vs. Attorney General 1986 (1) SLR 2009, it was held that,

"contumacious conduct on the part of the applicant is a reLevant consideration

when the exercise of discretion in his favour is invoLved. Our Courts have

proceeded on the principLe that a person who by his contumacious conduct

pLaced himseLf beyond the reach of the Law treating the originaL Courts and

their authority with contempt shouLd not be allowed to invoke the revisionary

jurisdiction of the appellate courts, particuLarLy the Court of Appeal. "

In the Case of Rajapakse vs. The State (2001) 2 SLR 161 it was held that,

"the Accused did not give any reasons for his absence from the Court and it was

onLy then that the TriaL Judge had proceeded to enforce the sentence imposed

on him on 22.07.7998 to be operative from 2.9.7999. in terms of Section 247(3)

the accused person if he appears before court and satisfies court that his

absence at the triaL was bona fide, the Court shall set aside the

conviction/sentence/order and the triaL then wouLd be fixed de-novo. An

appLication in revision shouLd not be entertained save in exceptionaL

circumstances. When considering this issue court must necessariLy have regard

to the contumacious conduct of the accused in vioLating the baiL conditions and

thereafter his conduct in a manner to circumvent and subvert the process of the

Law and judiciaL instructions. In addition, the party shouLd come before court

without unreasonabLe deLay. "

In the Case of CA PHC APN 52/2013, it was held that,

"there is a deLay of 77 months in filing the revision application. The inordinate

and unexpLained deLay in seeking relief itseLf disentitLes the Petitioner to it.

AppLication Dismissed. "

~ i 1 1 t

1 I 1

t I I i

1 1 I I 1 1 I I

,1 1 I i I 1

1 '1 t I ! l I i \ 1

'1

~

In the case of Seylan Bank vs. Thangaveli (2004) 2 SLR 101 at 105, it was held

that,

"in this application in revision the petitioner seeks to set aside the orders dated

7.3.2002 and 10.07.2002 made by the Learned District Judge. The petitioner has

filed this application on 77.7.2003. it appears that there is a delay of one year

and four months in respect of the order dated 7.3.2002 and a delay of seven

months from the order dated 10.07.2003. The petitioner has not explained the

delay. Unexplained and unreasonable delay in seeking relief by way of revision,

which is a discretionary remedy, is a factor which will disentitle the petitioner to

it. An application for judicial review should be made promptly unless there are

good reasons for the delay. The failure on the part of the petitioner to explain

the delay satisfactorily is by itself fatal to the application. "

Camillus Ignatious vs. OIC Uhana Police Station (Rev) CA 907/89, M.C. Ampara

2587. It was held

"that a mere delay of 4 months in filing a revision application was fatal to the

prosecution of the Revision application"

In the case of Opatha Mudiyanselage Nimal Perera vs AG rCA (Rev) 532/97-

Kandy HC 1239/92],

"these matters must be considered in limine before the court decides to hear

petitioner on the merit of his application before he could pass the gateway to

relief his aforesaid contumacious conduct and his unreasonable and undue

delay in filing application must be considered and determination made upon

these matters before he is heard on the merit of the application."

In the case of Attorney General vs. Kunchihambu [46 NLR 401] it was held that,

I i

~ ] \ I I

j

1 I I

~ I I I 1 ,j i 1 I I I

"the sentence was passed in February, 1945 and this application was made on

May 25, 1945 and now it is the end of July. In view of the delay that has

occurred I do not think I ought to exercise the discretion vested in me by Section

357(1) of the Criminal Procedure Code."

Revisionary Jurisdiction is a discretionary remedy vest with the Court, if anyone

invoking the said jurisdiction should come with clean hands and give reasons why he

is doing so. Time and again this Court had held that, discretionary jurisdiction is

jealously guarded and used only in deserving cases. Considering the facts of this case

especially conduct of the petitioner, we do not see that the Petitioner is entitled to

invoke the revisionary jurisdiction. Therefore we uphold the objections taken by the

Senior State Counsel.

In the case of Attorney General v Gunawardena (1996) 2 SLR 149 it was held that,

the

"Revision, like an appeal, is directed towards the correction of errors. But it is

supervisory in nature and its object is the due administration of justice and not,

primarily or solely, the relieving of grievances of a party."

In the case of Caderamanpulle vs. Ceylon paper sacks Ltd (2001) 3 SLR 112, It was

held that,

"the existence of exceptional circumstances is a precondition for the exercise of

the powers of the revision"

In the case of Dharmaratne and another vs. Palm paradise Cabanas Ltd and

others (2003) 3 SLR 25, it was held that by Amaratunga J,

"thus the existence of exceptional circumstances is the process of by which the

Court selects the case in respect of which this extra ordinary method of

rectification should be adopted."

f J I I j 1 1 I I 1 I I

I

1 1

In case of Soysa vs Silva and others (2000) 2 SLR 235, it was held that,

"the power given to Superior Court by way of revision wide enough to give it the

right to revise any order made by an original Court its object is the due

administration of justice and the correction of errors sometimes committed by

the Court itself in order to avoid miscarriage ofjustice. "

In Mariam Beebee vs. Seyad Mohamed (1965) 68 NLR 36, it was held that,

"the power of revision is an extraordinary power which is quite independent of

and distinct from the appeLLate jurisdiction of this Court. Its object is the due

administration of justice and the correction of errors, sometimes committed by

this Court itself, in order to avoid miscarriage of justice. It is exercised in some

cases by a judge of his own motion when an aggrieved person who may not be

a party to the action brings to his notice the fact that that unless the power is

exercised injustice will result."

In Bank of Ceylon vs. Kaleel and others (2004) 1 SLR 284, it was held that,

"to exercise revisionary jurisdiction the order chaLLenged must have occasioned a

failure ofjustice and be manifestly erroneous which is beyond an error or defect

or irregularity that an ordinary person would instantly react to it... the order

complained of is of such a nature which would have shocked the conscience of

the Court."

It is well established requirement that the Petitioner should aware about exceptional

circumstances, in her petition. If not, that alone will be sufficient to reject, an

application for revision. Considering the circumstances of this case, that the

Petitioner had not averred exceptional circumstances adequately. Therefore the

revision application fails.

Eventhough, the preliminary objections taken by the Senior State Counsel were

accepted. We perused the trial proceedings and the judgment; we find that there was

a proper trial held against the Petitioner. Considering the quantity of Heroin, in the

f

J I .

light of the relevant law, Petitioner was given the minimum punishment. Therefore

we do not find any reason to interfere with the conviction and the sentence.

Preliminary objections are upheld and the Petition is rejected. No order for costs.

Petition Refused.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL