Page 1 of 15

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of

section 331 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No- 15 of 1979.

Court of Appeal No: Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

CA/HCC/0002/21 COMPLAINANT

Vs.

High Court of Embilipitiya Weerappulige Upul Wijesinghe

Case No: HC/98/2016 ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

Weerappulige Upul Wijesinghe

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

Page 2 of 15

Before : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

: P. Kumararatnam, J.

Counsel : Amila Palliyage with Buddhika Serasinghe,

Sandeepani Wijesooriya, S. Udugampola, and J. de

Silva for the Accused Appellant

: Anoopa de Silva, DSG for the Respondent

Argued on : 22-09-2023

Written Submissions : 18-02-2022 (By the Accused-Appellant)

: 29-04-2022 (By the Respondent)

Decided on : 23-01-2024

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

The accused-appellant (hereinafter referred to as the appellant) was indicted

before the High Court of Embilipitiya for having committed the following offences.

1. That he committed the offence of kidnapping of a minor on 26-06-2014

at a place called Batahenkanda, Kiramawaththa within the jurisdiction

of the High Court of Embilipitiya, and thereby committed an offence

punishable in terms of section 354 of the Penal Code.

2. At the same time and at the same transaction, he committed the offence

of grave sexual abuse on the earlier mentioned minor by having

intercrural sex with her, and thereby committed an offence punishable

in terms of section 365B(2)(b) of the Penal Code as amended by

Amendment Act No. 22 of 1995, 29 of 1998 and 16 of 2006.

After the commencement of the trial and at the conclusion of the evidence of PW-

01, who was the victim child, the prosecuting State Counsel has moved to amend

the 2nd count in the indictment against the appellant by deleting the words

Page 3 of 15

intercrural sex ( ) and by replacing it with the words placing his

penis on the vagina of the victim child ( ).

It appears that this amendment has been made based on the evidence of the

victim child. The learned High Court Judge who heard the matter has allowed

the application and after charging the appellant on the amended charge, the

learned Counsel for the appellant has been permitted to cross-examine the victim

child again, based on the amendment.

This means that the appellant has not been prejudiced under any circumstance

because of the amendment made to the 2nd count preferred against him.

After trial, the learned High Court Judge of Embilipitiya of her judgement dated

18-01-2021 has found the appellant guilty as charged. In the sentencing order,

after having considered the mitigatory circumstances pleaded on behalf of the

appellant and the facts and circumstances of the matter, the learned High Court

Judge has sentenced the appellant in the following manner.

1. On count 1- 2 years rigorous imprisonment, and a fine of Rs.10000/-.

In default of paying the fine, 3 months simple imprisonment.

2. On count 2- 10 years rigorous imprisonment, and a fine of Rs.10000/-

In default of paying the fine, 3 months simple imprisonment.

In addition to the above, the appellant was ordered to pay Rs.100000/- as

compensation to the victim child, and in default he was sentenced to 6 months

simple imprisonment.

Having considered the fact that he has no previous convictions, the rigorous

imprisonment period imposed on the two counts had been ordered to run

concurrently to each other.

Being aggrieved of the said conviction and the sentence, the appellant preferred

this appeal.

Page 4 of 15

The Facts in Brief

By the time, the victim female child gave evidence before the High Court as PW-

01, she had been a 14-year-old and studying at grade 09 of her school. It is clear

from her evidence that the alleged incident has occurred on 26-06-2014 while

she was studying at grade 5. She was 09 years of age at that time.

On the mentioned date, she has gone to her school as usual, and since a mother

of a teacher has expired, she had been taken to attend the funeral by the school

authorities. After coming back to the school, she has gone home with another

elder girl studying in the same school who lives near their house. When she

reached home, she has found that her mother and father are not at home. Her

brother and younger sister were also not there.

Assuming that the mother has gone for a bath, victim child has gone near their

clothes line to collect some clothes with the hope of going for a bath. Before she

could reach the clothes line, the appellant whom she referred to as Upul maama

who is a person living close to their house and a relative, has come and grabbed

the victim child. He has taken her to a cinnamon growth behind their house,

which she has referred to as the direction of Kurunda ( ). The

evidence led in this action clearly establishes that what she refers to as Kurunda

was the land behind their house planted with cinnamon, tea and other crops.

The evidence also establishes the fact that this land was a rocky terrain and the

cultivation had been in between the rocks where cultivation was possible.

According to the evidence of the victim, when she was carried away by the

appellant, she was still wearing her school uniform. After taking her behind their

house, the appellant has forced her to lie down, removed her panty, lifted the

school uniform, and had placed his penis on her vagina.

From the moment the victim child was forcibly taken, she has shouted and had

attempted to escape.

Page 5 of 15

The victim had stated in her evidence that the appellant placed his penis on her

vagina after getting on top of her, but he could not do anything else, because,

after hearing her cries, her mother came and shouted at him. According to the

victim's evidence, when her mother came there, the appellant has released the

grip he had on the victim and had run away. After the incident, the mother of

the child had taken her to the hospital where she has given a statement relating

to what happened to her.

In her evidence, she has stated that she came home after school at the usual

time where she used to come, and faced this situation. She has admitted that

their land was a rocky land and the place of the incident was also a place where

lots of rocks were around.

It has been suggested to her that because of the enmity the parents of the victim

child had with the family members of the appellant, she has concocted a false

story against him.

For matters of clarity, I would like to reproduce the questions and answers

provided by the victim child when this defence was suggested to her.

:

.

: .

.

:

.

: .

:

?

: .

Page 6 of 15

: ?

: .

: ?

: . .

The mother of the victim child (PW-02) has also given evidence in this trial. She

has testified that this incident happened on 26-06-2014 around 1.45 2.00 p.m.

However, at the same time, she has testified that while working as a tea plucker

in a land belonging to someone else, she received a call from the kindergarten

teacher of her younger daughter informing her that a mother of a school teacher

has expired and the children will be taken to attend the funeral, and if possible,

she should also come.

It had been her evidence that because of the necessity to attend the funeral she

came home earlier than unusual around 12.30 - 1.00 p.m. on that day, and

when she reached home, she saw the school bag and the shoes of her elder child,

namely the victim, in front of their house.

According to her, she usually comes home after school around 2.00 and 2.20

p.m. Because she saw the shoes and the bag of her child, this has prompted her

to call for her loud calling her Sudu Sudu. Since there was no response, she

has walked towards the back door of the house and seen the child crying and

running towards her. She has come and informed the witness that Upul maama

took her. The victim child has come towards her from the direction of the

cinnamon growth behind their house. When asked what happened, the child has

explained that the appellant took her away, lifted her clothes, spat on her vagina

and placed his penis on it.

Overwhelmed by emotion, she has run towards the direction where the child

came and has seen the appellant running away. She has attempted to contact

her husband over the phone and had later taken the child to Omalpe hospital.

Page 7 of 15

From there, the child has been taken to Embilipitiya hospital where the child

and the mother had made statements to the police in relation to the incident.

In giving evidence, the child had admitted her birth certificate marked as P-1.

The panty and the uniform worn by her has been marked as P-2 and P-3

respectively.

The Judicial Medical Officer (JMO) who examined the child after she was

admitted to the hospital has not observed any injuries on her body. However, he

has opined, based on the history given by the child, that such an incident cannot

be overruled. He has also stated that in a situation where the child is laid on a

rough surface, there can be abrasions on pressure points of the body if the child

attempted to escape or resisted such an incident.

It needs to be noted that the history given by the victim child to the doctor was

consistent with the childs evidence as to what happened to her. The police officer

who conducted the site inspection as to the place of the incident too has given

evidence in this matter and had confirmed the geography of the area as stated

by the witnesses.

At the conclusion of the prosecution evidence and when the appellant was called

upon for a defence, he has given evidence under oath. He has claimed that he

has nothing to do with this incident and police arrested him on the 28th and

assaulted him.

He has been subjected to lengthy cross-examination by the prosecution. A

contradiction in his evidence in the statement he made to the police in relation

to his whereabouts on the day of the incident has been marked as X-1 by the

prosecution.

The learned High Court Judge in her judgement has considered whether the

evidence of the victim child can be believed and whether her and her mothers

evidence corroborates each other.

Page 8 of 15

The learned High Court Judge has considered the evidence having drawn her

attention to the fact that no person can be expected to have a photographic

memory of an incident of this nature. She has well considered the probability

aspect as well, and has determined that the defence taken up by the appellant

has not created any doubt as to the prosecution case. On the basis that the

prosecution has proved both the charges against the appellant beyond

reasonable doubt, the appellant has been convicted and sentenced.

The Grounds of Appeal

At the hearing of this appeal, the learned Counsel for the appellant formulated

the following grounds of appeal for the consideration of the Court.

1. The learned High Court Judge has erred in law by failing to consider

the probability factor that favors the appellant.

2. The findings of the learned High Court Judge on material points

favorable to the appellant have been based on mere surmises and

conjectures not supported by evidence.

3. The learned High Court Judge has come to a wrong finding that the

medical evidence corroborates the version of the prosecution.

Consideration of the Grounds of Appeal

As the 1st and the 2nd grounds of appeal urged are interrelated, I will now proceed

to consider the said grounds together.

The learned Counsel for the appellant made submissions on the basis that if the

incident occurred on a rough surface as admitted by the witnesses in their

evidence, there should have been more injuries observed by the doctor who

examined the child, and that is a factor that should have been considered in

favour of the appellant.

Page 9 of 15

However, the learned High Court Judge, rather than looking at that probability

factor in favour of the appellant, has decided that in favour of the prosecution

by coming into various surmises and conjectures. It was his view that there was

no basis for the learned High Court Judge to come to such findings based on the

evidence led in this trial.

He submitted that, even the police evidence as to the observation made in

relation to the place of the incident has established the fact that an incident of

this nature cannot happen without any visible injuries to a victim.

It is correct to say that the victim child has received no injuries as established

by the medical evidence. The doctor has clearly opined an incident of this nature

can happen without visible injuries or marks. It is an admitted fact that the land

on which this incident has occurred is a land with a rocky terrain and a

cinnamon growth. The police officer who recorded his observations as to the

place of the crime has observed fallen cinnamon leaves in the place shown as

the place where the incident occurred.

As pointed out correctly by the learned Deputy Solicitor General (DSG), the

evidence of the victim child had been that the appellant carried her to the place

of the sexual assault and made her to lie down, removed her panty, lifted the

school uniform she was wearing and committed this sexual abuse act on her.

This clearly establishes the fact that although it may be a rough surface, it was

a surface laid with dead leaves. The evidence also shows that the assailant could

not complete his intended sexual assault in full. He has bolted from the place

after hearing the mother of the victim.

The victim childs evidence had been that the appellant managed to place his

penis on her vagina only once, and ran away upon hearing her mother calling

her. This establishes the fact that although the victim child has stated she

struggled to escape from him after she was laid down on the ground, the actions

of the appellant had taken place during a time period of may be few seconds.

Page 10 of 15

The possibility of receiving any bruises or abrasions as a result of her being

sexually assaulted on a rough surface as claimed on behalf of the appellant is

highly improbable given the facts and the circumstances.

I am in no position to agree that this is a factor that should have been considered

in favour of the appellant. I find that the learned High Court Judge at page 27

and 28 of the judgement (page 257 and 258 of the appeal brief) has well

considered this aspect in coming to her findings in that regard.

The learned High Court Judge has well considered the evidence of the victim

child and that of her mother who has come to the scene of the crime while it was

happening. According to the evidence of the victim child, it was only because of

the mothers arrival, the appellant ran away after releasing the grip he had on

her. The mothers evidence had been that when she was calling for the child, she

came running towards her from the direction of the cinnamon growth. When

asked what happened, the child has revealed what happened to her. The mother

has then seen the appellant running away. The evidence of both the witnesses

clearly establishes that all these events had occurred in quick succession, which

shows that the mother seeing the appellant running away from the scene of the

crime is highly probable.

The learned High Court Judge has clearly considered the alleged discrepancies

and omissions in relation to the evidence. The mother has stated in her evidence

that her daughter told her that after removing her panty, the appellant spit on

her vagina and committed the sexual abuse on her. The mothers evidence had

been that when she examined her daughters private part, she saw something

whitish in colour in her daughters vagina. However, the victim child had not

stated anything in her evidence about spitting on her private part by the

appellant. It needs to be noted that as considered very correctly by the learned

High Court Judge, the victim child was around 9 years old when this incident

occurred. She has given evidence more than 4 years after the incident.

Page 11 of 15

Considering the harrowing experience as narrated by PW-01, her ability to

narrate everything what happened after more than 4 years cannot be expected

as of a photographic memory.

On the other hand, it can be safely assumed that PW-02, the mother of the

victim, being a much elderly person who may have a better capacity to narrate

what she was told by her daughter, was telling the truth in that regard in her

evidence. That may be the very reason why she has observed some whitish

matter when she examined her child.

Another matter which has drawn the attention of the learned High Court Judge

and contended during the hearing of this appeal was the timeline given by the

two witnesses namely the victim child and her mother as to when this incident

took place.

The girl has given clear evidence to state that after she went to the school, she

was taken to a funeral house of a relative of a staff member by the school

authorities, and on their return, the children were allowed to go home. She has

returned home along with another elderly student who lives near their house.

When she returned home, her parents and other siblings were not at home. She

has assumed that her younger sister may have gone to have a bath with their

mother.

According to the evidence of the mother, it was her habit to return home before

her child comes home for the day after school around 2.00 2.30 p.m. The

mother says that, on this particular day, she received a call from her younger

daughters kindergarten teacher, informing her the necessity to attend the

funeral of a relative of a staff member. Her evidence clearly provides that she has

returned home earlier than usual with the intention of attending the said funeral.

She has seen her daughters shoes and the bag in front of their house, which

clearly indicates that the daughter has come home earlier than usual, which has

prompted her to call for her.

Page 12 of 15

This provides a clear picture as to the timeline of the incident. I am of the view

that the discrepancies in that regard in the evidence are discrepancies that do

not go into the core of the matter. I find that when taking the evidence of the two

witnesses cumulatively, no doubt arises as to the incident that occurred on that

day.

At this stage, I find it appropriate to refer to the Indian case of Bhoginbhai

Hirjibhai Vs State of Gujarat (AIR 1983-SC 753 at pp 756-758) very often

cited in our Courts. It was held:

1) By and large a witness cannot be expected to possess a photographic

memory and to recall the details of an incident. It is not as if a video tape

is replayed on the mental screen.

2) Ordinarily, so happens that a witness is overtaken by events. The witness

could not have anticipated the occurrence which so often has an element

of surprise. The mental faculties therefore cannot be expected to be

attuned to absorb the details.

3) Ordinarily, a witness cannot be expected to recall accurately the sequence

of events which take place in rapid succession or in a short time span. A

witness is liable to get confused or mixed up when interrogated later on.

4) A witness, though wholly truthful, is liable to be overawed by the court

atmosphere and the piercing cross-examination made by counsel and out

of nervousness mix up facts, get confused regarding sequence of events,

or fill up details from imagination on the spur of the moment. The sub-

conscious mind of the witness sometime so operates on account of the

fear of looking foolish or being disbelieved though the witnesses is giving

truthful and honest account of the occurrence witnessed by him perhaps

it is a sort of a psychological defense mechanism activated on the spur of

the moment.

Page 13 of 15

Another matter that needs consideration is whether the victim child and her

parents concocted a story against the appellant because of the alleged land

dispute and the animosity they had with the appellants family.

It is clear from the evidence that the victim child and her family had to travel

over the land belonging to the appellants family in order to reach their land. PW-

02 has been clear that there was no animosity between them until this incident

occurred, and they were close relatives, and it was only after the incident the

appellants family members closed down the access to their land.

I find no reason to believe that any parent would use their young child to concoct

an allegation of this nature given the social stigma attached to such an

allegation, even if there was a dispute between the elders of the family.

Ranjith Silva, J. in the case of D. Tikiri Banda Vs. The Attorney General Bar

Association Law Report 2010 (BLR 92) observed as follows:

In the Indian as well as the Sri Lankan settings, it can be safely said that

rarely will a girl or a woman make false allegations of sexual assault or will

a mother instigate, induce or compel her small daughter to make such

allegations for fear of the lasting consequences. One cannot expect her to be

so silly, not to appreciate the stigma attached and that she and the rest of

her family would be virtually ostracized for rest of her life. Under the

circumstances of this case to suggest that the victim in this case made a

false complaint against the appellant because the mother of the victim or

any member of the family had stained relations with the appellant or any

member of his family is totally unacceptable.

For the reasons as stated above, I find no merit in the two grounds of appeal

considered.

Page 14 of 15

The 3rd ground of appeal is that the learned High Court Judge was misdirected

when it was stated that the history given by the child to the doctor when she was

examined has corroborated the evidence as to the incident.

It is trite law that the history given in a Medico-Legal Report can only be

considered in relation to the consistency of the evidence of a witness.

It needs to be noted that in a Medico-Legal Report that a doctor or a JMO should

submit to the Court, a separate space has been provided to mention the history

given by a patient. Taking down such a history becomes necessary for a doctor

to express an opinion in relation to his observations of a given situation. I am of

the view that the history given by a patient to a doctor becomes relevant in a

criminal trial only to establish that the relevant witness has been consistent with

regard to the stand as to what occurred in a given situation.

I am of the view that although the learned High Court Judge has used a wrong

word in the judgement to indicate that the history given to the doctor further

corroborates the evidence of the victim child, I do not find any reason to accept

that misdirection has caused any prejudice towards the appellant.

I am of the view that even if considered in its correct perspective, there would

not be any difference as to the final determination of the learned High Court

Judge as there was ample evidence to prove the charges against the appellant

beyond reasonable doubt.

I find that the learned High Court Judge has well considered the defence taken

up by the appellant and has rejected it with sound reasoning. I do not find any

basis to conclude that there was any matter that could have been considered in

favour of the appellant in relation to the evidence presented before the Court.

The learned High Court Judge has considered all the evidence in its totality and

has come to a correct finding that the prosecution has proved the case beyond

reasonable doubt against the appellant.

Page 15 of 15

Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed, as I find no reasons to interfere with the

conviction and the sentence.

The conviction and the sentence affirmed.

However, having considered the fact that the appellant had been in incarceration

from the date of conviction, it is ordered that his period of sentence shall deem

to have commenced from the date of the sentence, namely 18-01-2021.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P Kumararatnam, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal