Page 1 of 20

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for the revision and or restitutio-in-integrum under Article 138 of the Constitution of the Republic of Sri Lanka.

C.A (Revision) Application No. 130/2014

D.C. Maho 60/P W.M. Muthumanika of Nikewaratiya

Plaintiff

-Vs- 1. W.M. Wimaladasa

Kandegedara, Nikewaratiya. 2. W.M. Manikhamy

Gowamulla, Nikewaratiya. 3. W.M. Punchi Banda

Gowamulla, Nikewaratiya. 4. W.M. Mudiyanse

Gowamulla, Nikewaratiya. 5. W.M. Dingiri Banda alias W.M

Punchi Bandage Dingiri Banda Gowamulla, Nikewaratiya. 6. W.M. Kiribanda

Gowamulla,

Page 2 of 20

Nikewaratiya.

7. W.M. Ranbanda Gowamulla, Nikewaratiya.

8. S.N.S.T.B. Kaw Amma Karakole, Nikewaratiya.

9. T.M. DingiriMenika (Guardian of Minors)

Defendants And Between

Thennakoon Mudiyanselage Chithra Kumari Thennakoon Lake Road,

Karakole, Nikewaratiya.

Substituted 8th Defendant/Petitioner

-Vs-

W.M. Muthumanika of Nikewaratiya

Plaintiff/ Respondent

1. W.M. Wimaladasa alias

Wanninayake Mudiyanselage Kiribandage Wimaladasa (Deceased) Kandegedara, Nikewaratiya.

Page 3 of 20

1A. Wanninayake Mudiyanselage

Dissanayake 1B. Wanninayake Mudiyanselage Dingiri Amma alias Wanninayake Mudiyanselage Dilini Ashoka Kumari

1C. Wanninayake Mudiyanselage

Somasinghe 1D. Wanninayake Mudiyanselage Nawaratne 1E. Wanninayake Mudiyanselaga Karunawathie All of Kotuwaththawala Road, Kandegedara, Hulugalla, Nikewaratiya.

2. W.M. Manikhami alias

Wanninayake Mudiyanselage Kirihamige Manikhami (Deceased) Gowamulla, Nikewaratiya. 2A. W.M. Dingiri Banda 2B. W.M. Kiri Banda 2C. W.M. Ran Banda All of Gowamulla, Nikewaratiya. 3. W.M. Punchi Banda Gowamulla, Nikewaratiya 4. W.M. Mudiyanse(Deceased) Gowamulla,

Page 4 of 20

Nikewaratiya. 4A. Dissanayake Mudiyanselage Bandara Menika

4B. Wanninayake Mudiyanselage Thilekaratne 4C. Wanninayake Mudiyanselage Upatissa Bandara alias Wanninayake Mudiyanselage Diluka Bandara 4D. Wanninayake Mudiyanselage Tikiri Banda alias Wanninayake Mudiyanselage Asanka Wanninayake All of No. 18, Gowamulla, Nikewaratiya. 5. W.M. Dingiri Banda alias W.M. Punchi Bandage Dingiri Banda (Deceased) Gowamulla, Nikewaratiya. 5A. S.W.M. P. Kumarihami Udalagama alias S.W.M.P. Madduma Kumari Udalagama. 5B. Ruwan Chaminda Kumara Wanninayake. All of Gowamulla, Nikewaratiya. 6. W.M. Kiribanda Gowamulla,

Page 5 of 20

Nikewaratiya. 7. W.M. Ranbanda Gowamulla, Nikewaratiya.

Defendant / Respondents

Before: D.N Samarakoon, J

B. Sasi Mahendran, J

Counsel: W. Dayaratne, PC for the Substituted 8th Defendant-Petitioner

Chula Bandara for the 6th and 7th Defendant-Respondents

Written

Submissions : 09.01.2019 (by the Substituted 8th Defendant-Petitioners)

On 04.12.2019(by the 3rd,6th and 7th Defendants Respondents)

Argued On : 10.12.2021

Order On : 04.04.2022

B. Sasi Mahendran, J

This is an Application filed by the Substituted 8th Defendant-Petitioner

(hereinafter sometimes referred to as the Petitioner) in terms of Article 138 of the

Constitution invoking the jurisdiction of this Court to act in revision and/or

restitution-in-intergrum and set aside the judgment and the interlocutory decree

entered in case No. 60/P by the District Judge of Maho on 05.11.1979 and to set

aside the Order dated 23.11.1998 made by the learned District Judge of Maho in

the same case.

Page 6 of 20

The facts pertaining to this case and the background to the present issue

before this Court may be set out as follows.

The Plaintiff-Respondent by her Plaint dated 24-06-1974 filed an action in

the District Court of Maho seeking to partition a land called Wewaihalahena

which was in extent of eight acres. The Plaintiff-Respondent on 05-07-1976 moved

to amend the Plaint enabling her to claim 1/5 share of the said land.

In the said partition action, the Petitioners mother was added as the 8th

Defendant as she claimed ownership to a portion of the corpus.

A commission was initially issued to W.C.S.M. Abeysekera, Licenced

Surveyor on 26-08-1974 and later another commission was issued to the same

surveyor on 13-01-1975 and accordingly Plan bearing No. 376 dated 06-02-1975

and Report were filed in Court.

The original 8th Defendant had moved to file her statement of claim, but

later she gave up her claim on the basis that the corpus sought to be partitioned

in this action did not contain the land that she wanted to claim (Vide Journal

Entries dated 13.08.1979 on Page 36 and 24.03.1980 on page 38 of the Appeal

Brief).

It should be noted that, the original 8th Defendant had, prior to the

institution of this case, filed a Case bearing No. 2422/L in the District Court of

Kurunegala against one, W.M. Punchibanda who is the 3rd Defendant/ Respondent

in this case and obtained a judgment in her favour declaring that she is the lawful

owner of the land which is depicted as Lot-1 in Plan No. 844, dated 15.11.1967,

made by K.M.H. Navaratne, Licenced Surveyor. Thereafter, the 8th Defendant

obtained the Decree executed against the 3rd Defendant-Respondent in the Case

No. 2422/L. The Fiscal handed over possession to the 8th Defendant ejecting the

3rd Defendant-Respondent along with the 4th and 5th Defendants-Respondents in

this case who were also in possession of the 8th Defendants land.

Page 7 of 20

Against the writ, the 4th and 5th Defendants-Respondents applied for an

Interim Injunction on 23.02.1995 on the basis that the 8th Defendant had

renounced her title to the land concerned, by not filing her statement of claim.

After the issuance of an Enjoining Order, the original 8th Defendant filed

an application in the District Court of Maho on 03.02.1997 under Section 839 of

the Civil Procedure Code praying to set aside the judgment and interlocutory

decree entered in the case and to hold the trial de novo.

On 23.11.1998 the learned District Judge delivered his Order dismissing

the said application of the Original 8th Defendant. The learned District Judge

observed that Section 839 of the Civil Procedure Code cannot be invoked when

there are express statutory provisions providing for a particular matter and

highlighted the nature of finality attached to interlocutory decrees under the

Partition Law. The relevant excerpts of the judgment of the Learned District

Judge are as follows:

, 1977 21 48

(4) (5)

26

.

Further the learned Judge stated that;

,

,

.

, , 1980.03.24

8 1997.02.03 17

1979.11.05

.

Page 8 of 20

17

.

Against the said Order of the learned District Judge the Petitioner

preferred an appeal bearing No.CA 89/99(F) to this Court. On 14.11.2013 an

objection was raised by the Counsel for the Respondent to the effect that there is

no right of appeal against the said Order. Accordingly, the Petitioner withdrew

the said appeal.

The Petitioner filed the present application for Restitutio-in- intergrum

and/or Revision in respect of this partition action on 29.04.2014.

Grounds relied on to invoke the Restitutio-in-integrum and/or revisionary

jurisdictions of this Court by the Petitioner are as follows;

a. The Plaintiff- Respondent has failed to prove the title to this case and

the entire case has been decided by the learned District Judge only on

the oral testimony of the original owner namely Punchirala and there

was absolutely no document to prove that Ranmenika was a child of

Punchirala.

b. The entire case is a collusive action among the Plaintiff-Respondent

and 1-7 Defendant-Respondents as they have neither filed a statement

of claim nor participated at the trial.

c. On perusal of journal entry No 39 the trial has been held ex- parte

which is totally in contravention of mandatory provisions of Partition

Law and there was no reference in the judgment that it was an ex-parte

trial.

d. The original 8th Defendant did not file a statement a claim because the

Court Commissioner in this case namely Abeysekera, who prepared

Page 9 of 20

the preliminary plan superimposed Lot 1 in Plan No. 844 and clearly

reported to court that the 8th Defendants land is situated outside the

corpus.

e. According to the judgment dated 05.11.1979 the 8th Defendant was not

given any share

f. The 8th Defendant was placed in possession by the Fiscal of District

Court of Maho

g. A grave prejudice and irreparable loss and damage had been caused to

the Substituted 8th Defendant-Petitioner as her mother the original 8th

Defendant who prosecuted case No.2422/L in the District Court of

Kurunegala against the 3rd Defendant-Respondent in this case who

was declared as a trespasser has now been declared as an allottee of

1/5th share as a result of this collusive partition action depriving the

legal rights of the original 8th Defendant which were devolved on her

heirs.

On the other hand, the 6th and 7th Defendant-Respondents have

taken the following preliminary objections in their statement of objections.

a. The Petitioner has named 1st, 2nd, 4th and 5th Defendant-Respondents

who were dead before the above numbered case was filed.

b. The Petitioner has failed to file the Revision Application in the

Provincial Civil Appellate High Court of Kurunegala.

c. The Petitioner is guilty of laches as she has filed this Application

after 35 years seeking to set aside the judgment and interlocutory

Page 10 of 20

decree entered in case No. 60/P of the District Court of Maho dated

05.11.1979.

d. Petitioner has failed to show any exceptional circumstances.

Before proceeding to consider the stance of the parties, it will be appropriate

to briefly survey the principles annunciated in some judicial decisions of our rich

jurisprudence on the remedies sought in this matter.

Restitutio-in- integrum

One of the earliest cases that considered the scope of Restitutio in Integrum

and how our courts applied the principle when granting this relief was discussed

in Abeyesekere v. Harmanis Appu14 NLR 353 .

In this case, His Lordship Wood Renton J.( as he then was) held,

Under the civil law, where a person suffered a legal prejudice by the

operation of law, the praetor having personally inquired into the matter (causae

cognitio) in the exercise of his imperium, which enabled him to consider all the

actual facts of the case, might issue a decree re-establishing the original legal

position, that is to say; replacing the person injured in his previous condition. In

Roman law restitutio in integrum was the removal of a disadvantage in law which

had legally occurred. It was a protection against justice(as distinguished from an

action against injustice) which was rendered necessary on account of the practical

impossibility of taking legally, in advance, all the circumstances into consideration

that in reality may occur.. The remedy was received into the Roman-Dutch law

in a wider form. Restitutio was not only granted to minors. It might be granted to

any one, either in toto, on the grounds of metus, dolus, absentia, and minority, or

partially, on the ground that the damage suffered exceeded the value of what was

obtained through the transaction by half (ob laesionem enormem). Van der Linden

gives as additional grounds for partial restitution absence and error, and further,

Page 11 of 20

all such equitable reasons as rendered it unjust that the act should remain in

existence.

His Lordship, at page 357, also referred to a few local decisions.

In Stork v. Orchard, Mr. Justice Lawrie, then Acting Chief Justice, held

that the remedy of restitutio in integrum was available in all cases where a

contract can be shown to have proceeded on total misconception. In Gunaratne v.

Dingiri Banda, Sir John Bonser C.J., with whom Withers. J. concurred, held that

the proper remedy, where the consent of a party to a case instituted in the District

Court was obtained by fraud and so judgment obtained, was to apply to the

Supreme Court for an order on the Court below to review the impugned judgment

and to confirm or rescind it. At the close of his judgment, Sir John Bonser said:

Any such application will, of course, be an ex parte one." In describing the Roman-

Dutch procedure, he made use of the following language :If the applicant satisfied

that Court (i.e. , the highest Court of Appeal in Holland) "that he had a prima

facie case, the case was remitted to the Judge who pronounced the decree, and if

he found that the decree had been fraudulently obtained, he would restore the

parties to their original position.

In Perera et al v. Wijewickreme, 15 NLR 411, His Lordship Pereira, J. held;

This was an extraordinary remedy, even under the Roman-Dutch law,

allowed for good grounds, which, in the case of contracts, were limited to fear,

violence, fraud, minority, absence, excusable error, and prejudice in above half the

value of a thing alienated, and to such equitable grounds as justified the reduction

of cancellation of the contract (Voet 4, 1, 26; V. d. L. 1, 18, 10). It was also allowed

in the case of certain incidents of a suit, as, for instance, when circumstances

showed that the applicant should be permitted a fresh opportunity of proof or to

bring new facts to the notice of the Court (Voet 4, 1, 34), and it was not granted

unless no other remedy was available to the applicant or unless restitution was

the more effectual remedy (Voet 4, 1, 13, 14).

Page 12 of 20

In Phipps v. Bracegyrdle 35 NLR 302 His Lordship Driberg,J. held;

It can be granted where a decree has been obtained by fraud (Wood-Renton

C. J. in Buyer v. Eckert and Jayasuriya v. Kotelawala), also where a proctor has

consented to judgment against the instructions of his client (Silva v. Fonseka' and

Narayan Chetty v. Azeez'), for in such cases it could be said that there was in

reality no consent. On the same principle I can understand, though there is no

reported case on the point, relief being granted on the ground that both parties

have agreed to a settlement under a mistake of fact, for as in the case of contract

the element of consensus would be absent.

In A.E.M. Usoof v. Nadarajah 61 NLR 173 His Lordship H.N.G. Fernando

J. (as he then was) held;

While two of the three members of the Bench expressed themselves in

terms which are open to the construction that in their opinion the only means of

setting aside a decree improperly obtained, including a decree obtained by fraud,

would be by the process of restitutio-in-integrum in the Supreme Court, the case

itself was one where only mistake was alleged and any reference purporting to

cover cases of fraud was therefore obiter.

In Halib Abdul Cader Amer v. Danny Perera alias Podi Mahatmaya. 1998

(2) SLR 321 His Lordship G.P.S. De Silva C.J. held;

In any event. . the power to grant relief by way of restitution in integrum

is a matter of grace and discretion;(Usoof vs Nadarajah Chettiar, 61 NLR 173 at

177); the remedy by way of restitution in integrum is an extraordinary remedy

and is given only under very exceptional circumstances. (Menchinahamy vs

Muniweera, 52 NLR 409 at 413). No such circumstances are to be found in the

present case.

Page 13 of 20

In Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation Ltd v. Shanmugam [1995] 1 SLR 55

His Lordship Ranaraja, J held;

Superior courts of this country have held that relief by way of

restitution in integrum in respect of judgments of original courts may be sought

where (a) the judgments have been obtained by fraud, (Abeysekera-supra), by

the production of false evidence, (Buyzerv.Eckert), or non-disclosure of material

facts, (Perera v. Ekanaike), or where judgment has been obtained by force or

fraud, (Gunaratne v.Dingiri Banda, Jayasuriya v. Kotelawela). (b) Where fresh

evidence has cropped up since judgment which was unknown earlier to the parties

relying on it, (Sinnethamby-supra), and fresh evidence which no reasonable

diligence could have helped to disclose earlier, (Mapalathan-supra). (c) Where

judgments have been pronounced by mistake and decrees entered thereon,

(Sinnethamby-supra), provided of course that it is an error which connotes a

reasonable or excusable error, (Perera v. Don Simon). The remedy could

therefore be availed of where an Attorney-at-Law has by mistake consented

to judgment contrary to express instructions of his client, for in such cases it could

be said that there was in reality no consent, (Phipps-Supra, Narayan Chetty v.

Azeez), but not where the Attorney-at-Law has been given a general authority

to settle or compromise a case, (Silva v. Fonseka) .

Revision

The object of power of revision has been very clearly enunciated by His

Lordship Chief Justice Sansoni in Mariam Beebee v. Seyed Mohamed, 68 NLR 36,

as follows;

The power of revision is an extraordinary power which is quite independent

of and distinct from the appellate jurisdiction of this Court. Its object is the due

administration of justice and the correction of errors, sometimes committed by this

Court itself, in order to avoid miscarriage of justice. It is exercised in some cases

by a Judge of his own motion, when an aggrieved person who may not be a party

to the action brings to his notice the fact that, unless the power of exercised,

injustice result. The partition Act has not, I conceive, made any change in this

Page 14 of 20

respect, and the power can still be exercised in respect of any order or decree of a

lower Court.

This trend of authority has continued and in the case of Rasheed Ali v.

Mohomed Ali & Others 1981 (2) SLR 29, His Lordship Soza J. held,

I will now turn to the argument advanced on behalf of the 1st respondent

that in the circumstances of the instant case an application for revision will not

lie. It is well established that the powers of revision conferred on this Court are

very wide and the Court has the discretion to exercise them whether an appeal

lies or not or whether an appeal where it lies has been taken or not. But this

discretionary remedy can be invoked only where there are exceptional

circumstances warranting the intervention of the Court. . In the absence of

exceptional circumstances the mere fact that the trial Judges order is wrong is

not a ground for the exercise of the revisionary powers of this Court.

In Athurapana v. Premasinghe, (S.C Appeal No. 21/2002 decided on

14.05.2004 published in 2004 BLR 60) His Lordship Sarath N. Silva C.J. (along

with Hector Yapa,J and Nihal Jayasinghe,J.) held;

Section 753 of the Civil Procedure Code which gives the ambit the

revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal empowers the Court examine the

record for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the legality or propriety of any

judgment or order .....or as to the regularity of the proceedings and thereupon pass

any judgment or make any order as the interests of justice may require..

The Section has three elements that constitute the basis of the exercise of

revisionary jurisdiction. They are:

i. The legality or propriety of the judgment or order called in question

ii. The regularity of the proceedings; and

iii. The need to pass any judgment or make any order in the interests of

justice.

An examination of these elements demonstrate that every illegality,

impropriety or irregularity does not warrant the exercised only where the

Page 15 of 20

illegality., impropriety or irregularity in the proceedings has resulted in a

miscarriage of justice, by the party affected being denied what is lawfully and

justly due to that party. In such event the Court will in revision set right the

illegality, impropriety or irregularity by passing any judgment or making any

order as interests of justice may require.

In Siriwardena v. Thabrew &Others C.A (Rev) Application No. 2360/2004

decided on 08.09.2010, (Published in 2011 BLR 221), His Lordship Anil

Gooneratne, J held;

I have considered the following authorities. Rustom Vs Hapangama (1978-

79) 2 SLLR 225 where it was held that powers of revision of the appellate court is

very wide, though exercised in exceptional circumstances ; This dicta is

followed in several earlier decided cases, Rasheed Ali Vs. Mohamed 1981 (1) SLR

262; Revisionary remedy is discretionary and will not be exercised unless the

application disclose the circumstances amounting to miscarriage of Justice.

1997(2) SLR 365.

Availability of the remedies

Now, we proceed to consider the availability of the remedies of restitution

and revision in the light of the abovementioned judicial pronouncement, to the

facts in this case.

The main grievance of the Petitioner stems from the fact that the portion of

the land which was declared entitled to her in the District Courtof Kurunegala

case No. 2422/L which was instituted by her against W.M. Punchibanda (Father

of 5th to 7th Defendants) was erroneously partitioned by the interlocutory decree

entered in case No. 60/P.

It must be noted that the Petitioner had by her own volition decided to

refrain from filling any Statement of Claims in the Partition Action 60/P.

Page 16 of 20

There is no material before this Court to ascertain as to whether the land

partitioned in case No. 60/P is the same land which was declared entitled to the

Petitioner in case bearing No.2422/L. Although, she had been made a party to the

action and she having opted not to file statement of claims, she now urges the

court to grant relief. As such, this Court is unable to conclude that there has been

any miscarriage of justice that has occasioned to the Petitioner. As adumbrated in

the judicial decisions cited above, power of revision can only be exercised when

there are exceptional circumstances. The Petitioner has failed to satisfy this Court

of the existence of any exceptional circumstances.

In order to succeed in obtaining the relief of restitution, the Petitioner ought

to establish that the judgment was obtained by fraud or by production of false

evidence or by any of the other grounds referred to above. There is not even an

iota of evidence to convince this Court that the Respondents deceived the original

court by misrepresentation of facts to obtain the relief. Even collusion between

the parties has not been established. This Court observes that due to the lack of

due diligence and the failure to file necessary pleadings at the proper stage the

Petitioner was deprived from obtaining relief, if any, and now blatantly makes this

complaint of injustice.

The other aspect is delay. The Petitioner has failed to give reasons for the

delay of filling this action. The remedy of restitution-in-intergrum and/or revision

will not be available to a party who is guilty of laches and delay. The following

judicial pronouncements fortify this proposition.

In Abun Appu v. Simon Appu et al. 11 NLR 44, His Lordship Wendt, J. held,

The delay is wholly unexplained and is unreasonable. The Courts rightly

require the utmost promptitude in taking advantage of such a discovery, and I

consider that the petitioner's laches disentitles him to any relief

Page 17 of 20

In Perera v. Don Simon 62 NLR 118 His Lordship Sansoni, J. (as he then

was) held,

I would refer in this connection to Mapalathan v. Elayavan and Dember

v. Abdul Hafeel . In those cases it was held that restitutio would not be granted

where there has been negligence on the part of the applicant for relief. The case

is all the worse if the error is due to the act of the plaintiff himself, as would

appear to be the case here.

..Over three years had elapsed between the entering of the decree

and the filing of the present application, and it was therefore filed too late.

In M.A. Don Lewis v. D.W.S.Dissanayake 70 NLR 8 His Lordship

Tennekoon,J (as he then was) held;

These being the facts the first question that arises for consideration is

whether this court should exercise its extraordinary powers of revision or by way

of Restitutio in Integrum in favour of the applicant. There is no doubt in my mind

that the petitioner was aware of the partition action from the date the Surveyor

first went on the land. Petitioner has only himself to blame if he pursued the ill-

advised course of trying to usurp the place of the 8th defendant-respondent.

Petitioner could, long before the Interlocutory Decree, have sought to have himself

added instead of taking the inexplicable course he did. Even after the Interlocutory

Decree was entered the petitioner in seeking to intervene persisted in trying to

persuade the District Court that he and Carolis Caldera were one and the same

person. Further when his application to intervene was dismissed by the District

Court (which in its order explicitly stated that the petitioners remedy if any was

by way of an application for revision to this court) the petitioner did nothing for 8

months. It is not the function of this court in the exercise of the jurisdiction now

being invoked to relieve parties of the consequences of their own folly, negligence

and laches. The maxim Vigilantibus, non dormientibus, jura subveniunt provides

a sufficient answer to the petitioners application on the ground now under

consideration.

Page 18 of 20

In Seylan Bank v. Thangaveil 2004 (2) SLR 101, it was held by His Lordship

Wimalachandra,J.

...... An unexplained and unreasonable delay in seeking relief by way of

revision. Which is a discretionary remedy, is a factor which will disentitle the

Petitioner to it. An application for judicial review should be made promptly unless

there are good reasons for the delay. The failure on the part of the petitioner to

explain the delay satisfactorily is by itself fatal to the application..

This judgment was discussed in CA (PHC) APN 012/2019, decided on 21.

07. 2020. by Her Ladyship Devika Abeyratne, J.

In Siriwardena v. Thabrew & Others (supra) His Lordship Anil Gooneratne,

J. held,

The petitioner by this revision application seeks to set aside an order

refusing special leave under section 48(4) of the Partition law and to set aside the

Judgment of 11.03.1999 it is evident from the material placed before this Court

that the 3rd Defendant though filed his statement of claim on 04.03.1986 and also

moved for a Commission (not executed) had not appeared before the District

Court and pursued his defence for a very long time and failed to give notice to court

of change of address or act diligently, though Court had made every possible

attempt to notice the 3rd Defendant. The Substituted 3A Defendant had also not

acted diligently after the death of his father in the year 1996 (trial was on 1999)

to prosecute his defence until the year 2003 which explains that almost 7 years

have lapsed from the death of the 3rd defendant, and by that time, Court had on

an application of parties after inquiry allotted the unallotted lot

In Nimalawathie v. Perera & Another 2015 (1) SLR 393, His Lordship

Gafoor, J. held;

The conspicuous delay makes the Petitioner guilty of laches. The Petitioner

herself says in her petition that she became aware of the existence of the partition

Page 19 of 20

case only on 27.06.2005 at the Kelaniya Police Station. It also reveals that the

documents marked P10 to P13 filed with the petition had been obtained by the

Petitioner from the District Court office on 11.07.2005 Even soon thereafter the

Petitioner has not taken steps to file this revision application. The Petitioner has

not given any reason for this inordinate delay. "In an application for Revision it is

necessary to urge exceptional circumstances warranting the interference of this

Court by way of revision Filing an application by way of revision to set aside an

order made by the District Court 3 1/2 years before the institution of the revision

application is considered as inordinate delay and the application would be

dismissed on the ground of laches"

This Court observes there is an unexplained delay of more than 35 years in

filing this revision application and therefore, it can be concluded that the

Petitioner is guilty of laches.

After the appeal filed in this Court was dismissed on 14.11.2013 the

Petitioner waited for another six months to make the present application to this

Court. In addition to her prolonged delay in the District Court, the Petitioner has

further delayed to come before this court. The Petitioner has not endeavoured to

explain the delay at all. Having regard to what has been said above concerning the

conduct of the Petitioner we are of the opinion that there is no reason for this Court

to reexamine the facts alleged by the Petitioner.

Before we conclude this judgment, having in mind the principle enunciated

in H.A.M. Cassim v. GA Batticaloa 69 NLR 403, that There must be finality in

litigation, I like to quote a passage from the judgment of His Lordship Dias J in

Menchinahamy v. Muniweera52 NLR 409 which highlights the importance of

finality in matters such as these.

This case, therefore, is a melancholy example of the workings of our

antiquated and cumbersome Partition Ordinance. This case forcibly reminds one

of the famous though mythical case of Jarndyce v. Jarndyce immortalized by

Charles Dickens in " Bleak House " of which it was said-" And thus, through years

Page 20 of 20

and years, and lives and lives, everything goes on, constantly beginning over and

over again, and nothing ever ends ". And now, at the end of 1950, if the contention

of the petitioner is right, the work of twelve long years will be of no effect, because

the dispute which was settled by the interlocutory decree of the District Judge

and the judgment in appeal of the Supreme Court will have to be ignored, and

the matter dealt with anew.

For the reasons enumerated above, we are of the view that this application

is without merit. It is accordingly dismissed with costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D.N.SAMARAKOON,J

I AGREE

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL