Page 1 of 16

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of a Revision Application in

terms of Article 138 of the Constitution

read with section, 364 and 365 of the Code

of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

CA Revision Application: The Director General,

CPA/0136/22 Commission to Investigate Allegation of

Bribery or Corruption,

No. 36, Malalasekara Mawatha,

Colombo 07.

High Court of Colombo COMPLAINANT

Case No. HCB/1988/2013 Vs.

Ranaweera Wanasinghe Wanninayake

Herath Mudiyanselage Gamini

Wanasinghe

No. 349, Divulges Kotuwa, Galewela.

ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

Page 2 of 16

The Director General,

Commission to Investigate Allegation of

Bribery or Corruption,

No. 36, Malalasekara Mawatha,

Colombo 07.

COMPLAINANT-PETITIONER

Vs.

Ranaweera Wanasinghe Wanninayake

Herath Mudiyanselage Gamini

Wanasinghe

No. 349, Divulges Kotuwa, Galewela.

ACCUSED-RESPONDENT

Before : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

: P. Kumararatnam, J.

Counsel : Anuradha Siriwardhena, A.D.G. for the petitioner

: Asanka Mendis with Sandeepani Wijesooriya for

the respondent

Argued on : 01-11-2023

Decided on : 08-02-2024

Page 3 of 16

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

This is an application by the complainant-petitioner (hereinafter referred to as

the petitioner), namely, the Director General of the Commission to Investigate

Allegations of Bribery or Corruption, invoking the revisionary jurisdiction of

this Court granted in terms of Article 138 of the Constitution.

The petitioner is seeking to set aside the order dated 12-09-2022, of the

learned High Court Judge of Colombo, marked P-04 and P-05 along with the

petition, wherein, the action instituted by the petitioner before the High Court

of Colombo was dismissed.

When this matter was supported for notice, this Court, after having considered

the relevant facts and the circumstances issued notice to the accused-

respondent named.

Accordingly, the accused-respondent was allowed to file his objections in

relation to the application and the petitioner was also allowed to file counter

objections in that regard.

At the hearing of the application this Court listened to the submissions of the

learned Additional Director General of the Commission to Investigate

Allegations of Bribery or Corruption (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the

Commission) in support of the application, and to the submissions of the

learned Counsel who represented the accused-respondent, in order to

determine the application before the Court.

This is a matter where the accused-respondent (hereinafter referred to as the

accused) was indicted before the High Court of Colombo for committing two

counts of bribery, punishable in terms of section 19(b) and 19(c) of the Bribery

Act, by accepting Rs. 12500/- as a gratification for doing an official act he was

duty bound to perform. The offence had been allegedly committed on 4th July

2012 at Galewela.

Page 4 of 16

The indictment had been served on the accused on 20-02-2014, where the

accused had pleaded not guilty.

The trial has taken place before several learned High Court Judges, and when

the matter was mentioned before the learned High Court Judge who

pronounced the impugned order, the evidence had been concluded and it was

for final submissions by the respective parties.

It was the submission of the learned Counsel for the petitioner that when the

case was mentioned for the final submissions on 11-10-2021, the presiding

Judge inquired from the prosecution whether it had the authorization of all

three Commissioners of the Commission to initiate proceedings before the High

Court against the accused, for which the reply was that one Commissioner has

authorized the institution of proceedings. (See- Journal Entry at page 77 of the

brief).

This has resulted in an order by the learned High Court Judge by giving a date

for the prosecution to consider maintaining the action any further, or to make

submissions.

When the matter was mentioned on 03-11-2021, the prosecution has informed

the Court that the matter is under consideration by the Commission and the

learned Counsel who represented the accused had informed the Court that he

is objecting to any withdrawing of the case, and if there is any such application

he reserves his right to object to such an application. (See- Journal Entry at

page 379 of the brief)

The case has been mentioned again for the same purpose on 17-12-2021. The

Journal Entry in that regard shows that the learned Counsel for the accused

has informed the Court that he is agreeable for the continuation of the trial,

while the prosecution has informed that the advice of the Commission had

been to continue with the trial to its conclusion. (See- Journal Entry at page

381 of the brief)

Page 5 of 16

This has resulted in the learned High Court Judge making the following

Journal Entry with reads thus;

:-

.

.

.

.

.

The learned High Court Judge of Colombo has pronounced his order on 12-09-

2022, which is the order sought to be challenged by this application. (The order

marked P-04 along with the petition)

It is clear from the order that although there was no preliminary objection as to

the maintainability of the action before the Court by the accused, and in fact,

the accused had specifically objected to any withdrawal of the action by the

prosecution, the impugned order has been pronounced on the basis that the

accused raised a preliminary objection as to the jurisdiction. I find this as a

clear misdirection as to the facts by the learned High Court Judge, which needs

to be highlighted.

The learned High Court Judge, being guided by the judgment in the case of

Anoma S. Polwatte Vs. The Commission to Investigate Allegations of

Bribery and Corruption SC/Writ Application No 01/2011, decided on 26-

07-2018 has determined that the failure to get the sanction of all three

Commissioners prior to filing action before the High Court amounts to a patent

lack of jurisdiction and therefore ab initio void, hence, the action cannot be

maintained.

Page 6 of 16

For matters of clarity, I will now reproduce the relevant final determination by

the learned High Court Judge, which appears at page 22 of the said order

marked P-04.

,

.

. (patent lack of jurisdiction) . (ab initio void)

.

After pronouncing the above order and, accordingly, discharging the accused

from the indictment against him, on 20-09-2022, the learned High Court Judge

on his own motion has made a direction to notice the parties to appear before

the Court on 22-09-2022 in order to make a correction to the order

pronounced on 12-09-2022.

When the matter was mentioned on the day, the learned High Court Judge has

made the following Journal Entry in the case record.

2022.09.12

01, 02 . 2022.09.12

.

2022.09.12 .

.

2022.09.12

.

2022.09.12

.

. (

.)

.

Page 7 of 16

.

.

The learned High Court Judge has then filed of record, the order what he

termed as the edited order ( ) dated as 12-09-2022. This is the order

the petitioner has produced marked P-05 along with the petition.

It was the submission of the learned Counsel for the Commission that the

procedure adopted by the learned High Court Judge on 22-09-2022 to

pronounce another order on the basis that it is an edited version of the order

pronounced on 12-09-2022 was in total violation of section 283(4) of the Code

of Criminal Procedure Act, and shall have no legal effect.

The learned Counsel contended that although any clerical error or any obvious

defect can be corrected even after the rising of the Court, this was an

irregularity that cannot be considered as such.

The learned Counsel brought to the notice of the Court the following material

differences of the orders marked P-04 and P-05.

Old One (P4) New One (P5)

Page 2

4th paragraph

Page 2

4th paragraph not available

Page 3

1st, 2nd, 3rd paragraphs

Page 3

1st, 2nd, 3rd paragraphs not available

Page 3

Section 16 (3) available

Page 3

Section 16 (3) not available

Page 8

Paragraph 2

Not available in the new one

Page 8 of 16

Page 16

5th paragraph (last part) similar

paragraph

Page 15

1st paragraph. Later part had been

inserted newly.

4 rows had been inserted.

Page 18

From the bottom

2nd paragraph

Page 16

After No. 57

Not available

Page 18, 19

Not available

Page 16, 17

2 new paragraphs had been inserted.

Paragraph 58, 59 inserted newly.

It was her view that both the orders cannot be allowed to stand, as they have

no legal validity before the law as they stand now.

Before considering the other points raised during the hearing of this

application, I believe that the above matters brought to the attention of the

Court needs to be addressed, as find them to be important questions of law.

As I have stated before, the learned High Court Judge was misdirected when it

was determined that the accused raised a jurisdictional objection, whereas, it

was not, and it had been the learned High Court Judge who has thought it fit

to raise a jurisdictional objection on his own motion.

It needs to be reminded that our system of law is adversarial and not

inquisitorial where Judges are not expected to play the part of a prosecutor or

a defence Counsel in a trial.

Page 9 of 16

The relevant section 39 of the Judicature Act under which an objection to the

jurisdiction can be considered reads as follows;

39. Whenever any defendant or accused party shall have pleaded in

any action, proceeding or matter brought in any Court of first

instance neither party shall afterwards be entitled to object to the

jurisdiction of such Court, but such Court shall be taken and held to

have jurisdiction over such action, proceeding or matter:

Provided that where it shall appear in the course of the proceedings

that the action, proceeding or matter was brought in a Court having

no jurisdiction intentionally and with previous knowledge of the

want of jurisdiction of such Court, the Judge shall be entitled at his

discretion to refuse to proceed further with the same, and to declare

the proceeding null and void.

No doubt, a Judge can act even in a situation where no jurisdictional objection

was taken as provided for in the proviso of section 39, it is my considered view

that the proviso can only be applied to situations where there is a patent lack

of jurisdiction.

Although the learned High Court Judge had determined that the situation

considered by him to dismiss the action where, admittedly, all three

Commissioners have not given their sanction to initiate action as a matter

where patent lack of jurisdiction exists, I am in no position to agree. I find that

the learned High Court Judge has again been misdirected as to the question of

jurisdiction and law.

This is an action initiated by the Director General of the Commission in terms

of the Bribery Act where the High Court has the jurisdiction to hear and

determine the matter. Only in a situation where the High Court has no

jurisdiction to hear and determine a matter, the question of patent lack of

jurisdiction comes into play, whereas, this was no such situation.

Page 10 of 16

The question of jurisdiction considered by the learned High Court Judge, if it

can be considered as a jurisdictional question, is a situation where the

prosecution has been initiated without having the sanction of all the

commissioners, which is clearly a procedural defect, which can only be viewed

as a latent lack of jurisdiction. Even if the action is dismissed on such a basis,

there can be no bar for the Director General of the Commission to file the

action again before the High Court after rectifying the said procedural defect.

In the case of P. Beatrice Perera Vs. The Commissioner of National Housing

77 NLR 361 at 366, Tennekoon, C.J. has discussed the difference between

the patent lack of jurisdiction and latent lack of jurisdiction and the effect of

such a situation in the following manner.

Lack of competency in a Court is a circumstance that results in a

judgment or order that is void. Lack of competency may arise in one of two

ways. A Court may lack jurisdiction over the cause of matter or over the

parties; it may also lack competence because of failure to comply with such

procedural requirements as are necessary for the exercise of power by the

Court. Both are jurisdictional defects; the first mentioned of these is

commonly known in the law as patent or total want of jurisdiction or a

defectus jurisdictionis and the second a latent or contingent want of

jurisdiction or a defectus triationis. Both classes of jurisdictional result in

judgments or orders, which are void. However, an important difference

must also be noted. In that class of case where the want of jurisdiction is

patent, no waiver of objection or acquiescence can cure the want of

jurisdiction; the reason for this being that to permit parties by their conduct

to confer jurisdiction on a tribunal which has none would be to admit a

power in the parties to the litigation to create new jurisdictions or to extend

a jurisdiction beyond its existing limits, both of which are within the

exclusive privilege of the legislature; the proceeding in cases within this

category are non coram judice and the want of jurisdiction is incurable.

Page 11 of 16

In the other class of cases, where the want of jurisdiction is contingent

only, the judgment or order of Court will be void only against the party on

whom it operates but, acquiescence, waiver or inaction on the part of such

person may estop from making or attempting to establish by evidence, any

averment to the effect that the Court was lacking in contingent

jurisdiction.

For the reasons as considered above, I am of the view that the learned High

Court Judge had no basis to consider this matter as a preliminary objection

raised by the accused when there was no such objection, and on the basis that

this was a situation of patent lack of jurisdiction, whereas, it was not.

I find that this alone would vitiate the order of dismissal of the action by the

learned High Court Judge.

The next matter I would like to draw my attention is the manner in which the

learned High Court Judge decided to insert the 2nd order marked as P-05 on

the same matter after pronouncing his order on 12-09-2022.

It is well settled law that once a judgment, or an order for that matter, is

pronounced by a Judge, such a judgment or the order cannot be altered or

reviewed by the Judge who pronounced it unless in terms of section 283(4) of

the Code of Criminal Procedure Act. Such a judgement or an order can be

reviewed only by a competent appellate Court upon an application in that

regard

The relevant section reads thus;

283. (4) When a judgement has been so signed it cannot be altered

or reviewed by the Court which gives the judgment:

Provided that a clerical error may be rectified at any time and that

any other error may be rectified before the Court rises for the day.

Page 12 of 16

In the case of Hari Singh Mann Vs. Harbhajan Singh Bajwa AIR 2001 SC 43

the Indian Supreme Court considering the provisions of section 362 of the

Indian Code which has very much similar provision to our Code,

It was held:

"Section 362 of the Code mandates that no Court, when it has signed its

judgment or final order disposing of a case shall alter or review the same

except to correct a clerical or arithmetical error. The Section is based on an

acknowledged principle of law that once a matter is finally disposed of by

a Court, the said Court in the absence of a specific statutory provision

becomes functus officio and disentitled to entertain a fresh prayer for the

same relief unless the former order of final disposal is set aside by a Court

of competent jurisdiction in a manner prescribed by law. The Court

becomes functus officio the moment the official order disposing of a case is

signed. Such an order cannot be altered except to the extent of correcting a

clerical or arithmetical error.

I am in no position to agree with the procedure adopted by learned High Court

Judge in this regard, which was in contravention of the limitations imposed on

a trial Judge to alter a judgment or an order once pronounced.

A Judge is expected to pronounce a well-considered judgment or an order,

which amounts to the final determination of the question or questions before

him. It is my view that, therefore, a Judge has no legal right to enter another

order on the same matter, on the basis that the previous order was the

unedited version of his order and it has been pronounced due to a mistake

occurred in printing the same, however good the intentions of the learned High

Court Judge to pronounce an order he believed to be a more perfect one,

although it may not have changed the previously pronounced final

determination.

Page 13 of 16

I find that by adopting such a procedure, the learned High Court Judge, maybe

inadvertently, has created a situation where there are two orders in the same

matter of which the affected parties will be unable to understand the rationale

behind it.

If this kind of procedure is allowed to stand, no finality can be attached to any

such order or a judgment of a Court of first instance, and the purpose of

appellate procedure available for any dissatisfied party of an action would

become meaningless.

Therefore, it is my considered view that both the orders marked P-04 and P-05

cannot be allowed to stand.

Having determined the above questions of law in favour of the petitioner, to

have a finality on the matter, I will now focus my attention to the legal

provisions considered by the learned High Court Judge to dismiss the action

initiated by the Director General of the Commission.

For that purpose, I will only consider the order marked P-04 dated 12-09-2022,

which was the order that has to be considered for any such purpose.

It is clear that the learned High Court Judge has taken guidance from the case

of Anoma S. Polwatte Vs. The Director General of the Commission to

Investigate allegations of Bribery or Corruption (Supra) in determining that

the action cannot be maintained before the High Court.

This was a case where Anoma S Polwatte challenged the decision of the

Director General of the Commission to initiate action against her by way of a

Writ application filed before the appropriate forum, namely, before the Supreme

Court in terms of section 24(1) of the Commission to Investigate Allegations of

Bribery or Corruption Act (CIABOC), where she sought a Writ, which was

granted based on the applicability of section 11 of the CIABOC Act.

Page 14 of 16

It needs to be noted that when determining the matter, the learned High Court

Judge did not have the priceless advantage of the judgment of the Supreme

Court in the case of Indiketiya Hewage Kusumadasa Mahanama Vs. The

Commission to Investigate allegations of Bribery or Corruption, SC TAB-

1A and 1B/ 2020 decided on 11-01-2023, where the Five Judge Bench of the

Supreme Court resolved the application of section 11 of the CIABOC Act in

relation to actions filed before the High Court.

Vijith Malalgoda, P.C., J. referring to the Anoma Polwatte case at page 44

stated thus;

As already observed by us, when deciding the above case, this Court had

never intended to impose an additional requirement of submitting a written

directive given by the Commission when forwarding an indictment by the

Director General of the CIABOC to High Court other than following the

provisions of already identified under section 12(1) and (11) of the CIABOC

Act. If the Director General is directed under section 11 of the CIABOC Act

by the CIABOC to forward an indictment, he is only bound to follow the

provisions of section 12(1) and (11) of the CIABOC Act. In the absence of

any complaint that the Director General of CIABOC had failed to comply

with sections 12(1) and (11) if the CIABOC Act when forwarding the

indictment before the High Court at Bar, it is correct in refusing the

jurisdictional objection raised on behalf of the 2nd accused before the High

Court at Bar. The trial Judge before whom the indictment is fled is

therefore bound to accept the indictment and take up the trial unless there

is material to establish that Director General of CIABOC had failed to

comply with the provisions of sections 12(1) and (11) of the CIABOC Act.

Any party who intends to challenge an indictment forwarded by the

Director General CIABOC on the basis that the CIABOC has failed to

comply with section 11 of the CIABOC Act, the said challenge could only be

raised in an appropriate action before an appropriate forum.

Page 15 of 16

The appropriate action and the appropriate forum referred by his Lordship is

the filing an action in the nature of a Writ before the Supreme Court in terms

of section 24(1) of the CIABOC Act.

It is therefore clear that the learned High Court Judge had no mandate to

decide on an administrative function of the CIABOC, when there is a specific

forum in terms of the Act itself to amount a challenge to such an

administrative function.

I am of the view that the learned High Court Judge was misdirected as to the

relevant facts and the law when it was decided on his own motion to consider

the question of jurisdiction on the wrong premise of patent lack of jurisdiction

in deciding to dismiss the action and discharge the accused from the

proceedings.

This is an action where the petitioner has sought relief from this Court urging

the Courts intervention by invoking the revisionary jurisdiction of this Court.

It was held in the case of Hotel Galaxy (Pvt) Ltd. Vs. Mercantile Hotels

Management Ltd (1987) 1 SLR 5 that,

It is settled law that the exercise of the revisionary powers of the

appellate Court is confined to cases in which exceptional circumstances

exist warranting its intervention.

In the case of Wijesinghe Vs. Thamararatnam (Sriskantha Law Report Vol.

IV page 47) that,

Revision is a discretionary remedy and will not be available unless the

application discloses circumstances which shocks the conscience of the

Court.

Page 16 of 16

In the case of Vanik Incorporation Ltd. Vs. Jayasekare (1997) 2 SLR 365 it

was observed,

Revisionary powers should be exercised where a miscarriage of justice

has occasioned due to a fundamental rule of procedure being violated, but

only when a strong case is made out amounting to a positive miscarriage

of justice.

For the reasons considered as above, I am of the view that this is a situation

where a clear positive miscarriage of justice has occasioned, where exceptional

circumstances exist warranting the intervention of this Court to correct the

said positive miscarriage of justice.

Accordingly, I set aside the order dated 12-09-2022 marked P-04 and the order

dated P-05 of even date, but filed as a part of the case on 22-09-2022, as both

those orders cannot be allowed to stand.

I direct that the learned High Court Judge shall proceed to hear this action

commencing from where it stood before this order was pronounced, after taking

due procedural steps in that regard.

The Registrar of the Court is directed to communicate this order to the High

Court of Colombo for necessary compliance.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P. Kumararatnam, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal