IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal made in

terms of Article 331(1) of the Code

of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15

of 1979.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Court of Appeal Case No. Colombo 12.

HCC/003/19 Complainant

High Court of Colombo

Case No. 7522/14 Vs.

Thenuwara Anhendrige Sanjeewa

Udaya Kumara

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Thenuwara Anhendrige Sanjeewa

Udaya Kumara

Accused-Appellant

Vs.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Complainant-Respondent

2

BEFORE : K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J (P/CA)

WICKUM A. KALUARACHCHI, J

COUNSEL : Neranjan Jayasinghe for the Accused-

Appellant

Suharshi Herath, SSC for the

Respondent

WRITTEN SUBMISSION

TENDERED ON : 30.08.2019 (On behalf of the Accused-Appellant)

23.09.2019 (On behalf of the Respondent)

ARGUED ON : 04.03.2022

DECIDED ON : 05.04.2022

WICKUM A. KALUARACHCHI, J. The accused-appellant was convicted for the offences punishable under

Section 54A(b) and 54A(d) of the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs

Ordinance as amended, for trafficking and possessing 24.89 grams of

Heroin and was sentenced to death by the learned High Court Judge of

Colombo. This appeal has been preferred against the said conviction

and the sentence.

The learned Counsel for the appellant and the learned Senior State

Counsel for the respondent made oral submissions at the hearing of

this appeal. Prior to the hearing, written submissions have been filed

on behalf of both parties.

Prosecution case may be briefly summarized as follows:

On 20.05.2013, a team of police officers of the Police Narcotics Bureau

reached the Food City supermarket at Maradana around 6.45 a.m.

3

They met the informant who had given information to PW 6. Leaving the

rest of the team near the supermarket, PW 1 and PW 6 together with

the informant left in the informants three-wheeler towards Jalashaya

Road. When the accused-appellant was coming, the informant was sent

away and two police officers went close to the appellant, searched him

and found a parcel of Heroin in his right trouser pocket. Thereafter,

police officers went to search the appellants house but found nothing.

When the defence was called by the learned High Court Judge, the

appellant made a dock statement. Apart from that, the wife of the

appellant, an officer from the Surveyor General Department and the

Grama Niladari of the area were called to give evidence on behalf of the

appellant.

Seven grounds of appeal have been set out in the written submission of

the appellant. The 1st ground is that the evidence of the main

prosecution witness, PW 1 is untrustworthy and contradictory. The 2nd

and 4th grounds are that the learned High Court Judge had shifted the

burden of proof to the accused and had come to the conclusion on

assumptions. Grounds 3, 6 and 7 are based on the fact that defence

evidence has not been properly analyzed. The 5th ground is that the

learned Judge had arrived at a conclusion that the defence had not

challenged the prosecution evidence whereas the defence had clearly

challenged the evidence of PW 1 and PW 6.

I agree with the learned counsel for the appellant that some

observations of the learned High Court Judge are not perfectly correct

in law. The learned Judge has stated in his judgment that apart from

presenting the defence version, it had not been even suggested on

behalf of the appellant, a reason for the police officers to falsely

implicate the appellant for a serious charge like this. Also, the learned

Judge observed that the appellant had failed to prove that the notes of

the police officers are false. It is my view that the learned Judge should

4

not have made these observations because our law does not expect from

an accused in a criminal case to prove anything. Creating a reasonable

doubt on the prosecution case is sufficient for an accused to get an

acquittal. In addition, the learned High Court Judges observations that

the appellant had failed to prove that he was not arrested on the

Jalashaya Road is also incorrect. The burden of proving the fact that he

was arrested on the Jalashaya Road or in any other place is entirely on

the prosecution. Further, the learned Judges observation that the

defence has not challenged the evidence of the prosecution witnesses is

also incorrect. The appellant has challenged their evidence. Whether

the above challenge casts a reasonable doubt on the prosecution case

is another matter to consider.

This Court should consider whether the aforesaid defective

observations in the judgment may have influenced the final decision of

the learned Judge. Although the said observations are defective as

explained previously, there is no reason to revise or set aside the

judgment, if those observations have no impact on the findings of the

learned High Court Judge. Therefore, this court decided to consider the

arguments of the learned counsel for the appellant independently to see

whether the learned High Court Judges conclusion is correct.

It appears that all grounds of appeal are evolved on one main argument

advanced by the learned counsel for the appellant. His contention was

that the place of the arrest described by the PW 1 and PW 6 is wrong.

The learned counsel stressed the fact that Vidyodaya Pirivena is not

located near the junction where the Jalashaya Road and the Sri

Vajiragnana Mawatha joints. The defence version was PW 1 Ruwan

Kumara had arrested the appellant previously for a similar offence on

07.03.2011 and 18.05.2013, he came to the house of the appellant and

threatened to plead guilty for the previous offence. Since the appellant

had refused to do that, he was brought to Narcotic Bureau and

introduced Heroin, according to the appellant. Pointing out that the

5

location described by the witnesses about the place where the appellant

was allegedly arrested is not correct, the learned counsel for the

appellant contended that the prosecution witnesses could not describe

the place of the arrest accurately because they have arrested the

appellant in his house and not in the place where they described. In the

said circumstances, the learned counsel contended that the learned

High Court Judge has erred in rejecting the defence version.

The contention of the learned Senior State Counsel was that although

the witnesses were not sure about the name of the road for which they

have called Sri Vajiragnana Mawatha, both witnesses have clearly

given evidence regarding the place of the arrest. In addition, the learned

Senior State Counsel pointed out that the suggestions made to the

prosecution witnesses and the position taken by the appellant in

presenting the defence case are contradictory and thus defence version

has to be rejected.

Now, I proceed to consider the aforesaid central issues of this appeal.

The learned counsel for the appellant contended that according to

PW 1 and PW 6, the appellant was taken into custody at the junction

where the Jalashaya Road and Sri Vajiragnana Mawatha meet. The

learned counsel pointed out further that the said witnesses had stated

that the Vidyodaya Pirivena was near the said junction. However, the

learned counsel contended that the defence witness from the Surveyor

General Department and the Grama Niladari of that area who gave

evidence on behalf of the defence has proved that the Vidyodaya

Pirivena was about 500 meters away from the junction where Jalashaya

Road and Sri Vajiragnana Mawatha meet. Accordingly, the learned

counsel for the appellant advanced an argument that the prosecution

witnesses could not explain the said place correctly because they have

arrested the appellant when he was at home.

6

On the careful perusal of the evidence of both prosecution witnesses, it

is apparent that both of them have said that the name Vajiragnana

Mawatha may be wrong and they were not sure of the name of the road

but it is the road leading towards Maligakanda Court right next to

Ananda College. Also, it is apparent that both witnesses have clearly

stated that the appellant was arrested at the junction where the

Jalashaya Road meets the road runs near the Ananda College and the

Vidyodaya Pirivena was also located near that junction. It was not

challenged in any manner that Vidyodaya Pirivena was not located near

the junction where Jalashaya Road meets the road runs near the

Ananda College. Therefore, there is no any uncertainty about the place

of the arrest and both police witnesses have clearly described the place

of the arrest. Hence, the mistake done in mentioning the name of the

road which is near Ananda College has no impact on the credibility of

the witnesses and does not create any reasonable doubt about the place

of the arrest.

The only other matter left to be considered is whether the learned High

Court Judge is correct in rejecting the defence version. In this case, the

defence did not have one version. There were two defence versions. One

version has been suggested to the prosecution witnesses. The other

version has been disclosed when the defence case was presented.

It was suggested to PW 1 and PW 6 that Heroin had been introduced to

the appellant because of the animosity he had with the informant. (Page

123 and 193 of the appeal brief) When the appellant made the dock

statement, his position was that PW 1 came to the house of the

appellant and threatened to plead guilty for the previous case instituted

by PW 1 against the appellant for a similar offence. As he refused to

plead guilty, the Heroin was introduced to the appellant according to

him. It is vital to be mentioned that the said position taken up at the

stage of the defence case being presented had not been even suggested

to PW 1 or PW 6 when they were cross-examined. No single question

7

has been asked from PW 1 or PW 6 in respect of the aforesaid defence

position. In the Indian Judgment of Sarvan Singh V. State of Punjab

(2002 AIR SC (iii) 3652 at 3655 and 3656) it was held that it is a rule

of essential justice that whenever the opponent has declined to avail

himself of the opportunity to put his case in cross-examination, it must

follow that the evidence tendered on that issue ought to be accepted.

In the instant action, the appellant has put his case in cross-

examination but it was totally contrary to the case presented by the

appellant, when the defence was called after the prosecution case had

been closed. What was put to PW 1 and PW 6 is that Heroin was

introduced because of the animosity the appellant had with the

informant. That was the appellants case when the evidence was led on

behalf of the prosecution. However, when the defence case was

presented, there was no single word uttered regarding the animosity

between the appellant and the informant. The appellant came with a

new contradictory version and stated that PW 1 had come to his house

and threatened to plead guilty for the previous case. This version has

never been put to PW 1 when he was cross-examined.

It is to be noted that there is nothing wrong in taking two positions as

the defence. However, there cannot be two different defence versions.

Especially, in the instant action, one version has been put to the

prosecution witnesses and another version has been taken when the

defence case was presented. In addition, the position taken up in the

defence case has not been put to the prosecution witnesses and the

position that was suggested to the prosecution witnesses has never

been taken up, when the defence case was presented. Taking two

different positions at two different stages of the trial confirms that the

appellant did not have a probable and acceptable version. In these

circumstances, the learned High Court Judge is perfectly correct in

rejecting unacceptable, contradictory two versions of the appellant.

8

Furthermore, no contradictions were marked or omissions were

highlighted in the evidence of PW 1 and PW 6. The evidence of the

prosecution witnesses is corroborated by each other as described by the

learned High Court Judge. There is no acceptable defence version.

Accordingly, I hold that the decision of the learned High Court Judge to

convict the appellant for both counts is correct. The learned High Court

Judge has imposed the sentence considering the quantity of Heroin.

For the foregoing reasons, the Judgment dated 31.01.2019, the

conviction and the sentence are affirmed and the appeal is dismissed.

Appeal dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K. Priyantha Fernando, J (P/CA)

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL