==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0211/2024

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal Case No. Muruthawela Sumanajothi Himi

CA/HCC/ 0211/2024

High Court of Tangalle

Case No. THC/57/2021

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

CA/HCC/0211/2024

2 | P a g e

COUNSEL : Anil Silva, PC with Arindra Silva for the

Appellant.

Wasantha Perera, DSG for the Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 10/02/2026

DECIDED ON : 27/03/2026

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Appellant was indicted by the Attorney General under

Section 365 B (2) (b) of the Penal Code as amended by Act No. 22 of 1995 for

committing the offence of Grave Sexual Abuse on Rathnayake Mudiyanselage

Chamidu Madhushanka Pushpakumara on 09.08.2015.

Alternatively, the Appellant was charged under Section 345 of Penal Code for

committing Sexual Harassment on Rathnayake Mudiyanselage Chamidu

Madhushanka Pushpakumara on 09.08.2015.

On 06.09.2023, the prosecution had withdrawn the first charge of the

indictment. As such, the Appellant was discharged from count number One

and the trial had proceeded on the second count only. Further, the second

CA/HCC/0211/2024

3 | P a g e

charge was amended after the conclusion of the examination-in-chief of the

victim, PW1.

After leading all the necessary witnesses and marking productions, the

prosecution had closed the case. The Learned High Court Judge had called

for the defence and the Appellant had made a statement from the dock and

closed his case.

The Learned High Court Judge after considering the evidence presented by

both parties before him, convicted the Appellant as charged, and sentenced

the Appellant to 03 years of rigorous imprisonment and imposed a fine of

Rs.7,500/- subject to a default sentence of 03 months rigorous

imprisonment. In addition, a compensation of Rs.100000/- to PW1 was

ordered with a default sentence of 06 months simple imprisonment.

During the argument, the Appellant was present in Court as he was granted

bail pending appeal by the High Court.

The Facts of this case albeit briefly are as follows.

According to PW1 - the victim of this case, he had been about 12 years old

when he faced this bitter ordeal. When he gave evidence, he was 20 years

old.

According to the victim, he had come to the Naigala Rajamaha Viharaya on

09.08.2015 at around 8.30am with his two cousin sisters to practice for a

speech contest. When he was studying in a hall, the Appellant who is a

teacher by profession and resides in the said temple called and inquired as

to what the victim was doing at that time. When he had informed the purpose

of his visit, the Appellant had gone away from the place.

A little while later, the Appellant, from a two storied building, called PW1

again. When PW1 went into the building the Appellant was seated on a

revolving chair and had held PW1 by his left bicep. Then the Appellant had

CA/HCC/0211/2024

4 | P a g e

inquired as to whether he is the son of Nishanthi, the mother of PW1. PW1

had then answered in the affirmative. At that point the Appellant had

inserted his hand up to the lower part of PW1’s stomach and had started to

rub gently. As his mother had already taught him about child abuse by

elders, he had worshipped the Appellant and had gone away quickly. PW1

had immediately informed about the incident to his cousin sister Danushika

PW3 and after Dhamma School was over, the victim and PW3 had gone to

his aunt’s house and informed her about this incident. Thereafter, PW1 had

informed his parents about the incident as well.

PW1 with his parents had first gone to the ASP’s Office Tangalle and upon

direction he had gone to the Weeraketiya Police on the following day and

lodged his complaint.

Although the defence suggested that the Appellant had only touched his face,

PW1 had vehemently denied the said suggestion and reiterated what he had

said in his complaint.

PW2, the mother of PW1 had corroborated the evidence given by PW1 and

denied that the complaint lodged against the Appellant is a fabricated one.

PW3, the cousin sister of PW1 too had corroborated the evidence given by

PW1. According to her PW1 had told her immediately after the incident, that

the Appellant had touched his face and rubbed his stomach and tried to

insert his hand into his shorts. She too denied that this is not a fabricated

against the Appellant.

The JMO who had examined the victim had noted no injuries on PW1. In the

history given to the doctor, the victim had narrated the same incident he had

given in evidence.

After the closure of the prosecution’s case, the defence was called, and the

Appellant had given a statement from the dock and closed his case.

CA/HCC/0211/2024

5 | P a g e

The Learned President’s Counsel argued that the prosecution has failed to

prove the case beyond a reasonable doubt.

In a case of this nature, the testimonial trustworthiness and credibility of

PW1, mainly the probability should be assessed with utmost care and

caution by the trial judge. The Learned Trial Judge must satisfy and accept

the evidence of a child witness after assessing his competence and credibility

as a witness.

It was recognized in England as early as 1778 that children could be

competent witnesses in criminal trials.

In R v. Brasier 168 Eng. Rep.202 [1779] the court held:

“…….that an infant, though underage of seven years, may be sworn in

a criminal prosecution, provided such infant appears, on strict

examination by the Court, to possess a sufficient knowledge of the

nature and consequences of an oath… for there is no precise or fixed

rule as to the time within which infants are excluded from giving

evidence; but their admissibility depends upon the sense and reason

they entertain of the danger and impiety of falsehood, which is to be

collected from their answers to questions propounded to them by the

Court; but if they are found incompetent to take oath, their testimony

cannot be received ….”.

In Ratansinh Dalsukhbhai Nayak v. State of Gujarat [2004] 1 SCC 64 the

court held that:

“The decision on the question whether the child witness has sufficient

intelligence primarily rests with the trial Judge who notices his manners,

his apparent possession or lack of intelligence, and said Judge may

resort to any examination which will tend to disclose his capacity and

CA/HCC/0211/2024

6 | P a g e

intelligence as well as his understanding of the obligation of an oath.

The decision of the trial court may, however, be disturbed by the higher

Court if from what is preserved in the records, it is clear his conclusion

was erroneous. This precaution is necessary because child witnesses

are amenable to tutoring and often live in a world of make beliefs.

Though it is an established principle that child witnesses are dangerous

witnesses as they are pliable and liable to be influenced easily, shaked

and moulded, but it is also an accepted norm that if after careful scrutiny

of their evidence the Court comes to the conclusion that there is an

impress of truth in it, there is no obstacle in the way of accepting the

evidence of a child witness”.

In Ranjeet Kumar Ram v. State of Bihar [2015] SCC Online SC 500 the

court held that:

“Evidence of the child witness and its credibility would depend upon the

circumstances of each case. Only precaution which the court has to bear

in mind while assessing the evidence of a child witness is that the

witness must be a reliable one”.

E.R.S.R Coomaraswamy in his “Law of Evidence” Volume 2 Book 2 at page

658 has stated referring to child witness;

“There is no requirement in English law, that the sworn evidence of a

child witness needs to be corroborated as a matter of law. But the jury

should be warned, not to look for corroboration, but of the risks involved

in acting on the sole evidence of young girls and boys, though they may

do so if convinced of the truth of such evidence…….This requirement is

based on the susceptibility of children to the influence of others and to

the surrender to their imaginations”.

CA/HCC/0211/2024

7 | P a g e

At page 659 it states, “As regards the sworn testimony of children, there

is no requirement as in England to warn of the risk involved in acting on

their sole testimony, though it may desirable to issue such a warning,

though the failure to do so will generally not affect the conviction”.

In the case of R v Barker [2010] EWCA Crim 4 – Lord Chief Justice (England

and Wales Court of Appeal) it was held;

“……We emphasise that in our collective experience the age of a witness

is not determinative on his or her ability to give truthful and accurate

evidence. Like adults some children will provide truthful and accurate

testimony, and some will not. However, children are not miniature adults,

but children, and to be treated and judged for what they are, not what they

will, in years ahead, grow to be. Therefore, although due allowance must

be made in the trial process for the fact that they are children with, for

example, a shorter attention span than most adults, none of the

characteristics of childhood, and none of the special measures which apply

to the evidence of children carry with them the implicit stigma that children

should be deemed in advance to be somehow less reliable than adults. The

purpose of the trial process is to identify the evidence which is reliable and

that which is not, whether it comes from an adult or a child. If competent,

as defined by the statutory criteria, in the context of 12 credibility in the

forensic process, the child witness starts off on the basis of equality with

every other witness. In trial by jury, his or her credibility is to be assessed

by the jury, taking into account every specific personal characteristic which

may bear on the issue of credibility, along with the rest of the available

evidence.”

In State of UP. v Krishna Master AIR 2010 SC 3071 it was held;

“This Court is of the firm opinion that it would be doing injustice to a child

witness possessing sharp memory to say that it is inconceivable for him to

CA/HCC/0211/2024

8 | P a g e

recapitulate facts in his memory witnessed by him long ago. A child of

tender age is always receptive to abnormal events which take place in its

life and would never forget those events for the rest of his life. The child

would be able to recapitulate correctly and exactly when asked about the

same in future.”

Considering the above cited judicial decisions and the writings, as the

credibility of the evidence of a child witness would predominantly depend on

the circumstances of each case, it is the duty of the Learned Trial Judge to

assess and decide on the evidence given by the child witness.

In this case, the creditworthiness of the evidence given by the victim did not

suffer at any stage of the trial. No contradictions were highlighted in his

evidence. The Learned High Court Judge had considered the evidence given

by PW1 with caution and care and correctly held that PW1’s evidence is

convincing and cogent and sufficient on its own to prove the case against the

Appellant.

The victim’s evidence is further supported by the evidence given by his

mother P2 and his cousin sister PW3.

Hence, the argument put forward by the Learned President’s Counsel cannot

be accepted. Further, as stated above, in this case the prosecution had

adduced all necessary witnesses to prove their case.

In this case considering the facts of the case and the act committed by the

Appellant, I conclude that this is not an appropriate case to order a custodial

sentence against the Appellant who is a priest and a school teacher.

Therefore, I set aside the sentence of three years rigorous imprisonment

imposed on the Appellant by the Learned High Court Judge of Tangalle, and

substitute a sentence of two years rigorous imprisonment suspended for ten

years. Further I order no fine. The compensation imposed by the Learned

High Court Judge will remain the same.

CA/HCC/0211/2024

9 | P a g e

Suspended sentence will come into operation on the date the Appellant

appear in the High Court.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgement to the High

Court of Tangalle along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL