==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 11

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

CA/PHC/117/22 MC Balangoda Case No: 63643 HC Rathnapura Case No: Rev. 75/2019

In the matter of an appeal in terms of Article 138 and 154 (P) of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka read with Act No 19 of 1999 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act.

Officer-In-Charge, Police station, Balangoda.

COMPLAINANT Vs. Mohommdu Irufan Infar No. 30/30, Randola, Kirimetitenna, Balangoda.

ACCUSED Rathnayake Mudiyanselage Prasanna Indika Rathnayake, No. 367, Mathawa, Kohilegedara, Kurunegala.

REGISTERED OWNER Vs. Rathnayake Mudiyanselage Prasanna Indika Rathnayake, No. 367, Mathawa, Kohilegedara, Kurunegala.

REGISTERED OWNER PETITIONER

Page 2 of 11

Officer-In-Charge, Police Station, Balangoda.

COMPLAINANT RESPONDENT Mohommdu Irufan Infar No. 30/30, Randola, Kirimetitenna, Balangoda ACCUSED RESPONDENT

Vs.

1. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12. 2. Indra Finance Ltd.

Now known as, (Serendib Finance Ltd), No. 187, Katugasthota Road, Kandy.

RESPONDANTS

And now between Rathnayake Mudiyanselage Prasanna Indika Rathnayake, No. 367, Mathawa, Kohilegedara, Kurunegala.

REGISTERED OWNER PETITIONER APPEALANT

Vs.

Page 3 of 11

Before : Hon. Justice B. Sasi Mahendran

Hon Justice Amal Ranaraja

Counsel: Maheesha Dushyantha for the Petitioner

Riyaz Bary D.S.G. for the State

Written 19.11.2025 (by the Accused-Appellant)

Submissions 17. 02.2026 (by the Respondent)

Officer-In-Charge, Police Station, Balangoda.

COMPLAINT RESPONDANT-RESPONDANT Mohommdu Irufan Infar No. 30/30, Randola, Kirimetitenna, Balangoda

ACCUSED RESPONDENT-

RESPONDENT

1. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12. 2. Indra Finance Ltd.

(Serendib Finance Ltd), No. 187, Katugasthota Road, Kandy.

RESPONDENT-RESPONDENT

Page 4 of 11

On

Argued On : 26.03.2026

Judgment On: 25.05.2026

JUDGMENT

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

The Registered Owner -Petitioner-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the “Appellant”)

instituted this appeal against the order of the Learned High Court Judge of the

Provincial High Court of Sabaragamuwa Province holding in Rathnapura, in case No.

RA 75/2019 dated 03.09.2022, where the Learned High Court Judge affirmed the order

of the Learned Magistrate of Balangoda bearing No. 63643 dated 03.05.2019, where the

Learned Magistrate had confiscated a vehicle bearing No. SP LF 7807 consequent to an

inquiry.

The Accused-Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the Accused) was

charged before the Magistrate Court of Balangoda under Section 3(c), read with Section

3(a)(i), and Section 4 of the Animals Act No. 29 of 1958, together with Section 2(a)(i) of

the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Ordinance No. 13 of 1907, for transporting five

head of cattle in a cruel manner. The Accused entered a plea of guilty to the charge,

whereupon the Learned Magistrate duly convicted him. Following the conviction, the

Learned Magistrate proceeded to conduct an inquiry in terms of Section 3(A) of the

Animals Act as amended regarding the vehicle that had been seized for its involvement

in the unlawful transportation of animals, in contravention of the Act.

The Learned Magistrate allowed the Appellant to show cause as to why the vehicle

should not be confiscated. In an inquiry of this nature, it is incumbent upon the owner of

the vehicle to demonstrate to the Court that all reasonable precautions were taken to

prevent the vehicle's use in the commission of the offence, or the vehicle has been used

without his knowledge for the commission of the offence.

Page 5 of 11

The amendment to Section 3(A) Animals Act No. 29 of 1958 provides that,

“Where any person is convicted of an offence under this Part or any regulations

made thereunder, any vehicle used in the commission of such offence shall, in

addition to any other punishment prescribed for such offence, be liable, by order

of the convicting Magistrate, to confiscation:

Provided, however, that in any case where the owner of the vehicle is a third

party, no order of confiscation shall be made, if the owner proves to the

satisfaction of the Court that he has taken all precautions to prevent the use of

such vehicle or that the vehicle has been used without his knowledge for the

commission of the offence.”

In accordance with the proviso, an order for confiscation cannot be issued if the

Appellant establishes, on the balance of probabilities, the following matters:

1. that he has taken all precautions to prevent the use of the vehicle for the

commission of the offence;

2. that the vehicle has been used for the commission of the offence without his

knowledge.

This concept was considered by S.N. Silva J (as he was then) in the case of Faris v

Officer in Charge Police station, Galendindunuwawe and another

“This section has been considered in the case of Nizar v. Inspector of Police,

Wattegama. In that case Vythyalingam, J. considered the implications of the

proviso to Section 3A. It is observed that in view of this proviso, an order for

confiscation could be made only if the owner was present at the time of the

detection or there was some evidence suggesting that the owner was privy to the

offence.”

The above judgement was considered by Achala Wengappuli J, in the case of Attorney

General v Mohamed Buhari Ikram and another, SC Appeal 47/2008, Decided On

15.12.2022.

The issue to be determined is whether the Appellant has established, on the balance of

probabilities, any of the matters set out under the Animals Act.

Page 6 of 11

During the inquiry, Appellant contended that, through document X1, he had obtained a

vehicle from Indra Finance Limited. As he was unable to pay the lease rental, he

entered into a rental agreement with the Accused. The Appellant admitted that the

Accused was residing in Balangoda and that they had executed a business agreement,

marked as X.3 at the Ambalangoda, where the appellant was living in Kurunagala.

This fact was considered by the Learned Magistrate in his order. According to the

Appellant, this agreement expressly stipulated that the Accused was not to engage in

any illegal activities. However, following the arrest of the vehicle at Balangoida, the

Appellant came to know that it had been used by the Accused to transport animals

illegally. The appellant worked in the Kalpitiya hospital as a nurse, and he used to call

and inquire about the vehicle.

The learned magistrate was clearly unimpressed with the appellant’s evidence, rejected

it, and consequently made an order for confiscation.

It is pertinent to refer to the relevant portion of the impugned order of the learned

Magistrate.

Page 193 of the brief,

මේ අනුව මුල් අවස්ථාමේදී මෙෙ ම ාරි රථමේ අනනයතාවද ප්‍රශ්නගත වී ඇති බව වාර්ථා

කරමින් මෙෙ ම ාරි රථය වයාජ අංකයක් මයාදා සකස් කරන ද ම ාරි රථයක්ද යන්න පිළිබඳ

පරීක්ෂණ පවත්වන බවද පැමිණිල් අනාවරණය කර ඇත. මේ අනුව ලියාපදංචි අයිතිකරු සිය

සාක්ිමේදී අනාවරණය කළ පුද්ග යා පැමිණිල් විසින් මුල් අවස්ථාමේදී මෙෙ ම ාරි රථය අයිති

බවට ප්‍රකාශ කරමින් ප්‍රකාශයක් බාදුන් පුද්ග යාද එකෙ අමයකු බව මපනී යයි. මේ අනුව ම ාරි

රථමේ ලියාපදංචි අයිතිකරු ම ස මෙෙ නඩුමේ වරද පිළිගත් චූදත හා ගිවිසුෙකට එළඹීෙක් සිදු වුවද

එෙගින් මෙෙ ම ාරි රථමේ නියෙ අයිතිකරු නැතමහාත් සන්තකය දැරූ තැනැත්තා කවුද යන්න

ප්‍රශ්න සහගත මේ. විමශ්ෂමයන්ෙ ම ාරි රථමේ අංක සැසදීෙක් මනාවීමෙන්ද ඒ බව තවදුරටත් මපනී

යන්නකි.

මකමස් මවතත් මෙහිදී මූලිකවෙ මෙෙ අපරාදය සිදු කිරීෙ සදහා පූර්වාරක්ෂණ ක්‍රියාොර්ග ගත්

බව ඔප්පපු කිරීෙ ම ාරි රථමේ ලියාපදංචි අයිතිකරු සිදුක යුතු වන බැවින් ඔහු ඉදරිපත් කළ

කරුණ පිළිබද අධිකරණය සෑහීෙකට පත් මනාවන්මන් නේ ම ාරි රථය මුද හැරීෙක් කළ මනාහැකි

බව පැහැදලි වන්නකි. විමශ්ෂමයන්ෙ හුදු උපමදස් බා දීෙක් සියලු පූර්වාරක්ෂක ක්‍රියාොර්ග ගැනීෙක්

මනාවන බව මේරි ෙැටිල්ඩා සිල්වා එදරිව අයි.පී සිල්වා මපාලිස් ස්ථානය හබරණ CAPHC 86/97,

2010.07.08 හිදී තීරණය කර ඇත.

…………………….

Page 7 of 11

ම ාරි රථය බා ගත් මෙෙ නඩුමේ වරද පිළිගත් චූදත මෙෙ අපරාධය සිදු කිරීෙ සඳහා ම ාරි රථය

භාවිතා කළ බව පැහැදලි මේ. සෙස්ථ එෙ කරුණු සැ කීමේදී මෙෙ ම ාරි රථමේ ලියාපදංචි

අයිතිකරු කී අය මෙවැනි අපරාධයක් සිදුවීෙ වැළැක්වීෙ සඳහා සියලු පූර්වාරක්ෂක ක්‍රියාොර්ග ගත්

බව තහවුරු කර මනාෙැති බවට තීරණය කළ හැකි මේ. එමස්ෙ ලියාපදංචි අයිතිකරු සාක්ි බාදී

ඇති ආකාරය සහ වි ාෂය සැළකීමේදී ඔහු සිය ම ාරි රථමේ භාවිතාව සේබන්ධමයන් ප්‍රොණවත්

උනන්දුවකින් මසායා බ ා කටයුතු කර මනාෙැති වන බව පැහැදලි මේ.

I also note that the Learned Magistrate carefully analyzed the evidence presented and

was in a better position to assess the testimonial trustworthiness of the witnesses who

appeared before him. I am mindful that the credibility of witnesses is a question of fact,

and our courts have consistently held that the original courts are in a better position to

determine the testimonial trustworthiness of those witnesses. Accordingly, superior

courts are reluctant to interfere with such findings unless

a. the verdict of the judge is so unreasonable against the weight of the evidence

b. Or there is a misdirection of the law on the evidence.

At this juncture, I am mindful of the dictum of McDonald CJ in King v. Gunaratne and

Another, CLR V.14 page 144, Macdonnel CJ:

“This is an appeal mainly on facts from a Court which saw and heard the

witnesses to a Court which has not seen or heard them, and in dealing with this

judgment I have to apply the three tests, as they seem to be, which a Court of

Appeal must apply to an appeal coming to it on questions of fact. Can we say that

the verdict of the learned District Judge, namely, that these people are guilty,

was unreasonably. against the, weight of the evidence adduced on both sides?

Clearly it is not possible to say that. Can we say that there has been any

misdirection either on the law or on the evidence? Again I do not think it would

be possible to say so. There was a point of law argued here that accused had no

intention to cause loss in the end. I have dealt with that, and properly

understood, I do not think it is a misdirection in law at all. I do not remember

any other point that was seriously raised to this Court as a misdirection, Them

there is the third ground of interference, that the Court of trial has drawn the

wrong inferences from matter in evidence which is as much before this Court as.

it. was before the Court of trial, for instance, documents. Again, I do not think it

can be said that there has been any wrong inferences drawn by the Court of trial.

Page 8 of 11

On the contrary, the documents put in seem, rightly apprehended, to support the

findings of fact arrived at by the learned District Judge.”

He held further:

“The principles laid down by the authorities, referred to above, make it clear:

that, although the findings of a Magistrate on questions of fact are entitled to

great weight, yet, it is the duty of the Appellate Court to test, both intrinsically

and extrinsically the evidence led at the trial: that, if after a close and careful

examination of such evidence, the Appellate Court entertains a strong doubt as

to the guilt of the accused, the Appellate Court must give the accused the benefit

of such doubt.”

The main defence raised by the Appellant was that the agreement contained a condition

expressly prohibiting the Accused from engaging in any illegal activity. The issue is

whether the inclusion of such a clause alone is sufficient.

In the circumstances, the following judgements are relevant to the above contention.

H.G Sujith Priyantha vs OIC Poddala CA(PHC) 157/2012 by Chithrasiri J stated as

follows:

"This court on many occasions have decided that mere verbal instructions given

to the driver as to the manner in which the vehicle is to be used is not sufficient

to establish that owner has taken the necessary precautions to prevent the

offence being committed as required in the proviso to S3(A) of the Animals Act"

Recently, Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J in Officer in Charge v Ranbandaraghe Hasitha

Sulochana Priyarathne, SC Appeal 56/2024, decided on 16th of January 2026 held that,

“ In the present case, the respondent has only established that he issued certain

oral instructions to the driver. However, such instructions, by themselves, cannot

be regarded as constituting all the precautions that a prudent owner ought to

have taken. In his testimony before the learned Magistrate, the respondent

started that he had instructed the driver not to transport sand or wood but made

no mention issuing any direction with regard to the transportation of timber

without a valid permit. This omission is significant. The testimony of the accused

driver corroborates this position, as he too confirmed that the respondent had not

given any specific instructions regarding the transport of timber. The driver

Page 9 of 11

further stated that the respondent had no knowledge of the incident and that his

employment was terminated following the incident in question.

It is also noteworthy that the respondent admitted that he had never personally

inspected or visited the locations to verify the movements of his vehicle and had

solely on telephone communication for this purpose. Such a method cannot be

regarded as a sufficient precautionary measure. It I neither reasonable nor

realistic to expect that a driver engaged in unlawful activities would voluntarily

disclose such conduct to the vehicle owner during routine telephone calls.”

Considering the above judicial literature, I am of the view that the Appellant has failed

to establish, on the balance of probabilities, that he took all necessary and reasonable

precautionary measures to prevent the use of the vehicle in the commission of any

illegal activity, or that the offence was committed without his knowledge.

Upon perusal of the judgment of the Learned High Court Judge, it is evident that she

stated the Appellant had failed to demonstrate exceptional circumstances warranting

revision of the order made by the Learned Magistrate.

Page 118 of the brief

“මා ඉහතින් සඳහන් කරන්නට යෙදුන කරුණු අනුව යමම නඩුයේදී උගත් මයහේසේරාත්ුමා විසින්

සේවකීෙ තීන්දුයේදී වාහනෙ ලිොපදිංචි අයිතිකාර යපත්සම්කරුට මුදාහැරීමක් යනාකරන බවටත්

එනයින් වාහනෙ රාජසන්තක කරන බවටත් කර ඇති අවසාන නියෙෝගෙ නිවැරද නියෙෝගෙක්

බවටත්, එකී නියෙෝගෙ යවනසේ කිරීමට තරම් වන්නා වූ සුවිය ේෂ කාරණා කිසිවක් අනාවරණෙ වී

යනාමැති බවටත් මම තීරණෙ කරමි.”

I hold that the Learned High Court Judge correctly arrived at the conclusion,

considering the precaution that was taken by the Appellant and evaluating the order of

the Learned Magistrate.

At this juncture, it is my considered view that, in the instant case, the Appellant had

given his vehicle to a third party, Accused, on a rental basis, thereby placing control of

the vehicle in the hands of the Accused. When the third party has control of the vehicle,

can the Appellant then contend before the Court that he took all necessary precautions

to prevent its use in the commission of any illegal activity, or that the offence was

committed without his knowledge? The Appellant could not even establish that the

driver was his employee, through whom he exercised control over the vehicle.

Page 10 of 11

It is my considered view that this application is frivolous, and that the Appellant has

abused the time of the Court by filing it before the Magistrate’s Court in order to delay

the confiscation proceedings. When the vehicle is rented to the Accused under the

Agreement, and the Accused thereby assumes independent possession and control over

it, any breach of the Agreement by the Accused entitles the Appellant to seek legal

remedy by instituting proceedings before the District Court.

The fact as to who has control over the vehicle in issue has been gone into by Sisira de

Abrew, J, in Oriental Finance Services Corporation Ltd vs Range Forest Officer and

Another [2011] 1 SLR 86.

“In the present case the registered owner is the one who drove the vehicle at the

time of the commission of the offence. He was convicted on his own plea. If the

court is going to release the vehicle on the basis that the owner of the vehicle is

the absolute owner, then after the release, it is possible for the absolute owner to

give the vehicle to another person. If this person commits a similar offence, the

finance company can take up the same position, and the vehicle would be again

released. Then where is the end to the commission of the offence?”

Further held that,

“The absolute owner has no control over the use of the vehicle except to retake

the possession of the vehicle for non-payment of instalments.”

The above dictum was considered by His Lordship Amal Ranaraja J in Mahamudali

Arachchilage Sujana Krunarathne v Office in Charge, Police Station, Weerambugedara

and two others in CA PHC 53/2023, decided on 20.05.2026.

Further, in an inquiry in the nature of the one in question, the owner of a vehicle is

considered to be the person who has control over the vehicle in issue.

Having regard to the above circumstances, I find no reason to interfere with the order of

the Learned High Court Judge dated 03.09.2022, and the order of the Learned

Magistrate dated 03.05.2019

The appeal is accordingly dismissed, and I order the Appellant to pay Rs. 500,000/= as

the state cost.

Page 11 of 11

I direct the Registrar to communicate this order to the Magistrate's Court of Balangoda

for further compliance.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Amal Ranaraja, J.

I AGREE

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL