Page 1 of 6

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

In the matter of an application in terms of Article 154G of the Constitution and High Court of the Province (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 pf 1990. Officer-in-Charge Police Station, Welipenna.

Plaintiff

Vs. 1. Duwage Kularathna,

Manana, Navuththuduwa. 2. Fernando Rosalin,

Budu Gedara Watta, Keeranthidiya, Navuththuduwa. 3. Kalinga Lisi Nona

Budu Gedara Watta, Keeranthidiya, Navuththuduwa. 4. Maddage Mahindarathna,

Budu Gedara Watta, Keeranthidiya, Navuththuduwa.

1st Party 5. Kalinga Ranasingha 6. Kalinga Baby Nona 7. Kalinga Somapala 8. Kalinga Ariyadasa 9. Anagipura Agnus 10. Kalinga Karunawathi

All of Keeranthidiya, Navuththuduwa.

Intervenient 1st Party

Agampodidurage Somapala alias Remiyal, Keeranthidiya, Navuththuduwa.

2nd Party

AND

Court of Appeal Application No: CA (PHC) 131/2013

High Court of Kalutara Revision Application No: HC 19/11 Rev Magistrates Court of Matugama Case No: 66990/10

Page 2 of 6

Agampodidurage Somapala alias Remiyal, Keeranthidiya, Navuththuduwa.

2nd Party-Petitioner

Vs.

1. Duwage Kularathna,

Manana, Navuththuduwa. 2. Fernando Rosalin,

Budu Gedara Watta, Keeranthidiya, Navuththuduwa. 3. Kalinga Lisi Nona

Budu Gedara Watta, Keeranthidiya, Navuththuduwa. 4. Maddage Mahindarathna,

Budu Gedara Watta, Keeranthidiya, Navuththuduwa. 1st Party-Respondents 5. Kalinga Ranasingha 6. Kalinga Baby Nona 7. Kalinga Somapala 8. Kalinga Ariyadasa 9. Anagipura Agnus 10. Kalinga Karunawathi

All of Keeranthidiya, Navuththuduwa.

Intervenient 1st Party-Respondents

11. Officer-in-Charge

Police Station, Welipenna.

Plaintiff-Respondent

12. Hon. Attorney General

Respondent AND NOW Agampodidurage Somapala alias Remiyal, Keeranthidiya, Navuththuduwa.

2nd Party-Petitioner-Appellant

Vs.

1. Duwage Kularathna,

Manana, Navuththuduwa.

Page 3 of 6

2. Fernando Rosalin,

Budu Gedara Watta, Keeranthidiya, Navuththuduwa. 3. Kalinga Lisi Nona

Budu Gedara Watta, Keeranthidiya, Navuththuduwa. 4. Maddage Mahindarathna,

Budu Gedara Watta, Keeranthidiya, Navuththuduwa. 1st Party-Respondent-Respondents 5. Kalinga Ranasingha 6. Kalinga Baby Nona 7. Kalinga Somapala 8. Kalinga Ariyadasa 9. Anagipura Agnus 10. Kalinga Karunawathi

All of Keeranthidiya, Navuththuduwa.

Intervenient 1st Party-Respondent-

Respondents

11. Officer-in-Charge

Police Station, Welipenna.

Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent

12. Hon. Attorney General

Respondent-Respondent Before: Prasantha De Silva, J. K.K.A.V. Swarnadhipathi, J.

Counsel: Laknath Seneviratne for the 2nd Party-Petitioner-

Appellant.

Viran Fernando for the 1st Party-Respondent-Respondents. Both parties agree to dispose this matter by way of written submissions.

Written Submissions 30.07.2020 by the 2nd Party-Petitioner-Petitioner. tendered on: 01.02.2023 by the 1st Party-Respondent-Respondents.

Decided on: 23.02.2023

Page 4 of 6

Prasantha De Silva, J.

Judgment

This is an appeal emanating from the Order of the learned High Court Judge dated

08.08.2013 affirming the Order of the learned Magistrate dated 24.05.2011 that held

against the 2nd Party-Petitioner-Appellant.

It appears that 1st Party-Respondent-Respondents [hereinafter referred to as the

Respondents] had made a complaint to the Welipenna Police Station on 23.10.2010

against the 2nd Party-Petitioner-Appellant [hereinafter referred to as the Appellant]

stating that the Appellant along with two others had entered the land in dispute and

attempted to clear the same and take control over the property.

Consequently, the Officer-in-Charge of the Police Station Welipenna had filed an

information in terms of Section 66 (1) (a) of the Primary Courts Procedure Act No.44

of 1979. The learned Magistrate who was acting as the Primary Court Judge, after

having inquired into the matter had delivered the Order on 24.05.2011, in terms of

Section 68 (3) of the Primary Courts Procedure Act in favour of the 1st Party-

Respondents restoring their possession to the land in dispute.

Since there is no right of appeal conferred on the aggrieved party under the Primary

Courts Procedure Act against an Order of a learned Magistrate, the 2nd Party

Respondent-Petitioner had invoked the revisionary jurisdiction of the Provincial High

Court of the Western Province holden in Kalutara. The learned High Court Judge

too has affirmed the findings of the learned Magistrate.

Being aggrieved by the said Order of the learned High Court Judge, the 2nd Party

Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant [hereinafter referred to as the Appellant] has

preferred this appeal seeking to have the said Order of the learned Magistrate as

well as the Order of the learned High Court Judge set aside.

In the case of Jayasekarage Bandulasena and Others Vs. Galla Kankanamge

Chaminda Kushantha and Others CA (PHC) 147/2009 C.A.M 19.10.2017] Surasena

J. emphasized that it would be relevant to bear in mind that the appeal before this

Court is an appeal against an Order pronounced by the Provincial High Court in

exercising its revisionary jurisdiction. Thus, the task before this Court is not to

Page 5 of 6

consider an appeal against the Primary Court Order, but to consider an appeal in

which an Order pronounced by the Provincial High Court in the exercise of its

revisionary jurisdiction is sought to be impugned.

When perusing the Order of the learned High Court Judge, it is seen that the learned

High Court Judge has considered the evidence placed before the learned Magistrate

and come to the conclusion that the learned Magistrate had analyzed and evaluated

the evidence placed adduced before him and come to the correct findings of law

and facts and held with the 1st Party Respondent-Respondents in this appeal.

It appears that the learned High Court Judge has observed an availability of an

alternative remedy for the Appellant in the instant case. However, the Appellant

had invoked the revisionary jurisdiction of the Provincial High Court of Kalutara.

In this respect, Court draws the attention to the case of Devi Property Development

[Pvt] Ltd. And Another Vs. Lanka Medical [Pvt] Ltd. CA 518/2001 C.A.M.

20.06.2001 where Udalagama J. emphasized that revision is an extraordinary

jurisdiction vested to be exercised under exceptional circumstances, if no other

remedy is available.

The learned High Court Judge has observed that Appellant in this appeal had not

established exceptional circumstances in the High Court to have the Order of the

learned Magistrate dated 24.05.2011 revised.

The revisionary jurisdiction of the High Court can be invoked against the Order of

the learned Magistrate only when there is a miscarriage of justice or theres any

injustice caused to the party concerned that shocks the conscience of Court. The

Appellant had failed to establish that a miscarriage of justice or any injustice was

caused to the Appellant by the Order of the learned Magistrate. As a result, the

learned High Court Judge had held that Appellant in this appeal has not established

exceptional circumstances to invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of the High Court to

have the Order of the learned Magistrate dated 24.05.2011 revised.

Therefore, the learned High Court Judge was right when he refused to intervene

with the Order of the learned Magistrate.

Page 6 of 6

Since the learned High Court Judge has observed that the impugned Order of the

learned Magistrate is well founded, we see no reason to interfere with the Order of

the learned Magistrate dated 24.05.2011 and Order of the learned High Court Judge

dated 08.08.2013.

Hence, the appeal is dismissed with cost.

Appeal dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K.K.A.V. Swarnadhipathi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL