1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for mandates in the nature of Writs of Certiorari and Prohibition under and in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

CA (Writ) Application No. 51/2021

Manodara Aacharige Chaminda Sugath, Chairman, Ampara Urban Council, Ampara.

PETITIONER

Vs. 1) Anuradha Yahampath, Governor, Eastern Province, Governors Secretariat, Lower Road, Orr Hill, Trincomalee. 2) N. Manivannan, Commissioner of Local Government, Department of Local Government, Kanniya Road, Varothayanagar, Trincomalee.

3) A.T.M.Rafee, Regional Assistant Commissioner of Local Government, Office of the Assistant Commissioner of Local Government, Kachcheri Road, Ampara.

4) Dulip Lal Kumanayake, Vice Chairman,

2

Urban Council, Ampara. 5) N.P.B. Pethiyagoda, Secretary, Ampara Urban Council, Ampara. 6) Ampara Urban Council, Ampara.

7) Tyrrell Berenger. 8) D.L. Sudharshana Dahanayake. 9) D.M. Anura Bandara. 10) K.S.D. Gaya Chaminda Jayasundara. 11) Indika Nalin Jayawickrama 12) Saman Indika Moraes 13) Padmini Surasinghe. 14) H.G. Sriyani Pushpalatha 15) W.A. Chandralatha 16) K.A. Chaminda Krishantha 17) K. Kelum Kumara Fernando 18) Upatissa Wijewickrema

7th 18th Respondents are members of the Ampara Urban Council, Ampara.

19) Sagara Kariyawasam,

Secretary, Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna, Battaramulla.

20) Nimal G. Punchihewa,

Chairman,

Election Commission of Sri Lanka, Sarana Mawatha, Rajagiriya.

21) Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department, Hulftsdorp Street, Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

3

Before: Arjuna Obeyesekere, J / President of the Court of Appeal Mayadunne Corea, J Counsel: Jagath Wickramanayake, P.C., with Keishara Perera for the Petitioner

Manohara Jayasinghe, Senior State Counsel for the 1st Respondent Ruwantha Cooray for the 7th - 17th Respondents Supported on: 18th February 2021, 3rd March 2021, 25th March 2021 and 30th March

2021 Written Tendered on behalf of the Petitioner on 19th April 2021 Submissions:

Tendered on behalf of the 1st Respondent and 7th - 17th Respondents on 20th April 2021 Decided on: 10th June 2021 Arjuna Obeyesekere, J., P/CA

The issue in this application relates to the failure on the part of the Petitioner, the

Chairman of the 6th Respondent, Ampara Urban Council, to have the budget of the

6th Respondent for the year 2021 passed by the members of the 6th Respondent (i.e.

the 4th, 7th 18th Respondents), and the consequences that should flow from such

failure.

In terms of Section 2(1) of the Urban Councils Ordinance (the Ordinance), the

Minister may, by Order published in the Gazette, declare any area, which by reason

of its development or its amenities is urban in character, to be a town for the

purposes of the Ordinance. Section 4 provides that, the Urban Council constituted

for each town shall .... be the local authority, within the administrative limits of the

town, charged with the regulation, control and administration of all matters relating

to the public health, public utility services and public thoroughfares, and generally

with the protection and promotion of the comfort, convenience and welfare of the

people and the amenities of the town. It is observed that in addition to the above,

the relevant Urban Councils are responsible for the maintenance of public drains,

watercourses, public fairs, local markets, lighting of streets and public places etc.

4

Thus, an Urban Council plays a very important role in the day to day lives of the

people living within its area. It is therefore paramount that an Urban Council has the

necessary financial allocations in place in the form of its annual budget approved by

its members to carry out and perform its statutory duties.

Members are elected by the People to the Urban Councils every four years, with an

expectation that the members so elected would address the day to day issues of the

Urban Council area in an expeditious and efficient manner. Not only should the

elected representatives of the People be efficient, they should at all times ensure

good governance, maintain strict financial discipline in respect of the funds of the

local authority, refrain from any abuse of power and comply with the provisions of

the Ordinance.

I shall at the outset consider the four provisions of the Ordinance, which are

particularly relevant to the issue that has arisen for the determination of this Court,

namely Sections 26(2), 178, 178A and the proviso to Section 178A.

I shall commence with Section 178, in terms of which:

The Chairman of every Urban Council shall, each year, on or before such date

as may be fixed by by-laws of the Council or by rules made under section 193,

prepare and submit to the Council a budget for the next succeeding year in

such form as may be prescribed by the Commissioner, and containing:

(a) the details of the proposed expenditure set out in items under appropriate

heads;

(b) an estimate of the available income of the Council from sources other than

rates;

(c) an estimate of the rate or rates necessary for the purpose of providing for

the proposed expenditure.

The necessity for an Urban Council to have a budget and the obligation of the

Chairman of the Council to take responsibility for the preparation of the budget in

5

terms of the law and thereafter submit the said budget to the Council is clearly

established by Section 178.

The ability of the Council to carry out its statutory functions in the following year is

intrinsically linked to having a budget duly passed by the members of the Council,

and demonstrates the ability of the Chairman to command the confidence of the

majority of the Council and have the necessary finances to attend to the day to day

operations and the vital developmental activities of the Council.

The next provision that is relevant to this application is Section 178A which reads as

follows:

If the Urban Council modifies or rejects all or any of the items in any or

supplementary budget or adds any item thereto and the Chairman does not

agree with any such decision of the Council he shall re-submit the budget or

supplementary budget to the Council for further consideration. Where a budget

or supplementary budget is not passed by the Council within two weeks after it

is re-submitted, the budget or supplementary budget shall, notwithstanding

that it has not been passed by the Council, be deemed to be the duly adopted

budget or supplementary budget of the Council.

The effect of Section 178A is that by operation of law, the budget submitted by the

Chairman shall be considered as the duly adopted budget of a council, even though

the said budget has not been passed by the Council and therefore does not have the

support of the majority of the members of the Council. The law therefore has

provided a concession to a Chairman of an Urban Council to function for a period of

two years, notwithstanding that he may not have the support of the majority of the

Council to pass the budget. It must be kept in mind that notwithstanding the above

deeming provision, the obligation placed on the Chairman by Section 178 to submit

the budget to the Council for its decision must still be complied with, and that the

concession under Section 178A extends only to a Chairman who does so.

It must be noted that in terms of Section 26 (2) of the Ordinance:

6

All matters or questions authorised by this Ordinance or by any other written

law, to be decided by the members of an Urban Council shall be decided by the

majority of members present and voting at any general or special meeting.

Thus, wherever the Ordinance refers to a decision of the Council or requires a

decision to be taken by the members of the Council, it is imperative that such

decision is taken by way of a vote of the members present at a general or special

meeting of the Council. This position is clearly reflected in Section 178A of the

Ordinance which requires a decision of the Council (a) upon the submission of the

budget and (b) upon re-submission.

Section 178A was amended by Section 12 of the Local Authorities (Special Provisions)

Act No. 21 of 2012 by the insertion of the following proviso:

Provided that, if the Council according to sections 178 and 178A of this

Ordinance modifies or rejects all or any items in any budget or supplementary

budget or adds any item thereto which was submitted to the Council at any time

by the Chairman after a period of two years since the commencement of the

term of office of the Council, and

if the Chairman does not agree to such decision of the Council,

he shall resubmit the said budget to the Council for further consideration.

Where a budget or supplementary budget is not passed by the Council within

two weeks after it is resubmitted for the second time,

the Chairman shall be deemed to have been resigned from the office of

Chairman at the end of the said period of two weeks.

Thus, with the introduction of the proviso, the concession provided to a Chairman by

Section 178A to continue in office notwithstanding his inability to have the budget

passed by a majority of the members of the Council has been limited to the first two

years of office. After the first two years, it is not only imperative that the budget is

submitted to the Council, it is also imperative that the budget is passed by a majority

decision. The law has provided a Chairman with two opportunities to do so. The

7

difference between the first two years and the next two years is that, in the latter

two years, if the Chairman fails to submit or having submitted, fails to have the

budget passed at least at the second opportunity, the Chairman shall be deemed to

have resigned from his office.

In my view, Section 178A and the proviso contemplates two decisions of the Council

which attracts the provisions of Section 26(2) and therefore requires a vote by the

Council. The first is the decision of the Council to modify, add or reject the budget.

The acceptance of a modification and/or an addition, or the rejection of the budget

as a whole, should be by way of a majority vote of the Council. The second is the

decision of the Council whether to pass the budget that has been re-submitted by

the Chairman.

The above provisions can be summarised as follows:

a) The obligation of preparing the budget is with the Chairman vide Section 178;

b) The obligation of submitting the budget to the Council is with the Chairman

vide Section 178;

c) The budget must be passed by the Council and the obligation of having it

passed by the Council is at all times with the Chairman vide Section 178A;

d) In the first two years however, even if the budget is not passed, by operation of

law, the budget submitted by the Chairman is the duly adopted budget of the

Council vide Section 178A;

e) After the first two years, the Chairman shall have the budget passed by the

Council, for which he has been provided two opportunities vide the proviso to

Section 178A;

f) After the first two years, the failure on the part of the Chairman to have the

budget passed on the two occasions afforded to him would attract the

consequences set out in the proviso to Section 178A i.e. the Chairman is

deemed to have resigned from office.

8

The learned Counsel for the 7th - 17th Respondents has correctly submitted that the

provisions of the Ordinance with regard to the powers of the Chairman in relation to

the budget including the passing of the budget must be considered bearing in mind

that the Council must have a budget prepared in accordance with Section 178.

I shall now consider the facts of this application.

The Petitioner states that in June 2020, he commenced the process relating to the

preparation of the budget of the 6th Respondent for the year 2021. He states that at

the monthly meeting held on 11th June 2020, he submitted the timeline for the said

process and obtained the approval of the members of the 6th Respondent. The

Petitioner states further that he appointed a Budget Compilation Committee and

sought and obtained the views of the members of the 6th Respondent, the trade

associations and the people. He states that a further meeting was held on 18th

August 2020 to prepare the relevant estimates.

The Petitioner states that by letter dated 5th November 2020 marked P5a he

forwarded a copy of the draft budget proposals marked P5 to all members and

invited them to submit in writing any amendments that they may require to the

budget. The Petitioner submits that by P5a he had also informed the members that

the adoption of the draft budget proposals would take place at the monthly meeting

scheduled for 12th November 2020. The Petitioner states that in response he

received proposals from three members, which have been marked P6a P6c. I

have examined P6a submitted by the 17th Respondent and observe that apart from

proposing two modifications, P6a contains the complaints of the 17th Respondent

that the proposed income is not realistic when compared with the previous year.

P6b submitted by the 12th Respondent does not contain any modifications but only

points out certain errors.

The Petitioner states that a meeting of the Council was held on 12th November 2020,

as intimated by P5a. He claims that a majority of the members present at the said

meeting were in agreement with the amendments proposed by P6a P6c, and

that he too agreed with the said amendments. The minutes of the meeting have

9

been produced marked P8. Item 5.1 thereof relates to the budget. After a brief

introduction, the Petitioner had stated as follows:1

iNdm;s;+ud - wo osk, Tn fj; uSg fmr ud jsiska ,enSug ie,iajq 2021 jraIhg wod,

whjeh flgqusm; lshjd n,d we;ehs i,ld 2021 jraIhg wod, whjeh fhdaPkdj iNd iusu; lr .ekSu ioyd fus wjia:dfjs uu iNdjg bosrsm;a lrkjd tia. gS. pdur ks,xl uka;%S;+ud - .re iNdm;s;+uks tu fhdaPkdj uu ia:sr lrkjd iNdm;s;+ud - B,.g fhoS ;Sfnkafka fuu whjeh flgqusm; iNd iusu; lr.eksu.

whjeh ioyd ixfYdaOk lsysmhla bosrsm;a lr ;sfnkjd. hus ixfYdaOkhla lrkak kus

nyq;r leu;a; ta ioyd ;snsh hq;+hs. tfyu wjYH ke;akus nyq;r leue;af;ka fuu

whjeh wkqu; lrkafk kus fhdaPkd ixfYdaOk j,g hEu wjYH jkafka kE. iNdm;s;+ud jsiska uka;%S ;=uka jsiska ,ndoS ;snQ ixfYdaOk iNd .; lrk ,os.

P8 thereafter contains the discussions that were held on the draft budget

submitted by the Petitioner. Finally, the Petitioner has declared that he is in

agreement with the amendments proposed and called for a vote, as evidenced by

the following in P8:2

wjidk jYfhka Tn;+uka,df.a u;hg ud .re lrkjd. fus wusmdr k.r iNdfjs 2021 jirg wod,j whjeh flgqusm; ioyd uka;S%jreka ,sLs;j ,nd oqka ixfYdaOk ish,a,g ud

tl. nj fuhska m%ldY lr isgskjd. Bg Tnf.a tl.;djh ud jsuikjd. whjehg mlaIj

fyda jsmlaIj Pkaoh Ndjs;d l, yelsh. ta ioyd wjia:dj uu mqoa.,slj ldg fyda b,a,Sus

lsrSu n,mEus lsrSu wdosh lsisjla isoq lf,a keye. fusl ish,Q fokdf.a whjehhs. fusl

iNdm;s;+udf.a whjehla fkfjhs. k.r iNdj f,i fmdoq Pk;dj fjkqfjka wms

ish,a,lau tl;+ jS bosrsm;a lrk whjehhs.

Pkaoh jSuisfusos wusmdr k.r iNdfjs 2021 jirg wod,j ,sLs;j ,ndoqka ish ixfYdaOkhkag tl.j bosrsm;a lrk ,o whjehg mlaIj [names of the 6 members

voting] Pkaoh ,ndoqka w;r Pkaoh jSuisfusos wusmdr k.r iNdfjs 2021 jirg wod,j ish ixfYdaOkhkag tl.j bosrsm;a lrk ,o whjehg jSreoaOj [names of the 12 members voting] Pkaoh ,nd fok ,oS

1 Vide page 6 of P8. 2 Vide pages 22 and 23 of P8.

10

ta wkqj wusmdr k.r iNdfjs 2021 jirg wod,j whjehg mlaIj Pkao 06 ,enqk w;r Bg jsmlaIj Pkao 12 ,enqks ta wkqj bosrsm;a lr we;s ,sLs; ixfYdaOk j,g wkqj idlpsPd l, iyd bosrsm;a l,

lreKq wkqj ixfYdaOs; wh - jeh ,nk iNd jdrhg bosrsm;a lruS.

The following are clear from P8:

a) The Petitioner had submitted the budget of the 6th Respondent inclusive of the

amendments proposed by 6Ra 6Rc to the Council on 12th November 2020;

b) The members have expressed their views at the debate that followed;

c) A vote had thereafter been called by the Petitioner;

d) The budget submitted by the Petitioner had been defeated with 12 members

voting against the budget and 6 members voting for the budget.

Therefore, P8 reveals that the budget had been defeated by the members of the

Council on its first submission. As discussed above, the law provides the Petitioner

with another opportunity to have the budget passed by the Council. Accordingly, the

next step as required by the proviso to Section 178A is that the Petitioner shall

resubmit the said budget to the Council for further consideration. I will now consider

if the Petitioner has done so, as undertaken by the Petitioner at the end of the

meeting held on 12th November 2020.

The next meeting of the 6th Respondent has been held on 14th December 2020. The

minutes of the meeting have been marked P9. Having discussed four other items on

the agenda, the Chairman had made the following proposal:

.re iNdm;s;+udf.a fhdaPkdj

5.1 - 2021 jraIh ioyd wusmdr k.r iNdfjs uka;S% fhdaPkd wkqj ixfYdaOkh lrk ,o whjeh bosrsm;a lsrSuhs

whjeh hgf;a Tn;+uka,d ;sfofkla muKhs ,sLs; ixfYdaOk bosrsm;a flfra. tu

ixfYdaOk ish,a,u ksishdldrfhka whjeh f,aLkhg we;+,;a lr ;sfnkjd. tu whjeh f,aLk Tn;+udg ,ens we;s nj ud m%ldY lrk w;r 2020 fkdjeusnra ui 12 jeksod

11

mej;s wusmdr k.r iNdfjs reiajSfusos ud jsiska 2021 jraIhg wod, whjeh flgqusm; iusu; lsrsu ioyd bosrsm;a l,d. tu fhdaPkdj pdur ks,xl uka;%S;+ud jsiska ia:r lrd.

wm fuu whjeh f,aLkh ms<snoj idlpsPd l,d. tysos uka;S%jre jsiska 2021 jraIhg wod, wusmdr k.r iNd whjeh flgqusm; ioyd ,sLs;j bosrsm;a lrk ,o ixfYdaOk ;snqkd. tu ixfYdaOk ioyd ish,qu uka;%Skaf.a leu;a; m, lrd. tfia jqj;a Tn ;+uka,d

yg Pkaoh jsuiSu ioyd wjia:djla ,nd oqkakd. tysos mlaIj Pkao 06 la iy jsmlaIj fya;=jla fkdue;sj fkdolajd ixfYdaok lsrsfuka miqj;a ug jsreoaOj uka;S%jre 12 Pkaoh

m%ldY lr ;Sfnkjd.

After several exchange of words between the Petitioner and the 17th Respondent,

the Chairman had stated as follows:

tnejska Tn jsiska ,sLs;j bosrsm;a lrk ,o whjeh ixfYdAOk uf.a tl.;djh u; ish ixfYdAOk we;+,;a lr 2021 jraIfha wusmdr k.r iNdfjs whjeh ud Tnfj; ,enSug i,iajd ;Snqkd. ta wkqj 2021 jraIfha wusmdr k.r iNd whjeh f,aLkh iusu; jq whjeh f,aLkhla njg ud m%ldY lr isgskjd

iNdfjs lghq;+ wjika lrkjd Thus, it is clear that the Petitioner had re-submitted the amended budget, which

amended budget is not before Court, at the meeting held on 14th December 2020.

The purpose of resubmitting the budget to the Council is for further consideration by

the Council.

As I have already noted, in terms of the proviso to Section 178:

Where a budget or supplementary budget is not passed by the Council within

two weeks after it is resubmitted for the second time,

the Chairman shall be deemed to have been resigned from the office of

Chairman at the end of the said period of two weeks.

It is clear from P9 that even though the Petitioner has re-submitted the budget on

14th December 2020:

a) The Petitioner has not provided the members of the Council an opportunity of

further considering the budget;

12

b) The Petitioner has not called for a vote on the said amended budget;

c) The budget has not been passed by the Council.

Instead, the Petitioner had declared that the amended budget has been duly

adopted.

The effect of the above failure by the Petitioner to have the budget passed by the

Council is that the Petitioner had failed in his duty in having the budget of the 6th

Respondent for 2021 passed by the Council by the due date.

The refusal of the Petitioner to act in terms of Section 178A and its proviso had

triggered a series of events culminating in the filing of this application. I shall now

advert to these events.

On the same date i.e. 14th December 2020 - the 3rd Respondent, the Assistant

Commissioner of Local Government, Ampara - had served on the Petitioner a letter

dated 10th December 2020 marked P10a issued by the 2nd Respondent, the

Commissioner of Local Government, Eastern Province informing the Petitioner that if

he is in agreement with the amendments, he must incorporate same and re-submit

to the Council for its approval. By P12 dated 22nd December 2020, the 2nd

Respondent had informed the Petitioner that the budget of the 6th Respondent

Council for 2021 has not been passed and that the 1st Respondent, the Governor of

the Eastern Province has directed the Petitioner to re-submit the budget to the

Council and to have it passed prior to 31st December 2020. The Petitioner has

disregarded the above intimation.

In the absence of a valid budget for 2021, the 2nd and 3rd Respondents have informed

the Petitioner that he cannot incur any capital expenditure vide P13 dated 31st

December 2021 and P14 dated 5th January 2021, respectively. The 3rd Respondent

had also directed the Petitioner by letter dated 6th January 2021 marked P15 to

refrain from carrying out the functions of the office of Chairman of the 6th

Respondent.

13

By an Order made in terms of Section 184(1B) of the Ordinance and published in

Extraordinary Gazette No. 2209/73 dated 8th January 2021, the 1st Respondent had

suspended the Petitioner from office. This Order had however been revoked by a

further Order published in Extraordinary Gazette No. 2212/21 dated 27th January

2021.

The 1st Respondent, claiming to act in terms of the powers vested in terms of Section

247 of the Ordinance had also published the following Order in Extraordinary

Gazette No. 2212/23 dated 27th January 2021, marked P22:

The Chairman of Ampara Urban Council within the Province of the East has

submitted and failed to get adopted the Budget of the year 2021, as the power

vested in him under Section 178 and 178A of the Urban Council Ordinance

(Chapter 255) thus the said Chairman of the said Urban Council, as provided

under Section 12 of the Local Authorities (Special Provisions) Act, No. 21 of

2012, is deemed to have been resigned from the office of the Chairman effective

from 31.12.2020 and that the office of the Chairman of that Urban Council

become vacant effective from that date.

Aggrieved by the above decisions of the 1st 3rd Respondents, the Petitioner filed

this application on 1st February 2021, seeking inter alia the following relief:

(a) A Writ of Certiorari to quash the decision in P10 directing the Petitioner to

have the amended budget approved by the Council;

(b) A Writ of Certiorari to quash the decisions contained in P14 and P15;

(c) A Writ of Certiorari to quash the Order P22 made by the 1st Respondent.

Although fixed for support for 9th February 2021, this Court was not able to take up

this matter for support as the Respondents were absent and unrepresented on that

date. However, in order to prevent this application from being rendered nugatory,

this Court, by an order delivered on 10th February 2021, directed the 2nd and/or 3rd

Respondents to refrain from taking any steps in terms of P22 and/or call for the

election of a new Chairman in terms of Section 66G of the Local Authorities Elections

Ordinance.

14

It is clear that P10, P14, P15 and P22 have all been issued due to the failure on

the part of the Petitioner to have the budget passed by the Council. In considering

the legality of the decisions contained therein, the primary issue that arises for

determination is whether the budget of the 6th Respondent has been passed in terms

of the law, and if not, whether the Petitioner is deemed to have resigned from the

office of Chairman as provided for by the proviso to Section 178A of the Ordinance.

The principal argument of the learned Presidents Counsel for the Petitioner was that

where the Chairman agrees with the amendments or modifications proposed by the

members, the necessity for him to re-submit the amended budget does not arise. He

therefore submitted that the factual circumstances of this application do not fall

within the proviso to Section 178A and that the deeming provision that the Chairman

has resigned too does not apply.

By way of a motion dated 19th April 2021, the Attorney-at-Law for the Petitioner had

brought to my attention inter alia a letter dated 15th January 2021 issued by the

Secretary, State Ministry of Provincial Councils and Local Government Affairs issued

to the Chairman of the Ambalangoda Urban Council relating to Section 178A. Quite

apart from the letter by which advise has been sought not being tendered to this

Court, the said letter in my view does not set out the correct legal position.

I shall now consider whether the Petitioner has complied with the several obligations

cast on a Chairman by the Ordinance with regard to the budget. The first obligation is

to prepare the budget, which the Petitioner has complied with. The second is to

submit the budget to the Council, which too the Petitioner has complied with. The

third obligation is to have the budget so submitted, passed by the Council. As I have

noted, the Petitioner has two opportunities to have the budget passed. The

Petitioner has faltered at the first opportunity as a result of the budget being

defeated on 12th November 2020.

The Petitioner was thereafter required to re-submit the budget for further

consideration of the Council, which the Petitioner had undertaken to do vide P8.

The Petitioner has partially complied with this obligation by re-submitting the budget

on 14th December 2020. Having done so, the Petitioner has failed to afford the

15

members of the Council an opportunity of further considering the said budget. The

Petitioner has also failed to have the budget passed by the Council. As submitted by

the learned Senior State Counsel for the 1st Respondent and the learned Counsel for

the 7th - 17th Respondents, the Petitioner has thrown all democratic norms out of the

window.

It is not disputed that the concession granted by Section 178A to enable a Chairman of an Urban Council to function in office even where a duly submitted budget has not been passed by a majority comes to an end after two years of being elected as Chairman, and that the provisions contained in the proviso to Section 178A is applicable thereafter. Once the budget is submitted to the Council and debated and whatever the modifications or additions that a Chairman may agree during or after such debate, the budget must be submitted by the Chairman to the Council for its decision. This is mandatory and is confirmed by the use of the word, decision in the proviso to Section 178A. In terms of Section 26(2), a decision would mean a vote. I am therefore of the view that the Chairman agreeing to any modifications or additions that may be proposed by one or more or even all members does not suffice in order to claim that the budget has been passed. The claim that the Chairman agreed with the modifications and amendments and therefore the budget has been passed is a red herring. The budget must be passed by a majority vote if the Chairman wishes to avoid the deemed resignation being triggered. Where the Chairman re-submits the budget, he must provide the members an opportunity of further considering it and thereafter he must have the budget passed by a majority vote of the Council. In my view, the crux of the matter is that the Chairman must ensure that he has in place a budget duly passed by the Council by the due date. If he fails in this regard at whatever point of the process, he is deemed to have resigned from the office of Chairman by operation of law. A Chairman who does not take a vote cannot be in a better position than a Chairman who has re-submitted the budget and taken a vote, only to have the budget defeated by the Council.

The Petitioner has failed in his obligation to have the budget passed in terms of

Section 178A and therefore the consequence set out in the proviso to Section 178A

16

has been triggered. The Petitioner is therefore deemed to have resigned from the

office of Chairman of the 6th Respondent Council. The result is that there is a vacancy

in the office of Chairman. This in my view is what was intended by the legislature

when it introduced the proviso to Section 178A in 2012. I am therefore unable to

agree with the submission of the learned Presidents Counsel for the Petitioner that

the factual circumstances of this application are outside the scope of the proviso to

Section 178A of the Ordinance.

The learned Presidents Counsel for the Petitioner submitted that in any event, the

impugned Order P22 is ultra vires the powers conferred on the 1st Respondent by

Section 247 of the Urban Councils Ordinance and Section 2 of the Provincial Councils

(Consequential Provisions) Act No. 12 of 1989. To me, the series of events that

followed the refusal by the Petitioner to place the re-submitted budget to a vote and

have it passed by the Council reflects the desperation on the part of the Respondents

to ensure that the provisions of Section 178A are complied with. Even if the

argument of the learned Presidents Counsel for the Petitioner is accepted, nothing

flows from P22 for the reason that P22 is only an intimation of a factual position

that prevailed as at that date.

In the above circumstances, I see no legal basis to issue formal notice of this

application on the Respondents. This application is accordingly dismissed, without

costs.

President of the Court of Appeal

Mayadunne Corea, J

I agree

Judge of the Court of Appeal