IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

1. Chelliah Sabaraththenam,

2. Sabaraththenam Easwary,

Both of:

No.70, Thondaman Nagar,

Anthoniyar Kovilady,

Kilinochchi.

Petitioners

CASE NO: CA/WRIT/33/2017

Vs.

1. Northern Provincial Land

Commissioner,

Department of Land

Administration,

Northern Province,

No.80, Kandy Road,

Chundukuli,

Jaffna.

2. The Land Commissioner,

Land Commissioner Generals

Department,

No.1200/6,

Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

2

3. G. Pranavan,

Assistant Land Commissioner

(LLRC),

No.1200/6, Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

4. The Divisional Secretary,

Karachchi,

Kilinochchi.

5. L.B.S.B. Dayaratne,

Additional Secretary,

Land and Land Development

Ministry,

Mihikatha Medura,

No.1200/6, Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

6. Minister of Land and Land

Development,

Mihikatha Medura,

No.1200/6, Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

7. The Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

8. Jeyasiri Sivagowry,

No.69, Thondaman Nagar,

East Kilinochchi.

Respondents

3

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J.

Counsel: Shakthiyaraji Kamalanathan for the

Petitioners.

Anusha Fernando, D.S.G., for the 1st-7th

Respondents.

Ershan Ariaratnam for the 8th Respondent.

Argued on: 09.09.2020

Decided on: 20.10.2020

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The pleadings of the Petitioners are awfully prolix and it has

been quite a stressful and daunting task for me to separate the

wheat from the chaff and come to a correct conclusion. To

justify my complaint, suffice it to say the Petitioners

unnumbered counter objections alone contains 58 pages!

To reproduce verbatim, the Petitioners seek the following main

reliefs in the prayer to the petition:

(a) Writ of certiorari to quash the decision of the mobile

service dated 11.07.2014 to issue permit to the 8th

Respondent for lots 69 and 70;

(b) Writ of certiorari to quash the permit dated 20.10.2016

for the lots 69 and 70 to the 8th Respondent;

(c) Writ of mandamus on the Respondents to issue permit of

lots 69 and 70 to the Petitioners.

4

The lot numbers the Petitioners refer to is from the Plan marked

P1.

The Petitioners have not tendered a copy of the said decision nor

a copy of the said permit with the petition.

The 4th Respondent, the Divisional Secretary of Kilinochchi, has

tendered the said decision marked 4R4 with his affidavit.

According to this decision, the disputed portion of land was to

be given to three residents living on the land at that time. One

of them seems to be the 8th Respondent; the identity of the other

two is unclear. However, one thing is clear: without making the

other two residents parties to this application and without giving

them a hearing, the Court cannot quash the decision 4R4.

According to 4R5, which is a tracing prepared by the

Government Surveyor accompanied by a report, Lots 69 and 70

of the Plan P1 are in the occupation of or reserved for the 8th

Respondent, the Christian Missionary Church and the Road

Development Authority. According to this report, the Petitioner

is in occupation on permit No. KR/LB/KN-17/158. The

Petitioners say 4R5 shall be disregarded, as it has been prepared

after the filing of this application. However, it is not the position

of the Petitioners that what is contained in 4R5 is incorrect.

Even if the Court is to disregard 4R5, the Court cannot

disregard 4R4. The main relief sought by the Petitioners is to

quash the decision 4R4 by certiorari. As I have already said,

4R4 states the decision has been taken to grant the land for

three residents who are living there. Needless to say, the other

two residents are necessary parties to this application.

5

This application shall be dismissed in limine on failure to make

necessary persons parties to the application.

The Petitioners produce a copy of the permit issued to the 8th

Respondent marked B with the motion dated 30.01.2018.

Let me state the grievance of the Petitioners in the manner I

understand it. The Petitioners say they had been in possession

of Lots 69 and 70 since 1977 until they were forced to leave in

2008 due to the civil war, and when they returned in 2010 they

found that the 8th Respondent was in possession of the land.

The Petitioners rely on a list of names attached to the Plan P1,

wherein the name of the mother of the 1st Petitioner is

mentioned against Lot 69 and the name of the 2nd Respondent is

mentioned against Lot 70. This list is undated although P1 is

dated 20.09.1995.

According to this list, it appears Lots 69-75 (i.e. seven lots) are

claimed by the Petitioners family. It is also seen that Lot 80 is

claimed by the 1st Petitioner.

The 8th Respondent has tendered with his statement of

objections documents to say the 1st Petitioner had claimed Lots

60 and 61 on long possession in another case filed before the

Kilinochchi Magistrates Court.

The Petitioners contend in their counter affidavit that permits in

respect of the said Lots 60, 61 and 80 have been issued in the

names of other persons. This goes to show that the Petitioners

have claimed different lots at different times without confining

6

their claim to one lot. It appears to me their claims are

irresponsible.

The Petitioners rely heavily on P4 and P5 issued in 1994 to the

mother of the 1st Respondent and the 2nd Respondent,

respectively, to say the Divisional Secretary of Kilinochchi had

promised them Lots 69 and 70. There is however no mention of

lot numbers in P4 and P5.

The Divisional Secretary rightly states in his affidavit that in

view of multiple claims to several lots in Thondaman Nagar by

the Petitioners and their family members, there is no clarity as

to which lots these documents relate to.

The Divisional Secretary has tendered 4R1 to say the 1st

Petitioner has already been nominated as the successor to

another land located within the limits of his division, on a permit

issued to the 1st Petitioners mother for land in extent of 1 rood

and 23.4 perches. The 1st Petitioners mother died in 2002. This

nomination was not disclosed by the Petitioners to Court. The

Petitioners say in response that the nomination has not been

registered in the Land Registry and is therefore invalid in terms

of section 60 of the Land Development Ordinance. The 1st

Petitioner does not say the said land is in the possession of

someone else nor does he say a permit in respect of the land was

issued to someone else after the demise of his mother. The 1st

Petitioner shall understand that this is a writ application and

writ is a discretionary remedy.

7

The Divisional Secretary says that the Petitioners being husband

and wife are not entitled to more than one permit in respect of

State land. This position is not challenged by the Petitioners.

The Petitioners principal submission is that they were permit-

holders in terms of section 2 of the Land Development

Ordinance when the permit was issued to the 8th Respondent.

According to section 2, permit-holder means any person to

whom a permit has been issued and includes a person who is in

occupation of any land alienated to him on a permit although no

permit has been actually issued to him. The Petitioners

submission is on the premise that they were in occupation of the

land. But this is a disputed fact, not an admitted fact.

Therefore, this argument is bound to fail. The 8th Respondent

has tendered with his statement of objections a large number of

documents to show long possession of Lots 69 and 70. This

Court exercising writ jurisdiction cannot hold a fresh inquiry

into possession of the disputed portion of land. That is clearly

outside the purview of this Court. Hence, I am not in a position

to conclude whether or not the Petitioners were permit-holders

within the meaning of the Land Development Ordinance at the

time the permit was issued to the 8th Respondent.

The Petitioners say the decision 4R4 is in violation of the

circular 4R2 issued in 1995. After this circular, a new detailed

circular 4R3 was issued in 2013. The decision 4R4 was taken

on the latter circular. Even assuming without conceding that

the Petitioners submission on possession is correct, the

Petitioners have not taken any meaningful steps to regularise

their unauthorised possession on the circular 4R3. Therefore,

8

the Petitioners cannot find fault with the authorities for acting in

terms of the new circular 4R3.

I dismiss the Petitioners application but without costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal