i i I I I

! 1 ! I I J I I

I I I i

I

1 I

\ 1 i I I

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

An application for in the nature of Writs of Certiorari and Mandamus in terms of Article

140 of the Constitution.

Court of Appeal Application No. CA Writ 362/2017

Ven. Demunnewe Sumanarathna Thero Presently of Kiriwaula Purana Viharaya Kiriwaula, Pilimathalawe.

Vs.

Petitioner

1. Nimal Kotawalagedara Commissioner General of Buddhist Affairs, Buddhist Affairs Department, "Dahampaya", No. 135, Anagarika Dharmapala Mawatha, Colombo 07.

2. Yen. Bodhimaluwe Sangananda Thero, Presently acting as Viharadipathi of Sri Sudharsana Chaityarama Viharaya, Presently residing at Wayamba Sri Sathjaya Daham Nikethanaya, Rajakumara Vyana, Metiyagane, Narammala.

1 ; 1 J I ! I I I I I I I I I ! I

I I ! I 1

2

3. Ven. Anamaduwe Dhammadassi Thero, Presently Anunayaka, Formerly Secretary of the Asgiriya Chapter of Siyam Maha Nikaya, Asgiri Maha Viharaya, Kandy.

4. Yen. Medagama Dhammananda Thero, Presently Secretary of the Asgiriya Chapter of Siyam Maha Nikaya, Asgiri Maha Viharaya, Kandy.

5. Most Yen. Thibbatuwawe Sri

Siddhartha Sumangala Thero, Mahanayaka of the Malwatta Chapter

Before

Consel

of Siyam Nikaya, Malwatu Maha Viharaya, Kandy.

6. Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

: L.T.B. Dehideniya J. (PICA)

Shiran Goonaratne J.

Respondents

:Dr. Mahinda Ralapanawa with Nisansala Fernando for the

Petitioner.

Nayomi Kahawita SC for the Attorney General.

Argued on : 4/12/2017

Decided on : 14/12/2017

II

I

~ ,ti Ii 1

f j I

\ I I

I

3

L. T.B. Dehideniya J. (PICA)

This is an application instituted by the Petitioner, Yen. Demunnewa

Sumanarathana Thero seeking for a mandate in the nature of Writ of

Certiorari cancelling the registration of Sri Sudharsana Chaityarama Vihraya

of Werellagama, Alauwa, as a temple belonging to the Asgiriya Chapter, a

Writ of Certiorari cancelling the registration of recognizing the 2nd

Respondent as the Viharadipathi of the said temple. Further the Petitioner is

seeking for a Mandamus directing the 1 st Respondent to register the said

temple as a temple belonging to the Malwatta Chapter and to recognize the

Petitioner as the Viharadipathi of the said temple.

The Petitioner submits that the said temple belongs to Malwatta

Chapter. The Petitioner's tutor, at his robing and higher ordination Yen.

Galwarama Sumanatissa Thero, was the Viharadipathi of the said temple and

he belonged to the Malwatta Chapter. The Petitioner further submits that

said Sumanatissa Thero has transferred the Viharadipathiship of the temple

to the Petitioner by deed No. 2019 dated 14/10/2009 attested by Anura

Kithsiri Bandara Notary Public.

The 1 st Respondent, the Commissioner General of Buddhist Affairs

has registered the said temple as a temple belonging to the Asgiriya Chapter

and recognized the 2nd Respondent as the Viharadipathi of the said temple.

The Petitioner moves this court to cancel the said registration by the way of

a Writ of Certiorari and to compel the 1 st respondent to register the temple as

a temple belonging to Malawatta Chapter.

The Most Yen. Thibbatuwawe Sri Siddhartha Sumangala Thero, the

Mahanayaka of the Malwatta Chapter, the 5th Respondent, had requested the

1 st Respondent by the document marked X5 dated 03/07/2017 to register this

Ii g

I

/ 4

/ . '

/ temple as a temple belonging to the Malwatta Chapter. The 1 st Respondent

has replied the 5th Respondent informing that the Secretary of the Asgiriya

Chapter has informed him that the temple belongs to the Asgiriya Chapter

and the Viharadipathi Ven. Galwarama Sumanatissa Thero had transferred

the Viharadipathiship by a deed to the 2nd Respondent, Ven. Bodhimaluwe

Sangananda Thero. Mahanayaka of the Malwatta Chapter has again

informed the 1 st Respondent by the letter dated 06/09/2017 marked as X10

giving the history of the temple and requesting him to register it as a temple

belonging to the Malwatta Chapter.

The petitioner submitted that by the deed No. 2019 marked as X4, he

was appointed as the Viharadipathi. The Petitioner, as a full disclosure,

submitted the deed No. 1773 dated 02108/2011 attested by P. Wijerathne

Notary Public where the Petitioner's deed was revoked and the deed No.

1774 attested by the same Notary on the same day appointing the 2nd

Respondent as the Viharadipathi. The Petitioner challenges the validity of

the said two deeds on the basis that the deed No. 2019 was an irrevocable

deed.

The Petitioner further submits a certified copy of a letter issued by the

Ven. Pandith Thumbulle Sri Dhammananda Thero to the 1 st Respondent

certifying that the temple in question belongs to the Asgiriya Chapter.

With this evidence it is very clear that there is a dispute in relation to

the fact whether this temple belongs to the Malwatta Chapter or the Asgiriya

Chapter. The 1 st Respondent had asked for observations from the

Mahanayaka of the Malwatta Chapter before coming into a conclusion.

There is no evidence to show that the 1 st Respondent has held a formal

inquiry by calling witnesses but he has called for the observations of the

Most Ven. Mahanayaka Thero of the Malwatta Chapter.

5

When the facts are in dispute, a Writ Court cannot intervene. The facts

in issue have to be decided by a proper forum.

It had been held in the case of Thajudeen V. Sri Lanka Tea Board and

another [1981J 2 Sri L R 471 that;

Where the major facts are in dispute and the legal result of the facts is

subject to controversy and it is necessary that the questions should be

canvassed in a suit where parties would have ample opportunity of

examining the witnesses so that the Court would be better able to

judge which version is correct, a writ will not issue.

The 1 st Respondent has come to a certain conclusion on the evidence

made available to him. This Court cannot issue a mandate in the nature of a

Writ of Certiorari to quash the registration of the temple as a temple belongs

to Asgiriya Chapter or a writ of Mandamus compelling the 1 st Respondent to

register the temple as a temple belongs to the Malwatta Chapter on disputed

facts.

Under these circumstances I refuse to issue notice and dismiss the

application.

President of the Court of Appeal

Shiran Gooneratne J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal