1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal in terms of Section 331 (1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of 1979, read with Article138 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Complainant

CA/HCC-101/2020 Vs. High Court of Kalutara 1) Kalawila Pathirage Pradeep Chandana Case No: 271/2003 2) Senevirathne Aarachchige Hemantha Perera (alias) Jayasuriya Arachchige Bimal Samantha Perera Accused And Now Between 1) Kalawila Pathirage Pradeep Chandana

1stAccused-Appellant

Vs.

The Honourable Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12

Complainant-Respondent

2

BEFORE : N. Bandula Karunarathna, J.

: R. Gurusinghe, J.

COUNSEL : Chaminda Athukorale with Hafeel Fariz,

Veenashani Jayathilake and Isuru Gamage

for the Accused-Appellant

Shanil Kularatne, DSG and Priyani Abeygunawardena SC for the Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 11/11/2021

DECIDED ON : 09/03/2022

R. Gurusinghe, J.

The first accused-appellant (the appellant) and another was indicted in

the High Court of Kalutara for committing the murder of Vithanage

Siripala on or around the 15th of April 1998, at Yatadola Road, Kalawila,

an offence punishable under Section 296 of the Penal Code.

Having pleaded not guilty to the charge the accused preferred to have the

trial before the Learned High Court Judge without a Jury.

After the trial, the Learned High Court Judge found the appellant guilty

to the charge. The second accused was acquitted.

The appellant appealed against that verdict and the sentence.

3

The prosecution led the evidence of PW1, PW2, PW4, PW3, PW7, PW6,

PW8, PW9 and the Court Interpreter. The appellant gave evidence on his

behalf and denied the account of the events by the prosecution.

In the hearing of the appeal, the appellant relied on two grounds, which

are;

1. The eyewitness PW2 had not said that he saw the appellant

stabbing the deceased. However, after declaring PW2 as a hostile

witness, some portions of his statement to the police led as

evidence were contrary to the provisions of Section 110 of the

Criminal Procedure Code. Those portions were mentioned as 'X1'

and 'X2', which were not admissible evidence, and should have

been excluded.

2. The dying deposition relied upon by the prosecution is not a

reliable piece of evidence against the appellant and that evidence

regarding the dying deposition should not have been taken into

consideration to convict the appellant.

Case for the prosecution is as follows:

PW1 the wife of the deceased, in her evidence, stated that, on the date of

the incident the deceased left home at about 8.30am and came back

home at about 6.30pm. Afterwards, he went to buy cigarettes and within

about three minutes she heard someone saying ' '. She

came to the place where she heard the shouting coming from, and she

heard the name of the accused . She was not sure who said that

word '.' Her husband was lying on the ground and she saw blood.

PW2 was also there. PW2 told her that stabbed her husband.

4

PW2 described the incident as follows:

There was a new year ceremony and a marathon race on that day. The

accused was one of the organizers of the event. In the evening, there was

a quarrel. The deceased, Kumarasiri, and some others he could not

recollect were there. A fight took place between the people who were

present there at that time, including the deceased. The appellant

assaulted the deceased. He saw the appellant attacking the deceased

with his hands and feet. As somebody tried to assault him, he went to a

bus stop for safety. The deceased came towards him saying that Pradeep

stabbed him. He later saw the appellant and three or four people running

away. He further stated that he told the appellant's brother Upali that

your brother, Pradeep did this.

PW2 later said that if he had stated in his statement to the police that he

saw the appellant stabbing the deceased, it was correct.

PW4 said that he witnessed the incident and that somebody was trying to

stab the deceased. He did not know that person at that time. Then he

tried to stop the assailant, but he could not stop him. That person

stabbed the deceased and the deceased said that "

. "PW4 said that his hand got injured when he tried to stop the

assailant. There was sufficient light to identify the people. This witness

was not cross-examined.

PW3 in his evidence said that he saw the appellant and the second

accused with two knives at about 6.45 pm. He said he knows both the

accused persons from his childhood. Thereafter, he heard the noise of

the altercation, but he did not go there immediately. He said he knew

5

the deceased as well. He did not know any other in the village other

than the first accused. However, he did not see the stabbing.

The appellant gave evidence from the witness box. He said he did not

know the deceased, and he did not have any fight with the deceased.

There was an altercation at the new year festival, but it was not with the

deceased.

During the cross-examination, the appellant further stated that his

father informed him that the police were looking for him in connection

with the murder. He admitted that he had avoided the police, he evaded

the questions as to why he dodged the police. He said that he had

surrendered to court about one month later.

I consider the first ground of appeal relied on by the appellant regarding

the evidential value of the evidence of PW2. PW2 is a person who very

well knew the deceased, the appellant, and most of the others involved in

the incident, which eventually led to the killing of the deceased.

At a later stage of his evidence, PW2 was treated as a hostile witness to

the prosecution. Before he was declared a hostile witness, he unfolded

the incident as that had happened. PW2 clearly stated that he saw the

appellant assaulting the deceased and one other person. He identified

the appellant in the court. As PW2 approached the deceased, the

appellant tried to attack PW2 as well, and then PW2 ran to the nearest

bus stop and watched. He said the appellant was assaulting the

deceased, and then the deceased ran towards PW2 and said that (at Page

830) " ". PW2 said that he saw

. This evidence is entirely compatible with the

doctor's findings in the post mortem report.

6

There were six injuries on the body of the deceased. Out of those

injuries, five were on the back of the chest. The evidence of the doctor

corroborated the evidence of PW2.

On Page 180, PW2 described as follows:

: ?

:

:

: .

.

: ?

:

:

: ?

The only thing that PW2 did not say in his evidence-in-chief is that he

saw the appellant stab the deceased before the High Court treated him as

a hostile witness.

Then his attention was drawn to a portion of his statement to the police.

7

(On page 257)

:

1998.04.15 ?

.

?

?

The abovementioned portion of his statement was marked as X1

On Page 262

: . ?

: .

: ?

8

. X3

.

These pieces of evidence were challenged as illegally admitted evidence. It

was further argued that the evidence of PW2 should be disregarded

altogether. If the evidence of PW2 has been excluded altogether, the

evidence is inadequate to support the conviction.

The argument of the counsel for the appellant is based on the provisions

of section110 (3).

Section110 (3), is as follows;

(3) A statement made by any person to a police officer in the

course of any investigation may be used in accordance with

the provisions of the Evidence Ordinance except for the

purpose of corroborating the testimony of such person in

Court:

Provided that a statement made by an accused person in the

course of any investigation shall only be used to prove that

he made a different statement at a different time.

Anything in this subsection shall not be deemed to apply to

any statement falling within the provisions of section 27 of

the Evidence Ordinance or to prevent any statement made by

a person in the course of any investigation being used as

evidence in a charge under section 180 of the Penal Code.

The Learned Deputy Solicitor General for the respondent argued that

drawing the attention of the witness to what he had stated in the

9

statement does not contravene the law. He draws our attention to

section 159 of the evidence ordinance.

Counsel for the Appellant argued that no lay witness could refresh his

mind by looking at his statement. But when you read section 110(4),

there is no legal provision imposing any restrictions.

Subsection 110(4) reads as follows;

4. Any criminal court may send for the statements recorded in a

case under inquiry or trial in such court and may use such

statements or information, not as evidence in the case, but to aid it

in such inquiry or trial. Save as otherwise provided for in section

444 neither the accused nor his agents shall be entitled to call for

such statements, nor shall he or they be entitled to see them

merely because they are referred to by the court but if they are

used by the police officer or inquirer or witness who made

them to refresh his memory, or if the court uses them for the

purpose of contradicting such police officer or inquirer or witness

the provisions of the Evidence Ordinance, section 161 or section

145, as the case may be, shall apply :

Provided that where a preliminary inquiry under Chapter XV is

being held in respect of any offence, such statements of witnesses

as have up to then been recorded shall, on the application of the

accused, be made available to him for his perusal in open court

during the inquiry.

10

The above-emphasized portion shows that a witness can refresh his mind

by referring to his previously given statement.

As per the provisions of section 159, the witness may refer to a writing

made by him or made by any other person and read by the witness.

Section 159 and 160 of the Evidence Ordinance read as follows:

159 (1) A witness may, while under examination, refresh his memory by

referring to any writing made by himself at the time of the

transaction concerning which he is questioned or so soon

afterwards that the court considers it likely that the transaction

was at that time fresh in his memory.

(2) The witness may also refer to any such writing made by any other

person, and read by the witness within the time aforesaid, if when

he read it, he knew it to be correct.

(3) Whenever a witness may refresh his memory by reference to any

document, he may, with the permission of the court, refer to a copy

of such document:

Provided the court be satisfied that there is sufficient reason for

the non-production of the original.

(4) An expert may refresh his memory by reference to professional

treatises.

160. A witness may also testify to facts mentioned in any such

document as is mentioned in section 159, although he has no

specific recollection of the facts themselves, if he is sure that the

facts were correctly recorded in the document.

11

PW2 gave evidence before the High Court about sixteen years after the

incident. PW2 is not a relative of the deceased. Forgetting certain things

after sixteen years is natural and justifiable. In Francis Appuhamy Vs the

Queen 68 NLR 437 on page 433, Justice T. S. Fernando rejected the

argument that "the evidence of a witness must be accepted completely or

not at all".

Samaraweera vs. Attorney General 1991Sri LR 256 P R P Perera J stated

that all falsehood is not deliberate. Quoting the following passage of

Basnayake J in the case of Queen vs. Julis 65 NLR 505 on page 519;

'Falsus in uno, falsus in omnibus or Falsum in uno falsum in

omnibus, both forms are in use, (he who speaks falsely on one

point will speak falsely upon all) is a well-known maxim. In

applying this maxim, it must be remembered that all falsehood is

not deliberate. Errors of memory, faulty observation or lack of skill

in observation upon any point or points, exaggeration, or mere

embroidery or embellishment, must be distinguished from

deliberate falsehood. Nor does it apply to cases of conflict of

testimony on the same point between different witnesses.'

When considering the evidence of PW2, his evidence even before the

Learned State Counsel sought permission to question which might be

put in cross-examination is very helpful to establish the prosecution

case. PW2 said that as per his recollection, he had made the statement to

the police on the same day. This is correct. PW6, Assistant

Superintendent of Police, said that the statement of PW2 was recorded

on the same day at 10.50pm. PW2 had shown the place of the incident

to that police officer (on page 332). This witness also said that the

appellant had evaded the police and was not arrested.

12

As PW2 had given a statement to the police on the same day within three

hours of the incident, the statement satisfies the condition in sections

159 and 160 of the Evidence Ordinance that "at the time of the

transaction concerning which he is questioned or so soon afterward the

court considers it likely that the transaction was at that time fresh in his

memory". Such statements can be used to refresh the witness's mind. As

per the provisions under section 160 of the Evidence Ordinance, even if

the witness had no specific recollection of the facts themselves if he is

sure that the facts were correctly recorded in the document, he can

refresh his mind looking at such document. PW2 had admitted what he

had stated to the police was correct and that it had been correctly

recorded. When PW2 was confronted with the portions of his statement,

he accepted that as the truth. He did not deny the portions of his

statement put before him. Therefore, there was no contradiction. Such

evidence is substantial evidence. As fourteen years elapsed after the

incident, the witness should have been allowed to refresh his memory.

Therefore, questioning of certain portions of his statement is not illegal.

With regard to refreshing memory as per the provisions of sections 159

and 160 of the Evidence Ordinance, Woodroffe and Amir Ali in Law of

Evidence 20th edition at page 5503 say as follows:

"Though there are some objections to such a course, yet it is clear

that an important aid to exactness would be neglected, if, human

memory and inaccuracy being what they are, a witness were not at

liberty to justify his recollection of facts by reference to written

memoranda concerning them. It is desirable to secure the full

benefit of the witness's recollection as to the whole of the facts and

that a witness should not suffer from a mistake and may explain

an inconsistency. Indeed, a witness is under an obligation to

refresh his memory if he can and is invited by the court to do so, it

13

being his duty to lay the whole truth before the court to the best of

his ability. It is further to be observed that the committing of a

statement to writing calls for unavoidably a greater degree of

attention than the exhibition of it viva voce in the way of ordinary

conversation if this be done honestly at the time of the occurrence

which forms the subject of the statement, or so soon afterwards

that the incidents must have been fresh in the writer's memory,

the writing is a most reliable means of preserving the truth, more

reliable indeed than simple memory itself. The law, however, here

prescribes certain conditions with a view to securing that the

memoranda so employed shall be trustworthy. These conditions

are laid down by the sections abovementioned. The witness may be

cross-examined as to the paper in his hands, since in no other way

can the accuracy and recollection of the witness be ascertained,

and it is only by the production and inspection of the document

and by such cross-examination that it can be ascertained whether

the memorandum does assist the memory or not. The right of

production, inspection and cross-examination is necessary to

check the use of improper documents and to compare the witness's

oral testimony with his written statement.'

Records by the investigating officer are contemporaneous entries

made by him and hence for refreshing his memory, it is always

advisable, that he looks into those records before answering any

question. Similarly, deposition of complainant by referring to

documents after permission from court for the purposes of

refreshing his memory does not result in any illegality or

irregularity."

In view of the abovementioned case laws and principles, the evidence of

PW2 cannot be considered as illegally admitted evidence. Section 159

14

and 160 of the Evidence Ordinance and section 110(4) of the Criminal

Procedure Code Act allow a witness to refresh his mind. However,

marking certain portions of the statement is irregular. The Judge could

use the information book to verify whether such portions are contained

in the statement.

In Keerthi Bandara vs. Attorney General [2000] Sri LR 245, F.N.D

Jayasuriya J stated that "when the defence contends that there is a vital

omission which militates against the adoption of the credibility of the

witness, it is the Trial Judge who should peruse the information book

and decide on that issue."

Therefore, this irregularity does not warrant to vitiate the conviction. If

the witness denied making such a statement, it becomes a contradiction

and not substantial evidence. But here, the witness admitted making

such a statement and he further said it was true. Therefore, it becomes

substantial evidence.

Evaluation of evidence of an adverse witness.

The term hostile or adverse witness is not found in our Evidence

Ordinance or the Indian Evidence Act. Section 154 of the Evidence

Ordinance is as follows:

"The court may in its discretion permit the person who calls a witness to

put any question to him, which might be put in cross-examination by the

adverse party".

In the case of Moses vs. The State[1999] 3 SriLR 401 Hector Yapa J,

referring to the Indian case of Kesharam Gora vs. state of Asam 1998 AIR

65 quoted the following:

15

"While it is true that merely because a witness is declared hostile,

his evidence cannot be rejected on that ground alone it is equally

well settled that when once a prosecution witness is declared

hostile to the prosecution, it clearly exhibits his intention not to

rely on the evidence of such witness."

However, the above case does not reflect the present law of India in this

regard. By the Amendment Act no. 2 of 2006 sub-section 2 is added to

section 154 of the Indian Evidence Act. Sub-section 2 of the Indian

Evidence Act is thus,

"2. nothing in this section shall dis-entitle the person, so permitted

under sub-section 1 to rely on any part of the evidence of such

witness".

In Hari and Others vs. The State of UP, the Supreme Court India held as

follows; (in para 25)

'It is well settled that the evidence of prosecution witnesses cannot

be rejected in toto merely because the prosecution chose to treat

them as hostile and cross-examined them. The evidence of such

witnesses cannot be treated as effaced or washed off the record

altogether but the same can be accepted to the extent that their

version is found to be dependable on a careful scrutiny thereof. It

is for the Judge of fact to consider in each case whether as a result

of such cross-examination and contradiction, the witness stands

thoroughly discredited or can still be believed in regard to a part of

his testimony. If the Judge finds that in the process, the credit of

the witness has not been completely shaken, he may, after reading

and considering the evidence of the witness, as a whole, with due

caution and care, accept, in the light of the other evidence on the

16

record, that part of testimony which he finds to be creditworthy

and act upon it.'

In the case of Attar Singh vs State of Maharashtra decided on December

14, 2012 (https://indiankanoon.org/doc/13185807), the Supreme Court

of India stated the following regarding the evidentiary value of testimonial

of a hostile witness.

"13. We have meticulously considered the arguments advanced on this

vital aspect of the matter on which the conviction and sentence imposed

on the appellant is based. This compels us to consider as to whether the

conviction and sentence recorded on the basis of the testimony of the

witness who has been declared hostile could be relied upon for recording

conviction of the accused-appellant. But it was difficult to overlook the

relevance and value of the evidence of even a hostile witness while

considering as to what extent their evidence could be allowed to be relied

upon and used by the prosecution. It could not be ignored that when a

witness is declared hostile and when his testimony is not shaken on

material points in the cross-examination, there is no ground to reject his

testimony in toto as it is well-settled by a catena of decisions that the

Court is not precluded from taking into account the statement of a

hostile witness altogether and it is not necessary to discard the same in

toto and can be relied upon partly. If some portion of the statement of

the hostile witness inspires confidence, it can be relied upon. He cannot

be thrown out as wholly unreliable. This was the view expressed by this

Court in the case of Syed Akbar vs. State of Karnataka reported in AIR

1979 SC 1848 whereby the learned Judges of the Supreme Court

reversed the judgment of the Karnataka High Court which had discarded

the evidence of a hostile witness in its entirety. Similarly, other High

Courts in the matter of Gulshan Kumar vs. State (1993) Crl.L.J. 1525 as

17

also Kunwar vs. State of U.P. (1993) Crl.L.J. 3421 as also Haneefa vs.

State (1993) Crl.L.J. 2125 have held that it is not necessary to discard

the evidence of the hostile witness in toto and can be relied upon partly.

So also, in the matter of State of U.P. vs. Chet Ram reported in AIR 1989

SC 1543 = (1989) Crl.L.J. 1785; it was held that if some portion of the

statement of the hostile witness inspires confidence it can be relied upon

and the witness cannot be termed as wholly unreliable. It was further

categorically held in the case of Shatrughan vs. State of M.P. (1993)

Crl.L.J. 3120 that hostile witness is not necessarily a false witness.

Granting of a permission by the Court to cross-examine his own witness

does not amount to adjudication by the Court as to the veracity of a

witness. It only means a declaration that the witness is adverse or

unfriendly to the party calling him and not that the witness is

untruthful. This was the view expressed by this Court in the matter of

Sat Paul vs. Delhi Administration AIR 1976 SC 294. Thus, merely because

a witness becomes hostile it would not result in throwing out the

prosecution case, but the Court must see the relative effect of his

testimony. If the evidence of a hostile witness is corroborated by other

evidence, there is no legal bar to convict the accused. Thus, testimony of

a hostile witness is acceptable to the extent it is corroborated by that of a

reliable witness. It is, therefore, open to the Court to consider the

evidence and there is no objection to a part of that evidence being made

use of in support of the prosecution or in support of the accused."

Having regard to the abovementioned principles regarding testimony of

an adverse witness, I hold that evidence of an adverse witness is not to

be rejected in toto. The evidence of such witnesses cannot be treated as

washed off the record altogether. Such evidence can be accepted and

acted upon to the extent that is found to be dependable after a careful

scrutiny. It is for the Trial Judge to decide on and come to a conclusion

on how much of such evidence can be relied on or otherwise.

18

In this case, the Learned High Court Judge has carefully considered and

evaluated the evidence of PW2. PW2 did not try to help the prosecution.

He was not biased towards the prosecution. The prosecution could

definitely rely upon the evidence of PW2.

The next argument is that the Learned Trial Judge should not have relied

on the evidence regarding the dying declaration, one reason being that

the Trial Judge rejected the evidence of PW 8, and the other was that PW

4 did not know to whom the deceased referred to as 'Pradeep'. It was

further argued that after receiving the stab injuries, the deceased was

not in a position to speak, or at least it was doubtful whether he was able

to speak.

PW4 did not know who Pradeep was. PW4 tried to save the deceased

from stabbing by the assailant and he himself got injured. At that

moment, the deceased told him that Pradeep stabbed him. There was no

time gap between the stabbing and the dying declaration. PW 2 stated

that he saw the appellant bend the deceased and assault him.

Immediately the deceased ran towards PW2 and said that Pradeep

stabbed him. PW4 was not cross-examined, and his testimony stands

uncontested. Therefore, the fact that the deceased had told PW4 that

Pradeep stabbed him is established. Though PW4 did not know the

appellant, PW2 knew the appellant and his name from his childhood.

The wife of the deceased also testified that PW2 told that Pradeep

stabbed the deceased.

Now I consider whether the deceased was able to speak after receiving

the injuries.

On Page 384 the doctor stated as follows:

: ?

19

:

In Cross-examination the doctor answered as follows:

On page 397

:

?

: .

.

:

?

: .

: ?

On Page 398

:

.

In re-examination On Page 406 and 407

: . 3 ?

: .

20

: ?

: .

: ?

: l%s . . . .

: ?

: . . . .

: ?

: . .

The doctor's evidence quoted above established the fact that the

deceased could speak for a considerable time after receiving the injuries.

This is further corroborated by uncontradicted evidence of PW4.

21

The defence did not put any questions to PW 2 and PW4, to the effect

that the deceased was not in a position to speak after receiving the

injuries.

When considering the evidence of the doctor, PW2 and PW4, the fact that

the deceased made the dying declaration is established beyond

reasonable doubt.

The evidence is sufficient to establish the dying declaration.

We have examined the evidence in the case and we are satisfied. The

decision of the Trial Judge was based on admissible evidence and there

is no reason to upset the findings of the Trial Judge. Therefore, we affirm

the conviction and sentence imposed by the Trial Judge.

The appeal is dismissed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

N. Bandula Karunarathna, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal