IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal Against an order of the

High Court under Sec. 331 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

(01) Abdul Kareem Nazeer

(02) Mohamed Farook Abusally

Bogambara Prison

Accused

C. A. Case No. : 274/2009 Vs. H. C. Ampara Case No. : 896/2004

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

Complainant

And now

Mohamed Farook Abusally

Bogambara Prison

Accused-Appellant

1

--

BEFORE

COUNSel

ARGUED ON

DECIDED ON

M. M. A. Gaffoor, J &

K. K. Wickramasinghe, J

Vs

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

Complainant Respondent

AAL Dr.Ranjit Fernando for the Accused-Appellant.

Shanil Kularatne Senior State Counsel for the Attorney General.

2nd September 2016

4th November 2016

K. K. WICKRAMASINGHE, J.

When this matter was taken up for argument, the learned Senior State Counsel Shanil Kularatne

took up following preliminary objections:-

(1) the appeal against the conviction and sentence passed on the accused appellant on31st July

2009 is out of time, as the appeal has been lodged on the 2nd July 2010 (almost one year).

(2)there is no right of appeal against an order made under section 241(3) of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act.

2

The learned counsel for the appellant submitted to court that the accused appellant was

produced to court after 8 months and it was on the 10th March 2010 and thereafter the

application was made under section 241(3) explaining the reasons for his absence.

After conSidering the facts, the learned trial judge had refused the application for Trial De Novo

on the 22nd July 2010.Therefor the counsel for the appellant submitted that this appeal filed

only after the above mentioned order and therefor the appeal has been filed within 14 days.

It was further argued that the mandatory compliance of section 280 of CPC relating to allocutus

was not taken place and therefor the imposing of the death sentence cannot be considered as

pronounced. In the absence of the pronouncement of the death sentence, only the conviction

remained until 22nd July 2010, which alone would not constitute a judgement. Therefor the

Appealable period had commenced from the date of judgement and thereby the appeal has

filed within the time period.

It is pertinent to note that in the cases of CA Appeal No.81/2003 and CA Appeal No. 155/2000

Decided by Ranjith Silva J. that the above mentioned contention is untenable due to the

following reasons:

"One is that under section 241(3)(b)which is asfollows:- where the trial has been concluded, the court shall set aside the conviction and sentence, if any, and order that the accused be tried de novo.

We find that the necessary implicatiun or the corollary of this provision to be that, there mu!>t be a conviction and sentence in existence for the High Court Judge to set aside such conviction or sentence. From this we can conclude that in case the conviction and the sentence are not set aside, for all purposes, there is a conviction and sentence on record. Therefore if there is a conviction and sentence, especially a sentence (emphasis added) it would be redundant and superfluous to record an allocutus, because an allocutus is recorded before the sentence of death is passed. Therefore as I have mentioned above section 241 (3)(b) by necessary implication indicates the existence of a conviction and sentence".

On the other hand, by referring to section 286(f) of the Criminal Procedure Code it was further

held lithe provisions of this section too by necessary implication indicate the existence of a conviction and sentence".

Therefore it was held, that when an accused was tried in absentia is brought before the High

Court and if an application to set aside the judgement is not allowed, it is not necessary to

record an allocutus from the accused before the sentence is ordered to be carried out.

3

t f f ! ! t i

I I I ,

t

After considering section 279 of the Criminal Procedure Code it was affirmatively decided, that

when an accused against whom a sentence of death has already been passed, is arrested and

brought before the High Court, it is not necessary to pronounce the sentence of death and also

to record an allocutus.

The counsel for the appellant also contented the fact that the,evidence led under section 241

inquiry was based on hearsay evidence and therefor it is illegal. When considering the

proceedings itself, it is very clear that the appellant was deliberately keeping away from court.

When perusing the brief we find that the accused appellant was present in open courts and the

indictment was served on him and the charge was also read out and thereafter he had pleaded

not guilty for the charge against him on the 19th October 2004.Therefor, it is an obvious fact

that he was deliberately keeping away from court.

Further learned counsel for the accused appellant contended that the name of the accused

appellant mentioned by the police officer was wrong, but when considering the evidence of the

police officer as at pages 51/53 it is very clear that the discrepancy of the name of the accused

appellant as contented by the counsel, read as 'Abusaid" is only a typing mistake. Accordingly,

the second ground of the appellant has no merit.

As I have mentioned above and when considering the testimony of the accused appellant it is

evident that he was out of the island during the trial and it was a deliberate action. The learned

trial judge has given a well-considered order and further mentioned that if he wanted, he

would have even got permission of court before leaving the island.

The next argument of the counsel for the accused appellant was that by referring to page

No.442 of the brief and stated that the learned Judge was said to have been stated that "the accused appel/ant absconded, because he could not explain the prosecution case against him .......... " Thereby the above mention reasoning is not a judicial conclusion tenable in Law.

When carefully referring to the said page of the brief, it is noted that there is no such sentence

at the sited page.

Anyway, in the judgement of case No CA 81/2003 Hon. Ranjith Silva has held that

'''pronouncing the sentence for the second time was a redundant exercise on the part of the

learned judge. The maxim that one should not be allowed to benefit from his own wrong- doing

is applicable without reserve to the facts and circumstances of this case (nulprendra advantage

de son tort demesne). To permit the accused to take advantage of his own contumacious

conduct and grant him a special right of appeal after the appealable period is not only

anachronistic but also absurd.

4

'.

t

The other argument put forward by the learned counsel appearing for the accused appellant

was that if this appeal is not allowed, the court should invoke its revisionary powers under

section 363/365 of the CPC and reverse the ultimate findings of the trial court. As decided in

case No. 155/2000, we are also of the view that allowing such an application will tantamount

the court lending its hand to a person guilty of contumacious conduct and there by assisting

him. Therefor we hold that the Petition of Appeal is not properly constituted and is out of time.

As stated by the Learned Senior State Counsel there is no right of appeal against an order made

under section 241(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act. According to section 331 of the

Criminal Procedure Code, it gives only the forum jurisdiction (Vide Martin Vs Wijewardene 1939

2 SLR 409)

For the reasons stated above, we uphold the two preliminary objections raised by the Learned

Senior State counsel and dismiss the appeal in limine.

M.M.A. Gaffoor J.

I Agree

Cases Referred to:-

1. case No CA 81/2003 decided on 22/10/2007

2. case No. 155/2000 decided on 17/09/2007

3. Martin Vs Wijewardene (1939 2 SLR 409)

5

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Judge of the Court of Appeal

f I , !

f

~

~ I ! !