IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

CA Writ Application No: 784/2008

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Preethie Kumdinie Abeyesekera, No. 137/B7, 3'd Lane, Salgas Mawatha, Mattegoda Polgasowita.

Petitioner

V.

l. Hon. Gamini Thilaksiri

Minister of Sports, Youth Affaires, Women Affaires, Housing and Constructions - Western Provincial Council No. 204, Denzil Kobbekaduwa Mawatha, Battaramulla.

2. Homagama Pradeshiya Sabhawa

Pradeshiya Sabhawa Office, Homagama.

3. AJ. Karunaratne Divisional Secretary Divisional Secretariat - Homagama Court Road, Homagama.

4. J.A.S. Jayasuriya Regional Engineer's Office Court Road, Homagama.

5. Urban Development Authority

"Sethsiripaya" Battaramulla.

6. Victor Samaraweera

Chief Secretary - Western Provincial Council No. 32, Sir Marcus Fernando Mawatha, Srawasthi Mandhiraya

BEFORE

COUNSEL

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS

FILED ON

JUDGMENT ON

Colombo 07.

7. Nishendra Gunarathne

137/B5, 3'd Lane, Salgas Mawatha, Mattegoda.

8. Thananthara Withanage Wimalasiri

137113, 3'd Lane, Salgas Mawatha, Mattegoda.

9. Kaludeera Saman Rvindra Lal

137115, 3'd Lane, Salgas Mawatha, Mattegoda.

Respondents

K. PRIY ANTRA FERNANDO, J

SAMPATR B. ABAYAKOON, J

Anoma Goonathilake for the Petitioner.

Edward Ahangama for the 2nd Respondent.

Wikum De Abrew, SDSG for the 1st, 3'd, 4'h, 5'h and 6'h Respondents.

C. Wanigapura for the 7'h, 8'h, and 9'h Respondents

01.02.2021 by the Petitioner.

03.02.2021 by the 1st, 3'd, 4'h, 5'h and 6'h Respondents.

03.03.2021

2

K. PRIY ANTHA FERNANDO, J.

o I. The petitioner filed this application against the respondents seeking to quash by writs

of certiorari the approval granted and the decision taken by the I st and/or 2nd and/or 3'd

andlor 4th respondents or anyone or more of them, which decision is contained in the

letter dated 18th September 2008 marked PIO for the construction on lot No. B 10

depicted in survey plan No. 2391 /A dated II th April 1986 made by S.

Wickramasinghe Licensed Surveyor marked as PI(b), and to compel the 5th

respondent by way of a writ of mandamus to demolish the construction made on Lot

B I O. The parties agreed that the judgment could be delivered on Written Submissions

filed by the parties.

02. House and Property Traders Ltd., a property developer had blocked out the land called

Mattegodawatte on two survey plans bearing No. 2251 dated 13 th December 1985

(PI (a and No. 2391 /A dated II th April 1986 (PI (b, both made by S

Wickramasinghe Licensed Surveyor. It is an undisputed fact that when the above sub-

division was approved by the Colombo Development Council, lot No. B I 0 of plan No.

2391A was reserved for community and recreation uses in terms of regulation 22(1)

marked as P3.

03. On approving the above plan, the Authorized Officer recorded the following;

8> ,.,DB ""Cso go,.,. 8>. ~. 6/86/1

'f0"'. 2391 /<1 ~6"., 8~~~ "'~"',,; "'CJD 11.04.86 'f0"'. 8>. 1 BD 8>. 9 ~,.r!lJ 8> ,.,DB eo, c,e&

'f'!.l'" ,.,6~ .

04. The petitioner submits that on or about 31 st August 2008, with the approval of the 2nd

respondent, and with funds allocated by the I st respondent, under the supervision of

the 4th respondent, the 3'd respondent wrongfully and unlawfully commenced

constructing a non-residential building in the lot B lOin the above plan 239 1/ A.

3

05. While admitting the construction of the building in lot No. B 10, the respondents deny

the allegation made by the petitioner that the above construction is wrongful and

unlawful. It is the contention of the respondents that the property referred to in plans

PI(a) and PI(b) were sold by House and Property Trades Ltd. at public auction and

the block out plan was approved by the Colombo Development Council (CDC)

subject to the reservation of block B I 0 for public purposes. It is submitted that due to

the need of a community hall for the welfare of the community, on the request of the

members of the public of the 3'd lane of Salgas Mawatha, they have taken steps to

build the community hall which is the subject matter. It is further submitted by the 7th

8th and 9th respondents that the building in question was constructed by the

respondents due to the public demand made through the 7th 8th 9th respondents' society

and that any technical mistakes of non-compliance of regulations can be cured on

public interest.

06. It is pertinent to note that the land 'Mattegodawatte' had been a private property. It

was not owned by the State or the Urban Development Authority (UDA). House and

Property Trades Ltd. (The Developer) had got the necessary approval for the sub-

division.

07. Regulations made by the Minister in terms of Section 8 of the UDA Law No. 41 of

1978, which was published in gazette No. 392/9 dated 10.03.1986, among other things

provide for sub-division of land. Regulation 22 provides;

22(1) Where the parcel of land or site to be sub-divided exceeds 1.0 hectare, an area

of not less than ten percentum of the land or site, excluding streets shall be reserved

for community and recreation uses in appropriate locations.

22(2) Such reserved space shall be vested with the Authority free of all charges.

4

08. As provided in the above Regulation 22, when approving the sub-division of the land

Matlegodawatte, as a condition precedent the CDC has reserved Lot B 1 0 for

community and recreation uses. Therefore, it is obvious that all persons including the

petitioner who bought the blocks from the land Mattegodawatte from the Developer

have proportionately paid for that space (B I 0). Hence, it is clear that Lot B lOis

reserved for community and recreation of the allottees of the sub-division plan, not for

the general public.

09. Once the sub-division is approved, the reserved place BIO is vested with the UDA

free of all charges in terms of Regulation 21 (2). It is for the UDA or the local

authority to maintain the reserved space for community recreation for allottees of the

sub-division who are taxpayers to such local authority. In the above premise, I am of

the considered view that the respondents have no legal right to grant approval to build

or to build a community hall in lot BIO for the use of the residents of3'd Lane, Salgas

Mawatha, other than that for the use by the allottees of the plans PI(a) and PI(b).

10. Learned Counsel for the 1st 3'd 41h 51h and 61h respondents submitted that the petitioner

is guilty of lashes. It is submitted that the government funds have been utilized and the

building has almost been completed except for cementing the floor and plastering the

walls.

II. In the case of Seneviratne V. Tissa Dias Bal/daral/ayake and aI/other /1992J 2 SLR

341 at page 351, the Court commented;

'If a person were negligent for a long and unreasonable time, the law refosed

afterwards to lend him any assistance to enforce his rights; the law both to punish his

neglect, nam leges vigilantiblls, non dormientibus, subveniuntn and for other reasons

refoses to assist those who sleep over their rights and are not vigilant. '

5

12. In the case of Biso Menika V. Cyril de Alwis afl(l Others (1982/1 Sri LR 368, the

Supreme Court held:

"When the Court has examined the record and is satisfied the Order complained of is

manifestly erroneous or without jurisdiction the Court would be loathe to allow the

mischief of the Order to continue and reject the application simply on the ground of

delay, unless there are very extraordinary reasons to justifY such rejection. Where the

authority concerned has been acting altogether without basic jurisdiction, the Court

may grant relief in spite of the delay unless the conduct of the party shows that he has

approbated the usurpation of jurisdiction. In any such event, the explanation of the

delay should be considered sympathetically. "

13. The petitioner in submitting the sequence of events, in paragraph 10 of his petition has

stated that this alleged unlawful construction commenced on or about 31 " August

2008. I" 3'd 4th 5th and 6th respondents in paragraph 8 of their statement of objections

dated 17th December 2008, have admitted the contents of paragraph 10 of the petition,

other than the contention that the construction is wrongful and unlawful.

14. The petitioner has written the letter marked as PS on 9th September 2008 to the I"

respondent objecting to the above construction. The petitioner also has written letters

marked P6 to the 6th respondent with copies to the 2nd and 5th respondents and P7 to

the 6th respondent with copies to the 2nd and 5th respondents objecting to the

construction, and the acceptance of the above letters is not denied. On 18th September

2008, the 3'd respondent sent the letter marked PIO stating, among other things, that

the approval was granted by the 2nd respondent for the construction. The respondents

have continued with the construction work. The petitioner filed the instant application

on 26th September 2008. Hence, the submission by the respondents that the petitioner

is guilty of lashes is untenable.

6

IS. I bear in mind that even if the claim is made promptly, a Court may still refuse a

remedy if it considers that granting a remedy would be likely to cause substantial

hardship to, or substantially prejudice the rights of any person. [ see no such hardship

or prejudice to the 7th gth or 9th respondents who intervened or to other respondents, if

the relief sought by the petitioner to issue writs of certiorari is granted.

16. On behalf of the 2nd respondent, it is submitted that the petitioner has acted with an

ulterior motive. In that, it is submitted that the petitioner has constructed the eaves of

the upstair building on the common land and her rain water has been diverted to the

common land. Windows of her upstair building open to the common land and a gate

opens to the common land. It is submitted that the petitioner has violated the UDA

regulations.

17. If the petitioner has violated the UDA regulations, the 2nd respondent and or the

relevant local authorities may be entitled to take necessary steps to prevent such action

or take legal action against the petitioner. That does not permit, nor is it an excuse for

the respondents to act illegally or in excess of authority. It is pertinent to note that the

letter 2R3 sent to the 2nd respondent by the 3rd respondent to take necessary action

against the petitioner has been sent about five and a half years after the instant

application was filed by the petitioner. That shows the lackadaisical approach of the

2nd and 3rd respondents on their duties, and their intentions, not the ulterior motives of

the petitioner. That further shows that although the block B lOis vested with the UDA

in terms of Regulation 22(2), the UDA has failed to maintain it for the benefit of the

allottees of the lots in plans PI(a) and PI(b) including the petitioner, for their

community and recreation purposes as it is reserved for.

18. It is submitted on behalf of the 15t 3rd 4th 5th and the 6th respondents that the Town and

Country Planning Amendment Act No. 49 of 2000 amended section 8 of the UDA

Law No 41 of 1978. It is submitted that as per that amendment the legislature has

excluded the government projects from the operation of the regulations marked P3.

7

I I

19. As I have already concluded in paragraph 08 of this judgment, the lot B lOis reserved

for the community and recreation of the allottees of plans PI (a) and PI (b) and not for

the general public including the residents of the 3rd Lane, Salgas Mawatha. It is not

necessary for me to consider the issue of approval from the local authority for the

impugned construction. However, for the completeness of my judgment I will address

that issue as well.

20. It is to be noted that the 2nd respondent failed to appear in Court even after notices

were sent repeatedly. As per the journal entries dated 04.10.2019 onwards, on

18.12.2019 the learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General has informed Court that he

had no instructions other than the documents filed and has moved time to obtain

instructions as to whether a building application along with the plan has been

submitted. That was in spite of the fact that PI 0 had been sent by the 3rd respondent

that the construction has been approved by the 2nd respondent. Only after issuing

notice again through the Fiscal, District Court Homagama, the 2nd respondent

appeared and moved to file objections on 22.07.2020, after a lapse of about 12 years.

However, in both the objections and in the written submissions filed on their behalf,

the 2nd respondent omitted to mention the document PIO. The 2nd respondent has not

even mentioned paragraph 19 of the petition that referred to the document PIO.

21. As submitted by the learned SDSG for the 1st 3rd to 6th respondents, by the Town and

Country Planning Amendment Act No 49 of 2000 Section 8 of the UDA Act has been

amended. Section 8(P) of the UDA Act before the amendment was to read as;

'p) to approve, co-ordinate, regulate, control or prohibit, or any development activity,

of any government agency or any other person in such areas;

8

Substituted section 8p provides;

"to co-ordinate regulate or control any development scheme or project or any

development activity of any person in such areas ".

22. It is the contention of the learned SDSG, that as the words 'Government agency' have

been deleted, in terms of section 3 of the Interpretation Ordinance, the intention of the

legislature was to exclude government projects from the operation of the Regulations

marked P3.

23. I am unable to accept the above contention of the learned SDSG. Although the words

'Government Agency' have been deleted, the words 'development activity of any

person' remain. This has widened or expanded the scope by including the words 'any

person' .

24. On the 'Rule of Exclusion', Interpretation of Statutes by N. S. Bindra 7th edition at

page 485 states;

"This is merely an auxiliary rule of construction adopted for the purpose of

ascertaining the intention of the law-giver. It may be applied only when in the natural

association of ideas the contrast between what is provided and what is left out leads to

an inference that the latter was intended to be left out. It may accordingly be held

inapplicable if there exists a plausible reason for not including what is left out . ... "

25. Government agencies are not expressly excluded by the amendment and therefore the

words 'any person' should include government agencies as well. If the intention of the

legislature was to exclude government agencies from getting approval for their

projects, the legislature could have expressly excluded such agencies. Sections 8J (1)

and (2) remain unchanged which includes Government agencies. Hence the argument

9

of the learned SDSG that the Government projects are excluded from the operation of

the Regulations marked P3 is untenable.

26. As submitted on behalf of the petitioner, in terms of Regulation 16(1), no site or lot

abutting a street less than 9 meters in width shall be used for non-residential use or

construction of any bui Iding for such use except as provided under Regulation 16 (2)

(b). Regulation 16(2)(b) does not apply to this instance. Road access to lot BIO is 12

feet in width which is much less than the 9 meters situated between lots B6 and B7 of

plan PI(b). That access road is only to access lot BIO. Hence, the 2nd defendant could

not have legally given approval to construct a non-residential building in lot B 10. For

the reasons stated above, I conclude that the petitioner is entitled to get the relief

prayed in paragraphs (c) and (d) of the petition.

27. Now I will tum to consider the writ of mandamus prayed by the petitioner to direct the

5th respondent to demolish the unlawful construction made in lot B 10, in

contravention of the UDA regulations. It is submitted on behalf of the l SI 3rd to 6th

respondents that the community hall is almost complete and in the event that the Court

made an order to demolish the building, the residents in the area would suffer and also

it would be waste of public money.

28. There cannot be any issue of suffering by the residents in the area, as I have

mentioned before, that lot No. B lOis reserved for community and recreation for the

allottees of Plans PI (a) and PI (b), and not to the public. On the submission of waste

of public money, I wish to state that it is the respondents who were involved in the

illegal construction in contravention of the regulations, and it is the respondents who

are responsible for such waste of public funds, if any. The respondents have continued

with the construction work even after the objections were made by the Petitioner.

29. However, as public money has been utilized for the construction, I do not proceed to

issue the writ of mandamus as prayed by the petitioner to demolish the construction.

10

The construction may be utilized for the purpose of community and recreation of the

allottees of plans PI (a) and PI (b).

30. The petitioner is granted the relief as prayed in paragraphs (c) and (d) of the prayer of

the petition. Relief sought in paragraph (e) is refused.

Application of the petitioner is partly allowed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

SAMPATH B. ABAYAKOON, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

II