==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0065/2023

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of a petition of Appel in

terms of Section 331(1) of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka

Complainant

Vs

Migel Hettige Winston Anasly Thisera

alias Migel Hettige Winston Anasly

Thisera

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Migel Hettige Winston Anasly Thisera

alias Migel Hettige Winston Anasly

Thisera

Accused – Appellant

Vs

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department

Colombo 12.

Respondent

Court of Appeal Case No:

CA/HCC/0065/2023

High Court of Gampaha Case No:

HC 96/21

CA/HCC/0065/2023

2 | P a g e

Before : P. Kumararatnam, J.

Pradeep Hettiarachchi, J.

Counsel : Sumith Senanayake, P.C. with Nisali Balachandra & Kavindi

Kodithuwakku for the Accused – Appellant.

Shezon Mahboob, S.C for the State

Argued on : 12.01.2026

Decided on : 13.03.2026

Pradeep Hettiarachchi, J

Judgment

1. The Accused-appellant (hereinafter referred to as “the Appellant”) has preferred this

appeal against the sentence imposed on him by the Learned High Court Judge of Gampaha

on 13-03-2023.The Appellant was indicted before the High Court of Gampaha for

committing grave sexual abuse on a boy under 18 years of age.

2. On 26-11-2021 the Indictment was served on the Appellant and accordingly the trial was

fixed for 09-05-2022. However, on 09-05-2022, the trial was postponed as the High Court

Judge was on official leave. Thereafter, the trial was postponed on several occasions due

to various reasons and when the matter was mentioned on 31-10-2022 it was informed that

the Appellant was willing to conclude the trial by tendering a plea.

3. On 13-03-2023 when the charge was readout to the Appellant, he pleaded guilty and

accordingly was convicted and imposed following sentences.

• 9 years rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs.10, 000/- with a default sentence

of 2 months rigorous imprisonment.

• Furthermore, the Appellant was ordered to pay Rs.300, 000/-- as compensation to

the victim with a default sentence of 5 months rigorous imprisonment.

CA/HCC/0065/2023

3 | P a g e

4. Being aggrieved by the sentence imposed on the Appellant by the High Court, the

Appellant preferred the present appeal to this Court.

5. As directed by this Court, both parties have filed their respective Written Submissions.

6. The Appellant submitted that the sentence imposed by the Learned High Court Judge is

unreasonable, unjustifiable and unacceptable given that the Appellant had pleaded guilty

at the first instance. The Appellant has prayed before this Court to set aside the sentence of

9 years rigorous imprisonment imposed by the High Court on 13-03-2023 and to suspend

the same.

7. In support of the Appellant’s position, the Counsel for the Appellant placed much reliance

on the reasoning of the Supreme Court in SC Reference 03/2008 and the cases that

followed the said determination.

8. Citing SC Reference 03/2008, it was submitted that the sentence imposed by the High

Court Judge is contrary to Article 4 (c), 11 and 12 (1) of the Constitution of the country.

9. Opposing the Appellant’s contention, the Respondent submitted that the minimum

mandatory sentence for the offence of which the Appellant was charged was7 years and

maximum is 20 years and therefore learned trial Judge has acted in terms of law and has

duly passed a lawful sentence of 9 years having considered both mitigating and

aggravating circumstances. It is further submitted that there is no question of law that

arises from the sentencing of the Learned Trial Judge as it is within the four corners of the

law.

10. Furthermore, the Respondent submitted that since the Learned Trial Judge has considered

all aggravating factors and imposed a lawful sentence it does not warrant the intervention

of the Court of Appeal.

11. In this case, the Appellant was 33 years old at the time of committing the offence. The

victim was 15 years old and was a student when he faced this ordeal. It can be observed

that on the date of the incident the victim was in his school uniform and was at home as

his school vehicle had not come as scheduled. The Appellant was a neighbor and also

known to the victim. The Appellant had come to the victim’s house with his own infant

CA/HCC/0065/2023

4 | P a g e

child and had abused the victim. When this alleged act was being committed the victim’s

mother suddenly came home and the Appellant had left the house at that time.

12. In deciding the appropriateness of the sentence, Court will normally pay its attention to the

aggravating and mitigating circumstances and then imposed the sentence. In this case the

aggravating circumstances can be stated as follows;

• Age of the victim

• The relationship between victim and the Appellant

• The fact that the Appellant came to the victim’s house carrying the Appellant’s

infant child and had committed the offence.

• Only when the victim’s mother returned home the Appellant left the place.

• The age gap between the Appellant and the victim.

13. The mitigating factors are mainly that the Appellant has no previous convictions, he had

pleaded guilty at the first instance and also, he volunteered to pay compensation before

pleading guilty.

14. Since the Appellant placed great reliance on SC Reference 03/2008 and the cases which

followed the said determination it is pertinent to consider the said determination in this

context and its applicability to the case in hand.

15. The unanimous opinion of the Court in SC Reference 03/2008 was that;

“The minimum mandatory sentence in Section 362 (2) (e) is in conflict with Article 4

(c), 11 and 12 (1) of the Constitution and that the High Court is not inhibited from

imposing a sentence that it deems appropriate in the exercise of its judicial discretion

notwithstanding the minimum mandatory sentence.”

16. In the said reference Justice P. A. Ratnayake held that:

“The minimum mandatory sentence in Section 364(2)(e) is in conflict with Article

4(c), 11, and 12(1) of the Constitution.” “Article 80(3) of the Constitution only

applies where the validity of an Act is called into question. However, Article 80(3)

does not prevent a court from exercising its most traditional function of

interpreting laws. Interpretation of laws will often require a court to determine the

CA/HCC/0065/2023

5 | P a g e

applicable law in the event of a conflict between two laws. This is a function that

has been exercised by this court from time immemorial.” In the event of a conflict

between an ordinary law and the Constitution, the constitutional provisions must

prevail over an ordinary law.”

“The minimum mandatory sentence in Section 364(2) (e) of the Penal Code is in

conflict with Article 4(e), 11 and 12 of the Constitution and the High Court is not

inhibited from imposing a sentence that it deems appropriate in the exercise of its

judicial discretion notwithstanding the minimum mandatory sentence.”

17. This determination has done away with the minimum mandatory sentence which up to that

time had prevented the trial Judges from imposing an appropriate sentence having

considered the circumstances of the particular case tried by them. This was also followed

in the case of Rohana alias Loku v Attorney General SC/Appeal/89A/2009 (Decided on

12-05-2011) and also in Ambagala Mudiyanselage Samantha Sampath v Attorney

General SC/Appeal/ 17/2013 (Decided on 12-03-2015).

18. However, it must be emphasized that this discretion which is an inherent power of a Judge

shall be exercised very cautiously in offences against the children in particular the

offences of grave sexual abuse cases as cases of this nature against the children are on the

rise.

19. Furthermore, it is important to consider the context within which the Supreme Court in the

afore-cited cases has applied the reasoning in SC Reference 3 of 2008. Both in Rohana

alias Loku v Attorney General and in Ambagala Mudiyanselage Samantha Sampath v

Attorney General, the accused persons have been found guilty of committing an offence

punishable under section 364(2) (e) of the Penal Code.

20. The facts of case in Rohana alias Loku v Attorney General are briefly as follows;

The Prosecutrix has had a love affair with the Accused and due to the hostile

environment in her family after her mother got to know about her continued

association with the Accused, the Prosecutrix had asked the Accused to take her away

and even threatened him that she would take poison and commit suicide if the Accused

refuses or fails to take her away from her home. Consequently, the Accused had taken

CA/HCC/0065/2023

6 | P a g e

her to his uncle’s house which was within the walking distance from the Prosecutrix’s

house. After eloping, the Appellant and the Prosecutrix have on numerous occasions

enjoyed sexual intimacy as consensual partners. Thereafter, the police had come and

arrested the Accused. The Prosecutrix was 15 years and 3 months at the time the

incident took place. It was also observed by the Supreme Court that the victim had

been a reluctant witness against the Accused at the trial before the High Court.

21. Similarly, in Ambagala Mudiyanselage Samantha Sampath v Attorney General, the

Prosecutrix, who was 15 years old at that time, had got pregnant consequent to an affair

with her sister’s husband. The Prosecutrix’s sister had gone abroad for foreign

employment and the Accused and the married couple had no children. Thereafter, the

Prosecutrix’s parents had invited the Accused to come and live in the same house with

them. After sometime, the Prosecutrix was found to be pregnant and her parents asked the

Accused to leave the house; took her to another village and kept her there, with an older

married couple who had no children, having in mind to hand over the baby to them when

the child is born. Neither the parents nor the Prosecutrix informed the police about the said

incident in the first instance and quite surprisingly, it was upon the information of some

outsider that the police launched a search and found the Prosecutrix and the Accused. At

the trial before the High Court, the Accused also pleaded guilty for the charge. Thereafter,

the Prosecutrix gave birth to a baby girl at the Kuliyapitiya Base Hospital. It was

mentioned in the birth certificate of the child that her father is the Accused. The Accused

had been paying maintenance for the upkeep of the said child and had visited the child at

the school as her father when called upon to do so and arranged the transport to and from

the school.

22. One main factor taken into consideration by the Supreme Court in both the above cases

when imposing a suspended term against the accused persons is the consensual nature of

the relationship shared by the Accused and the Prosecutrix. And in Ambagala

Mudiyanselage Samantha Sampath v Attorney General, the Court took into

consideration the fact that there is an existing 3rd person in the picture, ie. the 10 years-old

girl who is born and living in this world as a result of the Prosecutrix and the Appellant

having had sexual intercourse and the adverse impact that it may have on the girl child if

the Appellant is sent to jail.

CA/HCC/0065/2023

7 | P a g e

23. However, in the present case, the Appellant was charged under section 365B (2)(b) of the

Penal Code (as amended) and he has pleaded guilty to the said charge. The Appellant was

33 years old at the time of committing the offence and the victim was 15 years old. On the

date of the incident, the victim was in his school uniform and was at home as his school

vehicle had not come as scheduled. The Appellant being a neighbor of the victim had

come to the victim’s house carrying his own infant child and had performed oral sex on

the victim. When this alleged act was being committed the victim’s mother had suddenly

come home and the Appellant had left the house at that time. Contrary to the above-

mentioned cases, in the present case, there was no evidence that the victim had been a

willing partner to the sexual act performed on him, nor was there any evidence to suggest

that he had been in a relationship with the Appellant. The Appellant in the present case,

had performed the aforesaid sexual act on the victim while being fully aware that the

victim is a child.

24. In the aforesaid circumstances, it is clear that the facts of the present case could be

distinguished from the above–mentioned cases that were heavily relied on by the Counsel

for the Appellant. As such, this Court is of the view that the present case is not a fit case

to apply the dictum in SC Reference 03/2008.

25. Furthermore, in deciding an appeal of this nature, the Court shall not lose the sight of the

intention of the legislature in imposing a minimum mandatory sentence with regard to

sexual offences involving women and children. The legislature in its wisdom had

introduced a new offence called ‘grave sexual abuse’ and prescribed a minimum

mandatory sentence to be imposed on the offenders committing grave sexual abuse in

order to strengthen the legal protection for victims-particularly children and women

against sexual violence that does not constitute vaginal penetration.

26. The Section 365B (1) reads as follows:

“Grave sexual abuse is committed by any person who, for sexual gratification,

does any act, by the use of his genitals or any other part of the human body or

any instrument on any orifice or part of the body of any other person, being an

act, which does not amount to rape under section 363, in circumstances falling

under any of the following descriptions, that is to say-….”

CA/HCC/0065/2023

8 | P a g e

(2) (b) of the Section states:

“Commits grave sexual abuse on any person under eighteen years of age shall

be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term not less than seven years

and not exceeding twenty years and with fine and shall also be ordered to pay

compensation of an amount determined by court to the person in respect of

whom the offence was committed for the injuries caused to such person.”

27. Therefore, if this Court imposes a suspended term applying the rationale behind SC

Reference 03/2008 and the cases that followed it, without considering the context within

which a particular crime was committed, it would defeat the very purpose of the

legislature that introduced such amendment.

28. As already stated above, mitigating factors are that the Appellant has no previous

convictions, he had pleaded guilty at the first instance and also, he volunteered to pay

compensation before pleading guilty.

29. In imposing a sentence upon a convicted person, the Court is required to consider both

mitigating factors and aggravating circumstances. The Court must also take into account

the principle of deterrence and the sentence's overall impact on society.

30. In determining the deterrent value of a sentence, the Court must have due regard to the

specific facts and circumstances of the case. This includes the nature of the offence, the

manner in which it was planned and executed, and the motive for its commission.

Furthermore, the Court must consider the conduct of the accused before, during, and after

the offence, the nature of the weapons or means employed, and all other attendant

circumstances relevant to the gravity of the crime.

31. The consideration of aggravating or mitigating circumstances is fundamentally relevant to

assessing the seriousness of an offence. The weight accorded to these factors in sentencing

may vary on a case-by-case basis and the Court maintains the discretion to consider any

factor it deems relevant to the severity of the sentence. Consequently, the sentence

imposed on an accused shall be proportionate to the gravity of the offence committed by

the accused must be both carefully and cogently reasoned.

CA/HCC/0065/2023

9 | P a g e

32. The following authorities emphasize the significance of imposing a sentence proportionate

to the gravity of the offence and provide key guidelines to assist in determining an

appropriate sentence.

33. In Attorney General vs. Mendis (1995) 1 SLR 138, Gunasekara, J. held that;

“Once an accused is found guilty and convicted on his own plea or after trial

the judge in deciding on sentence, should consider the point of view of the

accused on the one hand and the interest of society on the other. The nature of

the offence committed the machinations and manipulations resorted to by the

accused to commit the offence, the effect of committing such a crime insofar as

the institution or organization in respect of which it has been committed, is

concerned, the persons who are affected by such crime the ingenuity with

which it has been committed and the involvement of others in committing the

crime are matters which the judge should consider.

34. As decided by the Indian Supreme Court in the case of Alister Anthony Pereira vs. State

of Maharashta [2012] AIR 3802 (SC);

“Sentencing policy is an important task in the matters of crime. One of the

prime objectives of criminal law is imposition of appropriate adequate just and

proportionate sentence commenced with the nature and gravity of the crime

and the manner in which the crime is done. There is no straight-jacket formula

for sentencing an accused on proof of crime. The courts have evolved certain

principles: Twin objectives of sentencing policy are deterrence and correction

what sentence would meet the ends of Justice depends on the fact and

circumstances of each case and the court must keep in mind the gravity of the

crime, motive for the crime, nature of the offense and all other attendant

circumstances. The principle of proportionality in sentencing is a crime duo is

well entrenched in criminal jurisprudence. As a matter of law proportion

between crime and punishment bears mostly relevant influence in

determination of sentencing the crime to a full stop the court has to take into

consideration all aspects including social interest and consciousness of the

Society for award of appropriate sentence.”

CA/HCC/0065/2023

10 | P a g e

35. In Illakotulena Gamaralalage Thilakarathna v Officer in Charge, Motor Traffic

Division, Police Station, Kandy SC Appeal No. 173/2017, (Decided on: 22-10-2024) the

Supreme Court observed that:

Consideration of aggravating or mitigatory circumstances generally, has

relevance to the assessment of the seriousness of the offence. The appropriate

effect on such consideration in sentence would depend on the circumstances of

each case, in which the Court can take note of any factor it considers to

aggravate or mitigate the imposed sentence. As such, the consideration of

proportionality of the sentence to the gravity of the convicted offence, must be

well reasoned.

36. In Attorney General v Hewa Walimunige Gunasena CA/PHC/110/2012 (Decided on 12-

02-2014) it was held by Sunil Rajapakshe J that;

After analyzing the submissions made by the Petitioner and the Accused-

Respondent I am of the opinion that the facts relating to this case warrants that

the accused should be severely dealt with. Therefore, a sentence of two years

rigorous imprisonment suspended for ten years on the accused for a grave

child abuse is a very lenient sentence considering the beastliness of the crime.

When an offence of child abuse is proved victims of tender age and innocent

behavior the sentence of imprisonment should be imposed severely. Further I

hold two years R.I suspended for ten years is not adequate for the purpose of

preventing the commission of further offences by the accused. Cases of

indecent touching, threats by an older man on a small girl seem to attract

custodial sentence.

37. In Archbold: Sentencing Guidelines (2019), Thomson Reuters, on page 274, under the

heading of applicability of guidelines on sexual offences, it is stated that;

“Starting points define the position within a category range from which to

start calculating the provisional sentence.

……… Once the starting point is established, the court should consider further

aggravating and mitigating factors and previous convictions so as to adjust the

CA/HCC/0065/2023

11 | P a g e

sentence within the range. Starting points and ranges apply to all offenders,

whether they have pleaded guilty or been convicted after trial.”

38. It is keeping in mind the guidelines pronounced in the above-mentioned authorities that I

shall proceed to deal with the present case.

39. As already mentioned above, the Appellant is a neighbor of the victim and at the time the

victim faced this ordeal he was a school boy of 15 years old. The victim had been waiting

for his school bus which had not come to pick him up as scheduled. And it was at that time

the Appellant had come to the house of the victim and had abused the victim. The

Appellant had left the place only when the victim’s mother had come. The Appellant being

a neighbor and a known person to the victim had clearly taken undue advantage of the

trust reposed on him by the victim and his family and the Appellant. Also, it is needless to

say that, the Appellant being a neighbor and a known person to the victim may have

gained easy access to the victim which he had clearly misused.

40. When considering the aggravating factors, this Court should not lose the sight of the fact

that the Appellant had committed this heinous crime on the victim who was a child at the

time while still carrying his own infant which shows the disturbed mentality of the

Appellant.

41. In the aforesaid circumstances, this Court is of the view that the aggravating

circumstances of the present case and the public interest and the legislative intent in

preventing crimes of this nature outweigh the mitigating factors such as the absence of

pending cases against the Appellant, the age of the Appellant, pleading guilty to the charge

and agreeing to pay compensation prior to pleading guilty. In other words, this Court is not

convinced that there are compelling and convincing reasons to show any leniency towards

the Appellant.

42. However, having regard to the Appellant’s age, the fact that he has no prior convictions

and that he has pleaded guilty to the offence and had agreed to pay compensation in the

first instance and other attendant circumstances, with considerable reluctance I am

inclined to show limited leniency. Accordingly, the sentence of 9 years’ rigorous

CA/HCC/0065/2023

12 | P a g e

imprisonment imposed on the Appellant is reduced to 7 years. The fine and compensation

ordered by the Learned Trial Judge shall remain undisturbed.

43. Subject to the above variation in the sentence, this appeal stands dismissed. It is further

ordered that the sentence imposed shall run from the date of the conviction.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P. Kumararatnam,J

I agree,

Judge of the Court of Appeal