1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made

under Section 331 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of

1979

CA 228/2018

HC/ COLOMBO/ 7604/2014

Benedict Selvaraja Vijaya

Baskaran alias Viji

Accused-Appellant

vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

Complainant-Respondent

BEFORE : Devika Abeyratne J

P. Kumararatnam J

COUNSEL : Mr Isuru Somadasa AAL for the Appellant.

Mr.Janaka Bandara SSC for the

Respondent.

2 | P a g e

ARGUED ON : 02/02/2021

30/04/2021

DECIDED ON : 16/07/2021

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam J

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter after referred to as the

Appellant) was indicted by the Attorney General under Sections 54(A) (b) and

54(A) (d) of the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs Ordinance as amended

by Act No. 13 of 1984 for Trafficking and Possession respectively of 7.93

grams of Heroin on 29th January 2014 in the High Court of Colombo.

After the trial the Appellant was found guilty on both counts and the Learned

High Court Judge of Colombo has imposed life imprisonment on the first

count on 18th of July, 2018. The Learned High Court Judge had refrained

from imposing sentence on the second count.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the Appellant

has given consent to argue this matter in his absence due to the Covid 19

pandemic. During the argument he was connected via zoom from prison.

3 | P a g e

On behalf of the Appellant following Grounds of Appeal are raised.

1. The Learned Trial Judge has failed to consider the fact

whether the chain of Inward Journey was established by

the prosecution, amounting to a doubt whether the parcel

containing substance which was sent to the Government

Analyst could have been swapped or contaminated.

2. Whether the prosecution has failed to prove beyond

reasonable doubt the Inward Journey of the productions.

Background of the case

On 29/01/2014 a police party headed by IP Chandana Ranasinghe from

Colombo Crime Division had conducted a raid in Mattakkuliya area with the

assistance of IP Wasantha, PS 529 Botheju,PS 33936 Bandara,PS 30065

Palitha, PC 61115 Perera, PC 61178 Chaturanga,WPC 8041 Anusha and

PCD 1407 Bandara. During the raid the Appellant was arrested as he walked

towards the police vehicle in a suspicious manner. When he was subjected

to a body check a pink colour cellophane bag was recovered from his right-

side trouser pocket.

As the police suspected that the substance in the cellophane bag could be

heroin, the Appellant was arrested and the cellophane bag along with the

substance was weighed. The said parcel weighed about 25.180 grams.

The investigating officer had duly sealed the production in front of the

Appellant and handed it over to reserve duty officer PS 28675 Ramyakumara

under production number 141/2014.

IP Wasantha Kumara who had assisted the raid had corroborated the

evidence given by IP Chandana Ranasinghe.

The production was in the safe custody of the officers who held reserve duty

until the production was sent to the Government Analyst Department on

30/01/2014.

4 | P a g e

According to Government Analyst Report 7.93 grams of pure Heroin had

been detected in the said parcel.

After the conclusion of prosecution case the Learned Trial Judge had called

for the defence and the Appellant had decided to make a dock statement. In

his dock statement he had taken up the position that he never carried any

illegal substance as alleged by the prosecution.

In every criminal case the burden is on the prosecution to prove the case

beyond reasonable doubt against the accused person. In the case of this

nature the prosecution not only need to prove the case beyond reasonable

doubt but also ensure, with cogent evidence that the inward journey of the

production has not been disturbed at the all-material point.

In the case of Mohamed Nimnaz v. Attorney General CA/95/94 held:

A criminal case has to be proved beyond reasonable

doubt. Although we take a very serious view in regard to

offences relating to drugs, we are of the view that the

prosecutor should not be given a second chance to fill the

gaps of badly handled prosecutions where the identity of

the government analysis for examination has to be proved

beyond reasonable doubt. A prosecutor should take pains

to ensure that the chain of events pertaining to the

productions that had been taken charge from the Appellant

from the time it was taken into custody to the time it reaches

the Government Analyst and comes back to the court

should be established.

In the first appeal ground the Appellant contends that the Learned Trial

Judge has failed to consider the fact whether the chain of Inward Journey

was established by the prosecution, amounting to a doubt whether the parcel

containing substance which was sent to the Government Analyst could have

been swapped or contaminated.

5 | P a g e

In his second ground the Appellant contends that whether the prosecution

has failed to prove beyond reasonable doubt the Inward Journey of the

production.

As the Appellant challenges the accuracy of inward journey of the production

in both of his Appeal grounds, the counsel for the Appellant had mainly

argued that the prosecution had failed to establish the inward journey of the

production beyond reasonable doubt and thereby the conviction is bad in

law and unsafe.

According to chief investigation officer PW01 IP Chandana Ranasinghe, after

the arrest the substance found in the possession of the Appellant was

weighed properly and handed over to the reserve duty police officer PW08 PS

28675 Ramyakumara under production receipt number 141/2014. He had

received the same at 18.35 hours on 29/01/2014 and after proper

documentation he had handed it over to Officer in Charge of production room

PW10 IP Piyapala. IP Piyapala in his evidence admitted this position.

But on 30/01/2014 at 11.30 hours PW11 PS 36112 Niroshan Jayasinghe

had handed over the production number 141/2014 to PS 529 Boteju to be

taken to the Government Analyst Department. Hence the Learned Counsel

for the Appellant had submitted that without an entry whatsoever to show

that IP Piyapala had handed over the production bearing number 141/2014

to PW11 PC 39112 Niroshan Jayasinghe, under whose authority PW11 had

released the production to PS 529 Boteju to be taken to the Government

Analyst Department. Hence, he argues that this is a discontinuation in the

chain of custody of production.

According to PW10 IP Piyapala he had only put an entry stating that he had

received the production number 141/2014 from PW08 PS 28675

Ramyakumara on 29/01/2014 and had safely kept the same in the

production room of the Colombo Crime Division. In the cross examination he

had admitted that there is no entry with regard to handing over the said

6 | P a g e

production to PW11 Niroshan Jayasinghe. According to him a spare key has

been given to PW11 Niroshan Jayasinghe to handle the production in his

absence and this was the practice continued for a long time. He admitted

that there was no written authority available to substantiate his claim.

According to him this was an understanding that existed between him and

PW11 Niroshan Jayasinghe only. No evidence presented as to whether any

higher officer including the Officer in charge of CCD was aware of this

arrangement.

PW11 PC 39112 Niroshan Jayasinghe in his evidence admitted that when he

handed over the production to PW05 PS 529 Boteju, according to the record

the Officer in Charge of the production room was PW10 IP Piyapala. Further

when he handed over the said production to PW05, he was not officially

assigned duties to handle the productions in the production room of

Colombo Crime Division. According to him on verbal instructions of IP

Piyapala he had opened the production room and handed over the

production number 141/2014 to PW05. He had not made any entries in the

information book to corroborate his position. Further no documentary

evidence produced to establish that the PW11 was assigned duties to handle

production either in writing or verbally by higher officers of Colombo Crime

Division.

It is very important to consider at this stage whether the above-mentioned

deviation in handling productions in drug related matters cause any

reasonable doubt over the prosecution case as claimed by the Appellant. To

consider this issue it is very important to discuss our Higher Courts

approach with regard to handling evidence pertaining to productions in drug

related matters.

7 | P a g e

In Faiza Hanoon Yoosuf v. Attorney General CA/121/2002 it was held

that:

In effect the first ground of appeal is that the prosecution

failed to establish the nexus between the Heroin detected

and what was produced in court. In court, the prosecution

must prove the chain of custody. This must be done by

establishing the nexus between the heroin detected and

what was handed over to the Government Analyst for

examination and report. The prosecution must prove that,

what was subjected to analysis is exactly the same

substance that was detected in that particular case. In this

regard the inward journey of the production plays a

dominant role and is most significant.

In Perera v. Attorney General [1998] 1 Sri.L.R 378 it was held:

It is a recognized principle that in a case of this nature, the

prosecution must prove that the productions had been

forwarded to analyst from proper custody, without allowing

room for any suspicion that there had been no opportunity

for tampering or interfering with the production till they

reach the analyst. Therefore, it is correct to state that the

most important journey is the inward journey because the

final analyst report will depend on that.

In Mahasarukkalige Chandani v. Attorney General CA/213/2009 decided

on 30/06/2016 His Lordship Justice Malalgoda held that:

As observed by this court the inward journey of a

production in a case where the charges are mainly based

on the identity and the quantity of productions recovered

from the custody of the suspect, the prosecution has a

responsibility to establish this aspect of the case without

8 | P a g e

leaving any gaps before the trial court. In this regard the

seals said to have been placed on the production at the time

the production was handed over to the reserve has a

significance. The said seals have to be intact at every point

of time the custody is changed and finally it should be

observed by the person who breaks such seals in order to

commence his investigation. If it can be established at least,

that the said seals were observed by the receiving officer

and the removing officer who removed the production from

the police station as intact and by the Government Analyst

that he observed the same seal intact, when parcel was

opened, that could have been considered as sufficient for

this court to conclude that the prosecution has established

the inward journey to the satisfaction of court.

In the case of Koushappis v. The State of WA [2007] WASCA 26; (2007) 168

A Crim R 51 at para 85 the court held:

Whilst the safe custody of critical exhibits such as these

ought to be readily proved by clear and specific evidence

rather than being left to inference, having regard to the way

the case was conducted on both sides, the evidence here

was such in my view, as to allow the jury to be satisfied

beyond reasonable doubt that the drugs that were

analysed were in fact those seized by police from the

appellants house;

The above cited judgments clearly demonstrate how important the chain of

custody evidence is in a drug related offence. Further it gives the clear

direction as to how that evidence should be presented to the satisfaction of

the trial court. Every piece of evidence needs a proper analysis to decide

without any doubt where it came from and who had access to it without any

deviation in routine practice.

9 | P a g e

In this case the police evidence pertains to chain of custody shows an

unprecedented deviation from their usual practice. The explanations given

by both PW11 PC 39112 Niroshan Jayasinghe and PW10 IP Piyapala cannot

be considered as reasonable as their actions are not endorsed by the officer-

in-charge or any other higher officer in the Colombo Crime Division at that

time. Hence it is quite clear that the police had not properly handled the

chain of inward journey of the production in this case.

Chain of custody issues are very important in cases involving drugs. The

prosecution has to present undisputed evidence to prove the chain of

custody of the production. Further the prosecution has to prove that the item

presented at the trial is the same item that was in the possession or taken

from the accused. Allowing the Court to base its decision on evidence that is

tainted, unreliable or has been tampered with it would undermine the

integrity of the judicial system. Further the Court is not the place to correct

mistakes done by the investigating officers.

In the case of Sinniah Kalidasa v. The Hon. Attorney General CA/

128/2005 BASL Criminal Law 2010 Vol.111 page 31 in which Justice

Ranjith Silva quotes E.R.S.R. Coomaraswamy in the Law of Evidence Volume

2 Book 1 at page 395 dealing with how police evidence in bribery cases

should be considered;

In the great many cases, the police are, as a rule unreliable

witnesses. It is always in their interests to secure a

conviction in the hope of getting a reward. Such evidence

ought, therefore, to be received with great caution and

should be closely scrutinized

Ranjith Silva J states;

By the same token the same principles should apply and

guide the judges in the assessment of the evidence of excise

officers in narcotic cases. Judges must not rely on a non-

10 | P a g e

existent presumption of truthfulness and regularity as

regards the evidence of such trained police or excise

officers.

In this case evidence presented by the prosecution revealed a gross violation

of handling of production by the police witnesses. They have deviated from

their routine practice. Due to this the prosecution has failed to present

sufficient and clear evidence to prove the chain of inward journey as

advanced by the counsel for the Appellant.

Due to aforesaid reasons, we set aside the conviction and sentence imposed

by the Learned High Court Judge of Colombo dated 18/07/2018 on the

Appellant. Therefore, he is acquitted from both charges.

Accordingly, the appeal is allowed.

The Registrar is directed to send a copy of this judgment to the High Court

of Colombo along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

DEVIKA ABEYRATNE, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL