IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Case No. CA 67/2017

In the matter of an Appeal against an

order of the High Court under Section 331

of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act

No. 15 of 1979.

B.G. Wasantha Kumara

ACCUSED - APPELLANT

HC (Negombo) Case No. HC 10/08 VS

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

DECIDED ON

1

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENT

: Oeepali Wijesundera J.

: Achala Wengappuli J.

: Indika Mallawarachchi for the

Accused - Appellant

H.A. Navavi S.S.C. for the

Respondent

: 20th March, 2018

: 04th April, 2018

Oeepali Wijesundera J.

The appellant was indicted in the High Court of Negombo under

section 296 and section 300 of the Penal Code for the murder of

Chandralatha Kumari and attempted murder of Hasanthi Madushika.

After trial he was found guilty and convicted on both counts and

sentenced to death. He was not given a sentence for the second charge.

The deceased was the wife of the appellant and Madushika is the

daughter of the appellant. The prosecution case was based on a dying

declaration made by the deceased to a police officer. The injured

Madushika was only five months old at the time of the incident.

The grounds of appeal taken up by the appellant's counsel was

that the conviction which is based on an uncorroborated dying declaration

made to a police officer is unsafe due to infirmities. The other ground of

appeal was that the learned High Court Judge erred on the burden of

proof when he evaluated evidence given by the appellant.

Prosecution witness number one Anura Bandara has recorded the

dying declaration of the deceased on the 29th January 2005 at 1.25 p.m.

2

in the National hospital, five days after the incident. He has observed that

her entire body was bandaged but he has stated that she was conscious

and was able to speak and after making the statement since she could

not sign, her thumb impression was taken. Six hours after making the

statement she has passed away. This statement was marked and

produced as P1.

The learned counsel for the appellant argued that there are several

infirmities in this evidence. The statement was given five days after the

incident and six hours before she passed away. She has not said

anything about this incident earlier to anyone, even to a doctor or hospital

staff. The statement made has meticulous details of the incident and also

it contains inconsisted evidence with the evidence of other prosecution

witnesses. The statement was made only, in the presence of prosecution

witness number one, no hospital officer was present when it was made.

The correct procedure is to have a hospital staff member with the patient.

The second ground of appeal the learned counsel argued is that

the learned High Court Judge has compared the dying declaration and

the accused's evidence and said he had to consider which one is more

acceptable out of the two. There by shifting an unnecessary burden to

3

, "

the accused appellant's counsel cited the judgment in Queen vs

Ariyadasa 68 NLR 66.

The learned Senior State Counsel argued that the dying

declaration can be relied upon when considering with the other evidence.

He also stated that the learned High Court Judge did not act only on the

dying declaration but has considered other evidence as well. He said that

the dying declaration is reliable and other evidence supported the dying

declaration.

When considering the dying declaration we find that the deceased

has stated "@@m OO~J ~~o)O)()e)o) ej!J@e) eD~" but the prosecution

witnesses have stated that it was the appellant who threw water at the

deceased to douse the fire.

The appellant giving evidence had stated that when he was with

the child in the verandha the deceased doused herself in kerocine oil and

lit a match and set herself on fire. He has also said that when they argued

the deceased threatened that she will set herself on fire.

4

When considering the doctors evidence we find that the

deceased's feet were not burned and also her right hand did not have

burn injuries. Here we can apply the test of probability on the appellant's

evidence which is consistent with the evidence of Suresh who saw the

appellant splashing water at the deceased to douse the fire. Witness

Catherine also has testified that she saw the appellant bringing water to

throw at the deceased.

On perusal of the evidence placed before the High Court and the

judgment given by the learned High Court Judge we find that the burden

of proof has been shifted from the prosecution to the accused appellant.

It has flawed the principles relating to burden of proof thereby denying

the appellant a fair trial.

For the afore stated reason we decide to set aside the judgment

dated 09/03/2017 and allow the appeal.

Appeal allowed.

5

-

..

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Achala Wengappuli J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

6