1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

PC Colombo 3591 SpJ.

In the matter of an Appeal made in terms of Section 754 (l) of the Civil Procedure

Code.

Anura Liyanage

"Veda Niwasa"

Belegalgoda Road,

Ambalangoda.

Plaintiff

Court of Appeal No.CA/S09/2000 (F) Vs.

Ceylon Electricity Board, Sri Chittampala A Gardiner Mawatha, Colombo 2.

Defendant

AND BETWEEN

Ceylon Electricity Board, Sri Chittampala A Gardiner Mawatha, Colombo 2.

Defendant - Appellant

Vs.

Anura Liyanage

"Veda Niwasa" Belegalgoda Road,

Ambalangoda.

Plaintiff - Respondent

I

Before

Counsel

L.T.B. Dehideniya J, (PICA)

&

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

Chaya Sri Nammuni, SC for AG.

2

Hugo Anthony with M.S.M. Patabed for the Plaintiff - Respondent.

Written submission on : 26/08/2017

Judgement on : 06111/2017

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

The Plaintiff - Respondent above named (hereinafter sometimes referred to

as the Respondent) instituted action against the Defendant - Appellant (hereinafter

sometimes referred to as the Appellant) in the District Court of Colombo, inter

alia, seeking,

a) A declaration that the orders contained in documents marked P9 and P 1 0

are illegal and has no force or effect in law

b) For General and Special damages in a sum of Rs. 10,5001- and Rs.

50,0001- respectively, and continuing damages at Rs. 3,5001- per month

for the unlawful removal of the electricity meter and the disconnection of

the supply of electricity to the Rice Mill belonging to the Respondent.

The Appellant filed answer inter alia praymg for that the Respondents

action to be dismissed and also claimed in reconvention a sum of Rs. 165,790.87

for accrued loss from the fraudulent consumption of electricity by the Respondent.

3

At the conclusion of evidence the Learned District Judge by Judgement

dated 18th August 2000, held that the Appellant illegally disconnected the

Respondents supply of electricity, and awarded the Respondent damages in a sum

of Rs. 110,5001- and Rs. 3,5001- per month from the date of institution of action

and continuing damages there from at the said rate.

When this case was taken up for Argument on 2nd October 2017, the parties

agreed to dispose of the Appeal by way of written submissions.

The Plaintiff has obtained an electricity connection to a Rice Mill from the

Ambalantota Urban Council in January 1988. The said Urban Council has

supplied and distributed electricity to the Respondent as a licensee of the Ceylon

Electricity Board (CEB). On 30th April 1991, the supply and distribution of

electricity was taken over by the Ceylon Electricity Board. On information

received by the Appellant a team of Investigation Officers of the CEB had visited

the Respondent's premises on 22nd April 1992, and carried out an investigation on

the Respondent's Rice Mill and has found that the electricity meter fixed to the

Mill had been tampered with and the internal functions of the meter changed. It

has also been found that the laboratory seals of the meter had been broken.

The Appellant contends that the evidence given by the Manager

investigation Ruban Wickramarachchi clearly demonstrates that during the

investigation carried out at the Respondent's Rice Mill, it was established that the

laboratory seal of the electricity meter had been broken. Electrical Engineer

Vithanage Sunil R. De Silva in his evidence stated that all meters are accurately

4

calibrated and sealed before installation and therefore the observation made on the

electricity meter had clearly shown that it had been tampered with.

To establish credibility on the aforestated evidence, the Appellant heavily

relied on the fact that when the CEB took over the supply of electricity in

Ambalantota area in April 1991, the electricity meter of the Plaintiff was

functioning well and the seals attached were intact. The said conclusion was

arrived on the basis that the meter reader had not reported any fault or breakage of

the seals of the meter to the authorities.

In the circumstances the Appellant states that the electricity supply to the

Rice Mill was disconnected in good faith and in terms of the powers conferred

upon the Appellant in terms of Section 59 (1) of the said Act. Ceylon Electricity

Board Act, No. 17 of 1969 (as amended) states that,

"No suit or prosecution shall lie,

(a) against the Board for any act which in good faith is done or is

purported to be done by the Board under this Act or,

(b) against any member, officer, servant or agent of the Board for

any act which in good faith is done or is purported to be done by him

under this Act or on the direction of the Board."

Therefore the Appellant submits that the District Court of Colombo has no

jurisdiction to grant any relief to the Respondent in terms of Section 23 of the

Interpretation Ordinance.

Ii I

r , II

! ,

I If I I t r I I f I! I! , It I

f ! ! ! I ! I

i f

5

The Learned District Judge in Judgement dated 18th August 2000, has come

to a clear finding in respect of the investigation carried out on 22.04.1992 at the

Respondent's Rice Mill, where it is stated that,

a) There is no evidence led to conclude that the Appellant's electricity

meter was functioning well and the seals were intact at the time the CEB

took over the supply of electricity in the Ambalantota area in April 1991.

b) Since a new meter was not installed there is no evidence before Court to

conclude that after the taking over of the electricity supply and

distribution by the CEB, the Appellant's meter was checked and marked

as accurately calibrated and seals were intact.

Therefore in the absence of any evidence or justification that the Respondent

tampered with the meter or broke its seal the said findings of the CEB

investigation clearly shows that the Respondent was deprived of a just and lawful

inquiry to the allege electricity meter tampering before orders containing in

documents marked P9 and PI 0 were issued. Therefore the purported inquiry and

the subsequent disconnection of the power supply carried out on 22.04.1992 at the

premises of the Appellant does not in any measure satisfy the requirement to be

just and carried out in good faith in terms of Section 59 (1) of the Ceylon

Electricity Board Act. It is also observed that the Appellant has no legal right to

claim for any relief for losses accrued if any, from an unlawful consumption of

electricity by the Respondent.

6

When computing General Damages the Learned District Judge has taken

into consideration documents marked P 19 and P22 which were compared with the

average use of electricity by the Respondent for a period of 3 months. It is also

observed that in computing continuing damages the Learned District Judge has

taken into consideration the available evidence in support of the profits and losses

incurred by the Respondent's Rice Mill in arriving at a just computation of the

damages suffered by the Respondent with due consideration to the evidence led

before Court.

In all the above circumstances the Learned Trial Judge has considered all

facts and arrived at a decision. We see no basis to interfere with same, as such we

affirm the Judgement of the Learned District Judge and dismiss this Appeal with

costs.

Appeal dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

L.T.B. Dehideniya J, (PICA)

I agree.

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL