1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Mandates in the nature of Writs of Certiorari, Mandamus and Prohibition and under Article 140 of the Constitution. Senanayake Arachchilage Lionel Kithsiri, No.191, Nawagamuwa Ranala.

PETITIONER C.A. (Writ) Application No. 254/2014 Land Redemption No. DR 2930 VS.

01. Peoples Bank No.75, Sir Chittampalam S. Gardiner Mawatha, Colombo 2 02. Gamini Senarath Chairman No.75, Sir Chittampalam S. Gardiner Mawatha, Colombo 2 03. Jehan P. Amaratunga Board of Director No.75, Sir Chittampalam S. Gardiner Mawatha, Colombo 02.

2

04. Lakshmi Kumari Sangakkara Board of Director No.75, Sir Chittampalam S. Gardiner Mawatha. Colombo 02 05. Dharma N. Gammampila Board of Director No.75, Sir Chittampalam S. Gardiner Mawatha, Colombo 02. 06. Pawara Dassanayake Board of Director No.75, Sir Chittampalam S. Gardiner Mawatha, Colombo 02. 07. G.K.D. Amarawardena Board of Director No.75, Sir Chittampalam S. Gardiner Mawatha, Colombo 02 08. R.M.P.Ratnayake Board of Director No.75, Sir Chittampalam S. Gardiner Mawstha, Colombo 02 09. Piyadasa Kudabalage Board of Director No.75, Sir Chittampalam S. Gardiner Mawatha, Colombo 02

3

10. K.B.M.J. Senadeera Inquiring Officer, Land Redemption Department No. 220, Deans Rd., Maradana, Colombo 10. 11. Gnanaprakasham Jaan No.83, Nawagamuwa Ranala

RESPONDENTS BEFORE : M. M. A. GAFFOOR, J. COUNSEL : S.N. Vijithsingh for the Petitioner. Sunil Abeyratne for the 1st to 10th Respondents. Parakrama Agalawatta for the 11th Respondent. WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS TENDERED ON : 21-09-2018 (by the Petitioner) 30-07-2018 (by the 11th Respondent) 18-09-2018 (by the 1st- 10th Respondents) DECIDED ON : 14th January 2019

****** M. M. A. GAFFOOR, J. The Petitioner in this application instituted this instant action to

challenge the decision of the 10th respondent (Inquiring officer) who

finally recommended that the Board of Directors of the 1st Respondent

Bank acquire the property relating to the application made by

Gnanaprakasham Esther, the original applicant (deceased sister of the

11th respondent). The Petitioner states that this decision is arbitrary,

capricious and irrational.

4

According to the petition of appeal the facts of this case are that

the original applicant, Gnanaprakasham Esther, by Deed of Transfer

No.11983, marked P1 dated 04.07.2002 had transferred the land called

Siyambalagahawatta, bearing an extent of 3.45 perches for a

consideration of Rs. 60,000/- to the Petitioner, S. A. Lionel Kithsiri. At

the time of the execution of the said Deed, the original applicant had

agreed to redeem the said property within 1 years from the date of

execution by paying Rs.60,000/- together with 24% interest per annum,

and if the 11th Respondent failed to redeem the said property within 1

years, the Petitioner would become the lawful owner of that property,

which are conditions as contained in the said deed.

In the mean time, the original applicant Gnanaprakasham Esther,

had made an application dated 11.05.2004 marked P2 to the Land

Redemption Department of the Peoples Bank in terms of Part VII of the

Finance Act No. 11 of 1963 (as amended) to have the said property

redeemed and the Petitioner was served with notice of the said

application. Then the Petitioner raised objections seeking inter alia, a

dismissal of the said application, in which it was sought to have the said

property acquired by the 1st Respondent. Thereafter, written submissions

were tendered on behalf of both parties and the application was taken up

for inquiry. At the inquiry, both parties have adduced their respective

evidence. During the pendency of said inquiry, the original applicant

Gnanaprakasham Esther had passed away and an application was made

to substitute the 11th respondent, Gnanaprakasham Jaan (brother of the

deceased original applicant, Gnanaprakasham Esther) in the room of the

deceased original applicant. Though the Petitioner objected to that

application for substitution, the said substitution was allowed by the 10th

respondent and upon conclusion of the inquiry, written submissions

were tendered by both parties. Thereafter, the 10th Respondent, the

5

Inquiring Officer made his recommendation dated 26.05.2014 to the

Board of Directors of the 1st Respondent Peoples Bank to acquire the

property in question which is marked as P8(C).

Against that recommendation, the Petitioner made this application

seeking inter alia to quash the same. The main grievance of the Petitioner

is whether the recommendations made by the 10th respondent are

outside the authority vested on him under Section 71 of the Finance Act

No. 11 of 1963. It is to be noted that the said Act has been repealed by

Finance and Ceylon State Mortgage Bank (Amendment Act) No. 16 of

1973 and subsequent amendments. Therefore, I am of the view that the

Petitioner cannot maintain and bring an action before this Court

seeking remedies in the nature of Writ of Certiorari and Mandamus under

the repealed provisions of law as pleaded in his petition.

The second matter which requires to be determined in respect of

his application is whether the Peoples Bank had jurisdiction to entertain

the application of Gnanaprakasham Esther. The jurisdiction of the

Peoples Bank to acquire certain properties is conferred by the Finance

Act No. 11 of 1963 and amended by several amending statutes. Section

71(1)(d) of the Finance Act (as amended)Reads as follows:-

Subject to the provisions of subsection (2), the Bank is hereby

authorized to acquire the whole or any part of any

agricultural, residential or business premises, if the Bank is

satisfied that those premises were, at any time before or after

the appointed date but not earlier than the first day of

January, 1952.

6

(d) transferred by the owner of such premises to any

other person after receiving from such other person a

sum of money as consideration for such transfer and

upon the condition that, on the repayment by the

transferor (hereafter in this Part of this Act referred to

as the original owner) of that sum with or without

interest thereon within a specified period, such other

person will re-transfer those premises to the original

owner.

Furthermore, in terms of Section 71(2) (c) of the Finance Amendment Act

No. 36 of 2000 reads as follows:-

(2) No premises shall be acquired under subsection (1)

(c) Unless the Bank is satisfied

(i) in the case of an application made by the original

owner, that the annual average statutory income of the

original owner and the other members of the family of

which he is the head; or

(ii) in the case of an application made by the spouse or

any descendant of the original owner, that the annual

average statutory income of such spouse and the other

descendants of the original owner,

computed under the provisions of the written law relating to

the imposition of income tax for the three years immediately

preceding the date on which the application was made by

such original owner, spouse or descendant, as the case may

be does not exceed one hundred thousand rupees;

7

Accordingly, the Applicant original owner had to satisfy the Bank

on the following three matters:-

(i) that she had transferred the premises to the present

Petitioner after receiving from him a sum of money as

consideration and upon the condition of re-transfer on the

repayment by her of the said sum with or without interest

within a specific period;

(ii) That the assessed average annual statutory income of the

original and the family of which she is the head for the three

years of assessment immediately preceding the application

does not exceed Rupees One Hundred Thousand

(Rs.100,000/=) ; and

(iii) That the premises are reasonably required by her (original

owner) or any member of the family for residence or for the

purpose of any trade, profession , vocation or employment of

the original owner or any member of the family and that

such original owner or member of the family has no other

premises which could be used for the purpose.

The first matter of the said jurisdictional facts has been satisfied

by the production of Deed No.11983 marked P1- which is a Conditional

Transfer. Secondly, the Applicant original owner had supplied proof as

certified by the Grama Niladhari that her average annual assessable

income during the three years immediately preceding the application was

Rs. 36,000/=. As defined in Section 7(2) of the Statute for the purpose

of computation of her annual assessable income.

8

According to the above section, the Bank has the responsibility to

inquire into whether the Applicants annual salary does not exceed

Rs.100,000/= per annum. Accordingly, the inquiring officer had found

based on the evidence produced by the Gramasevaka on behalf of the

applicant that late Gnanaprakasham Esthers annual salary doesnt

exceed Rs.100,000/- three years of assessment immediately preceding

the date on which such application was made (documents marked A5

and A6 of the case record)

The Petitioner has challenged that along with the said applicant,

some other relatives are living in the premises and their income should

calculate. The Section 71(2) (c) (i) of the Act specifically states that the

average statutory income of the person making the application and of the

other members of the family of which he is the head, have to be

considered. According to the application marked P2 the applicant was

unmarried and there were no dependants.

Thirdly, she has established that the premises were used by her,

both for residential purposes as well as to operate a small boutique

selling pottery items, and that she had no other premises which she

could use for the said purposes. Thus, it is submitted that the Applicant

original owner had satisfied the jurisdictional requirements.

Furthermore, the Petitioner challenged the substitution of the 11th

Respondent on the basis that no proper nexus had been established

between the original Applicant and the party sought to be substituted.

However, Section 71(2) empowers a successor to make an application if

he fell within the category of the specified heirs. According to the above

section, spouse or any descendent of such person, or if there is no

surviving spouse descendent of such person, by a parent, brother or sister

9

of such person comes under the category of the specified heirs. In the

case of Atapattu and Others vs. Peoples Bank and Others [(1997) 1

S.L.R. 208] it was also decided that:

Upon the death of an applicant for the acquisition of a land

under Section 71 of the Finance Act No. 11 of 1963 as

amended, there can be substitution of a specified heir viz a

person mentioned in section 71(2)(a) in the prescribed order

of priority as well as of the testate heir. Whether the

application was duly constituted, or whether the Bank ought

to exercise its discretion to vest the premises in favour of the

substitute should not be considered at the stage of

substitution but only after a substitute has stepped into the

shoes of the deceased and has acquired the necessary status

to present his case

The present 11th respondent, Gnanaprakasham Jaan established

that he is the brother of the Applicant original owner by producing the

Birth Certificates of both. The said certificates as well as the Death

Certificate of the Applicant are marked as R12 (a) to R12 (c). Therefore,

the 10th respondent, Inquiring Officer had correctly allowed the

substitution of the 11th respondent.

Finally it is to be noted that the final decision is made by the Board

of Directors of the Bank and in this case the 10th respondent, the

Inquiring Officer, had only made a recommendation to the 1st respondent

Bank. Therefore, this application is premature, for the reason that the

above recommendation is not a final decision or determination for the

Petitioner to challenge by way of a Writ of Certiorari.

10

Accordingly, I am of the considered view that there is no legitimate

ground for the Petitioner to challenge the conduct and recommendation

of the 10th respondent in this regard. Hence, I dismiss this application

without Costs

Application dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL