CA/HCC/0009/23

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

The Democratic Socialist Republic of

Sri Lanka

COMPLAINANT

Vs

Court of Appeal No:

CA/HCC/0009/2023 1. Puwakwaththa Gamage Ranjith

High Court of Balapitiya alias Patty

Case No: HC/708/2004 2. Gatawara Kandage Priyantha alias

Adwin Priyantha

ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

Puwakwaththa Gamage Ranjith alias

Patty

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs

CA/HCC/0009/23

2

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

COUNSEL : Anil Silva, P. C. with Isuru Jayawardena,

Sarith Wadugedera and Arinda Silva for the

Appellant.

Sanjeewa Dissanayake, D. S. G. with Jehan

Gunasekara, SC for the Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 27/05/2025

DECIDED ON : 04/07/2025

******************************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) along with the second Accused with four other dead persons and

persons unknown to the prosecution were indicted in the High Court of

Balapitiya as follows:

CA/HCC/0009/23

3

1. That on or about the 29.01.1998 at Kahaduwa, the accused with four

dead persons named in the indictment and with persons unknown to

the prosecution were members of an unlawful assembly with the

common object of causing hurt to Kalahipadi Kankanamge Somadasa

thereby committing an offence punishable under Section 140 of the

Penal Code.

2. At the same time and same place and in the course of the same

transaction the accused by being a member of an unlawful assembly

caused the death of the above-named Kalahipadi Kankanamge

Somadasa and thereby committed an offence punishable under

Section 296 read with Section 146 of the Penal Code.

3. At the same time and same place and in the course of the same

transaction the accused by being a member of an unlawful assembly

caused the death of the abovenamed Kalahipadi Kankanamlage

Chaminda Kumara and thereby committed an offence punishable

under Section 296 read with Section 146 of the Penal Code.

4. At the same time and same place and in the course of the same

transaction the accused by being a member of an unlawful assembly

caused the death of the abovenamed Kalahipadi Kankanamlage Nalini

Kumari and thereby committed an offence punishable under Section

296 read with Section 146 of the Penal Code.

5. At the same time and same place and in the course of the same

transaction the accused by being a member of an unlawful assembly

caused the death of the abovenamed Kalahipadi Kankanamlage

Sanath Kumara and thereby committed an offence punishable under

Section 296 read with Section 146 of the Penal Code.

6. At the same time and same place and in the course of the same

transaction the accused by being a member of an unlawful assembly

caused the death of the abovenamed Kalahipadi Kankanamlage

Nalika Kumari and thereby committed an offence punishable under

Section 296 read with Section 146 of the Penal Code.

CA/HCC/0009/23

4

7. At the same time and same place and in the course of the same

transaction the accused by being a member of an unlawful assembly

caused the death of the abovenamed Kalahipadi Kankanamlage

Sampath Kumara and thereby committed an offence punishable

under Section 296 read with Section 146 of the Penal Code.

8. At the same time and same place, and in the course of the same

transaction the accused being a member of an unlawful assembly

attempted to commit the murder of Kalahipadi Kankanamlage

Nirosha Syamali and thereby committed an offence punishable under

Section 300 read with Section 146 of the Penal Code.

9. At the same time and same place, and in the course of the same

transaction the accused caused the death of the afore named

Kalahipadi Kankanamlage Somadasa and thereby committed an

offence punishable under Section 296 read with Section 32 of the

Penal Code.

10. At the same time and same place, and in the course of the same

transaction the accused caused the death of the afore named

Kalahipadi Kankanamlage Chaminda Kumarage and thereby

committed an offence punishable under Section 296 read with Section

32 of the Penal Code.

11. At the same time and same place, and in the course of the same

transaction the accused caused the death of the afore named

Kalahipadi Kankanamlage Nalini Kumari and thereby committed an

offence punishable under Section 296 read with Section 32 of the

Penal Code.

12. At the same time and same place, and in the course of the same

transaction the accused caused the death of the afore named

Kalahipadi Kankanamlage Sanath Kumarage and thereby committed

an offence punishable under Section 296 read with Section 32 of the

Penal Code.

CA/HCC/0009/23

5

13. At the same time and same place, and in the course of the same

transaction the accused caused the death of the afore named

Kalahipadi Kankanamlage Nalika Kumari and thereby committed an

offence punishable under Section 296 read with Section 32 of the

Penal Code.

14. At the same time and same place, and in the course of the same

transaction the accused caused the death of the afore named

Kalahipadi Kankanamlage Sampath Kumara and thereby committed

an offence punishable under Section 296 read with Section 32 of the

Penal Code.

15. At the same time and same place, and in the course of the same

transaction the accused attempted to commit murder of Kalahipadi

Kankanamlage Nirosha Siyamali and thereby committed an offence

punishable under Section 300 read with Section 32 of the Penal Code.

The trial commenced before the Judge of the High Court of Balapitiya as the

Appellant had opted for a non-jury trial. The 2nd Accused who was tried in

absentia after completing all necessary formalities as per Section 241(1) of

the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

The trial commenced on 22.02.2012, and the prosecution had called 08

witnesses and marked P1 to P5 and P7 to P8. After the conclusion of the

prosecutions case, the learned High Court Judge had called for the defence.

The Appellant had made a dock statement and had denied the charges.

Additionally, he had called one witness on his behalf.

After considering the evidence presented by both parties, the learned High

Court Judge had convicted the Appellant and the 2nd Accused for counts 1-

8 in the indictment. No order had been made in respect of counts 9 - 15 as

those are alternative counts. The Appellant and the 2nd Accused were

sentenced as follows:

CA/HCC/0009/23

6

For the first count: 06 months rigorous imprisonment each.

For the second count to seventh counts: death sentence passed

against both.

For the eighth count: 15 years rigorous imprisonment with

Rs.20,000/- fine with a default sentence of 01-year simple

imprisonment imposed against the Appellant and the 2nd

Accused. Additionally, the court ordered Rs.500,000/-

compensation payable to PW2 by the Appellant and the 2nd

Accused.

The Court had further issued an open warrant against the 2nd Accused.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

The learned Presidents Counsels for the Appellant informed this court that

the Appellant had given consent for this matter to be argued in his absence.

Background of the Case

In this case, all the deceased are the father and the children of the same

family. PW2 is one the one of the surviving members of the family and an eye

witness to the incident. According to her, all family members had gone to

bed, tired at 8.p.m. following a function that was held at her house. She and

her brother PW3 had slept in the dining room. One of her other brothers,

PW1 and her father had slept in the living room. A bottle lamp was burning

when the incident had taken place. Her father had alerted the others when

he had heard the cries of the people. At that time, she had witnessed her

relation Priyashantha, (now dead), the Appellant and the 2nd Accused forcibly

break into the house and Priyashantha stabbing the inmates of the house.

The Appellant and the 2nd Accused prevented the inmates of the house

leaving the premises during the incident. According to her, the Appellant who

was armed with a pole actively participated in preventing the inmates and

PW2 escaping from Priyashantha who was attacking all members of the

CA/HCC/0009/23

7

family. Another person called Chaminda (Now dead) also prevented the

inmates escaping the gruesome attack. PW2 witnessed this incident with the

help of a bottle lamp which was burning at that time.

PW2 sustained serious injuries to her abdomen but was able to escape from

the scene. After drinking some water from a nearby creek, she had heard

gun shots from the direction of her house. She had also seen her deceased

brother being taken to the hospital after the police arrived at the scene. PW2

had given her full statement on 11.02.1998 while receiving treatment at the

hospital.

The reasons for the deaths were gunshot wounds and multiple cut injuries

according to the JMO who held the postmortem examination.

PW1 and PW3 had managed to escape the gruesome event upon alerted by

their deceased father Somadasa. According to PW3, when he came to his

house after the arrival of the police, he had seen that his house was burnt

and that the bodies of his father and his siblings were piled up on top of the

other and had been burnt inside the house.

According to the police four Suspects died due to the shoot-out with the

police. Their names are mentioned in the indictment as deceased Accused.

According to the police, Somadass house was the third house attacked that

night. In the first house four people were murdered and in the second house

three people had been murdered. All murders had taken place in a similar

fashion as to what happened at Somadasas house.

The First Appellant had filed the following grounds of appeal.

1. Has the prosecution proved their case beyond a reasonable doubt?

2. Has the prosecution proved the involvement of the Appellant beyond

a reasonable doubt?

As this case mainly rests on the evidence given by PW2, her evidence needs

to be considered very carefully. PW2 was 14-year-old back in 1998 when this

macabre incident occurred. She had witnessed her father and five siblings

CA/HCC/0009/23

8

being murdered in a gruesome manner. Further, she too had sustained

serious injuries for which she was hospitalized and was even unable to

attend the funeral of her loved ones. Further, she is an eye witness to the

incident.

Eyewitness testimony, as a firsthand observation of a criminal event, is often

regarded as a critical component of evidentiary material in criminal trials.

Although such testimony can carry substantial persuasive weight with

juries, its reliability is not infallible and may be compromised by a range of

cognitive, psychological, and situational factors. Accordingly, a

comprehensive understanding of both the probative value and the potential

limitations of eyewitness testimony is essential in safeguarding the integrity

of the fact-finding process and ensuring the fairness of judicial proceedings.

The learned Presidents Counsel highlighting the portion of evidence given by

PW6 and the history given to the JMO by the eye witness PW2 contended

that the eye witnesss evidence cannot be believed as there is very serious

doubt as to whether she is telling the truth. Further, he contends that PW2

is an interested witness. The relevant portion of the evidence of PW6 is

reproduced below:

Page 248 of the brief: 01

m% ( Tn i`oyka l,d f fla' mS' fla' ksfrdaId hk wh fldfyao ;=jd, isfha@

W ( ksji by,ska iel. ishd iajdKs'

m% ( fldhs jf.a jg msgdjl o ie. isfha @

W ( f;a j.dj we;s m%foaYhl'

m% ( wehg l;d lsrSug mqjka lula ;snqko @

W ( ta wjia:df oS fyd`o udkisl;ajfhka isfha keye' ;=jd, ,nd isfha'

m% ( ta ;eke;a;sh ta wjia:df oS hula m%ldY l,d o @

W ( wehf.ka uu uiqjd' pkao" m%shYdka; fj ;enQ nj;a f.g .sKs ;enQ

nj;a lshd ishd'

m% ( f ;=jd, lrejka inkaOfhka h mshjrla .;a; o @

W ( tu ;=jd,lrejka fofokd jydu frday,g /f.k hdug mshjr .;a;d'

m% ( bka wk;=rej fuu wmrdOh inkaOfhka iellrejka w;awvx.=jg .ekSug

lghq;= l,do @

CA/HCC/0009/23

9

W ( tfyuhs W;=udfKks' ud we;=< fYaI ks,Odrska lKavdhula msgj .shd'

PW10, JMO who gave evidence over the MLR of PW2, described the injuries

sustained by PW2 as follows:

Page 329-330 of the brief-02.

m% ( tu frda.shd iska ,ndfok ,o fl b;sydih l=ulao hkqfjka ;udg m%ldY

lsrSug yelshjla ;sfhkjdo @

W ( tfyuhs '

f ;eke;a;sh 98.01.29 jk osk rd;%s ksod f.k isk g m%shka; keu;s

wh fodr lvd n,y;aldrfhka ksjig we;= wehg iy ksjfia is whg

wekq ;=jd, islr we;'

m% ( fuu ;eke;a;shf.a ndysr mrSlaIdj is lsrSfuka miqj uQ,sl jYfhka

ksrSlaIKh lsrSug we;s ;=jd, l=ulao hkqfjka ;udg lsj yels o @

W ( tfyuhs'

fuu jd;dj wkqj uQ,slj fuu ;eke;a;sh ud hgf;a uydpdh ksrswe,a,

uy;d iska mrSlaId lr we;' yosis Wor ffY,H luhla is l, njg'

;=jd, j, m%udKh yevh yd .eTqr ud yg ,nd osh fkdyel' Bg wu;rj

wehg ,nd oS we;s ffjoH jd;dj wkqj lrdmsh YslaIK frdayf,a jdgq

wxl 08 ys weo ysi m;a wxl 7236 ork wlrK ffjoH jd;dj wkqj"

ta wkqj 01 ;=jd,h j mshhqf jQ wekq ;=jd,hla'

02 jk ;=jd,h mmqf ol=Kq bosrs mshhqrg my,ska jQ wekq ;=jd,h'

;=jd, wxl 03 bosrs Worfha ;a;sfha by, uOH m%foaYfha jQ wekq ;=jd,hla'

04 jk ;=jd,h mmqf j mi jQ lemqula iy ta ;=,ska hejQ wka; mdY=l

ngh'

05 ;=jd,h ol=Kq mQj ndyqf fl,jr yd we;=,g jkakg msysgd ;snqK

ueyq ouk ,o lemq ;=jd, 02 la'

06 jk ;=jd,h ol=Kq ll=f,a okysig my,ska jQ ueyq ouk ,o lemq

;=jd,h'

07 jk ;=jd,h j ll=f,a okysig my,ska jQ ueyq ouk ,o lemq

;=jd,hla' ndysrj i`oyka lr ;sfhk ;=jd, tmuKhs'

CA/HCC/0009/23

10

According PW10, the injuries sustained by PW2 are quite serious and could

cause death in the ordinary course of nature. The relevant page is

reproduced below:

Page 335 of the brief-03.

m% ( ta wkqj frda.shdg isj we;s wl rer jykfhka urKh is ug

yelshdjla ;sfnkjd o @

W ( tfyuhs '

m% ( uy;auhd bosrsfha ;sfnk wlrK ffjoH jd;df nrm;, ;=jd, jYfhka

j.SlrKh wkqj cS;hg wk;=rla hyels ;=jd, jYfhka igyka

;sfnkafka lsk ;=jd, o @

W ( ;=jd, wxl 02 iy 03.

m% ( ta wkqj ffjoH;=uks fuu ;=jd, ish,a, iuia;hla jYfhka .;a;u frda.shdg

isj we;s ish ydks fya;=fldgf.k urKh is h yels ;=jd, jYfhka

ks.ukh lsrSug yelshdjla ;sfnkjd o @

W ( idudkH ;;a;ajh hgf;a urKh f.k osh yels ;=jd, jYfhka ks.ukhlg

t<h yelshs'

It is significant to mention that when PW6 CI/Hettiarachchige found PW2

hiding under tea bushes with injuries, PW2 informed him that Chaminda

and Priyashantha shot them and set the house on fire.

The Learned Presidents Counsel for the Appellant argued that since PW2

had not mentioned the presence of the Appellant when inquired by PW6 at

that time, it would weaken the case against the Appellant.

It is not worthy, that when PW6 found PW2 lying with injuries, she was never

questioned about the people who were present there at the time of

committing the offence. PW2 simply related who shot her family members.

Given the injuries sustained by PW2, her age and ordeal she had faced, one

cannot reasonably expect more details of the crime from a person like PW2

and that time.

Considering above cited portion of evidence it is evident that PW2 only

informed the major part of the incident to PW6 and PW10. She was not in a

good condition to divulge all facts covering the whole incident she had

CA/HCC/0009/23

11

witnessed. Further, the police could only record her incident upon her full

recovery. Therefore, relying on her evidence has not caused any prejudice to

the Appellant.

The learned Presidents Counsel for the Appellant further argues that the

evidence given by PW2 is not corroborated by any other witnesses.

The Section 134 of the Evidence Ordinance states as follows;

No particular number of witnesses shall in any case be required for the

proof of any fact.

In the case of Sumanasena v. The Attorney General [1999] 3 Sri.L.R 137

held that;

Evidence must not be counted but weighted and the evidence of a single

solitary witness if cogent and impressive could be acted upon by a Court

of Law

In the case of Madduma Siripala and another v. The Attorney General

CA/125-126/10 decided on 27/10/2017, Justice Thurairaja held that:

With reference to the above-mentioned section, there is no requisite

number of witnesses needed to be called to prove a fact. In fact, the

evidence of a single witness is sufficient to prove a fact provided the

evidence of the witness is uncontradicted, truthful, independent and

reliable to court.

In the case of Chacko Alias Aniyan Kunju & others v. State of Kerala-

[2004] INSC 87 (21st January 2004) held that:

The provision clearly states that no particular number of witnesses is

required to establish the case. Conviction can be based on the testimony

of single witness if he is wholly reliable. Corroboration may be necessary

when he is partially reliable. If the evidence is unblemished and beyond

all possible criticism and the Court is satisfied that the witness was

CA/HCC/0009/23

12

speaking the truth then on his evidence alone conviction can be

maintained.

In this case PW2 had clearly witnessed the incident and had given evidence

at the trial. When the incident had happened, she was only 14 years of age.

Hence, the evidence given by the eye witness PW2 is convincing and not

tainted with any ambiguity or uncertainty.

With reference to above cited judicial decisions, it is abundantly clear that

the trial court can act on the evidence of a single witness whose evidence is

truthful and impressive to come to a correct finding.

The learned Presidents Counsel for the Appellant referring to the evidence

given by PW2 argues that there are some deviations existing in the evidence

given by her.

In this case the eye witness PW2 had stated during the trial that the

Appellant was carrying a club at the time of the incident. But in her

statement to the police, she had failed to mention that the Appellant was

carrying a club. This was brought to the notice of the court as an omission

by the defence.

Next the learned Presidents Counsel highlighted the contradiction marked

in the trial. In the non-summary inquiry PW2 had stated that the Appellant

was seen carrying a knife at the time of the incident. But in the trial, she had

stated that the Appellant had carried a club in his hand.

The learned Counsel for the Appellant contended that the omission and

contradiction highlighted are important and sufficient to affect the credibility

of PW2. The learned High Court Judge in his judgment had accurately

considered the said omission and contradiction and had correctly held that

the omission and contradiction highlighted are not sufficient enough to

disturb the core of the case.

CA/HCC/0009/23

13

The injured PW2 was only 14 years of age when she witnessed the incident.

Also, she had lost her family members and was recovering mentally as well

as physically when she had given her statement to the police and

subsequently at the non-summary inquiry. Her position was that the

Appellant and the 2nd Accused prevented PW2 and the inmates of the house

from escaping the scene of crime. As the Appellant actively participated and

helped the deceased Accused Priyashntha to carry out the gruesome attack

on her father and the siblings of PW2, the omission and the contradiction

highlighted, are insufficient to create a doubt over the prosecution case.

In Bandara v. The State [2001] 1 SLR 63 the Court held that:

Discrepancies and inconsistencies which do not relate to the core of the

prosecution case, ought to be disregarded especially when all

probability factors echo in favour of the version narrated by a witness.

The learned High Court Judge in his judgment had clearly analysed the

evidence given by the lay witnesses against the Appellant. Further, the

learned High Court Judge, after considering the legal analysis of unlawful

assembly had correctly found that the Appellant including 2nd Accused guilty

under the charges levelled against them.

In this case, PW2 had clearly identified the Appellant through the lights

emanating from the oil lamp lit inside the house. Further, the investigating

officer had arrived at the scene of crime immediately after the information

was received and had duly observed the light conditions of the premises. The

learned High Court Judge in his judgment had considered the evidence very

clearly and accurately and given plausible reasons as to why he believed the

evidence given by PW2.

In this case the evidence given by PW2 is cogent without any ambiguity on

material points. Even though PW2 was only 14 years old when this gruesome

incident happened where her father and siblings had been killed in front of

CA/HCC/0009/23

14

her, she had given evidence without any contradiction pertaining to the main

incident. As such, the Trial Judge is correct to conclude that the prosecution

had presented a prima facie case against the Appellant.

In this case the learned High Court Judge had considered the evidence

presented by both parties to arrive at his decision. He had properly analyzed

the evidence given by both sides in his judgment. As the evidence adduced

by the Appellant failed to create a doubt over the prosecution case, the

conclusion reached by the learned High Court Judge in this case cannot be

faulted.

As discussed under the appeal grounds advanced by the Appellant, the

prosecution had adduced strong and incriminating evidence against the

Appellant. The learned High Court Judge had correctly analyzed all the

evidence presented by all the parties to arrive at a correct finding that the

Appellant was guilty of the charges levelled against him. Therefore, I dismiss

the Appeal and affirm the conviction and the sentence imposed on him on

25.08.2022 by the learned High Court Judge of Balapitiya.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgement to the High

Court of Balapitiya along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL