IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

P. Duraisamy,

Upper Division,

Campion Estate,

Bogawantalawa.

Defendant-Appellant

CASE NO: CA/11/2000/F

DC HATTON CASE NO: DE/111

Vs.

K. Vyapury,

Upper Division,

Campion Estate,

Bogawantalawa.

Plaintiff-Respondent

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Devika Panagoda with Nelum Wijeratne for the

Defendant-Appellant.

Plaintiff-Respondent is absent and unrepresented.

Decided on: 01.11.2018

2

Samayawardhena, J.

The plaintiff filed this action seeking ejectment of the defendant

from Lot 4 of the Plan marked P31 and damages. The defendant

sought dismissal of the action. After the trial, the learned

District Judge held with the plaintiff and granted ejectment, but

not damages. Being aggrieved by the said Judgment, the

defendant has preferred this appeal.

The plaintiff-respondent never participated in the appeal

proceedings despite notice being served on him several times.

This appeal can plainly be allowed on two basic principles.

The plaintiff and the defendants are estate workers. Both of

them state that they were allowed to possess the land by the

former superintendent of the estate. There is no dispute that

the defendant was in possession of the land at the time of the

institution of the action.

The plaintiff, at the trial, produced a photocopy of an Annual

Tenancy Agreement marked P1 entered into between the

superintendent and the plaintiff to say that the superintendent

gave the land to him for cultivation. This was marked subject to

proof and the superintendent was not called to give evidence.

Be that as it may, this is not a notarially executed document

and therefore, in any event, in terms of section 2 of the

Prevention of Frauds Ordinance, No. 7 of 1840, as amended, is

null and void and of no force or avail in law. (vide Hinni

Appuhamy v. Kumarasinghe (1957) 59 NLR 566, Arnolis Perera v.

1 Vide Admission No.2 at page 44 of the Appeal Brief.

3

David Perera (1967) 70 NLR 79 at 82, Pararajasekeram v.

Vijayaratnam (1968) 76 NLR 470)

Section 2 of the Prevention of Frauds Ordinance reads as

follows:

No sale, purchase, transfer, assignment, or mortgage of land or

other immovable property, and no promise, bargain, contract, or

agreement for effecting any such object, or for establishing any

security, interest, or incumbrance affecting land or other

immovable property (other than a lease at will, or for any period

not exceeding one month), nor any contract or agreement for the

future sale or purchase of any land or other immovable property,

and no notice, given under the provisions of the Thesawalamai

Pre-emption Ordinance, of an intention or proposal to sell any

undivided share or interest in land held in joint or common

ownership, shall be of force or avail in law unless the same shall

be in writing and signed by the party making the same, or by

some person lawfully authorized by him or her in the presence of

a licensed notary public and two or more witnesses present at the

same time, and unless the execution of such writing, deed, or

instrument be duly attested by such notary and witnesses.

Hence the great reliance placed by the learned District Judge on

P1 to hold with the plaintiff is untenable in law.

As the learned counsel for the plaintiff-respondent himself has

correctly pointed out to the learned District Judge in his written

submissions: This is a possessory action instituted against the

defendant by the plaintiff because the defendant was confirmed

4

in possession in the Primary Court of Hatton in case No. 58240.2

Hence P1 is, in any event, irrelevant, as the title is outside the

purview of the possessory action.

In terms of section 4 of the Prescription Ordinance, No. 22 of

1987, as amended, possessory action shall be brought within

one year of the ouster. That section reads as follows:

It shall be lawful for any person who shall have been

dispossessed of any immovable property otherwise than by

process of law, to institute proceedings against the person

dispossessing him at any time within one year of such

dispossession. And on proof of such dispossession within one

year before action brought, the plaintiff in such action shall be

entitled to a decree against the defendant for the restoration of

such possession without proof of title: Provided that nothing

herein contained shall be held to affect the other requirements of

the law as respects possessory cases.

According to the plaint, the defendant has come into forceful

possession of the land in June 1991. According to the certified

copy of the Primary Court Order referred to above, the said

Order, confirming the possession of the defendant has been

delivered on 18.02.1992.3

In the instant case, whether reckoning from the date of the

ouster (June 1991) or reckoning from the date of the delivery of

the Primary Court Order (18.02.1992), the plaintiff has not

2 Vide page 96 of the Appeal Brief. 3 Vide page 89 of the Appeal Brief.

5

instituted this action within one year. The plaintiff has instituted

this action on 03.03.1993.

Hence, the plaintiff cannot succeed in this action.

Accordingly, the plaintiffs action shall stand dismissed.

The Judgment of the District Court is set aside and the appeal is

allowed but without costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal