I I I I I l I ,

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SHI LANKA.

In the matter of an Application for orders

in the nature of a writ of Certiorari and

Mandamus under and in terms of the

proVIsIOns of Article 140 of the

Constitution.

Centre for Environmental Justice

(Guarantee) Limited,

20A, Kuruppu Road,

Colombo- 08.

Petitioner

Court of Appeal case

No. CA 11212015 Writ Vs.

Before

1. Sri Lanka Ports Authority,

No.19, Church Street,

Colombo-O 1.

and 05 others.

L.T.B. Dehideniya J, (PICA)

&

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

Respondents

Counsel Ravindranath Dabare instructed by Nimal Wickremasinghe for the

Petitioner.

2

Asanga Gunawansa with Dilshan Jayasooriya & Hiran Jayasooriya

instructed by Dinusha Mirihana for the 5th Respondent.

Supported on: 09/1 0/20 17

Decided on : 30/1 0/20 17

Order

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

When this Petition was taken up for support on 2nd June 2017, Senior DSG

raised three preliminary objections with regard to the maintainability of this

Petition, that the;

a) Petitioner is guilty of lashes.

b) Necessary parties are not before Court.

c ) Availability of an alternative remedy.

When this case came up for support on 8th August 2017, a further

preliminary objection was raised, that the relief prayed for is futile.

On 11 th December 2015, the Senior DSG informed Court that a

Supplementary Environmental Impact Assessment (SEIA) Report for the Colombo

Port City Project (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the "project") is filed of

! I I I I ! I

, I ! I I 1

3

record and a copy was made available to the Petitioner. Counsel further submitted

that the Petitioner has thirty (30) working days from 1st December 2015, to submit

objections if any. Accordingly, on 25 th January 2016, the Court was informed that

the Petitioner has submitted observations regarding the SEIA report.

Thereafter the Petition was re-fixed for support on 25 th May 2016, and the

Counsel for the Petitioner informed Court that he intends to support an amended

Petition. The amended Petition was filed by motion dated 4th November 2016, and

was listed for support on 19th January 2017, with notice to the 2nd, 3rd and 4th

Respondents. According to the proceedings dated 19th January 2017, the Court

was of the view that it is advisable to have the assistance of the Hon. Attorney

General, at the time this Petition is supported.

It was on 11th December 2015, the Court became aware of the SEIA report

which was tendered by the Senior DSG with notice to the Petitioner. Thereafter

the Petitioner moved for time to study the said report.

The Counsel appearing for the 6th Respondent submits that since December

2015, the Petitioner was aware of the said SEIA report and therefore the delay in

filing the Amended Petition challenging the said SEIA report, at this stage

amounts to an undue delay and therefore the Court should not exercise its

discretionary judicial remedy as prayed for.

When the original Petition was taken up for support on 18th March 2015,

the Court having noted the extraordinary nature of the project, sought the

I ! I I I i I

I I I I ! ! i I I !

4

assistance of the Hon. Attorney General. Thereafter when the case was mentioned

on several subsequent dates, the Senior DSG informed Court of the meetings,

additional documents and further reports on the progress of the project. It was also

made clear to Court that the SEIA Report was in respect of an additional 33

hectares to be filed. Accordingly the Court was aware of the magnitude and the

extensiveness of the said project and had sought the assistance of the Hon.

Attorney General with the objective of arriving at a possible settlement. This is

reflected in proceedings dated 19th January 2017.

The National Environmental Act No. 47 of 1980 (as amended), defines an

EIA report. The EIA not only provides for measures to ensure any potentially

negative environmental impacts, but also provides for management and

investigation of such environmental impacts. As pleaded, the Petitioner has

commented on the SEIA report. When the approving agency scrutinizes such

comments an opportunity is given, where appropriate, to the party to be heard and

to present any supporting material. Accordingly, if any alterations are made, a

fresh approval needs to be obtained.

The SEIA report was submitted to Court after the original Petition was

filed. Therefore the Petitioner should be given adequate time and opportunity to

pursue the project proposal in a reasonable and sensitive manner to consider not

only the likely adverse environmental impacts of the project, but also for the

management and investigation of such environmental impacts. Any substantial

5

hardship or prejudice caused to the Respondents due to any delay, if any, could be

determined at the full inquiry.

EIA reports are necessary for projects commg under the Coast

Conservation Act No. 5711981 (as amended). Accordingly the Petitioner has made

the Director General of the Coast Conservation and Costal Resource Management

Department, as a party to this action. As such whether proper parties are before

Court under the Coast Conservation Act could be decided at the full hearing. It is

also observed that with the available material, the Court at this stage cannot come

to a clear finding, whether the Petitioner's application is futile.

The Petitioner supports this application only for notice. In the

circumstances we see no reason to refuse formal notice on the Respondents.

Accordingly issue notice on the Respondents.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

L.T.B. Dehideniya J, (PICA)

I agree.

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL