CA (PHC) APN 14/2023

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for

revision in terms of Article 138 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

Court of Appeal The Officer-in-Charge

Application No: Rideegama Police Station

CA(PHC)APN 0014/2023 Rideegama.

Complainant

High Court of Kurunegala

No. HCR/15/2019 Vs.

MC Rambadagalla

Case No.26336/18 Kaluarachchilage Asela Kaluarachchi

Minsara Fish Shop,

Swarnamaliwatta,

Warakawehera, Morathiha.

Accused

AND THEN

Hawwa Dewalayage Sugath Lalana

No. 224, Mahaiyawa,

Morathiha.

Registered Owner-Petitioner

Vs.

CA (PHC) APN 14/2023

2 | P a g e

1. The Officer-in-Charge

Rideegama Police Station

Rideegama.

Complainant-Respondent

2. Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department

Colombo-12.

3. The Peoples Leasing and France

Company

No. 1161, Maradana Road,

Colombo-08

Respondents

AND NOW BETWEEN

Hawwa Dewalayage Sugath Lalana

No. 224, Mahaiyawa,

Morathiha.

Registered Owner-Petitioner-

Petitioner

1. The Officer-in-Charge

Rideegama Police Station

Rideegama.

Complainant-Respondent-

Respondent

CA (PHC) APN 14/2023

3 | P a g e

2. Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department

Colombo-12.

4. The Peoples Leasing and France

Company

No. 1161, Maradana Road,

Colombo-08.

Respondent-Respondents

BEFORE : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

P. Kumararatnam, J.

COUNSEL : Hejaaz Hizbulla for the Petitioner.

I.M.M.Fahim, SC for the Respondents.

ARGUED ON : 07/03/2024. DECIDED ON : 12/07/2024.

******************************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The Complainant-Respondent (Hereinafter referred to as the

Complainant) filed a charge sheet Under Section 28(2) of the Forest

Ordinance No. 13 of 1966 as amended for transporting 118 planks of

teak wood valued about 278,151.69 using a vehicle bearing No. NW LE-

2587 without a valid permit on 14.10. 2018.

CA (PHC) APN 14/2023

4 | P a g e

The charge sheet was filed against the Accused in the Magistrate Court

of Rambadagalla. As the Accused pleaded guilty to the charge sheet, the

Learned Magistrate of Rambadagalla had convicted the Accused and

imposed a fine of Rs.40,000/- and fixed for an inquiry to confiscate the

Vehicle bearing NW LE-2587.

At the conclusion of the inquiry, the Learned Magistrate had decided to

confiscate the aforesaid vehicle by his order dated 05.08.2019. At the

inquiry, the Petitioner, his father, the Accused, and a representative of

the absolute owner had given evidence on his behalf of the Petitioner.

Being aggrieved by the order of the Magistrate, the Appellant filed a

revision application in the Provincial High Court of North-Western

Province Holden at Kurunegala to revise the order of the Magistrate of

Rambadagalla. After an inquiry, the Learned High Court Judge had

dismissed the said revision application and affirmed the order of

Learned Magistrate of Rambadagalla by his order dated 16.12.2022.

Now the Petitioner filed this revision application to set aside the order of

the Learned High Court Judge of North-Wester Province Holden at

Kurunegala dated 16/12/2022.

The Petitioner submitted following exceptional circumstances:

a) The Learned Judge of the Provincial High Court has not

analysed the grounds on which the revision application of the

Petitioner was made, but has rather commented extensively on

the legal position that pertains to a case regarding illegal

transportation of timber, which in the instant matter were

undisputed;

b) The Learned Judge of the Provincial High Court has failed to

appreciate the fact that the Learned Magistrate has not taken

into consideration the evidence that indicate all the steps that

CA (PHC) APN 14/2023

5 | P a g e

the Petitioner and his father had actively taken to prevent the

vehicle from being used for an illegal activity;

c) The Learned Judge of the Provincial High Court has stated that

the Learned Magistrate has correctly analysed the case, that the

Learned Magistrate has correctly arrived at a conclusion in

terms of the burden of proving the preventive steps taken, that

the Learned Magistrate has followed the steps laid down by the

Law in delivering his Judgement, etc.

d) The Learned Judge of the Provincial High Court has not

appreciated the fact that the Learned Magistrate has not given

reasons for rejection or not considering the evidence placed

before him about the steps taken by the Petitioner and his

father to prevent the vehicle from being used for an illegal

purpose;

e) The Learned Judge of the Provincial High Court has failed to

appreciate that the Petitioner has taken all precautionary steps

he could take;

f) The Learned Judge of the Provincial High Court has failed to

appreciate that the total distance travelled by the said lorry was

within the radius of 9-10 kilometres.

g) The Learned Magistrate has taken irrelevant details in arriving

at his Judgement and the Learned Judge of the Provincial High

Court has failed to appreciate the same.

h) The Learned Judge of the Provincial High Court has upheld the

Judgement of the Learned Magistrate although the Petitioner

has established and proved the preventive measures taken on a

balance of probability;

i) The Learned Judge of the Provincial High Court has upheld the

Judgement of the Learned Magistrate when the Petitioner has

taken all precautionary measures humanely possible under the

circumstances of the case.

CA (PHC) APN 14/2023

6 | P a g e

The Partitioner has given evidence in the court and has claimed that he

was unaware of the crime being committed as he has employed the

Accused as a driver of the vehicle. The Petitioner has given specific

instructions to the Accused not to use the vehicle for the illicit transport

of sand, timber and other items which need permits. Further, he used

to contact the Accused daily in the evening to ascertain and assess the

happenings regarding the hires and related matters for the day.

The representative of the leasing company giving evidence said that

they had conducted an inquiry in this regard but the inquiry did not

reveal that the illegal timber transportation had happened with the

consent of the Petitioner.

The father of the Petitioner giving evidence stated that the vehicle in

question was purchased to transport lime stones. At the initial stages,

this witness and the Petitioner had driven the vehicle. As their lime

stones business was not successful, they appointed the Accused as the

driver of the vehicle. Although this witness employed as a watcher in an

estate, he used to check the vehicle and was vigilant about the vehicle.

After this incident, the Accused had been terminated. He refutes the

suggestion that the driver of the vehicle is a close relation of him.

The Accused also gave evidence and admitted that he transported

timber without the permission of the Petitioner or his father. He also

said that the Petitioner had given instructions not to use the vehicle for

any illegal activities.

The Learned Magistrate has dismissed the application on the basis that

the Petitioner had failed to show that he took all necessary precautions

to prevent a crime being committed.

Further, the Accused was working as the driver since 2007. During this

period there was no complaint about misusing the vehicle.

CA (PHC) APN 14/2023

7 | P a g e

In this case the Petitioners and his witnesses evidence has not been

contradicted or challenged by the Complainant.

The Petitioner had given cogent evidence that he had no knowledge

about transporting timber in this case. The complainant had charged

the Accused for transporting timber. Further, last ten years there was

no any offence committed by the Accused nor the vehicle involved in

any illegal activity. These matters had not been considered by the either

Courts. Further, the Petitioner had proved on balance of probability

that he had all precautionary measures humanely possible under the

circumstances of the case.

It is settled law that revision is a discretionary remedy, and such power

shall be invoked only upon demonstration of exceptional

circumstances.

In Marian Beebee v. Seyed Mohamed 69 CLW 34 the court held that:

Power of revision is an extraordinary power of the court

which is independent and distinct from the appellate

jurisdiction. The object of revisionary jurisdiction is to ensure

the due administration of justice and the correction of all

errors in order to avoid a miscarriage of justice.

In the case of Rasheed Ali v.Mohammed Ali and Others [1981] 1 SLR

262, the court held that:

the powers of revision vested in the Court of Appeal are

very wide and the Court can in a fit case exercise that power

whether or not an appeal lies. When, however, the law does

not give a right of appeal and makes the order final, the

Court of Appeal may nevertheless exercise its powers of

CA (PHC) APN 14/2023

8 | P a g e

revision, but it should do so only in exceptional

circumstances. Ordinarily the Court will not interfere by way

of review, particularly when the law has expressly given an

aggrieved party an alternative remedy such as the right to

file a separate action, except when non-interference will

cause a denial of justice or irremediable harm.

In Commissioner of Police v. Tanes (1957-58) 68 CLR 383, the court

held that:

"It is a deep-rooted principle of the law that before anyone

can be punished or prejudiced in his person or his property

by any judicial or quasi-judicial procedure, he must be

afforded adequate opportunity of being heard ... "

In this case the Learned High Court Judge only considering the order of

the Magistrate Court of Rambadagalla decided to dismiss the revision

application stating that that the Petitioner had failed to prove that he

did not had knowledge about committing of the offence.

Considering all these matters in to careful consideration, the only

conclusion this Court could reach is that Learned High Court Judge

has not exercised his revisionary jurisdiction justifiably in considering

the order made by the Learned Magistrate of Rambadagalla.

Hence, I set aside the order of the Learned High Court Judge of

Kurunegala dated 16.12.2022 and the order of Learned Magistrate

Court of Rambadagalla dated 05.08.2019.

Therefore, this revision is allowed.

CA (PHC) APN 14/2023

9 | P a g e

I direct that the vehicle No. NW LE 2587 be released to the Petitioner.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this Judgement to the

High Court of Kurunegala and the Magistrate Court of Rambadagalla.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

SAMPATH B. ABAYAKOON, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL