IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal under and in terms of Section 331 of the Criminal Procedure Code Act No. 15 of 1979.

The Attorney General of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Complainant

Court of Appeal Case No. CA 81/2010 Vs,

1. Madumage Don Dinesh Dhanushka Jayawardena 2. Chiran Hasantha 8alage

Accused

And Now Between

1. Madumage Don Dinesh Dhanushka

Jayawardena 2. Chiran Hasantha 8alage

Accused-Appellant

High Court of Anuradhapura Case No. HC 195/2006 Vs,

Before

Counsel

The Attorney General of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

: S. Devika de L. Tennekoon, J &

S. Thurairaja PC, J

Complainant-Respondent

: Shanake Ranasinghe PC with N. Mihindukulasuriya for the Accused-Appellant Parinda Ranasinghe, SDSG for the Complainant-Respondent

Judgment on : 28th November 2017

***********

CA 81/2010 JUDGMENT Page 1 of 6

}

fIf,I I

f

~ tII !

Judgment

S. Thurairaja PC J

Madumage Don Dinesh Dhanushka Jayawardane (First accused appellant herein after

sometimes referred to as first appellant) and Chiran Hasantha Balage (Second accused

and herein after sometimes referred to as second appellant) were indicted by the Hon.

Attorney General under Section 364 (2) (g) of the Penal Code for committing an offence

of Gang Rape. After the trial both accused were found guilty by the learned trial Judge of

the High Court of Anuradhapura.

The First Accused appellant was present before the High Court and the Indictment was

served on him. Half way through he did not appear before the court and retained Counsel

to defend him. The second Accused appellant was absent from the non-summery inquiry

stage and defended himself through an Attorney at Law. During the trial at the High Court,

summons and warrants were issued the pt and the 2nd accused were not present. After

fulfilling the requirements under Section 241 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act

(CCPA) 15 of 1979 (as amended), trial was held without accused persons but their

Counsels represented them at the trial.

Both Accused persons were found guilty by the learned trial Judge and issued with open

warrants without passing the sentences.

Both accused persons preferred an appeal against the conviction through their Attorney

at Law to the Court of Appeal. When the matter was mentioned on several occasions the

CA 81/2010 JUDGMENT Page 2 of 6

II

I

J

~ f

tiliIIii

fI

f

r

Ii

!I II

first appellant was absent and unrepresented. This Court issued several notices to the first

appellant and his Counsel on record brought no results, hence we decided to consider

the appeal with the available materials.

The second appellant was also absent but was represented by a President's Counsel. He

submits that he has proper instructions from the Second appellant.

Grounds of appeal on behalf of both appellants are identified as follows:

(i) Evidence against the accused persons were insufficient and contrary to the Law.

(ii) The learned trial Judge had not properly evaluated the evidence.

(iii) Decision of the trial judge is contrary to the evidence before the court.

(iv) The Ellenborough dictum is wrongly interpreted.

(v) Identification parade notes were accepted wrongly. (sic)

(vi) There is no evidence against second accused appellant for aiding and abetting

the first accused appellant.

Considering the available evidence led before the trial court, it appears, that the

Prosecutrix Hearath Mudiyanselage Rohini Maithri and her sister Herath Mudiyanselage

Kumudu Priyanganie Maithri were employed at Katunayake and Colombo respectively,

were returning home for the week-end. Their home is situated at Dampelessegama,

Maradankadawala. On the 20th October 2001 at around 8.30 pm they alighted from the

bus at Maradankadawala town and started to walk because there was no other transport

CA 81/2010 JUDGMENT Page 3 of 6

I

r

iIi

f

I i

available to them. On the way the Second accused appellant was riding a motor bike with

the first accused appellant on the pillion. Both accused commenced a conversation with

the sisters who were walking towards the village.

At a lonely place the first accused who was on the pillion got down from the bike and

approached the prosecutrix. Thereafter he dragged her to a place little away and had

sexual intercourse without her consent. When a van approached there, both girls sought

t

help from them and went to an Army camp and from there to the closest Police station

~:

~

II

to make a complaint.

Counsel for the Second appellant confines himself to one ground of appeal namely that

there is no evidence to the fact that the second accused appellant aided and abetted the

first accused appellant to commit the offence of rape.

The prosecution led the evidence of 9 witnesses. Six of them were lay witnesses, two

medical professionals, Investigating Police officer and the Court interpreter.

The virtual complainant Herath Mudiyanselage Rohini Maithri gave evidence and she was

intensely cross examined by the Counsel for the accused. She clearly described the

incident to the Court. There were no material contradictions marked, nor any omissions

brought to the notice of the trial Judge. She clearly narrated the incident and identified

the accused persons at the identification parade and in court. In her testimonial she says

that the first appellant dragged her away to a lonely place, laid her on the floor, removed

CA 81/2010 JUDGMENT Page 4 of 6

her clothes and penetrated. When a van came to that place, he withdrew from the act.

She also said that the second appellant was standing little away with her sister. According

to her evidence the second appellant was riding the bike and he was not involved in any

of the offensive act. Evidence of the Prosecutrix were corroborated by her sister and

medical evidence.

When the first accused appellant took the virtual complainant, the second appellant was

talking to the sister of the Prosecurix. She had given evidence and stated that the second

accused had asked her, "who are you all," then the sister had told him that they are sisters

then he had called the first appellant and told him "Iet her go."

The above evidence on record shows that the second appellants was not involved in the

act of rape. The evidence reveals that he was with the first appellant and nothing more.

To convict a person under section 364 (2) (g), there should be some evidence of abetment

must be proved. But in this case, there is no evidence against the 2nd accused appellant

and he had told the first accused to "Iet her go". Therefore, we conclude that there is no

incriminatory evidence against the second accused appellant, Viran Hasantha Balage.

Accordingly, we quash the conviction and acquit from the charge.

Considering the grounds of appeal of the first accused appellant, we find that the available

evidence before the court is sufficient to find the first accused guilty for the charge of

rape. Findings of the learned trial judge on count number one is well founded, hence this

court affirms the said conviction.

CA 81/2010 JUDGMENT Page 5 of 6

\

We notice in the judgment that the trial judge had found both accused persons guilty to

both charges in the indictment. Which is incorrect. The first and second counts are in

respect of first and second accused appellants respectively. This appears to be a minor

mistake which can be rectified under Section 353 (77) of the CCPA. We correct the error

as follows; The first accused appellant is convicted under Section 364 (2) of the penal

code. As stated above the appeal of the second accused appellant is allowed and the

conviction is quashed.

Appeal of the first accused appellant is dismissed

Appeal of the Second accused appellant is allowed.

S. Devika de L. Tennekoon, J

I agree,

CA 81/2010

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JUDGMENT Page 6 of 6

! Ii I

I