Page 1 of 10

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of

section 331 (1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979, against the

Judgment of the High Court of Balapitiya

case No. 2780/21.

Court of Appeal No: Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

CA/HCC/0140/2023 COMPLAINANT

Vs.

High Court of Balapitiya 1. Kaluwahandi Asanka Indikarathna alias

Case No: HC/2780/21 Janaka

2. Ambepitiyage Don Samith Madhushanka

ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

Kaluwahandi Asanka Indikarathna alias

Janaka

1ST ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

Page 2 of 10

The Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

Before : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

: P. Kumararatnam, J.

Counsel : Neranjan Jayasinghe with Randunu Heellage, Lahiru

Vidushanke and Imangsi Senarath for the Accused-

Appellant

: Malik Azeez, S.C. for the Respondent

Argued on : 28-03-2024

Written Submissions : 25-03-2024 (By the Complainant-Respondent)

: 13-03-2024 (By the Accused-Appellant)

Decided on : 30-05-2024

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

The 1st accused-appellant (hereinafter referred to as the appellant), along with

another, was indicted before the High Court of Balapitiya, for committing the

offence of attempted murder, punishable in terms of section 300 read with

section 32 of the Penal Code.

The indictment has been served on the appellant on 14-10-2021. The 2nd

accused has been served with the indictment on 25-11-2021. The trial has

been initially fixed for 15-03-2022. Since the appellant was absent and said to

be in remand in relation to another case, the trial has been postponed for 27-

Page 3 of 10

07-2022. On the said date, the 2nd accused had been absent and it had been

informed to the Court that he has left the country.

However, on the same day, the prosecuting State Counsel has informed the

Court that he intends to amend the indictment by including section 44(a) of the

Fire Arms Ordinance, since the offence has been committed using a gun.

Thereafter, the learned High Court Judge has taken steps under section 241 of

the Code of Criminal Procedure Act in relation to the absconding 2nd accused.

When the case was mentioned on 17-03-2023, it has been informed to the

Court that the appellant intends to plead guilty to the charge against him. Most

probably because of that, the prosecution has not amended the charge as

indicated earlier to the Court, and the appellant has pleaded guilty to the

charge on 06-04-2023.

In has been intimated to the Court that the appellant and the injured are now

friends and the appellant is willing to pay a sum of Rs. One million as

compensation.

After having listened to the mitigatory circumstances pleaded on behalf of the

appellant and also having listened to the PW-01 who was the injured of this

incident and after observing his present medical condition as a result of the

gunshot injuries he suffered to his head, as well as the previous conviction

record of the appellant, the learned High Court Judge of Balapitiya has

sentenced the appellant in the following manner.

(1) Fifteen years rigorous imprisonment.

(2) A fine of Rs 25000/-, and in default to a simple imprisonment of six

months.

(3) In addition to the above, a compensation in a sum of Rs. 1,000,000/-

to be paid to the PW-01 in terms of section 28 of the Assistance to and

Protection of Crime and Witnesses Act No 04 of 2015.

Page 4 of 10

(4) It has been directed that if the appellant fails to pay the said

compensation, it shall be recovered from him as a fine, and in default,

he shall serve a simple imprisonment period of two years.

On the basis of being aggrieved by the above sentence, the appellant has

preferred this appeal.

The Ground of Appeal

At the hearing of this appeal, the learned Counsel for the appellant urged the

following ground of appeal for the consideration of the Court.

(1) The learned High Court Judge has not considered the mitigatory

factors in the correct perspective when imposing the sentence on the

appellant.

Consideration of the Ground of Appeal

The submission of the learned Counsel for the appellant was mainly based on

the premise that the sentence imposed upon the appellant after he pleaded

guilty to the charge without wasting valuable time of the Court, and offered to

pay sufficient compensation, the sentence imposed was excessive. He was of

the view that the learned High Court Judge has gone on presumptions against

the appellant, and the comments made by the learned High Court Judge in his

sentencing order was not appropriate, given the facts and the circumstances of

the case.

It was the view of the learned State Counsel on behalf of the respondent that,

the fact that an accused person pleaded guilty to a charge should not be the

only consideration in deciding the appropriateness of a sentence. He submitted

that the learned High Court Judge has correctly considered the facts and the

circumstances that led to the PW-01 receiving serious gunshot injuries to his

head, and the present health condition of the injured, as well as the previous

conviction record of the appellant, as relevant in his sentencing order.

Page 5 of 10

It was his position that the sentence imposed on the appellant was within the

permitted legal parameters of the Penal Code and cannot be termed excessive

as claimed on behalf of the appellant.

The learned State Counsel moved for the dismissal of the appeal for want of

merit.

The relevant section 300 of the Penal Code under which the appellant had

pleaded guilty reads as follows;

Section 300-Whoever does any act with such intention or knowledge

and under such circumstances that if he by that act caused death he

would be guilty of murder, shall be punished with imprisonment of

either description for a term which may extent to ten years, and

shall also be liable to fine; and it hurt is caused to any person by

such act, the offender shall be liable to imprisonment of either

description for a term which may extend to twenty years, and shall

also be liable to fine.

As pointed out correctly by the learned State Counsel, since the injured have

received serious gunshot injuries to his head as a result of this incident, the

sentence that can be imposed upon a person found guilty can extend up to

twenty years imprisonment of either description. Hence, it is clear that the

sentence imposed upon the appellant has been within the legally permitted

limits in terms of the relevant section.

Therefore, the only question that needs to be determined in this appeal is

whether the sentence can be termed excessive, as contended on behalf of the

appellant, or whether it was reasonable enough, given the facts and the

circumstances of the case.

Page 6 of 10

I am in agreement with the submission of the learned State Counsel that

although the fact of pleading guilty to a charge can be considered in mitigation

of the sentence, that alone would not be a criterion for imposing a lenient

sentence on an accused. I am of the view that offering to pay compensation

cannot add much value in mitigation, as in any way, compensation can be

ordered after an accused is found guilty to an offence of this nature.

It is imperative on a trial judge to consider the mitigatory as well as

aggravating circumstances in an equal footing and come to a determination as

to what would be the appropriate punishment of an accused, even after such a

person having pleaded guilty to the charge or charges against him.

In the case of Attorney General Vs. H.N.De Silva 57 NLR 121, Bssnayake,

A.C.J. observed as follows;

In assessing the punishment that should be passed on an offender, Judge

should consider the matter of sentence both from the point of view of the

public and the offender. Judges are too often prone to look at the question

only from the angle of the offender. A Judge should, in determining the

proper sentence, first consider the gravity of the offence as it appears from

the nature of the act itself and should have regard to the punishment

provided in the Penal Code or other statute under which the offender is

charged. He should also regard the effect of the punishment as a deterrent

and consider to what extent it will be effective. If the offender held a

position of trust or belonged to a service, which enjoys the public

confidence, that must be taken into account in assessing the punishment.

The incident of crimes of the nature of which the offender has been found

to be guilty, and the difficulty of detection are also matter which should

receive due consideration. The reformation of the criminal, though no doubt

an important consideration is subordinate to others I have mentioned.

Page 7 of 10

Where the public interest or welfare of the State (which are synonymous)

outweighs the previous good character, antecedents and age of the

offender, public interest must prevail

The Indian Supreme Court held in the case of Sevaka Perumal et al. Vs. State

of Tamil Nadu AIR 1991 SC 1463 that;

Protection of society and stamping out criminal activity must be the object

of the law which must be achieved by imposing appropriate

sentenceTherefore, undue sympathy to impose adequate sentence would

do more harm to the justice system to undermine the public confidence in

the efficiency of law and society could not long endure under serious

threats. If the Court did not protect the injured, the injured then would

resort to private vengeance. It is, therefore, the duty of every court to

award proper sentence having regard to the nature of the offence and the

manner in which it was executed or committed etc

The above principles were considered and followed by S.N.Silva, J. (As he was

then) in the case Attorney General Vs. Ranasinghe and others (1993) 2 SLR

81, where the appropriateness of imposing suspended sentences on accused

who pleaded guilty to the charges against them were considered.

Although no evidence has been led in the case, there was facts before the Court

to consider the appropriate sentence on the appellant, having considered the

mitigatory as well as aggravating factor in this case. It is clear that the PW-01

has been shot at from a close range using a firearm. The Government Analyst

report made available shows that the weapon used was a gun in terms of the

FireArms Ordinance. The injured has received serious gunshot injuries to his

head and the chest, which has been categorized as injuries sufficient to cause

death in the ordinary course of nature. This amply provides that the appellant

had knowledge as well as a clear intention to kill the PW-01.

Page 8 of 10

The learned High Court Judge has had the advantage of observing the fact that

even after nearly eight years of the incident, the PW-01 was not in a position to

properly speak and walk as a result of the injuries sustained by him, which

should also be an aggravating factor.

Besides all this, the previous conviction record of an accused is also an

important factor when determining the sentence, irrespective of the fact that he

pleaded guilty to the charge, or found guilty after trial.

The appellant was a person who was found guilty of murder in terms of section

296 of the Penal Code of a judgment dated 09-01-2009 and sentenced to death.

However, upon an appeal, his conviction has been reduced to that of culpable

homicide not amounting to murder in terms of section 297 of the Penal Code,

and he had been sentenced to seven years rigorous imprisonment on 15-11-

2007.

The offence relating to this action has been committed on 15-12-2015. This

means that the appellant was a person who knew very well the consequences of

his actions, but showed scant disregard to the law.

It clearly appears from the sentencing order that the learned High Court Judge

had considered not only the aggravating factors but, the relevant mitigatory

factors when it was decided to reduce five years from the maximum possible

sentence that can be imposed on the appellant.

I am not in a position to agree with the submission of the learned Counsel that,

the learned High Court Judge has taken into consideration irrelevant matters

in his sentencing order. It appears that what the learned Counsel refers to is

the comments made by the learned High Court Judge as to what the proper

charge should have been against the appellant, if the charges were drafted

properly by the prosecuting authority.

Page 9 of 10

It is abundantly clear that the injuries caused to the PW-01 had been caused

by using a firearm, where the Government Analyst Report confirms that the

weapon used was a gun. The police investigators have recovered the alleged

gun used in the crime and spent cartridges, which has been analyzed by the

Government Analyst and issued his Report. The drafters of the indictment

should have all the necessary extracts of the evidence, investigation reports

such as Government Analyst Report, Medico Legal Report, Non-Summary

proceedings, etc., for consideration before the indictment was forwarded to the

relevant High Court. It is quite obvious to a legally trained person like a High

Court Judge that the charge should have been in terms of section 44(a) of the

Fire Arms Ordinance read with section 300 of the Penal Code, where the

punishment, if found guilty would-be life imprisonment. Even the prosecuting

State Counsel has recognized this fact when he informed the Court that he

intends to amend the charge accordingly.

I find that the learned High Court Judge has commented on these matters not

with the intention of considering them as aggravating factors against the

appellant. It is clear that the intention of the learned High Court Judge had

been only to bring these matters to the attention of the relevant authorities

with the view of emphasizing the importance of forwarding a correct indictment

after having considered the relevant facts and the applicable law, so that

amendments can be avoided at later stages of a case, and nothing else.

I view the comments made by the learned High Court Judge in this regard as

part of the duties of a trial judge, which should be brought into open, so that

the delivery of justice would be more efficient.

Since it is clear that the learned High Court Judge has not been influenced in

any way when sentencing the appellant by his above considered comments, I

find that no prejudice has caused to the appellant as contended.

Page 10 of 10

It is my considered view that the sentence imposed upon the appellant was a

fair and reasonable sentence having considered the facts and the

circumstances of the case.

Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed for want of merit.

However, as the appellant has been in incarceration from his date of conviction

pending the determination of the appeal, it is ordered that the sentence shall

deem have commenced from his date of the sentence on 06-04-2023.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P. Kumararatnam, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal