IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Court of Appeal Case No. CA PHC 188/15

PHC Badulla Case No. 44/2011 1!ill:l

MC (Mahiyanganaya) Case No. 68676

BEFORE

COUNSEL:

Abdul Kapoor Mohamed Aliyar, Pagaragammana, Mapakadawewa, Mahiyanganaya.

Petitioner-Appellant

v.

I. Officer in Charge,

Police Station, Girandurukotte.

2. HOIl. Attorney General, Attorney General 's Department, Colombo 12.

Respondents

K.K. WICKREMASINGHE, J

K.PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J

Shantha Jayawardena with Charnara Nanayakkarawasam for the Petitioner Appellant.

Pallchali Witharana SC for the Respondents.

1

,

ARGUED ON

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS

FILED ON:

JUDGMENT ON

K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J.

04.09.2019

21.05.2019 by the Petitioner Appellant.

07.08.2019 by the Respondent.

08.1 1.2019

01. This is an appeal against the Judgment dated 17.11.2015 by the learned High

Court Judge of the Provincial High Court Badulla which affirmed the order

of confiscation of the vehicle by learned Magistrate of Mahiyanganaya on

31.10.2009.

02. The Accused driver named 'Akbar' was charged in the Magistrate Court

Mahiyanganaya on 31 .10.2009 in case No. 68676 for illegally transporting 7

cattle using Motor lorry No. UPI-IE 6083, in violation of the section 03 of

Animals Act No. 13 of 1958 (as amended) and section 02 of Cruelty to

Animals Ordinance No. 13 of 1907 (as amended). Thereafter, on 01.09.2010

the Accused pleaded guilty and accordingly at the conclusion of the

proceedings the learned Magistrate had called for a vehicle confiscation

inquiry. Having evaluated the evidence presented at the inquiry, the learned

Magistrate ordered the said vehicle in question to be confiscated.

2

03. Being aggrieved by the said order, the registered owner of the said vehicle,

Petitioner Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Appellant) had preferred a

Revision application No.44/20 I I in the Provincial High Court of Badulla.

On 30.08.2012, the learned High Court Judge had dismissed the said

Revision application on the basis that Appellant had invoked the

Revisionary jurisdiction without preferring an appeal against the said

impugned order of the learned Magistrate.

04. However, the Appellant made an appeal against the said order of the learned

Provincial High Court judge dated 30.08.2012 in this Court in case No. CA

(PHC) 12112012 and this court set aside the said order dated 30.08.2012 and

directed the learned High Court Judge to consider the merits of the said

Revision application.

05. After re-hearing, the learned High Court Judge on 17.11.2015 dismissed the

said Revision application and affirmed the confiscation order of the learned

Magistrate. Being aggrieved by the said judgment the Appellant preferred

this appeal.

06. T carefully considered the evidence adduced at the inquiry, order of the

Magistrate, judgment of the learned High Court Judge, written submissions

fi led on behalf of the Appellant and the Respondent, and the submissions

made by counsel for both Appellant and the Respondent.

07. Contention of the counsel for the Appellant is that the said Motor lorry was

used for the transporting purposes of the rice mill owned by the Appellant.

He had assigned the said lorry to the Accused and the rice mill to his brother

in law as he was living in Batticaloa with his wife. The alleged offence was

committed while he was in Batticaloa. Therefore, the Appellant did not have

3

any knowledge of commission of the offence nor he was privy to the said

offence.

08. It was further submitted by the counsel for the Appellant that on a previous

occasion, the previous driver named 'Faizar' had committed a similar

offence using the same vehicle and the Appellant had removed him after

that. Then he had warned the Accused whom he had hired as the second

driver not to engage in any illegal transportation activity. Therefore,

according to the counsel for the Appellant, he had taken necessary

precautions to prevent the use of the vehicle for the commission of an

offence.

09. In terms of the section 3A of the Animals Act,

"where any person is convicted of an offence under this part or

any regulations made thereunder, any vehicle used in the commission

of such offence shall, in addition to any other punishment prescribed

for such offence, be liable, by order of the convicting Magistrate, to

confiscation;

Provided however, that in any case where the owner of the vehicle is a

third party, no order of confiscation shall be made, if the owner

proves to the satisfaction of the court that he has taken all precautions

to prevent the use of such vehicle or that the vehicle has been used

without his knowledge for the commission of the offence. "

10. His Lordship Justice Sisira de Abrew in the case of Mary Matilda Silva V.

P.H. De Silva, IP Police Statioll Habar{[fl{[ rCA (PHC) 86/97, decided 011

08. 0 7. 201 OJ, held that;

4

"In my view, for the owner of the vehicle to discharge the burden (I)

that he or she had taken all precautions to prevent the use of the vehicle for

the commission of the offence, (2) that the vehicle had been used for the

commission of the offence without his/her knowledge, mere giving

instructions is not sufficient. In order to discharge the burden embodied in

the proviso to Section 3A of the Animals A ct, is it sufficient for the owner to

say that the instructions not to use the vehicle for illegal purpose had

been given to the driver? If the Courts of this country is going to say that

it is sufficient, then all what the owner in a case of this nature has to say

is that he gave said instructions. Even for the second offence, this is all

that he has to say. Then there is no end to the commission of the offence

and to the use of the vehicle for the commission of the offence. Every time

when the vehicle is detected with cattle all what he has to say is that he

had given instructions to the driver. Then the pwpose of the legislature in

enacting the proviso to section 3A of the Animals Act isfrustrated."

11. The Appellant is bound to take every possible precaution to prevent an

offence being committed or he has to prove that he had no any knowledge

about the commission of the offence. The learned Magistrate had observed

that the said vehicle had been arrested on a previous occasion in relation to a

similar offence. The learned Magistrate of Kandy had released the said

vehicle subjected to a bond in 26.09.2009. Having released the vehicle

previously on such a bond, again on 31.1 0.2009 the Accused was charged

for committing a similar offence where the same vehicle had been used to do

so. Within such a short period of time, the Appellant should have been more

vigilant of his Vehicle and he should have had more control over his vehicle.

5

Merely stating that he warned the Accused not to commit any illegal act

using the vehicle would not be sufficient enough to discharge the burden

cast on him because he could have known that the vehicle could be used to

do another offence since he was aware about the similar offence committed

lIsing the said vehicle before. In this instance, he cannot discharge his

burden relying on the defence of no knowledge.

12. In Umma Habeeba V OIC Defliattakandiya {I999j 3 SLR 89, it was

decided that;

"What section 3A means is that the vehicle shall necessarily be

confiscated if the owner fails to prove that the offence was committed

without the knowledge but not otherwise. If as contended, the

Magistrate was given a discretion to consider whether to confiscate or

not - the Magistrate could confiscate even when the offence was

committed without the knowledge of the owner taking into

consideration other damnable circumstances apartjrom knowledge or

lack of it on the part of the owner. "

13. In Faris V OIC Galellbilldullllwewa {1992j 1 SLR 167, Justice S.N. Silva

held that,

"In terms of the proviso to the section 3A of the Animals Act, an

order for confiscation cannot be made if the owner establishes one of

two matters. "

They are;

6

1. That he has taken all precautions to prevent the use of the vehicle

for the commission of the offence;

2. That the vehicle has been used for the commission of the offence

without his knowledge.

In terms of the proviso, if the owner establishes anyone of these

matters on a balance of probability, an order for confiscation should

not be made. An order for confiscation could be made only if the

owner was present at the time of the detection or there was some

evidence suggesting that the owner was privy to the offence. "

14. A similar situation was discussed in R. W. Chamillda Parakrama V.

Attorney General and allother rCA (PHC) APN 5412016/, it was held that;

"it is pertinent to note that the vehicle was previously involved

in another offence as well. Therefore, the degree of preventive

measures that should have been taken by the owner of the vehicle to

prevent an offence being committed again using the vehicle is

comparatively higher. But the petitioner had re employed the Accused

driver after giving mere verbal instructions which in fact is

insufficient to establish, on a balance of probability, that he has taken

every possible precaution to prevent an offence being committed. "

15. Even though in his submissions, the Counsel for the Appellant argued that

the Appellant has not committed such an offence as a habitual offender, a

similar offence had already been committed in a previous occasion using the

same vehicle. Even though the driver was removed, the Appellant should

7

have expected that such an offence could be committed agall1. If this

argument is accepted anybody could get away from discharging his burden

by affirming that he gave instructions to the driver. Accordingly, I am of the

view that giving mere verbal instructions to the Accused driver by the

Appellant does not sufficiently establish that the Appellant took precautionary

measures on the said vehicle which was used to commit a similar offence

before. Brother in law of the Appellant who was under control of the rice mill

and the lorry, never gave evidence even to say that he took precautionary

measures.

16. The Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the learned Magistrate in her

order dated 20.10.20 I 0, proceeded to adjudicate the matter on the premise

that there is a presumption that the owner has not taken all precautions to

prevent the use of the vehicle for the commission of the offence and had

come to a conclusion that the Appellant has failed to adduce evidence to

rebut the said presumptions. Even though the learned Magistrate has erred in

stating that there is such a presumption, her order for confiscation was

correct in law and the Appellant has not been prejudiced.

17. In the above premise, J am of the view that the judgement of the learned

High Court Judge of Badulla affirming the confiscation order of the learned

Magistrate of Mahiyanganaya is in accordance with the law. Thus, I see no

reason to interfere with the decisions of both the learned High Court Judge

and the learned Magistrate.

8

Appeal is hereby dismissed.

K.K. WICKREMASINGHE, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

9