==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0007/2020

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal No: Welgamage Nevil Marcus

CA/HCC/0007/2020

High Court of Puttalam

Case No: HC/50/2018

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R.P.Hettiarachchi, J.

CA/HCC/0007/2020

2 | P a g e

COUNSEL : Tenny Fernando with Pasindu Gamage

for the Appellant.

Anoopa De Silva, DSG for the Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 23/06/2026

DECIDED ON : 28/08/2026

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) was indicted by the Attorney General in the High Court of

Puttalam for committing three counts of incest on his daughter namely

Welgamage Tharushi Madhushika between 01/09/2015 to 07/03/2016 an

offence punishable under Section 364(3) of the Penal Code as amended.

After the trial the Appellant was convicted for the first count and he was

sentenced to 16 years rigorous imprisonment with a fine of Rs.25,000/-. In

default of which 12 months simple imprisonment was imposed. The

Appellant was acquitted from the second and third counts.

CA/HCC/0007/2020

3 | P a g e

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court. The Learned Counsel for the Appellant

informed this court that the Appellant has given consent to argue this matter

in his absence. Also, at the time of argument the Appellant was connected

via the Zoom platform from prison.

The Counsel for the Appellant placed the following grounds of appeal

for adjudication:

1. The Learned High Court Judge misled himself in law and facts and

failed to consider that the prosecutrix did not elicit substantive or

cogent evidence regarding sexual intercourse which is an essential

item of evidence in a rape case.

2. That the Learned High Court Judge had failed to evaluate the material

inconsistencies between the testimony of the prosecutrix and other

witnesses which affect the root of the prosecution case.

3. The Learned High Court Judge failed to consider the defence evidence

in its correct perspective.

PW1, the prosecutrix who encountered this unpleasant incident was almost

12 years old, was schooling and was in grade seven. The Appellant is her

biological father.

On the day of the first incident, when she was sleeping, she suddenly got up

feeling heaviness on her body. At the same time, she had felt pain in her

vagina. At that time, she had seen that her father (Appellant) was on her

body. She had consistently said that her father was on her body when she

had felt pain in her vagina. Also, she had noted that her dress had been

removed.

The learned Counsel for the Appellant strenuously argued that the victim

had not testify on sexual penetration which is an essential element to prove

a case of rape. In this case, the victim did not say that she had felt the penis

entering her vagina. Instead, she had said that she had felt pain in her

CA/HCC/0007/2020

4 | P a g e

vagina. I consider this information to be enough to justify an arrest and the

filing of formal rape charges.

The doctor in his evidence stated that the victim in her history had said that

the Appellant used to sexually harass her. She had informed this to her class

teacher. The Appellant was arrested after lodging a formal complaint to the

police.

According to the JMO, a partially healed tear was found at the 6’ O’clock

position of the hymen. The JMO opined that according to the medical

evidence, repeated vaginal penetration had taken place in the past.

In criminal trials, the credibility of the evidence given by a rape victim would

be extremely crucial; this would be due to such evidence being used to

determine the conviction or acquittal of the accused, especially in situations

where physical evidence would not be available. In such situations, elements

such as the consistency in testimonies, post assault behaviour and other

circumstantial evidence would be taken into consideration by the Court. A

victim’s testimony alone would be sufficient to convict, only where such

testimony is free from “inconsistencies” or deviations from usual behaviours.

As such, any testimony given by the victim would be thoroughly analysed to

detect such contradictions or discrepancies which would affect the case.

In sexual assault cases, the pertinent elements which would establish

credibility include personal characteristics such as whether the victim is

genuine and trustworthy. This would be considered by assessing the victim’s

demeanour, one example would be the victim’s calm nature during trial,

where he would not be argumentative towards the defence. In such

situations, the victim’s memory and communication skills would be of

utmost importance, due to the victim being required to recall and relate what

happened. Further, credibility can also be ascertained by the assessment of

consistency in the statements given by the victim at different points in time

CA/HCC/0007/2020

5 | P a g e

of the trial, between the victim’s and witnesses’ statements and in the post

assault behaviour of the victim.

In the case of Deepak Kumar Sahu Versus State of Chhattisgarh 2025

INSC 929 it was held:

“This Court observed that if the evidence of the victim does not suffer

from any basic infirmities and the factor of probability does not render

it unworthy evidence, the conviction could base solely on the evidence

of the prosecutrix. It was further observed that as a general rule there

is no reason to insist on the corroboration accept in certain cases, it was

stated. The medical evidence may not be available in which

circumstance, solitary testimony of the prosecutrix could be sufficient to

base the conviction.”

In the case of Keshav v. State of Maharashtra (2025 INSC 604) it was held

that:

“The Court should be equally careful in protecting the accused from a

false implication. While applying the broad principle that an injured

witness, whose presence cannot be doubted, as she would ordinarily

not lie, still there is no presumption or any basis for assuming that the

statement of such a witness is always correct or without any

embellishments.”

In the case of Ajith v. Attorney-General, (2009) 1 SLR 23 it was held:

“If the prosecutrix in a rape case is not a reliable or believable witness,

the evidence seeking to corroborate her story cannot strengthen her

evidence. Court should seek corroborative evidence only if the

prosecutrix is a reliable witness.”

CA/HCC/0007/2020

6 | P a g e

In the case of State of Himachal Pradesh v. Manga Singh (2019) 16 SCC

759 it was held:

“The conviction can be sustained on the sole testimony of the

prosecutrix, if it inspires confidence. The conviction can be based solely

on the solitary evidence of the prosecutrix and no corroboration be

required unless there are compelling reasons which necessitate the

courts to insist for corroboration of her statement. Corroboration of the

testimony of the prosecutrix is not a requirement of law; but a guidance

of prudence under the given facts and circumstances. Minor contractions

or small discrepancies should not be a ground for throwing the evidence

of the prosecutrix. (12) It is well settled by a catena of decisions of the

Supreme Court that corroboration is not a sine qua non for conviction in

a rape case. If the evidence of the victim does not suffer from any basic

infirmity and the ‘probabilities factor’ does not render it unworthy of

credence. As a general rule, there is no reason to insist on corroboration

except from medical evidence. However, having regard to the

circumstances of the case, medical evidence may not be available. In

such cases, solitary testimony of the prosecutrix would be sufficient to

base the conviction, if it inspires the confidence of the court.”

In this case the victim had said what she had seen and felt when her father

was on her body. In respect of this point, I am of the belief that the victim

had not lied or fabricated a story against her father, rather she had merely

proceeded to recall and state the facts according to her comprehension at

that time, as a child below the age of 16.

In this case, the prosecutrix was consistent in her evidence about the

happenings of the incident. She had vividly explained how she was raped by

the Appellant on that fateful day. She had given evidence before the High

Court over three years after the incident.

CA/HCC/0007/2020

7 | P a g e

Further, the evidence of the JMO, which clearly notes that evidence of vaginal

and anal penetration was present, along with the partially healed tear as

considered above, further strengthens the prosecution’s case.

The Learned High Court Judge has sufficiently given due consideration to

the infirmities in the evidence of PW1 and therefore, I conclude that the

Learned High Court Judge had not erred in law in evaluating her evidence

under the accepted principles.

The Learned High Court Judge had considered the defence evidence at length

in his judgment. Therefore, it is incorrect to say that the Learned High Court

Judge had not correctly considered the defence evidence in the judgment.

The Learned High Court Judge in the judgment had considered all the

evidence adduced by the prosecution and the defence and had given reasons

as to why he acted on the evidence adduced by the prosecution. He has

accurately analysed all the evidence presented by both parties with a correct

perspective and had arrived at the correct finding.

In this case the Appellant is the biological father of the victim. He is a father

of three children including the victim. The defence had made mitigating

submissions highlighting the family situation of the Appellant.

Under Section 364(3) of the Penal Code, the minimum sentence is 15 years

and the maximum sentence is 20 years. The minimum sentence is

mandatory. As such, the sentence should start from 15 years and goes up to

20 years.

In this case the Learned High Court Judge had imposed a sentence of 16

years on the first count. Considering all the circumstances of the case, I

deduct one year from the 16 years sentence imposed bringing the prison

sentence to 15 years rigorous imprisonment.

The fine and default sentence imposed will remain same.

CA/HCC/0007/2020

8 | P a g e

I further order the sentence imposed to be operative from the date of

conviction namely 21/01/2020.

The appeal is, therefore, dismissed subject to the above variation of the

sentence.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgment to the High

Court of Puttalam along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL