IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A. Case No. 262/2000 (F)

D.C. Colombo Case No. 17168/L

Gnanasambandan Shanmuganathan

No. 172, Ginthupitiya Street,

Colombo 13.

PLAINTIFF

Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation

No. 21, Vauxhall Street,

Colombo 2.

DEFENDANT

AND NOW BETWEEN

Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation

No. 21, Vauxhall Street,

Colombo 2.

DEFENDANT ~ APPELLANT

~Vs~

Gnanasambandan Shanmuganathan

No. 172, Ginthupitiya Street,

Colombo 13.

PLAINTIFF ~ RESPONDENT

1

~

I

3

{i"\

1

BEFORE

COUNSEL

Argued on

Written Submissions on:

Decided on

A.H.M.D. NA WAZ, J.

A.H.M.D. Nawaz,J.

Rohan Gunapala and Dulani Perera for the

Defendant~ Appellant.

Ali Sabry, P.e. with Nuwan Bopage and P.e. De

Silva for the Plaintiff~Respondent.

02.11.2015

02.02.2016 (For the Defendant~Appellant)

01.02.2016 (For the Plaintiff~Respondent)

11.01.2017

~s case raises the fundamental elements of offer and acceptance that constitute

two of the most essential elements of a contract~a legally enforceable agreement.

It also engages the question of how vitiating elements such as duress can avoid a Deed

of Transfer (a contract of sale) signed by the vendor. The relevance of Section 92 of

the Evidence Ordinance to invalidate a deed for duress also surfaces to the fore in the

case.

This appeal is preferred by the Insurance Corporation of Sri Lanka, which is the

Defendant~ Appellant in this case, (hereinafter sometimes referred to as "the

Defendant") against the judgment dated 05.05.2000 of the learned District Judge of

Colombo in favour of the Plaintiff~Respondent, (hereinafter referred to as "the

Plaintiff").

The Factual Template

The facts of the case merit narration at the outset. The Plaintiff was the owner of the

land and premises morefully described in the first and second schedules to the plaint,

which were rented out to the Appellant some time ago. By a letter dated 14.09.1980

2

(P2), the Plaintiff requested the Defendant Insurance Corporation to vacate and give

vacant possession of the said land and premises as he wanted to marry and put up a

house on the said land. The Defendant by a letter dated 29.09.1980 (P3) informed the

Plaintiff that they could not vacate the premises until they found an alternative

accommodation for themselves. Further the correspondence on the matter shows that

the Defendant Corporation was interested in buying Lot 2, which is 24.25 perches in

extent.

Offer to Buy Lot 2

This is evident by the defendant's letter dated 15.10.1990, (P4), the 2nd paragraph of

which states:

''In this connection, we wish to inform you that the Management of this

Corporation has agreed to purchase Lot 2 consisting of 24.25. p. as per P.

Plan bearing No. 1607 dated 20.07.90 drawn by A. Welagedera .. licensed

Surveyor. "

I must state that this letter verily evinces an intention to purchase Lot 2 which was in

an extent of 24.25 perches. There is no doubt about the extent of land which the

Defendant Corporation had decided to purchase from the Plaintiff.

Price for Lot 2

One finds two valuations in respect of Lot 2 namely P7 filed by the Plaintiff from a

private company quoting the value at Rs. 4,282,500 and the other is from the

Government Chief Valuer, (but no report of the Govt. valuer is produced), which is

said to have valued Lot 2 at Rs. 2 million. The Defendant Corporation, by their letter

dated 09.08.1991 (P13) had indicated their position on the value to the Plaintiff in the

following tenor:

" We have pleasure to inform you that the Insurance Corporation of Sri

Lanka has decided to offer you Rs. 2 Million for the above premises."

The above premises is described in the head/note as follows:

3

"Sale of premises No. 77 (Lot 2), Ratnapura Road, AvissaweUa, in Survey

Plan No. 1607 dated 20/07/90 by A. Welagedera LS. property occupied by

the Insurance Corporation of Sri Lanka".

Again the Defendant Corporation has confirmed its position by a letter dated

18.11.1991 (P6) as follows:

" We have pleasure to inform you that the Insurance Corporation of Sri

Lanka has decided to offer you the Govt. Chief Valuer's valuation of Rs. 2

Million in respect of the above premises."

The description of the premises as given in the head-note of this letter is the same as

in the earlier letter (P13).

From these letters the Defendant Corporation has very clearly indicated their

intention that they were prepared to purchase only Lot 2 for Rs.2 million. Thus there

was no doubt about the subject matter of the agreement that the Defendant was

making an offer-lot 2 at Rs. 2 million. Did the Offeree-the Plaintiff accept this offer?

Acceptance of the Offer for Lot 2-P8

The Plaintiff, by his letter dated 26.11.1991 (P8) has responded to the Defendant as

follows:

"Further reference to your letter dated 1tr November, 1991 and my letter

to you dated 2fd November, 1991, I write to confirm that your offer of

Rupees two million is accepted by me on the sale of the above premises. "

(emphasis is added)

The heading of this letter too must be noted, which states:

"Premises No. 77 (Lot 02) Ratnapura Road, Avissawella."

This reply clearly indicates that the offer of Rs. 2 million for Lot 2 depicted in Plan

No. 1607 has been accepted by the Plaintiff. It is thus clear that the parties were

negotiating for the sale of Lot 2 as depicted in Plan No. 1607 which contains an extent

of 24.25 perches. Did this offer to buy and acceptance thereof mature into a contract?

4

Did it finally crystallize into a binding contract of sale of Lot 2 for a consideration of

Rs. 2 million? It is trite law that offer and acceptance alone will not result in a

binding contract of sale. Offer and acceptance will only give rise to an agreement.

A combination of offer and acceptance will not produce a legally enforceable

agreement. In order to convert an offer and acceptance into a legally enforceable

agreement which finally becomes a contract, there are further elements that must

be added to offer and acceptance.

The Other Requisites Necessary to Create a Contract

Contract Law requires that in addition to offer and acceptance, there are other

requisites necessary for the constitution of a valid contract such as consideration or

causa, intention to create legal relations, form and capacity but again these essentials

alone are not sufficient. Even if all these factors are present in an intended transaction

between two parties, there will not be a binding contract if the agreement is tainted

by vitiating factors such as duress, undue influence, mistake, misrepresentation and

illegality. The agreement which consists of offer and acceptance, provided form,

intent to create legal relationship and consideration or causa are present, should be

free from these vitiating factors. These factors, if they inhere in an agreement between

two parties, would render a seemingly valid contract void or voidable having regard

to the particular vitiating factor that taints the agreement.

If I may sum up the relevant law in a nutshell, not all agreements are contracts. An

agreement becomes a legally enforceable agreement (a contract) only if there are no

vitiating factors therein. Is there a vitiating factor alleged and established against the

Defendant Corporation? As far as the agreement to buy and sell Lot 2 for Rs. 2 million

is concerned, I must say that since it involves an agreement to convey interest in land,

there is a requirement as to form namely the agreement to sell must be notarially

attested. 1 It has to be noted that since this agreement was not notarially attested, it

was a nudum pactum-a naked promise or an unenforceable agreement. Not that it failed

1 Section 2 of the Prevention of Frauds Ordinance. 5

for want of consideration or otherwise but because there was a formal invalidity as

Section 2 of the Prevention of Frauds Ordinance was not complied with. The

requirement as to form was missing.

The Cause of Action Pleaded by the Plaintiff

The pleaded case of the Plaintiff in the case is that his agreement with the Defendant Corporation was

only in relation to Lot 2. But subsequently and without the consent of the Plaintiff, Lot 1 too had been

included in the Deed ofT ransfer No.715 which the Plaintiff alleges he was compelled to sign.

The final contract of sale (deed of transfer), which the Plaintiff was asked to

subscribe to, embodied the sale of not only Lot 2 but also Lot 1 for the same

consideration of Rs. 2 million and the Plaintiff impugns the whole transaction on the

ground of duress-one of the vitiating factors I have referred to above. The Plaintiff

has sought a declaration that the deed of sale that he signed was null and void.

This deed of sale has incorporated Lot I too. In fact Issue No.9 put forward the

issue of duress.

Before I discuss the deed bearing No. 715 and dated 29.04.l992 (PIS) which the

Plaintiff was finally asked to sign and whose invalidation he seeks in this case, I have

already stated that the Defendant offered a sum of Rs. 2 million only for Lot 2. No

doubt despite the acceptance of that offer by the Plaintiff, that agreement was only an

informal agreement. As I said before, it eventuated in a nudum pactum because it was

not embodied in a notarially attested instrument.

There was though a subsequent preparation of a draft deed of transfer (P9) which

referred to Lot 2. This would have become a binding contract of sale of Lot 2 if parties

had proceeded to have a deed of transfer duly executed. This did not come to pass.

The draft deed did not ripen into a binding sale as there was no final deed that was

prepared and executed. In other words this informal agreement for the sale of Lot 2

fell through because a final deed of sale in terms of Section 2 of the Prevention of

Frauds Ordinance was never executed. The informal agreement between the parties

for the sale of Lot 2 for Rs. 2 million did not become a binding contract of sale

6

between the parties because the requirements as to form of a contract of sale of

immovable properties as stipulated in Section 2 of the Prevention of Frauds

Ordinance was not complied with. Neither an agreement to sell Lot 2 nor an eventual

sale of lot 2 was ever notarially executed. What was finally executed was a deed

conveying Lot 1 and Lot 2. This is the deed bearing No. 71S and dated 29.04.1992 (PIS)

that was sought to be invalidated for duress.

It is trite that the formal requirements of a conveyance of a land are set out in Section

2 of the Prevention of Frauds Ordinance thus:

Deeds affecting immovable property to be executed before a notary and witnesses.

"No sale, purchase, transfer, assignment or mortgage of land or other immovable

property and no promise, bargain, contract or agreement for effecting any such

object or for establishing any security, interest or incumbrance affecting land or other

immovable property (other than a lease at Will or for any period not exceeding one month),

nor any contract or agreement for the future sale or purchase of any land or other immovable

property and no notice, given under the provisions of the Thesawalamai Pre~emption

Ordinance, of an intention or proposal to sell any undivided share or interest in land held in

joint or common ownership, shall be of force or avail in law unless the same shall be in writing

and signed by the party making the same or by some person lawfully authorised by him or her

in the presence of a licensed notary public and two or more witnesses present at the same time

and unless the execution of such writing, deed or instrument be duly attested by such notary

and witnesses." (Emphasis added)

I have already stated that a contract which is defined as a legally enforceable

agreement2 must have, as preconditions to its formation, offer, acceptance, causa or

consideration, intention to create legal relations, form and absence of any vitiating

factors. Applying this principle to the negotiated sale of Lot 2 for Rs. 2 million, I have

2 See how Treitel on The Low oj Contract (edited by Edwin Peel, 13th edn, 2011) defines a contract as an agreement giving rise to obligations which are enforced or recognized by law.

7

stated that though the correspondence between the parties shows an offer,

acceptance, consideration and intention to create legal relations, the requirements as

to form in Section 2 of the Prevention of Frauds Ordinance were not complied with

and therefore the parties did not bind themselves to a legally enforceable obligation

for the sale of Lot 2.

In terms of Section 2 of the Prevention of Frauds Ordinance, even an agreement for

the sale of Lot 2 would not eventuate unless it was reduced to writing and signed by

the vendor in the presence of a licensed notary public and two or more witnesses

present at the same time and unless the execution of such writing, deed or instrument

be duly attested by such notary and witnesses.

As I have stated, the schedule of the draft deed (P9) exchanged between the parties

describes only Lot 2. No other land is included, leave alone Lot 1. The draft deed,

though exchanged between the parties, did not ripen into a deed of sale as the

execution of a formal deed of sale did not go through. So no contract of sale came

about for the transfer of Lot 2.

There seems to be another reason as to why a final deed of sale of Lot 2 for a sum of

Rs. 2 million was not executed. There is evidence that the Defendant Corporation

evinced a subsequent intent to purchase Lot 1 as well, along with Lot 2 but for the

same consideration of Rs. 2 million. One finds evidence of this in the subsequent

correspondence between the parties.

Subsequent Offer to Buy Lots 1 and 2 for Rs. 2 million.

The Defendant Corporation went back on the informally agreed transaction of Lot 2

for Rs. 2 million and came out with a fresh offer, according to which, "certain portion

of Lot 2 would go for street line and therefore they may not have sufficient land to put

up their office building and therefore they wanted Lot 1 also"~vide PIO dated

12.03.1992. I would straightaway observe that if at all, this was a new offer put

forward by the Defendant Corporation. The Plaintiff rejected this offer to buy Lot 1, as

could be seen in the document marked Pll~vide page 123 of the appeal brief~see also

8

the evidence relating to the rejection of the offer at page 3 of the proceedings dated

01.07.1999.

However there seems to be a counter offer made by the Plaintiff to sell Lot 1 provided

a higher price was paid-see document marked PH dated 26.03.1992. This counter offer

for a higher price was not accepted at all by the corporation.

In this case the Defendant Corporation represented to the Plaintiff that they would be

buying only Lot 2 for Rs. 2 million and that belief induced the Plaintiff to accept the

offer to buy only Lot 2. The Plaintiff acted on the supposition that he would be

parting with only Lot 2 for a sum of Rs. 2 million even though the valuation which he

got for his property was somewhere around Rs. 4.1 million. As I have shown, this

agreement had long become unenforceable for want of form. Neither was the draft

deed carried through.

Thereafter the story of an offer for Lot 1 began but with the same price of Rs. 2 million

being offered for both Lot 1 and Lot 2.

There is no evidence before the Court that a portion of Lot 2 would be lost for street

line and if that be so, how much of Lot 2 would be lost. In the absence of any such

evidence, the stand taken by the Defendant Corporation to justify making the offer for

Lot 1 cannot be accepted.

It is the position of the Plaintiff that he reserved Lot 1 for his personal purposes, that

is, to construct a house therein for himself as he was to get married. But if the

Defendant Corporation was really in need of that land (Lot 1), then it goes without

saying that it had to be sold at a market value and not as an annex to Lot 2 free of

further consideration.

Having pleaded and prayed for the invalidity of the entire deed of sale wherein he

signed away Lot 1 and Lot 2 allegedly under duress, the Plaintiff pleaded a second

cause of action in his plaint dated 19.06.1995. The gravamen of the Plaintiff is that

Lot 1 should be valued at Rs. 1.56 million. His stance was that the sum of Rs. 2

million that was paid to him was only in respect of Lot 2. There was no consideration

9

j

j I

1

\ ! 1 ,

1

1 i I I ~ i j I

at all for Lot 1. In his 2nd cause of action he pleaded he should be paid Rs. 1.56 million

for Lot 1. Alternatively the entire deed bearing No. 715 and dated 29.04.1992 must be

declared null and void.

The argument was that the deed incorporating Lot 1 and Lot 2 was signed under

duress. Lot 1 was unlawfully included in the schedule to the Deed of Transfer No. 715.

The deed must be set aside not only for duress but also for want of consideration.

Alternatively the consideration for Lot 1 which the Plaintiff fixed at Rs. 1.56 million

should be paid. In other words this implied a waiver of the plea of invalidity of the

deed.

The question that arises is whether the vitiating element of duress was established in

order to support the remedy of setting aside the deed. The first proviso to Section 92

of the Evidence Ordinance sets out a list of factors that go to invalidate a document

that is required by law to be reduced to writing. It is not an exhaustive list but

duress though not specifically referred to in the first proviso to Section 92 of the

Evidence Ordinance would no doubt be included therein since words "such as

intimidation" are wide enough to mean and include duress. If duress is

established, it goes without saying that the first proviso to Section 92 of the

Evidence Ordinance would enable the invalidation of the Deed of Transfer

bearing No. 715.

Duress,the Vitiating Factor to Invalidate Deed No. 715

The Plaintiff alleged before the District Court that duress under which he signed the

Deed of Transfer containing the transfer of not only Lot 2 but also Lot 1 for Rs. 2

million was null and void and should therefore be set aside. This was his first cause of

action.

There is no evidence in this case that the Plaintiff has voluntarily agreed to sell Lot 1

in combination with Lot 2 for Rs.2 million, which is the amount agreed upon only for

Lot 2. All the letters exchanged between the Plaintiff and the Defendant Corporation

show that the sale price of Rs. 2 million was only for Lot 2. Therefore, the inclusion of

10

Lot 1 in the Deed of Transfer No. 715 is quite contrary to the agreement reached and

against the wish of the Plaintiff.

The Plaintiff, having agreed to sell only Lot 2 for Rs. 2 million cannot be expected to

part with another land, i.e., Lot 1, which is 6.5 perches in extent, free of any

consideration. No doubt given the inequality of the bargaining power between the

Plaintiff and Defendant, the Plaintiff was willing to part with Lot 2 for a lesser

amount than the value assessed by the private valuer. In light of the fact that the offer

of the Defendant for Lot 2 was only a sum of Rs. 2 million vis~a~vis the estimate of Rs.

4 million that the private valuer had apprised the property at, the Plaintiff was likely

to be deprived of a good amount of money if the sale for Lot 2 went through at a price

of Rs. 2 million and accordingly it would be unconscionable on the part of the

Defendant to coerce the Plaintiff to sell Lot 1 and Lot 2 for the same consideration of

Rs. 2 million by exercising undue influence and duress.

It must be reiterated that Lot 1 was not a matter in contemplation when the sale of

Lot 2 was negotiated. It was clearly agreed between the parties that the land to be

sold was only Lot 2 and the price for that Lot was Rs. 2 million. It was on this basis

that the draft deed of transfer had been prepared.

The testimony of the plaintiff's brother throws light on what happened subsequently

when he along with his father and uncle went to sign the deed of transfer at the

corporation. In fact it was Lot 2 for a consideration of Rs. 2 million that was in

contemplation of their minds. But the witness stated that Lot 1 had also been

included in the deed of sale whereupon they protested. They had gone again to the

corporation on 29.04.l992~the day on which the duress allegedly took place. The

evidence is to the effect that the then Chairman of the Corporation stated to them~

'"unless you sold Lot 1 too, the land would be acquired." So the witness caved in and

signed the deed bearing No. 715. The witness~the brother of the Plaintiff was quite

emphatic that the then Chairman told them in no uncertain terms on 29.04.l992 that

if Lots 1 and 2 were not sold for Rs. 2 million, the lands would be recommended for

11

l 1 1

j

J i I I i ! I I

acquisition. It has to be remembered that this evidence given by the witness was

never contradicted or impeached by the Defendant in any way.

When the Plaintiff leads evidence of a relevant fact and the Defendant does not

adduce evidence to contradict or impeach it, this is an additional "matter before the

court" towards proof of the relevant fact. Sir James Fitzjames Stephen the author of

our Evidence Ordinance quite advisedly uses the word "matters" in Section 3 of the

Evidence Ordinance thus:

"A met is said to be proved when, after considering the matters before it,

the Court either believes it to exist or considers its existence so probabJe

that a prudent man ought, under the circumstances of the particular case,

to act upon the supposition that it exists. "(Emphasis added).

So the uncontradicted allegation of duress as narrated by the witness is a "matter"

before the Court, which the definition of "proved" in Section 3 of the Evidence

Ordinance requires the court to take into account. There is another additional matter

that this Court has to allude to.

Letter Marked as VI

According to the witness who was the brother of the Plaintiff, it is not only the deed

of transfer that he signed under duress but also a letter dated 29th April 1992 to which

he appended his signature under improper pressure. On the same day as he signed the

deed of transfer which conveyed to the corporation Lots I and 2 for Rs. 2 million

namely on 29.04.1992, he was also asked to sign VI,the only document produced by

the Defendant at the trial. This document, according to the witness, was typed by the

managing director of the corporation and the plaintiff's brother was told to sign this

letter. The letter VI dated 29.04.1992 goes as follows:,

Deputy General Manager (Admn.), Insurance Corporation of Sri Lanka,

12

c. Shanmuganathan,

172, Gintupitiya Street, Colombo 13. 29th April, 1992.

21, Vauxhall Street, Colombo 2.

Dear Sir,

SALE OF PREMISES NO 77, RATNAPURA ROAD, A VISSAWELLA, LOTS 1 & 2 IN PLAN N01607 DA TED 27.07.1990 MADE BY A. WELAGEDERA, L.5.

I am in receipt of your undated letter. I am most surprised to note that you have subsequently observed that the lot No.2 was affected by a street line. The actual position is that the said lot No.2 was originally valued by the Government Chief Valuer at Rs.2 (Two) million taking the street line into careful consideration. Therefore your personal offer of Rs.2 million for lot 1 & 2 is really a disappointment. I believe you need more land to put up your new bUilding.

However, as requested I hereby confirm that Lots 1 & 2 as an entity will be transferred to the Insurance Corporation for a sum ofRs.2 Million. Please expedite the transaction.

Thankingyou, Yours faithfully,

~sgd~"

The pith and substance of the evidence of the witness is that he signed both the deed

of transfer and the letter under duress. The learned District Judge has believed the

witness on his testimony and having regard to the law governing duress, I would state

that the elements of duress are made out on the facts before Court. Let me set out the

cardinal elements of what has to be established, that would amount to duress.

Duress

Duress turns out to be a common law doctrine (equity's doctrine of coercion has now

been superseded by common law). The essence of 'duress' is improper pressure, and

this must be sufficiently powerful and influential so as to render consent legally

unsustainable. Such coercion can involve direct force (violence against a person, or

harm to his property or his commercial interests); or coercion can involve the threat

of personal violence, or of material or economic harm, or of harm to a person's

personal or family reputation. As Lord Devlin said:

13

"AU that matters to the plaintiff is that, metaphorically speaking, a club has

been used It does not matter to the plaintiff what the club was made of -

whether it is a physical club or an economic club or otherwise an illegal

club.,,3

Neil Andrews in his illuminative Contract Law 4 classifies duress under three

categories: duress as to person; duress as to goods; and economic duress. Because threats

can concern matters of personal or family reputation, Neil Andrews comments that this

tripartite classification though is not exhaustive.

''Duress does not extinguish contractual consent but merely vitiates it.

Thus, a coerced party is psychologically aware of the transaction: he is

neither mistaken about what he is doing, nor is he an automaton. In Mct, he

is all too 'painfully' or vividly aware of what, contrary to his wishes, he is

being coerced to do. The coerced person s consent is 'vitiated' because he

was not psychologically 'free' when deciding to enter the relevant

agreement. The Latin tag for this constrained act of contracting is

coactusvolui, 'I volunteered to act, having been compelled to do so. ,5

Five conditions need to be satisfied in order for there to be a finding of duress:

1. Pressure was exerted on the contracting party

2. This pressure was illegitimate

3. This pressure induced the claimant to enter the contract-causal impact of the pressure.

4. The claimant had no real choice but to enter the contract.

5. The claimant protested at the time or shortly after the contract was made.

Pressure was exerted on the contracting party

The witness in the case has clearly referred to the circumstances in which pressure

3See Rookes v Barnard (1964) AC 1129, 1209, HL, per Lord Devlin (spoken in the context of tort of intimidation: and approving Hamson's analysis, (1961) CU 191, 192-see Contract Law by Neil Andrews. 4(2011) at page 310 (Cambridge) sSee Neil Andrews, Contract Law-ibid at page 310.

14

i I I 1 ! 1

1 I I

was exerted on him to induce him to sign both the deed and the letter VI. Pressure

must have been exerted on the innocent contracting party, which amounted to a

compulsion of the will. As the law has developed, traditionally, the common law

confined the doctrine of duress to render consent obtained by means of physical

violence or threats of it, or unlawful constraint inoperative. Over the past 25 years,

the courts have extended the scope of the doctrine to include what has now come to

be known as economic duress.

Economic Duress

Economic duress occurs where one party was forced into a contract because of

economic pressure.

The principle that economic pressure could amount to duress was confirmed in Pao

On v. !.au Yiu Long,6 where the Privy Council declared

'It must he shown that the payment made or the contract entered into was

not a voluntary act.'

The pressure was illegitimate

Illegitimate pressure must have been exerted on the other contracting party. A threat

to do an unlawful act (which includes breaking a contract) will always be

illegitimate, but a threat to do a lawful act will only be illegitimate if the threat is unreasonable,

which will depend on the circumstances. The court did not accept, however, that the

fact that what was threatened was perfectly lawful, and would not have involved the

supplier in any breach of contract, was in itself fatal to a claim. It thought that it was

possible, in appropriate circumstances, for a threat to commit an entirely lawful act to amount to

duress. In coming to this conclusion, it noted with approval the opinion of Professor

Peter Birks that it ought not to be the case that 'those who devise outrageous but technically

lawful means of compulSion must always escape restitution'? So when the then Chairman Peter

6 (1980) AC 614, (1979) 3 W.L.R. 435; (1979) 3 All E.R. 65 (Privy Council)

7 Professor Peter Birks, An Introduction to the Law of Restitution (1989) p.l77. 15

Perera told the witness that if he did not agree to the sale of not only Lot 2 but also

Lot 1 for Rs. 2 million, the property would be acquired, no doubt he was prophesying

the prospect of what otherwise could be a lawful act of acquisition. As Mr. Rohan

Gunapala, Counsel for the Defendant Corporation submitted rightly, there is

provision in the Sri Lanka Insurance Act to acquire lands but Mr. Ali Sabry,

President's Counsel argued that the acquisition must be effected at a market price

and an unwilling buyer cannot be slapped with an order of acquisition when he

refuses to sell his property in the first instance.

I hold that a threat to do a lawful act (an acquisition permitted by legislation) may, in

appropriate circumstances, amount to economic duress if the threat is illegitimate in

that it coerces an unwilling seller into acquiescing in a sale which he would otherwise

not engage in. This was the duress of circumstances that surrounded the witness on

29.04.l992.

This appears to have been the approach taken in Atlas Express Ltd v. Kafco

(Importers and Distributors) Ltd. 8

Pressure Induced the Claimant to Enter the Contract

Duress must be one of the reasons for entering or modifying a contract, but it does not

have to be the only or even the main reason. In the Australian case of Barton v.

Armstrong 9 Armstrong, a former chairman of a company, threatened to kill Barton,

its managing director, if Barton did not agree to buy Armstrong's shares on terms

which were decidedly favourable to Armstrong. Barton bought the shares, but there

was some evidence that he in fact did so because it looked like a good business deal at

the time. Nevertheless, the Privy Council decided that the contract was voidable for

duress. Armstrong's threats had contributed to Barton's decision to sign the deed,

even if they were not the only reason. This could be described as a 'but for' test of

causation: but for the illegitimate pressure the claimant would not have entered the

contract and made a payment.

8 (1989) Q.B. 833; (1989) 3 W.L.R. 389.

9 (1976) AC 104 (Privy Council)

16

i I I ! f I I

\ I I I , ! ! I i I I I I I I I I ! I I I

Claimant had no real choice but to enter the contract

Universe Tankships v. International Transport Workers' Federation {The

Universe SentineljO concerned an industrial dispute. The ITWF insisted on a

payment being made to its welfare fund before it would call off a strike, which was

affecting a ship belonging to the claimant. The payment was made and, once the

strike was lifted, the ship~owners sought to reclaim it, as having been paid under

duress. In deciding that the payments had indeed been made under duress, Lord

Diplock further defined the test. He suggested that compulsion of will alone could

not form the basis of duress, since in all cases there is a choice, even though it may be

between two unpleasant options. In other words, the ship~owners had the choice of

paying the money or losing revenue while the ship was stuck in port; they were not

actually compelled to pay the money. He suggested that the issue should be whether

they had any practical alternative to complying with the threat, and whether the

pressure applied would be regarded by the law as illegitimate.

It now appears that economic duress will be present where there is compulsion of the

will to the extent that the party under threat has no practical alternative but to

comply. Accordingly, two elements of duress were identified in the case;

1. Compulsion of the will - absence of choice.

2. Illegitimacy of the pressure.

Thus I would hold that all elements of duress which were emphasized in the case

of Pao On v. Lau Yiu Longl have been established in the case.

I have said before that whether a contract is void or voidable depends on the

particular vitiating element.

Nature of Contractual Invalidity

Lord Scarman declared in Pao On v. Lau Yiu Long'2 that duress renders the contract

10 (1983) lAC 366

11 Supra

12 Supra 17

\ I I I , J 1 i l i J I

'I I i I I I 1 I ! I I ! I i I i I I

voidable, at least in the context of 'economic duress' (and, almost certainly, duress as

to goods ).13 The three consequences of treating the transaction as voidable, as distinct

from void ab initio, are: (1) a sub~purchaser, if he receives in good faith and without

notice, will acquire good title; (2) the coerced party also has the choice whether to affirm or set

aside the rdevant coerced transaction.

Whilst praying for the setting aside of the deed bearing No. 715 and dated 29.04.l992,

the Plaintiff has also prayed for the alternative remedy~namely he be paid Rs. 1,

560,000 as consideration for Lot 2. In other words he has prayed for an affirmation of

the transaction provided the Defendant makes a payment of Rs. 1, 560,000. Though

the parties indicated a possibility of a settlement prior to hearing, no such settlement

was forthcoming and the argument of the Plaintiff thereafter proceeded on the basis

that the coerced transaction should be annulled. Since the option of choosing either

the setting aside or affirmation is with the Plaintiff, this court regards the option of

affirmation as having been jettisoned having regard to the arguments that were placed

before this Court. Hence the Court indulged in an analysis of the constituent

elements of duress vis~a~vis the evidence adduced in the case.

It is clear, from the evidence led in this case, that the Plaintiff never agreed to sell both

Lot 1 and Lot 2 for a sum of Rs. 2 million. The Defendant has failed to prove that the

Plaintiff agreed to sell both these lots for Rs. 2 million without any protest. In the

absence of such evidence it is clear that the Defendant's Chairman Peter Perera

exercised duress on the witness and obtained his signature on the said deed No. 715.

This position has been accepted by the learned Trial Judge and I see no reason to

disturb that finding having regard to the law. That would in the end result in a

declaration of nullity of the Deed No. 715 dated 29.04.l992, subject to the right of the

Defendant to recover back the consideration it paid on the transaction.

13Pao On v. Lou Yiu Long (1980) AC 614, PC (cf Lord Cross' earlier reference in Barton v. Armstrong [1976] AC 104, 120, PC, to a threat as to person rendering the contract 'void so far as concerns him' is ambiguous on this point). 18

,I!

\

!I

i

I

[i

i

f

In the circumstances a decree of nullity of the deed bearing No. 715 has to be entered

and accordingly I proceed to dismiss the appeal of the Defendant-Appellant in view of

my finding as above.

For the reasons stated above, the Appeal of the Defendant is dismissed with costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

19

~

~

~j

\I

!,

IIi

~

i