IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Court of Appeal No: CIA 227/~19 (F)

D.C Hatton Case No: P /38

1. Amis Premaratne

1a. A.G. iJayawathie Premaratne

b. A.G. Dharmasena

c. A. G. Nanda Piyaseeli

d. A G. Padmasiri

e. A. G. Gamini Ranjith Promaratne

f. /\. (3. Nandavathee Premamtne

All of Hilgarapitiya Hatton. ,

2. VVilbert Rajakaruna

3. l~cllljith Premarathne

Both of Yatiberiya, Pitawala

-Vs-

1. Att818 Gamaralalage Pedhiris Singho

2. KM. Leelawathie

Both of Yatiberiya, Pitawala

:::,

Defendants

3.Kangun Mohottilage Somawathie,

Yatiberiya, Pitawala

Added- Defendant

And Between in an Appeal in the Court of Appea!

1. Attala Gamaralalage Pediris Singho

1 Cl. f\i:tala Gamaralal8ge Walter Yatiberiya

Yatiberiya, Pitawala

Substituted- Defendant- Appellant"

DC HATTON 39/P CA 227/99 FINAL

BEFORE A.H.M.D. Na\vaz,].

COUNSEL: M.LM. Naleem for the pt &:: 2nd defendant appell~nt~.

D.P. Munasinghe for the 3rd plaintiff respondent.

ARGUED &::

DECIDED ON: 02.05.2017

A.H.M.D. NA WAZ, I.

By an appeal dated 20.01.1999 the pt and 2nd defendants in this case

appealed against the judgment dated 20.12.1998 of lhe learned District Judge

of Hatton. By way of their appeal both the pt and the 2nd defendants seek to

impugn the aforesaid judgment on the basis that the learned District Judge

has misdirected himself on the question of prescription which the 1st &:: the

2nd defendants had pleaded in their plaint. The 2nd defendant who

intervened in the case claiming a share in the corpus was later on added by

the plaintiffs in the amended plaint. When the ca"e was taken up for trial

on 22.01.1998, the parties admitted that the corpus that was sought to be

partitioned was correctly depicted in the plan bearing No. 6124 dated

24.03.1992. As issue'~o. 02 recited, the entire cast" of the plaintiffs was run

on the basis of co-ow lership among the plaintiffs, P\ 2nd and yd defendants,

1

whereas the case of the pt & 2nd defendants was on the basis of prescription

which was claimed for more than 60 years.

The 3rd defendant did not raise any point of contest. The pt plaintiff in the

_case Attala Gamaralalage Emis Premarathne giving evidence testified as to the

devolution of the properrybased on deeds. The original ownership had

flowed from a crown grant and according to the pedigree filed in the case,

Premarathne - the pt plaintiff reiterated that the land was c%wned between

the three plaintiffs and pt, 2nd & 3rd defendants.' In fact the pt plaintiff

closed the case of the plaintiffs reading in evidence deeds marked as P I - P

15 to which there was no objections at all on the part of the defendants.

These deeds P I - P 15 show that the plaintiffs and the defendants all co-

owned this land in their respective shares. This oral testimony supported

by the documentary evidence such as P I - P 15 appears to be confirmed by

the surveyor's report which was marked by the pt plaintiff as X 1.

According to X I - the Surveyor report, it is clearly specified by the surveyor

that the plaintiffs and the defendants are in possession of the land.

Nowhere does the report indicate that only the defendants are in possession

of the entire corpus. The pt plaintiff also testified that until the father of the

pt defendant died in 1989, the father of the pt defendant had been giving

shares of income to the plaintiffs. This evidence has not been contradicted

by the defendants in the case. The question arises as to why the pt

defendant's father should pay a share to the plaintiffs if he was adversely

2

possessing this corpus against the interests of the plaintiffs. This

acknowledgement on the part of the father of the 1st defendant shows that

there was no ouster of the plaintiffs from the land. In the course of his

-testimony the pt defendant Pedirik Singhvadmits--1:hat his father had

-transferred a land in extent of one acre to him. However, this deed was not

produced by the pt defendant. If his father had possessed the entire land

and become the owner of this land by prescription, it is all the more reason

why this plaintiff should have produced this deed to establish that he has

secured a co-ownership to this property. This Court observes that all the

deeds that were produced by the plaintiffs clearly show that the pt

defendant is a co-owner. Even though his oral testimony is silent on the fact

of co-ownership he has not contradicted the deeds that confer co-

ownership on the pt defendant. It also appears that the 2nd defendant who

is the wife of the pt defendant has also obtained co-ownership rights

through a deed bearing No. 2461 and dated 30.01.1984-Vide the deed marked

as P 9. This also proves co-ownership rights on the part of the 2nd

defendant. The 2nd defendant herself in the course of her testimony admits

that she and her husband co-owned this land. When her right is only to a

portion of this corpus as indicated by P9, her answer has to be taken to

mean that her co-ownership along with her husband is in respect of the

corpus along with the plaintiffs.

3

Having gone through the evidence led in the trial and having regard to the

documents that have been produced before Court I take the view that

prescription has not been established by the pt &: 2nd defendants on the

stamiard ~~quired to prove prescription. The evic!ence ~oth documentary

and oral strengthens the fact that-there has been co~ownership among the

parties. It has to be remembered when there is proved co~ownership among

the parties there has to be an ouster of the other co--owners if the pt and 2nd

defendants were to succeed in their plea of prescription. At this stage this

Court bears in mind the jurisprudence of Corea .Vs. /seris Appuhamy 15

NLR page 65 where the Privy Council held that every co~owner must be

presumed to be in possession qua a co~owner and it is not possible for one

co~owner to secretly entertain an intention to put an end to co~o\\!TIership

and this case states quite clearly that nothing short of an ouster or

something equivalent to an ouster should be established to bring about a

termination of co~ownership.

In Tillekaratne VS. Bastian 21 N.LR 12 the full bench of the Supreme Court

(Bertram C], Shaw and De Sampayo ]]) formulated three propositions of

law applicable to what is meant by the word "adverse" in terms of Section 3

of the Prescription Ordinance (especially at page 18).

The proposition that is apposite to the instant case is as follows:

"A person who has entered into possession of land in one capacity is presumed to

continue to possess it in the same capacity"

4

, , [

The Supreme Court observed in the case that; "the effect of this principle is that,

where any person's possession was originally not adverse, an9 he claims that it has become

adverse, the onus is on him to prove it. And what must he prove? He must prove not only an

intention on his part to possess adversely, but a manifestation of that intention to the true

owner against whom he sets up his possession. .... " (at page 19)

In Sirajudeen and two others v. Abbas (1994) 2 SrLLR 365 at 370 -(SC)

G.P.S. de Silva, CJ held that where a party invokes the provisions of Section

3 of the Prescription Ordinance in order to defeat the ownership of an

adverse claimant to immovable property, the burden of proof rests squarely

and fairly on him to establish a starting point for him or her acquisition of

prescriptive rights. If the father of the plaintiff had passed away in 1989

there is no evidence before Court that adversity on the part of the pt &: the

2nd defendants had continued for 10 years prior to the bringing of this action

that took place in 1990. In the circumstances, this Court takes the view that

the pt &: 2nd defendants had not succeeded in establishing prescription at all

in the case. This Court has gone through the judgment dated 20.12.1998 of

the learned District Judge of Hatton and I see no reason to interfere with

the evaluation of evidence and findings he has reached on the facts that are

engulfed in this case. In the circumstances, this Court proceeds to affirm

the judgment dated 20.12.1998 and dismiss the appeal.

The Registrar is directed to despatch a copy of this Order along with the

record to the District Court of Hatton for further steps to be taken in the

District Court.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

5