==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Restitution, in the nature of Restitutio-In-Integrum under and in terms of Article 138 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Court of Appeal Malwila Sri Brahmana Ralalage Kumarihami, Case No: RII/0026/2022 Malabediyawa, Mahagirilla Petitioner VS 1. Semasingha Nawarathna Mudiyanselage Chanaka Maduranga, Malabediyawa, Mahagirilla 2. Semasingha Nawarathna Mudiyanselage Jeewan Maduranga Semasingha Malabediyawa, Mahagirilla 3. Semasingha Nawarathna Mudiyanselage Lasith Pramod Maduranga Semasingha Malabediyawa, Mahagirilla 4. People’s Bank 75 Sir Chittampalam A. Gardiner Mawatha, Colombo 2. 5. Hatton National Bank PLC 49, T.B. Jayah Mawatha, Colombo 10. 6. National Development Bank PLC., 40, Navam Mawatha, Colombo 2. 7. People’s Leasing and Finance PLC 161, Maradana Road, Colombo 8. Respondents

2

AND BETWEEN 1. Semasingha Nawarathna Mudiyanselage Chanaka Maduranga Malabediyawa, Mahagirilla 1st Respondent-Petitioner Vs. Malwila Sri Brahmana Ralalage Kumarihami Malabediyawa, Mahagirilla Petitioner-Respondent 2. Semasingha Nawarathna Mudiyanselage Jeewan Maduranga Semasingha Malabediyawa, Mahagrilla 3. Semasingha Nawarathna Mudiyanselage Lasith Pramod Maduranga Semasingha Malabediyawa, Mahagirilla 4. People’s Bank 75 Sir Chittampalam A. Gardiner Mawatha, Colombo 2 5. Hatton National Bank PLC 49, T.B. Jayah Mawatha, Colombo 10 6. National Development Bank PLC 40, Nawam Mawatha, Colombo 2 7. People’s Leasing and Finance PLC 161, Maradana Road, Colombo 08 Respondent-Respondents And Now Between 1. Semasingha Nawarathna Mudiyanselage Chanaka Maduranga Malabediyawa, Mahagirilla 1st Respondent-Petitioner-Petitioner

3

Vs Malwila Sri Brahmana Ralalage Kumarihami Malabediyawa, Mahagirilla Petitioner-Respondent-Respondent 2. Semasingha Nawarathna Mudianselage Jeewan Maduranga Semasingha Malabediyawa, Mahagirilla 3. Semasingha Nawarathna Mudiyanselage Lasith Pramod Maduranga Semasingha Malabediyawa, Mahagirilla 4. People’s Bank 75 Sir Chittampalam A. Gardiner Mawatha Colombo 2 5. Hatton National Bank PLC, 49, T.B. Jayah Mawatha, Colombo 10 6. National Development Bank PLC 40, Nawam Mawatha, Colombo 2 7. People’s Leasing and Finance PLC 161, Maradana Road, Colombo 8 Respondent-Respondent-Respondents Before : R. Gurusinghe, J. & Dr. S. Premachandra, J. Counsel : Pradeep Perera for the 1st Respondent-Petitioner-Petitioner Sapumal Bandara with Lakshitha Edirisinghe for the Petitioner-Respondent-Respondent and the 2nd and 3rd Respondent-Respondent-Respondent

4

Avendra Rodrigo P.C. for the 4th Respondent-Respondent-Respondent Supported on: 10-02-2026 Decided on : 19-03-2026

ORDER R. Gurusinghe, J.

The petitioner-respondent instituted an action before the District Court of Nikaweratiya, seeking the issuance of letters of administration in regard to the Intestate Estate of her late husband. The 1st and 2nd respondents to that action were children of the petitioner-respondent and her deceased husband.

Following a brief inquiry, the learned District Judge, by his Order dated 16-01-2019, granted limited letters of administration to the petitioner-respondent. Being dissatisfied with the said Order, the 1st respondent preferred an application for Revision before the Civil Appellate High Court of Kurunegala, bearing no. NWP/HCCA/KUR/10/2019. The Learned High Court Judges of the Civil Appellate High Court of Kurunegala dismissed that Revision Application by judgment dated 15-11-2022. Being aggrieved by the aforesaid judgment of the Civil Appellate High Court, the 1st respondent-petitioner filed the present application seeking restitution. When this application was taken up for hearing, the respondents raised two preliminary objections regarding the jurisdiction of this court and the maintainability of the present application.

1. The respondents have taken up that in light of the Supreme Court

judgment in the case bearing no. SC/Appeal/65/2025, the Court of Appeal does not have jurisdiction to entertain and determine on this matter because, as per paragraph 14 of the petition, all reliefs have been sought against the civil Appeal judgment dated 15-11-2022.

2. As per paragraph 17 of the petition, the petitioner has averred that he

has no other alternative remedy, which is erroneous, as the petitioner has not resorted to appeal against the judgment to the Supreme Court and has failed to aver any reason as to why he failed to do so.

5

Section 5 A of the High Court of Provisions (Special Provision) Act No. 19 of 1990 (as amended) by Act No. 54 of 2006 and Act No. 35 of 2022, conferred the jurisdiction of the High Court to hear appeals and revision applications from the District Court. That section is as follows:

5A. (1) A High Court established by Article 154P of the Constitution for

a Province, shall have and exercise appellate and revisionary jurisdiction in respect of judgments, decrees and orders delivered and made by any District Court or a Family Court within such Province and the appellate jurisdiction for the correction of all errors in fact or in law, which shall be committed by any such District Court or Family Court, as the case may be.

(2) The provisions of sections 23 to 27 of the Judicature Act, No. 2

of 1978 and sections 753 to 760 and sections 765 to 777 of the Civil Procedure Code (Chapter 101) and of any written law applicable to the exercise of the jurisdiction referred to in subsection (1) by the Court of Appeal, shall be read and construed as including a reference to a High Court established by Article 154P of the Constitution for a Province and any person aggrieved by any judgment, decree or order of a District Court or a Family Court, as the case may be, within a Province, may invoke the jurisdiction referred to in that subsection, in the High Court established for that Province.

Provided that no judgment or decree of a District Court or of a

Family Court, as the case may be, shall be reversed or varied by the High Court on account of any error, defect or irregularity, which has not prejudiced the substantial rights of the parties or occasioned a failure of justice.

The 1st respondent-petitioner has filed a Revision Application before the Civil Appellate High Court of the North Western Province, in terms of Section 5 (1) (A) of the High Court of Provinces (Special Provision) Act No. 19 of 1990 (as amended). In the event that the petitioner is dissatisfied with the judgment pronounced by the High Court established under Article 154 P of the Constitution, there is a specific provision that enables him to appeal to the Supreme Court. The relevant provision is contained in Section 5 C of the High Court of Provinces (Special Provision) Act No. 19 of 1990, (as amended). Section 5 C provides as follows:

6

5C (1) An appeal shall lie directly to the Supreme Court from any

judgment, decree or order pronounced or entered by a High Court established by Article 154P of the Constitution in the exercise of its jurisdiction granted by section 5A of this Act, with leave of the Supreme Court first had and obtained. The leave requested for shall be granted by the Supreme Court, where in its opinion the matter involves a substantial question of law or is a matter fit for review by such Court.

(2) The Supreme Court may exercise all or any of the powers

granted to it by paragraph (2) of Article 127 of the Constitution, in regard to any appeal made to the Supreme Court under subsection (1) of this section. Clearly, the petitioner has a specific remedy if he is dissatisfied with the judgment of the Civil Appellate High Court. In the Case of SC/Appeal 65/2025, the Supreme Court Held inter alia “the party dissatisfied with the judgment of the Provincial High Court cannot create a third tier of appellate scrutiny by describing the route as Revision or Restitutio-in-Integrum.”

The Supreme Court further held as follows:

“In this context, it would be legally impermissible and institutionally unsound for the Court of Appeal, in parimateria, to sit in appeal over judgments and orders pronounced by a Provincial High Court in the exercise of its appellate or revisionary jurisdiction. A party cannot pursue successive appeals before two courts of coordinate jurisdiction in respect of the same matter. This strikes at the very root of the issue. Such a practice is inimical to legislative intent, imposes unnecessary burdens on the judicial system and undermines the principle of finality in litigation. These considerations make clear that concurrent jurisdiction was intended to provide an alternative forum for appellate review, not to create an additional tier in the appellate hierarchy.”

In the above case, the Supreme Court held that the Court of Appeal has no jurisdiction, by way of final appeal, revision, or restitutio-in-integrum, to review any judgment or order of the Provincial High Court delivered in the exercise of its appellate Jurisdiction under Act No. 19 of 1990, as amended by Act No. 54 of 2006.

7

In the present application, the petitioner seeks to set aside the judgment dated 15-11-2022, pronounced by the Learned Judges of the Civil Appellate High Court of Kurunegala, bearing case no. NWP/HCCA/KUR/10/2019. As set out above, the petitioner’s remedy was to file a Special Leave to Appeal application before the Supreme Court. In the above circumstances, I uphold two preliminary objections raised by the respondents. I decided that the petitioner had an alternative remedy. Furthermore, as stated above, this Court lacks jurisdiction to set aside a judgment of the Civil Appellate High Court. Accordingly, the present application of the petitioner is dismissed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal. Dr. S. Premachandra J. I agree. Judge of the Court of Appeal.