I

1

1

J J 1 I

I

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SHI LANKA.

Court of Appeal case

In the matter of an Application for Writs in the

nature of Certiorari and Mandamus under Article 140 of the Constitution of the Republic of Sri Lanka.

Rajaguru Mudiyanselage Dharmathissa Herath

Also known as Thissa Herath Hunupola,

Nikadalupotha.

Petitioner

No. CA 294/2017 Writ Vs.

1. Sri Narayana Bamunu Mudiyanselage Ekanayaka, Basnayaka Nilame, Sri Vishnu Devalaya, Kandy.

2. Nimal Kotawelagedara,

"Dahampaya" , 135, Sri Anagarika Dharmapala Mawatha, Colombo 07.

3. D.M. Parakrama Jayawardana, Commissioner of Buddhist Affairs, Regional Office, District Secretariat Building, Kandy.

4. Rathnayaka Mudiyanselage Premasiri

Rathna yaka, Divisional Secretary, Divisional Secretariat, Polpithigama.

Respondents

Before

Counsel

L.T.B. Dehideniya J, (PICA)

&

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

Nihal Jayawardena, PC for the Petitioner.

Supported on : 09/10/2017

Decided on : 11110/2017

Order

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

Heard the President's Counsel in support of the Petition.

2

The Petitioner is before Court inter alia, seeking a stay order preventing the

1 st andlor 2nd Respondents taking any action in furtherance of the letter marked

P 12, until the final determination of this application and for notices on the

Respondents.

The Petitioner and the 1 st Respondent have entered into an Indenture of

Lease in respect of the land more fully described in the said Indenture, to the

Petitioner, for a period of 20 years. Since the 1 st Respondent refused to accept the

annual lease rental on the said indenture for the year 2017, the Petitioner has

requested the 2nd respondent "to state that the Petitioner is the lawful lessee of the

said property". The said request by the Petitioner is not filed of record.

I

~ I i ! III

tt ! J!. ! ! IIIi

I r{ !l I tt

t.

3

By letter dated 26 July 2017 marked P 12, the 2nd Respondent has

recommended both parties to the said Indenture, to arrive at an agreement or to an

alternate resolution, on consent of the parties. Therefore by letter dated 26 July

2017 marked P 12, the 2nd Respondent has not implemented any decision, but

confines himself to direct the parties to seek mutual consent to resolve the matter

m Issue.

Accordingly in the absence of an unlawful decision or a breach of a ,Ii statutory or a procedural requirement by the 2nd Respondent, we are of the view

! that the Petitioner has failed to justify the substantive relief prayed for in the

exercise of judicial review.

In the circumstances we refuse notices on the Respondents.

Petition dismissed without costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

L.T.B. Dehideniya J, (PICA)

I agree.

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL