Page 1 of 10

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for mandates in the nature of writs of certiorari, mandamus, and prohibition under Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. CASE NO: CA/WRIT/278/18

1. Arachchige Dona Christene Shani

De Silva No. 75, Old Road, Nawala, Rajagiriya.

2. Clarice Niranjela Gurusinghe

No. 75/2, Old Road, Nawala, Rajagiriya.

3. Suraweera Arachchige Mary Dona

Bridget No. 75/3, Old Road, Nawala, Rajagiriya. 4. Gurusinghe Devapriya Sumithra

Gurusinghe No. 75/2, Old Road, Nawala, Rajagiriya.

PETITIONERS

VS.

1. Urban Development Authority

6th & 7th Floors, Sethsiripaya, Battaramulla. 2. Sri Jayawardenapura Kotte

Municipal Council

Page 2 of 10

No. 06, Sri Jayawardenapura, Rajagiriya. 3. Condominium Management

Authority 1st Floor, National Housing Development Building, Sri Chittampalam A. Gardiner Mawatha, Colombo 02.

4. Central Environmental Authority

Parisara Piyasa No. 104, Denzil Kobbekaduwa Mawatha, Battaramulla. 5. JAT Property Group (Pvt) Ltd

(formerly known as JAT Engineering Pvt Ltd) No. 351, Pannipitiya Road, Thalawathugoda. 6. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

Before: M. T. MOHAMMED LAFFAR, J. and

K. K. A. V. SWARNADHIPATHI, J.

Counsel: Mangala Niyarepola with Kushani Gunaratne,

instructed by Tharaka Sachindra Jayathilaka for the Petitioner.

Jagatha Wickramanayake, P.C., with Kethmini Dharmasena, instructed by Padma Perera Ranamukaarachchi for the 2nd Respondent.

Page 3 of 10

Manoj Bandara with Thivanka Hettiarachchi, instructed by N.G.J.M.W. Senanayake for the 5th Respondent. K. De Silva, S.S.C., for the 1st, 3rd, 4th, and 6th Respondents. Written Submissions on: 23.05.2019, 21.09.2020, 19.03.2021 & 23.04.2021

(by the Petitioners).

23.02.2021 (by the 1st, 3rd, 4th, and 6th Respondents).

16.09.2020 (by the 2nd Respondent).

18.03.2021 (by the 5th Respondent).

Argued on: 30.03.2021.

Decided on: 26.10.2021.

MOHAMMED LAFFAR, J.

The Petitioners as residents or immediate neighbours of the

Apartment Complex in issue, which is located at No. 77, 4th Lane,

Old Road, Nawala, Rajagiriya have filed this application seeking

several prerogative orders including writs of certiorari, mandamus,

and prohibition upon several grounds that are set out in their

petition dated 31.08.2018 [vide paragraphs (b) to (m) of the prayer to

the petition].

The learned Senior State Counsel appearing for the 1st, 3rd, 4th and

6th Respondents took up several preliminary objections seeking

dismissal of the application in limine without going into the merits.

To understand the said preliminary objections in the proper

perspective, it is necessary to know the facts of the case. Hence, I

proceed to consider the merit of the application first.

Page 4 of 10

The Petitioners in their petition state that the 5th Respondent

Company as the Constructor, commenced the construction work of

the Apartment Complex on the adjoining land, which is immediately

adjoining to the Petitioners land and premises (on the Western side

of the Petitioners land) in which they have been residing since 1935.

The Petitioners state that the construction work of the said

Apartment Complex on the 5th Respondents land caused severe

inconveniences, nuisance, pollution and damages to them, the

members of their families and other neighbouring residents [vide

paragraph 14 (a) and (b) of the petition]. They also state that although

the 4th Respondent had laid down specific conditions as prescribed

in P8, the 5th Respondent repeatedly failed to take appropriate steps

to minimize the damages caused to them.

The Petitioners state that in relation to the said property which they

and other family members collectively own, they have developed a

10 feet wide private roadway from the Western boundary of the said

property in order to access from the Old Road, Nawala, Rajagiriya.

However, the said building of the 5th Respondent now has numerous

openings on each floor of the left side of the building which has been

strangely constructed on the existed Western boundary wall shared

by both the Petitioners as well as the 5th Respondent, whilst claiming

almost all light and ventilation and seriously affecting the privacy of

the Petitioners. Thus, the Petitioners further submit that, the 5th

Respondent had arbitrarily, dubiously, and unlawfully treated the

said 10 feet wide private roadway of the Petitioners and other family

members, which extends along the Western boundary of the

Petitioners land, as the side space and or fire gap of that Apartment

Project building of the 5th Respondent.

The Petitioners also state that even though they approached the 1st

to 4th Respondents to interfere with these unlawful acts of the 5th

Respondent, the 1st to 4th Respondents have failed or neglected to

Page 5 of 10

execute their statutory duties to take appropriate preventive and or

remedial action against the 5th Respondent.

When this matter was supported on 26.09.2018, the Petitioners

informed Court that they will not be pursuing the relief sought in

respect of the 4th Respondent. Accordingly, on 15.02.2019, learned

Senior State Counsel for the 4th Respondent filed a motion stating

that, in the circumstance, a statement of objections will not be filed

on behalf of the 4th Respondent. All other Respondents filed their

respective objections and written submissions.

The 1st Respondent in their statement of objections state that upon

receiving a complaint from the 1st and 2nd Petitioners on the alleged

opening i.e., window in the blind wall of the 5th Respondent, they

carried an inspection and accordingly on 12.02.2018 directed the 5th

Respondent to take necessary action to close all openings in the

blind wall and take precautions to mitigate the fire hazard (vide 1R9).

Therefore the 1st Respondent submit that upon the above issues

being brought to their attention, the 1st Respondent has taken

prompt action to inquire and take steps in accordance with law.

The 5th Respondent, in their statement of objections, while denying

the Petitioners averment that they are the immediate neighbours of

the said Apartment Complex of the 5th Respondent, submits that

upon the directions made by the 1st Respondent to take immediate

action to close the openings i.e., windows from the interior of the

said apartment building itself, towards the Eastern direction of the

said building, they took adequate steps to seal and close such

windows [vide 5R20(a) and 5R20(b)]. The 5th Respondent further

submit that although the 5th Respondent complied with these

necessary directions made by the relevant authorities including the

1st Respondent, the Petitioners have from the very commencement

of the said apartment complex of the 5th Respondent itself

Page 6 of 10

continuously made several baseless complaints against the said

apartment complex in mala fide.

Having heard the parties at considerable length and perused the

record in-depth, let me consider the primary objections now.

In their statement of objections, the learned Senior State Counsel

for the 1st and 3rd Respondents take up the following preliminary

objection:

1. The Petitioners are guilty of laches

2. The Petitioners have failed to name as Respondents, all

parties affected by the relief prayed for in this application.

Laches or inordinate delay:

The Respondents submitted that the said conditional Preliminary

Planning Clearence was granted to the 5th Respondent on

31.08.2015 by the 1st Respondent. The Development Permit in

respect of the impugned project was issued by the 2nd Respondent

on 14.12.2015. As per the paragraph 11 of the petition, the 5th

Respondent commenced construction of a building in mid-2016.

According to 1R4, the initial complaint by the Petitioners, expressing

concerns regarding the impugned project is dated 16.12.2017. The

petition filed in this Court only on 31.08.2018. Therefore, the

Respondents argued that the Petitioners have failed to explain the

undue delay in invoking the jurisdiction of this Court, they are guilty

of laches.

If the writ jurisdiction of this Court is invoked after an inordinate

delay, the Petitioner shall explain the delay in his petition. That is a

threshold requirement. Vide Lindsey Petroleum Com. v. Hurd

[1873-74] LR 5 PC 221; Fisher v. Brooker [2009] UKHL 41; Biso

Menika v. Cyril de Alwis and Others [1982] 1 Sri LR 368 and

Page 7 of 10

Bogawanthalawa Plantation Ltd. v. Minister of Public

Administration, Home Affairs and Plantation Industries [2004]

2 Sri LR 329.

The Petitioner in the instant matter has done so.

A careful perusal to the paragraph 46 of the petition dated

31.08.2018 shows that the Petitioners well explained the reasons for

making this delayed application. They have pleaded that they were

compelled to file this delayed application due to the delay in seeking

to obtain several documents from the various authorities including

the 1st to 3rd Respondents that are crucial to substantiate their case.

Therefore, the Petitioners submitted that they have never

intentionally delayed seeking relief before this Court and if any delay

was caused as purportedly alleged by the Respondent, such delay

was caused due to unavoidable circumstances, which were beyond

the control of the Petitioners. Therefore, I am of the view that the

delay in filing this application has been properly explained by the

Petitioners.

Accordingly, the objection raised as regards laches would be

overruled.

Necessary Parties not before court:

As I already mentioned hereinbefore, the Petitioners state that the

construction work carrying by the 5th Respondent, caused severe

inconveniences, nuisance, pollution and damages to them, the

members of their families and other neighbouring residents in the

area.

Also, at paragraph 44 of the petition, the Petitioners aver that the

5th Respondent has unlawfully sought to sell several condominium

parcels to several individuals and as at present, the Petitioners

believe that there are several Apartment Owners in the said

Page 8 of 10

Apartment Project located at No. 77, 4th Lane, Old Road, Nawala,

Rajagiriya. Hence, it is quite clear that at the time the petition

was being filed, there had been several parties as purchasers who

had brought condominium units from the Apartment Building and

had acquired rights or interests of their respective purchase.

Accordingly, it is further clear that, the case embraced by the

Petitioners challenging the legality of construction in the Apartment

Building clearly has an adverse effect on the aforesaid purchasers

whose property rights and interest are very much affected by the

grounds and matters alleged in the petition. However, the Petitioners

still had chosen not to add the said purchases or interested persons

as parties to this instant application.

As precisely observed by J.A.N. De Silva J. (as he then was) in

Rawaya Publishers and Other v. Wijedasa Rajapaksha,

Chairman Sri Lanka Press Council & Others [2001] 3 Sri LR 213

at 216, in the context of writ applications, a necessary party is one

without whom no order can be effectively made. A proper party is in

whose absence an effective order can be made but whose presence

is necessary to a complete and final decision on the question

involved in the proceedings. Therefore, the failure to make the

necessary party a respondent to the proceedings must be regarded

fatal to the application. If the omission is discovered during the

pendency of the application for the writ the Petitioner is well advised

to apply to court to add such party as a respondent. Such an

application for addition will be allowed only if the application is not

yet ready for final disposal by court: Vinnasithamby v. Joseph

[1961] 65 NLR 359. Once the final hearing of the application by court

commences, such an application made thereafter will be refused.

Vide Goonetilleke v. Government Agent, Galle [1946] 47 NLR 549

and Dharmaratne v. Commissioner of Elections [1950] 52 NLR

429, at 432 (also see, Dr. S.F.A. Cooreys Principles of Administrative

Law in Sri Lanka (2nd Edition) at p. 537).

Page 9 of 10

Therefore, I hold that the Petitioners are guilty of the non-joinder of

necessary parties in this case.

Now, I would pause at this moment to examine the relief sought by

the Petitioners. In my view, the relief sought by the Petitioners are

broad and vague. The order sought in paragraph (b) of the petition

reads as follows: Issue a writ of mandamus compelling the 1st

Respondent and/or its servant and/or agents to act forthwith in terms

of Sections 8, 8J, 8K, 28, 28A, 28B, 28C, 28D and other relevant

provisions of the Urban Development Authority Law of 41 of 1978 as

amended and other prevailing laws. The order sought in this

paragraph demonstrates that the Petitioners themselves do not

know which statutes grant powers to the Respondents to deal with

the alleged unlawful construction and approval.

Similarly, the Petitioners in prayer (d) seeks a writ of mandamus

compelling the 3rd Respondent to hold a formal inquiry under and in

terms of the provisions of the Condominium Management Authority

Law No. 10 of 1973 as amended.and/or take appropriate remedial

and punitive actions forthwith against the 5th Respondent. The

Petitioners have failed to specify a relevant provision which requires

and/or empowers the 3rd Respondent to conduct an inquiry.

Writ is a discretionary remedy. In a writ petition, it is eternally

important to correctly plead the relief sought. As it was observed by

Anil Gooneratne J. in S.P. Siriwardena v. Provincial Council

Public Service Commission North Western [2012] BLR 373 (CA),

One should never have a vague prayer. As far as possible there

should be reference to the order or decision to be quashed. Court

should not be called upon to supply the omission. Specific relief

should be pleaded with certainty.

In Sipkaduwa Anthony Danawathie Wimalasuriya v.

Commissioner General of Lands and Others [CA/WRIT/47/2014,

CA Minutes of 27.09.2018], held was held that, This Court cannot

Page 10 of 10

issue writs in such vague terms against an array of Government

Officials. This application, filed seeking vague reliefs, shall, in my

view, be dismissed in limine on that basis.

This view further emphasized in K. Selvarajah and Others v.

Minister Rural Economic Affairs and Others [CA (Writ) Appl. No.

431/2016, CA Minutes of 15.09.2020].

I am therefore of the view that the above relief sought by the

Petitioners are misconceived in law.

As such, on the 2nd preliminary objection raised by the State

regarding necessary parties which I uphold, the misconception of

the Petitioners in seeking the above vague relief, this application

should be dismissed.

Accordingly, I dismiss the application without costs.

Application dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT PF APPEAL

K. K. A. V. SWARNADHIPATHI, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL