Page 1 of 9

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for mandates in the nature of writs of certiorari and prohibition under and in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. CASE NO: CA/WRIT/0281/07

1. Udesh Kumara Senevirathne,

No. 125/B/1, Vaboda South, Vaboda. 2. H. M. Nalin Premalal,

C/8, National Housing Scheme, Thimbirigasya Road, Colombo 05. 3. Mohideen Durwis Rizvi,

150/24 d, Mahawela Lane, Baseline Road, Dematagoda, Colombo 09. 4. Mohammed N. Nawshad,

No. 125/B/1, Vaboda South, Vaboda.

PETITIONERS

VS. 1. K.L.T.G. Perera (Retired),

Director of Customs, Sri Lanka Customs, The Times Building, Colombo 01.

2. G.W.A. Silva,

Superintendent of Customs,

Page 2 of 9

Sri Lanka Customs, Colombo Port Colombo 01. 3. C. Wijethunga,

Deputy Director of customs, Revenue Task Force, Sri Lanka Customs, Colombo 01. 4. C.P.B. Pitawela, (Retired),

Asst. Superintendent of Customs, Sri Lanka Customs Colombo 01. 5. Mrs. P.S.M. Charles,

Director General of Customs, Sri Lanka Customs, Colombo 01.

RESPONDENTS Before: M. T. MOHAMMED LAFFAR, J. &

K. K. A. V. SWARNADHIPATHI, J.

Counsel: Faisz Musthapha, P.C. with M.R.M. Dhailamy for the

Petitioners. Kanishka de Silva, S.S.C. for the Respondents. Written Submissions on: 13.01.2020 (by the Petitioners). 29.11.2019 (by the Respondents). Decided on: 30.04.2021.

MOHAMMED LAFFAR, J.

The Petitioners in this application have invoked the supervisory

jurisdiction of this Court under Article 140 of the Constitution seeking the

following main relief:

Page 3 of 9

a) a writ of certiorari quashing the order of the 1st Respondent

above named dated 19.03.2007, marked as X4.

b) a writ of prohibition restraining the Respondents from enforcing

and/or proceeding on the said order X4.

When this matter was taken up for argument, both parties had consented

to dispose the matter by way of written submissions.

The 1st and 2nd Petitioners filed the instant application dated 20.03.2007

on the basis that they are Directors of two companies, namely One Time

Worldwide Express (Pvt) Limited and Korman Logistics Lanka (Pvt)

Limited, and that the said companies are engaged in provision of

International Freight Forwarding Services. The 3rd Petitioner claims that

he is the owner of the M/s S.N.S. Logistics, a clearing agency in Sri

Lanka. The 4th Petitioner is an employee of the said One Time Worldwide

Express (Pvt) Limited and Korman Logistics Lanka (Pvt) Limited.

The Petitioners state that in their normal course of business, the said One

Time Worldwide Express (Pvt) Limited and Korman Logistics Lanka (Pvt)

Limited act as cargo agents to several overseas fright forwarders in Dubai,

United Arab Emirates (U.A.E.) including Green Cargo Dubai of U.A.E.

The Petitioners further state that in the year 2003, the said One Time

Worldwide Express (Pvt) Limited and Korman Logistics Lanka (Pvt)

Limited received instructions from the said Green Cargo Dubai of U.A.E.

to issue delivery orders to an ultimate consignee by the name of Lakdiva

Trading Company to clear certain consignments which had arrived at the

Port of Colombo.

They further submit that the 3rd Petitioner thereafter provided his services

as per instructions from Green Cargo Dubai of U.A.E to the said

consignee namely Lakdiva Trading Company and issued delivery orders.

The said consignee had cleared 10 consignments with the assistance of

clearing agency, namely Victory Lanka Freight Services. The 4th Petitioner,

acting as an employee of the clearing agent, namely S.N.S. Logistics,

presented documents to Sri Lanka Customs on behalf of the said

Page 4 of 9

Lakdiva Trading Company and cleared six consignments. They further

submit that no allegation had been made or any inquiry held as against

Victory Lanka Freight Services which had acted in clearing 10

consignments.

Thereafter, surprisingly, on or about 04.11.2003, during the night,

several custom officers raided the office premises of the said One Time

Worldwide Express (Pvt) Limited and Korman Logistics Lanka (Pvt)

Limited then seized all files and documents at the office and recorded

statement of the 2nd Petitioner and took him into custody and on the next

date the 1st Petitioner went and made his statement, and both were

released from custody.

The Petitioners further submit that at the time the said raid was

conducted, they learnt that the raid conducted upon an investigation by

Sri Lanka Customs, into imports consigned to their client namely, M/s.

Lakdiva Trading Company. However, the Petitioners state that the said

One Time Worldwide Express (Pvt) Limited and Korman Logistics (Pvt)

Limited have had no whatsoever involvement in the said 16 containers

property to be investigated by Customs and imported by the said M/s.

Lakdiva Trading Company other than issuing of delivery orders in their

usual course of business.

It was further submitted by the Petitioners that upon the charges levelled

against them, they were ordered to be present for a Customs Inquiry on

10.08.2004 and after inquiry on 30.05.2006, the 1st Respondent issued

notice requiring the 1st and 3rd Petitioners, to show cause. This order has

been marked as X2.

The Petitioners filed a written explanation to the notice to show cause on

15.09.2006 (marked as X3) as ordered by the Inquiry Officers. However,

on 19.03.2007, the 1st Respondent delivered his final order imposing

forfeitures of money (penalties from the Petitioners) as set out in

paragraph 35 of the Petition. This forfeitures order marked as X4.

It was the contention of the Petitioners that the said whole consignment

belongs to them were duly inspected and cleared on payment of

Page 5 of 9

applicable customs duties and other levies as determined by the

consignees representatives. Thereafter, the said consignments were

handed over to the consignee's representative immediately upon clearance

thereof and the One Time Worldwide Express (Pvt) limited and Korman

Logistics (Pvt) Limited had nothing to do with the consignments other

than issuing of delivery orders in their usual course of business.

In the circumstances, the Petitioners submit that the said forfeiture order

- X4 is illegal, and null and void1.

However, when I peruse the Statements of Objection filed by the 5th

Respondent dated 17.10.2007, the causes for initiating the alleged inquiry

against the Petitioners are so expounded. They need to be reproduced

verbatim in the manner stated in the Affidavit filed by the 5th Respondent

as follows:

a) The instant case was initiated on 04.11.2003, on the detection of two

loads of cigarettes in two premises at Wellawatte. The two premises were: No. 4B, Collingwood Place, Wellawatte, Colombo 06 and No. 23/1, Anula Road, Colombo 06. These premises belonged to Mr. Abdul Cader Mohammed Baseer and Mr. Abdul Cader Mohammed Haseem respectively. b) The investigators found cartons of Tang Powder and Cigarettes at the

aforementioned premises. c) Subsequent to this find, the Investigators on the suspicion that the

Cigarettes had been smuggled into the country under the cover load of Tang Powder proceeded to cheque the names of the Importers of the same. The Import Clearance System showed that the said cartons of Tang Powder had been imported by a company named Lakdiva General Trading of No. 113, Vinayalankara Mawata, Colombo 2. The consignment of Tang Powder had been imported from Dubai in a 1X40 Container and cleared by the same on 03.11.2003. It was also revealed during the course of these investigations that prior to this, 14 other consignments had been cleared by the aforesaid Importer. d) However, investigations revealed that there is no Vinayalankara Mawata

in Colombo 2, the investigators proceeded to visit No: 113,

1 vide paragraph 36 of the Petition.

Page 6 of 9

Vinayalankara Mawata, Colombo 10 and found the premises to be an abandoned one. Consequently, the Owner of the aforesaid premises when contacted by the telephone stated that no business entity is or was registered by him or any other person under his authority, at the said premises. e) Upon investigations it was found that the sole Proprietor of the entity

Lakdiva General Trading was a Mr. Sheik Mohammed Jaffer Hussain of No: 212/1A, Quarry Road, Dehiwela. (The owner and occupier of these premises is a Retired Principle who was unaware of such a person and stated that there is no such person in his premises.) f) The Investigators then proceeded to visit the Offices of the Customs

House Agents who had cleared these shipments on behalf of the Importer. g) The Customs House Agents in question were found to be M/s. S.N.S.

Logistics of No: 1119/D, Dalupitiya Road, Hunupitiya, Wattala and Victory Lanka Freight Services of No: C-1, 1st Floor, YMBA Building, Colombo 01. The Proprietor of M/s. S.N.S. Logistics informed the Investigators that whilst he did not have any business under this name, his former Manager one Mr. Mohideen Durvis Rizvy was conducting business of clearing and forwarding under the same. The owner of Victory Lanka Freight Services was found to be Mr. Vitharanalage Garmini Jayalath.

. ff) The declared value of the good also appeared as largely under invoiced.

The banks stamps placed on the invoices were proved as having been forged. The suspect name Mohamed Niyas Nawshad appeared before the inquiry and admitted he was the recipient of import documents from Babu, which were handed over to the wharf clerks for clearing the goods from the port. He further admitted that he received the goods from the wharf clerks once they cleared from the port. However, he failed to answer as to whom these goods were then sold or delivered. gg) The evidence that was revealed at the inquiry showed that none of the

consignments were channelled through, approved exchange instruments and modes of payment (i.e., D/P. D/A L/C) or other related instruments is specified in Extraordinary Gazette Notification Number 1022/6 of 08.04.1998 which was published under the Import and Export Control Ac No: 1 of 1969 [vide 5R4] The violation of these Gazette Regulations constitutes an action that violates the provisions in Customs Ordinance under sections 12, 43 and Schedule B read with the Import and Export Control Act. Therefore, all the consignments were liable to forfeiture and the parties knowingly engaged in these illegal importations are liable in terms of section 129 of the Customs Ordinance.

Page 7 of 9

Accordingly, the Respondents took up the position that, there is no

perverse or illegality in the alleged Customs inquiry. They further

submitted that Petitioners have no basis in law to pursue this application

on the basis that they misrepresented the material facts and therefore,

they sought to dismiss the application.

This Court observes that when the Petitioners filed this application, they

were well aware that the investigation conducted by the Customs had

revealed that no company in the name and style of M/s Lakdiva General

Trading Company actually exists. In other words, the Petitioners in any

event have not contested the fact that the M/s Lakdiva General Trading

Company is a fiction.

Further, it is interesting to note that although the Petitioners accept the

fact that they had submitted papers on behalf of the said M/s Lakdiva

General Trading Company to clear the consignments in question2, no

plausible explanation offered as to how they dealt with and acted on

behalf of company that does not exists.

In my view, the conduct of the Petitioners does not warrant the issuance

of the writs as prayed in the Petition. A party cannot ask for a writ as of

right. It is a discretionary relief as well as an equitable relief. When

granting such a relief, the conduct of the party applying for it is intensely

relevant.

It is settled law that a person who approaches the Court for the grant of

discretionary relief, to which category an application for certiorari would

certainly belong, has to come with clean hands, and should candidly

disclose all the material facts which have any bearing on the adjudication

of the issues raised in the case. In other words, he owes a duty of utmost

good faith (uberrima fides) to the court to make a full and complete

disclosure of all material facts and refrain from concealing or suppressing

any material fact within his knowledge or which he could have known by

exercising diligence expected of a person of ordinary prudence.

2 vide paragraph 9 of the Petition.

Page 8 of 9

Learned State Counsel for the Respondents has drawn our attention to

the decision of W.S. Alphonso Appuhamy vs. L. Hettiarachchi (Special

Commissioner, Chilaw)3, in which it was found that an applicant for a

mandate in the nature of a writ of mandamus had suppressed and

misrepresented material facts. The Court decided the case on its merits,

but observed that the case was one in which the principles set out in the

celebrated English decision of King vs. The General Commissioners for the

Purpose of the Income Tax Acts for the District of Kensington-Ex-parte

Princess Edmond de Poignac4 would have applied, and the Court, in its

discretion, could have dismissed the application in limine5.

In Fonseka vs. Lt. General Jagath Jayasuriya and Five Others6, a

divisional bench of this Court held that,

1) A petitioner who seeks relief by writ which is an extra-ordinary

remedy must in fairness to Court, bare every material fact so that the discretion of Court is not wrongly invoked or exercised. 2) It is perfectly settled that a person who makes an ex parte

application to Court is under an obligation to make that fullest possible disclosure of all material facts within his knowledge. 3) If there is anything like deception the Court ought not to go into

the merits, but simply say" we will not listen to your application because of what you have done.

As correctly observed by Saleem Marsoof, J. in Namunukula Plantations

Ltd. vs. Minister of Lands and Others7, if any party invoking the

discretionary jurisdiction of a court of law is found wanting in the

discharge of its duty to disclose all material facts or is shown to have

attempted to pollute the pure stream of justice, the court not only has the

right but a duty to deny relief to such person.

3 [1973] 77 NLR 131

4 [1917] 1 KB 486.

5 It was held in Apuhamys case that when an application for a prerogative writ or an injunction is made, it is the duty of the petitioner to place before the Court, before it issues notice in the first instance, a full and truthful disclosure of all the material facts; the petitioner must act with uberrima fides.

6 [2011] 2 Sri LR 372.

7 [2012] 1 Sri LR 365.

Page 9 of 9

Therefore, I proceed to dismiss this application without costs.

Application dismissed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal.

K. K. A. V. SWARNADHIPATHI, J. I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal.