IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

CA Case No: CA (PHC) 3/16

PHC Polonnaruwa Case No: (Rev) 22/2014

In the matter of an appeal under and in terms of Article 154 P(6) of the Constitution read together with the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provision) Act No. 19 of 1990 (as amended)

Officer-In -Charge

Police Station Bakamuna

Complainant

MC Bakamuna Case No:23801 Vs.

1. Moihomed Haniffa Mohommed Illiyas, No.20, Pahala Gammedda Raja Vediya Digana.

2. Ambi Mohommed Marshu, No. 81, Dehemiyagama Kolongoda Hasalaka

Accused

AND BETWEEN

1

2

Navur Pichchei Moosin No.19, Kum bukkandura, Theldeniy.

Vs.

1. Officer-In-Charge Police Station Bakamuna

Petitioner

2. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12

Respondents

AND NOW BETWEEN

Navur Pichchei Moosin No.19, Kumbukkandura, Theldeniy.

Petitioner-Appellant

Vs.

3. Officer-In -Charge

Police Station Bakamuna

4. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12

Respondents- Respondents

Before

Counsel

Written Submissions On

Argued On

Decided On

K.K. Wickremasinghe,J

Devika Abeyratne,J

Shantha Jayawardhena with Ashiq Hassim and Dinush de Silva for the Petitioner Maheshika de Silva SCC for the Respondents

02.09.2019 (By the Petitioner-Appellant) 27.09.20 19(By the Respondents-Respondents)

12.03.2020 ,31.08.2020 and 28.09.2020.

20.11.2020

Devika Abeyratne,J

The petitioner appellant has preferred this appeal against the

Judgment of the learned High Court Judge of Polonnaruwa dated

25.01.2016 which affirmed the order of forfeiture of a vehicle by the

learned magistrate of Bakamune on 18.8.2014.

Briefly the facts relevant to this appeal are as follows;

The two accused in Case No 23801 in the Magistrate's Court of

Hingurakgoda were charged with the following offences to which they

3

were found guilty on their unconditional plea of guilt and fined

accordingly.

1. Transporting 20 heads of cattle (6 buffaloes and 14 dairy cattle)

on or about 23.08.2011 in contravention of the provisions of the

Animals Act No. 29 of 1958 (as amended)

2. Contravening the provisions of Cruelty to Animals Ordinance No.

13 of 1907 (as amended); and

3. Contravening the provisions of the Motor Traffic Act No. 14 of

1951 (as amended)

The inquiry pertaining to the vehicle involved in the above offences

was held and on 3.4.2013 the appellant being the registered owner has

given evidence stating that; he had not authorized the driver to use the

vehicle for any illegal activities; the said vehicle had never been involved

in the commission of any offence; he had never been prosecuted before

a Court of law; he was not privy to the commission of the said offences

by the Accused; the 'closed' body of the Motor Lorry was there at the

time he purchased the vehicle from its previous owner and the lorry was

necessary for his business which included transportation of vegetables

and building materials; that the Motor Lorry had been used in the past

to legally transport cattle on a permit issued by the Municipal Council

of Kandy which is borne out by document marked "Y" marked.

After inquiry by order dated 08.08.2014 the learned Magistrate has

confiscated the vehicle. For easy reference a part of the order is quoted

below;

4

" ..... The Finance Com.PLC Vs Agampodi Maha Pedige Priyantha

Chandana and others HC 105/ A 2008 wg)tJt; @OJPf} i2JrIJ1tJJ6WXXJ)

t%JgOU{}@C5 tJlBeif CJcl!IJce@ 00 (fUJJ. t!)@t; (T)J8c:f t!)e80 &J(ft3.t3 (ff)@@eif!iJb@oco CXiJ

t:J)oeif (f@C5t:Jf 1992 (1) OO~.'4'Ji5 167 w~@tJt; (f(;J@ t;D(;@(ff)W (fc63 @@w63t:J) t:J)ofofoC5

@t:J),

(ft363t:J)Oc tJlBeif 0()C5 (fCJOJeJ f)c@ct:JfC)@{) (ff)t:J)QQJ 8C5@ r;;WCf1JWC5eif @C5J(;J 63g{ i2Jf){),

@@t:J)@ CJJeifWJ@r.iJ (;c8i@tiJeif @t:J)J6o (f(;J@ fJ6(; 8b 00 (fc63 i2Jo{), C5W ooc@ 2 eif 1

t:Jf (jJt:J)f!Jt:J)J oceJi2Jo @t:J) &Jef{;} t:J)@QQJ C5W @@w63t:J) 8(feJJeifW@C5eif &J!iJi2J{) oi5t:J)@JeJ)@c:f(;

@1!IJt:J) t:Y(;l!IJeif t:J)@ ~ 2 @ (jJt:J)f!Jt:J)J f)ceJi2J6 @t:J) &Jef{;} t:J)@QQJ i2Jo t!)@t; t%Jr;}6c

QJ@C5 tJlBeif CJl!IJce@ t:J)0 (fct:J) r!J (f@O t:J8cD@JW 8~(ff)of t:J)ofofoC5 oeif@eif @1!IJt:J) t:Y(;l!IJeif ~ 2 @ (jJt:J)f!Jt:J)J oceJi2J6 @t:J) &Jef{;} t:J)@QQJ i2JfJt3.

@@@ wg)tJt; @@t:J)@ CJJeifWJ tJlBeif @1!IJt:J) t:Y(;l!IJeif ~ 2 @ (jJt:J)f!Jt:J)J f)ceJi2J(; @t:J) &Jef{;}

t:J)(; 1MJJ&63 @(!j)t3eif (fot:J) 68-9297 (;o$:j @@J8 (;()C5 ox:feJeif()t:J) t:J)0@ (emphasis

added)

An appeal as well as a revision application was preferred against

the said order and subsequently, the petitioner has opted to proceed

with the revision application agreeing that the order from the revision

application will apply to the Appeal as well, which revision application

was dismissed on 25.1.2016, which is the impugned order.

It is contended by the appellant that the learned High Court

Judge erred in law when he failed to appreciate that the learned

Magistrate has misdirected herself when she erroneously held that in

K.Mary Matilda Silva vs PH de Silva Inspector of Police Station, Habarana

C.A. (PHC) 86/97, The Finance Company Pvt Ltd. Vs. Agampodi Maha

Pedige Priyantha Chandana and Others SC Appeal 10SA 2008 decided

on 30.09.2010 and Faris Vs. O.I.C. Galenbindunuwewa and another

5

1992 1 SLR 167 has now determined the law to be that the petitioner

appellant has to prove both the following defences ; that he has taken

all precautions to prevent the use of such vehicle; and that the vehicle

has been used without his knowledge for the commission of the offence.

In the instant matter the relevant section is Section 3A of the

Animals Act. (as amended) which provides as follows;

"Where any person is convicted of an offence under this

part or any regulations made thereunder, any vehicle

used in the Commission of such offence shall be, in

addition to any other punishment prescribed for such

offence, be liable, by order of the convicting Magistrate,

to confiscation:

Provided, however, that in any case where the owner of

the vehicle is a third party, no order of confiscation shall

be made, if the owner proves to the satisfaction of the

Court that he has taken all precautions to prevent the

use of such vehicle OR that the vehicle has been used

without his knowledge for the commission of the

offence". ( emphasis added)

This section stipulates that one of the two alternatives should be

proved by the owner of the vehicle in order to satisfy Court why the

vehicle should not be confiscated. This position is clearly laid down by

His Lordship Sarath N Silva in Faris V The Officer-in-Charge, Police

Station. Galenbindunuwewa and another 1992 (1) SLR 167 at page 169

that only one of the above two requirements need be proved on a

6

'.

balance of probability under the proviso to section 3A of the Act and

held that;

" ...... . In terms of the proviso, if the owner establishes anyone of

these matters on a balance of probability, an order of confiscation should

not be made".[emphasis added]

In the instant case the learned Magistrate has concluded that both

defences have to be proved as per the decisions in Mary Matildas case

(supra) and The Finance Company Pvt Ltd. Vs. Agampodi Maha Pedige

Priyantha Chandana and Others (supra).

These two cases relate to section 40 of the Forest Ordinance and

in the instant case the relevant law is section 3 A of the Animals Act

which has specifically stipulated that if one of the requirements is

proved there should be no order of confiscation. Thus, it is clearly seen

that the learned Magistrate has misdirected herself on that position.

The learned High Court Judge quite correctly has held that the

appellant it required only to prove either one of the above mentioned

defences on a balance of probability to prevent the confiscation of the

vehicle. Thus, the High Court has accepted the fact that the learned

magistrate has erred in her determination, with regard to this most vital

issue. Thus it is established that the order of the magistrate is based on

an incorrect legal basis.

7

.

The appellant has testified that he bought the vehicle on

30.01.2010 for his business and that he had employed the first accused

flliyas as his driver who has been driving the said vehicle on hires to

places like Mahiyanganaya. It was also stated that the vehicle was used

to transport vegetables to Dambulla and Bricks to Mahiyanganaya and

at one time a permit had been obtained from the Kandy municipality

for the transportation of cattle.

Thus, it is apparent that the vehicle in question has been used for

various business purposes which is corroborated by the evidence of the

grama sewaka of the area who gave evidence on behalf of the appellant.

It is submitted that on 22.08.2011 the driver has taken the

vehicle on hire to Mahiyanganaya around 12.00 pm and on the

following day, 23.8.2011 the appellant has been informed that the

Bakamuna Police has taken the vehicle in to custody for illicitly

transporting cattle. It is submitted that the driver whom he employed

from the time he purchased the vehicle has not been authorised to use

the vehicle for any illegal purpose. He has also testified that there are

no previous incidents pertaining to such illegal acts and that he has no

knowledge that the driver has been committing any illegal acts. He has

discontinued the services of the driver immediately. Thus, it was his

evidence that he had no knowledge of the commission of this offence

and that he was not a participant who was privy to the illegal act. This

position is uncontradicted.

It is on record that at one time the appellant had obtained a valid

permit to transport cattle which document was marked as Y and

8

submitted by the appellant. However, the learned magistrate has

concluded that as previously the appellant had been transporting cattle

in this vehicle, it cannot be believed that he had no knowledge of the

illegal transportation of the cattle. It appears that the learned High

Court Judge and the Magistrate have drawn an inference that

transporting cattle on a permit on earlier occasions established that the

present offence was committed with the knowledge of the appellant.

This reasoning is without any legal basis and on conjecture which IS

not a fair, sound or reasonable conclusion.

The learned Magistrate has also concluded that the appellant had

changed the body of the Motor Lorry to accommodate the

transportation of cattle which according to the learned judge has been

further established by the accused pleading guilty to charge No 3 which

is, Contravening the provisions of the Motor Traffic Act No. 14 of 1951

(as amended).

The appellant was not an accused in the case, therefore, the

unconditional plea of guilt by the accused in the action cannot be

imputed against the appellant who was not charged with that particular

offence.

Further, the Certificate of Registration of the vehicle does not

specify the type of body which had been fixed to the lorry at the time it

was first registered. Therefore, it cannot be proved or disproved what

type of body the vehicle had. When there was no material before court

it was improbable to come to a finding that the vehicle was modified to

9

transport cattle. The learned High Court judge has failed to appreciate

this fact.

Thus, the learned Magistrate concluding that the vehicle was

modified to accommodate the transportation of cattle is without any

rational basis and is not tenable.

In Faris V The Officer-in-Charge, Police station Galenbindunuwewa

and another (supra), the Court of Appeal whilst allowing the appeal and

setting aside the order of confiscation of the lorry has stated; "The

presence of some special facility in the lorry for the transporting of

animals does not per se establish that the owner had knowledge of the

commission of the particular offence. This however, could be a highly

relevant fact, which may be used together with some other evidence, to

negative the claim of the owner that he had no knowledge of the

commission of the particular offence. In this case I am of the view that

there is no material to negative the claim of the owner that he had no

knowledge of the commission of the particular offence".

In the instant case, there is no evidence elicited that the appellant

was aware that an illegal transportation was taking effect on that

particular day. There have been no previous offences relating to the

vehicle or the appellant. After the commission of the offence, the driver's

services have been discontinued and there is no evidence to the

contrary.

The learned High Court Judge m affirming the order of the

learned Magistrate has not considered that there was no evidence before

10

"

'.

the Magistrate's court to conclude that the appellant had knowledge

of the commission or was privy to the commission or was a participant

of the alleged offences .

In consideration of all of the above facts, the appeal is allowed and

the order made by the High Court of Polonnaruwa dated 25.0l.2016

upholding the learned Magistrate's order dated 18.08.2014 as well as

the said order of the learned Magistrate is hereby set aside.

The registrar is directed to communicate this Judgment to the

High Court of Polonnaruwa and the Magistrate's Court of Hingurakgoda.

At the conclusion of the hearing of the appeal the learned State

Counsel informed this Court that the vehicle in issue has been sold by

public auction in the Magistrate's Court of Hingurakgoda. An

explanation was called from the relevant Magistrate's Court how the

vehicle was auctioned when the matter was in appeal. As per the

report dated 25.08.2020 the learned Magistrate has stated that officers

concerned have acted in an irresponsible manner in discharging their

duties and that the proceeds of the sale is in custody of Courts.

K.K. Wickremasinghe,J

I Agree

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

11