1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for the exercise of Your Lordships Court's revisionary powers under and by virtue of Article 138 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, against the Order of the High Court of the Western Province (Exercising Civil Jurisdiction holden at Colombo) dated 19th January 2015 in case bearing No. H. C.(Civil)

6012014/CO.

Ceylinco Insurance PLC, "Ceylinco House", No.69, Janadhipathi Mawatha, Colombo 01.

Petitioner

Court of Appeal Revision Application VS. No. CA (PHC)APN/18/2015 High Court Case No. HC/Civil/60/2014/CO

1. Ceylinco Life Insurance Limited, 106, Havelock Road, Colombo 05.

2. Ceylinco General Insurance Limited,

"Ceylinco House" 3rd Floor , , No.69, Janadhipathi Mawatha, Colombo 01. Respondents

2

AND THEN

Ceylinco Insurance PLC, "Ceylinco House", No.69, Janadhipathi Mawatha, Colombo 01.

Petitioner

VS.

1. Ceylinco Life Insurance Limited,

106, Havelock Road, Colombo 05.

2. Ceylinco General Insurance Limited, "Ceylinco House", 3rd Floor, No.69, Janadhipathi Mawatha, Colombo 01.

Respondents

AND

Global Rubber Industries (Pvt) Ltd. No.28, Joseph's Lane, Colombo 04.

Shareholder-Respondent

AND NOW

Global Rubber Industries (Pvt) Ltd. No.28, Joseph's Lane, Colombo 04.

Shareholder-Respondent-Petitioner

BEFORE:

COUNSEL:

3

vs.

Ceylinco Insurance PLC, "Ceylinco House", No.69, Janadhipathi Mawatha, Colombo 01.

Petitioner-Respondent

1. Ceylinco Life Insurance Limited,

106, Havelock Road, Colombo 05.

1 st Respondent-Respondent

2. Ceylinco General Insurance Limited, "Ceylinco House" 3rd Floor, No.69, Janadhipathi Mawatha, Colombo 01.

2nd Respondent-Respondent

W.M.M. Malinie Gunaratne, J. and

P.R. Walgama, J.

S.A. Parathalingam P.C. with Nishkan. Parathalingam for the Petitioner.

Supported on 14.05.2015.

Written submissions filed on : 12.08.2015

Decided on: 18.11 2015

4

Malinie Gunaratne, J.

The Petitioner-Respondent has instituted an action bearing No.

HCICivil/60/20 14/CO in the Commercial High Court of Colombo, seeking

the reliefs set out in the plaint. On 19.01.2015 the learned High Court Judge

delivered his Judgment I Order granting the relief prayed for by the

Petitioner-Respondent.

The Petitioner has filed a leave to appeal application against the

Judgment/Order in the Supreme Court (as per paragraph 30 of the Petition).

Having done that the Petitioner has filed this revision application in this

Court seeking to set aside the Order of the learned High Court Judge dated

19.01.2015.

When this matter came up for support on 14.05.2015, the view of the

Court was that this Court has no jurisdiction to exercise the Revisionary

powers, in respect of orders or judgments of the Commercial High Court.

The learned President's Counsel made oral submissions as regards the

said matter pertaining to the jurisdiction of this Court and moved permission

to file written submissions also.

I have carefully considered the submissions of the learned President's

Counsel. In the course of his submissions, the learned President's Counsel

for the Petitioner contended that, since the final appeal will take a long time

to be listed and in view of the urgency of the matter and in view of the

existing exceptional circumstances and the fact that grave, irremediable

damage and prejudice has been caused to the Petitioner and other

shareholders of the Petitioner-Respondent as a consequence of the said

5

Order. He further contended, that the exclusive revisionary jurisdiction is

vested with the Court of Appeal as per Article 138 of the Constitution.

The learned President's Counsel has completely disregarded the

change made by the legislature by enacting Act No.1 0 of 1996 as far as High

Court orders made in the exercise of powers vested in the High Court, under

the Act No. 10 of 1996. By the enactment of Act No. 10 of 1996, it is clear

that in any civil matter dealt with in the High Court, the appeal lies only to

the Supreme Court. This seems to be the clear intention of the legislature

with regard to matters dealt in the High Court.

The right of appeal from judgments, orders of the High Court is dealt

with under Section 5 of the said Act. The said Section 5 reads thus:-

" (1) Any person who is dissatisfied with any judgment pronounced

by a High Court established by Article 154P of the Constitution, in the

exercise of its jurisdiction under Section 2, in any action proceeding

or matter to which such person is a party may prefer an appeal to the

Supreme Court against such judgment, for any error in fact or in law.

(2)Any person who is dissatisfied with any order made by a High

Court established by Article 154 of the Constitution, in the

exercise of its jurisdiction under Section 2, in the course of any

action proceeding or matter to which such person is, or seeks to be

a party, may prefer an appeal to the Supreme Court against such

order, for the correction of any error in fact or law with the leave

of the Supreme Court first had and obtained".

In Australanka Exporter Pvt. Ltd. V s. Indian Bank (2001) 2 SLR 156,

it was held that the appellate jurisdiction in respect of judgments and orders

6

of the High Court of the Provinces made in the exerCIse of its civil

jurisdiction was vested exclusively in the Supreme Court.

In Senanayake and Others Vs. Kohen and Others (2002) 3 SLR 381,

Justice Amaratunga had made the following observation ... :

"It is not proper for the Court of Appeal to examine the legality of the

judgment of the Commercial High Court even for the limited purpose of

safeguarding itself that the Petitioner is entitled to the relief prayed for. If

the Court ventures into such an exercise it is an indirect usurpation of the

exclusive jurisdiction conferred on the Supreme Court by the legislature".

In the case of Merchant Bank of Sri Lanka, vs.J.P. Wijewardena and

Others 2010 (B.L.R) 233, it was held that, the right of appeal from

judgments/orders of the High Court is vested exclusively in the Supreme

Court and this Court cannot exercise even revisionary powers.

Being aggrieved by the said Order, appellants made an application for

special leave to appeal in the Supreme Court. In that case, dismissing the

appeal it was held that the judgment of the Court of Appeal is correct in law

as it has held that the exclusive right of appeal from an order or judgment of

the High Court exercising civil jurisdiction is vested with the Supreme

Court. In that case Suresh Chandra J. observed (other two judges agreeing)

" ... if revisionary jurisdiction to the Court of Appeal is given then it would

give the party applying for revision in a situation as in the present case a

favourable position by granting an additional opportunity of review as

against a party who comes within a purview of the civil jurisdiction of the

High Court regarding other matters as they will be entitled only to the right

to appeal to the Supreme Court".

7

" ..... this would give the party in such circumstances two opportunities

of review of the preliminary judgment when the clear intention of the

Legislature is that there should be only an appeal to the Supreme Court from

any judgment or order of the High Court in the exercise of its Civil

jurisdiction in terms of Section 5(1) and 5(2)".

I am of the view that the cases cited by the learned President's

Counsel have no relevance to the question at issue.

This Court is bound by the authorities of the Supreme Court referred

to above. Moreover, there is a clear statutory provision in Act No.10 of

1996.

Therefore, taking into consideration all the facts, relevant authorities

and submissions made in this case, the Court refuses to issue notice on the

Respondents.

Accordingly, the Petition is dismissed.

P.R. Walgama J.

I agree

Petition is dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL