==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Revision

and Restitutio-in-Integrum in terms of

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

CA /RII/43/2023

PHC/Matale Case No.(Rev) 32/2018

MC Dambulla Case No.80992

Secretary,

Divisional Divisional Secretariat,

Galewela.

PLAINTIFF

Vs.

Adhikari Gedara Sheela Adhikari,

Pahalawewa,

Galakiriyagama

RESPONDENT

And Between

Adhikara Gedara Sheela Adhikari

Pahalawewa,

Galakiriyagama.

RESPONDENT PETITIONER

2

Vs.

1. Secretary,

Divisional Divisional Secretariat,

Galewela.

2. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

PLAINTIFF RESPONDENTS

And Now Between

Adhikara Gedara Sheela Adhikari

Pahalawewa,

Galakiriyagama.

RESPONDENT PETITIONER APPELLANT

Vs.

1. Secretary,

Divisional Divisional Secretariat,

Galewela.

2. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT-

RESPONDENTS

3

Before: R. Gurusinghe J.

&

Dr. Sumudu Premachandra J.

Counsel Rohan Sahabandu, P.C., with Chathurika Elvitigala for

the Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant, instructed by

Pieris & Pieris.

Shemanthi Dunuwille, S.C. for the State.

Written Submissions : Of the Defendant-Petitioner-Appellant filed on

31/10/2025

Of the Plaintiff-Respondents-Respondents filed on

04/08/2025

Argued On : 03/04/2025

Judgment On: 03/12/2025.

Dr. Sumudu Premachandra J.

1] The Respondent Petitioner Appellant seeks the following reliefs and prays to:

a. Issue Notices

b. Issue a stay order staying the operation of the order of the High Court

dated 23/02/2023

c. Set aside the judgement of the High Court dated 23/02/2023

4

d. Set aside the judgement of the Learned Magistrate dated 21/03/2018

e. Grant costs and

f. Such other and further reliefs as Your Lordships’ Court shall seem fit

and meet.

2] Brief history of this application is as follows: the case began in the Magistrate's

Court under Section 66 of the Primary Courts Procedure Act, concerning a

breach of peace regarding a family burial ground. The officer in charge of

Galewela Police Station had filed a report under section 66 of the Primary Court

Procedure Act. The 1st Party (Petitioner) claimed the land, called

"Deganthuduwa," was a Paraveni Property given to her father and used as a

family burial ground for over 75 years, alleging that the 2nd Party

(Ethabendiwewa Upali Himi) unlawfully entered and filled the graves. The 2nd

Party disputed this, claiming the land was not a family burial ground and the

1st Party lacked title. It is seen in the said action that there were two intervenient

parties, namely Adhikari Gedara Thilakaratne and Adhikarigedara Punchim

Menika. However, by order dated 26/01/2016, said case bearing No. 68943(66)

of Dambulla District/Magistrate’s Court, the learned Primary Court Judge held

that possession was to be given to the 1st Party, the Petitioner.

3] The controversy escalated when the Divisional Secretary of Galewela

(Appellant/Petitioner) filed an action seeking recovery of possession under the

State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act of the said land, case bearing No. 80992

of Dambulla District/Magistrate’s Court, the basis of this application.

4] The Respondent (the original 1st Party), now the Petitioner in this application,

objected, asserting the land was a Paraveni Property and provided documents,

5

වා1 to වා 7. After inquiry, the learned Magistrate, by order dated 21/03/2018,

issued an order of ejectment, which was upheld by the Provincial High Court.

5] The Petitioner now seeks a Revision/Restitutio in Integrum, arguing the courts

acted on documents with "no legal value," failed to properly address the land

status as "Paraveni Land," and that the State Land Recovery of Possession Act

cannot apply to Paraveni Property, thus rendering the orders void.

6] When the matter was taken up, the learned State Counsel has taken up

preliminary objections, and parties have filed written submissions with effect to

those objections.

7] The first objection is that the Respondents say that the Petitioner should have

pursued the appropriate statutory appellate remedies, such as a Provincial High

Court (PHC) appeal, or a vindicatio action in the District Court to claim

title/ownership (paraveni). It is seen though; the Petitioner had filed revision

application with regard to the order of 66 Application order, the Petitioner has

not filed any application before High Court, regarding recovery of the State Land

Recovery of Possession Act. She has clear statutory rights against the

Magistrate’s impugned order which was delivered under the State Land Recovery

of Possession Act. Thus, it is clear that despite the alternative remedy, the

Petitioner had filed this application to this court. In Wijersiri Gunawardane &

Others v. Chandrasena Muthukumarana & Others, SC Appeal No. 111/2015

decided on 27.05.2020, his Lordship Aluwihare PC. J. considered and held that;

“One basic distinction would be that while the appellate rights are

statutory, the exercise of revisionary power is discretionary.

6

8] Thus, the Petitioner had a clear-cut statutory remedy, and he failed to exercise

it. In Perera v. Wijewickreme, 15 NLR 411. His Lordship Pereira J. held:

“It was not granted unless no other remedy was available to the applicant

or unless restitution was the more effectual remedy”

9] In the same case, His Lordship Ennis J. held that;

“This is an application for restitutio in integrum. It appears clear that such

an application is not granted in Ceylon if any other remedy is available.”

10] Thus, I am of the view that the Petitioner had not given a reasonable

explanation for not resorting to her appellate rights; thus, the application should

be dismissed.

11] Secondly, the Respondent has mentioned that the Petitioner waited 10

months after the High Court Order before invoking the RII jurisdiction; the delay

of the Petitioner is fatal to this application, as a discretionary relief is sought.

12] In Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation Ltd. v. Shanmugam and Others

[2005] 1 SLR 1, His Lordship Ranaraja J held;

“Restitution reinstates a party to his original legal condition which he has

been deprived of by the operation of law. It is an extraordinary remedy and

will be granted under exceptional circumstances. The remedy can be availed

of only by one who is actually a party to the legal proceeding. He cannot

claim damages but he should have suffered damages. A party seeking

7

restitution must act with the utmost promptitude. The court will not

relieve parties of the consequences of their own folly, negligence or

laches” [Emphasis is added]

13] The Petitioner says that the proceedings were flawed because no valid

application supported the Affidavit that was filed, which is a mandatory

prerequisite under Section 5 of the Act and established case law (Kandiah vs.

Abeykoon, Kandiah v Abeykoon, Sriskantha L.R. Vol. IV, p.96; H/L

Goonewardene J;

“Upon the construction of a statute as a whole, the forms of notice,

application and affidavit had to be in strict compliance with those which the

legislature has thought important enough to set out in the schedules before

the jurisdiction of the magistrate to eject the person in possession or

occupation could be exercised”

14] As I noted above, if the Petitioner had a good ground for argument, it is a

dubious why she has not considered exercising her appellate rights. I do not

think this can be taken as a valid ground for invoking our discretionary

jurisdiction.

15] Though, the Petitioner said that there are flaws in the judicial process, which

deprived her of a fair opportunity to present the facts and her claim that the land

is Paraveni property, cannot be taken as a valid ground since she was afforded

a fair opportunity to get these objections in the original forum and we see a fair

hearing was also given in the original forum.

8

16] In these circumstances, we uphold the preliminary objections. Thus, the

application is dismissed, no costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

I agree.

R. Gurusinghe

Judge of the Court of Appeal