==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

Orders in the nature of Writs of

Certiorari, Prohibition and Mandamus

under Article 140 of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Ceyquartz MBI (Pvt) Ltd, "Dutch House", No. 34/1, Castle Street, Colombo 8.

CA (Writ) App. No. 386/2024

PETITIONER

Vs.

1. Geological Survey and Mines Bureau,

No. 569, Epitamulla Road, Pitakotte.

2. Dr. Kithsiri manchanayake,

The Chairman, Geological Survey and Mines Bureau, J.M.S.N. Jayasingha, The Chairman, Geological Survey and Mines Bureau,

SUBSTITUTED 2ND

RESPONDENT

2

3. Prof. H.M.R. Premasiri,

Director General (Acting), Member, Board of Management, Geological Survey and Mines Bureau,

4. Mr. I.C. Pathiraja,

Member, Board of Management, Geological Survey and Mines Bureau,

5. Ms. Ajitha Batagoda,

Member, Board of Management, Geological Survey and Mines Bureau,

6. Dr. A.M. Hamdani,

Member, Board of Management, Geological Survey and Mines Bureau, U.G. Jayasuriya, Member, Board of Management, Geological Survey and Mines Bureau,

SUBSTITUTED 6TH

RESPONDENT

7. Mr. R. M. Gamage,

Member, Board of Management, Geological Survey and Mines Bureau,

The 2nd to 7th Respondents all of No. 569, Epitamulla Road, Pitakotte.

8. Mr. B.K. Prabath Chandrakeerthi,

Secretary, Ministry of Environment,

3

"Sobadam Piayasa", No. 416/C/1, Robert Gunawardana Mawatha, Battaramulla.

9. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

Before: Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Counsel:

Sanjeewa Jayawardena, P.C. with A.A.M. Illyas, P.C, and Dr. Milhan Mohomed instructed

by Neelakandan & Neelakandan for the Petitioner.

Avanthi Weerakoon, S.C. for the Respondents.

Argued on: 03.03.2026

Delivered on: 09.09.2026

4

Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Judgement

Introduction

The Petitioner is a body corporate duly incorporated under the laws of Sri Lanka, capable of suing

and being sued in its corporate name, and is also a Board of Investments (BOI) approved company.

The Petitioner seeks the intervention of this Court to compel the Respondents to implement the

National Mineral Policy of Sri Lanka 2023.

The 1st Respondent is the Geological Survey and Mines Bureau (hereinafter sometimes referred to

as “GSMB”), which is also a body corporate incorporated in terms of Section 2 of the Mines and

Minerals Act, No. 33 of 1992 (as amended) (hereinafter sometimes referred to as “the Act” or “the

Minerals Act”), is a public functionary charged with the responsibility of the conservation and

management of mineral resources of the country. Further, it asserts that in terms of Section 12(d)

of the Act, it is tasked with the function to regulate inter alia the exploration, mining, trading and

exportation of minerals by issuance of various licenses; therefore, it is the regulatory machinery in

respect of mineral resources of Sri Lanka. The 2nd Respondent is the Chairman thereof, the 3rd

Respondent is the Director General (Acting) of the 1st Respondent, while the 4th to 7th Respondents

are Members of the Board of Management of the 1st Respondent. The 9th Respondent is the

Secretary to the Ministry of Environment, which is the line ministry, and the 10th Respondent is

Honourable Attorney General.

5

Upon the issuance of formal notice, the Respondents filed their objections, and thereafter, the

matter was argued before me on 03.03.2026; hence, this judgement.

The Petitioner’s complaint

The Petitioner asserts that, prior to 1987, the exportation of vein (raw) quartz or unprocessed quartz

in quartz lumps was banned in Sri Lanka. However, in 1987, a policy decision was taken to permit

the exportation of vein quartz, subject to an export price of US Dollar 75 per tonne and the payment

of an export duty of 20%.

In 1993, the Government took a decision to permit the exportation of quartz only as a value-added

product. Accordingly, the company called “Aristons”, which is a shareholder of the Petitioner

company, commenced exporting vein quartz in 1994. Thereafter, in 1994, pursuant to the

Government policy taken in 1993 to permit only the exportation of value-added products, the

“Aristons” company entered into an agreement with the BOI and the Ministry of Industrial

Development; which is marked as P4.

Thereafter, pursuant to the said agreement and another agreement with the BOI, the Petitioner was

floated by the Aristons Private Limited company. The said BOI agreement entered into between

"Aristons" and the BOI is marked as P2 dated 03.02.1996.

The Petitioner asserts that it has been incorporated pursuant to an agreement entered between

"Aristons" and the 1st Respondent.

6

Pursuant to a Cabinet decision in 1999, the 1st Respondent had prepared a National Mineral Policy

in 2023, enshrined in a document marked as P20 annexed to the Petition (which the Petitioner has

obtained following the procedure laid down in the Right to Information Act, No. 12 of 2016 (as

amended)). The said National policy enshrined in P20 complimented by another document

prepared by the Ministry of Industrial Development in 1999, marked as P19 annexed to the Petition.

The Petitioner’s contention is that, from time to time, on an ad hoc basis, the joint ventures

operating in the mining, extraction, and exportation of quartz were permitted to export different

varieties of quartz, including vein and raw quartz, as well as value-added products.

The Cabinet decision dated 27.05.1998 taken to that effect is a national policy, which is marked

as P6.

Further, the Petitioner asserts that, in the meantime, in 2008 a Fundamental Rights application

bearing No. 431/2008 had been filed in the Supreme Court by certain persons engaged in the quartz

mining and exportation industry, and the 1st Respondent was a respondent thereto. However, the

1st Respondent, having considered the way it implements the National policy, finally entered into

an agreement pursuant to a direction given by the Supreme Court in the said Fundamental Rights

Application; according to that, only the licensed companies engaged in mining, processing, selling,

and exportation of quartz in the form of processed quartz or raw quartz in limited quantities, are

permitted to export and nobody else is permitted to mine quartz indiscriminately without any

license and exportation thereof without any licensing as vein quartz or raw quartz since there is no

value-addition.

7

However, the Petitioner was not a party to the said application. Nevertheless, pursuant to a

direction given by the Supreme Court in the said Fundamental Rights application, a report

containing a proposal for a national policy was prepared in respect of the exportation of minerals.

The relevant documents contained therein are marked as P9(a) and P8(b). In addition to that, a

report was forwarded to the Attorney General with a covering letter annexed thereto.

According to the said report, wherein the National policy is contained and marked as P9(b), the

National policy was to maximise the technological use and value-addition of the vein quartz

extracted from various mines and thereby to export the same, while discouraging the exportation

of raw or vein quartz. The objective was therefore to encourage optimum value-addition and

industrialisation of the industry, thereby generating more foreign income therefrom.

Accordingly, the Petitioner commenced export operations of certain quantities of raw products and

value-added products to various countries, thereby generating and bringing foreign exchange into

the country. In addition to that, it generated direct employment for 350 people at its plants in

Nawala, Matale, and Bentota, where it produces High-Purity Silica Quartz, Quartz Grits, and

Engineered Quartz Surfaces.

However, the exportation of different quantities, in different forms of exports of quartz from

different mines, was permitted on an ad hoc basis, and such permission was given by the Cabinet

of Ministers.

However, the initial permits were limited after the expiration of seven years. Then, the exportation

of raw quartz, vein quartz, or unprocessed quartz were limited or banned, unless such quartz

8

extracted from various mines were permitted to export as processed products after value addition.

Only pursuant to the value-addition policy did Aristons had to enter into a BOI agreement with the

Petitioner as a partner thereof; the Petitioner also asserts that it was incorporated for that purpose.

The Petitioner later realised, as transpired from the documents and correspondence between the 1st

Respondent and the Petitioner, that the 1st Respondent had decided to liberalise the said National

policy contained in the report marked as P9(b), which had been prepared pursuant to the directive

given by the Supreme Court in the said Fundamental Rights application. Therefore, the Petitioner

seeks the said writs in this Application.

It further asserts that valuable quartz are not available in every part of the country; however, are

available only in very limited areas such as Galaha-Kandy, Matale, Dambulla, and certain parts of

Galle. Therefore, the mining should be done under close supervision of and by the relevant

authorities, with minimum environmental impact that might result in serious harm to the flora and

fauna as part of the environment. Since there were steps to liberalise the permit issuance process,

there is a new draft “Mineral Investment Agreement” in the pipeline.

The Petitioner is seeking to invoke the writ jurisdiction of this Court to prevent the 1st Respondent

and other Respondents from taking actions of liberalising the exportation of raw quartz or vein

quartz, and to obtain a Writ of Certiorari quashing the issuance of any permit given for the

exportation of raw quartz. In addition to that, the Petitioner seeks a Writ of Mandamus to compel

the 1st Respondent to comply with the National policy.

Accordingly, the Petitioner seeks inter alia the following relief;

9

(b) Grant and issue a mandate in the nature of a Writ of Prohibition, prohibiting the 1st to

the 7th Respondents, and/or all of the Respondents, and/or any one or more of the

Respondents, from permitting the exportation of raw quartz;

(c) Grant and issue a mandate in the nature of a Writ of Certiorari, quashing any decision

by any one or more of the Respondents, to permit the exportation of raw quartz, and or

continuing to permit the exportation of raw quartz;

(d) Grant and issue a mandate in the nature of a Writ of Certiorari, quashing the purported

report of the Technical Evaluation Committee of the GSMB, annexed to the letter dated

29/12/2023 issued by the Information Officer of the GSMB, produced marked "P13";

(e) Grant and issue a mandate in the nature of Writ of Mandamus, directing the

Respondents to duly comply with the Government policy, to prohibit the exportation of raw

quartz from 2009;

(f) Grant and issue a mandate in the nature of a Writ of Mandamus, directing the

Respondents to duly comply with the National Mineral Policy of Sri Lanka- 2023, produced

marked ‘P20’;

The Respondents’ Objections

The Respondents by their Statement of Objections has taken up the position that the 1st Respondent

has taken steps to liberalise the strict nature of the licensing procedure and thus, paved the way or

opened the gates to various entrepreneurs or those who are engaged in mining and/or exportation

10

of quartz, to encourage foreign earnings. In addition to that, it is their main objection that the 1st

Respondent is taking steps to create a level-playing field for anybody to enter into the business of

mining, processing, selling, or exportation of quartz in its raw or processed forms.

Further, they have taken up the position that if the Petitioner’s Application is permitted, a

monopoly will be created for the Petitioner or certain cartel of people in the said business.

Arguments

Dr. Milham Mohamed argued that the Respondents have violated the report of the GSMB, which

was adopted after the Supreme Court decision or the settlement before the Supreme Court. Further,

he argued that before they authorised other competing parties to export quartz in bulk, a hearing

should have been given to the Petitioner to place his objections before such authorisation. Thirdly,

he argued that the authorisation given indiscriminately violates the National Mineral Policy.

On the other hand, Ms. Avanthi Weerakoon argued that the proper parties are not before the Court,

nor are there provisions in the Act itself to prohibit the export of quartz. Further, she argued that

if the Petitioner’s Application is allowed, a monopoly will be created.

Issues to be considered

In view of the matters pleaded by the Petitioner and by the Respondents in their Objections, in

addition to the arguments advanced at the hearing, it is my view that the following issues arise for

the consideration of the Court;

11

(i) Whether there is a national policy with regard to the mining, exportation and selling of

minerals and their by-products;

(ii) Whether the mining of quartz would fall within that policy and whether it is in accordance

with the national policy, and whether there is a prohibition against exporting vein quartz

or quartz in its raw form;

(iii) If the answer to the above is in the affirmative, whether the Government can issue licences

to exporters for the export of vein quartz or raw quartz;

(iv) Whether there is any reasonable and legitimate expectation entertained by the Petitioner

that the Respondents would implement the national policy and not permit anybody to

obtain a licence to export vein quartz or quartz in raw form.

In addition to the oral submissions made before me, the Petitioner as well as the Respondents have

further explained their submissions in writing. Thereby, the Petitioner expects the National policy

to be implemented by the Respondents, particularly by the 1st Respondent, by preventing anybody

from obtaining or preventing the 1st Respondent from issuing any licence to export vein quartz or

quartz in its raw form. Therefore, the Petitioner heavily relies upon the National policy contained

in P20, the report, and the settlement entered into before the Supreme Court in the said

Fundamental Rights application bearing No. 431/2008. The Petitioner also heavily relies upon the

concept of legitimate expectation based on the said National policy contained in P20.

However, on the other hand, it was argued on behalf of the Respondents that the Petitioner cannot

entertain such legitimate expectation because there is no legitimate right or duty cast upon the

Respondents by a statute.

12

In addition to that, it is the position of the Respondents that the Petitioner cannot expect the

Respondents to prevent other exporters from entering into a level-playing field in the exportation

of quartz. Accordingly, it is my view that, having considered the above issues raised by me, I

should proceed to decide this case.

Accordingly, I will now consider the questions raised above one-by-one, to arrive at a conclusion.

National policy

It is argued by the Petitioner that there is a National policy, and the 1st Respondent, along with the

other Respondents officials, are required to stick to following the national policy and implement

the same. However, it is argued for and on behalf of the 1st Respondent and other Respondents

officials that there is no such National policy, and if there is a National policy, it has to be in the

form of a statute.

Be it as it is, now I will consider whether there is a national policy.

There is a national policy to a certain extent which is reflected in the Act itself, and the 1st

Respondent is also established in terms of the same Act as well. However, the provisions thereof

is enacted as far back as in 1992, and therefore, from time-to-time there are certain new provisions

added to the National policy, either in the form of a Cabinet memoranda or in the form of

judgements and reports submitted by the 1st Respondent on the directives given by the Cabinet.

Although the provisions of the said Cabinet memoranda, reports, and Supreme Court judgements

are not enshrined in an Act of Parliament, still the provisions thereof are complimentary to the

13

provisions contained in the Minerals Act of 1992, which can therefore also be considered as part

of the National policy. Therefore, it is my view that there is a national policy contained in the Act;

since it is not comprehensive, from time-to-time interpretations or new provisions in the form of

Cabinet memoranda, and reports filed by the 1st Respondent under the directives of the Supreme

Court or Cabinet have become recognised as part of the National policy.

In addition to the provisions of the Act, there is a Cabinet Memorandum marked as P6 annexed to

the Petition and dated 20.05.1998, where it has been decided by the Cabinet to ban the export of

silica if the necessary requirements are not complied with; additionally, it is also decided that it

must be encouraged to export value-added products more than silica in its raw or vein form.

However, even if the quartz mined in Sri Lanka are permitted to be exported from time-to-time, it

should be limited depending on the requirements. Therefore, it is very clear by the said Cabinet

Memorandum that the policy of the Government is reflected.

Further, it is decided in the same Cabinet Memorandum that only the legal entities engaged in

quartz mining and exportation should be permitted to export; however, this should be done after

creating them as private BOI companies, and not otherwise.

Pursuant to the Cabinet decision taken in 1998, P20 was adopted as the National policy, and

complimentary thereof, P19 was prepared and adopted. In addition to that, the report P9(b) was

also prepared to be filed in the Supreme Court Fundamental Rights application bearing No.

SC/FR/431/2008. As such, the National policy is encapsulated in P20, and the other documents

are only ancillary to that and complimentary thereof.

14

As such, a report had been prepared, and it is marked as P9(a) and P9(b) annexed to the Petition.

The document marked as P9(a) is a letter sent to the Attorney General's Department by the 1st

Respondent based on the report P9(b). According to P9(b), a part of the National policy is set out,

particularly with regard to the quartz mined in Sri Lanka, which proposed that such quartz should

only be permitted to be exported subject to the value-addition made by the various local exporters.

Additionally, how to carry out the value-addition is also set out in the said report itself, and it is

suggested that quartz products with physical or chemical structural changes achieved through an

industry-specific process can be considered as value-addition to the raw quartz mined.

It is also further suggested that lumps and chips of quartz should not be permitted to be exported

and is discouraged, while value-addition should be encouraged.

Value-addition requires the use of foreign technology as most mineral processing technology is

not available locally. Therefore, it is suggested that the best method of evaluating the value-

addition is to ascertain the type of technology used to process the mineral, depending on the end-

user's requirements; for example, if the end-user wants a powder-type quartz, the machinery used

to produce such a product should be installed, having imported it from a country where such

machinery is available.

Therefore, value-addition is a very important and serious process for the purpose of generating

foreign income and employment opportunities generated within the industry to implement the

National policy. Thus, it is my view that there is a policy contained in the various sources

mentioned above.

15

The next question that I have raised is whether mining and exporting raw quartz in its raw form

should not be permitted.

Discouragement of the exportation of non-value-added quartz

Before 1992, there was no restriction on exporting quartz. However, once the Minerals Act came

into existence, it provides that all the minerals, either on the surface or below the soil, belong to

the Government, and identified minerals including quartz and all other sand minerals belong to the

Government as well. Therefore, if somebody is engaged mining, processing, selling, and

exportation of such minerals, they have to obtain a license first. The issuance of license is given

on ad hoc basis in respect of most of the mineral mining and sale.

Quartz is also such a mineral that requires such a license issued on ad hoc basis for its mining,

processing, selling, and exportation purposes.

In 1998, as reflected in P6, a Cabinet decision was taken to have a national policy. Pursuant to that,

the National policy P20 was prepared; complimentary to P20, P19 was also prepared. It should

also be noted that the main salient feature of the National policy in P20 is the promotion of value-

added products and the exportation of value-added products, not raw or vein quartz. In addition to

that, the value-addition has to be done depending on the requirements of the end-user; accordingly,

the local producers are encouraged to invest in sophisticated machinery for the production of value-

added quartz products depending on the requirement of the end-user.

However, it is my view, and as argued by the Petitioner, since value-addition is to be encouraged,

and BOI companies are encouraged to be set up for the purpose of processing quartz mining,

16

processing, sale, and exportation as value-added products, the use of technology is also seriously

encouraged according to the National policy. Therefore, permitting the exportation of raw quartz

is against the said National policy; as such, it is my view that it has to be discouraged. If quartz is

exported as raw quartz or vein quartz, it will first affect the future investors from investing in the

industry; secondly, it will affect the goodwill of the industry and damage the reputation by not

selling value-added products; thirdly, if the value-addition is done in Sri Lanka, more employment

opportunities will be created, and as the value-added products are more expensive than the sale of

raw products, more foreign exchange will be generated for the country. As such, value-addition

should be encouraged.

This is the rationale of the National policy contained in the sources that I have mentioned above.

Thus, the question raised above is answered in the negative and in favour of the Petitioner.

The third question that I have raised is whether the 1st Respondent can issue license to export raw

or vein quartz, and it is my view that it should be discouraged as it has been done so since 1992

because it affects the goodwill of the industry and the country's economy.

Responsibility of the Respondents

It has been argued for and on behalf the Respondents that they are responsible for creating a level-

playing field, and thereby, need to encourage more exporters and business entrepreneurs to enter

into the industry of mining raw or vein quartz and the exportation of the same.

17

However, the 1st Respondent is only entrusted by the Statute to carry on the duties for and on

behalf of the people of this country, and it cannot make policy decisions; it can only merely

implement them. It also must be remembered that to change such a serious National policy, even

the Government cannot do so overnight because the Executive branch of the Government can

implement those policies while holding the national treasures for and on behalf of the country;

therefore, they are holding it on trust for the people of this country.

As such, the Respondents cannot permit anybody do anything according to their whims and fancies

from time-to-time.

Legitimate expectation

Therefore, it is my view in the circumstances that I have explained above, the Petitioner has been

established for the purpose of following the National policy pursuant to a Cabinet decision taken

in 1996, as a BOI company who has been floated by the Aristons Private Limited, who had entered

into an agreement with the BOI, and consequent to the floating of the Petitioner, the Petitioner has

also entered into a subsequent BOI contract as reflected in P2.

Therefore, the Petitioner who has been in the industry, and always followed the directives available

in the various sources as I have referred to above, the Petitioner has also invested in the industry

of quartz mining with the legitimate expectation that indiscriminate mining would not be permitted

by the Trustees of public property, such as the 1st Respondent, who holds the property in the name

of the Nation while permitting mining and exportation expect for the benefit of the Nation.

18

To buttress my view, I rely on the judgement of His Lordship Justice Amerasinghe in the case of

Bulankulama and Others v. Secretary, Ministry of Industrial Development and Others.1

Therefore, it is my view that the Petitioner has legitimately expected that such national policy

could only be implemented by the 1st Respondent and other Respondents officials.

As such, it is my view that writs lie in favour of the Petitioner.

Conclusion

In light of the above-mentioned circumstances, I grant relief as prayed for in prayers (b), (d), (e),

and (f) of the Petition.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

1 [2000] 3 Sri L.R. 243.