..

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

CA 131/2013

H.C. Puthalam - HC: 17/2008

In the mater of an application for appeal under and in terms of Section 331 of the Criminal Procedure Code Act No. 15 of 1979.

The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka

Complainant

Vs.

Senanayaka Appuhamilage Harun Lanthra alias Paul mama

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Senanayaka Appuhamilage Harun Lanthra alias Paul mama

Accused - Appellant

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General Attorney General's Department Colombo 12.

Complainant - Respondent

BEFORE: S. DEVIKA DE LIVERA TENNEKOON J

S. THURAIRA.JA, PC, J

COUNSEL:

ARGUED ON

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS -

DECIDED ON:

2

Accused .-Appellant -Darshana

Kuruppu wuth Thanuja Dissanayake Complainant -Respondent -ASG Wasantha Navaratne Bandara

20.10.2017

Accused - Appellant - 02.11.2015

Complainant-Respondent -15.11.2017

14.02.2018

S. DEVIKA DE LIVERA TENNEKOON J.

The Accused-Appellant (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the Appellant) in

the instant case was indicted in the High COUli of Puthalam on 27.02.2008 for

allegedly committing the following offences;

1. Having abducted Mohomed Ali Fathima Sharmila in order that she may

be forced or seduced to illicit intercourse, or knowing it be likely that she

will be forced or seduced to illicit intercourse an offence punishable

under Section 357 of the Penal Code,

2. In the course of the same transaction for having committed the offence of

rape in respect of the said Mohomed Ali Fathima Sharmila an offence

punishable under Section 364(2)( e) of the Penal Code,

3. In the course of the same transaction for having committed the offence of

wrongful confinement of the said Mohomed Ali Fathima Sharmila an

offence punishable under Section 333 of the Penal Code.

3

The Appellant pleaded not guilty to the said charges and the Prosecution

commenced trial. The Prosecution led the evidence of Mohomed Ali Fathima

Sharmila (PW1), Mohammed Cader Mohammed (PW3), Perumal Gopal (PW4),

Dharmapala Gedara Priyanka Sanjeewani Ariyaratne (PW6), Jayalath Jadege

Indika Prabath (PW7), Dr. Yapa Mudiyanselage Gedara Ilangarathne Banda

(PW5), Udugampolage Aquinas Piyasiri Fernando (PW8) and closed the case.

The case in brief for the prosecution was that the prosecutrix had been at her

Aunts place as her Aunt was ill and on or about the 19th of April 2007 the

Appellant, who was known to her, had come to her Aunts place and informed

her that her father had met with an accident. She had therefore left with the

Appellant who had taken her to PW4's house. The Appellant had then promised

that he will arraigned the marriage between the prosecutrix and her boyfriend

and asked her to do as he says. The Appellant had then proceeded to remove her

clothing and despite her objections had forced her to lay down on a mat in the

room and climbed on her and forcibly removed her undergarments. The

Appellant had then inserted his penis into her vagina. The prosecutrix had tried

to stop the Appellant but had not been successful.

On the following day the prosecutrix's father (PW3) had come to the house

where she was allegedly been held captive and had taken her home. However,

since the Appellant had threatened her not to disclose the incident, she had not

disclosed it to her father or anyone else for about 2 months until her father

brought her a marriage proposal. At this point the prosecutrix had confessed that

owing to what the Appellant had done to her she was unable to get married.

The Appellant made a statement from the dock denying all chargers levelled

against him.

4

At the conclusion of the trial the learned High Court Judge found the Appellant

guilty of all three chargers and sentenced him as follows;

1) For the offence under Section 357 of the Penal Code - Two (2) years

rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 5,0001- (in default 6 months

simple imprisonment)

2) For the offence under Section 364(2)(e) of the Penal Code - Five (5)

years rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 10,0001- (in default 6

months simple imprisonment)

3) For the offence under Section 333 of the Penal Code - One (1) year

rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 5,0001- (in default 6 months

simple imprisonment)

4) A sum ofRs. 50,0001- as compensation to the Victim.

Being aggrieved by the said conviction and sentence the Appellant preferred the

instant Appeal on inter alia the following grounds;

a) The Prosecution has not proved the said charges beyond reasonable

doubt,

b) The contradictions and omissions of the prosecution witnesses go to the

root of the case and thus the conviction of the Appellant cannot be

substantiated,

c) The prosecutrix's evidence does not inspire the confidence and as such is

highly unsafe to convict the Appellant for the above charges,

d) The prosecutrix's evidence was contradicted by Medical evidence and as

such the conviction of the Appellant is highly unsafe,

5

e) The Appellant was denied the right to a fair trial by not gIvmg a

translator.

The first charge against the Appellant is under Section 357 of the Penal Code

which reads;

"Whoever kidnaps or abducts any woman with intent that she may be

compelled, or knowing it to be likely that she will be compelled, to marry

any person against her will, or in order that she may be forced or seduced

to illicit intercourse, or knowing it to be likely that she will be forced or

seduced to illicit intercourse, shall be punished with imprisonment of

either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also

be liable to fine."

On a plain reading of the above proVISIOn it is evident that an essential

ingredient of this offence is that a woman must be kidnaped or abducted to force

or seduce her to illicit intercourse. In determining whether the Appellant had

abducted/kidnapped the prosecutrix to force or seduce her to have illicit

intercourse it is pertinent to consider the nature of the relationship between the

Appellant and the prosecutrix and also the question of consent. These questions

would be considered along with the 2nd charge against the Appellant under

Section 364(2)( e) of the Penal Code which reads;

"Whoever-

(e) commits rape on a woman under eighteen years of age;

6

shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term not test

than ten years and not exceeding twenty years and with fine and

shall in addition be ordered to pay compensation of an amount

determined by court to the person in respect of whom the offence

was committed for the injuries caused to such person;,"

The offence of rape is defined in Section 363 of the Penal Code.

It is prudent to note that on 27.06.2011 the prosecuting State Counsel had

informed Court that he did not wish to proceed with the case on the basis that it

had been revealed by the evidence that sexual intercourse had taken place with

the consent of the prosecutrix (vide page 160 of the Appeal brief). The learned

High Court Judge however had rejected the application of the prosecuting State

Counsel and had proceeded with the trial against the Appellant and thereafter

found the Appellant guilty.

When considering the evidence elucidated at trial a materiel incident is revealed

through the prosecuting witnesses i.e. prior to the alleged incident for which the

Appellant stood trial, the prosecutrix had spent a few days with the Appellant at

PW4's residence. The prosecutrix alleges that the Appellant had taken her to

PW4's house on the pretext of preparing a passport for her to send her overseas

and kept her there for a few days. This is corroborated by PW 4 who also

testified that she seemed happy during her stay at PW4's residence. PW4

testifies that the prosecutrix spent about 3 weeks at his residence whilst PW3

(the father of the prosecutrix) testifies that she was missing for about 9 days.

Thereafter, PW3 had come in search of the prosecutrix and had found her at

PW4's residence. The prosecutrix says that although there was a complaint

7

made against the Appellant to the police regarding this first incident that

nothing resulted from it.

Consequently, when the prosecutrix was living at her aunt's house the Appellant

had come and allegedly taken her away on the pretext that PW3 hqd met with an

accident and thereafter allegedly raped her. On the next day PW3 (the father of

the prosecutrix) had come and taken her home. The incident of rape was only

revealed to PW3 on or about 09.06.2007, about 2 months from the date of the

alleged incident.

The learned ASG submits the case of Ajith Samarakoon Vs. Republic of Sri

Lanka (Kobaigane murder case) 2004 (2) SLR 209 at 220 which held that;

"just because the statement of a witness is belated the Court is not entitled

to reject such statement if the reasons for the delay adduced by the

witness are justifiable and probable the trial Judge is entitled to act on the

evidence of the witness who made the belated statement."

The father of the prosecutrix (PW3) in cross examination states not once but

repeatedly that the prosecutrix had disdosed to him that she was raped on the

same day that she was brought home. However, on the next date when he is

cross-examined he states that the prosecutrix had revealed that she was raped

only after the marriage proposal was brought by him and that it was 2 -- 3 days

after the alleged incident.

However, it was revealed that the prosecutrix had not disclosed the incident of

rape for about 2 months and only revealed the incident to her father (PW3)

when PW3 brought her a marriage proposal thinking she will be unable to get

8

married. The prosecutrix further testifies that she didn't reveal the incident of

rape to anyone since the Appellant had allegedly threatened her with death and

by saying that he would publish her photographs in the papers as a prostitute.

This Court finds that both the prosecutrix's and PW3's conduct and testimony

sheds doubt on the prosecution's case and the delay in making the police

complaint is not justifiable and not probable. The alleged incident was the 2nd

time his daughter, of less than 18 years, had spent with the Appellant. When

considering the evidence led by the prosecution there is no consistency about

how long the prosecutrix spent with the Appellant on the first occasion and it

seems that it could be between 9 days - 3 months. Although PW3 had lodged a

complaint against the Appellant in connection with this incident nothing has

resulted from it. When for the 2nd time the prosecutrix was found with the

Appellant PW3, as her father and guardian, ought to have been more vigilant

and inquired as to what happened to her, instead PW3 did nothing.

However, the prosecutrix had revealed to PW5 (JMO) when PW5 was

examining her that the prosecutrix had an affair with the Appellant and that she

knew that the Appellant was married (vide page 165 of the appeal brief).

Further, although the prosecutrix states in evidence that the Appellant allegedly

raped her as he pleased and states that he did so about four times (the

prosecutrix had told PW5 that it was about 6 times), the evidence of PW5

reveals that the injuries caused to her female genitalia were consistent with

penetration more than 6 times on several occasions.

In the circumstances as discussed above it seems that the prosecutrix had a

consensual relationship with the Appellant and as slIch the charges for illicit

intercourse and rape cannot be substantiated.

9

The third charge against the Appellant relates to the wrongful confinement of

the prosecutrix for a period of 3 days between the period 19.04.2007 and

21.04.2007. It is evident from the testimony of both the prosecutrix and PW3

that the prosecutrix had only spent one night with the Appellant on the 2nd

instance.

Moreover, the many inconsistencies in relation to dates and time, contradictions

and omissions in the narrative, previous and subsequent conduct of the

prosecutrix and her father (PW3) and the belated complaint sheds serious doubt

on the prosecution's case the benefit of which must be for the Appellant. I

therefore hold that it is unsafe to allow the Appellant's conviction and sentence

to stand.

In the circumstances as morefully discussed above this appeal is allowed and we

set aside the conviction and sentence of the learned Trial Judge and the Accused

- Appellant is hereby acquitted.

Appeal Allowed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

S. THURAlRAJA, PC, J

I Agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

\ I