IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

R. Ramani Siriwardhana,

No. 702/1,

Church Road,

Hingurakgoda.

Petitioner

CASE NO: CA/304/2016/WRIT

Vs.

1. R.M.D.P. Pushpakumari,

Divisional Secretary,

Divisional Secretarys Office,

Hingurakgoda.

2. Commissioner General of Land,

Land Commissioner Generals

Department,

No. 1200/6,

Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

3. W.W.A. Chandra,

Land Commissioner

(Development),

Land Commissioner Generals

Department,

No. 1200/6,

2

Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

4. Alahakoon,

Senior Superintendent of Survey,

District Survey Office,

Polonnaruwa.

5. Secretary,

Pradesheeya Sadha,

Hingurakgoda.

6. Dr. Suranga Hewawitharana,

Medical Officer of Health,

MOH Office,

Hingurakgoda.

7. Hon. Magistrate,

Magistrates Court,

Hingurakgoda.

8. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondents

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Sagara Kariyawasam for the Petitioner.

Maithree Jayasinghe, S.C., for the Respondents.

Argued &

Decided on: 26.10.2018

3

Samayawardhena, J.

The Petitioner filed this application seeking a mandate in the

nature of a writ of certiorari to quash the decision of the 1st

Respondent Divisional Secretary to proceed under the provisions

of the State Lands Recovery of Possession Act, No. 7 of 1979, as

amended, without holding a proper inquiry (by the Land

Commissioner as per P18) and/or to quash the Quit Notice

served on the Petitioner under the said Act.

Only the 1st and the 4th Respondents have filed objections to this

application.

The Petitioner does not dispute that the land in question

depicted as P7A in Plan marked P7 made in the year 2000 is a

State land. Among other documents, by P8, which is admitted

by the 1st Respondent in his objections, it is clear that the

Petitioner and his predecessor (her mother) have been in

possession of that portion of land since 1968 (or at least since

1987). By document marked X tendered with the counter

affidavit of the Petitioner, the 3rd Respondent Land

Commissioner admits that the house standing on that land (vide

P2) is about 15 years old by the year 2016.

It is the position of the Petitioner that on the day the land was

surveyed in 2004 by the Government Surveyor in order to issue

Permits to the occupants, she was not present, but immediately

thereafter, inter alia, by P11 and P13 informed that fact to the

Surveyor and the 1st Respondent.

4

When facts remained as such, the Petitioner has received the

above-mentioned Quit Notice dated 27.04.2016. This has been

followed by institution of the Magistrates Court proceedings

against the Petitioner.

Thereafter the Petitioner had complained to the 3rd Respondent

Land Commissioner with the Quit Notice in hand seeking

redress. Having given a hearing to her grievances, the 3rd

Respondent by P18 has directed the 1st Respondent to suspend

the legal proceedings initiated against the Petitioner and called

for the Reports from the 4th and 6th Respondents with the

recommendations of the 1st Respondent to make a final

determination by her (the Land Commissioner). This direction

has not been complied with by the 1st Respondent.

It is thereafter the Petitioner has filed this application before this

Court seeking the above-mentioned relief against the 1st

Respondent.

The learned State Counsel for the Respondents admits that the

3rd Respondent Land Commissioner is the proper authority to

make decisions under the State Lands Ordinance, No. 8 of 1947,

as amended. There is no complaint that the Land Commissioner

acted ultra vires when sending P18 to the 1st Respondent.

The Petitioner does not ask this Court to direct the Respondents

to issue a Permit in her name in respect of this portion of land.

All what the Petitioner seeks is to allow the Land Commissioner

to hold an inquiry with the participation of the Petitioner and

make a determination before sending the Quit Notice. To put

differently, to compel the Divisional Secretary to comply with the

5

direction given by the Land Commissioner by P18. Having regard

to the facts and circumstances of this case, I am convinced that

the Petitioner is entitled to that relief.

In my view, the learned State Counsel should have at the very

beginning agreed to it. Instead of doing it, the learned State

Counsel (no doubt with the best of intentions) has got another

survey done (before objections were filed) and thereafter has

decided to file objections as according to the learned Counsel the

Petitioners request is unreasonable. That is not what the

Petitioner expects and not what the law expects. Who shall

assess the reasonableness or unreasonableness of the

Petitioners claim to continue to stay in the land? With respect,

not the learned State Counsel, but the Land Commissioner.

The new documents including the new Plan and the Report

thereto tendered with the objections of the 4th Respondent have

been prepared after the institution of the action by the 4th

Respondent (at the behest of the learned State Counsel). The

rights of parties shall be determined at the institution of the

action. In comparison with the old Plan P7, learned counsel for

the Petitioner submits that the new Plan and the Report are

biased and particularly prepared to defeat the application of the

Petitioner.

Taking all the circumstances into account, I issue the writ of

certiorari against the 1st Respondent as prayed for in paragraph

(b) of the prayer to the amended petition. The Quit Notice

marked P17A is quashed. Let the Land Commissioner hold the

6

inquiry as contemplated in P18 and make a determination in

accordance with the law. I make no order as to costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal