1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal in terms of section

331(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act

No. 15 of 1979 read with Article 138 of the

constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

Court of Appeal Case No: Bribery Commissioner CA HCC 280/17 Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption HC Colombo Case No: Complainant B/1951/2013

VS.

Thelge Nadeeka Kaumadi Peiris No. 01 A Walana Road, Panadura Accused AND NOW BETWEEN Thelge Nadeeka Kaumadi Peiris No. 01 A Walana road, Panadura. Accused-Appellant

2

VS Bribery Commissioner Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption Respondent

Before : Devika Abeyratne,J

P.Kumararatnam,J

Counsel : Eraj De Silva with Hafeel Fariz, Janagam Sundaramoorthy and Daminda Wijesuriya for the Accused-Appellant.

Subashini Siriwardena with Anusha Sammandapperuma for the Complainant- Respondent

Argued On : 23.11.2021 and 30.11.2021

Decided On : 17.12.2021 ******************** Devika Abeyratne,J

In this case the Director General of the Commission to Investigate

Allegations of Bribery or Corruption, on the directions of the Commission had

indicted the accused appellant who was the school Principal of Mahanama

Navodya School in Panadura in the High Court of Colombo on the following

counts.

3

1. On or about 16th November 2008 in Panadura within the jurisdiction of

this Court, you being a public servant to wit the principal of Mahanama

Navodya School Panadura did solicit a gratification in a sum of

Rs. 25000/- from Sandanampichche Jenita Moreen Fernando as an

inducement or reward to do an official duty to wit to admit Wellasamy

Logeshwaran to Grade 6 of Mahanama Navodya School for the year

2009 and thereby committed an offence punishable under Section 19(b)

of the Bribery Act.

2. At the same date, place and in the course of the same transaction of

Panadura area within the jurisdiction of this Court you being a public

servant to wit the principal of Mahanama Navodya School Panadura did

solicit a gratification in a sum of Rs. 25000/- from Sansanampichche

Jenita Moreen Fernando and thereby committed an offence punishable

under section 19(C) of the Bribery Act.

After trial she was convicted on both counts and sentenced to a term of four

years rigorous imprisonment in respect of each count . In addition a fine of Rs

2500/- in respect of each count with a default sentence of 2 years rigorous

imprisonment in default of payment of fine was imposed and it was ordered that

the substantive jail sentence should run concurrently.

Aggrieved by the said conviction and the sentence the appellant has

preferred this appeal to this Court challenging the said conviction and the

sentence.

In the written submissions of the appellant the grounds of appeal are not

clearly set out. However, Counsel for the appellant Mr.Eraj de Silva who

4

appeared for the appellant at the argument has submitted the following grounds

of appeal on 25.11.2021.

1. The accused appellant was denied a right to Fair Trial, inter alia by

material non-disclosure. Further and accordingly the adverse inferences

drawn in the circumstance in particular, inter alia;

a. Initial police statement

b. Probation report;

c. Initial statement/statements made to probation officers;

d. Complaint to the HRC;

e. HRC Report;

f. Bank Account number written on a piece of paper (showing School

Development Fund Account number)

g. Fathers Evidence

h. Evidence of the Probation Officer;

i. Evidence of Year Nine student of the school

2. Even the evidence given and produced (though selective) there is plenty of

evidence to raise a reasonable doubt in favour of the Appellant;

3. The serious misdirection by the learned trial judge;

4. Burden of proof in criminal trials; the prosecution has not discharged its

burden according to law.

5. No evidence of the Bribery Commission having given their mind inter alia

to a direction to prosecute in this case which goes to the root of the courts

jurisdiction.

6. The Sentencing process is wrong in law

According to the main prosecution witness PW 1, who is the mother of the

school boy PW 3 Logeshwaran who has got through the Grade 5 scholarship

exam , the appellant who was the school Principal of Mahanama Navodya

5

Vidyalaya Panadura, has solicited a sum of Rs 25000/- to admit PW 3 to Grade

6 of that school.

It was alleged that as the solicited money was not paid due to hardship the

family was facing, the appellant has asked the child to be removed from school.

It was also submitted that the child was humiliated in front of other children in

the class for not paying the money. The child had been removed from school and

had been admitted to St Anthonys College in Panadura thereafter. It is admitted

that the child had attended Mahanama school from January to June in 2009.

A complaint had been made by the father of the child to the Bribery

Commission, that the appellant has solicited money to keep the child in school. It

transpired that the Human Rights Commission had been informed about this

incident.

In the Dock Statement of the appellant she has denied the allegations made

against her. She has stated that PW 1 had agreed to contribute to the School

Development Fund where the parents were at liberty to contribute money for the

welfare of the School and that she has given the number of the account of the

School Development Fund to PW 1.

The appellant had stated that PW 3 had come with his mother PW 1 for

the interview without the document described as (Student Progress Report)YsIH

ldh oYkh, which was a document necessary to admit the child to school.

However, as the Principal in the previous school had made a comment why she

was unable to submit that document, the appellant had admitted PW 3 to the

school after informing that the document has to be submitted at the earliest

opportunity. It was the position of the appellant that she never asked for any

money or asked PW 3 to leave school but has continually reminded PW 3 to

6

bring the school leaving certificate as otherwise it is not legal to keep him in the

school.

It was stated that the account number of the School Development Fund

was given to PW 1 and to the other parents who came for the interview. PW 3 in

his testimony at page 195 of the brief has admitted that PW 1 was given the

account number of the Fund. The Account number of the Fund is listed under

item No 6 in the list of productions in the indictment.

PW 3 had been admitted to the English Medium Stream. PW 1 in her

evidence at page 143 of the brief has stated that the Probation Officer has

conceded that if the child was studying in the English Medium, payment of Rs

25000/- was reasonable in the following manner.

In page 143

:

?

: .

.

: ?

: .

: ?

:

. .

.

.

. h 25000/-

.

7

PW 10 who is a retired Additional Director of the Provincial Education

Office at pages 230 and 231 of the brief has stated that contributions are made

to the School Development Fund maintained by the School. Thus, it appears it

was an accepted fact and nothing illegal was imputed to collecting funds in to that

account.

The Counsel for the Appellant among the other grounds of appeal argued

and, vehemently contended that the prosecution has failed to prove the case

beyond reasonable doubt. He submitted that the date, place or time of solicitation

has not been proved and that the learned trial judge has failed to consider these

important points. Further, that the learned trial Judge has misdirected himself

when he has concluded that apart from Rs 25000/- which was to be the

contribution to the School Development Fund another Rs 25000/- was solicited

when there was no evidence to that effect . At page 272 of the brief in the

judgment it states as follows;

..

. 01 . .. 01

.

.

.

.

25,000/-

...

The learned judge who delivered judgment has not had the benefit of

observing the evidence of the main witness PW 1 who alleges that the appellant

solicited money from her. On perusal of her evidence it is apparent that PW1 has

8

been changing her stance and that her evidence is somewhat contradictory and

confusing.

According to PW 1 on receipt of document P1 dated 6.11.2008 informing

PW 3 to come for an interview on 14.11.2008, she with her small daughter, and

a girl named Hansani who was a Year 9 student of the same school has gone to

the school, but as there was no one in school they had gone back home. PW 1

has stated that PW 3 was at home that day with his father as he was not well.

At page 131 of the brief in her evidence in chief PW 01 has testified that

when she went back to school a few days after the 14th of November, the principal

had asked for Rs 25000/- to admit the child to the school. She had informed the

Principal that she would try to find money. At the end of the month she has gone

to the school once again and as the Principal was not in the school, after inquiring

from the watcher she has gone to the Principals house with Rs 10,000/- which

was offered to the appellant who refused to take it and insisted the full amount

of Rs 25000/-.That day also she has been with Hansani and her small daughter.

At page 136, PW 1 has said the appellant wanted her to buy the books for the

child with the Rs 10000/ - in the following manner.

In page 136 of the brief.

: 25000/- ? : .

: ? : .

: ?

: . 25000/- . 10000/- .

9

.10000/- 10000/- . . . 25000/- . : . 10000/-

?

: . 25000/- .

At page 131 of the brief PW 1 has stated that the money was solicited

when she met the Principal at the school. Thus, the evidence is unclear whether

the appellant asked for Rs 25000/- at the school or at her residence. PW 1 speaks

of having taken the Rs 10000/- to the residence of the appellant which was refused

and the total amount of Rs 25000/= was demanded.

It is only the evidence of PW 1 that is before court with regard to

solicitation. The most important issue to consider is whether there was

solicitation? Is the evidence of PW 1 clear, cogent and established to consider

there was solicitation?

In the indictment the date of solicitation is on or around the 16th of

November 2008. This appears to be the date in P1 informing the date of interview.

PW1 has been unable to fix the exact date when she met the Principal in school.

What is stated is that it was a few day after the 14th of November, when for the

first time Rs 25000/- was solicited. Even if one believes that the appellant

solicited the payment even before seeing the student (according to PW 1s

evidence), the evidence that when Rs 10000/ was offered could have been

corroborated to some extent if Hansani was called as a witness.

10

There is no explanation why Hansani who is said to have been with PW 1

when she offered the money was not called to corroborate the evidence of PW 1.

It is trite law that it is not necessary to call a certain number of witnesses

to prove a fact. However, if Court is not impressed with the cogency and the

convincing character of the evidence of the sole testimony of the witness, it is

incumbent on the prosecution to corroborate the evidence as stated in Sunil Vs AG

1999 (3) SLR page 191 where it was held;

1. It is trite law that the trial Judge who hears a bribery trial is entitled

to convict on the sole testimony of a prosecution witness without any

corroboration provided he is impressed with the cogency, convincing

character of the evidence and the testimonial trustworthiness of the

sole witness.

2. It is an incorrect statement of the law to hold that a reasonable

doubt arises on the mere fact that the prosecution case rested on the

uncorroborated evidence of a solitary prosecution witness.

In King vs Chalo Singho 42 NLR Page 269 it was held;

Prosecuting Counsel is not bound to call all the witnesses named on

the back of the indictment or tender them for cross-examination. In

exceptional circumstances the presiding Judge may ask the

prosecuting Counsel to call such a witness or may call him as a

witness of the Court.

It is incomprehensible why Hansani was not called as a witness who

according to PW 1 was with her when Rs 10,000/= was offered and refused and

a demand for the full amount was made.

11

In Walimunige John and Another vs State 76 NLR 488 it was held;

The question of a presumption arises only where a witness

whose evidence is necessary to unfold the narrative is withheld by the

' prosecution and the failure to call such witness constitutes a vital

missing link in the prosecution case and where the reasonable

inference to be drawn from the omission to call the witness is that he

would, if called, not have supported the prosecution. But where one

witness's evidence is cumulative of the other and would be a mere

repetition of the narrative, it would be wrong to direct a jury that the

failure to call such witness gives rise to a presumption under section

114 (f) of the Evidence Ordinance."

Liyanage vs Attorney General (1978-79) 2 SLR 111 CA ), also considered

that in a trial under the Bribery Act on a charge of solicitation it is unsafe to allow

a conviction to stand solely on the uncorroborated testimony of the complainant.

It was held .. In regard to count 1 however the evidence of Agnes Nona is

uncorroborated. The learned District Judge does not seem to have addressed his

mind to this fact. I do not think it is safe to allow the conviction on count 1 to

stand solely on the uncorroborated testimony of the complainant Agnes Nona

particularly in view of the fact that the learned District Judge himself appears to

have been reluctant to act on her evidence alone. We therefore quash the

conviction and sentence on count 1..

Baddewithana v Attorney General [1990] 1 SLR 275 CA

P.R.P.Perera J held I am however in agreement with the submission of

Counsel for the appellant, that it would be unsafe to permit the conviction of the

accused appellant in this case, to stand in the absence of any corroborative

evidence to support the evidence of the virtual complainant Cader Ibrahim, in

regard to the purpose for which the money was accepted as set out in the

12

Indictment. On an examination of the totality of the evidence of this case, it is

clear, that there is no independent corroboration of the evidence of the virtual

complainant, either in respect of the allegation that the accused-appellant

accepted a sum of Rs. 5 as an inducement or a reward to perform an official act,

or that he accepted a sum of Rs. 20 on 11.1.75 for the same purpose. There is no

corroboration of the evidence of the virtual complainant Cader Ibrahim in

respect of the charge set out in count (3) as well.

..This lapse on the part of the prosecution has to be considered in the

light of the evidence of Habeebu-Thamby a witness called by the defence who has

testified to the effect that the conversation between Cader Ibrahim and the

accused-appellant related to some money that was due to the accused-which

according to the defence was rent payable by the virtual complainant to the

accused-appellant's sister-in-law.

..I am therefore of the opinion that in the absence of any corroborative

evidence relating to the purpose for which the accused-appellant accepted this

money it would be unsafe to permit a conviction of the accused appellant on

charges under the Bribery Act to stand.

Loku Bogahawattage Gedera Justin Weeraratne v Director General,

Bribery Commission (CA105-106/98 decided on 28.10.2003)

..A careful scrutiny of the proceedings shows, one Nishantha had been

a witness to many of the events connected with the alleged transaction. Nishantha

had been an attesting witness to the document marked P2 which described the

whole transaction as a loan. It is also incomprehensible as to why he was not

cited and called as a witness he could have thrown much light on the whole

13

transaction. The failure of the prosecution to call this person who had been

present at the transaction, throws a serious doubt on the veracity of the

prosecution story. The failure of the prosecution to call an important witness also

gives rise to the presumption under s.114 of the Evidence Ordinance.

. The receipts (P1-P2) issued in respect of the transaction also clearly show

that the money was accepted as a loan.

.. Taking the totality of evidence into account it cannot be said that the

prosecution has proved its case beyond reasonable doubt.

The above authorities stress the importance of corroboration in certain

instances.

The learned trial judge has in most places in the judgment referred to the

evidence of PW 2. ( which has to be PW 3 ) and commented on the probability

and consistency factors of the evidence of PW 1 and PW 2. It is important to keep

in mind that PW 3 was never a witness to the allegations made by PW 1 of the

instances where Rs 25000/- was demanded from PW 1.

However, the trial judge has not given his mind to vital discrepancies in

their evidence. For instance with regard to the application form, PW 1 has

specifically stated that she is the one who filled it and that she recognized her

handwriting when she saw the application form in the appellants hands when the

alleged solicitation had taken place. (page 133 of the brief)

Contrary to this evidence at page 170 of the brief PW 3 has stated he

personally filled the application form.

14

Likewise, with regard to the interview of PW 3, PW 1 has specifically

stated PW 3 was not interviewed. ( page 161) whereas PW 3 has stated he went

for the interview with his mother PW 1 (page 174, 180, 181) and further stated ,

that there was a discussion about payment to the School Development Fund .

These are vital discrepancies in the evidence of the main prosecution witnesses

the learned trial judge should have considered. These contradictions in the

testimony of PW 1 and PW 3 cannot be considered as minor discrepancies.

In this background, I am of the view when considering the serious charge

against the appellant, especially when there is no acceptable reason given why

Hansani was not called as a prosecution witness, it is dangerous to rely on the

sole evidence of PW 1.

It is also to be considered that if the money that was demanded was for the

personal use of the appellant, why the account details of the School Development

Fund was given, which as stated earlier is listed in the indictment. There is

uncontradicted evidence of PW 1 herself, that the Rs 10,000/- that was offered to

the appellant was utilized to buy books for PW 3 on the directions of the appellant.

Another question to consider here is would a person who had demanded a bribe,

advise PW 1 to buy books with the Rs 10000/- without taking what was offered

to her ?

In K Padmathillake alias Sergeant Elpiytiya V. The Director General,

Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption, 2009 2 SLR 151

SC,

..It has to be stressed here that credibility of prosecution witnesses

should be subject to judicial evaluation in totality and not isolated scrutiny by the

15

Judge. When witnesses makes inconsistent statements in their evidence either at

one stage or at 2 stages, the testimony of such witnesses is unreliable and in the

absence of special circumstances, no conviction can be based on the testimony of

such witnesses. On the other hand one cannot be unmindful of the proposition

that Court cannot mechanically reject the evidence of any witness. With regard

to appreciation of evidence in criminal cases it would be of importance to quote

what Sir John Woodroffe & Amir Ali had to say in their work on - Law of

Evidence-18th Edition- Vol. 1 at pg. 471:-

No hard and fast rule can be laid down about appreciation of evidence.

It is after all a question of fact and each case has to be decided on the facts as

they stand in that particular case. Where a witness makes two inconsistent

statements in his evidence with regard to a material fact and circumstance, the

testimony of such a witness becomes unreliable and unworthy of credence.

Further it is the paramount duty of the Court to consider entire evidence

of a witness brought on record in the examination-in-chief, cross-examination

and re-examination. In other words Courts must take an overall view of the

evidence of each witness...

I am of the view that it is not safe to allow the conviction solely on the

uncorroborated testimony of PW 1.

In the light of the above authorities, when considering the totality of the

evidence it is apparent that the prosecution has failed to prove beyond reasonable

doubt that there was solicitation by the appellant on the date specified in the

indictment. The benefit of that doubt must ensue to the appellant.

16

As the prosecution has failed to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt,

there is no necessity to consider the other grounds of appeal argued by the

counsel for the appellant.

Therefore, we allow the appeal and set aside the conviction and the

sentence and acquit the appellant from both charges.

Appeal Allowed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

P.Kumararatnam,J

I Agree JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL