Page 1 of 5

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

R. C. de Soysa

No. 23, Paramulla Road,

Pamburana,

Matara.

Petitioner

Vs.

1. E. M. S. B. Ekanayake

Secretary to the President of Sri Lanka,

Presidential Secretariat,

Galle Face Center Road,

Colombo 01.

2. Hon. Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department,

Hulftsdorp,

Colombo 12.

In the matter of an application for mandates in

the nature of Writs of Certiorari, Mandamus

and Prohibition in terms of Article 140 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

CA/WRIT/398/2022

Page 2 of 5

3. S. Alahakoon

Purported Chief Secretary-Southern

Province,

Office of the Chief Secretary,

H. S. Dhanayake Mawatha,

Galle.

Respondents

Before : Sobhitha Rajakaruna J.

Dhammika Ganepola J.

Counsel : Sandamal Rajapaksha with Sachira Andrahannadi for the Petitioner.

Sumathi Dharmawardena PC, ASG with S. Dunuwille SC for the

Respondents.

Supported on : 25.11.2022

Decided on : 10.02.2023

Sobhitha Rajakaruna J.

The Petitioner was holding the post of Chief Secretary of the Provincial Council of the

Southern Province from the year 2015 until the Petitioner was informed by the 1st

Respondent by letter dated 16.09.2022 (marked P6) that his appointment had been

terminated with effect from 20.09.2022. Thereafter, the 3rd Respondent was appointed as

the Chief Secretary by His Excellency the President (President).

The Petitioner is seeking for a writ of Certiorari quashing the decision and/or order

communicated to him by the 1st Respondent by the said letter P6 to remove the Petitioner

Page 3 of 5

from the post of Chief Secretary. The Petitioner alleges that such decision is illegal, ultra

vires, unlawful, arbitrary, capricious and also against the principles of legitimate

expectation. Further, a writ of Certiorari is also sought to quash the appointment of the 3rd

Respondent to the post of Chief Secretary.

The Petitioner has taken steps to prefer an appeal to the 1st Respondent by letter dated

25.09.2022, marked P7, setting out his alleged grievance with regard to the decision taken

to remove him from the said post. The Petitioner contends that there has been no

allegation or reference to any wrong doing by him and therefore, there is no justifiable

basis for his removal from office.

In a nutshell, the Petitioners grievance is that he could not complete the full term of office

as the Chief Secretary due to the termination of his appointment by the President.

Moreover, the Petitioner pleads that he is entitled to work beyond 60 years of age in view

of the Public Administration Circular No.03/2018.

The learned Additional Solicitor General (ASG) who appears for the Respondents

raising the following preliminary objections moved that the instant Application be

dismissed in limine;

i. Petitioner is not entitled to challenge the impugned decisions (P6) in terms of

Article 35 of the Constitution.

ii. The Governor of the Southern Province is a necessary party to this Application and

the Petitioner has failed to make the said Governor a party.

iii. The Petitioner cannot maintain this Application as the reliefs prayed for in the

prayer of the Petition are futile.

iv. The Petitioner was employed based upon a contract of service and accordingly, no

writ lies upon such contracts.

Now, I advert to the legal matrix in respect of the matters pleaded in the instant

Application of the Petitioner.

In terms of Section 31 of the Provincial Councils Act No. 42 of 1987 (Act), the President

shall appoint the Chief Secretary of each Province with the concurrence of the Chief

Minister of that Province. The Section 32(1) of the Act stipulates that subject to the

provisions of any other law the appointment, transfer, dismissal and disciplinary control

Page 4 of 5

of officers of the provincial public service of each Province is vested in the Governor of

that Province.

It is to be noted that the Petitioner does not assert that the power to dismiss him from

service is vested with the Governor under the said Section 32(1). Anyway, it cannot be

assumed that the Petitioner would be subjected to disciplinary control of the Provincial

Public Service Commission to which the Governor could delegate such powers. It is clear

that the Petitioners appointing authority was the President and the Provincial Public

Service Commission has no role to pay in reference to the said appointment.

Although there is no direct application of the provisions of Section 36 of the Act to the

instant Application, it is observed that the President has the authority, by virtue of the said

Section, to make orders and take actions if any difficulty arises in giving effect to the

provisions of this Act.

The cardinal argument of the learned ASG is that the Petitioner is not entitled to have and

maintain this Application on the strength of the provisions of the Article 35 of the

Constitution

35. (1) While any person holds office as President, no proceedings shall be

instituted or continued against him in any court or tribunal in respect of anything

done or omitted to be done by him either in his official or private capacity:

Provided that nothing in this paragraph shall be read and construed as restricting

the right of any person to make an application under Article 126 against the

Attorney-General, in respect of anything done or omitted to be done by the

President, in his official capacity:

Provided further that the Supreme Court shall have no jurisdiction to pronounce

upon the exercise of the powers of the President under paragraph (g) of Article 33.

The impugned order P6 has been issued by the 1st Respondent in respect of the

termination of services of the Petitioner by the President in his official capacity. Thus, I

uphold the jurisdictional objection raised by the Respondents as this Court has no

jurisdiction to entertain any application against the President in respect of anything done

or omitted to be done by the President either in his official or private capacity. However,

as per the proviso to Article 35(1) of the Constitution, any person is entitled to make an

Page 5 of 5

application under Article 126 against the Attorney General in respect of anything done or

omitted to be done by the President in his official capacity. Having considered the

jurisdictional objection as above, the requirement of examining the other preliminary

objections of the Respondents would not arise.

Additionally, the Petitioners services as the Chief Secretary to the relevant Provincial

Council has been extended on 01.12.2021 upon reaching the retirement age of 60 years.

The Petitioner has not provided adequate material to this Court to establish his claims

under the aforesaid Public Administration Circular No. 03/2018.

In the circumstances, I proceed to refuse the issuance of formal notice of this Application

on the Respondents.

Application is dismissed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Dhammika Ganepola J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal