Page 1 of 9

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of

section 331 (1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No- 15 of 1979, read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Court of Appeal No: Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

CA/HCC/180/2020 COMPLAINANT

Vs.

High Court of Kandy Bogayagama Chandrasenage Suren Perera

Case No: HC/57/2019 ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

Bogayagama Chandrasenage Suren Perera

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENT

Page 2 of 9

Before : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

: P. Kumararatnam, J.

Counsel : Asela Serasinghe for the Accused Appellant

: Riyaz Bary, DSG for the Respondent

Argued on : 09-01-2023

Written Submissions : 14-03-2022 (By the Accused-Appellant)

: 02-08-2022 (By the Respondent)

Decided on : 13-02-2023

Sampath B Abayakoon, J.

The accused appellant (hereinafter referred to as the accused) filed this appeal

on the basis of being aggrieved by the conviction and the sentence of him by the

learned High Court Judge of Kandy.

The appellant was indicted before the High Court of Kandy for committing 9 acts

of pawning fake jewellery at the Kandy branch of the Peoples Bank between the

period of 28th August 2010 and 25th June 2011, and thereby committing offences

punishable in terms of section 5(1) of the Offences Against Public Property Act

as amended.

After trial, he was found guilty of all nine counts preferred against him by the

judgement dated 30-07-2020, and he was sentenced to two years each rigorous

imprisonment for all 9 counts, apart from the respective fines imposed on all the

counts.

The jail term imposed was ordered to be effective concurrently.

Grounds Of Appeal

At the hearing of this appeal, the learned Counsel for the appellant formulated

the following grounds of appeal for the consideration of the Court.

Page 3 of 9

1. The penal sections under which the accused was charged and

proceeded to trial was defective and there was no basis for the learned

trial judge to convict the appellant for offences punishable in terms of

section 5(1) of the Offences Against Public Property Act.

2. The prosecution has failed to establish the appellants identity as the

person who pawned fake jewellery to the bank beyond reasonable

doubt.

3. The learned High Court Judge has failed to consider the defence of the

appellant.

Making submissions before the Court, the learned Counsel for the appellant

pointed out that it was before a single Judge, the trial has taken place on day-

to-day basis and the said trial has taken place on the basis of the original charges

filed against the appellant in the indictment for which he has pleaded not guilty.

After the conclusion of the trial on 22nd July 2020, the judgement had been set

to be pronounced on 30th July 2020. It was pointed out that on the said day,

before the pronouncement of the judgement, the prosecuting State Counsel has

made an application to the Court informing that the charges upon which the

trial proceeded was defective in relation to the penal sections. It has been pointed

out that the correct penal section should have been section 5(2) of the Offences

Against Public Property Act and not section 5(1) as mentioned in the charges

preferred against the appellant. The learned State Counsel has made an

application to amend the charges in terms of section 167 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

It was shown that although the indictment has been amended accordingly on

the date of the judgement and the judgement has been pronounced, the

judgement does not reflect the amended charges or that the evidence has been

considered on the basis of cheating. Pointing to the analysis of the evidence by

the learned High Court Judge in her judgement, it was submitted by the learned

Counsel that the evidence has been considered on the basis of criminal breach

Page 4 of 9

of trust and the accused has been convicted on the same basis and not on the

basis of cheating where the penal section would be section 5(2) of the Offences

Against Public Property Act.

It was his view that this was a total misdirection, and there is no basis to allow

the conviction of the appellant to stand, as it has been reached by considering

the evidence on a wrong basis.

He also contended that during the trial, the accused has been identified only as

a dock identification and the prosecution has failed to lead any evidence how the

relevant witnesses can identify him in such a manner. He also contended that

the prosecution has failed to establish the appellants identity as the person who

pawned fake jewellery to the bank by producing evidence to establish his identity

through his National Identity Card, as he is alleged to have produced it to the

bank for the purpose of pawning the said fake jewellery.

The learned Deputy Solicitor General (DSG) representing the respondent Hon.

Attorney General conceded that by going through the judgement, it appears to

be that the evidence has been considered by the learned High Court Judge on

the basis of an offence in relation to a criminal breach of trust and conviction

appears in the judgement also has been based on section 5(1) of the Offences

Against Public Property Act.

However, he pointed out to the last four lines of the page 33 of the judgement

(page 483 of the appeal brief) where the learned High Court Judge has referred

that the appellant has fraudulently and dishonestly induced the bank officials

and taken the money belonging to the government, in justifying the conviction.

Considerations of The Grounds of Appeal

As pointed out correctly and agreed, the entire trial against the appellant has

taken place on the basis that he has committed the offences punishable in terms

of section 5(1) of the Offences Against Public Property Act. For matters of clarity,

Page 5 of 9

I would now reproduce the first count preferred against the appellant where the

other 8 counts are also on similar line.

Count 1- 2010 28 2011 25

14200/=

1999 28

1982 12

5(1) .

As agreed by the learned Counsel for the appellant and the learned DSG, in

consideration of the facts and the circumstances, this is a case where the charges

against the appellant should have been on the basis that he committed the

offence of cheating, although the charges laid in the indictment does not refer

directly to the offence of cheating. However, it was agreed that the way the alleged

acts have been committed had been adequately described in the charges.

The relevant section 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act where the

essential requisites of a charge are described, reads as follows.

164 (1) Every charge under this code shall state the offence with

which the accused is charged.

(2) If the law which creates the offence gives it any specific

name, the offence may be described in the charge by that name

only.

(3) If the law which creates the offence does not give any

specific name, so much of the definition of the offence must be

stated as will give the accused notice of the matter with which

he is charged.

Page 6 of 9

(4) The law and section of the law under which the offence said

to have been committed is punishable shall be mentioned in the

charge.

(5) The fact that the charge is made equivalent to a statement

that every legal condition required by law to constitute the

offence charged was fulfilled in the particular case.

(6) The charge shall when it is preferred, whether at the inquiry

preliminary to committal for trial or at the trial, be read to the

accused in a language which he understands.

The above requirements of a charge clearly show that it is mandatory to mention

the punishable section of the offence committed by an accused person in a

charge. It is clear from the proceedings that the trial has taken place entirely on

a wrong punishable section when the matter was set for judgement on 30th July

2020.

It appears that after realizing this defect in the indictment, the learned

prosecuting State Counsel has brought it to the notice of the Court and had

invited the Court to act under section 167 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act

where the Court may alter any indictment or charge at any time before the

judgement is pronounced or in the case of trials before the High Court by a jury

before the verdict of the jury is returned.

When this matter was brought to the attention of the learned High Court Judge

on the day of the judgement, the learned High Court Judge has correctly decided

to act in terms of section 167 and 168 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.

The relevant order made by the learned High Court Judge, which appears on

page 487 of the appeal brief, reads as follows.

.

.

Page 7 of 9

5(2)

. .

.

.

It is clear from the indictment that the learned High Court Judge had amended

the penal sections of the charges accordingly to read as section 5(2) of the

Offences Against Public Property Act. I do not find any reason to disagree with

the procedure adopted by the learned High Court Judge as it has been provided

for in the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.

However, the issue arises when reading what was stated in the judgement as

contended by the learned Counsel for the appellant. It is clear that when the

learned prosecuting State Counsel made the application to amend the penal

section of the charges, the judgement has already been prepared and ready to

be pronounced on that day, as it was the date fixed for the pronouncement of

the judgement. It appears that after the said amendment was made, read and

explained to the accused, the learned High Court Judge has straight away

proceeded to pronounce the judgement.

In the judgement which appears on page 451 of the appeal brief, the learned

High Court Judge has commenced by reproducing the nine charges under which

the appellant was indicted as stated in the original indictment upon which the

trial proceeded to its conclusion, where the penal section has been mentioned as

section 5(1) of the Offences Against Public Property Act.

Section 5(1) of the Offences Against Public Property Act is the section whether a

person misappropriates or causes the criminal breach of trust in relation to a

public property can be punished.

As the Penal sections of the nine charges had been amended by the time the

judgement was pronounced, the judgement should mention the nine charges

Page 8 of 9

with the penal section as section 5(2) of the Offences Against Public Property Act.

If the evidence was considered in terms of section 5(2), the considerations should

have been to find whether the offence of cheating has been committed by the

appellant.

However, as pointed out correctly by the learned Counsel for the appellant, in

analyzing the evidence at page 31 of the judgement (page 481 of the appeal brief),

it appears that the consideration has been on the basis that the appellant has

committed the criminal breach of trust. The relevant portion of the judgment

reads as follows:

,

.

Furthermore, at page 33 of the judgement (page 483 of the appeal brief), it has

been stated thus;

.

This goes on to amply demonstrate that the judgement had been on the basis of

criminal breach of trust and not on the basis of cheating as for the amended

indictment. I am in no position to agree with the contention of the learned DSG

to otherwise. It is clear that, the judgement upon which the appellant was

convicted was not a judgement based on the indictment as amended. Therefore,

the conviction and the sentence cannot be allowed to stand.

Accordingly, I set aside the conviction and the sentence dated 30-07-2020.

The next matter that arises is whether this is a fit and proper case to send for a

retrial. This is an action instituted based on offences committed between the

period of 28-08-2010 and 25-11-2011, some 13 years ago.

Page 9 of 9

When considering the evidence placed before the Court, it is apparent that the

appellant had been arrested not while committing the act but subsequently on

a tip-off. There had been no identification parade held to identify the appellant

by the officers of the bank who transacted with him. Only a dock identification

has been made. As pointed out at the hearing of this appeal, the prosecution has

merely asked the witnesses to identify the appellant without first clarifying from

whether they are in a position to identify the person who pawned jewellery, if

seen again and the basis for such an identification. As there is a tendency for a

witness to believe that the accused person may be the person who committed

the crime, such a dock identification is highly unreliable which cannot be a basis

for a conviction.

Although the indictment speaks about a one single officer being cheated on all

nine occasions, the evidence had been that apart from five occasions, two other

officers also have been cheated. It appears that in the indictment, it has been

only mentioned that one bank official has been cheated on all nine occasions.

Given the time period that has lapsed and the mentioned infirmities in the

evidence and the investigations, I am of the view that this is not a fit and a proper

case to send for a retrial.

Therefore, I acquit the appellant of the charges preferred against him.

The appeal allowed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P. Kumararatnam, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal