IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal by way of

a Stated Case on a question of law

for the opinion of the Court of

Appeal under and in terms of

Section 141 (1) of the Inland

Revenue Act, No. 38 of 2000 (as

amended).

Lanka Marine Services (Private)

Limited,

130, Glennie Street,

Colombo 02.

and also of,

No. 117, Sir Chittampalam A.

Gardiner Mawatha,

Colombo 02

Appellant

Case No. CA/TAX/0004/2009

BRA 558

SCA-216

Vs.

The Commissioner General of

Inland Revenue,

Department of Inland Revenue,

Sir Chittampalam A. Gardiner

Mawatha,

Colombo 02.

Respondent

2

CA TAX 04 2009 BRA 558 SCA - 216

Before : Dr. Ruwan Fernando J. &

M. Sampath K.B. Wijeratne J.

: Romesh de Silva, P.C. with Harsha

Amarasekara, P.C. and Dr. Shivaji Felix for

the Appellant

F. Jammel, A.S.G., P.C. with N.

Wigneswaran, D.S.G for the Respondent.

Argued on : 02.12.2021 & 14.12.2021

Written Submissions filed on

: 18.10.2019 (by the Appellant)

20.05.2020 (by the Respondent)

Decided on : 31.03.2022

Dr. Ruwan Fernando, J.

Introduction

[1] This is an appeal by the Appellant by way of a Case Stated against the

determination of the Board of Review dated 07.01.2009 confirming the

assessment made by the Assessor by letter dated 10.03.2005. The taxable

period related to the appeal is the year of assessment 2001/2002.

Factual Background

[2] The Appellant is a limited liability company incorporated under the provisions of the Companies Act, No. 17 of 1982 and the principal activity of the Appellant is supply of marine fuel and lubricants to local and foreign vessels. The Appellant submitted its return of income for the year of assessment 2001/2002 and applied for the concessionary tax rate of 15% on the ground that the supply of bunker fuel to foreign vessels can be treated as a qualified export profits and income under Section 47 of the Inland Revenue Act, No. 38 of 2000 (as amended). The Appellant further

3

CA TAX 04 2009 BRA 558 SCA - 216

claimed an exemption under Section 15 (j) (ii) of the Inland Revenue Act, No. 38 of 2000 (as amended).

[3] The Assessor by letter dated 10.03.2005 (B) acting under Section 134

(3) of the Inland Revenue Act, No. 38 of 2000 rejected the return of income

for the year of assessment 2001/2002 for the following reasons:

1. According to the documents produced by the Appellant, no export

has been made during the year of assessment;

2. Therefore, the concessional rate of 15% under Section 47 of the

Inland Revenue Act, No. 38 of 2000 is not applicable and income tax to

be calculated at the rate of 35%.

[4] Accordingly, the notice of assessment (A) was issued by the Assessor

in respect of the year of assessment 2001/2002.

Appeal to the Commmissioner-General of Inland Revenue

[5] Being dissatisfied with the said assessment, the The Appellant appealed

to the Commissioner-General of Inland Revenue (hereinafter referred to as

the Respondent) against the said assessment and the Respondent

referred the appeal to the Board of Review under Section 139 of the Inland

Revenue Act, No. 38 of 2000.

Appeal to the Board of Review

[6] The Board of Review by its determination dated 07.01.2009 confirmed

the assessment made by the Assessor and and held that:

1. The word export, shall mean the sending of goods out of Sri Lanka

and therefore, there has to be a destination point outside Sri Lanka to

constitute an export. The Appellant did not produce any evidence to

show that the deliveries were made on the high seas to reach the

ultimate destination;

2. Sales to foreign ships which call over at the ports of Sri Lanka are made

within the territorial waters of Sri Lanka and thus, all sales were to be

considered as sales made in Sri Lanka by the Appellant and not

exports relying on the gudulines provided in the case of Burmah Shell

4

CA TAX 04 2009 BRA 558 SCA - 216

Oil Storage and Distributing Co. of India Ltd v. Commercial Tax Officers

and Others AIR 1961 SC 315);

3. The export sales and lighterage income reflected under the heading

export revenue in the financial statement cannot be deemed as

qualified export profits and income for the purposes of Sections 47 of

the Inland Revenue Act, No. 38 of 2000;

4. The Appellant did not send any goods abroad but only received a

service fee for delivery made in Sri Lanka and the Appellant is neither

an exporter in trade nor a receiver of export income from the supply

of bunker fuel, and accordingly, the Appellant is not entitled to claim

the exemption under Section 15 (j) of the Inland Revenue Act, No. 38

of 2000.

Questions of Law for the Opinion of the Court of Appeal

[7] Being dissatisfied with the said determination of the Board of Review,

the Appellant appealed to the Court of Appeal and formulated the following

questions of law in the Case Stated for the opinion of the Court of Appeal:

(1) Are the supplies made by Lanka Marine Services (Pvt) Ltd to foreign

ships capable of being lawfully classified as exports?

(2) Is Lanka Marine Services (Pvt) Ltd entitled to enjoy the benefits

conferred by section 47 and section 15 (j) of the Inland Revenue Act,

No. 38 of 2000 as amended?

Analysis

Questions of Law Nos. 1, & 2

[8] It is not in dispute that the principal activity of the Appellant is the supply

of marine fuel and lubricants to local and foreign vessels. At the hearing of

the Appeal, the learned Presidents Counsel for the Appellant, Mr. Romesh

de Silva submitted that the Appellant is engaged in bringing the bunker fuel

to Sri Lanka on a consignment basis and re-exported without subjecting it

to any process of manufacture. He submitted that therefore, the profits

5

CA TAX 04 2009 BRA 558 SCA - 216

and income arising in Sri Lanka to the Appellant from the export of the

bunker fuel is exempted from income tax under Section 15 (j) of the Inland

Revenue Act, No. 38 of 2000 (as amended). Mr. de Silva further submitted

that the Appellants income from exports of bunker fuel falls into the

category of qualified export profits and income under Section 47 of the

Inland Revenue Act, No. 38 of 2000 (as amened) and therefore, the

Appellant is entitled to the concessionary tax rate of 15% under Section 47

of the Inland Revenue Act, No. 38 of 2000 (as amended).

[9] Mr. de Silva further submitted that although the term export is not

defined in the Inland Revenue Act, No. 38 of 2000, the question of whether

the Appellant qualifies for the concessionary tax rate under Section 47 or

exemption under Section 15 (j) of the Inland Revenue Act, No. 38 of 2000

would have to be decided by resorting to other definitions of export in

other statutes.

[10] Mr. de Silva further submitted that the supply of bunker fuel qualifies

as an export when the Appellant satisfies the test of act of taking out of

Sri Lanka as specified in Section 22 of the Imports and Exports (Control)

Act, No. 1 of 1969, which is further confirmed by Section 16 of the Customs

Ordinance. Mr. de Silva referred to the definition of the term export set

out in several Dictionaries and judicial authorities and submitted that the

Appellant has established that the bunker fuel had been taken out of the

sri Lankan territorial waters, and the moment the bunker fuel is taken out

of Sri Lanka, the act of exportation is complete and thus, the Appellant

must be deemed to be an exporter.

[11] Mr. de Silva strenuously argued that the real test is whether ot not the

goods were taken out of Sri Lanka and once the act of taking out of Sri

Lanka is established, the final destination of the goods and the intent of the

person to dispose or leave such goods in a particular destination becomes

irrelevant. On the basis, Mr. de Silva, submitted that the supply of bunker

fuel to a foreign ship constitutes an export and therefore, the Appellant is

eligible for the concessionary tax rates under Section 47 or exemption

under Section 15 (j) of the Inland Revenue Act, No. 38 of 2000 (as amended).

[12] On the other hand, the learned Additional Solicitor General submitted that the Appellants transactions do not constitute exports under any of the four legal standards or tests that are recognized as characteristics of an

6

CA TAX 04 2009 BRA 558 SCA - 216

export such as (i) there should be an act of taking out of Sri Lanka; (ii) the goods must reach a final destination outside Sri Lanka; (iii) the transaction must involve an export from one country, and an import into another country; and (iv) the transaction should possess the characteristics of an international sale of goods trsnsaction.

[13] She submitted that the Appellant neither took the goods outside Sri

Lanka, nor caused the foreign vessel to take the goods outside Sri Lanka

with a final destination outside Sri Lanka as the contracts entered by the

Appellant do not provide for a terminus outside the territorial waters of Sri

Lanka. She submitted that as far as the Appellant was concerned, the

terminus was within Sri Lanka, and the transaction between the Appellant

and the vessel owners/charterers was a local transaction that took place

within the territorial waters of Sri Lanka and thus, the final destination was

not outside Sri Lanka. She further submitted that in any event, the

Appellant had no control over the ships journeys; and thus, it is manifest

that the goods have remained within the territorial waters of Sri Lanka,

indefinitely.

[14] Referring to the test of international sale of goods transaction, she

argued that the Appellant has failed to produce a single document such as

a Bill of Lading, Marine Insurance, invoices and letters of credit, and that

the Appellants documents do not support that its transaction could be

chaterertised as international sale of goods transaction. She argued

therefore, that the supply of bunker fuel was no export within the meaning

of Section 47 or Section 15 (j) of the Inland Revenue Act, No. 38 of 2000 (as

amended).

[15] The Board of Review in holding that the bunker fuel supplied by the

Appellant to ships travelling from Sri Lanka cannot constitute an export in

the absence of a foreign destination, relied on the test adopted by

Hidayatullah J. in the Indian Supreme Court case in Burmah-Shell Oil

Storage & Distribution Company Ltd v. Commercial Taxing Office and Othes

[1961]1SCR 902. That was a case relating to the sale and delivery of aviation

spirits to Aircrafts proceeding abroad and belonging to several companies.

The question arose was whether the sale and delivery of aviation spirits to

Aircrafts constitutes an export.

7

CA TAX 04 2009 BRA 558 SCA - 216

[16] In Burmah-Shell Oil Storage & Distribution Company Ltd v. Commercial

Taxing Office and Othes [supa), the Indian Supreme Court held that in the

context and setting in which the expression export out of the territory of

India occurs in Part XII of the Constitution, it was not sufficient that goods

were merely moved out of the territory of India but that it was further

necessary that the goods should be intended tio be transported to a

destination beyond India, so that aviation spirit sold to an aircraft for

enabling it to fly out of the country was not exported out of the country.

Referring to the word export, Hidayatullah J., further stated that (i) the

test is that the goods must have a foreign destination where they can be

said to be imported; (ii) the crucial fact is the sending of the goods to a

fereign destination where they would be received as imports; and (iii) the

two notions of export and import, thus, go in pairs.... and as long as it does

not satisfy this test, it cannot be said that the sale was in the course of

export. .. Under such circumstances, Hidayatulla J. stated at paragraph 37:

Applying these several tests to the cases on hand, it is quite plaint that avaiation sprit loaded on board an aircraft for consumption, though taken out of the country, is not exported since it has no destination where it can be said to be imported, and so long as it does not satisfy this test, it cannot be said that the sale was in the course of export. Further, as has already been pointed out, the sales can hardly be said to occasion the export. The seller sells aviation sprit for the use of the aitcraft, and the sale is not integrally connected with the taking out of aviation sprit. The sale is not even for the purpose of export, as explained above. It does not come within the course of export, which requires an even deeper relation. The sales, thus, do not come within Article 286 (1)(b).

[17] It was the contention of Mr. de Silva that the concept of export in India

as reflected in the Indian authories is based on different principles such as

the existence of two termini and the intention of their being landed in a

different port. He submitted that the real test is whether ot not the bunker

fuel was taken out of the Sri Lankan territorial waters and therefore, the

Indian authorities are irrelevant for the purpose of deciding the

concessionary tax rate under Sections 47 or exemption under Section 15 (j)

of the Inland Revenue Act, No. 38 of 2000 (as amended).

[18] It is true that the decision in Burmah-Shell Oil Storage & Distribution

Company Ltd v. Commercial Taxing Office and Othes (supra) is based on

8

CA TAX 04 2009 BRA 558 SCA - 216

constitutional provision of the Indian Constitution, [Article 286 (1) (b)] and

Section 5 of the CENTRAL SALES TAX ACT to define the word export and

such principles are not binding on the Courts of Sri Lanka. Hence, this Court

is called upn to decide the question of whether the supply of bunker fuel to

ships constitutes an export under Section 15 (j) or qualified export in

Section 47 of the Inland Revenue Act, No. 38 of 2000, independent of the

Indian authorities in particular, case of Burmah-Shell Oil Storage &

Distribution Company Ltd v Commercial Taxing Office and Othes (supra).

Statutory Provisions

[19] Before embarking upon the rival contentions of the parties, we may

proceed to notice the relevant statutory provisions which have a bearing

on the issue. Section 15 (j) of the Inland Revenue Act, No. 38 of 2000 (as

amended) exempts from income tax the profits and income arising in Sri

Lanka, to the consignor or consignee, from the export of any petroleum,

gas or petroleum product or such other products specified in the said

provision. It reads as follows:

15. There shall be exempt from income tax-

.......

(j) the profits and income arising in Sri Lanka, to the consignor or consignee, from the export of-

(i) any precious stones or metals not mines in Sri Lanka;

any petroleum, gas or petroleum product;or

such other products as may be approved by the Minister for the purposes of this paragraph having regard to the foreign exchange benefits that are likely to accrue to the country from the export of such products,

being stones, metal, petroleum, gas or products as the case may be brought to Sri Lanka on a consignment basis, and re-exported without subjecting such stones, metals, petroleum, gas or products ,a s the case may be to any process or manufacture.

[20] To be eligible for the exemption under Section 15 (j) of the Inland

Revenue Act, No. 38 of 2000, the Appellant must satisfiy that:

9

CA TAX 04 2009 BRA 558 SCA - 216

I. it has brought the bunker fuel into Sri Lanka on a consignment basis;

and

II. it is re-exporting such bunker fuel without subjecting it to any process

of manufacture;

[21] The term re-export is the process of exporting goods that were previously imported into a country in the same state as previously imported (Cambridge English Dictionary). The fundamental question that arises for consideration is whether or not, the supply of bunker fuel to ships by the Appellant constitutes an export within the meaning of Section 15 (j) of the Inland Revenue Act, No. 38 of 2000, which sets out the rate of income tax on profits and income arising in Sri Lanka to the consignor or consignee from certain exports.

[22] On the other hand, the Appellant contends that it being a specified

undertaking earned a qualified export profits and income from such

undertaking and therefore, the Appellant being an qualified exporter falls

within the meaning of Section 47 of the Inland Revenue Act, No. 38 of 2000

(as amended). Section 47 of the of the Inland Revenue Act, No. 38 of 2000

(as amended), sets out the rate of income tax on qualified export profits

and income of a company which carries on any specified undertaking as

follows:

47. Where any company commenced prior to November 10, 1993, to carry on any specified undertaking and the taxable income of that company for any year of assessment commencing prior to April 1, 2015, includes any qualified export profits and income from such specified undertaking, such part of such taxable income as consists of such qualified export profits and income, shall, notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Act, be chargeable with income tax at the rate of fifteen per centum.

[23] Section 52 of the Inland Revenue Act, No. 38 of 2000 interprets the

terms export turnover, qualified export profits and income and

specified undertaking for the purpose Chapter IX as follows:

60. For the purposes of this Chapter

(a) qualified export profits and income in relation to any person,

means the sum which bears to the profits and income (within the meaning of paragraph (a) of section 3, after excluding there from any profits and income from the sale of gems and jewellery and any

10

CA TAX 04 2009 BRA 558 SCA - 216

profits and income from the sale of gems and jewellry and any profits and income from the sale of capital assets) for that year of assessment from any specified undertaking carried on by such person, ascertained in accordance with the provisions of this Act, the same proportion as the export turnover of that undertaking for that year of assessment bears to the total turnover of that undertaking for that year of assessment; (b) export turnover in relation to any specified undertaking means

the total amount receivable, whether, received or not, by that undertaking from the export of goods or commodities or from the provision of any service referred to sub-paragraph (ii) of paragraph (d), but does not include

(i) any amount receivable, whether received or not, from the export of gems or jewellery or from the sale of any capital assets;

(ii) any amount receivable, whether received or not-from the export of black tea in bulk, crepe rubber, sheet rubber, scrap rubber, coconut oil, desiccated coconut (other than desiccated coconut manufactured by using continuous scale automated process technology and marketed with a quality guarantee), copra, fresh coconuts, coconut fibre or such commodity as may be specified by the Minister by Notice published in the Gazette; or

(iii) any profits and income not being profits and income within the meaning of paragraph (a) of section 3;

(c) total turnover in relation to any specified undertaking means the total amount receivable, whether received or not, by that undertaking from any trade or business carried on by that undertaking, but does not include any amount receivable, whether received or not, from the sale of capital assets, gems or jewellery or any profits and income not being profits and income within the meaning of paragraph (a) of section 3.

(d) specified undertaking means any undertaking which is engaged in

(i) the export of non-traditional goods manufactured, produced or

purchased by such undertaking; or

(ii) the performance of any service of ship repair, ship breaking,

repair and refurbishment of marine cargo containers, provision of

11

CA TAX 04 2009 BRA 558 SCA - 216

computer software, computer programmes, computer systems or recording computer data, or such other services as may be specified by the Minister by Notice published in the Gazette, for payment in foreign currency.

For the purposes of this section, non- traditional goods means goods other than black tea in bulk, crepe rubber, sheet rubber, scrap rubber, coconut oil, desiccated coconut (other than desiccated coconut manufactured by using continuous scale automated process technology and marketed with a quality guarantee), copra, fresh coconuts, coconut fibre or such other commodity as may be specified by the Minister by Notice published in the Gazette.

[24] The fundamendtal question that arises for consideration is whether or

not, the profits and income of the Appellant being a specified undertaking

were derived from the export of bunker fuel can be treated as a qualified

export profits and income within the meaning of Section 47 of the Inland

Revenue Act, No. 38 of 2000 as amended.

Issue

[25] Accordingly, this case stated raises an interesting but intricate the

fundamental question whether or not the supply of bunker fuel to vessels

constitutes an export within meaning of Section 15 (j) or 47 of the Inland

Revenue Act, No. 38 of 2000 (as amended) to be eligible for the

concessioanry rate of tax under Section 47 or the exemption under Section

15 (j) of the Inland Revenue Act, No. 38 of 2000 (as amended).

Definition of the termexport

[26] As the Inland Revenue Act does not provide a statutory definition to the term export, this Court has to decide what is envisaged by the term export for the purpose of Sections 15 (j) or 47 of the Inland Revenue Act, No. 38 of 2000. It has now become necessary to construe the scope of the term export by using its ordinary or literal meanings in common parlance as understood in its natural and grammatic manner in the context in which it occurs for the application of Sections 15 (j) and 47 of the Inland Revenue Act, No 38 of 2000 (as amended).

[27] Maxwell on Interpretation of Statutes (12th Edition, page 28), deals with

the concept of literal construction in the following words:

12

CA TAX 04 2009 BRA 558 SCA - 216

The first and most elementary rule of construction is that is it is to be assumed that the words and phrases of technical legislation are used in their technical meaning if they have acquired one, and otherwise in their ordinary meaning, and the second is that the phrases and sentences are to be construed according to the rules of grammar. 'The length and detail of modern legislation, wrote Lord Evershed M.R., 'has undoubtedly reinforced the claim of literal construction as the only safe rule.' If there is nothing to modify, alter or qualify the language which the statute contains, it must be construed in the ordinary and natural meaning of the words and sentences. The safer and more correct course of dealing with a question of construction is to take the words themselves and arrive if possible at their meaning without, in the first instance, reference to cases.

[28] In Craies on Statute Law (7th Edition, page 65), it is stated that:

Where the language of an Act is clear and explicit, we must give effect to it, whatever may be the consequences, for in that case the words of the statute speak the intention of the legislature.

[29] In M.N. Dastur and Co. Ltd. and Ors. vs. Union of India (UOI) and Ors.

(28.02.2005 - CALHC), it was stated that

Words used in a statute dealing with matters relating to the general public are presumed to have been used in their popular rather than narrow, legal or technical sense. The doctrine of Loquitur ut vulgus, i.e., according to the common understanding and acceptance of the terms, is to be applied in construing the words used in statute dealing with matters relating to the public in general. If an Act is directed to dealings with matters affecting everybody generally, the words used, have the meaning attached to them in the common and ordinary use of language.

[30] Lord Easter, in Unwin v. Hanson (1891) 2 QB 115 (CA) has further

explained the manner in which the words used in statutes dealing with

matters relating to the public in general are construed at page 119 as

follows:

Now when we have to consider the construction of words such as this occurring in Acts of Parliament we must treat the question thus: If the Act is directed to dealing with matters affecting everybody generally, the words used have the meaning attached to them in the common and ordinary use of language. If the Act is one passed with reference to

13

CA TAX 04 2009 BRA 558 SCA - 216

a particular trade, business, or transaction, and words are used which everybody conversant with that trade, business, or transaction, knows and understands to have a particular meaning in it, then the words are to be construed as having that particular meaning, though it may differ from the common or ordinary meaning of the words.

[31] In the Blacks Law Dictionary, Revised Edition, the term export is

defined in the following manner:

EXPORT, v. To carry or to send abroad. Tennessee Oil Co. v. McCanless, 178 Tenn: 683, 157 S.W. 2d 267, 271, 272. To send, take, or carry an article of trade or commerce out of the country. To transport merchandise from one country to another in the course of trade. To carry out or convey goods by sea. State v. Turner, 5 Har., Del., 501....

"Export," in its primary sense, means to carry or send out of a place, and in secondary sense means to carry from one state or country. McKesson & Robbins v. Collins, 18 Cal.App.2d 648, 64 P.2d 469, 470.

[32] The definition of export from the Oxford Advanced American

Dictionary is the selling and transporting of goods to another country. In

Cambridge Advance Learners Dictionary defines the term exportation as

the process of sending goods to another country for sale. In the Merriam-

Webster Online Dictionary, the term export means to carry or send

(something, such as a commodity) to some other place (such as another

country). Accordingly, the Dictionary meaning of the word export of

goods as normally understood is sending goods from one country to

another country for sale.

[33] However, the meaning of a word in a statute may also be affected by

its context, which may consist of surrounding sections, the whole Act or

the scheme or purpose of the legislation and the exceptions or deduction

granted thereunder. Thus, one has to construe the scope of the term

export in the context in which it occurs in Sections 15 (j) and 47 of the

Inland Revenue Act, having regard to the nature of the goods that are to

be exported, namely, the bunker fuel being a petroleum product which

is not manufactured in Sri Lanka but, used for the navigation of vessels,

and the purpose for which such exports are qualified for concessionary

tax rates under the Inland Revenue Act.

Imports & Exports (Control) Act

14

CA TAX 04 2009 BRA 558 SCA - 216

[34] The Appellant, however argues that as the Inland Revenue Act does not

define the term export, nor does it specify the criteria that must be

affirmatively satisfied in order that a supply may be classified as an export,

recourse must be had to the general principles of law applicable for the

purposes of determining what constitutes an export. This Court is now

required to find out what is meant by the phrase " export" for the purpose

of the Section 15 (j) and 47 of the Inland Revenue Act, and whether the

mere supply of bunker fuel to a ship constitutes an export under Sections

15 (j) or 47 of the Inland Reveue Act, No. 38 of 2000.

[35] The Appellant relies on the definition of the term exportation given in

the Stroud Judicial Dictionary, Vo. II 1903 referring to the decision in A.G. v

Pougett 2 Price, 381) and Stockton Ry v. Barrett, 11 Cl. & F. 590) in support

of his contention that the word export for the purpose of the Inland

Revenue Act, is not restricted to an exportation to foreign countries, but

may mean a carrying out of the Port The Stroud Judicial Dictionary, Vo. II

1903 defines the term exportation referring to the decision in A.G. v

Pougett 2 Price, 381, as follows:

Unless a vessel has proceeded out of the limits of the Port with her cargo, it is not such an Exportation of the goods as will protect the cargo from duties subsequently imposed on the Exportation of goods of the same nature;although the vessel is not only freighted and afoat but has gone through all the formalities of Clearance, & at the Custom House and has paid the Exportation Dues.

[36] In A.G. v Pougett (supra), the question was whether the goods laden on

board the ship, having broken ground in the Themes, and not having left

the port of London may be said to have been exported. It was held that the

goods shipped could not be considered as exported until the ship had

cleared the limits of the ports as follows:

It is significant to know that this action was decided under the Tyne Coal Dues Act 1872 and the Court held that There is nothing in the language of the Act (the Tyne Coal Dues Act 1872) to show that the word exported was used in any other than its ordinary sense, namely, carried out of the port ..We feel bound to hold that coals carried away from the port, not on a temporary excursion, as in a tug or pleasure boat, which intends to return with more or less of the coals on board, and which may be regarded as always constructively within the port,

15

CA TAX 04 2009 BRA 558 SCA - 216

but taken away for the purpose of being wholly consumed beyond this limits of the port, are coals exported within the meaning of the Act. (Muller v Baldwin (1874) L.R. 9 O.B 457, per cur., at p. 461).

[37] It is significant to note that A.G. v Pougett (supra) was not an income

tax or custom case, but a decision under the Tyne Coals Act which has now

been abolished. There was clear evidence in that case that the coals had

been taken away for the purpose of being wholly consumed beyond the

limits of the port and thus, the coals were held to be exported

[38] In Stockton Ry v. Barrett, 8 E.R. 1225 (House of Lords), the action was

for money had and received, originally brought in the Court of Common

Pleas, to recover three sums of money, which the plaintiff there, Charles

Barrett, alleged had been unlawfully received by the defendants as tolls on

the carriage of certain coals carried on the line of the Stockton and

Darlington Railway, of which they were the proprietors.

[39] It was held that the words shipped for Exportation are not,

necessarily, restricted to an exportation to foreign countries, but may mean

Exportation in its evident sense, i.e. a carrying out of Port, and thus, include

carrying commodities from one port to another, within the Kingdom and

that the words "the port of Stockton-upon-Tees aforesaid," meant the

whole port of that name, and was not restricted to the port of the town of

Stockton-upon-Tees;

[40] That action was, however, decided under the Railway Act, which

empowered the proprietors to levy on all coals carried along any part of

their line, such sum as they should direct, " not exceeding the sum of 4d.

per ton per mile." It then went on thus: " And for all coal, which shall be

shipped on board any vessel, etc. in the port of Stockton-upon-Tees

aforesaid, for the purpose of exportation, such sum as the said proprietors

shall appoint, not exceeding the sum of one-halfpenny per ton per mile: "

[41] As noted, the cases relied on by the Appellant relate to the statutory

interpretation given to the term exportation in different statutes, which

are unrelated to tax statutes, and such decisions cannot in my view,

determine the question as to whether the supply of bunker fuel to a ship

for its navigation or use during its voyage constitutes an export for the

purpose of the concessionary tax rate in the Inland Revenue Act, No. 38 of

2000.

16

CA TAX 04 2009 BRA 558 SCA - 216

[42] The Appellant, however, relied on the Imports and Exports (Control)

Act, No. 1 of 1969, and the Customs Ordinance in support of its position

that the supply of bunker fuel constitutes an export having regard to the

definition of the term export in the Imports and Exports (Control) Act, No.

1 of 1969. For this aspect of the case, it is appropriate to take note of Section

22 of the Imports and Exports (Control) Act, no. 1 of 1969, which provides

for levy of tax. The term export is defined in Section 22 of the Imporst &

Exports (Control) Act, 1969 as follows:

export with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions when used in relation to any goods, means the carrying and taking out of Sri Lanka, or causing to be carried or taken out of Sri Lanka, whether by sea or by air of such goods

[43] Accordingly, the statutory definition of the term export refers to the

actual carrying and taking out of Sri Lanka or causing to be carried out of

Sri Lanka of the goods in question by sea or by air of such goods. The

learned counsel for the Appellant relied heavily on the definition of "export"

in Section 22 of the Imports and Exports (Control) Act and it was argued

that since the definition does not refer to the requirement of destination,

the same applies to the concessionary tax rate under the Inland Revenue

Act. On this basis the Appellant argues that the Imports and Exports

(Contriol) Act, No. 1 of 1969 would indicate the statutory criteria applicable

for determining whether or not a person is an exporter for the purpose of

the Sections 15 (j) or 47 of the Inland Revenue Act, No. 38 of 2000.

[44] The question that arises for determination is whether the definition of

the term export in the Imports and Exports (Control) Act, is the

determinative factor in deciding that the bunker fuel had been exported

within the meaning of Sections 15 (j) or Section 47 of the Inland Revenue

Act, No. 38 of 2000.

Customs Ordinance

[45] The Appellant further argues that the concept of export defined in

Section 22 of the Imports and Exports (Control) Act is further confirmed by

Section 16 of the Customs Ordinance, which indicates the point of time

when an export is deemed to have taken place and an exportation of any

goods is made and completed shall be deemed to have had effect when the

17

CA TAX 04 2009 BRA 558 SCA - 216

goods had been shipped on board the ship in which they had been

exported. Section 16 of the Customs Ordinance provides s follows:

If upon the first levying or repealing of any duty, or upon the first permitting or prohibiting of any importation or exportation whether inwards, outwards, or coastwise in Sri Lanka, it shall - become necessary to determine the precise time at which an importation or exportation of any goods made and completed shall be deemed to have had effect, such time, in respect of importation, shall be deemed to be the time at which the ship importing such goods had actually come within the limits of the port at which such ship shall in due course be reported and such goods be discharged; and such time, in respect of exportation, shall be deemed to be the time at which the goods had been shipped on board the ship in which they had been exported; and if such question shall arise upon the arrival or departure of any ship, in respect of any charge or allowance upon such ship, exclusive' of any cargo, the time of such arrival shall be deemed to be the time at which the report of such ship shall have been or ought to have been made; and the time of such departure shall be deemed to be the time of the last clearance of such ship with the Director-General for the voyage upon which she had departed.

[46] That means that an importation starts from one point and ends at

another. It starts when the goods cross the customs barrier in a foreign

country (exporting country) and ends when they cross the limits of the port

in Sri Lanka (importing Country). In the case of exportation, the time of

exportation under Section 16 shall be deemed to be the time at which the

goods had been shipped on board the ship, in which the goods had been

exported, and it starts when the goods cross the customs limits of the port

of one country (exporting country) and delivered to the ship on board in

which such goods are exported to another country (importing country).

[47] In terms of this Section, the precise time at which exportation of any

goods shall be deemed to be the time at which the goods had been shipped

on board the ship in which they had been exported. Accordingly, the

Appellant argues that the statutory criteria applicable for determining

whether or not a person is an exporter, the destination is not a requirement

to be fulfilled under the law of Sri Lanka.

[48] The argument of the Appellant is that Section 22 of the Imports and

Exports (Control) Act read with Section 16 of the Customs Ordinance refer

18

CA TAX 04 2009 BRA 558 SCA - 216

to goods being taken out of the country rather than the goods necessarily

being delivered to another country. Accordingly, it was argued on behalf of

the Appellant referring to Section 16 of the Customs Ordinance that as the

time of the export of goods occurs when the goods have been put on the

ship, which constitutes an export notwithsndaning the fact that the ship is

within Sri Lankan territorial waters at the time of the delivery of the bunker

fuel. He further argued that the consumption, utilization or sale of the

bunker fuel occurs once the vessel leaves the Colombo Port into the

international waters and thus, the goods are taken out of the country.

[49] On the other hand, Section 16 of the Customs Ordinance applies to the

definition of time of importation or exportation of prohibited or restricted

goods and goods illegally imported for the purpose of levying or repealing

of any duty under the Customs Ordinance. This Section has to be read with

Section 3 of the Protection of Government Revenue (Special provisions) Act,

No. 1 of 2006, according to which the date of importation or exportation

...shall be the date of delivery to the Director General of Customs of the bill

of entry. Section 3 of the Protection of Government Revenue (Special

provisions) Act reads as follows:

3. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any of the laws specified in Part II of the Schedule hereto, for the purpose of levying or charging any tax, duty, surcharge, levy or other charge on the importation or exportation of goods into or from Sri Lanka, the date of importation or exportation, as the case may be, shall be the date of delivery to the Director-General of Customs, of the bill of entry relating to the goods on which such tax, duty, surcharge, levy or other charge is levied or charged.

[50] The Schedule includes, inter alia, the Customs Ordinance (Cap. 235), as

last amended by Act, No. 2 of 2003. For the purpose of levying or charging

any tax, duty, surcharge, levy or other charge on the importation or

exportation of goods into or from Sri Lanka, the date of importation or

exportation, as the case may be, under the Protection of Government

Revenue (Special provisions) Act shall be the date of delivery to the

Director-General of Customs, of the bill of entry relating to the goods on

which such tax, duty, surcharge, levy or other charge is levied or charged.

19

CA TAX 04 2009 BRA 558 SCA - 216

[51] As noted, for the purpose of the protection of government revenue

and prevention of any loss of revenue to the Government, the date of

importation or exportation of goods, the date of delivery are relevant to the

levying or charging any tax, duty, surcharge, levy or other charge under the

Customs Ordinance. Those principles are, however, not applicable to the

interpretation of the term export under Section 15 (j) or 47 of the Inland

Revenue Act, No. 38 of 2000.

[52] Accordingly, for the purpose of levying or repealing of any customs

duty upon the first permitting or prohibiting of any importation or

exportation of prohibited/restricted goods and goods illegally imported,

the time of importation shall be the time at which the ship importing such

goods had actually come within the limits of the port at which such ship

shall be reported and such goods be discharged. In case of exportation of

prohibited/restricted goods and goods illegally exported, the time of

exportation shall be the time at which the goods had been shipped on

board the ship.

[53] To constitute an export under Section 22 of the Import and Export

(Control) Act, the goods must be either taken out of the territory of Sri Lanka

or caused to be taken out of Sri Lanka, by sea or air of such goods. This

means that the mere delivery of the bunker fuel into the tanks of the ship

is insufficient to constitute an export unless such fuel had been either

actually taken out of Sri Lanka or caused to be taken out of Sri Lanka on a

ship bound for a place out of Sri Lanka.

[54] The Imports and Exports (Control) Act is intended to provide for the

control of the importation and exportation of goods and regulation of the

standards of exportable goods. The provisions of the Imports and Exports

(Control) Act shall be, however, read and construed with the Customs

Ordinance as set out in Section 21 of the Imports and Exports (Control) Act.

In terms of Section 21 of the Imports and Exports (Control) Act, the

provisions of the Act shall be construed with the Customs Ordinance and

for the purpose of the application of the Customs Ordinance-

(a). goods the importation of which is prohibited by this Act or by regulation made under this Act shall be deemed to be goods the importation of which is prohibited by that Ordinance;

20

CA TAX 04 2009 BRA 558 SCA - 216

(b) goods the exportation of which is prohibited by this Act or by regulation made under this Act shall be deemed to be goods the exportation of which is prohibited by that Ordinance;

(c) goods the importation of which is restricted by this Act or by regulation made under this Act shall be deemed to be goods the importation of which is restricted by that Ordinance;

(d) goods the exportation of which is restricted by this Act or by regulation made under this Act shall be deemed to be goods the exportation of which is restricted by that Ordinance.

[55] As noted, Section 16 of the Customs Ordinance, which applies to the

definition of time of importation or exportation for prohibited or restricted

goods and goods illegally imported for the purpose of levying or repealing

of any duty under the Customs Ordinance and thus, it cannot be strictly

applied for the purpose of interpreting the term export and levying

income tax under the Inland Revenue Act, No. 38 of 2000 (as amended).

[56] The provisions of the Imports and Exports (Control) Act shall be read

and construed with the Customs Ordinance and thus, the goods either

prohibited or restricted by the provisions of the Imports and Exports

(Control) Act shall be deemed to be the goods prohibited or restricted by

the Customs Ordinance. In the result, the definition of export in section 22

of the Imports and Exports (Control) Act cannot be strictly applied to the

interpretation of the term export for the concessuoanry tax rate under

Sections 15 (j) and 47 of the Inland Revenue Act, No. 38 of 2000 (as

amended).

Customs Clearance

[57] The learned Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the Appellant has a special customs entry (bill of entry) passed when it issued marine bunker fuel to foreign ships which are paid in foreign currency and such custom clearance and payment made in foreign currency shall be regarded as evidence that the supply of bunker fuel was an export transaction outside Sri Lanka in terms of the provisions of the Protection of Government Revenue (Special Provisions) Act No. 1 of 2006. The Appellant also relies on the Indian decision in CIT v .Silver and Arts Palace (2003) 259 ITR 684 to argue that the customs clearance is evidence that characterises the transaction as an export. It is the position of the Appellant that once

21

CA TAX 04 2009 BRA 558 SCA - 216

the goods are kept in the customs clearance station, then, the goods shall be deemed to have been in the export stream.

[58] The said case related to the refusal of the deduction claimed by the assessee under Section 80HHC of The Income- Tax Act, 1995 placing reliance on Explanation (aa) to Section 80HHC(4A) of the Act. The said Section provides that "'export out of India' shall not include any transaction by way of sale or otherwise, in a shop, emporium or any other establishment situate in India, not involving clearance at any customs station as defined in the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962)." There was no dispute in that case that transactions of counter sales effected by the respondent involved customs clearance within the meaning of Explanation (aa) to Section 80HHC (4A) of the Act, and further that the sales were in convertible foreign exchange.

[59] If the above interpretation applies to the export in question as projected by Dr. Felix in the written submissions filed on behalf of the Appellant, then, it would mean that irrespective of the condition in Sections 15 (j) or 47 of the Inland Revenue Act, the delivery of goods shall be after customs clearance, i.e., after goods have cleared all local customs and all other legal formalities and are kept ready for delivery to the ships tanks, the Appellant would qualify for the concessionary tax rates under Section 47 or exemption under Section 15 (j) of the Inland Revenue Act, No. 38 of 2000 (as amended).

[60] In my opinion, the concept sought to put in service in CIT v. Silver and Arts Palace (supra) cannot be applied to the facts of this case and therefore, the submission of customs clearance (bill of entry) per se does not constitute an Appellant an exporter of the bunker fuel under Sections 15 (j) or 47 of the Inland Revenue Act, No. 38 of 2000 (as amended).

Use of Foreign Currency

[61] The learned Counsel for the Appellant citing the Exchange Control Act,

No. 24 of 1953, as amended, submitted that the fact that the Appellant is

permitted by the Central Bank to accept foreign currency payments for

supplies of marine bunker fuel to ships travelling in international waters

supports the position of the Appellant that the sales undertaken by the

Appellant are not local sales but are in fact exports. He submitted that it is

an offence to accept foreign currency for a local sale and therefore, this

transaction should be construed to be an export.

22

CA TAX 04 2009 BRA 558 SCA - 216

[62] On the other hand, the Central Bank has powers to permit any person

under Section 7 of the Exchange Control Act, to make any payment to, or

for the credit of a person resident outside Sri Lanka or make any payment

to or for the credit of a person resident in Sri Lanka. In my view the mere

fact that the sale of bunker fuel was paid for in foreign currency does not

necessarily render it an export within the meaning of Sections 15 (j) or 47

of the Inland Revenue Act, No. 38 of 2000.

Licence under the Ceylon Petroleum Corporation Act, No. 28 of 1961

[63] The Appellant argues that the Appellant possesses a licence under

Section 5B of the Ceylon Petroleum Corporation Act, No. 28 of 1961 to

import, export, sell, supply or distribute marine gas, oil and furnace oil

(Vide- paragraph 57 of the written submissions tendered on behalf of the

Appellant on 18.10.2019). In my view, the licence granted by the Ceylon

Petroleum Corporation under Section 5B of the Ceylon Petroleum

Corporation Act, No. 28 of 1961 does not necessarily mean that the supply

of bunker fuel shall be treated as an export within the meaning of Sections

Sections 15 (j) or 47 of the Inland Revenue Act, No. 38 of 2000.

Central Bank Annual Reports

[64] The Appellant relies heavily on the Annual Reports of the Central Bank

for the year 2011 in table 3.4 at page 63, which, the Appellant claims

distinguishes between exports and local sales and table 3.4 which lists the

Appellant as a source for both imports and export data. The Appellant

submits that the Report supports his contention that the supply of bunker

fuel has been recognised as an export by the Central Bank. In my view, the

table 3.4 does not support the contention that the it distinguishes between

exports and local sales or that the Central Bank has recognised the

Appellant as an exporter within the meaning of any statute as claimed by

the Appellant.

[65] The Appellant relies on the New Zeeland Court of Appeal case in

Commissioner of Inland Revenue v. International Importing Limited (1972)

NZLR 1095 in support its position that the word export is complete when

(i) taking the goods out of the country and (ii) sending them or causing them

to be sent out. The question in the said case was whether, for the purposes

of Section 129B of the Land and Income Tax Act 1954, the goods sold by a

23

CA TAX 04 2009 BRA 558 SCA - 216

"duty free shop operated by respondent company, to travellers departing

overseas, and the subsequent carriage of those goods beyond New

Zealand by the purchasers, constituted the "export of those goods by the

company, entitling it to the deduction given for income tax purposes by s

129B. Section129B of the said Act reads as follows:

"Export goods means goods exported from New Zealand by a taxpayer, being goods (a) Which were sold or disposed of by the taxpayer; and (b) Of which the taxpayer was the owner at the time of the sale or disposal

but does not include

(c) Goods exported by way of gift: (d) Goods taken or sent out of New Zealand with the intention that they will at some later time be brought or sent back to New Zealand: (e) Goods imported into New Zealand and subsequently exported from New Zealand after being processed, packed, graded, or sorted in New Zealand or incorporated with another product in New Zealand, if the consideration receivable for the sale or disposal of the goods so exported is less than fifteen percent greater than the cost of all imported goods included in the goods so exported, such cost being the landed cost

of those imported goods (exclusive of New Zealand customs duty) at the time when they were imported into New Zealand: (f) Goods imported into New Zealand and subsequently exported from New Zealand in the same form without processing, packing, grading, or sorting thereof in New Zealand: (g) Goods exported to the Cook Islands (including Niue) or to the Tokelau Islands: (h) Animals, animal products and by-products (including dairy produce, meat, meat products, wool, and their respective by-products), newsprint, and minerals:

Provided that the Governor-General may from time to time, by Order in Council, exclude any such goods or any specified class or classes of such goods from the operation of this paragraph: (i) Any other goods specified by the Governor-General from time to time by Order in Council:

24

CA TAX 04 2009 BRA 558 SCA - 216

[66] The vital question in that case was whether goods which were sold by

the respondent (and of which it was admittedly the owner at the time of such sales) were exported from New Zealand by the respondent within the opening words of the foregoing definition. The finding of the Commissioner was challenged on one question only, namely his finding that the goods sold to departing travellers in the respondent's duty free shops were exported by the respondent.

[67] The transactions were sales of goods of which respondent was the owner at the time of sale. The goods were taken out of the country as a direct result of the sale, and as one intended by both vendor and purchaser.

And these were sales and the immediate result of which was an increase in foreign currency reserves, and (1) taking the goods out of the country, and (2) sending them or causing them to be sent outthe choice between them depends on the answer to the question: What operation is it that the Section is obviously designed to subsidise? Turner J, at pp 1097 stated:

The section contains no definition of "export nor can it be contended that this word is a term of art. It must therefore be given its ordinary meaning, or perhaps I should say one of its ordinary meanings, to be selected according to context. Clearly, if it is given one of its ordinary meanings the travellers may be said to have "exported the goods themselves, for they carried them (if small enough) on to the plane personally, keeping them in their possession while the plane flew out of New Zealand. And no different result follows in the case of the larger packages which were put into the plane's hold, of which the passenger-purchasers doubtless must be deemed to have had possession at the time when they were taken out of the country. But should the word "export so be read, as referring to what these people did, if proper regard is had to the context in which that word is found in s 129B, and if the acknowledged the purpose of that section is remembered? The legislation is plainly addressed to those persons, and to those alone, who increase the foreign exchange reserves of New Zealand, by sending goods abroad, or causing them to be sent abroad, receiving in return foreign exchange for which they are bound to account, and do account, to the Reserve Bank. It is clear that even if the travellers may be regarded as themselves "exporting the goods, the word "export where used in the section must also clearly be applicable to those, such as respondent company, who send the goods abroad, or cause them to be sent, with this result. Surely a dairy company "exports butter, and a fruit

25

CA TAX 04 2009 BRA 558 SCA - 216

cannery "exports its manufactures, whether it ships the goods to its own order in another country, or sells here f.o.b. to a foreign person or corporation, provided simply that the transaction is one in which it causes goods to be sent abroad in exchange for foreign currency which it receives and for which it accounts. t is to be observed however that s 129B is solely concerned with the actions of vendors. In our opinion a vendor may export either by taking or by sending. There will be many cases where it can be said that the buyer exports by taking, as for example in the case of an ordinary contract.

[68] Thus, Turner J., stated that the question whether the respondent or the passengers, who is to be regarded, for the purposes of s 129B, as having "exported the goods which it sold to the travellers. Referring to the

meanings of the word (1) taking the goods out of the country, and (2) sending them or causing them to be sent outthe choice between them depends on the answer to the question: What operation was it that the section is obviously designed to subsidise? On this approach to the matter, it seemed clear to to Turner J. that it is respondent's operation which was meant to receive the reward offered by the statute.

[69] The facts of the New Zeeland judgment and the legal principles discussed under Section 129B of the Land and Income Tax Act 1954 are completely different in the present case for the following reasons:

1. The Respondent in that case owned and operated a duty free shop at

the "Christchurch International Duty Free Shops and the passengers were allowed to purchase goods from a duty free shop situated in the departure lounge of the airport to be taken out of New Zeeland. The question that was decided was whether or not it was the respondent or the passengers who is to be regarded, for the purposes of s 129B, as having "exported the goods which it sold to the travellers. In the present case, the issue was whether or not the supplier of bunker fuel to a ship constitutes an export for the purpose of the concessionary

tax rates under Sections 15 (j) or 47of the Inland Revenue Act.

2. The New Zeeland Act provides that to constitute an export goods, the

goods exported by a taxpayer from New Zeeland shall be goods exported which were sold or disposed of by the taxpayer; and of which the taxpayer was the owner at the time of the sale or disposal. Section 129B of the New Zeeland Act is not so worded as to require

26

CA TAX 04 2009 BRA 558 SCA - 216

the taxpayer to be the owner of the goods at the time of export. The

Section only requires that he should be the owner of the goods at the time of sale. There is no similar requirement in the Inland Revenue Act of Sri Lanka.

3. The New Zeeland decision is also based on the operation mode of the

taxpayer as the owner of the goods. In order to purchase the goods from the duty free shop, the customer has to produce his boarding pass to the aircraft and his flight number of the duty free shop owned by the respondent The goods, in the open bags were handed to the passenger at the call to board the aircraft by the employees of the respondent on production of their copy of the sales docket in the

"clear area at the airport and in the presence of Customs Officers. There is no such conditions to be fulfilled for the charging of income tax under the Inland Revenue Act.

4. As a matter of fact and degree, the whole nature of the respondent's

specialised business and the circumstances under which it is conducted, taken together with the actual part played by the respondent in bringing about the removal from New Zealand of goods sold by it to departing passengers, proved that the respondent exported the goods in question by sending them out of New Zealand. There the duty free sale occurred inside the departure

lounge of the airport after the passengers were cleared for immigration and already stamped as having left the country by the customs officer that was strong evidence to establish that the passengers had already left the country. In the circumstances, the Court treated the goods to be export goods within the meaning of section 129B of the New Zeeland Act.

[70] Under such circumstances, the Court came to the conclusion that the whole nature of the respondent's specialised business and the circumstances under which it is conducted, taken together with the actual part played by the respondent in bringing about the removal from New Zealand of goods sold by it to departing passengers, justify the view that the respondent exported the goods by sending them out of New Zeeland. In my view the New Zealand case will not support the stand taken by the Appellant in the instant case and it cannot be regarded as a precedent for the case in hand.

27

CA TAX 04 2009 BRA 558 SCA - 216

[71] The Canadian case of R v.Wuulf (1970) 1 CCC (2d) 281 relied on by the

Appellant is a criminal case for attempting to export out of Canada to the

USA silver coins of Canada without a permit and the issue arose about the

definition of the word export under the statute. It was held that the word

export was simply take outside of Canada. The definition of the term

export for the purpose of criminal liability of attempting to export goods

under a criminal statute cannot be used to define the term export for the

purpose of defining the term export under Sections 15 (j) or 47 of the

Inland Revenue Act.

[72] In R. v. Smith (Donald) (1973) Q.B. 924, the defendant was charged with

being knowingly concerned in the fraudulent evasion of the prohibition

against the importation of cannabis imposed by the Dangerous Drugs Act

1965 , contrary to Section 304 (b) of the Customs and Excise Act 1952, and

with being knowingly concerned in the fraudulent evasion of the

prohibition against the exportation of cannabis imposed by the Act of 1965,

contrary to Section 56 (2) of the Act of 1952.

[73] In that case, packets containing cannabis addressed to a person in

Bermuda were put on board an aircraft in Kenya, which was bound for

Heathrow Airport in the United Kingdom. At Heathrow, the packets were

unloaded and without leaving the customs area were put on board a

second aircraft bound for Bermuda. The cannabis was discovered when the

packets arrived in Bermuda. The question was whether the prohibited

goods retained within the customs area were imported into the United

Kingdom. It was held that although the cannabis had merely been

transferred from one aircraft to another, the cannabis had been imported

into the country when the aircraft from Kenya landed at Heathrow and had

been exported when placed on board the aircraft bound for Bermuda (post,

p. 935G-H).

[74] In A.G. v. Kumarasinghe (1995) 2 Sri LR. 1, the accused, a Sri Lankan

passport holder was indicted for having imported into Sri Lanka, 40 pieces

of Gold valued at Rs. 2 million without a valid permit issued by the Central

Bank. After arriving in Sri Lanka on an Air Lanka flight, he had been at the

Transit Lounge with the pieces of gold to proceed to Male. The High Court

of Negombo acquitted the accused. Referring to R. Smith (supra), it was

held that (i) Importation is not defined in the Exchange Control Act, but

28

CA TAX 04 2009 BRA 558 SCA - 216

recourse could be had to Section 22 of the Imports and Exports (Control)

Act 1 of 1969; and (ii) the moment the accused-respondent landed in Sri

Lankan soil with gold, the act of importation was complete, if he failed to

produce the requisite permit for possession of that gold. Accordingly, it was

held that he has contravened the provisions of Section 21(1).

[75] In all three criminal cases, the accused was considered to be an

exporter on the basis that he was himself involved physically importing

prohibited goods into a foreign country without a permit in violation of a

criminal statute either under the Customs Act or Imports and Exports Act.

Here, the issue is whether or not the supply of the bunker fuel to a ship that

visits a port of Sri Lanka can constitute an export for the purpose of

concessionary tax rates under Sections 15 (j) or 47 of the Inland Revenue

Act.

[76] The other argument of the Appellant was that as the consumption of

bunker fuel occurs mid-voyage in international waters of another country,

the question of Bill of Lading or Insurance Contract does not arise and thus,

the mere fact that the goods do not arise at a foreign port does not

preclude the goods from being considered an export. The argument of the

Appellant was that the mere supply of bunker fuel to a foreign ship and

utilization of such bunker fuel in the international waters constitutes an

export within the meaning of Sections 15 (j) or47 of the Inland Revenue Act.

Although the argument is attractive, I am afraid that I do not find any merit

in the same.

[77] The charging provision in Section 2 is the prime purpose of the Inland

Revenue Act and it shall control the profits and income that are chargeable

with income tax subject to the provisions of the said Act. As noted, the

charging Section is not controlled by the measure of tax levied under the

provisions of the Imports and Exports (Contriol) Act or the Customs

Ordinance. The relevant statutory provisions with regard to levy of customs

duties are found in the Customs Ordinance and the relevant statutory

provisions with regard to the imposition of income tax are found in the

Inland Revenue Act.

[78] The principles of charging the income tax and the principles of customs

are distinct, different and independent of each other. The income tax is

charged on profits or income of a person which falls within the scope of

29

CA TAX 04 2009 BRA 558 SCA - 216

Section 2 of the Inland Revenue Act and the rate of income tax varies

subject to the provisions of the Inland Revenue Act. Customs Duty is a tax

imposed on imports and exports of goods under the Customs Ordinance

when they are transported across international borders and the rate of

Customs duty varies subject to the provisions of the Customs Ordinance.

[79] When the provisions of the Imports and Exports (Control) Act are read

and construed with the Customs Ordinance, the goods either prohibited

or restricted by the provisions of the Imports and Exports (Control) Act shall

be deemed to be the goods prohibited or restricted by the Customs

Ordinance. The Customs Ordinance takes care of levy of import of goods

or export of goods and thus, the taxable event for levy of custom duty and

entry tax are different and distinct. The "pith and substance" and "aspect"

of custom levy, as regards both imports and exports in terms of restrictions,

prohibition and permissibility are different and distinct from the charging

of income tax under the Inland Reveue Act.

[80] The learned counsel for the Appellant submits that the definition of

"export" as defined in Section 22 of the Imports and Exports (Control) Act

does not include "place of destination but only Taking out of Sri Lanka or

causing to be carried or taken out of Sri Lanka and, therefore, the concept

of destination on the supply of bunker fuel to a ship is clearly beyond the

ambit of Inland Revenue Act. In my view, Section 22 of the Imports and

Exports (Control) Act or the Customs Ordinance has no overriding effect

over the provisions of the Inland Revenue Act and the imposition of income

tax under the provisions of the said Acts are based on different principles

and the fulfilment of different conditions.

[81] If the Legislature intended to apply the same term export for the

purpose of Sections 15 (j) or 47 of the Inland Revenue Act, the Legislature

could have easily used the same meaning as defined in Section 22 of the

Imports and Exports (Control) Act, No. 1 of 1969. Thus, the argument of the

Appellant that since the place of destination is not specifically mentioned

in the definition of "export" in Section 22 of the Imports and Exports

(Control) Act, it will give rise to the inference that Legislature intended not

make the concept of destination as a requirement of export for the

purposes of Sections 15 (j) or 47 of the Inland Revenue Act is without

substance.

30

CA TAX 04 2009 BRA 558 SCA - 216

[82] This case is not concerned about the imposition of levy under the

Imports and Exports (Control) Act or the Customs Ordinance, and we are

dealing with the imposition of income tax and the concessionary tax rates

under Section 47 or exemption under Section 15 (j) of the said Act. This

Court is not inclined to apply the principles of the imposition of levy under

the Imports and Exports (Control) Act or the Customs Ordinance to a case

of export under Sections 15 (j) or 47 of the Inland Revenue Act.

[83] It is only from the language of the statute that the intention of the

Legislature (Inland Revenue Act) must be gathered, for the Legislature

means no more and no less than what it says. It is not permissible for the

court to speculate as to what the Legislature (here the Inland Revenue Act)

must have intended and then to twist or bend the language of a different

statute (the Customs Ordinance and the Imports and Exports (Control) Act

to make it accord with the presumed intention of the Legislature (see-

Polestar Electronic (Pvt.) Ltd. v. Additional Commissioner, Sales Tax, 1978]

41 STC 409 (SC).

[84] Of course, equitable construction may be admissible in relation to

other statutes, but such an interpretation is not permitted to a charging or

taxing provision of a statute (see-Murarilal Mahabir Prasad v. B.R. Vad

[1976] 37 STC 77 (SC), which has laid down the tax is altogether different

from the recovery of the tax/duty under the Imports and Exports (Control)

Act and the Customs Ordinance

UN Report

[85] The Appellant relied on the United Nations Department of Economic

and Social Affairs-International Mercandise Trade Statistics:Concept and

Definitions (IMTS 2010) to susbstantiate its position that that the supply of

bunker fuel to ships travelling in international waters constitutes an export.

Paragraph 1.32 at page 18 of the Report on Bunkers, stores, ballast and

dunnage reads as follows:

1.32. Bunkers, stores, ballast and damage that are supplied:

1. to foreign vessels or aircraft in the economic territory of the

compiling country;or 2. by national vessels or aircraft to foreign vessels or aircraft outside

the economic territory of the compiling country; or

31

CA TAX 04 2009 BRA 558 SCA - 216

3. are landed in foreign ports from national vessels or aircraft;

are in the scope of IMTS 2010 for exports.

[86] Paragraph 1.42 which relates to goods recommended for exclusion

reads:

1.42. Goods simply being transported include goods under in transit or in transshipment customs procedures but are not limited to them. ...Irrespective of the custom procedure applied when goods cross the compiling countrys border, if it is known that their destination is a third country, the goods should be treated as simply being transported through the country and excluded. However, goods that are not under in transit or transshipment customs procedure and change ownership after entering the economic territory of a country should be recoded as imports and re-exports if they leave the country in the state as imported.... [87] Firstly, the publication contains guidelines or recommendations and

therefore, Sri Lanka is not obliged to adhere to them. Secondly, these

guidelines or recommendations cannot change the principles of income tax

specified in the Inland Revenue Act of Sri Lanka. Thirdly, the guidelines first

classify the bunker fuel supplied to foreign vessels within the economic

territory as exports. They also classify the bunker fuel supplied by national

vessels to foreign vessels outside the economic territory as exports. Thirdly,

they classify the bunker fuel supplied to vessels that are landed in foreign

ports.

[88] It is my view, that the classification is based on the nationality of the

vessel which is not the basis on which the concept of export is decided in

the Inland Revenue Act of Sri Lanka. Fourthly, paragraph 1.42 states that

when goods are taken out of the territory of a country, the goods should be

treated as simply being transported to a third country where the destination

of a foreign country is known. It seems that the guidelines themselves,

recognize that where the destination is known, the goods may be said to

have been transported to a foreign country. For those reasons, I am of the

view that the UN Report will not support the contention of the Appellant in

the present case.

[89] In my view the mere supply or stores of bunker fuel in the ships tanks

for consumption on board a ship cannot possibly be a deemed export, and

32

CA TAX 04 2009 BRA 558 SCA - 216

such consumption by a foreign going ship cannot ever be considered as a

supply occasioning the export of bunker fuel unless there is documentary

evidence that manifest an indication that the ship that is consuming bunker

fuel for navigation on the high seas is intended to a foreign destination

point. Such documentary evidence in my view would exclude the possibility

that such goods are not meant for supply of local consumption, which does

not signify an export within the meaning of Sections 15 (j) or 47of the

Inland Revenue Act.

Destination Principle

[90] If the present transaction of the Appellant involves goods being moved

from one jurisdiction to another, the destination principle applies and

under the destination principle, the element of export is satisfied when the

foreign destination point is intended and indicated in the relevant

documents submitted by the Appellant.

[91] The mere delivery of the bunker fuel outside the customs barrier to the

vessel cannot be regarded as having taken place out of the territory of Sri

Lanka to constitute an export unless goods are taken out of Sri Lanka to

another foreign point and the element of taking out of the territory of Sri

Lanka to a destination point of another country become an integral part of

the transaction, to constitute an export under Sections 15 (j) or 47 of the

Inland Revenue Act. A following illustrations given by Hidayatullah., J. In

Burmah Shell Oil Storage and Distributing Company case (supra) will explain

this proposition vividly. Goods cannot be said to be exported if they are

ordered by the health authorities to be destroyed by dumping them in the

sea, and for that purpose are taken out of the territories of India and beyond

the territorial wastes and dumped in the open sea (paragraph 36). Another

illustration is where goods put on board a streamer bound for a foreign

country, but jettisoned can still be said to have been exported, even

though they do not reach their destination (supra).

[92] The objective of granting the concessionary tax rate under Section 47

or the exemption under Section 15 (j) of the Inland Revenue Act as regards

the supply of bunker fuel to foreign going ships for navigation is to attract

foreign going ships to Sri Lankan ports and promote bunkering industry. So

that foreign going ships will visit the Ports of Sri Lanka and receive bunker

33

CA TAX 04 2009 BRA 558 SCA - 216

fuel for navigation on the high seas in the course of its journey to the next

foreign destination Port and the suppliers will be benefited from the

concessionary tax rate under Section 47 or the exemption under Section 15

(j) of the Inland Revenue Act.

[93] The term 'export' in Sections 15 (j) or 47 of the Inland Revenue Act

signifies etymologically 'to take out of Sri Lanka into the territory of another

country, and therefore, means to take out of Sri Lanka, goods to a territory

of another country. Now the term "export " for the purpose the taking

bunker fuel out of Sri Lanka means taking out of Sri Lanka to any place

(destination point) in the high seas outside the territorial waters of Sri Lanka.

In this sense, any "place" beyond the territorial waters of Sri Lanka would be

a place outside the country. The test is that the sending of the bunker fuel

out of the country is satisfied when the bunker fuel, which is directly

delivered to the operator /owner of the foreign going vessel for navigation

on the high seas has a foreign destination point. The resulting position is

that the ownership of the bunker fuel will be transferred to the

owner/operator of the vessel by the supplier from a taxable activity and the

vessel will use those bunker fuels for navigation on the high seas intended

for a foreign destination point out of the Sri Lankan territorial waters (the

next foreign port). In short, to earn the exemption or concessionary tax rate,

the goods must have a foreign destination point where they can be said to

be taken out of Sri Lanka to constitute an export under Sections 15 (j) or 47

of the Inland Revenue Act.

[94] At the hearing, the learned Additional Solicitor-General submitted that

in order for a transaction to qualify as export, there should be a recipient for

such goods in another jurisdiction as an importer and as there was no

corresponding importer in another country to physically receive the goods,

the transition in the present case does not constitute an export. Bunker fuel

supplied to a foreign going vessel for navigation occasions an export and

eligible for the exemption under Section 15 (j) or concessionary tax rate

under Section 47 of the Inland Revenue Act if it is delivered by the supplier

directly to a foreign going vessel and received by its owner/operator for

navigation on the high seas out of Sri Lanka, with evidence of a foreign

destination point.

34

CA TAX 04 2009 BRA 558 SCA - 216

[95] I do not think that given the nature of the goods being the bunker fuel,

which is supplied to the operator/owner of the ship for navigation on the

high seas for the next foreign destination point, the requirement in

traditional export of cargo where the goods are exported to a specified

recipient in another foreign jurisdiction is necessary to constitute an export

under Sections 15 (j) or 47 of the Inland Revenue Act. The above-mentioned

second illustration that goods put on board a streamer bound for a foreign

country, but jettisoned can still be said to have been exported, even

though they do not reach their destination vividly explains this proposition

in case of bunker fuel which is supplied for navigation. Another illustration

is where goods shipped from Colombo intended for delivery in Bombay

proceeded on a voyage, leaving the Sri Lankan territorial waters, but

developed engine trouble and returned and ran aground in the Sri Lankan

territorial waters at Hambantota Port. In this illustration, the ship intended

to deliver the goods at Bombay Port (destination point) and moved out of

the Sri Lankan territorial waters and the export was complete when the

goods were taken beyond the territorial waters of Sri Lanka with the

intention of delivering at Bombay Port. The fact that the ship was brought

back to Sri Lanka did not affect as the goods sold were intended to be taken to that foreign destination point, namely, the Bombay Port.

[96] I hold that the exemption under Section 15(j) or the concessionary tax

rate under Section 47 of the Inland Revenue Act in the present case applies

to the bunker fuel directly supplied to the operator or owner of the foreign

going vessel to be used for navigation on the high seas (out of the territorial

waters of Sri Lanka) and intended to a destination point of another country.

This finding is limited to this case and it shall not in any way be construed as

an application to other goods in respect of which the exemption claimed

under Section 15 (j) or the concessionary tax rate is claimed under Section

47 of the Inland Revenue Act.

[97] How can the Appellant satisfy that that the ship carrying bunker fuel for

navigation was taken out of the Sri Lankan territorial waters? It must be

shown that the supply of bunker fuel was delivered to the foreign going

ships tanks by the Appellant to be used for navigation on the high seas with

a foreign destination point of another country.

35

CA TAX 04 2009 BRA 558 SCA - 216

[98] To benefit from the exemption under Section 15 (j) or the concessionary

tax rate under Section 47 of the Inland Revenue Act, as regards the supply

of bunker fuel, the Appellant is required to satisfy the following documents:

1. Purchase orders for the receiver (customer) of the bunker fuel

indicating the name of the vessel, date of departure and next

destination from Sri Lanka;

2. Purchase order indicating written instructions for the receiver

(customer) to deliver the bunker fuel to the vessel;

3. Sales invoice to the receiver of bunker fuel;

4. Bunker delivery note endorsed by the Master/Chief Engineer/ such

responsible officer of the vessel; and

5. Evidence of payment from the receiver (customer).

[99] In the instant case, there is nothing to indicate that the bunker fuel

supplied by the Appellant to a ship was bound for a foreign destination point

out of Sri Lanka as there is no evidence whatsoever, such as the bunker

delivery note or nomination indicating that the destination of the ship was

any foreign place outside Sri Lanka or foreign destination point of another

port. Such a destination is conspicuously absent in the present case. The

argument of the Appellant that the moment the bunker fuel was taken out

of the Sri Lankan territory, the export was complete cannot be presumed

and accepted in the absence of documentary evidence indicating the next

foreign destination point of the vessel.

[100] For those reasons enumerated in this judgment, I hold that the supply

of bunker fuel by the Appellant in the present case, does not constitute an

export within the meaning of Sections 15 (j) or 47 of the Inland Revenue Act,

No. 38 of 2000 (as amended) and therefore, the Appellant is not entitled to

claim the concessionary tax rate under Section 47 or exemption under

Section 15 (j) of the Inland Revenue Act, No. 38 of 2000 (as amended).

Conclusion & Opinion of Court

[101] In these circumstances, I answer Questions of Law arising in the Case

Stated against the Appellant and in favour of the Respondent as follows:

1. No.

2. No

36

CA TAX 04 2009 BRA 558 SCA - 216

[102] For those reasons, subject to our observations in paragraphs 94, 95

and 96 of this judgment, the determination made by the Board of Review

dated 07.01.2009 is affirmed and the Registrar is directed to send a certified

copy of this judgment to the Tax Appeals Commission.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

M. Sampath K.B. Wijeratne, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL