Page 1 of 11

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal in terms of Article

138 (1) of the Constitution read together with

section 331 of the Code of Criminal Procedure

Act No. 15 of 1979.

The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka

Complainant

Gunapolasingam Benet Jerome

Accused

CA Case No:

CA/HCC/255/17

HC of Jaffna Case No: AND NOW BETWEEN

HC/1974/2016

Gunapolasingam Benet Jerome

Accused-Appellant

Vs.

The Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Complainant-Respondent

Page 2 of 11

Before: Menaka Wijesundera, J.

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

Counsel: N. Srikanthan with S. Panchadsaran for the Accused-Appellant

Shaminda Wickrama, SSC for the Respondent

Written 26.08.2020 (by the Accused-Appellant)

Submissions: 04.05.2022 (by the Respondent)

On

Argued On: 13.06.2023

Decided On: 03.08.2023

Sasi Mahendran, J.

The Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Accused) was indicted in

the High Court of Jaffna under Section 296 of the Penal Code for committing the murder

of Vetharasa Lily Mary (hereinafter referred to as the Deceased) on the 29th of

December 2008.

The Prosecution led evidence from eleven witnesses, with marked productions

from P1 to P4, and closed its case. The Accused also gave evidence from the witness box.

At the conclusion of the trial, the Learned High Court Judge found the Accused guilty and

imposed the death sentence.

The following grounds for appeal were set out in the written submission.

1. There is no substantial evidence either direct or circumstantial led by the

prosecution incriminating the Accused-Appellant.

2. In the absence of any eyewitness, the evidence submitted by the prosecution went

only to the extent of establishing

a. The death of the deceased

b. The exhumation of her decomposed body on judicial order following

information and

c. The fact that the death was caused by violence. Thus, the case of the

prosecution was bound to fail.

Page 3 of 11

3. The fact that, in addition to the absence of either direct or circumstantial evidence,

there was no cogent evidence incriminating the applicant-petitioner, in the form of

(1) Any recovery in consequence of his own statement permissible under section 27

(1) of the Evidence Ordinance connecting him with the death of the deceased, or

(2) his own confession to a Learned Magistrate, and thus the conviction cannot be

sustained.

We must be mindful that this case is based on circumstantial evidence. Therefore,

we are guided by the well-established principles of law on circumstantial evidence.

In the case of State of U.P. vs Dr. Ravindra Prakash Mittal( 1992, 2 S.C.J, 549 it

was held that the essential ingredients to prove guilt of an accused person by

circumstantial evidence are :-

1) The circumstances from which the conclusion was drawn should be fully proved:

2) The circumstances should be conclusive in nature;

3) All the facts so established should be consistent with the hypothesis of guilt and

inconsistent with innocence;

4) The circumstance should; to a moral certainty, exclude the possibility of guilt of any

person other than the accused.

This judgement was referred by Balapatabendi, J in the case of Karunasena

v. Attorney General,2005 (2) SLR 233.

Before we scrutinize the evidence led before the Learned High Court Judge, it is

pertinent to consider the reasons found in his judgment that led him to form the opinion

with regard to the guilt of the Accused.

On Page 153 of the translated brief;

Analysis of evidence by Court that it was the accused who had committed the murder

1. The person who was murdered in this case had been living at No.18 Martin Lane

Jaffna.

Page 4 of 11

2. The accused and his wife too had been living in that house on rent.

3. The first information with regard to murder of Lily Mary and her body was buried

at No. 14 Martin Lane was informed to the police by the accuseds wife Roxy.

4. The wife of the accused Roxy is dead now.

5. A complainant was made to the police with regard to Lily Mary going missing, in

December 2008.

6. Accused Jerome had sold a gold chain in December 2008 the 5th witness. Joseph

Welington who was a jewelry shop owner. That chain had been melted by the

witness. The witness said that as per the police, that chain was of Lily Mary.

7. This sale of the chain had taken place in December 2008 by the accused Jerome.

8. It has been proved that Lily Mary had gone missing during 2008 December.

9. Accused in his evidence had said that he was arrested by the Army Intelligence in

December 2009.

10. The accused did not put forward any witnesses documents with regard to his

arrest.

11. It has been proved that the chain of Lily Mary was sold by accused Jerome to the

jewelry shop of the 5th witness (But the chain had been melted)

12. Similarly a pair of ear studs was sold at the jewelry shop of witness No. 3 in

December 2008.That too had been melted.

13. The spot where the corpse was buried was shown to the Magistrate by wife of the

accused, Roxy.

Page 5 of 11

14. It is proved that the accused, his wife and the deceased Lily Mary had been living

in that house.

15. Almost after period of 2 months information regarding the murder of Lily Mary

and the place where the corpse was buried were given to the police by the wife of

the accused and corpse was exhumed at No. 18 Martin Lane Jaffna.

16. Lily Mary who lived at the address is dead. The wife of the accused Roxy too has

died now. Only the accused Jerome who lived in that house is alive.

17. Evidence Ordinance states that the wife who gave information with regard to the

murder and the place of the corpse where it was buried, cannot give evidence

against the husband.

18. The case commenced based on the complainant and information given by the wife

of the accused under section 109 and 110 of the Criminal Procedure Code.

19. The corpse was exhumed on 11/03/2009 before the Magistrate.

20. The spot where the corps was, had been identified by the wife of the accused.

21. In the evidence of the accused, he said that he was arrested by the Intelligence

officer during December 2008 and that he was not at Martin Lane.

22. According to Section 103 of the Evidence Ordinance the onus of proving the

particular information lies with the accused. The matter that the accused was

arrested by the Army Intelligence was not proved by the accused in Court. On the

contrary, the matter of the accused being at No.18 Martin Lane during December

2008, and the matter of Lily Mary going missing in that month, the sale of Lily

Mary Jewellery that were sold to a Jewellery shop in 2008 December and the

matter of the accused selling that gold chain directly to the jewellery shop that was

said in the evidence of witness Joseph Wellington have been proved.

Page 6 of 11

23. Therefore it is proved that when Lily Mary went missing in 2008 December, the

presence of accused, Jerome being in that house has been proved.

24. It is proved that it was the wife of the accused, Roxy who had given all the

information with regard to the murder to the police and had assist the police to

recover the corpse. She is now dead.

25. As such, the Court pronounce the Judgment in this case that it has been proved

beyond reasonable doubt through circumstantial evidence that it was accused

Jerome who had committed the murder of Lily Mary.

The question before us is whether the prosecution has established sufficient

evidence for the court to form an inference that the one and only irresistible and

inescapable conclusion is that the Accused himself committed this crime.

To answer this question, we focus on the evidence led by the prosecution before the

trial:

According to PW1 Jayakumaran Rajkumaran, a relative (great-grandson) of the

deceased, he was informed by the Accused's wife, Jerome Roxy, and his mother-in-law,

Anthony Ritamalar (PW2), about the killing and burying of his relative, the Deceased.

According to PW1, it was an assumption that the Deceased's body could be at the house.

During this time, the Accused's wife and PW2, after quarreling with the Accused, were

residing close to PW1's house. This is when they decided to tell PW1 that the Deceased's

body was at their house (the Accuseds house). PW1 had already lodged a complaint three

days after her disappearance and was later notified by the Accused's wife and PW2 about

the Deceased's demise. PW1 and his brother-in-law then lodged a complaint with the

Police, who conducted the investigation and recovery of the Deceased's body from the

Accused's house. The place was pointed out by the Accused's wife and PW2, and they dug

up and recovered the decayed body. PW1 identified the decayed body as that of his

relative.

In his cross-examination, it was put forward that the Accused's wife had made the

complaint to the police station two months after the killing of the Deceased, and that the

particular place where the body was buried was exactly pointed out by the Accused's wife,

Page 7 of 11

stating that this was where the body was buried. This piece of evidence was challenged

by the Accused.

It must be noted that his statement was recorded 2 months after the incident.

No reason was given for this delay. We are mindful of the Accused's allegation in their

grounds of appeal.

We are mindful that PW8 IP Rukmal, who conducted the investigation, was not

called to give evidence at the trial. The Learned High Court Judge only relied on the

premise of the evidence postulated by the 10 witnesses that were summoned, as the

prosecution had not elicited the reason as to why the Accused had committed the murder

of the Deceased, as there had been no evidence postulated by the witnesses regarding this

issue. This raises the question as to whether the evidence relied upon by the Learned

High Court Judge is enough to convict the Accused of the Murder of the Deceased.

The Accuseds version:

The Accused testified under oath that he used to live at the house at No. 18 Matin

Lane, which was given by his grandfather, as it was owned by his relatives. The Accused

and his wife moved into that house during that time, and the old lady had been residing

there for seven years. It was pointed out that she was not the owner of that house. The

Accused, his wife, and their child (who was born later) resided there along with the

Deceased, as she was asked to stay behind instead of going to an elder's home. After

finding out about his wife's previous marriage, which was not disclosed to him, he engaged

in a physical altercation with his wife. Later on, after his father-in-law committed suicide,

his brother-in-law and his wife assaulted him. Afterward, he lived at his friend's house,

which was on the same road in front of his house. Due to a dispute with Chooti, he reported

the Accused to the Army intelligence unit due to his affiliation with the LTTE, where he

was later apprehended towards the end of November 2008. He was assaulted and confined

for 26 days. In his re-examination, he was released on the 26th of January 2009. After

that, when he returned home, his wife, child, and the old lady were not at home. Upon

further inspection, PW2 told him that his wife and child were not there anymore, and he

later learned that his wife had left with Chooti. He then reported this to the police, who

merely overlooked his complaint. One night, when he was alone, the roof of his house was

set on fire, and succumbing to fear, he lived with his grandfather. When he was at a

church, he was put into a police jeep, and upon being arrested, he was inquired about the

whereabouts of the old lady, of whom he had no knowledge of her disappearance.

Page 8 of 11

Thereafter, he learned that his wife had reported to the police that he had killed

and buried the body of the Deceased. He was assaulted while under custody. Prior to these

events, he stated that the Deceased had informed him that Chooti used to visit their house

and give money to his wife from the Accused's bank account. Eight people were arrested

alongside him on that day.

In his cross-examination, he stated that he did not know where his family had gone

to, and he did not take any action to find them as he feared that he would be taken by the

Army and assaulted again.

We must note that in the evidence given by the Accused from the evidence box,

he was not questioned about the gold jewelry that was sold off to the goldsmiths by the

prosecution. Neither was he questioned about the reason for the killing of the old lady

who resided in his house.

It is pertinent to note that according to the evidence statement given by PW11, it

was the Accused's wife who pointed out the location of where the body was buried. This

gives rise to the question as to how she knew precisely where the exact spot was, and how

it had created credibility to believe the statement given by her to the police about this

incident. We are mindful of Section 120 (2) of the Evidence Ordinance, which reads as

follows: In criminal proceedings against any person the husband or wife of such person

respectively shall be a competent witness if called by the accused, but in that case, all

communications between them shall cease to be privileged.

The Learned High Court Judge has considered this evidence against the Accused. As

per page 153 of the translated brief:

20. The spot where the corps was, had been identified by the wife of the accused.

24. It is proved that it was the wife of the accused, Roxy who had given all the information

with regard to the murder to the police and had assist the police to recover the corpse.

She is now dead.

On the other hand, the Learned High Court judge has failed to consider the

following evidence;

1. Apart from the Accused there were other people including his wife living in that

house at the time of the incident.

2. Evidence given by the Accused stated that there was animosity between the

Accused himself and his wife which existed prior to this incident.

Page 9 of 11

We are mindful of the following Indian judgement that was considered by our judges when

dealing with circumstantial evidence:

In the case of Hanumant Govind Nargundkar and another v. State of Madhya

Pradesh, AIR 1952 SC 343 at Page 345, Mahajan, J held that ,

In dealing with circumstantial evidence the rules specially applicable to such

evidence must be borne in mind. In such cases there is always the danger that conjecture

or suspicion may take the place of legal proof and therefore, it is right to recall the warning

addressed by Baron Alderson, to the jury in Reg v. Hodge ((1838) 2 Lew. 227), where he

said :-

"The mind was apt to take a pleasure in adapting circumstances to one another, and

even in straining them a little, if need be, to force them to from parts of one connected

whole; and the more ingenious the mind of the individual, the more likely was it,

considering such matters to overreach and mislead itself, to supply some little link that

is wanting, to take for granted some fact consistent with its previous theories and

necessary to render them complete."

It is well to remember that in cases where the evidence is of a circumstantial nature,

the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should in the first

instance be fully established, and all the facts so established should be consistent only

with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused. Again, the circumstances should be of a

conclusive nature and tendency and they should be such as to exclude every hypothesis

but the one proposed to be proved. In other words, there must be a chain of evidence so

far complete as not to leave any reasonable ground for a conclusion consistent with the

innocence of the accused and it must be such as to show that within all human probability

the act must have been done by the accused.

For this, we shall follow the judgements passed in the cases of;

In the case of Sudu Hakuruge Jamis and 1 Other v. The Attorney General, CA

204/2010, decided on 13.11.2013, Sisira De Abrew, J held;

Applying the principles laid down in the above judicial decisions, I hold that in a

case of circumstantial evidence if the Court is going to arrive at a conclusion that the

accused is guilty of the offence, such an inference must be the one and only irresistible

and inescapable conclusion that the accused himself committed the crime. Further I hold

Page 10 of 11

that if the proved facts are not consistent with the guilt of the accused, he must be

acquitted.

This was further analysed in the case of H.K.K.Habakkala v. Attorney General CA

Appeal 107/2005, his Lordship Sisira De Abrew, J held that:

The case against the appellant entirely depended on circumstantial evidence. Therefore

it is necessary to consider the principles governing cases of circumstantial evidence. In

his judgement he had referred the following case of Don Sunny v. AG 1998 2 SLR Page 1

Gunasekara J held that

1. when a charge is sought to be proved by circumstantial evidence the proved items

of circumstantial evidence when taken together must irresistibly point towards

the only inference that the accused committed the offence. On a consideration of

all the evidence the only inference that can be arrived at should be consistent

with the guilt of the accused only.

2. If on a consideration of the items of circumstantial evidence if an inference can be

drawn which is consistent with the innocence of the accused, then one cannot say

that the charges have been proved beyond reasonable doubt.

3. If upon a consideration of the proved items of circumstantial evidence if the

only inference that can be drawn is that the accused committed the offence then

they can be found guilty.

Therefore, we hold that the prosecution has failed to draw inference between the

deceased body found at the accuseds property and the accused himself.

The next point we need to consider is the items of gold jewelry that were sold and

exchanged by the Accused with the witnesses PW3 and PW5. They claim that the Accused

had visited their respective shops to exchange items of gold jewelry, which were later

melted after the transaction was completed. It is evident that these items of jewelry were

not identified by anyone as they were melted. We observe that the learned High Court

judge had come to the conclusion that these items were identified by the police but had

been melted before the recovery was made. So, the issue raised here is how a connection

was made between the said melted jewelry and the deceased.

Page 11 of 11

In the case of RANASINGHE v. ATTORNEY-GENERAL 2007/ 1 S L.R 218, at page

223, his Lordship Sisira De Abrew, J held that;

The learned Counsel for the appellant was that the erroneous approach of the

learned trial Judge with regard to section 27 (Evidence Ordinance) statement of the

appellant (hereinafter referred to as section 27 statement). Learned trial Judge, referring

to recovery of iron club recovered from a well, observed as follows: "This iron club was

recovered from a well in consequence of the accused's statement. This shows that the

accused tried to hide the weapon which was used to commit the crime." In my view the

above conclusion of the learned trial Judge is erroneous since discovery in consequence of

a section 27 statement only leads to the conclusion that the accused had the knowledge

as to the weapon being kept at the place from which it was detected. This view is

supported by the judgment of His Lordship Justice Sirimane (with whom

Samarawickrama, J. and Weeramantry, J. agreed) in the case of Heenbanda v Queers7)

which states as follows: "Where part of a statement of an accused person is put in evidence

under section 27 of the Evidence Ordinance, it is the duty of the trial Judge to explain to

the Jury that such a statement is only evidence of the fact that the accused knew where

the article discovered could be found, and nothing more."

It is not sufficient to convict the Accused based on the witness statements given by

PW3 and PW5 about the gold jewelry, which was sold and exchanged by the Accused, and

which was not identified by anyone as belonging to the Deceased.

After considering the above-said facts and the judgments, it is my considered

opinion that the circumstantial evidence led by the prosecution against this accused was

not sufficient to prove his guilt with regard to the murder of Vetharasa Lily Mary (the

Deceased). Therefore, we set aside the findings, conviction, and sentence imposed on the

Accused, and acquit him. This Appeal is allowed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Menaka Wijesundera, J.

I AGREE.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL