==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/CPA/0098/2022

Page 1 of 18

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for revision under Article 138 of the Constitution.

1. J. Chathuranga Dharmakeerthi,

No. 21, Koboduwa Road, Kuda Waskaduwa, Waskaduwa. 2. S.S. Bastian, alias Bastian

Sundararajan No. 58/19, Lords Place, Kandana.

Applicants Vs. Lucky Homes (Private) Limited, No. 145/1, High Level Road, Pannipitiya.

Respondent AND

Lucky Homes (Private) Limited, No. 145/1, High Level Road, Pannipitiya.

Respondent-Appellant Vs.

1. J. Chathuranga Dharmakeerthi,

No. 21, Koboduwa Road, Kuda Waskaduwa, Waskaduwa.

Court of Appeal Case No: CA/CPA/0098/2022 High Court Case No: ALT/09/2019 Labour Tribunal Court Case Nos: MH/33/152/2013 MH/33/1153/2013

CA/CPA/0098/2022

Page 2 of 18

2. S.S. Bastian, alias Bastian

Sundararajan No. 58/19, Lords Place, Kandana.

Applicant-Respondents

AND NOW

1. J. Chathuranga Dharmakeerthi,

No. 21, Koboduwa Road, Kuda Waskaduwa, Waskaduwa. 2. S.S. Bastian, alias Bastian

Sundararajan No. 58/19, Lords Place, Kandana.

Applicant-Respondent-Petitioners

Vs.

Lucky Homes (Private) Limited, No. 145/1, High Level Road, Pannipitiya.

Respondent-Appellant-Respondent Before : D. THOTAWATTA, J. K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J. Counsel : Sandamal Rajapakse with Kalpanee

Dissanayake for the Applicant-Respondent-Petitioners. Isuru Lakpura for the Respondent-Appellant-Respondent. Argued on : 08.09.2025

CA/CPA/0098/2022

Page 3 of 18

Written Submissions of the Applicant-Respondent -Petitioners tendered on : 26.11.2025 Written Submissions of the Respondent-Appellant -Respondent tendered on : 21.10.2025 and 07.11.2025 Decided on : 23.01.2026 K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J. Instant application in revision has been preferred to this Court by the Applicant-

Respondent-Petitioners (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the Petitioners”)

seeking to revise and set aside an interlocutory order dated 12.07.2022, made

by the learned High Court Judge of the Western Province holden at Homagama

in an action bearing No. ALT 09/2019 in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction

vested in it by Article 154P(3)(b) of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the Constitution”) to

be read with Article 138 of the Constitution, a certified copy of which was

annexed to the petition furnished to this Court by Petitioners marked as X10

(hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the HC order”) whereby, he had made order

allowing an application made to it by the Respondent-Appellant-Respondent

(hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the Respondent”) to receive and admit new

evidence additional to, or supplementary of, the evidence already taken in the

labour tribunal in the form of documents marked as A1 to A6. The Respondent

had at the outset, raised an objection as to the jurisdiction of this Court over the

instant matter mainly, relying on the decision in W.T.S. Nilantha Fernando Vs.

P.M.S. Nilanthi Perera-SC-APPEAL 65/2025-DECIDED ON 10.10.2025, and

it is to the following effect;

“Does the Court of Appeal have a revisionary jurisdiction in terms of Article

138 of the Constitution in respect of a decision of the Provincial High Court

CA/CPA/0098/2022

Page 4 of 18

made in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction in terms of section 31D

of the Industrial Dispute Act No. 43 of 1950 as amended?.”

On the other hand, the Petitioners had mainly, relying on the decision in

Gunawardane and Others Vs. Muthukumarana and Others-2020 [3] SLR 306

sought to resist it.

It may now, be examined.

At the outset, it is to be observed that the order impugned (X10) is an

interlocutory order made by the learned High Court Judge of the Western

Province holden at Homagama in an action bearing No. ALT 09/2019 in the

exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in it by Article 154P(3)(b) of the

Constitution to be read with Article 138 of the Constitution.

Now the pertinent question that would arise for our consideration is whether an

interlocutory order made by a High Court established by Article 154P of the

Constitution in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in it by section 3

of the Act in respect of an order of the Labour Tribunal is amendable to an extra-

ordinary revisionary jurisdiction of this Court when proviso to section 9(a) of the

Act expressly, confers upon a party aggrieved by such an order a right of appeal

to the Supreme Court with special leave to appeal first had and obtained.

Article 138(1) of the Constitution enacts that,

“The Court of Appeal shall have and exercise subject to the provisions of

the Constitution or of any law, an appellate jurisdiction for the correction

of all errors in fact or in law which shall be [committed by the High Court,

in the exercise of its appellate or original jurisdiction or by any Court of

First Instance], tribunal or other institution and sole and exclusive

cognizance, by way of appeal, revision and restitutio in integrum, of all

causes, suits, actions, prosecutions, matters and things [of which such

High Court, Court of First Instance], tribunal or other institution may have

taken cognizance...”

CA/CPA/0098/2022

Page 5 of 18

Proviso-not reproduced.

It was inter-alia, held by the Supreme Court in Weragama v. Eksath Lanka

Wathu Kamkam Samithiya and others-1994[1] SLR 329, that “….however,

the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal under Article 138 is not an entrenched

jurisdiction, because Article 138 provides that it is subject to the provisions “of

any law"; hence it was always constitutionally permissible for that jurisdiction

to be reduced or transferred by ordinary law (of course, to a body entitled to

exercise judicial power). That is the reason why I held in Swastika Textile

Industries Ltd. v. Dayaratne, that section 3 of the High Court of the Provinces

(Special Provisions) Act, No. 19 of 1990, conferred concurrent, appellate and

revisionary jurisdiction on the High Courts in respect of Labour Tribunals, and

that thereafter section 31D3 of the Industrial Disputes Act, as amended by Act

No. 32 of 1990, made that jurisdiction exclusive, thereby taking away the

jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal in that respect.

It was inter-alia, held by the Supreme Court in SC/Appeal/65/2025-Decided

on 10.10.2025 at page 32 that, “In this context, it would be legally

impermissible and institutionally unsound for the Court of Appeal, in pari

materia, to sit in appeal over judgments and orders pronounced by a Provincial

High Court in the exercise of its appellate or revisionary jurisdiction. A party

cannot pursue successive appeals before two courts of coordinate jurisdiction in

respect of the same matter. This strikes at the very root of the issue. Such a

practice is inimical to legislative intent, imposes unnecessary burdens on the

judicial system, and undermines the principle of finality in litigation. These

considerations make clear that concurrent jurisdiction was intended to provide

an alternative forum for appellate review, not to create an additional tier in the

appellate hierarchy.”.

Hence, it becomes manifest that the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal under

Article 138 is not entrenched and therefore, not absolute and as such it is

inherently, conditional and it can thus, be altered by ordinary law as held by

Supreme Court in Weragama v. Eksath Lanka Wathu Kamkam Samithiya and

CA/CPA/0098/2022

Page 6 of 18

others (Supra) and in Swasthika Textiles Industries Ltd Vs Dayaratne-1993

[2] SLR 348

The Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution enacted Article 154P(1) to the

Constitution and it reads thus;

“There shall be a High Court for each Province with effect from the date on

which this Chapter comes into force. Each such High Court shall be

designated as the High Court of the relevant Province.”

Hence, Article 154P(1) of the Constitution so enacted by the Thirteenth

Amendment, made provisions for the establishment of the High Courts in the

provinces.

Article 154P(3)(b) of the Constitution enacted by the Thirteenth Amendment to

the Constitution, reads thus;

“Every such High Court shall –

(b) notwithstanding anything in Article 138 and subject to any law,

exercise, appellate and revisionary jurisdiction in respect of convictions,

sentences and orders entered or imposed by Magistrates Courts and

Primary Courts within the Province;” [Emphasis is mine]

Hence, Article 154P(3)(b) conferred upon the High Court so established under

Article 154P(1) the appellate and revisionary jurisdiction in respect of

convictions, sentences and orders entered or imposed by Magistrates Courts and

Primary Courts within the Province notwithstanding anything in Article 138

and subject to any law. [Emphasis is mine]

Article 154P(6) of the Constitution enacted by Thirteenth Amendment to the

Constitution confers upon any person aggrieved by a final order, judgment or

sentence of any such High Court so established under Article 154P(1) of the

Constitution made in the exercise of its jurisdiction under paragraphs (3)(b) or

(3)(c) or (4) a right of appeal to the Court of Appeal in accordance with Article

CA/CPA/0098/2022

Page 7 of 18

138 of the Constitution subject to the provisions of the Constitution and any law

and it reads thus;

“(6) subject to the provisions of the Constitution and any law, any

person aggrieved by a final order, judgment or sentence of any such Court,

in the exercise of its jurisdiction under paragraphs (3)(b) or (3)(c) or (4) may

appeal there from to the Court of Appeal in accordance with Article 138.”

[Emphasis is mine]

However, no provision was made with regard to the procedure to be followed in

such High Courts. With a view to providing for the lacuna in the law with regard

to the procedure to be followed in the High Court of the Provinces, so established

under Article 154P(1) of the Constitution which enacted by the Thirteenth

Amendment to the Constitution, the High Court of the Provinces (Special

Provisions) Act, No. 19 of 1990 (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the Act”)

was enacted making provision “regarding the procedure to be followed in, and

the right to appeal to, and from, the High Court established under Article 154P

of the Constitution”.

The Act also made provision for the appeals to be brought in before the Court of

Appeal as well as the Supreme Court from the High Court. While section 9 of the

Act provides for the appeals to Supreme Court from High Court, section 11

thereof provides for appeals to Court of Appeal from the High Court established

under Article 154P of the Constitution.

Section 9 of the Act reads thus;

“9. Subject to the provisions of this Act or any other law, any person

aggrieved by

(a) a final order, judgment, decree or sentence of a High Court

established by Article 154P of the Constitution in the exercise of the

appellate jurisdiction vested in it by paragraph (3) (b) of Article 154P of the

Constitution or section 3 of this Act or any other law, in any matter or

CA/CPA/0098/2022

Page 8 of 18

proceeding whether civil or criminal which involves a substantial question

of law, may appeal therefrom to the Supreme Court if the High Court

grants leave to appeal to the Supreme Court ex mero motu or at the

instance of any aggrieved party to such matter or proceedings :

Provided that the Supreme Court may, in its discretion, grant special

leave to appeal to the Supreme Court from “any final” or

“interlocutory order”, judgment, decree or sentence made by such High

Court, in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in it by paragraph

(3) (b) of Article 154P of the Constitution or section 3 of this Act, or any

other law where such High Court has refused to grant leave to appeal

to the Supreme Court, or where in the opinion of the Supreme Court,

the case or matter is fit for review by the Supreme Court:

Provided further that the Supreme Court shall grant leave to appeal in

every matter or proceeding in which it is satisfied that the question to be

decided is of public or general importance; and

(b) a final order, judgment or sentence of a High Court established by

Article 154P of the Constitution in the exercise of its jurisdiction conferred

on it by paragraph (3) (a), or (4) of Article 154P of the Constitution may

appeal therefrom to the Court of Appeal.”[Emphasis is mine]

Section 3 of the Act enacts thus;

“A High Court established by Article 154P of the Constitution for a Province

shall, subject to any law, exercise appellate and revisionary jurisdiction

in respect of orders made by Labour Tribunals within that Province

and orders made under section 5 or section 9 of the Agrarian Services Act,

No. 58 of 1979, in respect of any land situated within that Province”.

[Emphasis is mine]

Section 31DD(1) of the Industrial Dispute’s Act 43 of 1950 (as amended) enacts

thus;

CA/CPA/0098/2022

Page 9 of 18

“Any workman, trade union or employer who is aggrieved “by any final

order” of a High Court established under Article 154P of the Constitution,

in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in it by law or in

the exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction vested in it by law, in relation

to an order of a labour tribunal, may appeal therefrom to the Supreme

Court with the leave of the High Court or the Supreme Court first had

and obtained.”

Upon a careful analysis of section 9(a) of the Act, it becomes manifestly, clear

that, subject to the provisions of the Act or any other law, any person aggrieved

by a final order, judgment, decree or sentence of a High Court established by

Article 154P of the Constitution in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested

in it by paragraph (3)(b) of Article 154P of the Constitution or section 3 of the

Act or any other law, in any matter or proceeding whether civil or criminal which

involves a substantial question of law, may appeal therefrom to the Supreme

Court if the High Court grants leave to appeal to the Supreme Court ex

mero motu or at the instance of any aggrieved party to such matter or

proceedings. Hence, it inevitably, follows therefrom that section 9(a) of the Act

does not in any manner, confer upon the Court of Appeal jurisdiction to grant

leave to appeal ex mero motu or at the instance of any aggrieved party to such

matter or proceedings from an interlocutory order made by a High Court

established by Article 154P of the Constitution in the exercise of the appellate

jurisdiction vested in it by paragraph (3) (b) of Article 154P of the Constitution

or section 3 of the Act or any other law, in any matter or proceeding whether

civil or criminal which involves a substantial question of law. [Emphasis is mine]

Similar provision can be found in section 31DD(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act

as amended which provides that “Any workman, trade union or employer who is

aggrieved “by any final order” of a High Court established under Article 154P

of the Constitution, in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in it

by law or in the exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction vested in it by law, in

relation to an order of a labour tribunal, may appeal therefrom to the Supreme

CA/CPA/0098/2022

Page 10 of 18

Court with the leave of the High Court or the Supreme Court first had and

obtained.”.[Emphasis is mine]

Upon a careful analysis of section 9(a) of the Act and section 31DD(1) of the

Industrial Disputes Act as amended, it becomes abundantly, clear that neither

section, namely; section 9(a) of the Act or section 31DD(1) of the Industrial

Disputes Act as amended, provides for a right of appeal to the Supreme Court

with the leave of the High Court or the Supreme Court first had and obtained

from an “interlocutory order” of a High Court established under Article 154P

of the Constitution, in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in it

by section 3 of the Act, in relation to an order of a labour tribunal. [Emphasis

is mine]

Conversely, the 1st proviso to section 9(a) of the Act expressly, confers upon the

Supreme Court the jurisdiction to grant in its discretion, special leave to appeal

to the Supreme Court from “any interlocutory order” made by such High

Court, in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in it by section 3 of

this Act, where such High Court has refused to grant leave to appeal to the

Supreme Court, or where in the opinion of the Supreme Court, the case or

matter is fit for review by the Supreme Court. [Emphasis is mine]

Hence, it becomes manifestly, clear without an iota of doubt upon careful

analysis of 1st proviso to section 9(a) of the Act that it expressly, confers upon

the Supreme Court the jurisdiction to grant in its discretion, special leave to

appeal to it from “any interlocutory order” made by such High Court, in the

exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in it by section 3 of this Act in

relation to an order of the labour tribunal in those instances, namely; a) where

such High Court has refused to grant leave to appeal to the Supreme Court,

or b) where in the opinion of the Supreme Court, the case or matter is fit

for review by the Supreme Court. [Emphasis is mine]

In the circumstances, it becomes manifestly, clear that 1st proviso to section 9(a)

of the Act expressly, provides for a right of appeal to the Supreme Court from an

CA/CPA/0098/2022

Page 11 of 18

interlocutory order made by such High Court, in the exercise of the appellate

jurisdiction vested in it by section 3 of this Act in relation to an order of the

labour tribunal with special leave to appeal first had and obtained from the

Supreme Court under any of those circumstances as enumerated therein.

[Emphasis is mine]

Hence, it becomes manifestly, clear upon a careful analysis of the provisions

enumerated above taken cumulatively, that the legislature had expressly, and

unambiguously, provided for a right of appeal “only” to the Supreme Court

both from a final order as well as from an interlocutory order made by such

High Court in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in it by section 3

of this Act in relation to an order of the labour tribunal with special leave to

appeal first had and obtained from the Supreme Court under any of those

circumstances as enumerated therein. [Emphasis is mine]

Now, the pertinent question is; What was the specific objective that the

legislature intended to achieve by expressly, unequivocally and unambiguously,

providing for a right of appeal “only” to the apex Court of this country-the

Supreme Court, to an aggrieved party by enacting a proviso to section 9(a) of the

Act “from an interlocutory order” made by a High Court established by Article

154P of the Constitution in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in it

by section 3 of the Act in relation to an order of the labour tribunal with special

leave to appeal first had and obtained therefrom under any of those

circumstances set out in proviso to section 9(a) of the Act in the same way as

from a final order as provided for by section 9(a) of the Act as well as by section

31DD(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act as amended?. In my view, the specific

objective intended to be achieved by the legislature thereby, was to arrest delays

in the administration of justice, which would in turn, result in the early and

expeditious disposal of the disputes arising out of labour matters for; resolution

of disputes as such expeditiously, is an essential element for the smooth and

fast economic growth of this Country. [Emphasis is mine]

CA/CPA/0098/2022

Page 12 of 18

The next question that would then arise for our consideration in view of the

jurisdictional objection so raised to us by the respondent would be; “In the light

of the law set out above, does the Court of Appeal have a revisionary jurisdiction

in terms of Article 138 of the Constitution in respect of a decision of the Provincial

High Court made in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction in terms of section

31D of the Industrial Dispute Act No. 43 of 1950 as amended?.”

It was observed by the Supreme Court in Gunawardane And Others Vs.

Muthukumarana and Others (Supra) at page 314 that, “At the outset, it must be

borne in mind that the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal is a

Constitutional mandate. Its genesis lies in Article 138 of the Constitution. There is

no question that the Constitution is the supreme law of the land (vide In Re

Reference under Article 125(1) of the Constitution. In those circumstances, any

ouster or restriction of a Court's jurisdiction which is founded on the Constitution,

in so far as it is permitted under the Constitution, must be made in express

language. In Re the Nineteenth Amendment to the Constitution, a bench of 7 judges

unequivocally opined that "This manifests a cardinal rule that applies to the

interpretation of a Constitution, that there can be no implied amendment of any

provision of the Constitution" (at page 110). Therefore, it is only right and befitting

that this Court insists that every provision which restricts or modifies a Court's

Constitutional mandate is express and set out in no uncertain terms.”.

It is in this context, I would think it expedient at this juncture to direct my

judicial mind to the observations explicitly, made by the Supreme Court in a

later case in W.T.S. Nilantha Fernando Vs. P.M.S. Nilanthi Perera (Supra),

dealing with the observations so made by the Supreme Court in Gunawardane

v. Muthukumarana (Supra), and they may be reproduced verbatim the same as

follows to the extent that would be necessary for the proper resolution of the

jurisdictional objection so raised by the Respondent before us as enumerated

above;

CA/CPA/0098/2022

Page 13 of 18

“The Court of Appeal relied heavily on the judgment of this court in

Gunawardane v. Muthukumarana [2020] 3 Sri LR 306 in overruling the

preliminary objection raised by the defendant on jurisdiction. In that case,

at page 310, this court held as follows: Section 9 of the High Court of the

Provinces (Special Provisions) Act, No. 19 of 1990, as amended, does not

oust the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal in respect of decisions

made by a Provincial High Court exercising its appellate powers. Therefore,

the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal referred to in Article 138

of the Constitution of the Republic of Sri Lanka can be invoked in order to

canvass a decision made by a Provincial High Court exercising its appellate

powers.

With all due respect, I am unable to agree with that conclusion. That

judgment is predominantly premised on the conceptual separation of

revision from appeal, in the manner adopted by Sansoni C.J. in the oft

quoted decision in Mariam Beebee v. Seyed Mohomed (1965) 68 NLR 36,

where it was observed at page 38:

The power of revision is an extraordinary power which is quite independent

of and distinct from the appellate jurisdiction of this Court. Its object is the

due administration of justice and the correction of errors, sometimes

committed by this Court itself, in order to avoid miscarriages of justice. It is

exercised in some cases by a Judge of his own motion, when an aggrieved

person who may not be a party to the action brings to his notice the fact that,

unless the power is exercised, injustice will result. The Partition Act has not,

I conceive, made any change in this respect, and the power can still be

exercised in respect of any order or decree of a lower Court.

When Mariam Beebee v. Seyed Mohomed was decided in 1965, Sri Lanka

was governed by the Soulbury Constitution. Neither the Soulbury

Constitution nor the First Republican Constitution of 1972 contained any

provision equivalent to Article 138 of the present Constitution of 1978, which

CA/CPA/0098/2022

Page 14 of 18

expressly enacts the appellate, revisionary, and restitutio in integrum

jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal, to be exercised “subject to the provisions

of the Constitution or of any law.”

Indeed, the Supreme Court in Gunawardane, at page 314, acknowledged:

“At the outset, it must be borne in mind that the revisionary jurisdiction of

the Court of Appeal is a Constitutional mandate. Its genesis lies in Article

138 of the Constitution.” However, both the Supreme Court in Gunawardane

and the Court of Appeal in the instant case failed to properly appreciate that

Article 138 is not an entrenched provision but an enabling one. Article 138(1)

itself makes plain that the appellate jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal “by

way of appeal, revision and restitutio in integrum” is “subject to the

provisions of the Constitution or of any law”. Nevertheless, both courts

proceeded on the footing that, in the absence of an express exclusion, the

Court of Appeal continues to retain revisionary jurisdiction over judgments

of the Provincial High Court.

At page 316 of Gunawardane, it was further stated: “As I observed earlier,

the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal is a Constitutional

mandate which, undoubtedly, is subject to the provisions of statutory law.

Nevertheless, owing to its genesis in the Constitution, any restriction or

modification which the Legislature seeks to introduce must be introduced by

way of express wording.” In my view, this reasoning is untenable. Whilst

conferring revisionary jurisdiction on the Court of Appeal, the Constitution

itself expressly stipulates that such jurisdiction is “subject to the provisions

of the Constitution or of any law.” When the Constitution at the outset makes

clear that the revisionary jurisdiction is conditional and not absolute, there

is no need for express words of exclusion. Parliament, by ordinary

legislation, is empowered to regulate, modify, or reallocate such jurisdiction.

To hold otherwise would elevate Article 138(1) to a status of entrenchment

which the Constitution has not conferred.

CA/CPA/0098/2022

Page 15 of 18

This is consistent with the principle affirmed in Swasthika Textile Industries

Ltd v. Dayaratne, where the Supreme Court held that appellate and

revisionary jurisdiction under Article 138(1) is not entrenched and can be

altered by ordinary law. In that case, the Supreme Court held that section

31DD, introduced into the Industrial Disputes Act by Act No. 32 of 1990,

which provides that: “Any workman, trade union or employer who is

aggrieved by any final order of a High Court established under Article 154P

of the Constitution, in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in it

by law or in the exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction vested in it by law, in

relation to an order of a Labour Tribunal, may appeal therefrom to the

Supreme Court with the leave of the High Court or the Supreme Court first

had and obtained”, removed the appellate and revisionary jurisdiction of the

Court of Appeal in respect of final orders of the High Court made in relation

to orders of Labour Tribunals, and vested such jurisdiction exclusively in the

Supreme Court. In that instance also, there was no express removal of the

revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal. This position was

subsequently accepted as correct by a Bench of five Judges of this court in

Abeywardene v. Ajith De Silva [1998] 1 Sri LR 134 at 140.

As I have emphasised repeatedly, Provincial High Courts were vested with

special jurisdiction under Acts Nos. 19 of 1990, 10 of 1996, and 54 of 2006

with the specific objective of arresting delays in the administration of justice.

Sansoni C.J. in Mariam Beebee v. Seyed Mohomed did not recognise the

revisionary power as an absolute and unqualified principle of law; rather,

His Lordship acknowledged that its exercise is subject to legislative intent.

This is apparent from his explicit observation in the above excerpt that “The

Partition Act has not, I conceive, made any change in this respect, and the

power [of revision] can still be exercised in respect of any order or decree of

a lower Court”, thus recognising that the legislature could, through statute,

alter or limit the scope of revisionary powers.

CA/CPA/0098/2022

Page 16 of 18

Unlike the Partition Act considered in Mariam Beebee, Acts Nos. 19 of 1990,

10 of 1996, and 54 of 2006 expressly restructure appellate jurisdiction and,

by their terms, exclude any intermediate recourse to the Court of Appeal

from judgments and orders of Provincial High Courts exercising their

appellate jurisdiction. The legislative design, read together with the enabling

nature of Article 138, leaves no scope for the Court of Appeal to invoke its

appellate, revisionary or restitutio in integrum jurisdiction in such instances,

without disregarding the clear statutory command and frustrating the very

object of the Provincial High Court scheme.”

I would therefore, hold following the decision of a bench of five judges of the

Supreme Court in Abeywardene v. Ajith De Silva 1998 [1] SLR 134 at Page

140 and the decision of the Supreme Court in Swasthika Textile Industries

Ltd v. Dayaratne (Supra) and the recent decision of the Supreme Court in

W.T.S. Nilantha Fernando Vs. P.M.S. Nilanthi Perera (Supra), that while

conferring revisionary jurisdiction on the Court of Appeal, the Constitution itself

expressly enunciates that such jurisdiction is “subject to the provisions of the

Constitution or of any law” and therefore, its exercise is subject to legislative

intent; and that when the Constitution at the outset makes clear that the

revisionary jurisdiction is conditional and not absolute, there is no need for

express words of exclusion; and that Parliament, by ordinary legislation, is thus,

empowered to regulate, modify, or re-allocate such jurisdiction; and that to hold

otherwise would elevate Article 138(1) to a status of entrenchment which the

Constitution has not conferred; and that in the result, appellate and revisionary

jurisdiction under Article 138(1) which is not entrenched, can be altered by

ordinary law; and that more particularly, section 31DD which introduced into

the Industrial Disputes Act by Act No. 32 of 1990, which provides that: “Any

workman, trade union or employer who is aggrieved by any final order of a High

Court established under Article 154P of the Constitution, in the exercise of the

appellate jurisdiction vested in it by law or in the exercise of its revisionary

jurisdiction vested in it by law, in relation to an order of a Labour Tribunal, may

CA/CPA/0098/2022

Page 17 of 18

appeal therefrom to the Supreme Court with the leave of the High Court or the

Supreme Court first had and obtained”, and 1st Proviso to section 9(a) of the Act

had clearly, removed the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal in

respect of both the final orders as well as interlocutory orders of the High

Court established under Article 154P of the Constitution, in the exercise of

the appellate jurisdiction vested in it by section 3 of the Act or in the exercise of

its revisionary jurisdiction vested in it by law, made in relation to orders of

Labour Tribunals, and vested such jurisdiction “exclusively” in the Supreme

Court for; in that instance too, there was no express removal of the revisionary

jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal. [Emphasis is mine]

It is to be observed that the pivotal question that arose before this Court for our

consideration is; “Does the Court of Appeal have a revisionary jurisdiction in

terms of Article 138 of the Constitution in respect of a decision of the Provincial

High Court made in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction in terms of section

31D of the Industrial Dispute Act No. 43 of 1950 as amended?” and therefore,

legal effect of both the proviso to section 9(a) of the Act as well as section 31DD(1)

of the Industrial Dispute’s Act had directly, come before us for our consideration,

whereas, the pivotal question that arose before the Supreme Court in the

decision in Gunawardane v. Muthukumarana (Supra) for its consideration

was whether “Having failed to exercise the right to file an appeal in terms of

section 9 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of

1990 as amended, could a person invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court

of Appeal referred to in Article 138 of the Constitution of the Republic of Sri

Lanka in order to canvass a decision made by a Provincial High Court exercising

its appellate powers?”, and hence, the legal effect of the proviso to section 9(a)

of the Act or the section 31DD(1) of the Industrial Dispute’s Act had never been

the subject matter of the said case that had come before the Supreme Court for

its consideration, and therefore, Supreme Court had no occasion to examine the

legal effect of section 9(a) of the Act or the section 31DD(1) of the Industrial

Dispute’s Act and hence, the facts of this case are different from the facts of the

CA/CPA/0098/2022

Page 18 of 18

said Supreme Court decision and therefore, the decision of the Supreme Court

in Gunawardane v. Muthukumarana (Supra) can clearly, be distinguishable

from the facts of the instant application in revision before us and therefore, I

would most respectfully, and humbly, state that the decision of the Supreme

Court in Gunawardane v. Muthukumarana (Supra) has no bearing on the

instant application in revision before us.

In view of the foregoing, I would hold that the Court of Appeal does not have

revisionary jurisdiction vested in it in terms of Article 138 of the Constitution in

respect of an interlocutory order of the Provincial High Court established by

Article 154P of the Constitution and made in the exercise of the appellate

jurisdiction in terms of section 31D of the Industrial Dispute Act No. 43 of 1950

as amended in relation to an order of a Labour Tribunal by reason of the fact

that 1st Proviso to section 9(a) of the Act had clearly, removed the revisionary

jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal in respect of the interlocutory order of the

High Court established under Article 154P of the Constitution made in the

exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in it by section 3 of the Act or in the

exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction vested in it by law and made in relation to

orders of Labour Tribunals, and vested such jurisdiction “exclusively” in the

Supreme Court.

In the circumstances, the preliminary objection so raised by the Respondent is

entitled to succeed in law and as such it is upheld.

In the result, I would dismiss the instant application in revision in limine with

costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL