IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

1. F. Najimudeen

(N ow deceased)

2. Fayaz Marikkar,

Both of

No. 198/3,

Sri Vajiragnana Mawatha,

Colombo 09.

1

Accused-Petitioner-Appellants

C.A. Case No: CA (PH C) 198/2012

H.C. Colombo Revision Case No:

HCRAl63/2009

MC Maligakanda Case No: 99421M

J agath Chamila Hettiarachchi,

Authorized Officer,

Municipal Engineering Department

(Planning),

Colombo Municipal Council,

Town Hall,

Colombo 07.

Applicant-Petitioner-Respondent-

Respondent

Before A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

&

Mahinda Samayawardhena J.

2

Counsel Sabry Nilamdeen for the Accused-Petitioner- Appellant.

Channa Nilanduwa for the Respondent.

Written Submissions: By the 2nd Accused-Petitioner-Appellant on 01/10/2018

and 04/07/2019

By the Applicant-Petitioner-Respondent on 04/07/2019

Argued on: 27/06/2019

Judgment on : 24/07/2019

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

This is an Appeal from an order made by the learned Provincial High Court

Judge of Colombo dismissing an action filed by the 1 st and 2nd Accused-Petitioner-

Appellants (Appellants), in the exercise of revisionary jurisdiction of the

Provincial High Court, in terms of Article 154 P (3) of the Constitution.

The Applicant-Petitioner-Respondent-Respondent (Respondent), the

Authorized Officer of the Colombo Municipal Council instituted proceedings

against the Appellants in the Magistrates Court of Maligakanda in terms of Section

3

28 (A) (3) of the Urban Development Authority Law No. 41 of 1978, (as

amended), (UDA Act) for an order for the demolition of a building at No. 198/3,

Vajiragnana Mawatha, Dematagoda, Colombo 09, on the basis that the said

premises was an unauthorized structure. The Learned Magistrate by order dated

21/04/2009, directed the Respondent to demolish the purported building and also

imposed a fine ofRs. 50,000/- to be paid by the Appellants.

When this case was taken up for argument, the counsel for the Appellants

addressed Court on the following grounds;

a) whether the powers given to the Urban Development Authority as

contained in Section 28A of the UDA Act be considered as falling within

the scope of "Planning" and not development activity, and,

b) whether such powers could be validly delegated in terms of Section 23(5)

of the UDA Act.

Section 23 (5) of the Urban Development Authority Law as amended by

Act No.4 of 1982 provides as follows;

"23(5) The Authority may delegate to any o(ficer of a local authority in

consultation with that local authority. any of its powers. duties and functions

relating to planning. within any area declared to be a development area under

Section 3, and such officer shall exercise, perform or discharge any such power,

4

duty or functions so delegated, under the direction, supervision and control of the

Authority. "

The question whether the Mayor had any lawful authority to make an

application for a demolition order under the provisions of the UDA Act was

looked into by this Court in CA (PRC) No. 02/97, where Gamini Amaratunga J.

cited with approval the case of Piyasena Vs. Wijesooriya CA. Application No.

119/90- CA. Minutes of 4/11/1994, where this Court held that 'functions of

planning would include the taking of steps to enforce planning procedure" and

was of the view that "the delegation of the functions of planning would include the

taking of steps to enforce planning procedure and accordingly, the Mayor had the

authority to institute proceedings against an owner of an unauthorized building

for an order to demolish such building. "

In M.P. Selvam v. K.H. Perera (SC Appeal No. 123/09) Sripavan J. (as he

was then) held that,

"The "Planning Procedure" is governed by the amending Act No. 4 of 1982. This

Amending Act brought into force Section 28A as well which deals with the

"procedure to be followed in respect of certain development activities

commenced, continued, resumed or completed contrary to any terms or conditions

of a permit. The scope of Section 28A is therefore free from obscurity that the

legislature intended to secure compliance with the development plan so that

5

proper implementation of the said plan is carried out. The "Planning Procedure"

referred to in Part IIA in Section 8B identifies matters pertaining to the,

i. Preparation;

ii. Implementation and

iii. Enforcement of a development plan.

Hence, implementation of a development plan falls within the broad caption of

"Planning Procedure" ------, Section 8J makes it clear that the purpose of issuing

a permit is to ensure that all development activities in development areas should

conform to the development plan.

The provisions contained in Section 28A (3) fall within the scope of the term

"planning" and therefore the powers, duties and functions referred to therein

could be delegated by the UDA to any officer of a local authority. "

Therefore, the powers duties and functions of the Urban Development

Authority within the scope of the term planning could be validly delegated to any

officer of a local authority.

Section 8J (1) of the UDA Act provides that,

"Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law, no Government agency or any

other person shall carry out or engage in any development activity in any

development area or part thereof except under the authority, and in accordance

with the terms and conditions, of a permit issued in that behalf by the Authority. "

6

Even though, the Appellant submits that the order of demolition is In

relation to a development activity, the Appellant has failed to submit a permit

issued by the Urban Development Authority authorizing the construction of the

building ordered to be demolished. Part II A of the Act provides that in terms of

Section 8U) of the Act, development activity in any development area can be

undertaken only under and in terms of a permit issued by the Urban Development

Authority.

The Appellant has failed to produce a valid permit issued in terms of the

UDA Act. The Appellants must prove that their construction is according to law.

Section 8U) of the Amendment Act has clearly stated that if any person is carrying

out or engaged in any development activity in any development area, there must

be a permit issued by the Authority.

Therefore, I do not see any reason to overturn the judgment given by the

learned High Court Judge or the order of the learned Magistrate, since the

Appellants application is without merit.

Accordingly, the Petition is dismissed with costs fixed at Rs. 10,0001-.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL