Page 1 of 8

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

Court of Appeal Case No:

CPA / 105 /2021

High Court of Gampaha Case No:

HC / 497 / 19

Magistrates Court of Mahara Case

No: B 5003 / 17

In The matter of an application for

revision under and in terms of the

article 138 of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic of

Sri Lanka read together with the

section 404 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 for

revising judgement / order of the

High Court.

The Hon. Attorney General.

Complainant

Vs.

1. Cardar Masthan Kamal Rahuman.

2. Anjani Madhushika Hettiarachchi.

Accused

AND NOW IN BETWEEN

Hettiarachchige Piyumi Lakshani,

53/2, Swarna Chaithya Road, Geandpass,

Colombo 14.

Page 2 of 8

Petitioner

On Behalf of

Anjani Madhushika Hettiarachchi.

2nd Accused

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Complainant Petitioner

Before: Menaka Wijesundera J.

Neil Iddawala J.

Counsel: Tenny Fernando with W. Fernando for the Petitioner.

Sudharshana de Silva, DSG with KanishkaRajakaruna, SC for

the State.

Argued on: 15.03.2022

Decided on: 06.04.2022

MENAKA WIJESUNDERA J

The instant application has been filed to set aside the order dated

05/07/2021 of High Court of Gampaha.

The second accused namely AnjaniMadushikaHettiarachchi has been

indicted in the High Court of Gampaha along with the first accused for

Page 3 of 8

possession and trafficking of 93.43g of heroin on or about 25/11/2017

under the provisions of the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs

(Amendment) Act No .13 of 1984.

The main contention of the counsel for the second accused is that the

second accused has been in remand since 25/11/2017 up to date and

although the indictment was served on the second accused on

25/08/2020, trial had not commenced up to date.

The counsel for the respondent conceded that the trial had not

commenced but the case has been called on numerous occasions

without being fixed for trial. He further contended that he could

undertake to ensure that the trial would be fixed on the next date and it

would be taken up and concluded without further delay. But the

counsel for the second accused refused to accept the same.

Upon perusal of the court record, this court notes that,

1) The government analyst report has been received on 29/12/2017

2) The indictment had been forwarded to the High Court on

21/01/2020 which is after four years of the alleged offence.

3) The second accused had been served with the indictment on

25/08/2020

4) Since then the case had been called on more than twelve

occasions up to date without being fixed for trial

Therefore this Court notes that the second accused had been in remand

for six years upto date without trial being concluded.

Page 4 of 8

In the instant matter, the second accused had been indicted under the

provisions of the Poisons Opium and Dangerous Drugs Ordinance as

amended by the Act no 13 of 1984 under which if an accused person is

charged under Section 54(a) or (b) he shall be enlarged on bail by the

High Court only on exceptional grounds as per section 83 of the Act.

The term exceptional has not been defined in the Act but in many of

our decided cases so far it has been defined and many factors had been

considered as being exceptional such as,

1) The nature of the accusation,

2) The culpability of the accused,

3) The severity of the sentence if convicted,

4) The health condition of the accused or the suspect which would

be aggravated by the incarceration.

Hence up to now what has evolved is that exceptionality would be

decided by the facts of each case, but in the case of Carder vs. OIC

Narcotics Bureau 2006 3 SLR 74 Eric Basnayake J had said that,

these types of offences affect the society at large and the law should

not be made impotent that it does not serve the society and the anti-

social elements should not be given license to create havoc in the

society citing the case of Abdul Hamidkari Path and etc vs the State of

Gujarat and other 15 476.

The law pertaining to the instant matter has provided for the accused

person to be remanded until the conclusion of the trial if not for

Page 5 of 8

exceptional circumstances, but it is not meant to be used to keep the

accused persons in remand for uncertain lengthy periods violating the

basic right of a person for free movement provided for by the

Constitution itself.

It has been held in the case of AnuruddhaRatwatte and others v The

Attorney general (2003)2 Sri L.R.39, it was held that,

The right to liberty and security of person is a basic tenet of our public

law and is universally recognized as a human right guaranteed to every

person (vide Article 9 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and

Article 9 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights).

Based on this right of liberty and security of person, Article 13 of the

Constitution guarantees as a fundamental right to every person, the

freedom from arbitrary arrest, detention and punishment, This Article

covers all three stages at which a persons liberty is deprived. They are-

1) At the stage of arrest of a person (Article 13(1))

2) At the stage a person is held in custody , detained or

otherwise deprived of his personal liberty ( Article 13(2))

3) At the stage a person is convicted is convicted and punished

with death or imprisonment (Article 13(4))

In respect of all 3 stages the respective Sub-Articles specifically provide

that the deprivation of personal liberty cannot take place except

according to procedure established by law. In the 2nd and 3rd stages

referred to above, being, continued custody detention or deprivation of

personal liberty beyond the period the arresting authority could validly

Page 6 of 8

detain and at the stage of punishment, it is further provided that such

deprivation of liberty could only be effected by an order of a competent

court. Therefore in respect of the 2nd and 3rd stages referred to above ,

two requirements have to be satisfied for a person to be lawfully

deprived liberty, they are-

1) That it is on an order of a competent court;

2) That such order is made in accordance with the procedure

established by law

A competent court is a court having jurisdiction in the matter and in the

case we are dealing with it is the High Court at bar. Section 450(6)

specifically provides that in any trial before High Court at bar the court

or the presiding judge thereof may give directions for the summoning,

arrest, custody or bail of all persons charged before the Court on

indictment or by information exhibited under this section. It is been

that the sub- section does not contain any provision as to the procedure

that would apply in this regard (Emphasis added)

Therefore, in view of the judgment cited above, the right to liberty of

any person has not been defined as an absolute right but it shall be

restricted under certain circumstances. Therefore, suspects being kept

in custody according to the procedure established by law would not

amount to a violation of such right.

But in the instant matter, this court observes that the date of offence

has been on 25.11.2017, the government analyst report has been

received by 27/01/2018, but the indictment has been forwarded to the

High Court after two years of the receipt of the government analyst

Page 7 of 8

report. The second accused in this matter has been served with the

indictment on 25/08/2020, but since then, matter had been called in

the high court without being fixed for trial which we think is a mockery

of justice.

One may argue at this juncture that the second accused is charged with

a serious offence which if convicted the penalty is the death sentence.

But, according to the Evidence Ordinance the presumption of innocence

applies to all accused. Therefore, although the second accused is

indicted with an offence if convicted warrants the death sentence there

is a clear delay in the administration of justice in this matter. The term

delay has been defined in the case of Attorney General v Ediriweera

[S.C. Appeal No.100/2005] (2006 B.L.R 12) and it was held that,Delay

is always a relative term and the question to be considered is not

whether there was a mere explicable delay, as when there is a backlog

of cases, but whether there has been excessive or oppressive delay

and this always depends on the facts and circumstances of the case

Therefore, the period of remand amounting up to nearly five years

without a trial date being fixed clearly displays the fact that the

conclusion of the trial remains to be very far and remote, which makes

it an exceptional circumstance to enlarge the second accused namely

AnjaniMadushikaHettiarachchchi on bail.

As such the suspect mentioned above in the instant revision application

is enlarged on bail and we direct the learned high court judge to impose

suitable conditions of bail and enlarge the above mentioned suspect on

bail.

Page 8 of 8

Judge of the Court of Appeal.

I agree.

Neil Iddawala J.

Judge of the Court of Appeal.