==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 12

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCTRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application made under

and in terms of section 14 of the Judicature Act

No. 2 of 1978, section 111 of the High Court of

the Provinces Special Provisions Act No. 19 of

1990, read together with section 331 of the

Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

CA Case NO:

CA/HCC/108/2023 The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

HC Chilaw Case No: 31/2019

Complainant

V.

Kaunagoda Appuhamilage Anura Lanka

Ratnasiri alias Manju

Accused

And Now between

Kaunagoda Appuhamilage Anura Lanka

Ratnasiri alias Manju

Accused-Appellant

Page 2 of 12

Vs.

The Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department

Colombo 12.

Complainant -Respondent

Before : B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

Amal Ranaraja, J

Counsel: Rashmini Indatissa for the Accused- Appellant

Lakmini Girihagama , DSG for the Respondent

Argued On: 12.03.2025

Judgment On: 30.04.2025

JUDGMENT

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

The Accused- Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Accused) was indicted before the

High Court of Chilaw on the charge of committing the offence of murder of one Jawahir

Mohamed Amir on 09.09.2014 punishable under Section 296 of the Penal Code as

amended.

The Prosecution led the evidence through eleven witnesses and marking productions from

P1 to P5 and thereafter closed its case. The Accused in his defence made a dock statement.

Page 3 of 12

At the conclusion of the trial, the Learned High Court Judge by judgment dated

24.02.2023 found the Accused guilty of murder and imposed the death sentence.

Being aggrieved by the afore-mentioned conviction and the sentence, the Accused has

preferred this appeal to this Court.

The following are the grounds of appeal as pleaded by the Accused in his Written

Submission.

1. That the Learned Trial Judge failed to consider that PW08’s evidence is

inconsistent and that therefore, he cannot be considered a credible witness

2. That the Learned Trial Judge failed to consider that PW01’s evidence as to how he

identified the Appellant based on the statement of the deceased is inconsistent

3. The Learned High Court Judge has not considered the accepted legal principles

with regard to dying declarations

4. That the Learned High Court Judge failed to consider the accepted legal principles

with regard to circumstantial evidence.

5. The Learned High Court Judge erred in law in holding that the Prosecution has

proved its case beyond reasonable doubt

6. That the judgment is a mere recital and does not contain a proper evaluation of

the evidence.

According to the evidence placed before the Learned High Court Judge, the prosecution

has relied on two dying declarations along with the Accused being arrested with a human

blood-stained manna knife on the same day who was hiding.

Before we analyse the evidence placed before the trial Court with regard to dying

declarations, it is pertinent to consider how our Courts have considered dying declarations

to be accepted as a piece of evidence.

It is pertinent to reproduce the sentiments expressed by His Lordship H.N.G. Fernando J

in Queen v. Anthony Pillai 68 CLW 57 with regards to how the Court could act on such

dying declarations.

“The failure on the part of the Learned Trial Judge to caution the jury as to the

risk of acting upon a dying declaration, being the statement of a person who is not

a witness at the trial, and as to the need to consider with special care the question

Page 4 of 12

whether the statement could be accepted as true and accurate had resulted in a

miscarriage of justice.”

This dictum was considered by Hos Lordship Sisira de Abrew J in Gamini Mahaarachchi

vs. The Attorney General, CA 106/2002, Decided On 22.08.2007, held that:

“When a dying declaration is sought to be produced as an item of evidence against an

accused person in a criminal trial. the Trial Judge or the jury as a case may be, must

bear in mind on the following weakness;

1. Statement of the deceased person was not made under oath.

2. Statement of the deceased person has not been tested by cross-examination

vide King vs. Asirivadan Nadar 51 NLR 322 and Justin Pala vs. Queen 66 NLR

409/

3. That the person who made the dying declaration is not a witness at the trial.

As there are inherent weaknesses in a dying declaration which I have stated above,

the trial Judge or the jury as a case may be, must be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt

on the following matters;

a. Whether the deceased in fact made such a statement

b. Whether the statement made by the deceased was true and accurate

c. Whether the statement made by the deceased person could be accepted

beyond reasonable doubt.

d. Whether the evidence of the witness who testifies about the dying

declaration can be accepted beyond reasonable doubt.

e. Whether the witness is telling the truth.

f. Whether the deceased was able to speak at the time the alleged declaration

was made.

g. Whether the deceased was able to identify the assailant.”

(Similar legal principles related to dying declarations were considered by His Lordship

Sisira De Abrew in Ranasinghe v Attorney-General [2007], 1 S.L.R 218)

This was followed by His Lordship Achala Wengappuli J in Korinvige Anura Lakshman

Silva alias Pechchei alias Chooti vs. The Attorney General, CA No. 288/2013 decided on

04.05.2018 and held that:

Page 5 of 12

“It is the contention of the accused-appellant that the dying deposition on which

he was convicted fails to satisfy these stringent tests, in view of the inconsistencies

referred to above and therefore the prosecution has failed to prove its case against

him.”

With these authorities in mind, it is pertinent to delve into the facts as revealed at the

trial Court in terms of the two dying declarations made by the deceased.

According to PW1, Abdul Sameen Mohamadu Rilwan while he was talking to one Jiffry

at around 1.30 PM near Kottaramulla Al-Hira School, he saw the deceased in a three-

wheeler driven by PW2. The deceased was bleeding at the time and the deceased said ‘මාව

කැපුවා’. When the PW1 asked ‘මමාකද වුමේ’, the deceased had replied ‘මට මංජු කැපුවා’.

According to him, he has identified that the name mentioned as Manju refers to the

Accused. The deceased had asked PW1 whether to go to the Police or to the hospital. Then

PW1 asked PW2 to take the deceased to the hospital immediately. As stated by PW1, then

the deceased was taken to the Marawila Hospital and was transferred to the Colombo

General Hospital, and passed away there.

PW1 has given evidence at the post-mortem at the Marawila Magistrates Court.

At the cross examination, PW1 affirmed that he met the deceased near Al-Hira School.

He further affirmed that when he asked as to what happened from the deceased, he

replied saying ‘මට මංජු කැපුවා’. Further, PW1 has stated that there is no one else called

Manju in the area other than the Accused.

According to PW8, Jayamaha Hitihamilage Dharmarathna Jayamaha, the Police Officer,

when he was the Acting OIC of the Koswatta Police, on 09.09.2014, he received a piece of

information through 119. Thereafter, he along with some other officers went to the crime

scene at around 2.40 PM. He mentions that there were blood stains on the crime scene.

Further according to PW8, a person called Rubin showed the crime scene and the people

who had gathered there informed them about the Accused.

He states that after the investigation of the crime scene, the Accused was arrested on the

same day at around 2.35 PM according to an information they received. According to him,

the Accused tried to escape with a manna knife in his hand and was shivering.

On page 182 of the brief;

Page 6 of 12

“සැකකරු අපි දැකලා පැනලා යාමට අමේ මේන පිහියක් තියාමෙන ඉදිරියට ෙැස්මසමිේ, මවව්ලමිේ

පැමිණියා.”

Further, he states that the said manna knife was blood-stained.

On page 183 of the brief;

“සැකකරු අමේ මේනා පිහියක් තිබුණා මේ තැවරුණු.”

We note that the Government Analyst Report marked පැ.3 confirms that the blood in the

said knife was human blood.

On page 616 of the brief;

“පැ .1 පිහිමයහි සහ පැ. 4 සරමමහි මා විසිේ රතු පාටිේ ලකුණු කරන ලද ප්‍රමේශයේහි වූ තරමක් ඝන

පැේලම් මත මිනිස් මේ හඳුනා ෙැනීමට මයදිනි.”

Thereafter, PW8 along with other officers had gone to the Marawila Hospital to see the

injured. Then, he asked the deceased as to who did this, the deceased had only replied

Manju.

On page 188 of the brief;

“ප්‍ර : ඔබ තුවාලකරුමෙේ මම් සිේියට අදාළ යම් කරුණු අනාවරණය කර ෙැනීමක් කරේන උේසහ

කලාද?

උ : එමහමයි.

ප්‍ර : මකාමහාමද?

උ : මම් සිේිය කමේ කව්ද කියලා තුවාලකරුමෙේ විමසීමක් කලා.

ප්‍ර : ඒ අවස්ථාමව්දී ඔබට යම්කිසි පිලිතුරක් ලැබුනාද?

උ : එමහමයි තුවාලකරු මංජු කියා පමණක් කියා සිටියා.”

Later, the deceased was transferred to the Colombo General Hospital.

At the examination in chief, PW8 identified the manna knife recovered from the Accused

at the time of the arrest which was marked as පැ.1.

During the cross-examination, he affirmed that Rubin was the one who showed them the

crime scene. Further, he affirmed that through a private spy, they received the

information about the Accused. PW8 states that they came to know while inspecting the

Page 7 of 12

deceased that the deceased had met a person called Iruwan on the way and had told him

that it was Manju who caused injuries to him. Further, he affirmed the position that when

he asked the deceased as to what happened, he mentioned the name of Manju.

When we consider both witnesses, there is no reason for us to dispute their versions as on

the same day the Accused was arrested with a human blood-stained manna knife. We are

also mindful that PW8 who was a Police Officer had initially gone to the crime scene and

thereafter arrested the Accused with a human blood-stained manna knife. Thereafter he

had gone to the hospital and there only the deceased had told him what happened.

There is no reason for PW1 and PW8 to implicate against the Accused. We also note that

PW1 was consistent in his evidence. Further, his evidence was corroborated by PW2 that

he saw the deceased talking to PW1 when he was inside the three-wheeler.

According to PW4, S.D. Malawirachchi, the Judicial Medical Officer, there were several

deep-cut injuries on the face and neck area of the deceased. Injury No. 1 was a 16cm long

and 1cm deep injury which had cut a bone in the face. Further there were around more

than 10 injuries which were more than 5 cm in length. Further, injuries no. 1,3,7 and 8

were deep-cut injuries that had caused heavy blood flow and were life-threatening.

Further, she has testified that according to the hospital reports, the deceased had a

healthy, conscious mind when taken to the General Hospital.

On page 308 of the brief;

“ප්‍ර : එතමකාට වවදයතුමියනි ඔබ ප්‍රකාශ කළා මරෝගියා ජාතික මරෝහලට මෙන එන මකාටේ සිහි

කේපනාව තිබු බවට ?

උ : එමහමයි.

ප්‍ර : මතයක් ප්‍රකාශ කරේන පුලුවේද ඔහුට කතා කිරීමට මහෝ ප්‍රකාශයක් ලබා දීමට තරම් මසෞඛ්‍ය

තේේවයක් ඒ අවස්ථාමව්දී තිබුනාද කියන කරුණ ෙැන?

උ : ස්වාමිනි මරෝගියාට කතා කිරිමම් හැකියාව තිමබේන පුළුවේ. මමාකද මාරවිල මරෝහමලේ පැහැදිලි

සටහනක් දාලා තිමබනවා. මහාද සිහි කේපනාව තිබු බවට conscious rational මලස විමශ්ෂමයේ

වවදයවරමයකු සටහේ තබා තිමබනවා. ඊට අමතරව ස්නායු පේධතිය සම්බේධමයේ සම්පුර්ණමයේ

මහාඳ ක්‍රියාකාරී තේේවයේ තිබු බවට සටහේ මයාදා තිමබනවා. ජාතික මරෝහලට ඇතුලේ කිරීමම්දී

එම ස්නායු පේධතිය සම්පුර්ණමයේ ක්‍රියාකාරී තේේවමයේ තිබුනා. සාමානයාමයේ කහිනවා. කතා

Page 8 of 12

කරනවා. වැනි වවදයමය සලකුණු මයාදා තිමබනවා. ඒ අනුව මරෝගියාට කතා කිරීමම් හැකියාව

පැහැදිලිව ප්‍රකාශ කිරීමම් හැකියාවක් තිමබනවා.”

Further, on page 315 of the brief;

“ප්‍ර : ඔබ මුලිේ පකාශ කළා මාරවිල මරෝහමේ සටහේ මයාදා තිමබනවා කියා මමම මරෝගියා සිහි

කේපනාමවේ සිටියා කියා?

උ : එමහමයි . ස්වාමිනි මාරවිල මරෝහමලේ සටහේ ඒවා තිබුනා. මාරවිල මරෝහමේ ජාතික මරෝහලට

මාරු කර යැවීමම්දී සටහේ පතක්. මමය පැහැදිලිව සටහේ කර තිමබනවා. මරෝගියා මහාද සිහි

කේපනාමවේ සිටිය පුේෙලමයක්ව සිටි බවට. මමාකද වවදයවරුේට වෙකීමක් තිමබනවා.

මරෝගියාමේ ආරම්භක තේේවය ඊළඟ මරෝහලට දැනුම් දීම. මොඩ අසාධය නම් වවදයවරමයක් සහ

මහදියක් මරාගියා සමඟ පැමිමණනවා. ඒ නිසා නිතයානුකුලව සටහන මයාදනවා. මරෝගියාමේ

තේේවය සම්බේධමයේ. එතමකාට මරෝගියාමේ තේේවය සම්බේධමයේ මයාදා තිමබන සටහේ

අනුව පැහැදිලිව දක්වා තිමබනවා. මාරවිල මරෝහමේ ලියා පදිංචි අංක 27235 වාට්ටු අංක 03 සිට ජාතික

මරෝහලට ඒවා ඇත. 2004.09.09 වවදයවරයකු විසිේ සටහේ මයාදා තිමබනවා. එහි සටහනක්

මයාදා තිමබනවා. concious rational ඊට අමතරව සටහනක් මයාදා තිමබනවා. GCS 15/15 එම

සටහමේ දැක්මවේමේ ස්නායු පේධතිමේ පරීක්ෂාවක් GCS 15/15 එම පරීක්ෂණමේදී සාමානයමයේ

ඇස් මදක අරිේන පුළුවේ. කතා කරේමේ නැතිව ඇස් පිේලේ ෙසේන පුළුවේ. සාමානය විදියට

කතා කමලාේ කතා කරනවා. නම මමාකේද කිව්මවාේ නම කියනවා. අත උස්සේන කිව්මවාේ අත

උස්සනවා. සාමානයමයේ වවදයවමරකුට සාමානය ප්‍රතිචාරයක් සක්වනවා. ඒ වමේම සාමානය

සම්පුර්ණ ප්‍රතිචාර දැක්වීමම් හැකියාවක් තිමබන මරෝගිමයක් තමයි මාරවිල මරෝහමලේ ජාතික

මරෝහලට ඒවා තිමබේමේ. ඒ කියේමේ පැහැදිලි වවදය සටහනක් තිමබනවා. ඒ වමේම මපනහළු

රුිර පීඩනය ෙැන සටහනක් දමා තිමබනවා. ඉතාමේ සාමානය තේේවමේ තිබිල තිමබනවා. හර්ද

ස්පේදනය ෙැන සටහනක් තිමබනවා. එයේ සාමානය තේේවමයේ තිමබනවා. මපනහළුවල

ක්‍රියාකාරිේවය ෙැන සටහනක් දාලා තිමබනවා. ඉතා මහාද තේවමේ තිබී තිමබනවා.”

The medical evidence substantiates that the deceased was in a conscious mind when he

was transferred to the General Hospital. Therefore, it is clear that the statements made

by the deceased to both PW1 and PW8 before being transferred to the General Hospital

were made when the deceased was in a present mind. Further, according to PW4, the

deceased could speak. We are also mindful that PW2 had seen the deceased talking to

PW1.

Thus, there is no reason for us to disbelieve that the deceased made the said dying

declarations.

Page 9 of 12

Therefore, the Learned High Court Judge had considered the principles related to dying

declarations laid in the above judgments and correctly had come to the conclusion that

the Prosecution had established that the evidence of the witnesses, PW1 and PW8 who

testified about the dying declaration could be accepted beyond reasonable doubt. There is

no reason for us to dispute this decision.

Further, PW4, the Judicial Medical Officer who conducted the post-mortem had observed

that, injuries 1,3,7,8,11,12,13,14,15 which are deep cut injuries, especially 1,3,7, and 8 are

associated with a cut of bone suggesting the application of moderate to severe force in the

head, face, and neck area. It shows that the Accused had the intention to cause the injuries

that he knew, it would be likely to cause death. Thus, through this evidence, the Court

can come to the conclusion that the Accused had the mens rea to cause the death of the

deceased.

In King vs. Thajudeen 6 NLR 16 at page 19, His Lordship Bonser CJ has held that;

“But it was urged that they did not intend to break the man’s rib and therefore

they could not be convicted of grievous hurt. No doubt they had not in their mind

at the time they struck him their baton and with their fists any definite idea that

they were going to break his ribs or any particular rib; but when people cause

injuries to a man, their intent must be judges by the result of their action. They

must be deemed in law to have intended what they did.”

In the instant case, through the nature of the injuries caused to the deceased, the Court

can come to the conclusion that the Prosecution has established that the Accused had the

intention to cause bodily injuries knowing it would be likely to cause death.

The fact remains that when the Accused was arrested, he had a human blood-stained

knife. Further, when he faced the trial, there were two dying declarations implicating that

the Accused caused the injuries to the deceased.

The question then arises as to what the explanation given by the accused is against the

said incriminating evidence. We note that he merely denied the charge and stated as

follows from the dock:

Page 10 of 12

On page 341 – 342 of the brief;

“මම කරුණාමොඩ අප්පපුහාමිලාමේ අනුරලංකා රේනසිරි. මම මම් සිේියට කිසිම සම්බේධයක් නැහැ.

මම ඒ සිේිය වුනා කියන දවමසේ වැඩට ගිහිේ හිටිමේ. මම රැකියාව හැටියට කරේමේ කුලී වැඩ.

මම් සිේිය සිදු වුනා කියන දවමසේ මම වේතක් සුේද කරේන ගිහිේ හිටිමේ. කිසිම මහ්තුවක් නැතුව

මපාලිසිමයේ ඇවිේලා මාව අේඅඩංගුවට අරමෙන මාව මම් නඩුවට සම්බේධ කළා. මම් මිය ගිහිේ

තිමබන පුේෙලයි, මමෙයි අතර කිසිම තරහක් මතමේදයක් තිබුමේ නැහැ. මම මම් මචෝදනාවට

නිර්මදෝෂී. මට කීමට ඇේමේ එපමණයි.”

We note that the Accused’s defence was the denial of the offence.

The Learned High Court Judge has rejected this evidence of the Accused.

We are mindful that our Courts have held that when evaluating a dock statement of the

Accused if he raises reasonable doubt in the prosecution case, the defence of the Accused

must succeed.

When incriminating evidence is placed against the Accused, our Courts expect the

Accused to give the Court an explanation.

At this stage, it is pertinent to reproduce the dictum of Lord Ellenborough in R Vs. Lord

Cochrane and others (1814 Gurney's Report 479):

"No person accused of crime is bound to offer any explanation of his conduct or of

circumstances of suspicion which attach to him; but, nevertheless, if he refuses to

do so, where a strong prima facie case has been made out, and when it is in his

own power to offer evidence, if such exist, in explanation of such suspicious

circumstances which would show them to be fallacious and explicable consistently

with his innocence, it is a reasonable and justifiable conclusion that he refrains

from doing so only from the conviction that the evidence so suppressed or not

adduced would operate adversely to his interest."

The above dictum was followed by our Courts in the following judgments.

In Sumanasena vs. Attorney General (1999) 3 SLR 137, His Lordship Justice Jayasuriya

held thus;

Page 11 of 12

“When the prosecution establishes a strong and incriminating evidence against the

accused, the accused in those circumstances was required in law to offer an

explanation of the highly incriminating circumstances established against him.”

In Baddewithana vs. The Attorney General (1990) 1 SLR 275, His Lordship Justice P.R.P.

Perera held thus;

“From the failure of an accused to offer evidence when a prima facie case has been

made out by the prosecution and the accused is in a position to offer an

explanation, an adverse inference may be drawn under S. 114 (f) of the Evidence

Ordinance.”

In Aruna Alias Podi Raja v. Attorney General, 2011 2 SLR 44, His Lordship Justice Sisira

De Abrew held that:

“When prosecution established a strong incriminating evidence against an accused

in a criminal case the accused in those circumstances is required to offer an

explanation of the highly incriminating evidence established against him and the

failure to offer such explanation suggests that he has no explanation to offer.”

Considering the above judicial decisions, we hold that the Accused failed to offer an

explanation against the evidence placed against him. According to the evidence, the

Accused was arrested with a blood-stained manna knife. Further, according to PW1 and

PW8, the deceased had made two dying declarations to the effect that it is the Accused

who caused injuries to the deceased. Already we have indicated that there is no reason to

disbelieve the said dying declarations.

We hold that the Learned High Court has properly evaluated the testimonial

trustworthiness of PW1 and PW8 to whom the dying declarations were made and had

arrived at the correct finding with regard to the dying declarations.

Considering the above evidence and the judicial decisions, we therefore hold that the

Learned High Court Judge has correctly applied the principles governing the dying

declarations.

Page 12 of 12

For the above-said reasons, we affirm the conviction and the sentence and dismiss the

appeal.

Appeal dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Amal Ranaraja, J.

I AGREE

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL