Page 1 of 9

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of

section 331 (1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No- 15 of 1979, read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Court of Appeal No: Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

CA/HCC/0182/20 COMPLAINANT

Vs.

High Court of Kalutara 1. Liyana Arachchige Don Gunasena

Case No: HC/510/05 2. Kuruppu Arachchige Lal Pathmasiri

Gunathilake

ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

Liyana Arachchige Don Gunasena

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12

RESPONDENT

Page 2 of 9

Before : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

: P. Kumararatnam, J.

Counsel : Darshana Kuruppu with Buddhika Thilakarathne

and Dineru Bandara for the Accused Appellant

: Dileepa Pieris, SDSG for the Respondent

Argued on : 05-10-2022

Written Submissions : 26-10-2021 (By the Accused-Appellant)

: 31-01-2022 (By the Respondent)

Decided on : 17-11-2022

Sampath B Abayakoon, J.

The 1st accused appellant (hereinafter referred to as the appellant) was indicted

along with another, in the High Court of Kalutara for committing the following

offences.

1. That on 10th May 1998, he, along with the other accused, caused

the death of Imiyage Don Sirisena and thereby committed the

offence of murder, punishable in terms of section 296 read with

section 32 of the Penal Code.

2. At the same time and at the same transaction, caused grievous

injuries to Nathandalage Hemapala using a manna knife and

thereby committed an offence punishable in terms of section 317

read with section 32 of the Penal Code.

After trial without a jury, the appellant was found guilty of the judgement dated

28-07-2020 for both the charges preferred against him by the learned High Court

Judge of Kalutara, while the 2nd accused indicted was acquitted of the charges.

Accordingly, the appellant was sentenced to death on the 1st count. He was

sentenced to 10 years rigorous imprisonment on the 2nd count, and ordered to

Page 3 of 9

pay a fine of Rs. 10,000/- and a compensation of Rs. 300,000/- to PW-02, who

was the injured in the incident. In default, he was ordered to serve six months

each simple imprisonment as well.

The Grounds of Appeal

At the hearing of this appeal, the learned Counsel for the appellant urged the

following grounds of appeal for the consideration of the Court.

1. The learned High Court Judge failed to consider that it is highly unsafe

to rely on the evidence of PW-02 Hemapala as his evidence was

contradicted by PW-01 and other witnesses called on behalf of the

prosecution.

2. The identification of the appellant has not been proved beyond

reasonable doubt and the possibility of mistaken identity of the

appellant has not been ruled out.

3. The learned High Court Judge has failed to consider that the defence

of the appellant is more probable, as the appellant has taken an alibi

at the time of his arrest and has maintained it right throughout, which

has been corroborated by the prosecution and the defence witnesses as

well.

4. There was several misdirection in the judgement with regard to the

burden of proof in a criminal case.

The Facts in Brief

The deceased Sirisena was a person who had a small business at a place called

Digadara junction. PW-02, who was the injured and the main witness for the

prosecution was his long serving servant. On the day of the incident, the

deceased and PW-02 along with the 16-year-old daughter of the deceased (PW-

01) has left around 8-8.30 in the night to go home after closing the business for

the day. PW-01 has come to the shop after attending a tuition class. They were

walking along the road to reach the house of the deceased, which was about a

kilometer away. According to PW-02, both he and the deceased were carrying

Page 4 of 9

torches that were lit at the time of the incident. He has identified the torch carried

by the deceased marked as P-02 at the trial.

It had been his evidence that he was walking a little distance behind the deceased

and his daughter, and heard somebody approaching them from behind. He has

testified that when he turned back and pointed the torch towards the person

approaching, he saw the appellant Gunasena running towards them wearing a

short and after going past him, attacking the deceased using a short, flat

weapon.

It was his evidence that after the 1st attack, he went and grabbed the assailant

and grappled with him and the 2nd accused too came to assault the deceased.

He has stated that he identified both of them because of the torch light since

both of them are well-known to him. It was his position that during the struggle

with the appellant, the appellant attacked him with the manna knife he was

carrying and as a result his hands got injured. He has testified further that after

the 1st assault, the assailants went away and the deceased asked from his

daughter whether the persons who attacked were identified. At that point, the

appellant returned and attacked the deceased again using the same weapon he

previously used and ran away was his evidence.

The daughter of the deceased namely PW-01 has confirmed in her evidence that

her father and the PW-02 were attacked while they were walking toward their

house. Her evidence had been that although they had torches with them, they

were not lit because it was near the Poya day and there was sufficient moonlight

which enabled them to walk. It had been her evidence that the persons who

attacked her father and PW-02 were wearing dark clothes and she could not

identify any of them.

According to the evidence led at the trial, it is clear that soon after the incident,

several villagers had come and assisted the injured. However, PW-01 has failed

to reveal that it was the appellant and the 2nd accused indicted that attacked

them even after inquired by those who came to assist them. It appears that PW-

Page 5 of 9

02 has revealed the names of the assailants only when he made his police

statement.

Consideration of the Grounds of Appeal

The learned Counsel for the appellant was of the view that relying on the evidence

of PW-02 for the purposes of identification of the appellant was highly unreliable

and the learned High Court Judge has failed to consider the inherent infirmities

in his evidence before finding the appellant guilty for the charges.

He referred to the evidence of PW-08 and 09 who has come immediately after

hearing the cries of the injured and assisted them. PW-08 was a former employee

of the deceased. He has assisted PW-02 to cover his bleeding wounds and also

had inquired as to what happened. However, the PW-02 has not answered, but

has run away. Even to PW-09, who was a fellow villager and a police officer, the

PW-02 has not revealed anything as to who assaulted them. It was the view of

the learned Counsel that the learned High Court Judge has wrongly applied the

guidelines provided in the case of Bharwada Bhoginbhai Hirjibhai Vs. State of

Gujarat 1983 AIR 753.

It was contended that the learned High Court Judge has failed to consider the

relevant principles as to whether the prosecution has positively established the

identity of the appellant and also whether the prosecution has established that

the alibi taken up by the appellant cannot be accepted. It was his position that

the conviction cannot stand on the question of the identity alone.

The learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General (SDSG) making submissions on

behalf of the respondent, the Honorable Attorney General, agreed that this is not

a case where the conviction can be considered as a safe conviction due to the

serious infirmities in the identification of the appellant by the PW-02.

It was his submission that since PW-02 has been the only witness who has said

that he identified the appellant and the second accused, it was necessary for the

Page 6 of 9

learned trial Judge to apply Turnbull guidelines and consider whether the

evidence of PW-02 as to the identity can be accepted beyond reasonable doubt.

Learned SDSG admitted that the prosecution has failed to exclude the alibi of

the appellant as well.

Having considered the relevant evidence and the judgement of the learned High

Court Judge, the learned SDSG conceded that he is in no position to support the

conviction and the sentence of the appellant.

This Court would like to express appreciation to the learned SDSG for making

submissions before this Court with a clear understanding of his duty to assist

the Court in dispensing justice.

As pointed out above, this is a matter where the prosecution has solely relied on

the evidence of PW-02 as to the identity of the appellant, as well as the 2nd

accused indicted as the persons who attacked the deceased and PW-02.

Having considered the evidence and as agreed by the learned Counsel, I am of

the view that this is a clear case where Turnbull guidelines should have been

strictly applied by the learned High Court Judge.

In the judgement of Rex Vs. Turnbull (1977) QB 224, it was held,

Where the case against an accused depends wholly on the correctness of

the identity of the accused, the Judge should warn the jury of the special

need for caution before relying on the correctness of the identification by

the witness.

The Judge should tell the jury that,

Caution is required to avoid the risk of injustice.

A witness who is honest may be wrong, even if they are convinced,

they are right.

A witness who is convincing may still be wrong.

More than one witness may be wrong.

Page 7 of 9

A witness who recognizes the defendant even when the witness

knows the defendant may be wrong.

Some of the circumstances a judge should direct the jury to examine in

order to find out whether a correct identification has been made include,

The length of time the accused was observed by the witness

The distance of the witness from the accused

The state of the light

The length of time elapsed between the original observation

and the subsequent identification to the police

In this matter, it is clear from the judgement of the learned High Court Judge,

the question of identity has not been considered in line with the Turnbull

guidelines. The learned High Court Judge has brushed aside the infirmities in

the evidence of PW-02 on the basis that those infirmities do not go into the root

of the matter and such infirmities can occur in a case of this nature.

However, as agreed by the learned Counsel for the appellant as well as the

learned SDSG, this is not a case where the learned High Court Judge can

disregard the question of identity in the manner it was done. The evidence of PW-

01, the daughter of the deceased, who was nearest to the decease when the

attack took place clearly shows that she could not identify the assailants because

they were wearing dark clothes and since she saw them from behind. The

evidence of PW02 was also that the two assailants were wearing dark raincoat

like clothes when he saw them rushing pass him towards the deceased.

According to the evidence led, both the appellant and the other accused were

fellow villagers who were well-known to PW-01 and the deceased as well. It is

abundantly clear that the PW-01 had told the absolute truth as to what she saw

when this incident happened. According to her evidence, although her father

carried a torch and PW-02 may have too, they were not lit at the time this

incident occurred. This piece of evidence cut across the evidence of PW-02 who

Page 8 of 9

says both the torches were lit and he identified the appellant because of the

torchlight. Besides that, it is clear that even the deceased had failed to identify

the assailants, The evidence shows that he has questioned as to who assaulted

him, after the assailants ran away from the scene.

It is also necessary to consider the evidence of PW-08 and 09 in the light of the

evidence of PW-02 as to the identity. Both the said witnesses have reached the

place of the incident soon after it happened. PW-08 had been a former employee

of the deceased. He is the person who has helped PW-02 to cover his wounds He

has been specific that he questioned PW-02 as to what happened, for which he

has not got a reply. PW-09 was another villager lived nearby and also a police

officer. PW-02 has failed to reveal to none of them as to who assaulted him and

the deceased.

It is my view that it would be the natural reaction of a person who faced with

this kind of a situation to reveal to the persons who arrive to help him as to who

was responsible for the injuries caused to him, which has not happened in this

incident. This goes on to show that the identification of the appellants and the

other accused by PW-02 at a later stage was an afterthought as argued correctly

by the learned Counsel for the appellant.

It is clear that the appellant has maintained an alibi from the very moment of

his arrest and throughout the case. He has given evidence on oath and has faced

the test of cross-examination, where he has maintained the same position.

Although it was not necessary for him to prove his alibi, he has called witnesses

in support, to establish that he was elsewhere during the time the witnesses say

this incident happened. It has been an admitted fact that there was a wedding

function in the village at the alleged time of the incident.

E.R.S.R. Coomaraswamy in his book The Law of Evidence Vol-01 at 279

states thus;

The credibility of an alibi is greatly strengthened if it be set up at the time

when accusation is first made and is consistently maintained thereafter.

Page 9 of 9

Conversely, the weight of the defence is weakened if it is not resorted to

until sometime after the charge was made.

An alibi is not an exception to penal liability like the general exception and

special exceptions laid down in the Penal Code

When the defence of alibi is taken, there is no burden of proof for the

accused. The defence evidence on alibi has merely to be weighed in the

balance with the prosecution evidence. If the evidence of alibi is not believed,

it fails. If it is believed, it succeeds. But if it is neither believed nor

disbelieved, but creates a reasonable doubt as to the prosecution case on

identity, the accused is entitled to be acquitted.

Under these circumstances, I am of the view that letting the conviction to stand

is highly unsafe because of the prosecutions failure to establish the identity of

the appellant beyond reasonable doubt.

Therefore, I allow the appeal of the appellant, and acquit him of the charges for

which he was convicted.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P. Kumararatnam, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal