j I I I I

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

1

In the matter of an Application for Writs in

the nature of Certiorari, Mandamus and

Prohibition to the Court of Appeal of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

under Article 140 of the Constitution of the

Republic.

CA (Writ) Application No: 11112015 Vs.

Chandrakala Subramanium,

No: J/1/4, Labour Flats,

State Road, Colombo 14.

Petitioner

1. The General Manager,

National Housing Development Authority,

Sri Chittampalam A. Gardiner Mawatha,

Colombo 02.

2. National Housing Development Authority,

Sri Chittampalam A. Gardiner Mawatha,

Colombo 02.

3. Mahalingam Muniamma,

J/G/I, Labour Flats,

Stace Road,

Colombo 14.

Respondents

! I t \

ti

t i

l r l

\

lI

I

Before

Counsel

Argued on

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne 1.

Harsha Fernando with Chamith Senanayake instructed by Jagath

Talgaswattage for Petitioner.

Manohara Jayasinghe, SC for 1 st and 2nd Respondents.

C.E. De Silva for 3rd Respondent.

: 18/09/2017

Written Submission on: 12/0112018

Judgement on 16/03/2018

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

2

By Petition dated 2nd March 2015, the Petitioner, inter alia, is seeking an

order in the nature of a writ of Mandamus to compel the 1 st and or 2nd Respondents

to evict the 3rd Respondent, alleged to be in unauthorized possession of premises

bearing address, J/G/l, Labour Flats, State Road, Colombo 15, (hereinafter

referred to as the "said premises") and upon eviction to restore vacant possession

of the said premises to the Petitioner, in terms of the relevant provisions of the

National Housing Development Authority Act No. 17 of 1979, ( hereinafter

referred to as the "NHDA Act" ) in pursuant to agreement marked P3, dated 30th

November 2006.

Upon a probate granted in favour of the Petitioner, (Chandrakala

Subramanium) on 30th November 2006, in Testamentary case bearing No:

I

3

36483/T, by the District Court of Colombo, the 2nd Respondent (National Housing

i i :

~ Development Authority, herein after referred to as the NHDA) entered into a sale

\ agreement (P3), with the Petitioner. However, the Petitioner contends that the lI!

continued unlawful possession of the said premises by the 3rd Respondent,

(Mahalingam Muniamma) has deprived the Petitioner of her legitimate right of

possession, lawfully acquired by said agreement dated 30th November 2006, (P3)

entered into with the NHDA. The Petitioner further contends that the NHDA on its Ipart has failed in its statutory duties to protect the rights of the Petitioner, by

failing to recognize the Petitioner in terms of the said agreement dated 30th

November 2006.

Statement of objections to the Petition was filed by the 3rd Respondent. The

JI

1 st and 2nd Respondents did not file objections. However, at the hearing, the State

Counsel made oral submissions on behalf of the 1 st and 2nd Respondents and has

tendered written submissions.

The facts relevant to this application briefly, are as follows;

Chithrawaduw Kandasami, (the mother of the petitioner) with her children,

more fully described in paragraph 7 of the petition, lived in the said premises, and

made monthly payments to the NHDA, as the lawful tenant of the said premises

by agreement application No. 235332/2. Nadaraja Kirumani the brother of the

petitioner also lived in the said premises with his wife, the 3rd Respondent \continued to live in the same premises after the death of her husband.

I

4

!

Chithrawaduw Kandasami died testate, where all her rights and obligations

concerning the said premises were given to the petitioner by last will dated

20/12/1997, a copy of which is marked PI. The petitioner as the executor of the

last will was granted probate dated 04/05/2005, marked P2, by the District Court

of Colombo in Testamentary case bearing No. 36483/T.

The probate obtained in the said case was challenged by the 3rd Respondent

in case bearing No. 97321RE, instituted in the District Court of Colombo, a copy

of the Plaint is attached marked P5. In paragraph 10 of the said plaint the 3rd

Respondent claims that the 1 st Defendant, the petitioner in this case, has

suppressed andl or misrepresented material facts in case bearing No. 36483/T, and,

the 3rd Respondent has filed statement of objections to the said testamentary

action, inter alia, seeking to be recognized as the lawful tenant of the said

premises.

The Petitioner, (1 st Defendant in case bearing No. 9732/RE) after filling

proxy through her registered Attorney at Law, failed to prosecute the said case

diligently, and the case proceeded for trial ex parte, and an order was made against

the Petitioner.

The subsequent application by the Petition to purge default in the District

Court of Colombo and the revision application to the Provincial High Court of

Civil Appeal of the Western Province, to vacate the initial order of the District

Court of Colombo, was decided against the Petitioner.

1I i

f I

f III

t

~

f I,

f

5

I

The Petitioner has drawn attention of court to section 64 (l) of the NHDA

Act, and states that it mandates the 1 st Respondent, where it is lawful for the

landlord to file action in a case, where the occupier of a building fails to comply

with the provisions of subsection 1 of Section 63 for the ejectment of the said

occupier, from the potion or land thereof. However, the 1st Respondent (NHDA)

has informed court that they will not file answer in case bearing No. 97321RE,

which the Petitioner contends is, in violation of its statutory obligations.

It is noted that the 3rd Respondent instituted action in the District Court of

Colombo in case bearing No. 9732/RE, within less than a month of the petitioner

entering into the said Sale Agreement with the NHDA. After been noticed, by

motion dated 4/412007, the NHDA (2nd Defendant), informed court that it will not

file answer and abide by what ever decision given by court. Therefore, the J

Petitioner (the 1 st Defendant in the said District Court case) was aware of the stand

taken by the NHDA way back in 2007. At the time, the petitioner did not complain

to the NHDA or to any other appropriate forum of non-compliance of its statutory

obligations. The petitioner has made a demand to the NHDA to defend title by

letter dated 15112/2014, marked P8, after a lapse of over seven years from the

institution of the case in the District court of Colombo. On this ground of undue

delay alone, this petition should fail. Meanwhile the petitioner (1 st Defendant),

having filed proxy moved for a date to file statement of objections in order to

proceed with the case.

I I

1 6

j

The petitioner, in written submissions filed of record, at page 4 states,

"With the issuance of probate (P2) and signing of P3, the Petitioner

attempted to seek possession of the premises. The 3rd Respondent and

her son illegally refused to give possession and prevented entry of the

petitioner. The petitioner then made a complaint to the police and

action under section 66 of the Primary Courts Procedure Act No. 44 of

1979 was instituted".

Going by the documents annexed to the petition, action under Section 66 of

the Primary Courts Procedure Act was initiated in the year 2002. Therefore, the

above statement is chronologically and factually incorrect. This amounts to a clear

ground of misrepresentation of facts. The assurance of probate and the agreement

entered into by the petitioner with the NHDA came much later than the order in

case bearing No: 33815/4 which is dated 13/0912002, where the Learned

Magistrate ordered the relevant parties to maintain the status quo to prevent a

possible breach of the peace by the respective parties. Therefore, the Petitioner

was well aware that the 3rd Respondent was refusing and preventing the entry of

the petitioner to the said premises, well before signing the agreement with the

NHDA, dated 30111/2006.

As noted earlier, the petitioner was a party noticed to the District Court of

Colombo, Case No. 9732/RE, dated 20112/2006, instituted by the 3rd Respondent

seeking inter alia, for a declaration that her tenancy with the NHDA was lawful. In

~ t r

\ t I I I

f

j t

I

!I,!

~ ,i ! II

Jf t

7

this action the 3rd Respondent has challenged the Last Will No. 53 dated 20th

December 1997 (P 1), concerning the rights and obligations of the said premises

given to the petitioner. As the executor of the said Last Will, the petitioner was

granted probate by the District Court and thereafter, the NHDA entered into an

agreement with the petitioner in respect of the said premises. Accordingly, the

basis in which the probate was granted and the subsequent Salel Tenancy

agreement entered into with the NHDA, was challenged in this case. In the

circumstances the District Court had the jurisdiction to go into the disputed factual

issues arising out of the said agreement and the merits of the Last Will, challenged

by the 3rd Respondent. The District Court is the appropriate forum to look into

such questions of fact interwoven with issues of law and to try contested facts on

oral evidence as appropriate. The petitioner having entered the said forum to

defend the said claim by the 3rd Respondent, failed to prosecute the case diligently

and also has failed to completely exhaust the statutory entitlement of the available

appellate procedure. Therefore, the order given by the District Court Colombo, in

favour of the 3rd Respondent stands.

The Petitioner is aggrieved that the NHDA has not discharged its statutory

obligations by not filling answer in the District Court Case No. 97321RE. Letter

dated 15112/2014 marked P8, written by the petitioner to the NHDA demands that

the NHDA resist the said District Court action on behalf of the petitioner. The

undue delay caused in writing the said letter to the NHDA is not explained by the

I i ) 1 ; , I

\ I I

8

Petitioner. No court can compel a defendant to resist an action when such party

informs court that it wishes to abide by any decision given by court. Such

adherence to court procedure by a party on notice, can not in our view, be

considered as a violation of a statutory obligation which would attract judicial

reVIew.

In the case of Perera vs. National 110 using Development Authority (2001)

3 SLR 50, held that,

"writ being a discretionary remedy the conduct of the applicant

is also very relevant. The conduct of the applicant may disentitle

him to the remedy"

As such, if the Petitioners faliour to prosecute her case diligently at the

appropriate forum, is redressed, it would amount to a vindication of the petitioners

conduct, to abuse the judicial process.

Therefore, in all the above circumstances, I refuse to grant any of the reliefs

prayed for by this Petition.

Accordingly, the Petition is dismissed without costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

1I" ~

f f

~. II

I

J

~ f , II,

lt

~ I IIt

J