IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA.

C.A. Appeal No.575/2000 IF) D.C. Matale Case No.4007/L

In the matter of an Appeal to the Court of Appeal of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

K.D.Somapala Kehelpotuwa Watta Elkaduwa.

PLAINTIFF - Vs. -

Saminadan Aiyadurai Rehelkotuwe Watta Elkaduwa.

AND DEFENDANT

Saminadan Aiyadurai (Deceased) Rehelkotuwe Watt a Elkaduwa.

Saminda Devasayagam No. % Mahatunnagama, Elkaduwa

SUBSTITUTED-DEFENDANT-APPELLANT

Vs

K.D. Somapala (Deceased) Kehelkotuwa Watta Elkaduwa.

1. Swarnamali Tissa Kuttige 2. Tissa Kuttige Dona Shyamali 3. Tissa Kuttige Semali 4. Srimali Tissa Kuttige

All of 124, Arangala, Naththarampotha.

SUBSTITUTED 1" TO 4th DEFENDANTS-RESPONDENTS

Before:

Counsel:

Janak De Silva J.

&

N. Bandula Karunarathna J.

Upendra Walgampaya for the Substituted -Defendant-Appellant.

Ranjan Suwandarathna, PC with Anil Rajakaruna and Ineka Henawitharana for the Substituted - Plaintiff - Respondent.

Written Submissions: Filed on 18th March 2014, Substituted 1st to 4th Plaintiff-Respondent.

Argued on:

Judgment on:

Filed on 6th June 2018, Additional Written Submissions of Substituted-Defendant-Appellant.

20/01/2020.

16/11/2020.

N. Bandula Karunarathna J.

The Original Plaintiff-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the 'Plaintiff) by Plaint dated

26.01.1989, instituted this action against the Original Defendant-Appellant (hereinafter

referred to as the 'Defendant'). By amended Plaint dated 28.01.1992 the Plaintiff prayed, inter alia, for: -

(a) ejectment of the Defendant, his servants, agents and all those claiming

through him from the premises described in the schedule to the Plaint;

(b) a declaration that the Plaintiff is the owner of the premises described in

the schedule to the Plaint;

(c) damages at Rs. 1,000/- per month from 01.01.1979.

The Plaintiff has pleaded, inter alia, in the Amended Plaint that the original owner of the

land described in the schedule to the Plaint was one Arumabaduge Dona Mani

Gunawardane and that the said Dona Mani Gunawardane after long continued possession,

by Deed NO.36094 dated 16.01.1969 attested by S.P. Wijayatilake, Notary Public,

transferred the land to the Plaintiff. Thereafter the Defendant was employed by the Plaintiff

and given a room to live on the said land. The Plaintiff on or about 11.01.1986 terminated

the Defendant's employment.

The Plaintiff states that the Defendant was working under him and he permitted the

Defendant to occupy the house which is situated in the property in suit.

Page 2 017

Thereafter, the Plaintiff terminated the services of the Defendant but he failed to vacate the

said building and continued to be in possession. Also used to take the produce of th.e said

property and under those circumstances only the Plaintiff instituted the said action seeking

for the aforementioned relief.

Although the Plaintiff terminated the Defendant's employment the Defendant continues to

forcibly possess the said premises and enjoyed plantations on the said land. The property

which is described in the schedule to the Plaint is described as a property in extent of 7

acres 3 roods and 10 perch which is the land called 'Kehelkotuwa Hena' depicted in Plan

No.1960 dated 9th February 1970, made by R.C.O.D. Lamotte L.S.

The Plaintiff states that although the Defendant alleged that he has prescribed to 1 acre 2

roods and 34 perch of the said property which is described in the Court Commission Plan

N.2502 dated 11.7.1990 made by S. Ranchagoda L.S, it is Significant to note that this action

was instituted on 26th January 1989, and the said plan was prepared through Court, 1 Y,

years after the institution of the said action. That makes it clear that the purported area

claimed by the Defendant on prescription was not defined by way of a plan even at the time

of the institution of the said action.

According to the Plaintiff, the said Plan No.5202 depicts a land in extent of 1 acre 2 roods

and 34 perch and the part of the Southern Boundary of the said land which is the area

described in the schedule to the answer is mentioned as boundaries are indefinite. The

Easter and the part of the Southern Boundaries is the Halmillapitiya Ela which is a natural

boundary and the said plan suggests that there is no specific area possessed by the

Defendant at any given time for him to claim prescriptive title in relation to a part of the

land owned by the Plaintiff.

The defendant moved for the dismissal, of the Plaintiff said action and also moved for a

declaration that he is entitled to the property described in the schedule to the answer and

alternatively moved for Rs. 25,000/- compensation on the purported improvements.

Thereafter on K.W.H.M.R. Jayaratne Bandara was called to give evidence and the said

witnesses father was the owner of the land to the South of the subject matter of the said

action and the said witness is personally aware of the said property and mentioned that he

is personally aware that the Plaintiff regularly used to come to the land though he is not

residing there and also pointed out that the Defendant came into the land around 1979-80

and he came for the purpose of looking after the land owned by the Plaintiff and the

Defendant was employed as a watcher.

The Plaintiff states that the said evidence confirmed the fact that the Defendant was

working as an employee under the Plaintiff in relation to the Plaintiff's horticulture project.

On 9.3.1999 the Plaintiff testified and produced the gazette notification dated 17.12.1976 as

P4 to show that the said property came under the statutory determination gazette in terms

Page 3 of 7

of the Land Reform Law and also produced Plan NO.3960 as P5 and produced documents up

to P12 to establish his possession and the ownership to the property.

The Plaintiff states that at the beginning of the cross examination of the Defendant

admitted that he came to the land under the Plaintiff and the flower plantation project was

carried in the said property in order to take flowers to the flower shop the Plaintiff had in

Colombo. According to the Plaintiff, those admissions made in cross examination by the

Defendant itself goes against his own contention and therefore the Plaintiff emphasizes that

the Defendant miserably failed in providing prescriptive right to any portion of the land

described in the schedule to the Plaint.

On the contrary the Defendant filed his Answer dated 08.02.1991 and prayed, inter alia, for ,

(a) a declaration that the Defendant is the owner of the land described in the

schedule to the Answer;

(b) if the Plaintiff is declared as the owner of the land described in the

schedule to the Answer for an order directing a payment of Rs. 25,000/-

to the Defendant for the improvements carried out on the said land;

(c) dismissal of the Plaintiff's action.

The Defendant pleaded in the Answer, inter alia, that the land which the Plaintiff claims

originally belonged to one Don David Gunaratne who died a long time ago and his estate

was administered in D.C. Matale case No.4094/T. Therefore, the Plaintiff's predecessors had

no right to transfer the said land to the Plaintiff. The Defendant has acquired prescriptive

rights to the land described in the schedule to the Answer. The Defendant has made

improvements to the land at a cost of around Rs. 30,000/-.

The Defendant has filed the present Appeal seeking, inter alia, to have the said Judgment of

the District Court of Matale, set aside and to obtain the reliefs prayed for in the Answer of

the Defendant.

Some of the findings found by the Learned District Court Judge is as follows;

(i) The Plaintiff has become the owner of the subject matter on Statutory

Determination marked Ot4. Therefore, the burden of proving

prescriptive title is on the Defendant,

(ii) The Defendant has failed to establish that his possession was adverse

to that of the Plaintiff,

(iii) The Plaintiff has not proved damages,

Page 4 of 7

Subsequent to a thorough analysis of the facts, it could be seen that the Plaintiff has failed

to prove as to how his predecessor acquire rights in the subject matter. In the original and

Amended Plaints there is no pleading as to how the Plaintiff's purported predecessor in title,

the said Dona Mani Gunawardane, became entitled to the land described in the schedule to

the Plaint.

I believe that the Learned Additional District Judge has erred in law in holding that the

Plaintiff has acquired title on Gazette ~14 when the Plaintiff has not proved the title pleaded

and put in issue. It is seen that the previous title of the Plaintiff to agricultural land, including

the alleged subject matter which was pleaded and put in issue, is admittedly extinguished by

the operation of the Land Reform Law. Therefore, the title pleaded and put in issue by the

Plaintiff cannot be the basis on which the Plaintiff becomes the owner of the alleged subject

matter.

It is my observation that the Plaintiff has not proved the title which he pleaded but goes on

to state that the land vested by operation of law in the Land Reform Commission and the

Plaintiff became entitle to the subject matter by Statutory Determination marked ~14. The

Learned Trial Judge has erred in fact and in law in coming to the conclusion that the Plaintiff

has received title on ~14 when the Plaintiff has clearly not pleaded ~14 and therefore has

not proved the title which he pleaded.

It is brought to my attention that once the Plaintiff has pleaded a certain title and framed

issues relating to that title, it is not open to the Plaintiff to later claim title by other means

which was not pleaded or put in issue. It was held in the case of Loku Menika and Others vs.

Gunasekera [1997] 2 Sri L.R. 281 that: -

'the Plaintiff must set out his title on the basis on which he claims a declaration of

title to the land and must prove that title against the Defendant. A Court cannot

grant any relief to a Plaintiff except on what he has pleaded and proved to the

satisfaction ofthe Court'.

It was also held in the case of Dharmadasa vs. Jayasena [1997] 3 SLR 327 that 'in a rei vindication action the burden is on the Plaintiff to establish the title pleaded and relied on

by him. The Defendant need not prove anything.

I further observe that the land granted to the Plaintiff by Statutory Determination marked

~14 is not the land described in the schedule to the Plaint to which a declaration is sought.

The said Statutory Determination refers to Preliminary Plan NO. &b 287, made by the

Surveyor-General. There, however, is no reference to the said Plan to the land described in

the schedule to the Plaint, to which land the Plaintiff seeks a declaration of title. The extent

of the land described in the schedule to the Plaint and the land described in the said

preliminary Plan No. (!}J 287 is also completely different.

Page 5 of7

A further matter for consid!ration is that the land to which the Plaintiff seeks a declaration

is part of the larger land called "Kehelkotuwa Henan. The said fact can be ascertained by

observing that the boundaries to the North, West and South to the land depicted in the

Surveyor General's Plan is also "Kehelkotuwa Hena". Therefore, there is a burden on the

Plaintiff to show that the land specified in the statutory determination is the land described

in the schedule to the Plaint and not some other part of the "Kehelkotuwo Henan. The

burden is not discharged by the Plaintiff.

It is my observation that there are serious doubts as to the identity of the subject matter.

Firstly, the Plaintiff is by Amended Plaint seeking a declaration to a land depicted Plan

No.3960 of R.C.C. De La Motte, Licensed Surveyor which is said to be in extent of 7 acres, 3

roods andlO perches (A.7; R.3; P.10). Although the Plaintiff claims that he became entitled

to the purported subject matter on Gazette o~4 which refers to a land in extent Acres: 7,

Roods:l , Perches: 27, in the Preliminary Plan No. iJ, 287, made by the Surveyor-General,

there is no reference to Preliminary Plan No. &b 287, in the schedule to the Plaint, nor is

there a superimposition of Preliminary Plan No. & 287, on De La Motte's Plan No.3960.

It is to be noted that the Plaintiff has also taken out a commission and prepared Plan Nos.

2502 and 3693 to depict the land possessed by the Defendant. The said Plans have not

been brought into the schedule to the Amended Plaint, nor have they been superimposed

on Preliminary Plan No. &b287 to show that it falls within the land claimed by the Plaintiff.

It is the Defendant's position that the land possessed by the Defendant is not that part of

'Kehelkotuwa hena' claimed by the Plaintiff.

An analysis of the facts of the case reveal that the Defendant was never an employee of the

Plaintiff.

Although Oral submissions were made that the Defendant was an employee of the Plaintiff,

it is seen that the Plaintiff has specifically framed issues Nos. 4 and 5 as to the purported

employment. The said issues and the Learned Trial Judge's answers thereto read as follows:

9 5d:!SllSl6~ o~&e!lSl6~ ~i)G'd G'di)~ lSlC G'di)lSlG'~z:;l~? c - wag lSl6 l5l~2Sl

9 -0JG'a:I' G'di)J lSlJC ~ l5J(,; o~o5i) 8d0i) o~&~lSl6~ 58l5l' G'00 '1)el0 l5JC 8!8Cl

c13 lSlJ06~ C@J~l5l'G'l5l'~?

C -wag lSl6 l5l~2Sl

Page 6 of 7

It is also pertinent to note that the Plaintiff has not challenged the above findings of the

learned Trial Judge by way of a cross appeal. It is also to be noted that in any event there is

no proof of the Plaintiff having contributed EPF or ETF, or paid a salary, or the amount of the

salary, or nature of employment. The Plaintiff has failed to prove that employment was

terminated and that the license of the Defendant to possess has been terminated.

For the aforesaid reasons I will allow the Appeal, set aside the Judgment of the Learned

Additional District Judge of Matale dated 25.08.2000, grant the reliefs prayed for in the

Answer and dismiss the action of the Plaintiff with costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Janak De Silva, J

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Page 7 of 7