==== BLOCKS ==== 

WRT/0054/2026

Page 1 of 25

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for mandates in

the nature of Writs of Certiorari and Mandamus,

under and in terms of Article 140 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

KST EVERGREEN (PVT) LTD,

No.71, Negombo Road,

Kandana.

Petitioner

Vs

1. HON. K. D. LAL KANTHA,

Minister of Agriculture, Livestock, Land

and Irrigation and Chairman, Food

Policy and Security Committee,

Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Land

and Irrigation,

No. 80/5, 'Govijana Mandiraya',

Rajamalwatta Lane,

Battaramulla.

2. D. P. WICKRAMASINGHE,

Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture,

Livestock, Land and Irrigation Ministry

of Agriculture, Livestock, Land and

Irrigation,

Court of Appeal Case No: CA(Writ) No: 0054/26

WRT/0054/2026

Page 2 of 25

No. 80/5, 'Govijana Mandiraya

Rajamalwatta Lane,

Battaramulla.

3. HON. WASANTHA SAMARASINGHE,

Minister of Trade, Commerce, Food

Security and Co-Operative

Development, and Chairman, Food

Policy and Security Committee Ministry

of Trade, Commerce, Food Security and

Co-Operative Development,

No. 492, R. A. De Mel Mawatha,

Colombo 03.

4. K. A. VIMALENTHIRARAJAH,

Secretary, Ministry of Trade,

Commerce, Food Security and Co-

Operative Development,

No. 492, R. A. De Mel Mawatha,

Colombo 03.

5. HON. DR. NALINDA JAYATISSA,

Minister of Health and Mass Media and

Cabinet Spokesperson, Ministry of

Health and Mass Media, Suwasiripaya,

No. 385, Rev. Baddegama

Wimalawansa Thero Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

6. DR. ANIL JASINGHE,

WRT/0054/2026

Page 3 of 25

Secretary, Ministry of Health and Mass

Media Suwasiripaya, No. 385, Rev.

Baddegama Wimalawansa Thero

Mawatha, Colombo 10.

7. HON. DR. ANIL JAYANTHA

FERNANDO,

Deputy Minister of Finance and

Planning Ministry of Finance, Planning

and Economic Development, The

Secretariat, Colombo 01.

8. HON. U. D. NISHANTHA

JAYAWEERA,

Deputy Minister of Economic

Development Ministry of Finance,

Planning and Economic Development,

The Secretariat, Colombo 01.

9. DR. HARSHANA SURIYAPPERUMA,

Secretary. Ministry of Finance,

Planning and Economic Development,

Ministry of Finance, Planning and

Economic Development,

The Secretariat, Colombo 01.

10. T. T. UPULMALEE PREMATHILAKA,

Controller General Department of

Imports and Exports Control,

WRT/0054/2026

Page 4 of 25

No. 75 1/3, 1st Floor, Hemas Building,

York Street, Colombo 01.

11. D R. W.A.R.T. WICKRAMAARACHCHI,

Director General of Agriculture

Department of Agriculture No. 01, Old

Galaha Road, Peradeniya.

12. K. D. S. RUWANCHANDRA,

Chairman, Standing Cabinet Appointed

Procurement Committee and Former

Secretary, Ministry of Port, Shipping and

Aviation, No. 19, Chaithya Road,

Colombo 01.

13. J. M. THILAKA JAYASUNDARA,

Member, Standing Cabinet Appointed

Procurement Committee, and Former

Secretary, Ministry of Education,

Isurupaya, Batttaramulla.

14. R. M. P. RATHNAYAKE,

Member, Standing Cabinet Appointed

Procurement Committee, and

Former Deputy Secretary to the

Treasury, Ministry of Finance, The

Secretariat, Colombo 01.

15. J. P. R. KARUNARATNE,

Member,

WRT/0054/2026

Page 5 of 25

Standing Cabinet Appointed

Procurement Committee, and Former

Deputy Governor, Central Bank of Sri

Lanka, No. 30, Janadhipathi Mawatha,

Colombo 01.

16. K. P. A. DE SILVA,

Member, Standing Cabinet Appointed

Procurement Committee, and Former

Chief Financial Officer, Ministry of

Trade,

No. 492, R. A. De Mel Mawatha, Colombo

03.

17. PRADEEP SAPUTHANTHRI,

Secretary to the Prime Minister, and

Member, Food Policy and Security

Committee,

Prime Minister's Office No. 58, Sir Ernest

De Silva Mawatha, Colombo 07.

18. KAPILA JANAKA BANDARA

GUNARATNE,

Senior Additional Secretary to the

President and Member, Food Policy and

Security Committee,

Presidential Secretariat, Galle Face,

Colombo 01.

19. N. S. WANASINGHE,

WRT/0054/2026

Page 6 of 25

Additional Secretary to the President,

Presidential Secretariat, Galle Face,

Colombo 01.

20. SRI LANKA THRIPOSHA LIMITED,

No. 17, Negombo Road,

Kapuwatta, Ja-Ela.

21. AMAL ATTANAYAKE,

Chairman,

Sri Lanka Thriposha Limited,

No. 17, Negombo Road,

Kapuwatta, Ja-Ela.

22. DEEPTHI KULARATNE,

Former Chairman,

Sri Lanka Thriposha Limited,

No. 17, Negombo Road,

Kapuwatta, Ja-Ela.

23. SEEVALI ARUKGODA,

The Director-General of Customs,

Sri Lanka Customs, Customs House,

Colombo 11.

24. SRI LANKA PORTS AUTHORITY,

Level 7, HQ Colombo,

No. 464, T.B. Jaya Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

WRT/0054/2026

Page 7 of 25

25. HON. DR. HARINI AMARASURIYA,

Minister of Education, Higher Education

and Vocational Education, Ministry of

Education, Higher Education and

Vocational Education, Isurupaya,

Battaramulla.

26. HON. VIJITHA HERATH,

Minister of Foreign Affairs, Foreign

Employment and Tourism, Ministry of

Foreign Affairs, Foreign Employment and

Tourism, Republic Building,

Colombo 01.

27. HON. BIMAL RATNAYAKA,

Minister of Transport, Highways and

Urban Development, Ministry of

Transport, Highways and Urban

Development, 7th Floor, Sethsiripaya

Stage II, Battaramulla.

28. HON. SUNIL HANDUNNETHTHI,

Minister of Industry and

Entrepreneurship Development, Ministry

of Industry and Entrepreneurship

Development,

No. 73/1, Galle Road, Colombo 03.

29. HON. RAMALINGAM

CHANDRASEKAR,

WRT/0054/2026

Page 8 of 25

Minister of Fisheries, Aquatic and Ocean

Resources Ministry of Fisheries, Aquatic

and Ocean Resources, New Secretariat,

Maligawatta, Colombo 10.

30. HON. PROF. ANIL JAYANTHA

FERNANDO,

Minister of Labour, Ministry of Labour,

6th Floor, Mehewara Piyesa,

Narahenpita, Colombo 05.

31. HON. SAMANTHA VIDDYARATHNA,

Minister of Plantation and Community

Infrastructure, Ministry of Plantation

and Community Infrastructure, 11th

Floor, Stage II, Sethsiripaya,

Battaramulla.

32. HON. ANURA KARUNATHILAKA,

Minister of Ports and Civil Aviation,

Ministry of Ports and Civil Aviation,

No. 19, Chaithya Road, Colombo 01.

33. HON. PROF. A. H. M. Н.

ABAYARATΗΝΑ,

Minister of Public Administration,

Provincial Councils and Local

Government, Ministry of Public

Administration, Provincial Councils and

Local Government,

WRT/0054/2026

Page 9 of 25

Independence Square, Colombo 07.

34. HON. HARSHANA NANAYAKKARA

(ATTORNEY-AT-LAW)

Minister of Justice and National

Integration Ministry of Justice and

National Integration No. 19, Sri

Sangaraja Mawatha, Colombo 10.

35. HON. SAROJA SAVITHRI PAULRAJ,

Minister of Women and Child Affairs,

Ministry of Women and Child Affairs, 5th

Floor, Sethsiripaya Stage II,

Battaramulla.

36. HON. DR. UPALI PANNILAGE,

Minister of Rural Development, Social

Security and Community Development,

Ministry of Rural Development, Social

Security and Community Development,

1st Floor, Stage II, Battaramulla.

37. HON. K. M. ANANDA WIJEPALA,

Minister of Public Security and

Parliamentary Affairs, Ministry of Public

Security and Parliamentary Affairs, 18th

Floor, Suhurupaya, Battaramulla.

38. HON. DR. HINIDUMA SUNIL SENEVI,

WRT/0054/2026

Page 10 of 25

Minister of Buddhasasana, Religious and

Cultural Affairs, Ministry of

Buddhasasana, Religious and Cultural

Affairs, No. 135, Sreemath Anagarika

Dharmapala Mawatha, Colombo 07.

39. HON. SUNIL KUMARA GAMAGE,

Minister of Youth Affairs and Sports,

Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, No.

09, Philip Gunawardana Mawatha,

Colombo 07.

40. HON. DR. CHRISHANTHA ABEYSENA,

Minister of Science and Technology,

Minister of Science and Technology, 03rd

Floor, Sethsiripaya Stage I,

Battaramulla.

41. HON. ENG. KUMARA JAYAKODY,

Minister of Energy, Ministry of Energy,

No. 437, Galle Road, Colombo 03.

41A. HON. ANURA KARUNATHILAKA,

Minister of Energy, Ministry of

Energy, No. 437, Galle Road,

Colombo 03.

Substituted-41st Respondent.

42. HON. DR. DAMMIKA PATABENDI,

WRT/0054/2026

Page 11 of 25

Minister of Environment, Ministry of

Environment, 'Sobadam Piyasa', No.

416/C/1, Robert Gumawardana

Mawatha, Battaramulla.

43. HON. DR. SUSIL RANASINGHE,

Minister of Housing, Construction and

Water Supply, Ministry of Housing,

Construction and Water Supply 2nd

Floor, Sethsiripaya, Stage I,

Battaramulla.

44. W. M. D. J. FERNANDO,

Secretary to the Cabinet of Ministers,

Lloyd's Building, Sir Baron Jayathilaka

Mawatha, Colombo 01.

45. THE HON. ATTORNEY GENERAL,

The Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondents

Before : D. THOTAWATTA, J.

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Counsel : Kuvera de Zoysa, PC with Kevin Dias

instructed by Sanjay Fonseka for the

Petitioner.

WRT/0054/2026

Page 12 of 25

Rajin Gooneratne, SC for the Respondents

except the 22nd and 41st Respondents.

The 22nd and 41st Respondents absent and

unrepresented.

Preliminary objection of the

Petitioner raised on : 30.04.2026

Written Submissions

of the Petitioner

tendered on : 07.05.2026

Written Submissions

of the 1st to 21st, 23rd,

25th to 45th Respondents

tendered on : 18.05.2026

Written Submissions

of the 22nd and 41st

Respondents tendered on : Not tendered.

Decided on : 27.05.2026.

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

This is an application made to this Court by the Petitioner under Article 140 of

the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka (hereinafter

called and referred to as “the Constitution”.) for mandates in the nature of Writs

of Certiorari of kind as prayed for in prayer ‘d’, ‘e’ and ‘f’ of the petition as well as

for mandates in the nature of Writs of Mandamus of kind as prayed for in prayer

WRT/0054/2026

Page 13 of 25

‘g’, ‘h’, ‘i’, ‘j’ and ‘k’ of the petition and for a mandate in the nature of a Writ of

Prohibition of kind as prayed for in prayer ‘i’ of the petition together with an array

of interim orders of kind as prayed for in paragraph ‘m’ to ‘s’ of the petition.

This Court had having heard respective Counsel on the question of the issuance

of notices, made order issuing notices of this application on all the Respondents

named in the petition (hereinafter called and referred to as “the 1st to 45th

Respondents”.) and the joint statement of objections were filed by and on behalf

of all the Respondents except the 21st and 41st Respondents.

This matter had then, been fixed for argument and at the outset of the argument,

the learned President’s Counsel Petitioner had raised a preliminary legal

objection as to the sustainability and/or legal validity of the statement of

objections filed by and on behalf of all the Respondents except the 21st and 41st

Respondents and moved that the statement of objections be accordingly,

rejected.

The preliminary legal objection so raised to Court by the learned President’s

Counsel for the Petitioner is two-fold, namely;

i) The purported statement of objections filed on behalf of the

Respondents is bad in law as there are no corresponding affidavits

before Court on behalf of the Respondents other than the 10th

Respondent, hence the purported statement of objections is in

contravention of Rule 3 (7) of the Court of Appeal (Appellate

Procedure) Rules 1990; and

ii) The purported affidavit of the 10th Respondent dated 07.04.2026 is

bad in law as there is no averment affirming that the contents of the

affidavit are of the 10th Respondent's own/personal knowledge.

It may now, be examined.

1) The purported statement of objections filed on behalf of the

Respondents is bad in law as there are no corresponding affidavits

WRT/0054/2026

Page 14 of 25

before Court on behalf of the Respondents other than the 10th

Respondent, hence the purported statement of objections is in

contravention of Rule 3 (7) of the Court of Appeal (Appellate

Procedure) Rules 1990.

While clearly, and unequivocally, conceding that the purported statement of

objections filed on behalf of the Respondents is bad in law as there are no

corresponding affidavits before Court on behalf of the Respondents other

than the 10th Respondent supporting the averments of fact contained

therein, and hence the purported statement of objections is in

contravention of Rule 3 (7) of the Court of Appeal (Appellate Procedure)

Rules 1990, as contended by the learned President’s Counsel for the Petitioner

in the preliminary legal objection, it was nevertheless, sought by the learned

State Counsel for the Respondents except the 21st and 41st Respondents, to

resist it on the footing that the admitted defect in the statement of objections is

a formal defect and therefore it is a mere technicality and as such, it is curable.

In the circumstances, learned State Counsel for the Respondents except the 21st

and 41st Respondents sought the indulgence of this Court to rectify the same by

furnishing to Court a valid statement of objections of the Respondents in the

shape of a rectified and/or amended statement of objections in compliance with

Rule 3 (7) of the Court of Appeal (Appellate Procedure) Rules 1990 (hereinafter

called and referred to as ‘the CA Rules 1990’.) which was vehemently, objected

to by the learned President’s Counsel for the Petitioner on the premise that, the

compliance of Rule 3 (7) of CA Rules 1990 is mandatory and non-compliance

thereof, is fatal and accordingly, the said rule does not provide for this Court

with the latitude to grant the Respondents to file amended statement of

objections as urged.

Hence, the position maintained by the learned President’s Counsel for the

Petitioner was that the compliance of Rule 3 (7) of CA Rules 1990 is mandatory

and non-compliance thereof, is thus, fatal and accordingly, the said rule does

WRT/0054/2026

Page 15 of 25

not grant this Court power to permit the Respondents to file amended statement

of objections as urged, whereas, the position maintained by the learned State

Counsel for the Respondents except the 21st and 41st Respondents was that

although the compliance of Rule 3 (7) of CA Rules 1990 is mandatory,

nevertheless, non-compliance thereof, is not fatal but curable and accordingly,

the said rule grants this Court power to permit the Respondents to file amended

statement of objections as urged, in compliance with Rule 3 (7) of CA Rules 1990.

In view of the preliminary legal objection so raised by the learned President’s

Counsel for the Petitioner and the manner in which it was sought to be resisted

by the learned State Counsel for the Respondents except the 21st and 41st

Respondents as enumerated above, the pivotal question that would now, arise

for our consideration is whether or not the compliance of Rule 3(7) of the CA

Rules 1990 to be read in conjunction with Rule 3(4)(b)(i) thereof, is mandatory;

and if so whether or not non-compliance thereof, is fatal.

It is an admitted fact that the purported “objections” of the Respondents except

the 21st and 41st Respondents was by way of joint statement of objections with

the averments of facts containing therein being supported only by the affidavit

of the 10th Respondent in as much as no affidavit as such by and on behalf of

the rest of the Respondents except 21 and 41 Respondents had been furnished

to this Court in support of the averments of fact admittedly, contained in their

joint statement of objections as required by Rule 3(7) of the CA Rules 1990.

Hence, the issue that is before us for our determination is whether filing of an

affidavit only by the 10th Respondent along with the joint statement of objections

of the Respondents except the 21st and 41st Respondents, is sufficient

compliance with the said Rule 3(7) of the CA Rules 1990 read together with Rule

3(4)(b)(i) thereof.

It is in this context, let me now, examine Rules 3(4)(b)(i) and 3(7) of the CA Rules

1990.

WRT/0054/2026

Page 16 of 25

Rule 3(4)(b)(i) of the CA Rules 1990 reads thus;

“(b) the Court shall fix the dates for the filing of statements of objections

by the respondents, for the filing of counter affidavits by the petitioner,

and for the hearing of the application; if any of such dates is not fixed by

the Court, the following provisions shall apply: -

(i) a statement of objections shall be filed by each respondent

within four weeks of the date of service of notice;-” [Emphasis is

mine]

Rule 3(7) of the CA Rules 1990 reads thus;

“(7) Upon an application being registered, the respondent shall be entitled

to take notice of it, and file a statement of objections at any time before

the date fixed by Court for filing objections. A statement of objections

containing any averments of fact shall be supported by an affidavit in

support of such averments.” [Emphasis is mine]

A plain reading of Rule 3(4)(b)(i) of the CA Rules 1990 in conjunction with Rule

3(7) thereof, as reproduced above, makes it abundantly, clear without an iota of

doubt that a statement of objections shall be filed by each Respondent within 4

weeks of the date of service of notice; and that, a statement of objections

containing any averments of fact shall be supported by an affidavit in

support of such averments. [Emphasis is mine].

It is to be observed that the learned State Counsel for the Respondents except

the 21st and 41st Respondents did not in any manner, seek to dispute the fact

that the joint statement of objections of the Respondents except the 21st and 41st

Respondents do contain averments of facts instead he opted to admit that it was

so when he clearly, and unequivocally concedes that the statement of objections

of the Respondents except the 21st and 41st Respondents is defective for the very

WRT/0054/2026

Page 17 of 25

reasons stated by the learned President’s Counsel for the Petitioner in the

preliminary legal objection.

Hence, learned State Counsel had clearly, and unequivocally, admitted that Rule

3(7) of the CA Rules 1990 make it mandatory that a statement of objections as

such containing any averments of facts “shall be” supported by an affidavit in

support of such averments. [Emphasis is mine]

It is in this context, let me now, examine the phraseology used both in Rule

3(4)(b)(i) of the CA Rules 1990 as well as Rule 3(7) thereof. The phraseology used

therein, is “shall be” and it is canon in rules of interpretation that the phrase

“shall be” is used to denote something mandatory.

For the foregoing, I am of the my view, that the phrase “shall be” has deliberately,

been used both in Rule 3(4)(b)(i) of the CA Rules 1990 as well as Rule 3(7) thereof,

to denote that compliance of Rule 3(4)(b)(i) of the CA Rules 1990 as well as Rule

3(7) thereof, is mandatory and non-compliance thereof, is fatal and hence, not

curable in any event. [Emphasis is mine]

The view taken by me as aforesaid is fortified and well supported by the decision

of this Court in Gita Fonseka V. The Monetary Board of the Central Bank of

Sri Lanka [2004] 1 SLR 149 where, this Court had occasion to examine the

legal effect of the Rule 3(4)(b)(i) of the CA Rules 1990 and Rule 3(7) thereof, and

this Court had having carefully, considered and analysed the legal effect of the

Rule 3(4)(b)(i) of the CA Rules 1990 and Rule 3(7) held that specially, in view of

Rule 3(7) of the CA Rules 1990, it is abundantly, clear that the rules envisaged

the filing a statement of objection and affidavit supporting averments of

fact as two distinct documents.[Emphasis is mine]

It is in this backdrop of the case, let me now, examine the position so adverted

to by the learned State Counsel for the Respondents that non-compliance of the

Rule 3(7) of the CA Rules 1990 is a mere technicality and therefore, is curable

and hence, this Court exercising its discretion in favour of the Respondents,

WRT/0054/2026

Page 18 of 25

should grant the Respondents permission to file amended statement of

objections in compliance with Rule 3(7) thereof, specially, considering the fact

that shutting out of the Respondents’ case over a mere technicality would deprive

this Court of the evidentiary context required to determine whether the decision

marked ‘P3’ was made intra vires or ultra vires. Hence, the contention of the

learned State Counsel appears to be that if the Respondents are not permitted

to oppose the instant application, this Court has greater burden on it.

It may now, be examined.

Contention similar to that of the one raised by the learned State Counsel before

us as enumerated above, was raised by the learned Deputy Solicitor-General

before this Court in the decision in Gita Fonseka V. The Monetary Board of

the Central Bank of Sri Lanka (Supra) in that it was contended by the learned

Deputy Solicitor-General that if the Respondents are not permitted to oppose the

application, the Court has greater burden on it. Dealing with the contention so

advanced by the learned Deputy Solicitor General, it was held by this Court that

“Gravity of the burden of court is no reason to dispense with or ignore rules of

court. The discretion of court considered in Kiriwanthe's case does not exist any

longer after the promulgation of the Court of Appeal (Apellate Rules) 1990. This

aspect of the discretion is adequately dealt with by the Supreme Court in the case

of K. Shanmugavadivu v J. M. Kulatilakd considering the ambit of rule 3 of the

Court of Appeal (Appellate Rule) 1990, observed that,

" In such circumstances, the only kind of discretion that could be exercised by

court is to see whether and how much time could be permitted for the filing of

papers in due course.

The several cases cited by the learned Deputy Solicitor General were on matters

related to the rules that were repealed and as commented by the Supreme Court

in the aforesaid case of Shanmugavadivu, “The new rules (of 1990) indicate that

the objectivity of exercising judicial discretion, as intended in Kiriwanthe's case

WRT/0054/2026

Page 19 of 25

has been incorporated as it enables an applicant to submit to court the relevant

documents at a later stage,...”

Rule 3 (4) (b) (i) read with rule 3 (7) however leaves no discretion to the court

in the case of filing of statement of objections to dispense with either the

statement of objections or the affidavit in support of averments of fact.

Accordingly this court has no discretion to dispense with the requirement of

a statement of objection to be filed by a respondent in terms of the rules of

the court. There is no cursus curiae or the practice of the court to permit non-

compliance by a respondent of rules requiring him to file statement of

objection and a practice specially of the Attorney General's Department

cannot override or supercede the provisions of the Rules of Court which are

held to be mandatory by the Supreme Court as well as this court as referred

to by the teamed Deputy Solicitor General in all the cases cited in his written

submissions.”

Hence, I would hold that since Rule 3(7) of the CA Rules 1990 is mandatory in

nature and its non-compliance is fatal and therefore, incurable and as such this

Court has been vested with no amount of discretion in permitting any

amendment of pleadings under Rule 3(8) of the CA Rules 1990 for the reason

that when there is no valid pleading, there is nothing to amend for; the statement

of objection of the Respondents is not in compliance with Rule 3(7) of the CA

Rules 1990 to be read with rule 3(4)(b)(i) thereof, as enumerated above and

therefore, there was no valid statement of objection of the Respondents.

The learned State Counsel appeared to have sought to place heavy reliance on a

number of authorities cited in the written submissions in resisting the

preliminary legal objection so raised by the learned President’s Counsel for the

Petitioner under this head. However, it is to be observed that all of them are

distinct and therefore, have if I may say so respectfully, no relevance to the issue

WRT/0054/2026

Page 20 of 25

at hand for; none of them had in any manner, dealt with the legal effect of Rule

3(7) of the CA Rules 1990 to be read with Rule 3(4)(b)(i) thereof, with special

reference to its non-compliance as well as its legal effect that would derive from

non-compliance thereof.

In view of the above, I would uphold the first preliminary objection so raised by

the learned President’s Counsel for the Petitioner.

Let me now, examine the second preliminary legal objection so raised by the

learned President’s Counsel for the Petitioner.

ii) The purported affidavit of the 10th Respondent dated 07.04.2026 is bad

in law as there is no averment affirming that the contents of the affidavit

are of the 10th Respondent's own/personal knowledge.

It may now, be examined.

While conceding, so called defect in the affidavit of the 10th Respondent, it was

contended by the Learned State Counsel for the Respondents resisting the

preliminary legal objection as enumerated above, that the admitted omission in

the affidavit of the 10th Respondent was purely, inadvertent and is entirely,

curable under section 9 of the Oaths and Affirmation Ordinance No. 9 of 1895

as amended (hereinafter called and referred to as “the Ordinance”); and that the

absence of this boilerplate phrase does not mean that the 10th Respondent lacks

personal knowledge for; the 10th Respondent being the very official who issued

the impugned decision annexed to the petition of the Petitioner marked P30 and

submitted documents marked R1 to R7 directly, from the said Respondent’s

official custody.

It is in this context, let me now examine section 9 of the Ordinance with special

reference to its scope and the legal effect.

Section 9 of the Ordinance reads thus;

WRT/0054/2026

Page 21 of 25

“No omission to take any oath or make any affirmation, no substitution of

any one for any other of them, and no irregularity whatever in the form in

which any one of them is administered, shall invalidate any proceeding or

render inadmissible any evidence whatever in or in respect of which such

omission, substitution, or irregularity took place, or shall affect the

obligation of a witness to state the truth.”

However, upon a careful scrutiny of section 9 of the Ordinance, it clearly, appears

that it only provides for a kind of omissions, substitutions, or irregularities

contained in an affidavit which shall not invalidate any proceeding or render

inadmissible any evidence whatever in or in respect of which such omission,

substitution, or irregularity took place, or shall affect the obligation of a witness

to state the truth and as is discernible therefrom, they can be itemized as follows;

a) no omission to take any oath or make any affirmation,

b) no substitution of any one for any other of them,

c) and no irregularity whatever in the form in which any one of them is

administered.

However, it is significant to observe that section 9 of the Ordinance does not in

any manner, contemplate and/or provide for a kind of omission and/or defect

and/or irregularity with regard to the statements that an affidavit may contain

and hence, the section 9 of the Ordinance contains no provision dealing with a

kind of omission and/or defect and/or irregularity that would arise from the

absence of a statement that an affidavit ought to contain and therefore, the

section 9 of the Ordinance has not in any manner, made provisions dealing with

a situation as such.

Hence, the contention so raised by the learned State Counsel that the admitted

omission of the affidavit of the 10th Respondent is curable under section 9 of the

Ordinance cannot in any, manner sustain in law and as such it should be

rejected in-limine.

WRT/0054/2026

Page 22 of 25

However, Civil Procedure Code as amended makes provisions for the statements

that an affidavit ought to contain and they may now, be examined.

Section 181 of the Civil Procedure Code as amended, reads thus;

“Affidavits shall be confined to the statement of such facts as the declarant

is able of his own knowledge and observation to testify to, except on

interlocutory applications in which statement of his belief may be

admitted, provided that reasonable grounds for such belief be set forth in

the affidavit.”

Section 183A of the Civil Procedure Code as amended, reads thus;

“Where any person is required under the provisions of this Code, or under

any other law for the time being in force, to make an affidavit, then-

(a) where the action is brought by or against the Attorney-General,

any officer of the State, and

(b) where the action is brought by or against a corporation, board,

public body, or company, any secretary, director or other principal

officer of such corporation, board, public body or company; and

(c) where any party to the action is absent from Sri Lanka, his

attorney duly authorized to bring, conduct or defend the action, as

the case may be; and

(d) where any party to the action, or where there is more than one

party to the action such of the parties as are in Sri Lanka, or when

such attorney of the parties as is just above mentioned, is or are

unable, for want of personal knowledge or bodily or mental infirmity,

to make the required affidavit, any recognized agent of such party,

may make an affidavit in respect of these matters, instead of the party to

the action:

WRT/0054/2026

Page 23 of 25

Provided that in each of the foregoing cases the person who makes the

affidavit instead of the party to the action, must be a person having

personal knowledge of the facts of the cause of action, and must in his

affidavit swear or affirm that he deposes from his own personal knowledge

of the matter therein contained and shall be liable to be examined as to

the subject-matter thereof at the discretion of the Judge, as the party to

the action would have been, if the affidavit had been made by such party.”

Upon a careful analysis of section 181 in conjunction with section 183A of the

Civil Procedure Code as amended, it becomes manifestly, clear that the law

thereby, stipulates that affidavits shall be confined to the statement of such facts

as the declarant is able of his own knowledge and observation to testify to, except

on interlocutory applications in which statement of his belief may be admitted,

provided that reasonable grounds for such belief be set forth in the affidavit; and

that where any person is required under the provisions of this Code, or under

any other law for the time being in force, to make an affidavit, then where the

action is brought by or against the Attorney-General, any officer of the State,

may make an affidavit in respect of these matters, instead of the party to the

action: Provided that in each of the foregoing cases the person who makes the

affidavit instead of the party to the action, must be a person having personal

knowledge of the facts of the cause of action, and must in his affidavit

swear or affirm that he deposes from his own personal knowledge of the

matter therein contained and shall be liable to be examined as to the subject-

matter thereof at the discretion of the Judge, as the party to the action would

have been, if the affidavit had been made by such party. [Emphasis is mine]

It is common ground that the 10th Respondent to the instant application is the

Controller General of Department of Imports and Exports Control and therefore,

is an officer of the State within the meaning of section 183 (a) of the Civil

Procedure Code as amended and she had therefore, made the affidavit in

WRT/0054/2026

Page 24 of 25

question not in her personal capacity but as a State officer holding the position

of the Controller General of Department of Imports and Exports Control.

Hence, the 10th Respondent is bound by the provisions contained both in

sections 181 and 183A of the Civil Procedure Code as amended in making her

affidavit in question in that 10th Respondent must in her affidavit in question,

have sworn or affirmed that she had deposed from her personal knowledge of the

matters contained therein.

However, it is regrettable to observe that, the 10th Respondent had observed the

statutory obligation so cast upon her by sections 181 and 183A of the Civil

Procedure Code as amended, in total breach when she had failed to swear or

affirm that she had deposed from her personal knowledge of the matters

contained in her affidavit in question.

This is particularly, so when considering the matters of facts affirmed to by her

in paragraph 16 of her affidavit in question for; most of the averments which

contains facts, pertains to the decisions (R1 to R6) not made by herself on her

own but, by the Cabinet of Ministers and therefore, matters contained therein,

are something that is not within her personal knowledge and therefore, amount

to hearsay evidence, admission of which these two provisions of the Civil

Procedure Code as amended, namely; sections 181 and 183A thereof, intended

to prevent.

Hence, the affidavit of the 10th Respondent is not in conformity with the

provisions contained in sections 181 and 183A of the Civil Procedure Code as

amended, and therefore, it is in total contravention of those two provisions

contained therein, and as such affidavit of the 10th Respondent in question is

bad in law and in the circumstances, cannot be acted upon by this Court as

rightly, contended by the learned President’s Counsel for the Petitioner and

therefore, it should be rejected in-limine as rightly, urged by learned President’s

Counsel for the Petitioner.

WRT/0054/2026

Page 25 of 25

The view taken by me as aforesaid is fortified and well supported by the decisions

of this Court in Umma Anina Vs. Jawahar 2004[2] SLR 1, Jayasundera Vs.

Tilakeratne and Another 2006 [1] SLR 309 and International Dresses (PVT)

Ltd Vs. Municipal Council of Moratuwa 2006[2]203.

For the reasons stated above, I would if I may say so respectfully, hold that the

decisions cited to us in the written submissions of the learned State Counsel in

this regard are distinct and therefore, have no relevance to the facts of the instant

case in as much as none of them had dealt with the provisions concerning the

responsibility of the declarant to affirm that the declarant had deposed from his

own personal knowledge of the matters contained in his affidavit as provided for

by section 181 and 183A of the Civil Procedure Code as amended.

In view of the above, I would uphold both of the preliminary legal objections so

raised by the learned President’s Counsel for the Petitioner.

Hence, this Court rules that the Respondents referred to above, which failed to

comply with the mandatory applicable Rules 3(7) of the CA Rules 1990 to be read

with Rule 3(4)(b)(i) thereof, and sections 181 and 183A of the Civil Procedure

Code as amended, are deprived of their right to appear in these proceedings in

opposition to the petition.

In the result, the instant application is fixed for argument on a day appointed by

this Court.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL