1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

Orders in the nature of Writs of

Certiorari, Prohibition and Mandamus

under Article 140 of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

A. A. F. Farween

275/3A, Megoda Kolonnawa,

Wellampitiya.

CA (Writ) App. No. 811/2025

PETITIONER

Vs.

1. Secretary,

Judicial Service Commission,

Superior Courts Complex,

Colombo 12.

2. Hon. Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

2

Before: S. U. B. Karalliyadde, J

Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Counsel:

Farhana Azeez for the Petitioner.

Prabhashanee Jayasekara, S.C. for the 2nd Respondent.

Supported on: 28.08.2025

Order delivered on: 10.09.2025

Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Order

Introduction

The Petitioner claims that she is still married to the brother of a judicial officer, and she alleges

that there had been certain disputes between her husband and the Petitioner. Consequently, there

are certain litigations arising from those disputes. However, the Petitioner alleges that the said

judicial officer who is the brother of her husband, had given an affidavit to the Judicial Service

Commission (herein after referred to as JSC) incriminating her husband, and she had received a

copy thereof. Since the said document is a vital document for her pending litigations, she had made

attempts to obtain a certified copy thereof from the JSC, which they had refused. Therefore, the

Petitioner seeks a Writ of Mandamus from this Court, compelling the 1st Respondent to release the

said document or the connected information. This was supported before us, and the following

arguments were advanced.

3

Arguments

The thrust of the submission advanced by Ms. Azeez is that the Petitioner is seeking to obtain a

Writ of Mandamus, compelling the Secretary of the JSC to issue certain certified copies which are

relevant to be produced as evidence in several cases.

However, upon questioning, it was her position that her client the Petitioner did not make any

application under the Right to Information Act No. 12 of 2016 (herein after referred to as RTI

Act), since certain documents are relating to the conduct of a judicial officer, and therefore, is

something confidential.

On the other hand, Ms. Jayasekara, having vehemently objected to the issuance of notice, brought

to our attention that when there are alternative remedies provided by the statutory law, a Writ of

Mandamus will not lie. Having referred to paragraph 5.6 of the Petition, Ms. Jayasekara contended

that in view of the Petitioners own showing, she is not entitled to any relief sought.

The next argument advanced by Ms. Jayasekara is that having referred to paragraph 2.1 of the

Petition, the Petitioner has sought to invoke the writ jurisdiction of this Court against the JSC in

terms of Articles 111D and 111H of the Constitution, which is totally irrelevant to the complaint

made by the Petitioner in this Court.

Further, she contended that if those documents that are not available to the Petitioner are

confidential in nature, and if they are vital for her case, she should have summoned the Secretary

of the JSC to produce those documents. Additionally, she argued that some of the documents that

the Petitioner is seeking to rely upon to produce evidence in Courts, are irrelevant to her claim

since they are documents exchanged between other parties.

4

Relevancy of the documents

According to the Respondent, the Petitioner is seeking to adduce certain documents in evidence in

the District Court that were exchanged between two parties; namely, a judicial officer who is under

the JSC, and the JSC. Therefore, if those documents are relevant to any case before any court, the

Petitioner must establish their relevancy in that court. Then, if necessary, the learned Judge of the

said court will make a ruling directing the Secretary to produce the documents. Therefore, the

Petitioner is first under a duty to establish the relevancy of the said documents. Even if the

documents are obtained from the JSC, if they are not deemed relevant to the case before the court,

the learned District Judge may overrule them.

The other matter raised by Ms. Jayasekara was that, if at all the Petitioner needs to adduce such a

document as part of evidence that she seeks in any litigation, she can still adduce the copy of the

document currently in her possession. However, when the other party objects only, she has to call

upon the Secretary of the JSC to establish the authenticity of the document. Therefore, such

alternative legal provisions are also available to the Petitioner.

When the documents fall within the RTI Act

Additionally, the Petitioners complaint to this Court is based on the need to obtain certain

documents received by the JSC, which are maintained as part of the record. When the Petitioner

sought the said document to be released by the Secretary to the JSC, he has not complied with the

said request. As such, the Petitioner herself has stated that she is entitled to obtain the said

document, or information related to the said document in terms of the RTI Act. However, if the

JSC Secretary has a duty under the RTI Act to divulge or to release the information that the

Petitioner needs relating to certain record maintained in the JSC Secretariate, the Petitioner should

have first gone to the Right to Information Commission and taken steps under the RTI Act.

5

However, upon questioning, the Counsel for the Petitioners contention was that her client does

not want any other party to know or come to know about the said document. Therefore, it is very

clear as argued by Ms. Jayasekara, that the Petitioner should have first initiated an application

under Sections 3 and 4, read with Section 5 of the RTI Act. As such, the Petitioner cannot invoke

the writ jurisdiction of this Court without resorting to proper legal proceedings.

Conclusion

Therefore, it is my view that no Writ of Mandamus can be granted in this case, based on the

application made by Petitioner. As such, I am not inclined to issue formal notice, and the

application is dismissed in limine without costs.

Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

S. U. B. Karalliyadde, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL