Page 1 of 8

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for mandates in the nature of Writs of Prohibition, in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Warnakulasuriya Wijesinghe Chathura Manaram Perera Gunathilake No. 364 M, Awariwatta Road, Batagama North, Ja-Ela.

PETITIONER Vs. 1. Officer in Charge

Public Complaints Division, Criminal Investigations Department, Colombo 02. 2. Mr. Katukolihe Gamage Saman Avantha Kariyawasam No 171, Lake City, Ja Ela.

RESPONDENTS

Before: Sobhitha Rajakaruna J.

Counsel: Rajeev Amarasuriya, Chanaka Weerasekara with Subhani Hewapathirana, Yohani

Yoharaja, Hana Hafface and Mathew David for the Petitioner

Dates Fixed for Support: 05.08.2024 and 07.08.2024

Written Submissions: Petitioners - 08.08.2024

Decided on: 09.08.2024

CA/WRIT/518/2024

Page 2 of 8

Sobhitha Rajakaruna J.

The Petition and the Affidavit of the Petitioner have been filed in the Registry of the Court of

Appeal at 08.39 a.m. on 05.08.2024 as per the rubber stamp which appears on the motion by

which the Petition dated 05.08.2024 has been tendered to the Registry of this Court. Two

courier receipts dated 05.08.2024 issued by Prompt Xpress (Pvt) in Ratmalana are also

annexed to the set of documents filed on 05.08.2024. Apart from the said Petition and

Affidavit, the Petitioner has filed another motion annexing a document marked X at

08:39a.m. on the same date; 05.08.2024.

The Registrar of this Court sent the docket relating to the instant Application with an

endorsement made by His Lordship the President of the Court of Appeal, directly to the

Bench while the proceedings of this Court were in progress on 05.08.2024. The reasons for

forwarding the docket to Court in such an expeditious manner are not known to this Court.

However, it needs to be stressed that in view of Notice No. 01/2024 of the Court of Appeal

issued by His Lordship the President of the Court of Appeal, all new applications filed on

extremely urgent basis will be accommodated at the discretion of the presiding Judge of the

relevant court and may be mentioned on a desired day only if such application is duly filed

(with proof of dispatch of notice to the Respondents) at least before 10.00 a.m on the day

before such desired date.

It is pertinent to note that the 1st Respondent has been named as the Officer-in-Charge of the

public complaints division of the Criminal Investigations Department (CID) whereas, the

2nd Respondent is a private individual. I have noticed a recent trend where the Attorney

General is not being made a party in Review Applications filed in this Court that seek orders

to prevent arrests. I believe this practice has led to significant delays in bringing the relevant

public or police officers to court to address matters related to the writ applications. This

situation ultimately benefits the Petitioners, allowing them to seek interim relief, such as

preventing arrests, without the Respondents being present in Court. Such a practice cannot

be endorsed to legitimize ex parte applications for interim orders and it affects the best interest

of justice.

Page 3 of 8

The learned Counsel for the Petitioner on 05.08.2024 urged that the instant Application be

taken up for support and an interim order be issued preventing the arrest of the Petitioner.

Respondents were absent and unrepresented on 05.08.2024. Anyhow, the learned Counsel

for the Petitioner expressed his consensus to Support the instant Application on 07.08.2024

after serving direct notices on the Respondents. I have serious doubts in the manner in which

the Petitioner has dispatched the notices of the instant Application on the Respondents via

courier before 08:39 a.m. on 05.08.2024.

The grant of interim relief by Court of Appeal is dealt with in Clause 2 of the Court of Appeal

(Appellate Procedure) Rules 1990. It is mandatory that every application for a stay order,

interim injunction or other interim relief shall be made with notice to the adverse parties or

respondents that the applicant intends to apply for such interim relief. However, in terms of

Clause 2(1) of the said Rules, an interim relief may be granted for a limited period not

exceeding two weeks, although such notice has not been given to some or all of the

Respondents,

(i) if the Court is satisfied that there has been no unreasonable delay on the part of the

applicant

(ii) and the matter is of such urgency that the applicant could not reasonably have

given such notice.

The Respondents were absent and unrepresented even on 07.08.2024 when this matter was

taken up for Support and nonetheless, the learned Counsel for the Petitioner moved that this

matter be taken up for Support. This Court, having heard the learned Counsel for the

Petitioner, decided to reserve the order on the issuance of notice and interim relief until

09.08.2024.

The officer in charge of the Public Complaints Unit of the Criminal Investigations

Department (CID) filed a B Report bearing No. B/627/20 on 19.06.2020 against the

Petitioner in the Magistrates Court of Welisara. The learned Magistrate on 19.06.2020 has

made an observation that no criminal case could be maintained upon the offences recorded

in the said B Report. The complainant (2nd Respondent in the instant Application) has lodged

a Revision Application bearing No. HC/REV/03/2021 in the High Court of Chilaw against

Page 4 of 8

the said order dated 19.06.2020 of the learned Magistrate. The Hon. High Court Judge

delivering his order on 03.09.2021 has directed the learned Magistrate of Welisara to act in

terms of section 124 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act (CCPA) in respect of the

information filed by the CID on 19.06.2020 against the Petitioner of the instant Application.

There is no evidence on record to ascertain as to whether the said order of the High Court has

been read out in the relevant Magistrates Court. Apparently, the proceedings before the said

Magistrates Court have not been recommenced against the Petitioner of the instant

Application after 19.06.2020.

The Petitioner states that the 1st Respondent by way of the notices marked P11a and P11d

summoned him to appear at the Public Complaints Division of the CID on 22.06.2024. The

time gap between 22.06.2024 and the date of the Petition is over a period of one month. The

Petitioner asserts that there is an imminent threat of arrest by the CID when the Petitioner

reaches the CID to give a statement. An anticipatory bail application filed by the Petitioner

has been refused by the learned Magistrate of Welisara on 19.07.2024.

The contention of the Petitioner is that the transaction that resulted in the above series of

events are loans obtained by the Petitioner from the 2nd Respondent, and as such were

entirely civil in nature and do not embody any component of criminal law or encompass any

offence punishable therein. The purported agreement entered into between the Petitioner and

the 2nd Respondent is annexed marked as P8. The said document P8 implies that the

Petitioner has obtained a sum of Rs. 14,400,000 from the 2nd Respondent and it contains

neither a default clause nor an alternative method to resolve the disputes among the parties

resolved.

The Petitioners main argument for invoking the jurisdiction of this Review Court is that the

charges brought against them in the Magistrate's Courts under sections 388, 389, and 400 of

the Penal Code, specifically for Criminal Breach of Trust and Cheating, are not applicable, as

the contested transaction does not qualify as a criminal matter, as determined in the document

marked 'P12'. Additionally, the Petitioner asserts that no criminal case can be maintained

upon the assumption of the learned Magistrate made on 19.06.2020.

Page 5 of 8

It is important to bear in mind that this is a Judicial Review Application. Judicial review

generally focuses on the decision-making process, not the decision itself and accordingly, the

role of this Court is to consider whether the Respondents have exceeded their powers.

Therefore, there should be a blatant error made by the Respondents executing their duties or

any abuse of power or authority in order to exercise the supervisory jurisdiction of this Court.

The only relief sought by the Petitioner is a writ of Prohibition preventing the 1st Respondent

and/ or any officer acting under his direction from arresting the Petitioner on the ground that

he has committed any offense as set out/alleged in the B Report filed in the said Magistrates

Court of Welisara. The Petitioner seeks the same relief even as an interim order to be operative

until the final determination of the instant Application. Therefore, a reasonable question

arises as to what is the substantive relief the Petitioner seeks from this Review Court.

Atkin LJ in R v Electricity Commissioners ex p London Electricity Joint Committee Co. [1920] Ltd

(1924) 1KD 171 at 206 has stated that he can see no difference in principle between Certiorari

and Prohibition, except that the latter may be invoked at an earlier stage.

Although a prohibiting order was originally used to prevent tribunals from meddling with

cases over which they had no jurisdiction, it was equally effective, and equally often used, to

prohibit the execution of some decision already taken but ultra vires. So long as the tribunal

or administrative authority still had some power to exercise as a consequence of the wrongful

decision, the exercise of that power could be restrained by a prohibiting order.1 (Vide -

H.W.R.Wade and C.F.Forsyth, Administrative Law [11th Edition] p.511). Therefore, I

take the view that Prohibiting Orders need to be linked with an alleged wrongful decision

which is disclosed in the writ application.

This Court has constantly decided that a decision made by an authority may be liable to be

quashed by a quashing order if the said authority wholly or in part assumes a jurisdiction

which he does not have or exceeds that which he has or acts contrary to principles of natural

justice or pronounces an Award which is eminently irrational or unreasonable or is guilty of

1 See Estate and Trust Agencies (1927) Ltd v. Singapore Improvement Trust (1937)

Page 6 of 8

an illegality2. The Petitioner has not provided any decision taken by the learned Magistrate

or the CID to arrest the Petitioner. The aforesaid B Report filed in the Magistrates Court of

Welisara is not in active mode as no future date has been given to consider it and also the said

order of the High Court has not been read out in the Magistrates Court. The Petitioner filed

the instant Application after a lapse of over one month from the notice of the CID, marked

P11a and P11d.

Moreover, the learned Magistrate has refused the anticipatory bail application filed by the

Petitioner after considering the detailed observations (marked X - annexed to the motion

dated 05.08.2024) provided by the CID. No Revision Application has been filed against the

said order of the leaned Magistrate refusing anticipatory Bail. As such it is the Petitioners

burden to establish that filling a Revision Application against the decision to refuse

anticipatory bail is not an adequate and efficacious remedy.

The trite law is that there should be (a) a reasonable complaint, (b) credible information or (c)

a reasonable suspicion to arrest a person without a warrant. The said principle is embodied

in Section 32(1) (b) of the CCPA. Hence, based on the circumstances of this case, I am of the

view that it is not this Court but the prosecution or the learned Magistrate are the best persons

to assay the document marked P8 by which the Petitioner has borrowed a large sum of

money from the 2nd Respondent and the subsequent conduct of the Petitioner who has

admitted his liability by making part payments to the said 2nd Respondent. Similarly, it is in

the hands of the prosecution to ascertain whether credible information or reasonable suspicion

exists against the Petitioner. It can be inferred that the learned Magistrate was likely

persuaded to believe that a reasonable suspicion exists regarding the Petitioners involvement

in an offence, based on the observations (X) made by the CID. The document marked P8

cannot be considered as a reasonable commercial agreement upon which the Petitioner could

claim alternative remedies to resolve the disputes between the Petitioner and the 2nd

Respondent. The judicial process concerning judicial review must be approached with

responsibility and should not be misused by filing Review Applications without merit, thereby

2 Also see; Kalamazoo Industries Ltd. and others v. Minister of Labour and Vocational Training and Others [1998] 1 Sri.L.R. 235 at p. 249.

Page 7 of 8

transforming the Review Court into a de facto Bail Court. Judicial review, especially in

respect to prevent arrest or to quash judicial orders, should only be sought where there is a

clear and blatant error in the decision or the decision-making process or when the authorities

have acted beyond their jurisdiction.

In Johnston Xaviour Fernando v. C. D. Wickramaratne, the Inspector General of Police

CA/WRIT/200/2022 Decided on 21.06.2022, I have decided as follows:

When issuing interim orders, we are guided by the Rules of the Court of Appeal and by the

principle whether the Courts final order would, if the Petitioner is successful, be rendered

nugatory. Judicial Review jurisdiction is not a discrete part of our legal system and its roots

emerge from constitutional law which is enriched with constitutional theories. Although, there

are classifications as civil law jurisdiction and the criminal law jurisdiction etc., when it comes

to the concept of Rule of Law, there should be only one jurisdiction. In a broader

sense, Rule of Law means that Law is supreme and is above every individual; no individual

whether if he is rich, poor, rulers or ruled etc. are above law and they should obey it.

I take the view that the law identifies a significant difference between the despatch of notices

and the serving of notices in applications for stay orders/ interim reliefs. There is no doubt

that the phrase giving notice embodied in Clause 2 of the said Court of Appeal Rules always

limits only to the despatch of notices but certainly, it extends to the stage of physically

serving notices to the hands of the Respondents except in exceptional circumstances. It is

the foremost duty of prerogative courts to take swift action at the first sign of any breach of

the Rule of Law within the court. Thus, a petitioners conduct in a writ application, where he

attempts to exert undue pressure on the Court by seeking stay orders or interim relief only

after dispatching notices probably by registered post on the day before or the same day, should

be viewed as a compelling reason to reject such applications in limine. Petitioners who invoke

the inherent jurisdiction of this court must act with due diligence, utmost transparency, and

good faith, avoiding any abuse of the process of the court by ensuring proper service of notice

to the Attorney General or other Respondents in applications for stay orders or interim relief.

Any form of deceptive practices related to applications for stay orders or interim orders in a

Review Court should be eradicated by identifying and addressing the underlying cause of such

behaviour in the Review Court.

Page 8 of 8

I see there is no reason to interfere with the discretion of the CID for the investigation process

as there is no blatant error made by the 1st Respondent or the CID by issuing the notices

marked P11a and P11d and prima facie, no evidence is available to show that the 1st

Respondent or the CID have exceeded their powers.

In light of the above, I am not inclined to issue an interim relief at this stage due to the

unreasonable delay on the part of the Petitioner and failure of the Petitioner to establish

reasonable grounds for not duly serving notices of the instant Application on the Respondents.

In summary, the Petitioner has not acted with due diligence, utmost transparency and good

faith to avoid any abuse of the process of the Court when making an application for interim

relief as prayed for in the prayer of the Petition.

However, I am of the view that the cumulative effect of all the circumstances and the

consequences of the events taken place after filing the above B Report will have to be taken

into consideration when a person complains to the Review Court especially of an imminent

threat of arrest. Hence, I take the view that an order on the issuance of notice and interim

relief should be made after hearing the Attorney General, as I believe the full burden of abuse

of process of court cannot be shifted completely to a litigant personally who seeks an order to

prevent arrest. In light of the above, I decide to fix this Case for support on a date convenient

to this Court.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to forward a certified copy of this order to the Hon.

Attorney General himself, enabling the Attorney General to take appropriate steps to assist

this Court in applications for stay orders/interim orders where no notices of such applications

have been duly served on the Attorney General or the respective public officer/ Inspector

General of Police

Judge of the Court of Appeal