IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal under

and in terms of section 331 (1) of

the Code of Criminal Procedure

Act No. 15 of 1979.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Court of Appeal Case Colombo 12.

No. HCC/012/19 Complainant

High Court of Kegalle Vs.

Case No. HC/3514/15

Pathiraja Arachchilage

Chandrathilaka alias Thilake

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Pathiraja Arachchilage

Chandrathilaka alias Thilake

Accused-Appellant

Vs.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12. Complainant-Respondent

2

BEFORE : K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J (P/CA)

WICKUM A. KALUARACHCHI, J

COUNSEL : Anil Silva PC with A. Bandara for the

Accused-Appellant

Azard Navavi, DSG for the Respondent

WRITTEN SUBMISSION

TENDERED ON : 17.09.2019 (On behalf of the Accused-Appellant)

14.12.2021 (On behalf of the Respondent)

ARGUED ON : 18.05.2022

DECIDED ON : 08.06.2022

WICKUM A. KALUARACHCHI, J.

The accused-appellant was indicted in the High Court of Kegalle for

having committed the murder of Vithana Arachchilage Indra Piyasiri

Jayampathi on or about 12th August 2011, an offence punishable under

section 296 of the Penal Code.

After the trial, the learned High Court Judge found the accused-

appellant guilty and sentenced him to death. This appeal has been filed

against the conviction and the sentence. Both parties filed written

submissions prior to the hearing of the appeal, and the learned

President's Counsel for the appellant and the learned Deputy Solicitor

General for the respondent made oral submissions at the hearing.

The doctor who performed the autopsy and provided the post-mortem

report stated that the cause of death was hemorrhagic shock caused by

3

several injuries to the neck, chest, and abdomen. According to the

doctor's testimony, there were five stab injuries and two cut injuries.

In the "Galapitamada Junction," PW2 ran a boutique and PW4 ran a

hotel. Prosecution witnesses 2, 4, and 5 have spoken about some of the

details regarding the incident. These three witnesses are not related to

the deceased or the appellant and have no special relationship with

them. Witnesses recognized the deceased and the appellant as residents

of the village.

The incident occurred around 9:00 p.m. PW2's home was also near her

boutique. When she was at her front door, she observed the deceased

approaching her and said, " , " (page

33 of the appeal brief). PW4 was at her hotel at the time. Inside the

hotel, she heard a loud boom. Then she noticed the deceased and the

appellant running into the hotel and heard glasses crashing. She

testified that afterward, the deceased fled the hotel and the appellant

chased him. Following that, she witnessed the deceased fall with

injuries a few meters away from the hotel.

In the circumstances, no one witnessed the appellant causing injuries

to the deceased. No facts have been discovered in consequence of

information received from the accused-appellant in terms of section 27

of the Evidence Ordinance. Therefore, the prosecution case is based on

circumstantial evidence and the dying declaration.

Although it is stated in the written submission tendered on behalf of

the appellant that there was a doubt whether the deceased was able to

speak at the time, when the alleged dying declaration was made, the

learned President's Counsel conceded at the hearing of the appeal that

the evidence regarding the dying declaration had never been challenged.

4

In the circumstances, the learned President's Counsel for the appellant

confined his arguments to the defence of a sudden fight.

The PW2 has given evidence regarding the dying declaration. As

conceded by the learned President's Counsel for the appellant, the dying

declaration was never challenged in cross-examination. However, to act

upon a dying declaration, the trial judge must be satisfied beyond a

reasonable doubt on certain matters. Those matters are specified in the

case of Ranasinghe Vs. Attorney General (2007) 1 Sri L.R. 218, as

follows:

a. Whether the deceased in fact made such a statement.

b. Whether the statement made by the deceased was true and

accurate.

c. Whether the statement made by the deceased could be accepted

beyond a reasonable doubt.

d. Whether the evidence of the witness who testifies about the dying

declaration could be accepted beyond a reasonable doubt.

e. Whether the witness is telling the truth.

f. Whether the deceased was able to speak at the time the alleged

declaration was made.

The above-mentioned matters a, b, c, d, and e do not have to be

considered because the fact of the dying declaration being made by the

deceased and the contents of the dying declaration have never been

challenged on behalf of the appellant. Even then, before acting on the

dying declaration, it is safe to consider the matter f because the doctor

expressed his opinion that the death of the deceased could have

occurred within 2 to 4 minutes after being injured. As pointed out by

the learned Deputy Solicitor General, the doctor has given a clear

answer to this issue in the following manner.

5

: ,

?

: .

(Page 83 of the appeal brief)

In cross-examination:

:

?

: .

(Page 83 of the appeal brief)

So, the doctor clearly stated in his evidence that the deceased could

walk, run, or speak within the said 2 to 4 minutes. Therefore, it is

apparent that the deceased could speak at the time PW2 asserts he

made the dying declaration. Hence, it could be safely concluded that

the deceased had in fact made the dying declaration as described by

PW2 in her testimony.

Now, the only matter remaining to be considered is the defence of a

sudden fight. The learned Presidents Counsel contended that the

learned High Court Judge had not considered the possibility of a

sudden fight. I regret that I am unable to agree with that contention

because, on page 23 of the impugned judgment, the learned High Court

Judge stated that it was not revealed in the trial that the act committed

by the accused falls within any exception to section 294 of the Penal

Code.

It is to be noted that even if a sudden fight is accepted as a defence, it

is not a defence to get an acquittal. If the defence of sudden fight is

accepted, the appellant is guilty of the offence of culpable homicide not

amounting to murder. So, if the accused-appellant relies on the

exceptions to section 294, it is his duty to demonstrate that the offence

committed by him comes under the exceptions.

6

However, the appellant has never taken the defence of a sudden fight.

Only the following two sentences comprise his very brief dock

statement.

. .

(Page 95 of the appeal brief)

It appears that the appellant has simply denied his involvement in any

offence.

In addition, it is pertinent to mention that no prosecution witness was

ever questioned about a sudden fight; there was not even a single

suggestion on behalf of the appellant to any of the prosecution

witnesses regarding a sudden fight; and the accused-appellant said

nothing about a sudden fight in his dock statement.

Nevertheless, the learned President's Counsel for the appellant

contended that since there is evidence of a sudden fight, the learned

High Court Judge could consider the defence of a sudden fight. In any

case, the learned President's Counsel conceded that the items of

evidence on page 36 of the appeal brief are the only items of evidence

pertaining to a sudden fight. The following are the said items

of evidence:

. .

. .

. .

: ?

: . .

(Page 36 of the appeal brief)

I am of the view that the aforementioned piece of evidence could lead to

7

the conclusion that there was a big noise from a crowd. This noise may

occur when there is a fight between two or more persons. At the same

time, such a commotion may occur shortly after a crime of this nature.

Therefore, it cannot be said with certainty that the shouting was due

the sudden fight.

In her testimony, PW4 indicated that the deceased ran to her hotel and

that the appellant followed him. She stated that the appellant then

chased the deceased when the deceased ran out of her hotel. (The said

items of evidence are found on pages 38, 39, and 40 of the appeal brief).

Although the appellant was given the opportunity to cross-examine the

PW4, no single question was asked on behalf of the appellant. Thus,

her evidence has never been challenged. According to PW4s evidence,

it is obvious that there could not be a sudden fight because the

appellant came behind the deceased when the deceased rushed to

PW4s hotel and the appellant chased the deceased when he ran out of

the hotel. The said circumstances transpire that the deceased tried to

escape from the appellant. Hence, the evidence in this case clearly

demonstrates that there was no sudden fight. For these reasons, I hold

that the defence of a sudden fight would not succeed. Taking all the

circumstantial evidence and the dying declaration into account, it could

be concluded beyond a reasonable doubt that the appellant and no one

else committed the murder.

At the hearing of the appeal, the learned Presidents Counsel for the

appellant did not point out any other flaw or shortcoming in the

impugned judgment. When perusing the judgment of the learned High

Court Judge, it becomes clear that the learned High Court Judge

carefully and properly evaluated the evidence in the case and correctly

decided that the appellant is guilty of murder.

8

For the reasons stated above, I affirm the judgment dated 24.01.2019,

as well as the conviction and sentence.

The appeal is dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K. Priyantha Fernando, J (P/CA)

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL