IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Case No. CA/TAX/09/2017

Tax Appeals Commission Case No.

TAC/VAT/016/2014

Before: Janak De Silva J.

Achala Wengappuli J.

Counsel:

F.N. Goonewardena for the Appellant

In the matter of a Case Stated under Reference No.

TAC/VATj016j2014 by the Tax Appeals Commission

under Section 36 of the Value Added Tax Act No. 14

of 2002 as amended

Kegalle Plantations PLC

310 High Level Road,

Nawinna, Maharagama.

Vs.

APPELLANT

The Commissioner General of Inland Revenue,

Department of Inland Revenue,

Sir Chittampalam A. Gardiner Mawatha,

Colombo 02.

RESPONDENT

Susantha Balapatabendi Senior D.S.G. for the Respondent

Page 1 of 18

Written Submissions tendered on:

Appellant on 10.05.2018

Argued on: 19.07.2018

Decided on: 04.09.2018

Janak De Silva J.

This is a Case Stated submitted for the opinion of this Court by the Tax Appeals Commission (TAC)

under section 36 of the Value Added Tax Act No. 14 of 2002 as amended (VAT ActJ. Although

neither party raised this issue, we note that the VAT Act was amended by the Tax Appeals

Commission Act No. 23 of 2011 as amended (TAC Act) by the repeal of section 36 therein. Hence

the TAC has made a reference to this Court under a repealed provision.

However, it is well-settled that an exercise of power will be referable to a jurisdiction which

confers validity upon it and not to a jurisdiction under which it will be nugatory. This principle has

been applied even to cases where a Statute which confers no power has been quoted as authority

for a particular act and there was in force another Statute which conferred that power. [Pieris v.

The Commissioner General of Inland Revenue (65 N.L.R. 457L Kumaratunga v. Samarasinghe,

Additional Secretary, Ministry of Defence and Others (1983) 2 SrLL.R. 63]. Section 11A of the TAC

Act enables the TAC to refer for the opinion of this Court a Case Stated. Accordingly, we are of

the opinion there is a valid reference and make our determination accordingly.

The questions of law raised by the Appellant for consideration by Court are as follows:

1. Was the Tax Appeals Commission 'Junctus officio" to make the decision in view of Section

10 of the TAC Act?

2. Are any of the assessments that form the subject matter of this appeal invalid and bad in

law by reason of the Inland Revenue Department failing to comply with the provisions of

section 29 of the VAT Act with regard to the disallowance of the input tax claimed by the

Appellant?

Page 2 of 18

3. Without prejudice to (2) above, are the Assessment Nos. 6895482, 6895483, 6895484,

6895485,6895486,6895487 time barred in terms of section 33(1) of the VAT Act?

4. Has the TAC erred in concluding that the agreements entered into by the Appellant with

the contractors titled "Agreement for Uprooting Old Rubber Trees and clearing the Land"

were in fact contracts for the supply of rubber logs?

5. Would the supply of Rubber trees in terms of the aforesaid agreements be an exempt

supply in terms of the VAT Act by reasons of it being:

a. "Unprocessed agricultural products produced in Sri Lanka" within the meaning of

item (b) (xxiii) of Part II of the First Schedule of the VAT Act;

or

b. "Agricultural plants" in terms of item (a)(xi) of Part II of the First Schedule of the

VAT Act?

The first three questions relate to preliminary issues while the other three questions deal with

substantive issues.

Time Bar in making Determination by the Tax Appeals Commission

The Appellant contends that in view of section 10 of the TAC Act the appeal before the TAC is

time barred. Section 10 of the TAC Act reads:

"The Commission shall hear all appeals received by it and make its decision in respect

thereof, within two hundred and seventy days from the date of the commencement of its

sittings for the hearing of each such appeal"

The Appellant submits that it was notified by letter dated 20th March 2015 that the appeal

preferred to the TAC by the Appellant was fixed for hearing on 14th May 2015 in terms of section

9(1) of the TAC Act. It was submitted that due to numerous postponements of the appeal

subsequent to 14th May 2015, the determination of the TAC was given only on 6th December 2016

which is almost a ten-month delay from the statutory requirement. The Appellant relies on the

judgment of this Court in Mohideen v. Commissioner General of Inland Revenue rc.A. 02/2007;

C.A.M. 16.01.2014].

Page 3 of 18

The learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General submitted that the TAC Act does not spell out the

consequences arising from the failure of the TAC to adhere to the time limit and relied on the

decisions in Jayanetti v. Land Reform Commission and others [(1984) 2 Sri.L.R. 172] and

Ramalingam v. Thangarajah [(1982) 2 Sri.L.R. 693] as well as an extract from Bindra on

Interpretation of Statutes [12th Ed., page 314].

In addressing this question, the fundamental issue to be determined is whether the time limit

given in section 10 of the TAC Act is directory or mandatory. The question whether provision in

a statute is mandatory or directory is not capable of generalization but when the legislature has

not said which is which, one of the basic tests for deciding whether a statutory 'direction is

mandatory or directory is to consider whether violation thereof is penal or not. It has been the

traditional view that where disobedience of a provision is expressly made penal it has to be

concluded that the provision is mandatory whereas if no penalty is prescribed non-compliance

with the provisions, of a statute may held to be directory.

Where the prescription of a statute related to performance of a public duty and where invalidation

of acts done, in neglect of them would work serious general inconvenience or injustice to persons

who have no control over those entrusted with the duty yet not promote the essential aims of the

legislature, such prescriptions seem to be generally understood as mere instructions for the

guidance and government of those on whom the duty is imposed, or, in other words, as directory

only. Neglect of them may be penal, indeed, but it does not affect the validity of the acts done in

disregard of them. It has often-been held, for instance, when an Act ordered a thing to be done

by a public body or public officers and pointed out the specific time when it was to be done,

then the Act is directory only and might be complied with after the prescribed time. (Emphasis

added) [Maxwell on Interpretation of Statutes, 11th Edition, at page 369].

Page 4 of 18

In Nagalingam vs. Lakshman de Mel (78 NlR 231, 237) in respect of a similar situation where the

Commissioner of labour had not made his order within the time prescribed under the

Termination of Employment of Workmen (Special Provisions) Act No. 45 of 1971 Sharvananda J.

(as he was then) held:

"The delay should not render null and void the proceedings and affect the parties, as the

parties have no control over the proceedings. It could not have been intended that the

delay should cause a loss of jurisdiction, that the Commission had to give an effective

order of approval or refusal. In my view, a failure to comply literally with the aforesaid

provisions does not affect the efficacy or finality of the Commissioner's order made

thereon. Had it been the intention of the Parliament to avoid such order nothing would

be simpler than to have so stipulated. " (Emphasis added)

In Visuvalingam v. Uyanage [(1985) 1 Sri lR 203] a Bench of nine Judges of the Supreme Court

considered whether Article 126 (5) of the Constitution is mandatory or directory. Article 126 (5)

of the Constitution provides that when an application to the Supreme Court for relief against

violation of fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution has been made "the Supreme

Court shall hear and finally dispose of any petition or reference under this Article within two

months of the filing of such petition ... ". The Supreme Court by majority judgment held that the

provisions of Article 126 (5) of the Constitution are directory and not mandatory. Dealing with

the argument that Article 126 (5) is mandatory and that even a fault of the court is no excuse,

Samarakoon, c.J. said (at page 226) that:

"If that right was intended to be lost because the court fails in its duty the Constitution

would have so provided. It has provided no sanction of any kind in case of such failure. To

my mind it was only an injunction to be respected and obeyed but fell short of punishment

if disobeyed. I am of opinion that the provisions of Article 126 (5) are directory and not

mandatory. Any other construction would deprive a citizen of his fundamental right for

no fault of his. While I can read into the Constitution a duty on the Supreme Court to act

Page 5 of 18

in a particular way I cannot read into it any deprivation of a citizen's guaranteed right due

to circumstances beyond his control".

In terms of section 8(1) of the TAC Act, it is only a person who is aggrieved by the determination

of the Commissioner General of Inland Revenue in relation to the imposition of any tax, levy,

charge, duty or penalty or the Director General of Customs under subsection (lB) of section 10

of the Customs Ordinance who can prefer an appeal to the TAC. Section 9(10) of the TAC Act

allows the TAC to on appeal confirm, reduce, increase or annul, as the case may be, the

assessment determined by the Commissioner General of Inland Revenue or to remit the case to

the Director General of Customs.

The TAC Act does not spell out any penal consequences for the failure on the part of the TAC to

comply with the time limit set out in section 10 of the TAC Act. If the Appellant is correct in

submitting that the time bar on the TAC is mandatory, it will result in the validity of the impugned

determinations made by the Commissioner General of Inland Revenue and the Director General

of Customs been maintained for no fault of the aggrieved party where the TAC fails to adhere to

the time limit. Such deprivation of rights of the aggrieved party cannot be implied in the absence

of clear and unambiguous statutory provisions. On the other hand, if the failure on the part of

the TAC to adhere to the time limit should result in the aggrieved party obtaining the relief

claimed, the legislature would have specifically stated so. For example, the second proviso to

section 34(8) of the VAT Act specifically provides that "the appeal shall be deemed to have been

allowed and the tax charged accordingly" where the appeal to the Commissioner-General against

an assessment made by the Assessor is not determined within the stipulated time of two years.

In Mohideen's case (supra), this Court concluded that the determination of the Board of Review

was not time barred in terms of section 140(10) of Act No. 38 of 2000 as amended by section 52

of Act No. 37 of 2003. However, Court went on to state that lilt would be different or invalid if

the time period exceeded 2 years from the date of the oral hearing. If that be so it is time barred."

Page 6 of 18

Rupert Cross in Precedents in the English Law (3rd Ed., 1977) offers the following formulations for

ratio decidendi and obiter dictum:

"The ratio decidendi of a case is any rule of law expressly or impliedly treated by the judge

as a necessary step in reaching his conclusion, having regard to the line of reasoning

adopted by him, or a necessary part of his direction to the jury" (page 76)

"Obiter dictum is a proposition of law which does not form part of the ratio decidendi"

(page 79)

Thamotheram J. in Walker Sons and Co. (UK) Ltd. v. Gunatilake [(1978-79-80) 1 Sri. l. R. 231 at

232] explicitly held that the ratio decidendi of a Superior Court is binding for all inferior Courts:

"The ratio decidendi of cases decided by the Court becomes a rule for the future binding

all courts which the courts of last resort are not whether it be under the same system or

under a different system."

We are of the view that the statement in Mohideen's case (supra) that the determination of the

Board of Review is invalid if not made within the statutory time period is obiter dicta. Accordingly,

we are of the view that the Tax Appeals Commission was not '1unctus officio" to make the

decision in view of Section 10 of the TAC Act.

Disallowance of the Input Tax

The learned counsel for the Appellant informed Court during the argument that the Appellant is

not pursuing this question of law.

Page 7 of 18

Taxable Supply of Goods

We will consider Question 3 after considering Questions 4 and 5 as they have a bearing on

Question 3.

In terms of section 2(1) of the VAT Act, one condition forthe imposition of Value Added Tax (VAT)

is that there must be a "taxable supply of goods and services". The Appellant contends that this

condition is not met in the circumstances of the instant case.

The Appellant is a public quoted company engaged in the cultivation, manufacture and sale of

tea, rubber, coconut and other agricultural products. The Appellant called for public .tenders for

"Uprooting Old Rubber Trees". The Appellant entered into several contracts with contractors for

the uprooting and removal of rubber trees. The agreement states that it is for the "uprooting and

removal of trees". It requires the contractor to uproot and clear old rubber trees.

The contention of the learned counsel for the Appellant is that the contracts are in effect

contracts for the sale of rubber trees in situ (i.e. live rubber trees in the natural form) and the

successful bidder has paid the full sale consideration when the trees are in live form and live trees

are "unprocessed agricultural product", which is an exempt supply within the contemplation of

item (b){xxiii) of Part II of the First Schedule to the VAT Act. In the alternative the Appellant

contends that it sold agricultural plants which is an exempt supply within the contemplation of

item (a)(xi) of Part II of the First Schedule to the VAT Act.

In this context it is important to determine the true nature of the contracts entered into by the

Appellant. The substance test has been used by courts to determine whether a contract is a

contract for the sale of goods or contract for the supply of services [per Greer L.J. in Robinson v.

Graves [(1935) 1 KB 579 at 587; Atiyah, Adams and Macqueen, The Sole of Goods (11th Ed.; page

27)]. We are of the view that the same test is appropriate in determining the true nature of a

contract.

Page 8 of 18

The true nature of the contracts entered into by the Appellant can be discerned only after

scrutinizing its terms and conditions. The contractor has to pay the Appellant a particular sum for

each tree which in some cases was Rs. 1500/= and 1340/= per tree in other cases. Furthermore,

the contractor is required to deposit a sum of Rs. 75/= per tree in some cases and Rs. 50/= per

tree in other cases as a security deposit to ensure the due uprooting and removal of the tree.

Where the contractor fails to duly clean the land, the security deposit is forfeited. Some of the

agreements even specify the dimensions of the pieces to which the tree must be cut. More

importantly, in the audited statements of accounts, the transaction forming the subject matter

of this Case Stated was identified as "Sale of Rubber Logs" (Refer Note 32 of the audited financial

statements 2007/2008 and 2008/2009). This, although not decisive, is important in

understanding the true nature of the contracts under consideration as the intention of the parties

is paramount in a contract. The intention as well as the understanding of the Appellant is quite

clear when it describes the profits of the contracts as "Sale of Rubber Logs".

However, the learned counsel for the Appellant submitted that in terms of section 2(1)(a) of the

VAT Act, VAT is chargeable at the time of supply and that in terms of section 4(1) of the VAT Act

the time of supply is deemed to be the earlier of payment or delivery.

The learned counsel for the Appellant then referred to clauses 2 and 3 of one agreement and

contended that they evidence that (i) at the time of signing the agreement the contractor is

required to make a deposit of Rs. 50/= per tree which is to prevent him from defaulting on the

agreement; and the contractor is required to pay the full sum payable in respect of the number

of trees he intends to remove, and he would only be entitled to remove the trees after he has

paid for the full value of the trees. Accordingly, he contended that the supply for the purpose of

the VAT Act in the instant case was complete whilst the tree was in situ and therefore the contract

must be construed as being one for the supply of live trees in their natural form which is an

exempt supply.

Page 9 of 18

We are of the view that this proposition is not tenable in law. The Appellant called for tenders to

uproot and remove non-harvesting rubber trees. Hence, the trees sold have ceased to be

productive in their natural form. Furthermore, section 4(1) of the VAT Act reads:

"The supply of goods shall be deemed to have taken place at the time of occurrence of

any of the following whichever, occurs earlier; (a) the issue of an invoice by the supplier

in respect of the goods; or (b) a payment for the goods including any advance payment

received by the supplier; or (c) a payment for the goods is due to the supplier in respect

of such supply; or (d) the delivery of the goods have been effected."

The meaning of the word "deemed" was considered and explained by Ranasinghe, J:(as he then

was) in Jinawathie v. Emalin Perera [(1986) 2 SrLL.R. 121 at 130,131] in the following words:

"In statutes, the expression deemed is commonly used for the purpose of creating a

statutory function so that a meaning of a term is extended to a subject-matter which it

properly does not designate ... Thus, where a person is deemed to be something it only

means that whereas he is not in reality that something, the Act of Parliament requires

him to be treated as if he were".

Section 4(1) of the VAT Act is a deeming provision to determine the time of supply for the

purposes of section 2(1) of the VAT Act. VAT is charged at the time of supply and as such it is

important to clearly identify the time at which the taxable supply of goods or services takes place.

Section 4(1) of the VAT Act seeks to facilitate the identification of this point of time. The deeming

effect is in our view restricted to ascertaining the time of supply for the purpose of charging VAT.

It cannot be used to establish that the supply of goods did in fact take place at that point of time.

In terms of section 83 of the VAT Act "supply of goods" means the passing of exclusive ownership

of goods to another as the owner of such goods. Hence for there to be a "supply of goods" there

must be a passing of "exclusive ownership of goods". That in our view must be ascertained upon

a consideration of the provisions in the Sale of Goods Ordinance dealing with the passing of

property.

Page 10 of 18

The learned counsel for the Appellant concedes this point in submitting that the Sale of Goods

Ordinance applies to the relevant contracts in relation to when the property or title to the

underlying goods passes. However, he contends that the goods forming the subject matter of the

contracts are specific or ascertained goods and that in terms of section 18 of the Sale of Goods

Ordinance, the property is transferred to the buyer at such time the parties to the contract intend

it to be transferred.

We are of the view that the goods forming the subject matter of the contracts between the

Appellant and his contractors are not specific or ascertained goods but unascertained goods. The

contracts do not identify the particular trees to be cut. It refers only to the number of trees. The

contracts require the contractor to take over the trees that are identified by the field officer.

Hence the goods remain unascertained as at the date of payment and passing of "exclusive

ownership of goods" did not for the purposes of the Sale of Goods Ordinance take place at the

date of payment as submitted by the learned counsel for the Appellant.

Section 19 of the Sale of Goods Ordinance sets out different rules for ascertaining the intention

of the parties as to the time at which the property in the goods pass to the buyer unless a

different intention appears from the terms of the contract, conduct of the parties and the

circumstances of the case. Rule 5 thereunder specifies that where there is a contract for the sale

of unascertained or future goods by description, and goods of that description and in a

deliverable state are unconditionally appropriated to the contract, either by the seller with the

assent of the buyer or by the buyer with the assent of the seller, the property in the goods

thereupon passes to the buyer. In Kursell v. Timber Operators & Contractors Ltd. [(1927) 1 K.B.

298] the plaintiff sold to the defendants all the trees in a Latvian forest which conformed to

certain measurements on a particular date, the buyer to have 15 years in which to cut and

remove the timber. The English Court of Appeal held that the property in the trees had not passed

to the defendants as the goods were not sufficiently identified, since not all the trees were to

pass but only those conforming to the stipulated measurements.

Page 11 of 18

In the instant case, exclusive ownership of the trees is not passed when the payment was made

by the contractor as the goods remain unascertained. The property in the trees can be passed if

at all only after the trees are ascertained by the field officer as stated above.

However, as long as the trees are in situ on land owned by the State property in them cannot be

transferred to the contractor. The property in them can be transferred only after uprooting them.

In those circumstances, the true nature of the contracts in substance is that they are for the

uprooting and removal of trees for the supply of rubber logs. The consideration for these

contracts was the timber value of the trees uprooted, removed and taken into the possession of

the contractor.

Accordingly, we reject the argument made by the learned counsel for the Appellant that the

contracts are in effect contracts for the sale of rubber trees in situ.

We conclude that there has been a "taxable supply of goods" by the Appellant in terms of the

VAT Act in relation to rubber trees under the aforesaid agreements,.

Unprocessed Agricultural Product! Agricultural Plant

The learned counsel for the Appellant submitted that even if the Respondents argument was to

be accepted that the supply could only take place after the trees were uprooted and cut, whether

the mere uprooting and cutting of the tree for removal from the estate could be considered to

be "processing" which would disentitle the Appellant to the exemptions referred to in section 7

of the VAT Act which are available for an "unprocessed agricultural product" or "agricultural

plant".

In addressing this contention Court is called upon to interpret the provisions of the VAT Act to

ascertain whether the activity of the Appellant under consideration is subject to VAT. In Perera

& Silva ltd., v. Commissioner General of Inland Revenue [79(11) N.L.R. 164 at 167] Thamotheram J.

quoted with approval the following statement in C. N. Beatie- Elements of the Law of Income and

Capital Gains Taxation at page 2;

"It has frequently been said that, there is no equity in a taxing statute. This means that

tax being the creature of statute, liability cannot be implied under any principle of equity

Page 12 of 18

but must be found in the express language of some statutory provision. The ordinary

canons of construction apply in ascertaining the meaning of a taxing statute: "the only

safe rule is to look at the words of the enactments and see what is the intention expressed

by these words." If in so construing the statute the language is found to be so ambiguous

that it is in doubt whether tax is attracted or not, the doubt must be resolved in favour

of the taxpayer, because it is not possible to fall back on any principle of common law

or equity to fill a gap in a taxing statute. " The subject is not to be taxed unless the words

of the taxing statute unambiguously impose the tax upon him ". However, this does not

prevent the court from construing a taxing statute against the subject, where that appears

to be the correct interpretation of a provision the meaning of which it may be difficult to

understand. Difficulty does not absolve the court from the duty of construing a statute;

it is only when ambiguity remains after the statute has been properly construed that

the court is entitled to decide in favour of the taxpayer". (Emphasis added)

The Appellant contends that the mere act of cutting or felling trees would not amount to

"processing". The learned counsel for the Appellant contended that the term "processed"

connotes the performance of a series of mechanical or chemical operations on an object in order

to change or preserve its original form and the mere act of cutting the tree would not change or

modify the essential character of the tree and therefore cannot be construed as "processing".

Reliance was placed on the term "unprocessed agricultural product" and the opposing term

"processed agricultural product" used in Title 7 of the U.S. Code, European Union Regulation No.

510/2014 and United Kingdom Consumer Protection Act of 1978 and it was submitted that in all

such contexts the envisaged processing would not cover the mere act of cutting down or felling

an agricultural product such as a live tree.

We note that even these legislative instruments do not support the proposition advanced by the

Appellant and do not have a common meaning attributed to the word "unprocessed agricultural

products". While in Title 7 of the U.S. Code "processing" appears to imply doing an act which

makes the product retail ready, the European Union Regulation No. 510/2014 appears to require

steps such as adding chemicals or breaking down or otherwise changing the character of the

agricultural product.

Page 13 of 18

Hence the legal meaning of a word changes from jurisdiction to jurisdiction depending on its

context and the intention of the legislature. We are of the view that it is unsafe to define a word

used in the domestic legislation merely by reference to the same word and its meaning in

different foreign legislative instruments.

The learned counsel for the Appellant referred to the Guide to the Value Added Tax in Sri Lanka

and submitted that the directions issued by the Respondent defines "unprocessed agricultural

produce" to include live trees, and other plants, roots, branches, leaves, flowers, tubes, seeds,

fruits and nuts of trees and other plants in natural form not otherwise processed. He contended

that manifestly live trees are caught up within the definition of unprocessed agricultural produce

and that the Respondent is estopped from taking up a contrary position.

In terms of Article 23(1) of the Constitution, all laws are enacted and published in the Sinhala and

Tamil, together with a translation thereof in English. Any interpretation of the VAT Act must be

therefore be done by reference to the Sinhala Act as section 84 therein states that the Sinhala

text shall prevail where there is any inconsistency between the Sinhala and Tamil texts and as

the English text is only a translation.

The term used in the Sinhala text for "unprocessed" is "OIz:.:i)9@ @Z5)Oz:.:i)@". We are of the view that

the term "OIz:.:i)9@ @Z5)Oz:.:i)@" is not a term of art as used in the VAT Act and must be given a literal

meaning. In CS2~@dZ5) cs:lO Bocs:lG (ld@{(@z:.:i)J~c:J compiled by Harischandra Wijetunge (2005, 1st Ed.)

the word "oIz:.:i)8@" is defined as Z5)og Oz:.:i)OZ5)t)o c:J25f@Z5)&l eno Z5)O ag@c:JG 636, 8@cs;f~ 2@c:Jz:.:i)C)

ag@c:JG 636, 9~9 @d CDGOO Oz:.:i)d 636, OIz:.:i)Id.

The subject matter of the contracts between the Appellant and his contractors are not in our

view live trees. The true nature of the contracts in substance is that they are for the uprooting

and removal of trees for the supply of rubber logs. The consideration for these contracts was the

timber value of the trees uprooted, removed and taken into the possession of the contractor.

The exemption from VAT given to "unprocessed agricultural product" does not cover the instant

case where non-harvesting rubber trees are uprooted and removed. That involves a process

which changes the subject from a rubber tree to firewood, logs and chips. The Appellant in the

Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 31st March 2008 identify the profits ofthese

Page 14 of 18

transactions as "Sales of firewood, logs and chips". Accordingly, the subject matter of the

contracts between the Appellant and its contractors are not live trees within the meaning of the

Guide to the Value Added Tax in Sri Lanka. It is also not "unprocessed agricultural product" within

the meaning of item (b) (xxiii) of Part II of the First Schedule of the VAT Act.

The remaining question is whether the subject matter of the contracts between the Appellant

and the contractors are "Agricultural plants" in terms of item (a)(xi) of Part II of the First Schedule

of the VAT Act.

In the Sinhala text of the VAT Act, the word used in item (a)(xi) of Part II of the First.Schedule is

"t5)a5ilt5)3b'@t5) oIC". In Cl2-ii@d~ @ro3 BoroC (S;'l@'t@t5)JIl!lc.:l compiled by Harischandra Wijetunge

(2005, pt Ed.) the word "oIC" is defined to mean "alb ~3g<D 1 ~t:l3 (S;'l3t5)c.:l , boB <DO, b't0l <DO

2 Q)d~330 ~03e) 3 8B ado 4 St:l3e), @og. ~. boel, b't0{. Non-harvesting rubber trees of

around 25 feet which according to the Appellant were sold and profits derived as "Sales of

firewood, logs and chips" are not in our view "t5)a5ilt5)3b'@t5) olC" within the meaning item (a)(xi)

of Part II of the First Schedule of the VAT Act.

Time Bar of Assessments

Although the Appellant initially contended that six (6) assessments, namely Assessment Nos.

6895482, 6895483, 6895484, 6895485, 6895486, 6895487 are time barred in terms of section

33(1) of the VAT Act, during the argument the learned counsel for the Appellant submitted that

this position is pursued only in relation to four assessments, namely Assessment Nos. 6895484,

6895485,6895486,6895487 for period June, 2009, July 2009, August 2009 and September 2009.

There is no dispute that the Appellant is a registered person under the VAT Act. Section 21(1)(a)

of the VAT Act requires every registered person to furnish a return not later than the 20th day of

the month after the expiry of the taxable period.

Page 15 of 18

Section 33(1) of the VAT Act imposes a limitation of time for making an Assessment. It must be

done within three years from the end of the taxable period. Hence the time bar period for

Assessment Nos. 6895484, 6895485, 6895486, 6895487 are respectively 29.06.2012,30.07.2012,

30.08.2012 and 29.09.2012 respectively whereas the dates of the relevant assessments are

02.10.2012.

The learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General for the Respondent submitted that it is section 33(2)

of the VAT Act that is applicable to the instant case and not section 33(1) therein. Section 33(2)

of the VAT Act reads:

"(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1) where the Assessor is of

opinion that a person has wilfully or fraudulently failed to make a full and true

disclosure of all the material facts necessary to determine the amount of tax

payable by him for any taxable period, it shall be lawful for the Assessor where

an assessment -

(a) has not been made, to make an assessment, or

(b) has been made to make an additional assessment,

within a period of live years from the end of the taxable period to which the

assessment relates. For the purposes of this Chapter any notice of assessment

may refer to one or more taxable periods."

He submitted that the Assessor had found that there was undeclared value of VAT liable supplies

by the Appellant which was detected only after an audit which amounted to a willful or

fraudulent failure to make a full and true disclosure of all the material facts necessary to

determine the amount of tax payable by him for any taxable period. The learned counsel for the

Appellant contended that there was no willful non-disclosure.

In Chellappah v. Commissioner of Income Tax (52 N.l.R. 416 at 418) Basnayake J. (as he was then)

held that ordinarily the word" wilfully" means deliberately or purposely without reference to

bona fides but that in penal statutes it is used in a sense denoting deliberately or purposely and

with an evil intention. The VAT Act been a fiscal rather than a penal statute, the word "willfully"

in section 33(2) therein means deliberately or purposely without reference to bona fides.

Page 16 of 18

The Appellant did not declare the value of VAT liable supplies by the Appellant in relation to the

subject matter of the instant case. After examining the VAT returns submitted by the Appellant,

the Assessor called for additional information and decided to conduct an audit. It is only after the

Appellant submitted the VAT return did the Assessor call for and obtain the other information

including the audited annual financial statements of the Appellant. In the audited statements of

accounts, the transaction forming the subject matter of this Case Stated was identified as "Sale

of Rubber Logs" (Refer Note 32 of the audited financial statements 2007/2008 and 2008/2009).

Clearly, there was no doubt in the mind of the Appellant as to the true nature of the said

transaction. On that characterization, VAT was payable which the Appellant did not declare in

the return. This in our view amounts to "wilfully or fraudulently failing to make a full and true

disclosure of all the material facts necessary to determine the amount of tax payable by him for

any taxable period". Accordingly, we are of the view that Section 33(2) of the VAT Act applies in

the instant case and the impugned assessments are not time barred.

Accordingly, we answer the questions of law arising in the Case Stated as follows:

1. Was the Tax Appeals Commission '1unctus officio" to make the decision in view of Section

10 of the TAC Act? No.

2. Are any of the assessments that form the subject matter of this appeal invalid and bad in

law by reason of the Inland Revenue Department failing to comply with the provisions of

section 29 of the VAT Act with regard to the disallowance of the input tax claimed by the

Appellant? No.

3. Without prejudice to (2) above, are the Assessment Nos. 6895482, 6895483, 6895484,

6895485, 6895486, 6895487 time barred in terms of section 33(1) of the VAT Act? No.

During the argument the learned counsel for the Appellant submitted that this position

is pursued only in relation to four assessments, namely Assessment Nos. 6895484,

6895485, 6895486, 6895487 for period June, 2009, July 2009, August 2009 and

September 2009.

4. Has the TAC erred in concluding that the agreements entered into by the Appellant with

the contractors titled "Agreement for Uprooting Old Rubber Trees and clearing the Land"

were in fact contracts for the supply of rubber logs? No.

Page 17 of 18

..

5. Would the supply of Rubber trees in terms of the aforesaid agreements be an exempt

supply in terms of the VAT Act by reasons of it being:

a. "Unprocessed agricultural products produced in Sri Lanka" within the meaning of

item (b) (xxiii) of Part II of the First Schedule of the VAT Act? No.

or

b. "Agricultural plants" in terms of item (a)(xi) of Part II of the First Schedule of the

VAT Act? No.

Accordingly, acting in terms of section llA (6) of the VAT Act, we confirm the assessment

determined by the TAC and dismiss this appeal with costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Achala Wengappuli J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Page 18 of 18