IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Case No. CA (PHC) 192/2018

P.H.C. Kegalle No. 5411/REV

M.C. Kegalle No. 9861/D/17

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of Article 154P

(6) of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka read with the Provisions of the

High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act

No. 19 of 1990.

Consumer Affairs Authority

1" and 2nd Floor, C. W. E. Secretariat Building,

P. O. Box 1581, No. 27,

Vauxhall Street, Colombo 02.

Vs.

Atlas Metal Engineering (Private) Limited

No. 571, Kandy Road, Kegalle.

Plaintiff

(M . H. M . Ghouse appearing as the Agent)

Respondent

AND BETWEEN

Mohamad Hanifa Mohamad Ghouse

[Owner of Atlas Metal Engineering (Private) Limited

at No. No. 571, Kandy Road, Kegalle]

No. 434, Meepitiya, Kegalle.

Respondent-Petitioner

Vs.

1. Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

1st Respondent

2. Consumer Affairs Authority

1st and 2nd Floor, C. W. E. Secretariat Building,

P. O. Box 1581, No. 27,

Vauxhall Street, Colombo 02.

Plaintiff-Respondent

3. M. T. M. Shafi

No. 54 C, Sirimawo Bandaranayake Mawatha,

Kandy.

3,d Respondent

Page l of7

AND BETWEEN

Mohamad Hanifa Mohamad Ghouse

[Owner of Atlas Metal Engineering (Private) Limited

at No. No. 571, Kandy Road, Kegalle]

No. 434, Meepitiya, Kegalle.

Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant

Vs.

4. Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

1st Respondent-Respondent

5. Consumer Affairs Authority

1st and 2nd Floor, C. W. E. Secretariat Building,

P. O. Box 1581, No. 27,

Vauxhall Street, Colombo 02.

Plaintiff-Responde nt-Respondent

6. M. T. M. Shafi

No. 54 C, Sirimawo Bandaranayake Mawatha,

Kandy.

3,d Respondent-Respondents

AND NOW BETWEEN

Mohamad Hanifa Mohamad Ghouse

[Owner of Atlas Metal Engineering (Private) Limited

at No. No. 571, Kandy Road, Kegalle]

No. 434, Meepitiya, Kegalle.

Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant-Petitioner

Vs.

1. Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

1st Respondent-Respondent-Respondent

2. Consumer Affairs Authority

1st and 2nd Floor, C. W. E. Secretariat Building,

P. O. Box 1581, No. 27,

Vauxhall Street, Colombo 02.

Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent-Respondent

Page 2of7

Before: K.K. Wickremasinghe J.

Janak De Silva J.

Counsel:

3. M. T. M. Shafi

No. 54 C, Sirimawo Bandaranayake Mawatha,

Kandy.

3,d Respondent-Respondent-Respondents

Sunil Abeyratne for Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant-Petitioner

Nuwan Pieris SC for 1st Respondent-Respondent-Respondent and Plaintiff-Respondent-

Respondent-Respondent

Written Submissions tendered on:

Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant-Petitioner on 04.01.2019

1't Respondent-Respondent-Respondent and Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent-Respondent

09.01.2019

Decided on: 15.10.2019

Janak De Silva J.

This is an appeal against the order ofthe learned High Court Judge of the Sabaragamuwa Province

holden in Kegalle dated 26.09.2018.

The 3,d Respondent-Respondent-Respondent (3,d Respondent) made a complaint to the Plaintiff-

Respondent-Respondent-Respondent (Respondent) that although he had paid a sum of Rs.

21,000,000/= to the Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant-Petitioner (Petitioner) to make a spice

drying machine, the Petitioner had failed to provide him with such a machine with the required

qualities. The Respondent after inquiry had made order directing the Petitioner to return the sum

of Rs. 21,000,000/= to the 3,d Respondent.

Thereafter the Respondent acting in terms of section 13(6) of the Consumer Affairs Authority Act

complained to the Magistrates Court of Kegalle in case no. 9861/D/17 to recover the said sum of

Rs. 21,000,000/= from the Petitioner to the 3,d Respondent.

The learned Magistrate rejected the show cause tendered by the Petitioner and directed him to

pay the said sum against which order the Petitioner sought to move in revision to the Provincial

Page 30f7

High Court of Sabaragamuwa holden in Kegalle. The learned High Court Judge refused to issue

notice and hence the Petitioner filed the above styled appeal to this Court.

While the appeal was pending the Petitioner made an application by way of petition and affidavit

to stay the order of the learned Magistrate of Kegalle in case No. 9861/D/17 to pay the said fine

before the judgment ofthe said appeal pending before this Court.

A preliminary objection was raised on whether there is a right of appeal to this Court against the

order of the learned High Court Judge of the Sabaragamuwa Province holden in Kegalle dated

26.09.2018.

It is true that the present application arose from the application made by the Petitioner for

interim relief. However, the preliminary objection is a matter that must necessarily engage the

attention of Court since in Weerawansha and Others v. Attorney General and Others [(2006) 1 Sri.

L. R. 377 at 385] S.N. Silva c.J. stated as follows:

"In considering the nature and the extent of the interim relief to be granted it is relevant

to advert to the criteria generally applicable to the grant of interim relief. The criteria that

is generally applicable is to be discerned from the judgments of this Court constituting

precedents that date to the judgment in the case of Jinadasa vs. Weerasinghe. The criteria

fall under 3 different heads. I would summaries the criteria under the following heads:

(i) Prima Facie Case

The party seeking interim relief should make out a strong prima facie case of an

infringement or imminent infringement of a legal right. That, there is a serious question

to be tried in this regard with the probability of such party succeeding in establishing the

alleged ground of illegality.

(ii) Balance of Convenience

Under this head the main factor to be considered is the uncompensatable disadvantage

or irreparable damage that would result to either party by granting the interim relief or

the refusal thereof.

(iii) Equitable Considerations

This involves the consideration of the conduct of the respective parties as warrants the

grant of interim relief.

Page 40f7

The prima facie test requires the Court to consider whether the Petitioner does have a right of

appeal against the impugned order refusing notice.

Article 154P (6) of the Constitution reads:

"Subject to the provisions of the Constitution ond any law, any persan aggrieved by a final

order, judgement or sentence of any such Court, in the exercise of its jurisdiction under

paragraphs (3)(b) or (3)(c) or (4) may appeal there from to the Court of Appeal in

accordance with Article 138"

Thus, the right of appeal conferred by this constitutional provision is only in respect of final

orders, judgments or sentences imposed by a Provincial High Court exercising either its appellate

or revisionary jurisdiction. The question therefore is whether the order of the learned High Court

Judge of the Sabaragamuwa Province holden in Kegalle dated 26.09.2018 is a final order, entitling

the Petitioner to invoke the appellate jurisdiction of this Court relying on Article 154P (6) of the

Constitution.

In Sri Lanka, the method of determining whether an order of a civil court is a final order or

interlocutory order had given rise to two conflicting strands of judicial opinion. In Siriwardena v.

Air Ceylon Ltd. [(1984) 1 Sri L.R. 286] the Supreme Court adopted a test known as the 'order

approach' to answer this question. In essence, the test was whether the order of the Court finally

disposed of the rights of the parties. If an order did so, it could be regarded as a final order. The

rival strand of authority adopted a test known as the 'application approach'.

This approach is succinctly explained in the following judicial statements made in Salaman v.

Warner [(1891) Q.B. 734]:

"/ think that the true definition is this. I conceive that an order is 'tinal" only where it is

made upon an application or ather proceeding which must, whether such application or

other praceeding fail or succeed, determine the action, Conversely I think that an order

is "interlocutory" where it cannot be affirmed that in either event the action will be

determined. "

The application approach which was initially adopted by a three-judge bench of the Supreme

Court in Ranjit v Kusumawathie [(1998) 3 Sri L.R. 232], has subsequently been followed in

S.R. Chettiar vs. S.N. Chettiar [(2011) 2 SLR 70] (5 judge bench) and Sc. Appeal No. 41/2015 and

SC/CHC Appeal 37/2008 (S.C.M 04.08.2017) (7 judge Bench).

Page 5 of7

Admittedly, the aforementioned tests have been used to decide whether an order of a court

governed by the Civil Procedure Code is a final or interlocutory order. However, in Patirana v.

Gaanawardena and others rCA (PHC) 15/2016, C.A.M 14.07.2016J the application approach was

applied by a divisional bench of this court (Dehideniya J. with Walgama J. agreeing) in order to

determine whether an order of a Provincial High Court exercising its revisionary jurisdiction

against an order of a Primary Court was a final or interlocutory order.

In Patirana v. Gaonawardena and others (supra) this court had to decide whether an order of a

Provincial High Court refusing to issue notice was a final or interlocutory order. This Court

observed that the order of the High Court was made upon an application by the petitioner to

issue notice on the respondents. It was held that although the order refusing to issue notice on

the respondents finally determined the matter, if the High Court decided to issue notice, the

matter would not have been finally determined. On this baSis, this Court regarded an order

refusing to issue notice as an interlocutory order that did not come within the scope of Article

154P (6) of the Constitution.

We are inclined to adopt the approach taken in Patirana v. Gaonawardena and others (supra)

and determine that the order of the learned High Court Judge of the Sabaragamuwa Province

holden in Kegalle dated 26.09.2018 is an interlocutory order. If the Court decided to issue notice

then the matter needed to be finally determined.

We are fortified in coming to this conclusion having regard to the following unreported decisions

as well. In Neththikumara v. OIC Thalangama Police Station and others rCA (PHC) APN 21/2016,

C.A.M. 2017.08.03]' an order of a Provincial High Court refusing to issue notice in the exercise of

its revisionary jurisdiction was challenged by invoking the revisionary jurisdiction of this Court. In

Abbas v. Brown and Company PLC rCA (PHC) APN 77/2015, C.A.M 03.03.2016J a stay order issued

by a Provincial High Court - being an order of an interlocutory nature - was challenged before

this Court by way of revision.

Accordingly, the Petitioner is not entitled to invoke the appellate jurisdiction ofthis Court against

the order of the learned High Court Judge ofthe Sabaragamuwa Province holden in Kegalle dated

26.09.2018.

Page 6 of 7

For the foregoing reasons, the appeal is dismissed with costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

K.K. Wickremasinghe J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Page 7 of7