IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Case No. 765/97(F)

D.C. Kuliyapitiya No. 11202/L

Before: M.M.A. Gaffoor J.

Janak De Silva J.

Counsel: Yasas De Silva for Defendant-Appellant

Meragal Pedi Durayalage Daya,

Maradagolla Watta,

Giriulla.

DEFENDANT-APPELLANT

Vs.

Munasinghe Arachchige Nishantha

Pushpakumara,

Maradagolla Watta,

Giriulla.

PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT

Palitha Subasinghe with Tharanga Edirisinghe for Plaintiff-Respondent

Written Submissions tendered on: Defendant-Appellant 23.05.2012 and 22.04.2014

Plaintiff-Respondent 21.05.2012,30.08.2017 and 17.10.2017

Argued on: 11th September 2017

Decided on: 6th November 2017

Janak De Silva J.

The plaintiff-respondent (hereinafter referred to as IIplaintiff") instituted the above action in the

District Court of Kuliyapitiya and stated that on 29th April 1993 the land known as Maradagolla

Watta more fully described in the schedule to the plaint was given to him as a grant under Section

1

I ,

i I i I ,

I I I I

!

19(4) of the Land Development Ordinance. He claimed that from 29th April 1993 the defendant-

appellant (hereinafter referred to as IIdefendant"), who is the father of the plaintiff, is in unlawful

and unjust occupation of the said land causing damages to the plaintiff. The plaintiff prayed for

a declaration of title, ejectment of the defendant from the land and damages.

The defendant contested the title of the plaintiff and claimed that the plaintiff had obtained the

grant by misrepresenting facts to government officials. He stated that the land more fully

described in the schedule to the plaint was in his possession for more than ten years prior to the

date of the plaint. He therefore claimed prescriptive title and prayed for a dismissal of the action.

The learned District Judge held that the corpus was at one-time state land to which a permit

under the Land Development Ordinance had been issued in 1955 in the name of Meragal Pedige

Johna, the father of the defendant. He states that 1S of the said land had been given to the plaintiff

by way of a grant dated 29th April 1993 issued under section 19(4) of the Land Development

Ordinance. The said grant was marked as OIl during the trial and the learned District Judge comes

to a finding that the plaintiff has established title to the corpus on the strength of OIl. He has

considered the prescriptive title pleaded by the defendant and concludes that in view of the

Supreme Court decision in Abeysinghe v. Abeysinghe1 very strong evidence of exclusive

possession was necessary to establish prescriptive title where a family member claims

prescriptive title against other family members. The learned District Judge concludes that the

defendant has failed to so. Accordingly, he gave judgment in favour of the plaintiff. Hence the

present appeal to this court by the defendant.

The plaintiff asserts ownership to the land more fully described in the schedule to the plaint and

contends that the defendant is in unlawful occupation of it. The plaintiff's claim to be restored

to possession is based on his claim to ownership of the land in issue. Clearly the plaintiff's action

is an actio rei vindicatio.

134 CLW 69

2

I f

It is an established principle that ownership of the property claimed in a rei vindicatio action is a

fundamental condition to its maintainability2 and the burden is on the plaintiff to establish the

title pleaded and relied on by him.31 will first consider this aspect.

The grant given to the plaintiff has been marked as oIl without any objection from the

defendant. It conveys title of the corpus to the plaintiff. Yet the defendant sought to challenge

its validity by issue no. 8 which reads as follows:

8. @ OI@'&G@G CO@G@~@d' eJdl5)c) Z5)c) en63 ~t)@@ OI@'&(3Z5)c)I z53B o~o)~~ @25)3I63e:l

Bf) c)o@d 253eW3'a'l5i @25)3(s) ~e:l3 gc;325)de:l~~ eQ)3@(S)25) ~I~c;?

The defendant relies on the evidence of the Land Officer from the Land Commissioner's Office,

Kurunegala to support his stand. He only testified that the grant had been given to the plaintiff

on the recommendation of the Assistant Government Agent but he is not aware whether the

Divisional Secretary conducted an inquiry before doing so. He did not state that no inquiry was

held. How can this evidence invalidate the said grant?

The grant OIl has been given under the hand of His Excellency the President. Illustration (d) to

Section 114 of the Evidence Ordinance states that the Court may presume that judicial and official

acts have been regularly performed. The presumption that official acts were regularly performed,

particularly at the level of the head of the Executive and the head of the Judiciary, cannot lightly

be disregarded.4 While I reserve my opinion on whether the validity of a grant given under the

hand of His Excellency the President in terms of Section 19(4) of the Land Development

Ordinance can be impugned in the District Court in proceedings between the holder of the grant

and another private party by way of an issue, I am of the opinion that there is no evidence in this

case to establish that the grant has been obtained by misrepresenting facts to government

officials.

2 Vide De Silva v. Goonetilleke (32 NLR 217), Pathirana v. Jayasundera (58 NLR 169), Mansil v. Devaya [(1985) 2 SrLL.R. 46], Latheefv. Mansoor [(2010) 3 SrLL.R. 333]

3 Dharmadasa v. Jayasena (1997) 3 SrLL.R. 327

4 Fernando J. in Edward Francis William Silva and three others v. Shirani Bandaranayake and three others [(1997) 1 SrLL.R. 92 at 96]

3

,

f

Therefore, the learned District Judge was correct in concluding that the plaintiff has paper title

to the corpus.

There is one observation I wish to make on the written submissions dated 22nd April 2014 filed

on behalf of the defendant. It refers to the case of R.I.B. Jayaratne v. The Commissioner of Lands

and OthersS and quotes the Supreme Court as having held "The impugned grant has been made

by the President on the basis of incorrect entries that have been submitted by the relevant

officers that there has been a mistake". A copy of the judgment was not attached to the written

submissions. I have examined the judgement and it does not contain what the written

submissions claims it to contain. All what the judgment states is:

"Mr. Bandara for the Petitioner submits that the impugned grant has been made by the

President on the basis of incorrect entries that have been submitted by relevant officials.

That there has been a mistake."

The Supreme Court has not made any findings on this submission. Counsel must be careful in

making submissions on positions not stated in a judgment.

This leaves the question of prescriptive title pleaded by the defendant. The defendant states that

he was in possession of the corpus for more than 10 years prior to the date of the plaint.

The defendant is the father of the plaintiff. The father of the defendant is Johna a permit holder

in terms of the Land Development Ordinance since 1955. The learned District Judge concluded

that the defendant had not led sufficient evidence to support his claim of prescriptive title. The

learned District Judge relied on the Supreme Court decision in Abeysinghe v. Abeysinghe6 where

it was held that very strong evidence of exclusive possession was necessary to establish

prescriptive title where a family member claims prescriptive title against other family members.

I see no reason to disagree with the findings of the learned District Judge on this issue.

5 S.c. (Spl) L.A. 150/2007; S.c. Minutes of 13.09.2007 634 c.L.W. 69

4

t ! I

i ! J I I , , I .'

However, an issue on prescriptive title should never have been raised in the circumstances of the

case. There is a fundamental question of law which does not appear to have been appreciated

either by the parties or court.

The evidence is that Johna, the father of the defendant, was in possession of the corpus in terms

of a permit issued under the Land Development Ordinance in 1955. Johna gave evidence during

the trial and the permit issued to him was marked as oI.2 in evidence. The defendant did not

dispute the existence of oI.2. In fact, the defendant admitted under cross examination that the

land forming the subject matter of the action and the land referred to in the permit are the same.

The grant marked oI.1 is dated 29th April 1993 and the plaint is dated 2nd May 1995. The

defendant claims undisturbed and uninterrupted possession ten years prior to the date of the

plaint. It is clear therefore that the corpus was the subject matter of a permit issued under the

Land Development Ordinance during the period the defendant claims prescriptive title, except

for the period between 29th April 1993 and 2nd May 1995, during which time it was the subject

matter of a grant.

Can any person claim prescriptive title to land alienated on a permit issued under the Land

Development Ordinance?

Section 161 of the Land Development Ordinance reads as follows:

"No person shall, by possession of any land alienated on a permit, acquire any prescriptive

title thereto against any other person or against the State."

Section 161 as originally enacted in 1935 applied to land alienated both by way of a permit and

grant. By Act No. 16 of 1969 the word "grant" was removed and thereby the prohibition against

prescriptive title been acquired in relation to land given by way of a grant under the Land

Development Ordinance was removed. The prohibition against prescriptive title been acquired

in relation to land alienated on a permit was maintained. The word "permit" is defined in Section

2 of the Land Development Ordinance to mean "a permit for the occupation of State land issued

under Chapter IV". The prohibition is employed using the word "no person". This term is very

wide and covers both a permit holder as well as a third party. Therefore, a permit holder or any

other person cannot set up prescriptive title against the State or any other person in relation to

5

t r

land alienated on a permit for the occupation of state land issued under Chapter IV of the Land

Development Ordinance. In view of the above statutory prohibition, I am of the opinion that the

defendant could not have raised any issue on prescriptive title given the admitted facts. On this

ground alone, the defendants claim of prescriptive title should have been rejected.

It is of concern that the learned District Judge has lost sight of the statutory prohibition against

prescriptive title been acquired in relation to state land alienated on a permit issued under the

Land Development Ordinance. Courts should be mindful of such statutory prohibitions and it is

the duty of Court to ex mero moto give effect to them even where parties fail to raise issues on

them and not abdicate its responsibility to the parties in the recording of issues.

The defendant further argued that the identity of the corpus has not been proved. His argument

is based on the purported difference in extent between the extent in the schedule to the plaint

and the permit marked 01.2. This is not an issue that was raised during the trial. It involves a

question of fact and should not be allowed to be raised in appeal for the first time. However, for

the sake of completeness I wish to point out that the defendant had raised the following issue:

6. e ~d~Z5)61 01@~<3Z5)61() 6e6t0e:>, ol@~GeG coeG@25)ed eJe515)6 Z5)6 (n~ ~t:le

ol@~GeG ~25)() q.861~ 1OZ5)() qWZ5) Z5):JGc.:l:Q) q@~t:le:> Q):JWJ 6t015)e:> ~:Q)~ ~~e2:)) ~~Cl Z5):JG B:J

q:J~:J 025)15) c.:lCled q8~e:>:JBZ5) GQ):J q1dl'{?

Hence there was no dispute in the mind of the defendant as to the identity of the corpus. He

pleaded prescriptive title by reference to the land more fully described in the schedule to the

plaint. In any event, there is a valid reason for the difference in extent of land referred to in the

schedule to the plaint and the permit marked 01.2. The evidence is that when the plaintiff was

given the grant marked 01.1, it was only for a portion of the land covered by the permit marked

01.2, and that the balance portion of the land was given by another grant to the uncle of the

plaintiff.

The learned District Judge also granted damages to the plaintiff as prayed for in the plaint. The

defendant has failed to challenge the evidence of the plaintiff on this issue.

6

For the foregoing reasons I see no reason to interfere with the judgment of the learned District

Judge dated 28th August 1997. I affirm the judgment and dismiss the appeal with costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

M.M.A. Gaffoor J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

7

,

\ t

I i I I I ,

1,