==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/167/24

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made

under Section 331 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of

1979.

Court of Appeal Case No. Hewa Kekanadurage Nishantha

CA/HCC/ 0167/2024

High Court of Hambantota

Case No. HC/47/2018 ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

COUNSEL : Rajindra Kandegedera for the Appellant.

Wasantha Perera, DSG for the Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 10/12/2025

DECIDED ON : 22/01/2026

CA/HCC/167/24

2 | P a g e

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Appellant was indicted by the Attorney General for

committing two counts of grave sexual abuse punishable under Section 365B

(2) (b) of the Penal Code on Ridiyagama Radage Sithupraba Chamini

Pradeeptha between the period of 01.04.2015 and 07.11.2015.

The trial commenced on 15/07/2019. After leading all the necessary

witnesses, the prosecution had closed the case. The Learned High Court

Judge had called for the defence and the Appellant opted to give evidence

from the witness box and closed the case.

The Learned High Court Judge after considering the evidence presented by

both parties, convicted the Appellant for the second count and sentenced the

Appellant to 08 of years rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs10,000/- was

imposed, subject to a default sentence of 06 months rigorous imprisonment.

In addition, a compensation of Rs.50,0000/- was ordered with a default

sentence of 01-year rigorous imprisonment.

The Appellant was acquitted from the 1st count.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the Appellant

has given consent to argue this matter in his absence. At the time of the

argument, he was connected via the Zoom platform from prison.

CA/HCC/167/24

3 | P a g e

Before the commencement of the argument, as a preliminary issue, the

Learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the evidence

given by the victim did not disclose the act which had been mentioned in the

second charge. Therefore, he had contested that the prosecution has not

proven the second charge beyond reasonable doubt.

The Learned Deputy Solicitor General, in keeping with the highest traditions

of the Attorney General’s Department, conceded that the prosecution has not

elicited the particular act mentioned in the indictment from the victim. In

the second charge, the Appellant was charged for committing fingering into

the victim’s vagina. However, in her evidence, she had only mentioned that

the Appellant had touched her vagina over her clothes.

The charge acts as the most basic foundation in a criminal trial. By charging,

an accused is provided information as to the nature of the allegation levelled

against him. The charge must identify the act committed by the accused and

the law alleged to have been violated by him. Furthermore, the particulars

pertaining to the alleged offence must be specified in the charge.

In Hattuwan Pedige Sugath Karunaratne v Hon.Attorney General SC

Appeal 32 of 2020 dated 20.10.202 his Lordship Aluvihare, J. held that:

“……………… No doubt the duty of a State Counsel is to present the

prosecution in an effective manner to the best of their ability in furtherance

of securing a conviction, if the evidence can support the charge. The

Prosecutor, however, is an officer of the court and their role is to assist the

court to dispense justice. Thus, it is not for a Prosecutor to ensure a

conviction at any cost but to see that the truth elicited, and justice is meted

out”.

The Supreme Court in The Queen v Liyanage and Others (1963) 65 NLR

337, stated that:

“… on a trial upon Indictment, by the very essence of the pre-trial

procedure, an accused person becomes aware of all the evidence relied

CA/HCC/167/24

4 | P a g e

upon by the Crown in support of the Indictment and which the Crown

intends to place against him at the trial. He is entitled in law to know such

evidence before he is called upon to plead to the Indictment. It is a right of

his, inherent in that procedure.”

In the case of Rowe and Davis v the United Kingdom [2000] ECHR, The

European Court of Human Rights held:

“… in a criminal case, that both prosecution and defence must be given the

opportunity to have knowledge of and comment on the observations filed

and the evidence adduced by the other party.”

In the case of Edwards and Lewis v. United Kingdom (2004) 40 EHRR 593

it was held that:

“It is in any event a fundamental aspect of the right to a fair trial that

criminal proceedings, including the elements of such proceedings which

relate to procedure, should be adversarial and that there should be

equality of arms between the prosecution and defence. The right to an

adversarial trial means, in a criminal case, that both prosecution and

defence must be given the opportunity to have knowledge of and comment

on the observations filed and the evidence adduced by the other party

(ibid., § 51). In addition, Article 6 § 1 requires that the prosecution

authorities should disclose to the defence all material evidence in their

possession for or against the accused (ibid.).”

The Facts of this case albeit briefly are as follows.

The victim was 08 years old and was in grade three at the time of the incident.

She cannot remember the exact date or the time of the incident. The

Appellant is her father’s brother who lived in close proximity to her house.

The incident had taken place when the Appellant had arrived at her house

to do wiring. At that time, the Appellant had allegedly showed pornographic

scenes to the victim by using his mobile phone.

CA/HCC/167/24

5 | P a g e

This incident had come to light when the victim told this incident to her sister

who had in return told the same to her mother. The complaint was lodged

on 07.11.2015.

The Appellant had given evidence from the witness box and denied the

charge.

Section 365 B (1) states:

Grave Sexual Abuse is committed by any person who, for sexual

gratification does any act by the use of his genitals or any other part of

the human body or any instrument on any orifice or part of the body of

any other person being an act which does not amount to rape under

section 363…

In Mahalakotuwa v. The Attorney General [2011] 2 B.L.R 406 D.S.C

Lecamwasam,J. held that:

“On a plain reading of the above section it is clear, that the section

envisaged a grave situation which falls short of rape. It cannot be a mere

‘Touch’. It has to be much more serious than a touch and to come within

the ambit of ‘Grave Sexual Abuse’ it must be of a very high degree, so

serious and grave in nature that it can only fall short of Rape, but must

surpass situations expected in section 345,365 and 365A”.

Further, in the case of Yoga v. Attorney-General [2010] 2 Sri L.R. 162 it was

held that:

“To establish a charge under section 365 (B) of the Penal Code the

prosecution must establish that the alleged act was done with the intention

of having sexual gratification. This aspect must be proved beyond

reasonable doubt.”

In the case of Jayathilaka v. Attorney-General [2008] 2 Sri L.R. 117, rape

and grave sexual abuse was distinguished as follows:

CA/HCC/167/24

6 | P a g e

“In a charge of rape, the prosecution must prove penetration, in acharge of

grave sexual abuse prosecution is not required to prove penetration. The

ingredients in a charge of rape are different from the ingredients that must

be proved in a charge of grave sexual abuse.”

In the body of the charge, it is alleged that in order to obtain sexual

gratification, the Appellant had inserted his finger into the vagina of the

victim. However, when the victim gave evidence, she quite notably restricted

her evidence to claim that the act was a mere touch of her vagina over her

clothes. According to the plain reading of Section 365 B (1) of the Penal

Code, I conclude that the act which was said to have been committed on the

victim does not constitute an offence under 365 B (1) of the Penal Code in

this case. Hence, it is necessary to consider what the appropriate section

under the Penal Code should have been considered in this case.

Section 345 of Penal Code as amended states:

“Whoever, by assault or use of criminal force, sexually harasses another

person, or by the use of words or actions, causes sexual annoyance or

harassment to such other person commits the offence of sexual

harassment and shall on conviction be punished with imprisonment of

either description for a term which may extend to five years or with fine

or with both and may also be ordered to pay compensation of an amount

determined by court to the person in respect of whom the offence was

committed for the injuries caused to such person.”

EXPLANATION

1. Unwelcome sexual advances by words or action used by a person in

authority, to a working place or any other place, shall constitute the

offence of sexual harassment.

2. For the purposes of this section an assault may include any act that

does not amount to rape under section 363 or grave sexual abuse under

section 365B.

CA/HCC/167/24

7 | P a g e

3. "injuries" includes psychological or mental trauma.

According to the facts of this case, taking the victim under his authority, the

Appellant had intentionally used force on the victim and touched her vagina

over her clothes and thereby had caused sexual harassment, therefore

committing an offence under section 345 of the Penal Code and not under

section 365 B (1) of the Penal Code as amended.

In Mahalakotuwa v. The Attorney General (Supra) the court further held

that:

“Assuming but without conceding, that the act committed by the appellant

falls within both sections 345 and 365B or alternatively if it is uncertain

as to which precise section of the two it falls under, then he should be

convicted under section 345 and not 365B. According to Maxwell on

Interpretation of Statutes 12th edition page 239 Lord Esher M.R. had held

in Tuck and Sons v. Priester (1887 (19) QBD 629 at 638) …..if there are

two reasonable constructions, we must give the more lenient one”

In the case of Sebastian Fernando v Katana Multi -Purpose Co-operative

Society Ltd and Others (1990) 1 SLR 342 it was held that:

“Statutes which encroach upon the rights of the citizen have to be “strictly"

construed: they should be interpreted, if possible, to respect such rights,

and if there is any ambiguity, the construction which is in favour of the

freedom of the individual should be adopted. Statutes which impose

pecuniary burdens or penalties are subject to the same rule. If there are

two reasonable constructions, one of which will avoid the penalty, that

construction must be preferred.”

CA/HCC/167/24

8 | P a g e

In the case of Wickramasinghe v Attorney General and Another (2010) 1

SLR 141 it was held that:

“Assuming that there are two different interpretations of the words in the

Bail Act, is it reasonable, sensible or justifiable to keep a suspect or

accused on remand indefinitely without being prosecuted? I think not. For

these reasons I think that courts will have to interpret the law giving a

meaningful interpretation to the intention of the legislature.”

In this case, the Learned High Court Judge who delivered the judgment had

not evaluated the ingredients of Sections 365B and 345 of the Penal Code as

amended to consider what the appropriate charge is, to be framed against

the Appellant. Had this been correctly analysed and considered at that time,

the court could have sentenced the Appellant under Section 345 of the Penal

Code.

In Mahalakotuwa v. The Attorney General (Supra) the court further held

that:

“In a case of this nature when the facts clearly show that the accused

cannot brought under 365B (2) b, learned judges should not hesitate to use

their prudence in deciding whether a particular set of facts constitute the

offence contained in the indictment or not. If not, without mechanically

passing the sentence on the indictment already filed they must have the

audacity to act under 177 or 178 of the CPC and convict the accused

accordingly for a different offence.”

As discussed above, the evidence adduced by the prosecution does not

support the conviction delivered by the Learned High Court Judge of

Hambantota dated 30/05/2024. Hence, I set aside the said conviction and

substitute it with a conviction under Section 345 of the Penal Code as

amended and impose three years rigorous imprisonment and a fine of

Rs.10,000/- with a default sentence of 01-year rigorous imprisonment.

CA/HCC/167/24

9 | P a g e

Further, the Appellant is ordered to pay a sum of Rs.300000/- to PW1 as

compensation and in default serve 2 years of rigorous imprisonment.

Considering all the circumstances of this case, I order the sentence to take

effect from the date of conviction i.e., from 30/05/2024. Subject to the above

variations, the appeal is dismissed.

The Registrar is directed to send this judgment to the High Court of

Hambantota along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL