IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

1. Ranabahuge Chithrasiri,

Ambagahawatta,

Kalawana.

2. Udakanda Kankanamalage Karunarathna,

Ambagahawatta,

Kalawana.

Petitioners

CASE NO: CA/38/2016/WRIT

Vs.

1. National Gem and Jewellery Authority,

No.25, Galle Face Terrace,

Colombo 3.

And 7 Others

Respondents

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Nuwan Bopage for the Petitioners.

Indula Ratnayake, S.C., for the 1st-5th and 7th

Respondents.

Nandapala Wickramasuriya for the 6th Respondent.

Argued on : 18.05.2018

Decided on: 31.05.2018

2

Samayawardhena, J.

The Petitioners filed this application seeking to quash the decision

of the 1st Respondent National Gem and Jewellery Authority to

issue the Gem Mining Licence to the 6th Respondent in respect of

the land known as Dodamgahapelessa. Pending determination of

the Petitioners' application, the validity periods of the 1st and 2nd

licences lapsed and the 3rd licence (X21) has now been issued.

Before the 1st licence was issued, admittedly, a formal inquiry has

been held by the 1st Respondent with the participation of the

Applicant 6th Respondent and the opposing Petitioners. It is not

the complaint of the Petitioners that the inquiry was conducted in

an unreasonable or unlawful manner per se. Their complaint is

that the decision taken after the inquiry to issue the Gem Mining

Licence to the 6th Respondent is perverse.

There is no dispute that National Gem and Jewellery Authority Act,

No. 50 of 1993 repealed the previous Act, namely, State Gem

Corporation Act, No. 13 of 1971, but section 54 of the new Act

provided inter alia that every rule and by-law made under the

repealed Act and was in force on the day immediately preceding

the appointed date and which are not inconsistent with the

provisions of new Act shall be deemed to be rules and by-laws

made under the new Act.

The by-laws under the name of "State Gem Corporation by-laws,

No. 1 of 1971" made in terms of section 21 of the repealed Act and

published in the Government Gazette No. 14, 989/8 dated

23.12.1971 (X5), and also the circular dated 29.06.2007 issued

under the hand of the Chairman of the 1st Respondent Authority

3

(X6) spell out the procedure to be adopted by the officials

concerned in issuing Gemming Licences.

No. 8(2) of the aforesaid by-laws reads as follows:

No licence shall be granted to any person unless-

a) he himself owns the land; or

b) he has obtained the consent of so many of other owners as to

ensure that the applicant and such other consenting owners

together own at least two-thirds of the land in respect of

which the application has been made.

This is reiterated in the circular X6 as well (vide in particular page

3 thereof under "Special Matters to be mindful at the Inquiry")

where it is stressed that unless two-thirds share is established no

licence shall be issued.

Admittedly the Applicant 6th Respondent is not the owner of the

land. He has taken the land on lease for the sole purpose of gem

mining from certain individuals claiming to be the co-owners of

more than two-thirds of the land. According to the circular X6, the

Applicant need not necessarily be the owner of the land, and a

lessee can also apply for a licence provided the other conditions are

fulfilled. That is not an issue before this Court.

Both parties do not have paper title to the land (except some very

recent Deeds) and they basically claim title on inheritance.

According to the pedigree of the 6th Respondent unfolded at the

inquiry, the original owner of the land Dodamgahapelessa was N.V.

Appuhamy and the 6th Respondent took leasehold rights to the

land from the heirs of N.V. Appuhamy.

4

However it is interesting to note that the 6th Respondent does not

explain the most important question of how N.V. Appuhamy

became the original owner of the land Dodamgahapelessa.

At the inquiry the 6th Respondent seems to have produced the

pedigree accepted by the District Court in a former partition case

No. 9390/P filed to partition a totally different land named as

Mahagederawatta where N.V. Appuhamy was accepted as the

original owner. However that does not prove even remotely that

the same N.V. Appuhamy who owned Mahagederawatta owned

Dodamgahapelessa (which is the land in respect of which Gem

Mining Licence was sought) as well.

When that central question was raised at the argument before this

Court, the answer of learned counsel for the 6th Respondent was

that the said N.V. Appuhamy figures in the pedigree of the

Petitioners as well. In order to substantiate that position, the

attention of the Court was drawn to paragraph 2 of the plaint of

the partition action (X2) filed by the Petitioners subsequent to the

inquiry before the 1st Respondent Authority.

The position of the Petitioners at the inquiry as well as in X2 had

been that the said N.V. Appuhamy is one of the three original

owners of the land and not the sole ownervide paragraph 8 of the

written submissions of the Petitioners tendered at the inquiry

marked X10(i) and paragraph 2 of X2. If that position is accepted

by the 6th Respondent, he cannot claim rights for two-thirds of the

land from the heirs of N.V. Appuhamy.

In short, both parties have tendered two different pedigrees at the

inquiry, and I would hasten to add that the Petitioners have

tendered different pedigrees at different times.

5

In the decision X11 (also marked as 1R8) taken after the inquiry,

the Chairman of the 1st Respondent Authority candidly admits

that contradictory positions have been taken up by both parties

regarding original owners of the land Dodamgahapelessa.

Nevertheless, he says that despite those contradictory positions as

to original owners, (a) as the Applicant 6th Respondent has

established his pedigree through the partition action No. 9390/P

and (b) the Petitioners claim rights only for undivided one-thirds of

the land, the 1st Respondent Authority decides to issue the licence

to the 6th Respondent (subject to the 6th Respondent depositing

one-thirds share of the ground share of the value of all gems found

on the land).

I have no hesitation to conclude that the 1st Respondent Authority

manifestly erred on facts when it came to the crucial conclusion

that the 6th Respondent's chain of title was proved by the pedigree

established in the former partition case. The accepted pedigree of

the former partition case may probably prove the devolution of title

of the intestate estate of N.V. Appuhamy. But by no stretch of

imagination does it prove N.V. Appuhamy was the original owner of

the land known as Dodamgahapelessa which is totally

unconnected to the land partitioned in the partition case, which is

Mahagederawatta. Therefore the finding (a) above in X11 is

palpably erroneous.

Learned State Counsel appearing for the 1st-5th and 7th

Respondents in paragraph 12 of the statement of objections and

the corresponding affidavit state that "in any event during the

inquiry the Petitioners failed to establish that they had an

entitlement to a two third share (2/3 share) of the subject land-

Dodamgahapalassa."

6

The finding (b) above in X11 is also on the same basis.

Learned counsel for the 6th Respondent also during the course of

argument stated that a party who has only less than one-thirds

share of the land such as the Petitioners cannot object to the

issuance of the Gem Mining Licence, and further went on to say

that such a party has no locus standi to challenge the decision of

the Authority by way of a prerogative writ.

I am unable agree with this line of argument.

I must straightaway say that at the inquiry there was no burden

on the Petitioners to prove anything. Conversely, it was incumbent

on the part of the Applicant 6th Respondent to satisfy the 1st

Respondent Authority that he together with other consenting

owners own at least two-thirds of the land. The fact that the

Petitioners came out with different pedigrees at different times is

beside the point. Even if there were no objections, the 1st

Respondent could not have issued the Gem Mining Licence over

the counter unless and until it is satisfied that the Applicant

together with other consenting owners own at least two-thirds of

the land.

According to the by-laws and the circular which I referred to

earlier, it is the duty of the 1st Respondent Authority to give

publicity about the application for Gemming Licence in respect of a

land of which the Applicant is not the sole owner by way of notices

affixed on the land, at the Grama Seva Office, Post Office,

Divisional Secretarys Office etc. and call for objections if any for

the granting of such a licence. There is no restraint that those who

object shall have a claim for two-thirds share of the land. The

7

objector who has no burden to prove can raise that the Applicant

does not have two-thirds share and not vice versa.

Hence finding (b) of X11 is also plainly erroneous.

Regarding the second part of the argument of learned counsel for

the 6th Respondent about locus standi all what I have to say in

short is that frontiers of writ jurisdiction have now advanced

accommodating even a stranger who does not have personal

interest but has sufficient interest to invoke the writ jurisdiction

of this Court because of the element of public interest. (Wijesiri v.

Siriwardene1, Perera v. Central Freight Bureau of Sri Lanka2,

Jathika Sevaka Sangamaya v. Sri Lanka Ports Authority3,

Premadasa v. Wijewardena4, Vasudeva Nanayakkara v. Governor,

Central Bank of Sri Lanka5) I am satisfied that the petitioners have

sufficient interest to file this application.

I am conscious of the fact that the pedigree dispute cannot be

solved by this Court in the exercise of writ jurisdiction. Nor can it

be solved by the 1st Respondent Authority at an inquiry to issue a

Gem Licence. "The adjudication of disputed title is not within its

purview". (Weerasinghe v. Podimahatmaya6) When there is a

pedigree dispute in respect of a land Gem Mining Licence is

sought, the 1st Respondent Authority, in my view, cannot issue a

licence.

In Weerasinghe v. Podimahatmaya (supra) the Respondents who

were admittedly co-owners of the entire land objected to the Gem

1 [1982] 1 Sri LR 171 2 [2006] 1 Sri LR 83 3 [2003] 3 Sri LR 146 4 [1991] 1 Sri LR 333 5 [2009] BLR 41 6 [1994] 3 Sri LR 230 at 233

8

Mining Licence being issued to the Petitioner (who had acquired

the leasehold rights of three-fourths share of the land) on the basis

that the Respondents have acquired prescriptive title to the co-

owned land. There cannot be any dispute that proof of prescriptive

title by one co-owner against other co-owners is an uphill task.

Nonetheless, the Gem Corporation on the strength of that objection

refused to issue the Gemming Licence. The Petitioner came before

this Court seeking certiorari and mandamus against that order but

this Court refused that application on the premise that when title

is disputed the Corporation was not wrong to have exercised its

discretion against the Petitioner in view of the by-laws referred to

earlier.

There is a misconception that even if the decision is patently

erroneous, writ of certiorari does not lie, if the deciding authority

has erred on facts and not on law and the decision making process

was flawless.

Whilst conceding that the jurisdiction to issue writs vested in this

Court by Article 140 of the Constitution is supervisory and not

appellate, I must state that "error of law on the face of the record",

which is a well-accepted ground for certiorari, can be made use of

to quash perverse administrative or judicial decisions based on

patent misapplication or misdirection of facts.

An error of facts can also be an error of law.

By way of analogy, a question of facts can also be a question of

law. In Collettes Ltd. v. Bank of Ceylon7, a Divisional Bench of the

Supreme Court held that Where there is or is not evidence to

support a finding, is a question of law. And also it was held in the

7 [1982] 2 Sri LR 514

9

same case that "Given the primary facts, the question whether the

tribunal rightly exercised its discretion is a question of law." It was

held in Sithamparanathan v. People's Bank8 that "Failure to

properly evaluate evidence or to take into account relevant

considerations in such evaluation is a question of law." A similar

conclusion was reached in Fonseka v. Candappa9 where it was

decided that: "It becomes a question of law where relevant evidence

bearing on a fact has not been considered or irrelevant matters have

been given undue importance or the conclusions rest mainly on

erroneous considerations or is not supported by sufficient evidence."

Coming back to the main matter under consideration, it was held

in Gunasekera v. De Mel, Commissioner of Labour10 that: "A tribunal

which has made findings of fact wholly unsupported by evidence or

which it has drawn inferences wholly unsupported by any of the

facts found by it will be held to have erred in point of law. The

concept of error of law includes the giving of reasons that are bad in

law or inconsistent, unintelligible or it would seem substantially

inadequate. It includes also the application of a wrong legal test to

the facts found taking irrelevant considerations into account and

arriving at a conclusion without any supporting evidence. If reasons

are given and these disclose that an erroneous legal approach has

been followed the superior Court can set the decision aside by

certiorari for error of law on the face of the record. If the grounds or

reasons stated disclose a clearly erroneous legal approach the

decision will be quashed. An error of law may also be held to be

apparent on the face of the record if the inferences and decisions

reached by the tribunal in any given case are such as no reasonable

8 [1989] 1 Sri LR 124 9 [1988] 2 Sri LR 11 10 (1978) 79(2) NLR 409 at 426

10

body of persons properly instructed in the law applicable to the case

could have made."

In Health & Co (Ceylon) Ltd v. Kariyawasam11 the decision of the

arbitrator was quashed by way of certiorari on the basis that: "No

reasonable man could have...reached that conclusion on the

evidence placed before him. The finding here is so completely

contrary to the weight of evidence that one can only describe it as

perverse."

The conclusion was almost the same in Wijerama v. Paul12 where

the decision was quashed by certiorari inter alia on the premise

that: "A tribunal which draws an inference wholly unsupported by

the primary facts errs in point of law."

In Virakesari Ltd v. Fernando13 is yet another case where an

application for certiorari was allowed inter alia when it was found

that: "The omission of the first respondent to take into consideration

the evidence touching the charge of having instigated a go-slow

is....a misdirection amounting to an error of law on the face of the

record."

In Mudanayake v. Sivagnanasunderam14 the decision was not

allowed to stand as it was the opinion of the Court that: "certiorari

lies not only where the inferior Court has acted without or in excess

of its jurisdiction but also where the inferior Court has stated on the

face of the order the grounds on which it had made it and it appears

that in law those grounds are not such as to warrant the decision to

which it had come."

11 (1968) 71 NLR 382 at 384 12 (1973) 76 NLR 241 at 258 13 (1963) 66 NLR 145 at 150-151 14 (1951) 53 NLR 25 at 31

11

For the aforesaid reasons, I allow the application of the Petitioners

with costs and quash the decisions X11 and X21 of the 1st

Respondent Authority based on complete misdirection of facts by

way of certiorari on the ground of "error of law on the face of the

record".

Judge of the Court of Appeal