I

1 I I

1 j 1

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C A (Writ) Application

No. 362 / 2015

In the matter of an Application for a

mandate in the nature of Writ of Quo

Warranto in terms of Article 140 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

1. N W E Buwenaka

La lith

Keembiela,

Beddegama,

Galle.

2. J K Amarawardhana

8,

Bovitiyamulla,

i I i I

< 'I !

j I I

,

2

Yatalamatta.

3. A C Gunasekara

"Lakshmi"

unawatuna,

Galle.

4. J K Wijesingha

48-10A,

Mai n Street,

Ambalangoda.

5. H L Prasanna Deepthilal

60/1/1,

Viskam Road,

Galle.

PETITIONERS

-Vs-

" I , i 1 1 i

J I t " J 1 I

~ 1 ~ j 'I I I 1 I t ! I 4 " ~

~t

~ I i 1 " I > J I I I I 1 i I j I 1 1 ! i l 1

.~ I i " I

1 1 , i

j 1 i i 1 J

~ I l

3

1. Geetha

Kumarasinghe,

No.2,

Samanmali

Temple Road,

Nawala,

Rajagiriya.

2. M N Ranasinghe,

Controller General

Immigration and Emigration,

of

Department of Immigration

and Emigration,

41,

Ananda Rajakaruna Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

3. Mahinda Amaraweera

Secretary,

United People's Freedom

Alliance,

\

Before:

4

301,

T B Jaya Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

4. Dhammika Dasanayake,

Secretary General of

Parliament,

Parliament of Sri Lanka,

Sri Jayawardhanapura,

Kotte.

RESPONDENTS

Vijith K Malalgoda PC J (PICA)

P Padman Surasena J

Counsel: ] C Weliamuna for the Petitioners.

Manohara De Silva PC for the 1st Respondent.

,

5

Janak De Silva DSG with Suranga Wimalasena sse for the 2nd

and 4th Respondents.

Argued on:

2016-07-26, 2017-01-17, 2017-01-24, 2017-02-07, 2017-03-14.

Written Submissions tendered on: 2017-04-05.

Decided on: 2017 - 05 - 03.

JUDGMENT

P Padman Surasena J

1. BACK GROUND

The Petitioners in this application, being citizens of Sri Lanka, have

challenged the 1st Respondent to show by what authority she claims to

hold office as a Member of Parliament. The said challenge is on the basis

that she is not qualified to hold office as a Member of Parliament as she is

a holder of a dual citizenship. (Le. citizenships of both Sri Lanka and

Switzerland) .

,

6

2. PRAYERS

It is on the above footing that the Petitioners in this application have

prayed inter alia for;

i. A mandate in the nature of a writ of quo warranto requiring the 1st

Respondent to show by what authority she claims to hold office as a

Member of Parliament;

ii. A mandate in the nature of a writ of quo warranto declaring that the

1 st Respondent is disqualified to be a Member of Parliament and thus

not entitled to hold office as a Member of Parliament;

iii. A direction on the 2nd Respondent Controller General of Immigration

and Emigration to submit before this Court, all documentation

relating to the 1st Respondent's citizenship status, including the

relevant Register of Dual Citizenship as at 2015-08-17 and 2015-09-

i I

01 ,

iv. Costs and other reliefs this Court shall seem fit.

3. ARGUMENTS FOR THE PETITIONER

,

7

The 1st Respondent has been elected as a Member of Parliament by the

Parliamentary Election held on 2015-08-17 and had subsequently taken

oa'ths as a Member of Parliament before the Speaker on 2015.09.01.

It is the submission of the learned counsel for the Petitioners that the 1st

Respondent is a holder of a dual citizenship i.e. the citizenship of Sri Lanka

as well as that of Switzerland, and that she had not divulged her dual

citizenship at the time of submission of her nominations for the said

election. It is the contention of the learned counsel for the Petitioners that

the 1st Respondent is therefore not qualified to hold office as a Member of

Parliament and/or to sit and vote in Parliament by virtue of Article

91(1)(d)(xiii) of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka (hereinafter sometimes be referred to as the Constitution).

4. ARGUMENTS FOR THE 1ST RESPONDENT

The arguments advanced by the learned President's Counsel in reply to the

contentions put forward by the Petitioners could broadly be categorized

under five headings. They are as follows;

,

8

i. That the Court of Appeal has no jurisdiction to quash the election of

the 1 st Respondent.

ii. That the election of a Member of Parliament can be challenged only

by way of an Election Petition.

iii. That the Petitioners have no locus standi to file an election petition or

to seek judicial review.

iv. That no Court has jurisdiction to impeach or question proceedings of

Parliament.

v. That the Petitioners have failed to establish before this Court that

the 1st Respondent is a holder of a dual Citizenship at the material

time.

5. TASK

The task of this Court in the backdrop of the above arguments primarily

becomes three fold. This Court has to first go into the question whether it

has jurisdiction to go into the matter in its hand!. If this Court answers that

question in the affirmative, then this Court has to embark on the second

task of ascertaining whether the Petitioners have the requisite locus standi

1 i.e. arguments No. I, II, & IV above mentioned, put forward on behalf of the 1st Respondent.

! \ I ! . ! i I I I ! I I I ! ! I !

I

! I I I , I I i I I i I I I

9

to file this application2 If this Court holds that they indeed do, then this

Court has to move on to the final phase of ascertaining whether there is

sufficient ground to issue a writ of quo warranto as prayed for by the

Petitioners3.

6. ANALYSIS OF ARGUMENTS

THE ARGUMENT THAT THE COURT OF APPEAL HAS NO JURISDICTION TO

QUASH THE ELECTION OF THE 1 Sf RESPONDENT.

With regard to this argument it is the submission of the learned President's

Counsel on behalf of the 1st Respondent,

i. that it would be necessary for this Court to quash the declaration

made by the Commissioner of Elections produced marked P 4 if this

Court is to declare that the election of the 1st Respondent is null and

void,

ii. that in terms of the transitional provision 49 (3) (c) in the 19th

amendment to the Constitution, 'any decision or order made or ruling

given by the Commissioner of Elections under any written law prior to

2 i.e. arguments No. III, above mentioned, put forward on behalf of the 1st Respondent.

3 i.e. arguments No. V, above mentioned, put forward on behalf of the 1st Respondent.

\

10

the date on which the Election Commission is constituted under

Article 103, shall be deemed, with effect from the date on which the

Election Commission is constituted, to be a decision or order made or

a ruling given, by the Election Commission,

iii. that therefore the declaration marked P 4 made by the Commissioner

of Elections under section 62 of the Parliamentary Elections Act being

deemed to be a decision of the Election Commission, can only be

quashed by the Supreme Court and not by the Court of Appeal.

First and foremost, it must be stressed here that this is not a proceeding in

which the Petitioners have prayed for a writ of certiorari to quash the said

declaration made by the Commissioner of Elections. However since the

learned President's Counsel for the 1st Respondent has placed reliance on

Article 104 H of the Constitution, this Court will proceed to consider its

content which is to the following effect.

Article 104 H

" ... The jurisdiction conferred on the Court of Appeal under Article 140 of

the Constitution shall, in relation to any matter that may arise in the

f I

t i J

J

f t ! I I

r t I

IIi , ! l f 1 I

~ ! II

f ! ! t

,

11

exercise by the Commission of the powers conferred on it by the

Constitution or by any other law, be exercised by the Supreme Court . ... "

A closer look at the above Article would show that for that Article to apply

two basic requirements must exist. They are as follows.

i. It must be an occasion in which the Court of Appeal is required to

exercise jurisdiction under Article 140.

ii. That occasion must be in relation to any matter that has arisen in the

exercise by the Commission4 of the powers conferred on it by the

Constitution or by any other law.

It must be observed that Article 104 H has been brought in to the

Constitution by its seventeenth amendment. It is an Article in Chapter XIV

A which was inserted afresh into the Constitution by its seventeenth

amendment. It must be borne in mind that the primary purpose of this

chapter is to establish an Election Commission which is required under

Article 104 B of the Constitution to exerCise, perform, discharge all such

powers, duties and functions conferred, imposed on or assigned to the said

Commission or to the Commissioner General of Elections by the

4 In terms of transitional provision 49 (3) (c) in the 19th amendment to the Constitution decisions of Commissioner of Elections referred to therein, shall be deemed, to be a decision of the Election Commission.

II

II

t

IiI

J F

~ II

,

12

Constitution, and by the law for the time being relating to the election of

the President, the election of Members of Parliament, the election of

Members of Provincial Councils, the election of local authorities and the

conduct of referenda, including but not limited to all the powers, duties and

functions relating to the preparation and revision of registers of electors for

the purpose of such elections and referenda and the conduct of such

elections and referenda. Thus it is the duty of this Commission to enforce

all laws relating to holding of any such election or the conduct of any such

referenda, as has been specifically mentioned in Article 104 B (2). It is

quite logical for the Constitution to have shifted the writ jurisdiction of the

Court of Appeal to the apex Court of the land having regard to the

important, decisive and unique nature of the crucial powers vested in the

Election Commission.

It is important to remember that the Petitioners in this application have not

impugned any matter arising in the exercise of powers by the Election

Commission or by the Commissioner of Elections which could have

attracted the application of Article 104 H of the Constitution. Neither the

Election Commission nor its members nor the CommiSSioner General of

Elections are respondents in this case. The complaint of the Petitioners is

J t I

f f I !

13

not regarding any exercise of powers by the Election Commission or by the

Commissioner of Elections (which would generally come to an end with the

conclusion of the relevant election), but regarding an absolute

disqualification that the Constitution has imposed to prevent any person

with such disqualification from continuing to hold office as a Member of

Parliament. Therefore it is the view of this Court that the contention on

behalf of the 1st Respondent that this Court ceases to have jurisdiction to

hear the matter in hand lacks any legal basis and that Article 104 H of the

Constitution has no application to this case.

Further, the above argument even runs counter to another position taken

up on behalf of the 1st Respondent that the proper way to challenge the

election of the 1st Respondent is to file an election petition in the Court of

Appeal. It is the Court of Appeal which is charged with the jurisdiction to

hear Election Petitions as has been provided for in section 93 of the

Parliamentary Elections Act and Article 144 of the Constitution.

Therefore it does not stand to reason to declare as alleged in the written

submissionS of the 1st Respondent that the petitioners are attempting to do

what they cannot do directly since it is anyway the Court of Appeal which

5 3rd paragraph in page S of the written submission filed by the 1st Respondent.

\

14

has jurisdiction to decide on the election petitions under Parliamentary

Elections Act.

THE ARGUMENT THAT THE ELECTION OF A MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT

CAN BE CHALLENGED ONLY BY WAY OF AN ELECTION PETITION.

Learned President's Counsel on behalf of the 1st Respondent drew the

attention of this court to section 92 (2) (d) and 93 of the Parliamentary

Elections Act and Article 144 of the Constitution.

Section 92(2) provides that the election of a candidate as a Member shall

be declared to be void on an election petition on any of the grounds

mentioned therein, which may be proved to the satisfaction of the election

judge. One such ground is that the candidate was at the time of his

election a person disqualified for election as a Member6

Section 93 of the Parliamentary Elections Act provides that every Election

Petition shall be tried by the Court of Appeal in terms of Article 144 of the

Constitution.

6 section 92(2)(d) of the Parliamentary Elections Act

I

\

. 15

Article 144 of the Constitution states that 'The Court of Appeal shall have

and exercise jurisdiction to try election petitions in respect of the election

to' the membership of Parliament in terms of any law for the time being

applicable in that behalf'.

It is on that basis that the learned President's Counsel for the 1st

Respondent submitted that when a specific procedure is laid down that

specific procedure and no other must be followed.

It would be important to bear in mind that the legal regime governing

judicial review is different from that of the other actions which are regular

in nature.

Article 144 of the Constitution has m~rely conferred forum jurisdiction to

the Court of Appeal to try election petitions. However all the other

questions such as the Place of trial of an election petition, as to who may

present such election petition, as to what reliefs could be claimed, as to

who should be made parties to such a petition, the contents of such

election petition, special provisions relating to the procedure to be followed

before an Election Judge and also as to what could be determined by an

I f t If I If t I

~ I ,I

r { t " f I! IIi , r !

,

16

Election Judge are governed by the various provisions in the Parliamentary

Elections Act which is an ordinary statute.

In contrast, the writ jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal is exclusively

governed by Article 140 of the Constitution. It does not depend on any

other statute and thus is not subject to any other law. The following is an

instance where this issue became the subject matter of discussion before

the Supreme Court.

The Supreme Court in the case of Atapattu and others Vs. People's Bank

and others7, having considered the issue whether the powers vested under

Article 140 of the Constitution could be diminished by a provision in the

ordinary law stated as follows;

" ..... The position is the same in regard to Article 140: the language used is

broad enough to give the Court of Appeal authority to review, even on

grounds excluded by the ouster clause.

But there is one difference between those Articles and Article 140. Article

140 (unlike Article 126) is "subject to the provisions of the Constitution". Is

that enough to reverse the position, so as to make Article 140 subject to

7 1997 (1) S L R 208.

i i I I I I I r ,I f

17

the written laws which Article 168(1) keeps in force? Apart from any other

consideration, if it became necessary to decide which was to prevail- an

ouster clause in an ordinary law or a Constitutional provision conferring

writ jurisdiction on a Superior Court, "subject to the provisions of the

Constitution" - I would unhesitatingly hold that the latter prevails, because

the presumption must always be in favour of a jurisdiction which enhances

the protection of the Rule of law, and against an ouster clause which tends

to undermine it. .... "

The Supreme Court in that case held that the phrase "subject to the

provisions of the Constitution" in Article 140 of the Constitution refers only

to contrary provisions in the constitution itself, and does not extend to

subject the Article 140 to the provisions of other written laws. As has been

said by the Supreme Court in that judgment where the Constitution

contemplated that its provisions should be subjected to the provisions of

ordinary law it has specified it in terms such as "subject to any law" like

that appears in Article 138. Thus the power that Article" 140 vests in this

Court cannot and should not be restricted by the provisions of the

Parliamentary Elections Act.

It f I

1 . I

18

Indeed this Court in the case of Dilan Perera Vs. Rajitha Senaratne8 held

that a writ of quo warranto lies to call upon a person to show by what

authority he claims to hold a questionable office. This Court having

considered this issue stated in its judgment as follows;

" ... .In this application question has been raised on behalf of the 1st

respondent with regard to the Locus Standi of the petitioner to file this

application. It is to be observed that quo warranto is a remedy available to

call upon a person to show by what authority he claims to hold such office.

Therefore the basic purpose of the writ is to determine whether the holder

of a public office is legally entitled to that office. If a person is disqualified

by law to hold statutory office the writ is available to oust him. Vide

Gunasekera Vs. Wijesinghe. This writ would not be issued unless the

statute itself clearly disentitles a person from holding such office. Vide

Martin Perera Vs. Madadombe. In Mandamus the petitioner must show that

he is a person aggrieved but this requirement is not necessary in quo

warranto, since this writ seeks to prevent an occupier or a usurper of an

office of public nature from continuing in that position. Therefore in these

proceedings it would appear that any person can challenge the validity of

8 2000 (2) 5 L R 79.

19

an appointment to a public office irrespective of whether any fundamental

or other legal right of that person is infringed or not. But the Court must be

satisfied that the person so applying is bona fide in his application and that

there is a necessity in public interest to declare judicially that there is an

usurpation of public office. On the contrary, if the applicant concerned is

not bona fide in his application, he cannot claim this remedy. Even though

the applicant may not be an aspirant to the office, nor he has any interest

in the appointment, he can still apply as an ordinary citizen. A member of a

municipal body or a mere rate payer can challenge the right of a member

to sit as a member in a municipality. Any person though not personally

interested in the results of an election can apply for the writ of quo

t " 9 warran o ... ,

In the instant case the petitioners are citizens of this country.

It is to be noted that the disqualification set out in Article 91 (1) (b) (xiii) is

a disqualification specifically brought in by the 19th amendment to the

Constitution. A closer look at the commencement of the said Article makes

9 Please note that this excerpt would be relevant to the discussion of the next argument put forward by the 1st

Respondent regarding locus standi of the Petitioners.

i I II

~ t I I ,

~-i I

,

20

it clear that a person could become disqualified subsequently also. This is

evident from Article 66 of the Constitution also. It has provided that;

The seat of a Member of Parliament shall become vacant;

a .....

b .....

c .....

d. If he becomes subject to any disqualification specified in Article 89 or

91

e ..... ..

f ......

g. If his election as a member is declared void under the law in force for

the time being

h .....

Section 108 of the Parliamentary Elections Act stipulates that;

(1) Every election petition shall be presented within twenty-one days of

the date of publication of the result of the election in the Gazette:

i l

J II I

t i t , I i I I I !,

f

,

21

(2) An election petition presented in due time may, for the purpose of

questioning the return or the election upon an allegation of a corrupt or

illegal practice, be amended with the leave of the Election Judge within the

time within which an election petition questioning the return or the election

upon that ground may be presented.

Therefore it is clear that no one is able to challenge any person who usurps

public office in violation of the Constitution after the above time limit. In

any case filing of election petition could only be done by the persons

referred to in section 95 of the Parliamentary Elections Act and no other.

The question that arises here as to what course of action is available to

oust a person who would become disqualified after the lapse of the above

time limits specified in the Parliamentary Elections Act.

It is the submission of the learned President's Counsel for the 1st

Respondent that in such a situation all what the law provides for, is for the

Attorn~y General to institute an action under Article 100 of the Constitution

to recover Rs. 500/= per day of such sittings by such usurper.

Article 100 of the Constitution is as follows;

"Any person who

,

22

a) Having been elected a Member of Parliament but not having been

at the time of such election qualified to be so elected, shall sit and

vote in Parliament; or

b) Shall sit or vote in Parliament after his seat therein has become

vacant or he has become disqualified from sitting or voting

therein,

Knowing or having reasonable grounds for knowing that he was so

disqualified or that his seat has become vacant, as the case may be, shall

be liable to a penalty of five hundred rupees for every day upon which he

so sits or votes to be recovered as a debt due to the Republic by an action

instituted by the Attorney General in the District Court of Colombo. "

Parliament is the most crucial cornerstone of the very foundation of the

constitution. It is the frontrunner institution charged with protecting and

upholding the inalienable sovereignty of people of this country.

This Court is unable to agree with the submission of the learned President's

Counsel that the law provides for a person who Knowing or having

reasonable grounds for knowing that his seat therein has become vacant or

he has become disqualified from sitting or voting therein, to continue to sit

[ ! I i t

~ I t I i t

f I

f I I II I f t f I II

,

23

and vote in Parliament unabated even when everyone else is aware that

such person is not entitled to sit or vote as a Member of Parliament.

This Court does not think that it requires to give some more reasoning to

justify its refusal to accept the said argument of the 1st Respondent due to

its obvious absurdity.

In these circumstances this Court is unable to hold that the power vested

in this Court by virtue of Article 140 of the Constitution cannot be applied

to oust any person who usurp the public office in violation of Constitutional

requirements and continue to function as Members of Parliament.

The case law relied upon by the learned President's Counsel, in particular

Hendrick Appuhamy Vs. John AppuhamylO and Mansoor and another Vs.

OIC Avissawella Police and anotherll are both cases in which the Court

held that when a statute has created a specific remedy it is that specific

procedure which should be followed and not the procedure set out in

common law. Those were not cases in which provisions in an or~inary law

Vis a Vis the provisions of the Constitution came to be in conflict. Further

no such discussion or decision regarding that issue had been made in those

10 69 N L R 32.

11 1991 (2) 5 L R 75.

,

24

cases. Hence those cases have no application to the matter in hand where

this Court has to decide whether Article 140 has been restricted by the

provisions in an ordinary statute namely the Parliamentary Elections Act.

THE ARGUMENT THAT THE PE I I I lONERS HAVE NO LOCUS STANDI TO

FILE AN ELECTION PE I I I ION OR TO SEEK JUDICIAL REVIEW.

Learned President's Counsel for the 1st Respondent based this argument on

section 95 of the Parliamentary Elections Act which states that an election

petition may be presented to the Court of Appeal by anyone or more of

the following persons, namely:

a) Some persons claiming to have had a right to be returned or

elected at such election

b) Some person alleging himself to have been a candidate at such

election.

It is his submission that the petitioners do not fall within any of the above

categories and as such they are not given any right by law to challenge an

election under the provisions of the law enacted for that purpose.

t i t I I ,

,

25

This Court has to re-iterate the fact that this is an application for judicial

review under Article 140 of the Constitution which prays for a writ of quo

warranto. Section 95 of the Parliamentary Elections Act applies to filing of

election petitions under the provisions of Parliamentary Elections Act. It

cannot have any application to the powers vested in this Court by Article

140 of the Constitution.

It would be in order to set out at this juncture, the following paragraph

taken from the judgment in the case of Forbes & Walker Tea Brokers Vs.

Maligaspe and others12.

" ....... The tendency in the past seems to have been to limit locus

standi to persons who had a particular interest or grievance of his

own over and above the rest of the community. But in more recent

years there is in England a veering away from that view and the

concept of locus standi seems to have been progressively widened to

extend standing, if I may use the words of Lord Denning, to almost

"anyone coming to court to get the law declared and enforced". To

deprive or to deny, as had been done in the past, locus standi to any

applicant for judicial review merely because he (the applicant) happens

12 1998 (2) SLR 378

,

26

to share the injury complained of with others is utterly illogical as

explained by Lord Wilberforce in the Gouriet case13. "A right is none

the less a right or a wrong any the less a wrong because millions

of people have a similar right or may suffer a similar wrong. It is

illogical to treat the adequacy of interest of an applicant for judicial

review to be as having being vitiated or wiped out by its being

shared with a large or indefinite group of persons; on the contrary,

each member of the definite group ought to be treated as a person

"interested" or having a stake in the matter and accorded standing".

"

The question of locus standi of an applicant in an application for a writ of

quo warranto was discussed by this Court in the case of Dilan Perera Vs.

Rajitha Senarathne14 which this Court has already referred to in the course

of the discussion pertaining to the previous argument put forward by the

1 st Respondent1s. As has been decided in that case, it is open for any bona

fide applicant to apply for a writ of quo warranto to challenge the validity

13 Gouriets Case - 1977 1 AER 696.

14 Ibid

15 Reference in this regard has been made in the foot note No.9 above.

I

f,

,

27

of an appointment to a public office since this writ seeks to prevent a

usurper of such public office from continuing in that position.

Documents produced marked P 2 (a), P 2 (b) P 2 (c) and P 2 (d) show

that the Petitioners are people entitled to exercise their franchise to elect

members to the Parliament from Galle District in the Parliamentary

Elections held in 2015. They form part of people of Sri Lanka who are

entitled to exercise their inalienable right to sovereignty vested in them

under Article 4 (e) of the Constitution. Their sovereignty includes the

exercise of their franchise at the election of Members of Parliament also. It

would therefore suffice to state here that this Court is unable to agree with

the submission of the learned President's Counsel for the 1st Respondent

that the Petitioners will not have recourse to Article 140 of the Constitution

to prevent any person who is disqualified by the Constitution itself, from

continuing in office without any hindrance. This Court indeed cannot think

of Article 140 being put to a better use than that of the present instance.

THE ARGUMENT THAT NO COURT HAS JURISDICTION TO IMPEACH OR

QUESTION PROCEEDINGS OF PARLIAMENT.

,

28

As it is Article 4 (c) of the Constitution which the learned President's

Counsel used as the platform to advance this argument, it would be

convenient at the outset to set out here the relevant portions of that

Article.

Article 4(c) of the Constitution.

4. The Sovereignty of the People shall be exercised and enjoyed in the

following manner:-

( ......... )

(c) the judicial power of the People shall be exercised by Parliament

through courts, tribunals and institutions created and established, or

recognized, by the Constitution, or created and established by law, except

in regard to matters relating to the privileges, immunities and powers of

Parliament and of its Members wherein the judicial power of the People

may be exercised directly by Parliament according to law; ....... "

It is the submission of the learned President's Counsel for the 1st

Respondent that this Court has no jurisdiction to hear and determine this

,

29

case as it amounts to going into the matters relating to the privileges,

immunities and powers of Parliament and of its Members and that Article

4(<:) has imposed a bar for the exercise of judicial powers in that regard.

Further, it was submitted on behalf of the 1st Respondent that section 3 of

the Parliament Powers and Privileges Act has removed the power of Court

to impeach or question matters pertaining to proceedings of Parliament16

He relied on some material in his attempt to establish that the question

whether a person is qualified to sit as a member in Parliament falls within

the scope of parliamentary privilege and is therefore not cognizable by

Courts.

Gomes Vs. M H Mohomed, Speaker of Parliament17 which the learned

President's Counsel for the 1st Respondent has relied upon, is an

application praying for a writ of certiorari to quash the decision of the then

Speaker of the Parliament that he "ceased to have entertained" a

resolution to be laid before the Parliament under Article 38(2) (a) of the

Constitution setting out allegations against the then President of the

Republic. The said application also prayed for a writ of mandamus to

16 Page 12 of the written submission filed by the 1st Respondent.

17 1991 (2) 5 L R 408

,

30

compel the then Speaker of the Parliament to lay the said resolution before

the Parliament. Thus it is in that backdrop that this Court had stated that

the "Parliament is the guardian of its own privileges and is the sole judge \ ,

of the lawfulness of its own proceedings" and held in that case that the

Court is precluded from examining that matter as it is part of the

proceedings of Parliament.

It must be borne in mind that the judgment cited above has been so

pronounced by Court after taking into consideration the issues raised in

that case which, as has already been mentioned, also consisted an issue

whether a writ of certiorari to quash a decision of the Speaker of the

Parliament should be issued or not. Thus it is not justifiable for this Court

to separate some statements pertaining to law from that judgment,

interpret such propositions in isolation and make them applicable to the

instant case which is an application for a writ of quo warranto challenging

the 1st Respondent to show by what authority she claims to hold office as a

Member 'of Parliament.

,

31

It should be stressed here that what Article 4 (c) sets out is one of the

ways in which the sovereignty of the people18 shall be exercised and

enjoyed. It could therefore be seen that what the Parliament may directly

exercise are;

the matters relati ng to the

i. privileges,

ii. immunities and

iii. powers

of Parliament and of its members

Article 67 of the Constitution states that "the privileges, immunities and

powers of Parliament and of its Members may be determined and regulated

by Parliament by law and until so determined and regulated, the provisions

of the Parliament (Powers and Privileges) Act shall mutatis mutandis

apply."

As the Parliament has not up until now passed any law to determine and

regulate the privileges, immunities and powers of Parliament and of its

Members except for several amendments to the existing Act, these matters

18 Which is inalienable under Article 3 of the Constitution.

,

32

have to be determined and regulated according to the provisions of the

Parliament (Powers and Privileges) Act.

Section 3 of the Parliament (Powers and Privileges) Act states as follows;

"There shall be freedom of speech, debate and proceeding in Parliament

and such freedom of speech, debate or proceedings shall not be liable to

be impeached or questioned in any Court or place out of Parliament."

This Court by no means is questioning or impeaching or even attempting to

do any of such things in this application. On the other hand only a Member

of Parliament is entitled to enjoy the privileges, immunities and powers

under both the Constitution and the Parliament (Powers and Privileges)

Act. A person who has been disqualified by the Constitution itself cannot be

a Member of Parliament. Therefore such person is not entitled to enjoy the

privileges, immunities and powers under both the Constitution and the

Parliament (Powers and Privileges) Act.

In this instance all what this Court has done is to require the 1st.

Respondent to show by what authority she claims to hold office as a

Member of Parliament in an application filed under Article 140 of the

Constitution by some of the people in Sri Lanka who exercise their judicial

f I I I

I I

[ ! } ,

,

33

power as part of their inalienable sovereign power vested in them by virtue

of Article 3 and 4 of the Constitution. This they have to exercise through

Courts as has been stated in Article 4 (c) of the Constitution.

Learned President's Counsel for the 1st Respondent drew the attention of

this Court to the following passage taken from a book. It is as follows;

" ... The question of qualification to sit as a member of either house of

Parliament falls within the scope of parliamentary privilege and is not,

therefore, cognizable by courts of law except in so far as parliament has

expressly provided for a judicial determination. The relevant statutory

provisions do not empower the courts to award injunctions to restrain

persons from sitting as members ... "

This passage relied upon by the learned President's Counsel for the 1st

Respondent is found at page 465 in de Smith's Judicial Review of

Administrative Action; 4th Edition published in the year 1980.

Learned President's counsel for the Petitioners as well as the 1st

Respondent have agreed19 that the remedy by way of writ of quo warranto

has been abolished in England as far back as in the year 1938. It must

19 Paragraph 9.9 (al at page 10 of the written submissions filed by the Petitioner & page 11 of the written submissions filed by the 1st Respondent.

,

34

also be noted that the above paragraph is a paragraph that deals with

injunctive reliefs in general. The book states in its page 463 as follows;

" ...... Until 1938 an information in the nature of a quo warranto (which had

replaced the old prerogative writ of quo warranto) could be exhibited either

by the Attorney General or, by leave of court, in the name of the King's

Coroner and Attorney at the instance of a private prosecutor, to challenge

the usurpation of public office. The proceedings although criminal in form,

were deemed to be civil in character. In 1938 the information in the nature

of quo warranto was abolished. It was provided that in any case where a

person acted in an office to which he was not entitled and a quo warranto

information would formerly have lain against him, the High Court could

grant an injunction restraining him from so acting and if necessary, declare

the office to be vacant. No such proceedings could be taken except by a

person who would have been entitled to apply for a quo warranto

information. Proceedings for an injunction in these circumstances must

now be commenced by an application to the Divisional Court for judicial .

. " review ....

The above passages make a clear distinction amongst the following three

concepts;

I

J J f I f , t f l t

~ !r t I ! t

f. f i l II

I ! I l l I

,

35

i. old prerogative writ of quo warranto

ii. exhibiting quo warranto information either by the Attorney General

or, by leave of court,

iii. Proceedings for an injunction under such circumstances.

The above passage shows that each of the three concepts listed above had

existed as the law in England at one point of time according to their

chronological order in the above list. A careful consideration of the scheme

of the book discloses that it is the third situation under item No. iii above

that has been the subject matter of the discussion in the paragraph relied

upon by the learned President's Counsel.

That being the prevailing position in England, it is prudent to now turn to

the law applicable in Sri Lanka in this regard.

Article 140 of the Constitution states as follows;

"Subject to the provisions of the Constitution, the Court of Appeal shall

have full power and authority to inspect examine the records of any Court

of First instance or tribunal or other institution and grant and issue

according to law, orders in the nature of writs of certiorari, prohibition,

,

36

procedendo, mandamus and quo warranto against the judge of any Court

of first Instance or tribunal or other institution or any other person. ",ff

Hence unlike the present position in England, this Court by virtue of the

Constitution itself shall have full power and authority to grant and issue

according to law, orders in the nature of writs of quo warranto.

Thus it is the view of this Court that no support would be accrued to the 1st

Respondent from the above passage relied upon by the learned President's

Counsel.

The case of Dilan Perera Vs. Rajitha Senarathne20 is a good example of an

instance where this Court issued a writ of quo warranto declaring the

appointment of the 1st Respondent in that case as a Member of Parliament

void and that he has no right to continue to hold office as a Member of

Parliament. It is significant that the Petitioner in that case was also a

Member of Parliament. Thus he has had all the access to the proceedings

in Parliament. However it is inter~sting to note that he had chosen to move

Court and not the Parliament, to have the impugned appointment declared

void.

20 Ibid.

,

37

This Court indeed declared the appointment of the 1st Respondent in that

case as a Member of Parliament void on the basis that he had entered into

various contracts with government institutions to supply dental equipment

and material and hence is guilty of having such interest in such contracts

entered into with the state institutions or public corporations as

contemplated by Article 91(1) (e) of the Constitution. This Court on that

basis granted a writ of quo warranto as prayed for by the petitioner in that

case declaring that the appointment of the 1st respondent in that case as a

Member of Parliament void and that he has no right to continue to hold

office as a Member of Parliament.

Thus, this Court is unable to agree with the contention of the learned

President's Counsel that it has no jurisdiction to hear and determine this

case for the reasons he sets out.

7. WHETHER THE 1ST RESPONDENT IS DISQUALIFIED?

It is under Article 91(1) (d) (xiii) of the Constitution that the Petitioners

allege that the 1st Respondent stands disqualified to hold office. Hence the

relevant portion of that Article is reproduced below.

,

38

Article 91(1) (d) (xiii) of the Constitution,

91. (1) No person shall be qualified to be elected as a Member of

Parliament or to sit and vote in Parliament-

(a)

(b)

(c) ........ ..

(d) if he is

(i)

(xiii) a citizen of Sri Lanka who is also a citizen of any other country; .... "

The 1st Respondent has admitted the followings;

i. That she contested the Parliamentary Elections held on 2015-08-1721,

ii. That she was nominated to contest the said General Election from

21 Paragraph 5 of the affidavit of the 1st Respondent.

I I ,

f I I r I f I I

,

.

39

iii. That she was elected as a Member of Parliament23.

iv. That the said Parliamentary Elections were held on 2015-08-1724.

v. That she took the oath of office as a Member of Parliament on 2015-

09-0125.

vi. That she was interviewed by the Sunday Observe,-26.

vii. That she received the letter referred to in paragraph 13 of the

petition, from the Petitioners27.

viii. That she was elected by the people of Galle District28

Thus the consideration of the question whether the 1st Respondent is

disqualified under Article 91(1) (d) (xiii) of the Constitution could be

narrowed down to the question whether the 1st Respondent is 'a citizen of

Sri Lanka who is also a citizen of any other country' as envisaged in that

Article.

The 3rd Petitioner in his affidavit has claimed that the 1st Respondent is a

holder of a dual citizenship, (i.e. citizenship of Sri Lanka and that of

22 Paragraph 7 of the affidavit of the 1st Respondent.

23 Paragraph 7 of the affidavit of the 1st Respondent.

24 Paragraph 8 of the affidavit of the 1st Respondent.

25 Paragraph 10 of the affidavit of the 1st Respondent.

26 Paragraph 12 of the affidavit of the 1st Respondent.

27 Paragraph 15 of the affidavit of the 1st Respondent.

28 Paragraph 19 of the affidavit of the 1st Respondent.

I I J I ! f I! I , I J 1 I

t i ! f i f

,

40

SWitzerland), and had not divulged her dual citizenship at the time of

submission of her nomination to contest the said election.

The said nomination paper has been produced marked P 1 wherein the 1st

Respondent has signed certifying that she is not subject to any

disqualification for election29

It must be noted with significance that the 19th Amendment which brought

in the disqualification set out in Article 91(1) (d) (xiii) of the Constitution

was certified by the Speaker of Parliament on 2015-05-15. This date

assumes significance because it had deliberately brought in this fresh

disqualification into the Constitution before approximately two months

before the date on which the nomination paper had been handed over (i.e.

on 2015-07-09).

The current travel document details report issued on 2015-08-26, by the

Department of Immigration & Emigration produced marked P 7, clearly

states that the holder of that travel document is a dual citizen. The 2nd

Respondent being the Controller General of the Department of Immigration

and Emigration, in his affidavit filed before this Court has not denied the

authenticity of this document. Effect of his assertions therein is compatible

29 Last column in the nomination paper marked U

,

41

with the material part of P 7 which is that the 1st Respondent has been a

holder of a dual citizen as at 2015-08-26 which is the date P 7 has been

issued. The 1st Respondent has been content by offering a bare denial30 of

the averments in paragraph 11 of the petition and the corresponding

averments in the affidavit inclusive of the document marked P 7 and stop

at that.

It would thus be the time now to consider further the position taken up by

the 2nd Respondent. The 2nd Respondent being the Controller General of

Immigration and Emigration of the Department of Immigration and

Emigration has taken up the following positions in his affidavit filed before

this Court.

i. That according to the departmental records, the 1st Respondent had

applied for dual citizenship of Sri Lanka/Switzerland on 2006-08-29

and was registered as a dual citizen on 2006-08-29 under the

Citizenship (Amendment) Act No. 45 of 198731

ii. The dual citizenship certificate bearing No. 17096 has been issued to

the 1 st Respondent on 2006-09-1932

30 Paragraph 13 of the affidavit of the 1st Respondent.

31 Paragraph 4(a) of the affidavit filed by the 2nd Respondent.

32 Paragraph 4(a) of the affidavit filed by the 2nd Respondent.

,

..

42

iii. That the 1st Respondent had on 2015-10-30, had applied for a

diplomatic passport and had requested that the same be issued

without an endorsement that she is a dual citizen33

iv. That the 1st Respondent had submitted a letter dated 2015-09-11

(produced marked R 2) issued by the Registry and Citizenship

services, Canton of Bern indicating that Mrs. Geetha Samanmali

Fuhrer, nee Kumarasinghe, is released from Swiss Citizenship34.

v. That Hon. Attorney General advised him to request the 1st

Respondent to clarify paragraph 4 of her letter dated 20015-09-11

and to provide evidence that she has been released absolutely from

Swiss Citizenship35.

vi. 1 st Respondent did not respond when she was called upon to do so

as per the Attorney General's above advice.

The letter dated 2015-10-30 containing the advice of the Attorney General

has been produced marked R 4 and the letter dated 2015-11-02 written by

the 2nd Respondent to the 1st Respondent has been produced marked R 5.

33 Paragraph 4(c) of the affidavit filed by the 2nd Respondent.

34 Paragraph 4(d) of the affidavit filed by the 2nd Respondent.

35 Paragraph 4(f) (iii) of the affidavit filed by the 2nd Respondent.

I ! I ! f ! ! r I I

" I , I

,

,.

43

It is to be noted that in any case the effect of the order marked R 2 would

be only from the date of its issue which is 2015-09-11. This means that the

1 st, Respondent had been holding an unfettered dual citizenship at least up

until that date.

In the letter dated 2015-10-30 written and signed by the 1st Respondent,

she has admitted that at least at one point of time she has been a holder

of dual citizenship. This is clear from the phrase " .... @J 15?S!t) aOt)IS

WJt)e'c..5zsi' ~ ctlt53 @15zsi' .... ". It is thus clear that it is an admission on

the part of the 1st Respondent that she had up until that time been a

holder of a dual citizenship. The 1st Respondent has opted not to offer any

explanation on the above evidence.

Paragraph 4 of the letter dated 2015-09-11 (produced marked R 2) states

that "the Registry and Citizenship Services inform the registry office of the

home municipality of the release from Swiss Citizenship as soon as it

becomes absolute." This clearly means that the 1st Respondent has not yet

been absolutely released from the Swiss Citizenship. The 1st Respondent

chose not to respond to the letter written to her by the 2nd Respondent

calling upon her to explain the real position and to produce further

evidence on this aspect. Further she has chosen to continue with that

silence before this Court also. In these circumstances inclination of this

, , Court to draw an adverse inference against the 1st Respondent would be

irresistible.

Thus it would be inevitable that this Court would conclude on the above

material that the 1st Respondent, contested the said Parliamentary Election,

,

44

was elected, and subsequently took oaths in the office as a Member of

Parliament and thereafter sat and voted in Parliament as a Member of

Parliament whilst also being a citizen of any other country namely

Switzerland.

8. CONCLUSION

For the reasons set out above, it is the conclusion of this Court that the 1st

Respondent has failed to satisfy this Court that she has any authority to

claim to hold office as a Member of Parliament. Therefore this Court is of

the considered opinion that the 1st Respondent is disqualified to be a

Member of Parliament in terms of Article 91(1) (d) (xiii) of the Constitution

of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

In these circumstances and for the foregoing reasons we decide to grant

and issue a mandate in the nature of a writ of quo warranto declaring that

the 1st Respondent is disqualified to be a Member of Parliament and that

therefore she is not entitled to hold office as a Member of Parliament;

We also direct that 1st Respondent must pay costs of this application to the

Petitioners.

45

Further, we also direct the Attorney General to consider taking steps to

recover the fines payable by the 1st Respondent as a debt due to the State

as has been provided for under Article 100 of the Constitution.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Vijith K Malalgoda PC J

I agree,

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL