Page 1 of 10

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for mandates in the nature of writ of certiorari and mandamus under Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. CASE NO: CA/WRIT/262/14

S. Victor Wijerathne, No. 355, Moderwatte, Kurunegala.

PETITIONER

VS. 1. Hon. Tissa R. Balalle,

Governor of the North Western Province, Governors Office, Maligawa, Kurunegala. 1A. Hon. Amara Piyaseeli Ratnayake,

Governor of the North Western Province, Governors Office, Maligawa, Kurunegala. 1B. Hon. K.C. Logeswaran,

Governor of the North Western Province, Governors Office, Maligawa, Kurunegala. 2. Secretary to the Governor of the

North Western Province, Governors Office, Maligawa, Kurunegala

Page 2 of 10

3. Mr. G.S. Waththegedara,

The Chairman, Provincial Public Service Commission of the North Western Province. 4. Ms. Kanthi Wehalla,

Secretary, Provincial Public Service Commission of the North Western Province. 5. Mr. H.M. Meththananda Nilame,

Member, Provincial Public Service Commission of the North Western Province. 5A. Mr. E.M.P. Ekanayake,

Member, Provincial Public Service

Commission of the North Western Province. 6. Mr. D.S. Jothirathne,

Member, Provincial Public Service Commission of the North Western Province. 6A. Mr. Nihal Sumanadeera, Member, Provincial Public Service

Commission of the North Western Province.

7. Mr. M.M. Iqbal,

Member, Provincial Public Service Commission of the North Western Province.

8. Mr. W.A.D.T. Sarath Stanley,

Member, Provincial Public Service Commission of the North Western Province.

Page 3 of 10

9. Chief Secretary, Chief Secretarys Office, North Western Province.

10. Mr. S.L. Gunasekara, Administrative Officer, Livestock and Health Department of

North Western Province, Kurunegala. 11. W.W. Fernando,

Inquiry Officer, No. 370, Vajira Mawatha, Vilgoda Road, Kurunegala. 12. A.P. Gunathilake,

Administrative Officer, Chief Secretarys Office, Noth Western Province, Kurunegala. 13. Director General of Pensions,

Department of Pensions, Maligawatte, Colombo 10. RESPONDENTS Before: M. T. MOHAMMED LAFFAR, J. and

K. K. A. V. SWARNADHIPATHI, J.

Counsel: Saliya Peiris PC, instructed by Manjula Balasooriya for the

Petitioner. Manohara Jayasinghe SSC for the Respondents. Written Submissions on: 20.02.2019 & 22.11.2019 (by the Petitioner). 24.12.2018 (by the Respondents). Decided on: 05.08.2021.

Page 4 of 10

MOHAMMED LAFFAR, J.

The Petitioner in this application has invoked the supervisory jurisdiction

of this Court under Article 140 of the Constitution seeking, inter alia, for

the following relief:

b) a mandate in the nature of a writ of certiorari quashing the

Disciplinary Orders at P-15 and P-16;

c) a mandate in the nature of a writ of certiorari quashing the decision

reflected by P-18;

d) a mandate in the nature of a writ of mandamus directing one or

more or all of the Respondents,

i. to take steps according to law to pay the Petitioner his due

emoluments including back wages from the date of

interdiction to the date of his retirement and

ii. to take steps according to law to pay the Petitioner his

pension from the date of retirement.

When this matter was taken up for argument, both parties had consented

to dispose the matter by way of written submissions that have already

been tendered.

Admittedly, the Petitioner had joined the public service on 02.06.1977 as

a clerk and had been worked several government institutions of North

Western Province after being absorbed to the Provincial Public Service

until his impugned interdiction was done on or about 15.10.2008.

The Petitioner, by the letter dated 12.09.2008 was informed by the 10th

Respondent, Administrative Officer of Livestock and Health that he had

been ordered to hold a preliminary investigation against the Petitioner in

respect of misappropriation of money of the office of the Deputy

Commissioner of Co-operative Development of North Western Province at

the time he served.

Page 5 of 10

Accordingly, on 17.09.2008, a statement was recorded from the Petitioner

on the said allegation and thereafter, he was interdicted by letter dated

15.10.2008 of the Chief Secretary of the North Western Province and

subjected to a formal Disciplinary Inquiry which was commenced on

19.02.2010 based on 36 charges [vide P-11b].

After the inquiry, by letter marked P-15 and P-16 the Petitioner was

informed by the Secretary of the Provincial Public Service Commission

through the 9th Respondent that the Petitioner had been found guilty of

28 charges in the charge sheet at the inquiry. Further it was informed

that after considering the outcome of the inquiry, the commission had

ordered to dismiss the Petitioner from the service from the date of

interdiction.

The Petitioner further submits that having dissatisfied by the disciplinary

order, he appealed to the Governor of the North Western Province and to

the Secretary of Public Service Commission on 04.05.2013. However, this

appeal was refused by the Governor [by the letter dated 20.07.2013

marked P-18] without a hearing and proper reasons.

According to the Petitioner, the main ground for premising this

application is that the disciplinary inquiry is unfair, ultra vires and

contrary to the rules of natural justice.

The Petitioner states that as the allegations related to his conduct in his

previous assignment in the Provincial Public Service namely, the

Kurunegala Co-operative Development Assistant Commissioners Office,

the Provincial Public Service Commission could not have lawfully held an

inquiry against him. In contrast, the Respondents correctly submitted

that Petitioners this position is flatly contradicted by clause 6.1 of the

Disciplinary Procedure Code of the Provincial Public Service of the North

Western Province [vide P6/1R8] which clearly provides that the current

Head of Department can inquire into misconduct alleged to have taken

in the previous place of employment in the Provincial Public Service.

Page 6 of 10

It was further complained by the Petitioner that the purported

disciplinary inquiry was instituted under the influence of one A.P.

Gunathilake [i.e., Prosecuting Officer] who was the Administrative Officer

in the Chief Secretarys office who has developed an animosity with the

Petitioner while he was serving in the same office1. Therefore, the

Petitioner submits that he was deprived an opportunity of fair trial as

preparing charge sheet as well as conducting the prosecution by an

officer who has an animosity with the Petitioner.

It is well settled that every member of a tribunal that is called upon to try

issues in judicial or quasi-judicial proceedings must be able to act

judicially; and it is of the essence of judicial decisions and judicial

administration that adjudicators should be able to act impartially,

objectively and without any bias. In such cases the test is not whether in

fact a bias has affected the judgment; the test always is and must be

whether a litigant could reasonably apprehend that a bias attributable to

a member of the tribunal might have operated against him in the final

decision of the tribunal. It is in this sense that it is often said that justice

must not only be done but must also appear to be done [vide R v. Sussex

Justices, ex parte McCarthy (1924) 1 KB 256].

As correctly observed by Ratnayake J in Captain Nawarathna v. Major

General Sarath Fonseka and 6 Others [(2009) 1 Sri LR 190], where the

petitioner denies that rules of natural justice have not been complied with

and the respondents assert the contrary, a petitioner can do no more

than deny the compliance with the rules of natural justice and the burden

is on the respondents to establish that rules of natural justice have been

complied by producing an acceptable record of proceedings. In the absence

of production of such a record of proceedings the Court would not have

any option other than to accept the petitioners version that there has

been procedural impropriety leading to a denial of the rules of natural

justice.

1 Vide para 5 of the Petition dated 06.08.2014.

Page 7 of 10

The principle which emerges from bias is not concerned with the fact that

the decision maker was biased, but with the possibility that he or she

might have been biased i.e., a real likelihood of bias [see, Simon v.

Commissioner of National Housing (1972) 75 NLR 471].

It is necessary to point out, however, that courts will not merely uphold

a plea of bias simply because a party has raised it. It should be made

clear that a party wishing to raise a complaint of bias has to do so with

the disciplinary authority. The disciplinary authority is enjoined to

consider such objection and make a decision. Where the objection of bias

has not been raised before the disciplinary authority, the complainant

has to demonstrate actual bias in the proceedings on appeal or judicial

review.

Question of likelihood of bias can only, logically, be raised before or

perhaps during the proceedings in question. It can never be based on

conjecture or on flimsy insubstantial grounds and there must be material

which shows a tendency to favour one side unfairly at the expense of the

other [vide Dr. Karunaratne v. Attorney General and Another (1995) 2 Sri

LR 298 per Gunersekera J in page 302]. In such cases, an affected party

would normally be expected to request that the person suspected of such

bias recuse himself from participation in the proceedings in question.

Parties may be held to have waived the right to invoke the bias rule if they

were fully informed of the facts that could support a claim of bias but

failed to raise the issue in a timely manner. Vide Canada (H.R.C.) v.

Taylor, [(1990) 3 SCR 892] and In re Human Rights Tribunal and Atomic

Energy of Canada Ltd. [(1986) 1 FC 103 (CA)]. Accordingly, in my view,

where a party does not raise any objections then such party cannot rely

on the ground of likelihood of bias on appeal or judicial review. This

ensures that the tribunals decisions are not set aside based on a point

that had not been brought to their attention.

In the instant case, the Respondents have submitted the inquiry

proceedings in its entirety [vide 1R9]. A careful perusal to the document

1R9 is suggested that the Petitioner afforded the opportunity to lead his

Page 8 of 10

defence with testimony of witnesses and documents. The Petitioner has

not placed any materials to show that he had objected the said inquiry

as to the alleged animosity of the inquiring officer or any irregularity of

procedure. Therefore, this Court is of the view that there is no basis for

the Petitioner to complain now of an irregularity of procedure based on

bias.

The Petitioner further contended that as per the clause 19.1.1 of the

Disciplinary Procedure Code, the Inquiring Officer should take necessary

steps to issue a disciplinary order within one year after issuing the charge

sheet against a Respondent or Charged Officer. However, the Petitioner

submitted that the charge sheet dated 26.05.2009 was served on the

Petitioner on 05.05.2009 and after concluding the inquiry the

disciplinary order was communicated to the Petitioner on 22.04.2013

where it took approximately four years delay for the completion of the

inquiry. Therefore, the Petitioner submits that this prolonged delay for

completion of the inquiry against the Petitioner which has not been

explained is unreasonable and unfair.

The Respondents, while admitting the fact that the inquiry took longer

than intended, submit that there was good reason for this and there was

certainly no intention to protract the process with a view to vexing and

harassing the Petitioner. They further submit that the Secretary of the

Provincial Public Service Commission wrote repeatedly to the inquiry

officer urging an expeditious inquiry [vide 1R1]. However, the ill-health of

the inquiring officer Mr. Ariyaratne and the difficulty in calling a crucial

witness [vide 1R4 and 1R5] caused an unavoidable delay to conclude the

inquiry. They further submit that the Respondents made every endeavour

in good faith to conclude the inquiry early and therefore, the delay which

they have duly explained cannot be the basis for invalidation of the

Provincial Service Commissions order. Therefore, the delay which the

Respondents have duly explained cannot be the basis for an invalidation

of the findings of the inquiry commission.

Page 9 of 10

It was also submitted by the Petitioner that even though the Petitioner

was communicated with the disciplinary order [vide P-15 and P-16], the

Respondents have not specified the findings and reasons on each

individual charges in the charge sheet. It was further contended that the

Petitioner was unaware on which charges he had been found guilty and

from which charges he had not been found guilty until the Inquiry Report

1R9 was submitted along with objections of the Respondents.

It is not only appropriate but is a solemn duty of every decision-maker,

to state the reasons in support of their decisions. Reasoning is the soul

of a judgment and embodies one of the three pillars on which the very

foundation of natural justice. Every decision-maker shall give reasons at

the time of making the decision, unless there is an agreement to the

contrary. Failure to give reasons cannot be remedied by giving reasons

later. However, if reasons have been given but not communicated to the

party concerned, the situation is different. In such a situation, once the

appeal or judicial review is put in motion, the decision-maker can tender

the reasons to Court, as suggested by S.N. Silva J (later CJ) in

Kusumawathie v. Aitken Spence Co. Ltd. [(1996) 2 Sri LR 18] and Mark

Fernando J in Karunadasa v. Unique Gems Stones Ltd. [(1997) 1 Sri LR

264]. However, if reasons are suggested for the first time in Court, the

tendency is to reject them as afterthoughts [vide Abeysinghage Chandana

Kumara v. Kolitha Gunathilaka and 10 Others, CA Minutes dated

01.06.2020].

In any event, in the case in hand, this Court observed that the findings

of the disciplinary inquiry on all the charges contained in the charge

sheet has been clearly set out in the order. The Petitioner has been found

guilty on charges 1 to 27 and charge 36 and cleared of charges 28 to 35.

While the reasons for each offence are clearly stated in the order, the

Petitioner was briefly informed the final decision reached by the inquiring

officers. The Petitioner would have always been able to obtain or peruse

the order or relevant proceedings of the inquiry at any time. No complaint

was made to this Court to the contrary.

Page 10 of 10

In these respects, I am of the considered view that the Petitioners

arguments on the ambiguity in the disciplinary order and breach of

natural justice are devoid of merits.

The Petitioners next compliant is that although he appealed to the

1st Respondent - Governor against the disciplinary order on 04.05.2013,

by the letter marked P-18 dated 29.07.2013 sent by the Secretary to the

1st Respondent stating that the appeal of the Petitioner has been refused

after being considered by the Governor under the powers conferred on

him in the section 33(8) of the Provincial Council Act, No. 42 of 1987

without a hearing and proper reasons.

This Court carefully perused the letter P-18 in its entirety. In this letter

the Governor has correctly stated that after perusing the entire inquiry

proceedings and the alleged order, he was of the opinion that the Inquiring

Officers correctly found the Petitioner guilty of the charges i.e.,

Misappropriation of State funds. Accordingly, he had refused to interfere

with the findings of the Inquiry Commission and accordingly, he

dismissed the Petitioners appeal.

Therefore, I am unable to agree with the contention of the Petitioner that

the Governor had refused the appeal without stating reasons.

In the circumstances aforesaid, I see no merit in this application.

I dismiss the application without cost.

Application dismissed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal.

K. K. A. V. SWARNADHIPATHI, J. I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal.