1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Case No:

CA-Writ-0306-19

In the matter of an Application for mandates in the nature of Writs of Certiorari, and Mandamus under and in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialists Republic of Sri Lanka. Rajakaruna Mudiyanselage Leelawathie, Mudungoda, Kiralogama.

Petitioner

Vs.

1. Director General,

Mahaweli Authority, No. 500, T.B. Jaya Mawatha, Colombo 10. 2. Resident Project Manager (land),

Thambuththegama. 3. Commissioner of Lands,

Land Commissioner's Department, Colombo 07. 4. Registrar of Lands,

Land Registry, Anuradhapura. 5. Rajakaruna Mudiyanselage

Padmawathie, Mudungoda, Kiralogama. 6. Hon.Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

Respondents

2

Before:

M. T. Mohammed Laffar, J.

S. U. B. Karalliyadde, J.

Counsel:

Esara Wellala, instructed by Bandula Wellala for the Petitioner.

Medhaka Fernando, SC for the 1st-4th and 7th Respondents.

Migara Doss with Isuru Jayasantha, instructed by Dinesh De Silva for the 5th

Respondent.

Written submissions tendered on:

17.11.2022 by the 5th Respondent.

29.11.2022 by the Petitioner.

29.11.2022 by the 1st and 2nd Respondents.

Argued on: 20.09.2022.

Decided on: 31.05.2023.

S.U.B. Karalliyadde, J.

By this Writ Application the Petitioner is challenging the nomination of the 5th

Respondent by the Petitioners mother as her successor under and in terms of the Land

Development Ordinance, No. 19 of 1935 (as amended) (hereinafter referred to as the

Ordinance). As evident by the documents marked as P2 and P2 (a) the father of the

Petitioner, Punchirala had been selected on 21.09.1979 in terms of the Sale of State

3

Lands (Special Provisions) Law, No. 43 of 1973 of the National State Assembly, to

alienate the subject matter of this Application which is a paddy land. The Petitioners

father Punchirala had died on 29.10.1980. After the demise of the father, in terms of

section 19 (2) of the Ordinance, on 12.12.1984 a Permit (marked as P6) and thereafter,

on 17.01.2002 in terms of section 19 (4) a Grant (marked as P5) had been issued in the

name of the Petitioners mother, Nandawathi for the subject matter.

The position of the learned Counsel appearing for the Petitioner is that on the consent

of the Petitioners father and her siblings, the Petitioner possessed the subject matter

and Punchirala had nominated her as his successor to the subject matter. Nevertheless,

in P6 which was prepared to be issued to Punchirala before his death naming him as the

permit-holder and in the Land Ledger marked as P7, Punchiralas name has been

deleted and the name of the Petitioners mother, Nandawathi has been written and

further, in P6 Punchralas nomination of the Petitioner as his successor has been deleted

and the name of the 5th Respondent, Padmawathi who is the sister of the Petitioner has

been entered as the nominee by some Officer/s of the 1st-3rd Respondents. The learned

Counsel for the Petitioner has submitted to Court that the mother of the Petitioner, under

the undue influence of the 5th Respondent, has submitted the nomination paper marked

as P 8 to 1st-3rd Respondents by which the 5th Respondent has been nominated as the

successor of the mother and accordingly, the name of the 5th Respondent has been

entered in the Land Ledger marked as P7. Under the said circumstances, the learned

Counsel appearing for the Petitioner argued that as provided by the Ordinance, the

mother of the Petitioner had only the life interest of Punchirala and therefore, in terms

of section 48A (2) of the Ordinance she was not entitled to nominate the 5th Respondent

as her successor to the subject matter and the deletion of the Petitioners name as the

successor and insertion of the name of the 5th Respondent as the successor by the

4

Respondents is illegal. On that premise, the Petitioner seeks to issue a writ of Certiorari

to quash the decision of the 1st to 3rd Respondents to enter the 5th Respondents name in

P7 as the successor of the subject matter and writs of Mandamus directing the said

Respondents to enter the Petitioners name as the nominee of the subject matter and

directing the 4th Respondent to delete the 5th Respondents name in the Land Ledger

marked as P7. In the Petition to this Application, no reliefs have been sought against

naming the mother of the Petitioner as the Permit-holder in the Permit marked as P6

and in the Grant marked as P5 as the Grantee.

The position of the learned Counsel appearing for the Respondents is that in terms of

the Sale of State Lands (Special Provisions) Law after Puncirala was selected to alienate

the subject matter of the action, the Permit marked as P6 has been prepared but before

alienation processes were completed by issuing the Permit to him he had died.

Therefore, in the Permit marked as P6 and in the Ledgers maintained by the 1st to 4th

Respondents in respect of the subject matter were altered by entering the name of

Punchiralas widow, Nandawathi as the Permit-holder. Thereafter, the Grant marked as

P5 has also been issued in the name of Nandawathi. The argument of the learned

Counsel appeared for the Respondents is that since Nandawathi was the Permit-holder

and thereafter the Grantee in terms of sections 19 (2) and 19 (4) of the Ordinance

respectively, under Chapter VII of the Ordinance she has a right to nominate a successor

and therefore, the nomination of the 5th Respondent by Nandawathi as her successor is

according to the provisions of the Ordinance.

It is evident that Punchirala died on 29.10.1980 before the alienation process was over;

therefore, the permit marked as P6 has been issued to his widow, Nandawathi on

12.12.1984, after Punchiralas death. Therefore, the Court can be satisfied that even

though the Permit had been prepared to be issued to Punchirala before it was issued he

5

had died and therefore, the name of Punchirala had been deleted in P6 and the name of

Nandawathi who was the widow of Punchirala has been entered deleting Punchiralas

name. Since Punchirala had died before the Permit or Grant was issued, the conclusion

of this Court is that the provisions of section 48 A (2) of the Ordinance have no

application to the facts of this Application. Under the above-stated circumstances, the

Court cannot accept the argument of the learned Counsel appearing for the Petitioner

that Nandawathi had only the life interest to the subject matter and therefore, she had

no right to nominate the 5th Respondent as her successor to the land. The Court can be

satisfied that the Permit marked as P6 and thereafter the Grant marked as P5 has been

issued in the name of Nandawahi and she has nominated the 5th Respondent as her

successor in terms of the Ordinance. Therefore, Court can conclude that the

Respondents following the provisions of the Ordinance the Grant marked as P5 has

been issued to Nandawathi and after it was issued Nandawathi, has nominated the 5th

Respondent as her successor. Under the said circumstances, the Petitioner is not entitled

to the reliefs sought in the Writ Application. Therefore, I dismiss the writ Application

without costs.

Application dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

M.T. MOHAMMED LAFFAR, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL