IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A Case No.:CA (PHC) APN 55/2017

H.C Kuliyapitiya Case No.: 137/12

In the matter of an appeal in terms of section i 3 1 (1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No 15 of 1979 read with Article 138(1) of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

LankCl

Complainant

Vs.

01. Thelasinghe Mudiyanselage

Chandrawathi Thelasinghe

02.Silmagurughe Julius Greshan

Accused

1

AND NOW BETWEEN

Thelasinghe Mudiyanselage

Chandrawathi Thelasinghe (presently

at Wariyapola Prison)

Accused-Appell~!!t-Petitioner

Vs

BEFORE

Counsel

Written Submissions on

Decided on

K. K. WICKRAMASINGHE, J.

Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

Complainant- Respondent

Padman Surasena, J. (PICA)

K. K. Wickramasinghe, J.

Nalin Ladduwahetty, PC with Keerthi sri Gunawardena, Ashanthi De Almuida and Shalika Gunawardena for the Accused-Appellant-Petitioner

Varunika Hettige, DSG for the Complain::ll1t Respondent

29.11.2017 for the Complainant- Respondent

09.01.2018 for the Accused-Appellant-Petitioner

15.05.2018

The Accused-Appellant-Petitioner (hereinafter referred to as the Petitioner) filed this revision application seeking to set aside the order, refusing bail by the Leameci High Court Judge of the High Court of Kuliyapitiya dated 13/03/2017. At the stage of argument it was agreed to conclude the case by way of filing Written

Submissions and both parties had agreed to abide by the same.

2

Facts of the case:

The petitioner along with another indicted in the High Court of Kuliyapitiya under the case number 137/2017, in terms of Sections 456 and 403 read with sections 113 and 102 of the Penal Code. After the trial, petitioner was found guilty for 1 S\ 2nd, i h and 8th counts and was sentenced for 10 years Rigorous imprisonment.on each count separately with compensation to the victim and fines with default sentences. Further directed that the sentences for 1 st and 2nd charges to run concurrently and sentenced for i h and 8th charges to run concurrently. Thus the Petitioner was sentenced for 20 years Rigorous Imprisonment.

After the conviction, the Petitioner had filed a separate application for bail, to the High Court of Kuliyapitiya. As exceptional circumstances, the petitioner averred the petitioner's health conditions, for not having previous convictions, not perverting the course of justice and the evidence. Learned High Court Judge had pronounced the order dated 13/03/2017 refusing to grant bail to the petitioner, on the ground that the petitioner had failed to demonstrate exceptional circumstances and \vhen lh,~ health condition of the Petitioner is considered, the Medical Repolis of the Judicial ~v!edical Officer did not mention of any serious medical condition that is incapable of being treated inside the Prison or in the Prison Hospital.

Being aggrieved by the said order made by the Learned High court Judge, the Petitioner ha-; filed this application for revision in this court. The Learned Counsel for the Petiti(mer states that the Learned High Court Judge had failed to consider . '-'-the medical condition of the Petitioner which in fact was an exceptional circumstance.

In the case of Sulaiman Lebbe Mohammed Uvais v Director General of Bribery (CA PHC APN 86/2010), citing the case of Attorney General Vs Ediriweera (2006) BLR page 12), it was held that

" ... the norm is that bail after conviction is not a matter of right but would be granted only under exceptional circumstances. "

It is further stated in the abovementioned Sulaiman Case, citing Rex V s Muthuretty 54 NLR 43,

3

" ... that in a bail pending appeal, Court will not grant bail as a rule. Bail is granted only in exceptional circumstances. /I

This court is of the view that the Learned High court Judge had correctlv '-' '-' . considered all aspects of bail pending appeal although the learned counsel for the petitioner argued to the contrary.

In the case of Ramu Thamotharampillai v Attorney General (2004) 3 Sri. L.R

180, it was held that,

" ... but the illness must be a present illness and that continued incarceration would endanger life or cause permanent impairment o/health. Moreover there must be evidence of the nature of the illness and its effect. "

Also, taking a similar view in the case of Attorney General Vs Ediriweera (2006) BLR page 12) it was held that,

" ... he must additionally show that the illness was not only a present one but that continued confinement would imperil life or cause permanent impairment of his phys leal condition ... "

It is important to c1l"!'1,u/ attention to the well-recognized practice 0fn('t 'grunting bail pending appeal to any convict sentenced to a term of imprisonment of 07 years or more. In the case of Attorney General Vs Ediriweera (2006) BLR page 12),

Shiranee Tilakawardena, J, stated that

... ,. in the case ofRamu Thamotharampillai v Attorney General (SC 141175) the court followed the well-recognized and uninterrupted practice of not granting bail pending Appeal to any convict sentenced to a term of imprisonment of Seven years or more and that this should be a norm to be adhered to ... "

Accordingly the order of Learned High court Judge refusing the bail was sound in law since the sentence was exceeding seven years of imprisonment in this case.

When aforementioned authoritative cases are considered, it is abundantly clear that the intention of the legislature is that, unless the exceptional circumstances are demonstrated, bail shall not be granted.

4

Therefore considering severity of the punishment and the fact that the exceptional circumstances were not shown to exist, this court is of the view that the Learned High Court Judge was correct in refusing to admit the petitioner to bail.

Accordingly Revision application is dismissed without costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Padman Surasena, J

I Aoree

b '

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

5