==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/PHC/0117/2018

Page 1 of 17

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of Appeal under and in terms of Article 154(P)(6) of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka read with Section 11 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990. R.M.B.G. Heenbanda, No. 27/1, Galkanda, Rambukewela. Petitioner

Vs.

1. N. S. Senadheera,

Commissioner of Co-operative Development & Registrar (Central Province), Department of Co-operative Development- Central Province, Ehalepola Kumarihamy Mawatha, Bogambara, Kandy. 2. Pujapitiya Multipurpose Co-operative

Society Ltd, Pujapitiya. 3. Gayan Bandara Wijesundere,

Arbitrator, Sudharshana Mawatha, Mawathagama.

Respondents

AND NOW BETWEEN

Court of Appeal Case No:CA/PHC/0117/2018 Kandy High Court No: WRT 42/2015

CA/PHC/0117/2018

Page 2 of 17

R.M.B.G. Heenbanda, No. 27/1, Galkanda, Rambukewela.

Petitioner-Appellant

Vs.

1. N. S. Senadheera,

Commissioner of Co-operative Development & Registrar (Central Province), Department of Co-operative Development- Central Province, Ehalepola Kumarihamy Mawatha, Bogambara, Kandy. 1. Amila Navarathna,

Commissioner of Co-operative Development & Registrar (Central Province), Department of Co-operative Development- Central Province, Ehalepola Kumarihamy Mawatha, Bogambara, Kandy.

Substituted 1st-Respondent-Respondent

2. Pujapitiya Multipurpose Co-operative

Socicty Ltd, Pujapitiya. 3. Gayan Bandara Wijesundere,

Arbitrator, Sudharshana Mawatha, Mawathagama

Respondents-Respondents

CA/PHC/0117/2018

Page 3 of 17

Before : D. THOTAWATTA, J. K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J. Counsel : Upul Ranjan Hewage with Ms. Kaushali Samaratunga for the Petitioner-Appellant.

Prabashini Jayasekara, S.C. for the 1st and 3rd Respondents- Respondents.

A. M. E. B. Athapattu with Dinendra Senaratne for the 2nd Respondent-Respondent.

Argued on : 09.07.2025 Written Submissions of the Petitioner -Appellant tendered on : 11.01.2023 Written Submissions of the 1st and 3rd Respondents -Respondents tendered on : 29.04.2022. Written Submissions of the 2nd Respondent -Respondent tendered on : 26.03.2024. Decided on : 07.11.2025 K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

The instant appeal arises from an order of the learned High Court Judge of the

Central Province holden in Kandy dated 12.07.2018 (hereinafter called and

referred to as “the order”) wherein the learned High Court Judge had dismissed

an application made thereto by the Petitioner-Appellant (hereinafter called and

referred to as “the Appellant”) praying for orders in the nature of a writ of

certiorari quashing the decision made by the 1st Respondent-Respondent

(hereinafter called and referred to as “the 1st Respondent”) and contained in

CA/PHC/0117/2018

Page 4 of 17

ෙප7 dismissing the appeal preferred to him by the Appellant (ෙප5) against the

arbitral award made by the 3rd Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter called and

referred to as “the 3rd Respondent”) (ෙප2), appointed by the 1st Respondent to

arbitrate the dispute that had arisen between the 2nd Respondent-Respondent

(hereinafter called and referred to as “the 2nd Respondent”) and the Appellant,

for the failure on the part of the Appellant to deposit as security 10% of the

sum specified in the arbitral award (ෙප2) in contravention of Rule 49(xii)(a) of

the Co-operative Societies Regulations 1973 read in conjunction with section

72(2) of the Central Province Co-operative Societies Statute of No. 10 of 1990

as amended and a writ of mandamus directing and compelling the 1st

Respondent to hear and conclude the said appeal preferred to him by the

Appellant (ෙප5).

The facts and circumstances pertaining to the instant appeal as recited in the

petition of appeal by the Appellant, may be briefly, set out as follows;

The Appellant had at all times material to the instant application, been

employed as a manager of a retail outlet of the 2nd Respondent; and that, the

2nd Respondent had demanded a sum of Rs. 666779.54/- from the Appellant

for shortage of goods that had been in his possession in that capacity as a

manager of that retail outlet of the 2nd Respondent which demand had been

rejected by the Appellant; and that the 2nd Respondent had then, referred the

dispute to the 1st Respondent who had then referred it to the 3rd Respondent

for arbitration; and that consequent to an inquiry held by him, the 3rd

Respondent had made his arbitral award (ෙප2), by which the Appellant was

held liable to pay the 2nd Respondent a sum of Rs. 666779.54/-; and that being

aggrieved by the said arbitral award, the Appellant had then preferred an

appeal to the 1st Respondent against the arbitral award and deposited only

Rs.50/- and the Appellant had thereby, failed to deposit 10% of the value of the

Arbitral Award (ෙප2) as required by Rule 49(xii)(a) of the Co-operative Societies

Regulations 1973 read in conjunction with section 72(2) of the Central Province

CA/PHC/0117/2018

Page 5 of 17

Co-operative Societies Statute of No. 10 of 1990 as amended; and that the 1st

Respondent had by letter dated 06.05.2015 (ෙප7), informed the Appellant that

his appeal was rejected for; he had failed to deposit the required amount; and

that the Appellant had then made an application to the High Court of the

Central Province holden in Kandy praying for orders in the nature of a writ of

certiorari to quash the said decision of the 1st Respondent contained in (ෙප7)

and a writ of Mandamus; and that the learned High Court Judge had dismissed

the application by holding that the Appellant had failed to deposit the

minimum required amount resulting in the rejection of the appeal for; Court

had in Sebastian Fernando Vs. Katana Multi-purpose Co-Operative Society

LTD and Wijesekara Subsinghe Siripala vs. Elpitiya Multi-purpose Co-

Operative Society LTD cited to Court by the Appellant in support of his

application, not pronounced a mandatory order and hence, it appears that the

real intention of the Appellant was to delay the payment of said sums of

monies. It was in this premise, the High Court had dismissed the instant

application. Hence, this Appeal on the grounds of appeal urged by the

Appellant in paragraph 7(අ),(ආ),(ඇ) and (ඈ) among any other grounds of appeal

that may be urged by Counsel at the hearing of it and they may be reproduced

verbatim the same as follows;

“(අ) අȴයාචකෙĘ ඉɢɤම හා සȼබǦǝත නƍ ǨƯය ǧʆ පɜǎ සැළûɢලට ෙනʣගැǨම;

(ආ) ɪෙශʢෂෙයǦම ෙසබස්ƯයǦ ȝනාǦǐ එ කටාන ɪɪධ ෙසʢවා සȿපකාර සȽƯය නƍ ưǦǐව

මĵǦ අȴයාචන තැǦපත සȼබǦධෙයǦ කර ඇƯ ɪශ්ෙɢෂණයǦ හා ඉǦ පʈව ưරණය ɭ

ɪෙŎෙසʢකර ʈභʆංහ ʆɜපාල එǎɜව ඇɢȘŹය ɪɪධ ෙසʢවා සɀපකාර සȽƯය C.A.(P.H.C)

APPEAL අංක 8/94 නƍ ưǦǐව ෙකෙරʏ ȝමාණවƮ සැළûɢලú ෙනʣදúවා Ưȫම;

(ඇ) අȴයාචකෙĘ ඉɢɤම හා සȼබǦǝත අෙනýƮ ෙɢඛණ එනȼ ǎවɐෙǦ අනýƮ

පළාƮවලට ෙසබස්ƯයǦ ȝනාǦǐ නƍ ưǦǐෙɩ ස්ථාවරය අǩව කටɒƱ ûɝමට ǨƯපƯ

ෙදපාəථෙȼǦƱව මęǦ ලබා Ǐ ඇƯ උපෙදස් සැළûɢලට ෙනʣගැǨම;

CA/PHC/0117/2018

Page 6 of 17

(ඈ) ආəǂක ǐෂ්කරතා ඇƯ සǊභාවමය අȴයාචකෙයýට ෙබɞȼකරණයûǦ අනƱɞව

සȿපකාර සȽƯ ෙරŏස්žාəවරයා ෙවත අȴයාචනයú මĵǦ ǨƯෙɏ සහණ ලබා ගැǨමට ඇƯ

අවස්ථාව අʏȽ ɫම සළකා ෙනʣබැɤම.”

When translated into English, it reads thus;

“(a) Failure to properly consider the case law relevant to the appellant's

request;

(b) Failure to give sufficient consideration to the analysis made in the

Sebastian Fernando vs. Katana Multi-purpose Co-operative Society in

relation to the appeal deposit, and the subsequent decision in Wijesekera

Subhasinghe Siripala v. Elpitiya Multi-purpose Co-operative Society

C.A.(P.H.C) APPEAL No. 8/94;

(c) Failure to consider other documents relevant to the appellant's

request, namely; the instructions given by the Attorney General's

Department to other provinces in the island to act in accordance with the

position of the Sebastian Fernando case;

(d) Failure to consider the deprivation of a bona fide appellant with

economic hardship of the opportunity to seek relief in law through an

appeal to the Registrar of Co-operative Societies after an arbitral award.”

It is in this backdrop, I would now, propose to consider the instant appeal

based on the grounds of appeal so urged by the Appellant.

I would think it appropriate at this juncture to reproduce verbatim the same,

the paragraph 10 of the petition which sets out the grounds for his application

for writs of certiorari and mandamus sought therein;

“10. ෙපƮසȼකɞ ෙමʏǏ ûයා ʆŹǦෙǦ ƱǦවන වග උƮතරකාර ෙȩɞȼකɞෙĘ ưǦǐවට

එෙරʏව කɞǩ ûයා ʆźමට ඇƯ අවස්ථාව අʏȽ ɫම ǧසා පහත සඳහǦ ෙහʢƱ මත ɒúƯෙɏ

අපගමනයú ʆǐ ɫ ඇƯ බවය.

CA/PHC/0117/2018

Page 7 of 17

(අ) ෙසබස්ƯයǦ ȝනාǦǐ එ. කටාන ɪɪධ ෙසʢවා සɀපකාර සȽƯය (X1) යන නƍ

ưǦǐෙɩ Ǐ 1973 සȿපකාර සȽƯ ɝƯ මාලාෙɩ 49 (xii) අɝƯය 1972 සɀපකාර පනෙƮ

ɝƯ සෑǏමට ඇƯ බලය ඉúමවා සෑǑ ɝƯයú බව ȝකාශයට පƮ කර Ưȫම;

(ආ) තවද ෙසබස්ƯයǦ ȝනාǦǐ නƍ ưǦǐව ȝකාශයට පƮ කර ƯȪයǏම ඉǦ පʈව

ưරණය ɭ ɪෙŎෙසʢකර ʈභʆංහ ʆɜපාල එǎɜව ඇɢȘŹය ɪɪධ ෙසʢවා සɀපකාර සȽƯය

C.A.(P.E.C) APPEAL අංක 8/94 නƍ ưǦǐව මĵǦ ද ඉහත ü ස්ථාවරය Șʘෙගන

Ưȫම;

(ඈ) ǎවɐෙǦ අනýƮ පළාƮ වලට ෙසබස්ƯයǦ ȝනාǦǐ නƍ ưǦǐෙɩ ස්ථාවරය අǩව

කටɒƱ ûɝමට ǨƯපƯ ෙදපාəථෙȼǦƱව මĵǦ උපෙදස් ලබා Ǐ Ưȫම. (X2);

ඈ) සǊභාවමය අȴයාචකෙයýට ෙබɞȼකරණයûǦ අනƱɞව ෙමවැǧ අȴයාචනයú

මĵǦ ǨƯෙɏ සහණ ලබා ගැǨමට ඇƯ අවස්ථාව අʏȽ ɫම.”

When translated into English, it reads thus;

“10. The petitioner states that the deprivation of the opportunity to

present matters in defence against the decision of the 3rd Respondent-

arbitrator, has resulted in a miscarriage of justice for the following

reasons:

(a) In the case of Sebastian Fernando v. Katana Various Services

Cooperative Society (X1), it was declared that Section 49 (xii) of the

Cooperative Societies Rules, 1973 was a rule made in excess of the

power to make rules under the Cooperatives Act, 1972.

(b) Further, even after the Sebastian Fernando judgment was

pronounced, the said position was also accepted in the subsequent

case of Wijesekera Subhasinghe Siripala v. Elpitiya Various

Services Cooperative Society C.A.(P.E.C) APPEAL No. 8/94

(d) The Attorney General’s Department has instructed other

provinces in the island to act in accordance with the position of the

Sebastian Fernando judgment. (X2)

CA/PHC/0117/2018

Page 8 of 17

d) A bona fide appellant can obtain relief of law through such an

appeal after a hearing. Loss of opportunity.”

Upon a careful analysis of paragraph 10(අ) of the petition in particular that was

furnished by the Appellant to the High Court of the Central Province holden in

Kandy for a kind of relief as enumerated above, it clearly, appears that before

the High Court, the Appellant had not in any manner, sought to challenge the

vires of Rule 49(xii)(a) of the Co-operative Societies Regulations 1973 read in

conjunction with section 72(2) of the Central Province Co-operative Societies

Statute of No. 10 of 1990 as amended, instead he had proceeded on an

assumption that the Supreme Court in Sebastian Fernando vs. Katana Multi-

purpose Co-operative Society-1990 [1] SLR 342, had already, declared and

determined Rule 49(xii)(a) of the Co-operative Societies Regulations 1973 to be

ultra vires.

It is to be noted that, the learned High Court Judge of the Central Province

holden in Kandy appeared to have proceeded to dismiss the instant application

on the premise that the Supreme Court in Sebastian Fernando vs. Katana

Multi-purpose Co-operative Society (Supra) had not declared any order as to

the vires of Rule 49(xii)(a) of the Co-operative Societies Regulations 1973 as

being a binding judicial precedent. It is this order, that the Appellant now,

seeks to canvas before us in the instant Appeal.

However, it is significant and interesting to observe that the Appellant had in

the instant appeal before us, abandoned his original position so adverted to,

before the High Court that the Supreme Court in Sebastian Fernando vs.

Katana Multi-purpose Co-operative Society(Supra), had already, declared and

determined Rule 49(xii)(a) of the Co-operative Societies Regulations 1973 to be

ultra vires, instead, he had endeavoured to convince this Court both in the oral

and written submissions made at the hearing of the instant appeal before us

that the learned High Court judge of the Central Province holden in Kandy in

arriving at the said findings which resulted in the dismissal of the application

CA/PHC/0117/2018

Page 9 of 17

of the Appellant, or this Court in arriving at the findings in CA(PHC) 12/2014-

Decided on 05.10.2018, had not in any manner, taken into consideration the

pertinent observations made by their Lordships Mark Fernando, J and

Kulatunga, J in Sebastian Fernando vs. Katana Multi-purpose Co-operative

Society (Supra) as to the vires of Rule 49(xii)(a) of the Co-operative Societies

Regulations 1973 read in conjunction with section 72(2) of the Central Province

Co-operative Societies Statute of No. 10 of 1990 as amended.

While, vehemently, controverting and refuting the original position so adverted

to by the Appellant before the High Court, it was on the other hand, contended

at the hearing of this appeal before us by the 1st and 3rd Respondents that the

Supreme Court in Sebastian Fernando vs. Katana Multi-purpose Co-operative

Society (Supra) had not declared Rule 49(xii)(a) of the Co-operative Societies

Regulations 1973 to be ultra vires, but the Supreme Court in Weerakkody

Pathirennehelage Somarathne Vs. D.D. Premachandra, Comissioner of Co-

operative Societies and Others-SC APPEAL 58/80-Decided on 28.07.1981 had

held it to be intra-vires and therefore, the petition of the Appellant is

misconceived in law and as such, it should be dismissed in-limine with punitive

or exemplary costs. It is to be observed that the 2nd Respondent too, had

associated with the position so adverted to by the 1st and 3rd Respondents at

the hearing of this appeal.

In the light of the above, the pivotal question that would arise for consideration

in the instant appeal, is the legal effect of the observations made by their

Lordships Mark Fernando, J and Kulatunga, J in Sebastian Fernando vs.

Katana Multi-purpose Co-operative Society (Supra) as to the vires of Rule

49(xii)(a) of the Co-operative Societies Regulations 1973 read in conjunction

with section 72(2) of the Central Province Co-operative Societies Statute of No.

10 of 1990 as amended, namely; it can in law, be considered as ratio decidendi

or obiter dicta.

It may now, be examined.

CA/PHC/0117/2018

Page 10 of 17

It is true that the Supreme Court in Sebastian Fernando vs. Katana Multi-

purpose Co-operative Society (Supra) had made an extensive and exhaustive

analysis on the vires of Rule 49(xii)(a) of the Co-operative Societies Regulations

1973. However, it is significant to observe that the Supreme Court had not in

any manner, declare it to be ultra vires, instead the Supreme Court had at page

349, proceeded to state as follows;

“Thus a serious question arises as to the vires of Rule 49 (Xll) (a) that the

requirement of an appeal deposit is not authorised by sections 58 (3), 61

(1) or 61(2) (y). However, as that question was not placed before the

Court of Appeal for consideration, and as the Respondents were not

heard in that Court (nor in this Court, though duly noticed) it is only

proper that it should be determined by that Court, after such

amendment of the petition as that Court may permit in its discretion,

and after hearing the Respondents.”

It was further observed by Court in Sebastian Fernando vs. Katana Multi-

purpose Co-operative Society (Supra) at page 360 that,

“For the above reasons, I am of the view that a serious question arises as

to the vires of Rule 49 (XII) (a). This question was not raised in the

appellant's application to the Court of Appeal but only in this Court;

leave was allowed on that ground and the question was argued without

the respondents being heard. As such, it is only proper that a

determination on that ground should be made by the Court of Appeal

after such amendment of the petition as that Court may permit in its

discretion.”

Hence, it clearly, appears that the Supreme Court in Sebastian Fernando vs.

Katana Multi-purpose Co-operative Society (Supra) left the vires of Rule

49(xii)(a) to be considered by the Court of Appeal. However, it was revealed that

when the matter was sent back to the Court of Appeal, the State had given an

CA/PHC/0117/2018

Page 11 of 17

undertaking to Court that the Registrar of Co-operative Development

notwithstanding the insufficiency of fees will entertain the petition of appeal

dated 21.03.1983. In view of this undertaking the petitioner withdrew his

application and hence the Court of Appeal did not make a finding on the vires

of Rule 49(xii)(a) as directed by the Supreme Court as observed by this Court in

CA(PHC)12/2014-Decided on 05.10.2018.

It becomes thus, manifest that the Supreme Court in Sebastian Fernando vs.

Katana Multi-purpose Co-operative Society (Supra) had not in any manner,

gone into the question of the vires of Rule 49(xii)(a) of the Co-operative Societies

Regulations 1973 nor had it declared it to be ultra vires, instead, the Supreme

Court had having observed that a serious question arises as to the vires of Rule

49(xii)(a) of the Co-operative Societies Regulations 1973, that the requirement

of an appeal deposit is not authorized by sections 58(3), 61(1) or 61(2)(y) and

left it to be considered the Court of Appeal but not considered by it for the

reasons enumerated above.

Hence, it clearly, appears that the observations so made by the Supreme Court

in Sebastian Fernando vs. Katana Multi-purpose Co-operative Society (Supra)

is clearly, not a ratio decidendi but, an obita dicta.

In the circumstances, the principle ground so urged by the Appellant in

paragraph 10(අ) of his petition filed before the High Court of Central Province

holden in Kandy in support of his application for writs of certiorari and

mandamus against the 1st Respondent cannot in any manner, sustain in law

and as such his application for writs of certiorari and mandamus ought to have

been rejected in-limine by the learned High Court Judge of Central Province

holden in Kandy on this ground alone, as rightly done by him in the order now

sought to be impugned in the instant appeal before us by the Appellant.

On the other hand, it was inter-alia, held by the Supreme Court in Weerakkody

Pathirennehelage Somarathne Vs. D.D. Premachandra, Comissioner of Co-

CA/PHC/0117/2018

Page 12 of 17

operative Societies and Others(Supra) at page 4 that, “I am therefore of the

view that Rule 49(xii)(a) is the rule that has been framed under Section 61(2)(y)

by the Minister and does not circumscribe the right of appeal granted under

section 58(3) of the Law as the rule making powers of the Minister entitles the

Minister in terms of the law to prescribe forms, fees to be paid and procedure

to be observed.”

It was further held by the Supreme Court in Weerakkody Pathirennehelage

Somarathne Vs. D.D. Premachandra, Comissioner of Co-operative Societies

and Others(Supra) at page 5 that, “and therefore, I am of the view that, Rule

49(xii)(a) is not ultra vires, the rule making powers conferred on the Minister.”

However, it appears that, the Supreme Court in Sebastian Fernando vs. Katana

Multi-purpose Co-operative Society (Supra) had proceeded to consider the

ruling in Weerakkody Pathirennehelage Somarathne Vs. D.D. Premachandra,

Comissioner of Co-operative Societies and Others(Supra) as to the vires of Rule

49(xii)(a) of the Co-operative Societies Regulations 1973 as obiter dicta.

It is in this context, it would be pertinent at this juncture to examine the

distinction between the ratio decidendi and the obiter dicta of a decision.

Rupert Cross in Precedents in English Law (3rd Edition, 1977) delineates the

two legal terms as follows;

“The ratio decidendi of a case is any rule of law expressly or impliedly

treated by the judge as a necessary step in reaching his conclusion,

having regard to the line of reasoning adopted by him, or a necessary

part of his direction to the jury” (page 76)

“Obiter dictum is a proposition of law which does not form part of the

ratio decidendi” (page 79)

CA/PHC/0117/2018

Page 13 of 17

Rupert Cross in Precedents in the English Law (Oxford University Press, 1961

at p. 75) states that,

“in order to discover what the ratio decidendi of a particular case, one

must have regard to the facts of that case, the issues raised by the

pleadings and arguments and subsequent cases that have considered the

case under review.”

It was explicitly, held by Court in Walker Sons and Co. (UK) Ltd. v. Gunatilake

and others-1978-79-80 [1] SLR 231 at 232 that, the ratio decidendi of a

Superior Court is binding for all inferior Courts:

“The ratio decidendi of cases decided by the Court becomes a rule for the

future binding all courts which the courts of last resort are not whether

it be under the same system or under a different system.”

It is significant to observe that, in Weerakkody Pathirennehelage Somarathne

Vs. D.D. Premachandra, Comissioner of Co-operative Societies and

Others(Supra), although the petition of appeal was not sent to the Registrar of

Co-operative Development, the appeal deposit was also not paid and it is in

this context that the Court in Weerakkody Pathirennehelage Somarathne Vs.

D.D. Premachandra, Comissioner of Co-operative Societies and Others(Supra)

unlike in Sebastian Fernando vs. Katana Multi-purpose Co-operative Society

(Supra) had the benefit of a full argument on the vires of Rule 49(xii)(a) of

the Co-operative Societies Regulations 1973 and held that it to be intra

vires.[Emphasis is mine]

According to Rupert Cross in Precedents in English Law (3rd Edition, 1977), a

distinction can be drawn between different kinds of dicta.

This would be:

(a) dicta which are irrelevant to the case in which they occur-obiter dicta; and

CA/PHC/0117/2018

Page 14 of 17

(b) dicta which relate to some collateral issue in the case although not

forming part of the ratio decidendi-judicial dicta. [Emphasis is mine]

This distinction appears to suggest that judicial dicta have a higher level of

authority than mere obiter dicta. [Emphasis is mine]

In the light of the above, it is my view that the dicta in Weerakkody

Pathirennehelage Somarathne Vs. D.D. Premachandra, Comissioner of Co-

operative Societies and Others (Supra) would amount to judicial dicta.

Applying the Judicial dicta pronounced in Weerakkody Pathirennehelage

Somarathne Vs. D.D. Premachandra, Comissioner of Co-operative Societies

and Others (Supra), I would declare Rule 49(xii)(a) of the Co-operative Societies

Regulations 1973, to be intra vires.

There is a further point which is directly, linked with the issue at hand before

us, and it arises out of the doctrine of approbation and reprobation and it may

now, be dealt with.

As manifest from paragraph 10(අ) of his petition as enumerated above, the

Appellant does not in any manner, seek to challenge before the High Court of

the Central Province holden in Kandy, the vires of Rule 49(xii)(a) of the Co-

operative Societies Regulations 1973 read in conjunction with section 72(2) of

the Central Province Co-operative Societies Statute of No. 10 of 1990 as

amended, instead he assumes that the Supreme Court in Sebastian Fernando

Vs. Katana Multi-purpose Co-Operative Society(Supra) had already, determined

and declared Rule 49(xii)(a) of the Co-operative Societies Regulations 1973 to

be ultra vires, nevertheless, he had proceeded to partially comply with the Rule

49(xii)(a) of the Co-operative Societies Regulations 1973 when he had on his

own volition, proceeded to furnish Rs. 50/- as a security deposit along with his

appeal to the 1st Respondent as required by the Rule 49(xii)(a) of the Co-

operative Societies Regulations 1973. Hence, it manifestly, appears that the

CA/PHC/0117/2018

Page 15 of 17

Appellant had by doing so on his own volition, affirmed the Rule 49(xii)(a) of the

Co-operative Societies Regulations 1973 and when the 1st Respondent rejected

his appeal, he had then, proceeded to disaffirm the same rule that he had once

affirmed as aforesaid thereby contending that the Supreme Court in Sebastian

Fernando v. Katana Various Services Cooperative Society (Supra) had declared

it to be ultra vires.

It is in this context, I would think it appropriate at this juncture to examine the

principle enunciated by the Supreme Court in Ranasinghe Vs. Premadharma

and Others 1985 [1] SLR 63 at page 70, wherein it was held that, “The

rationale of the above principle appears to be that a defendant cannot

approbate and reprobate. In cases where the doctrine of approbation and

reprobation applies, the person concerned has a choice of two rights, either of

which he is at liberty to adopt, but not both. Where the doctrine does apply, if

the person to whom the choice belongs irrevocably and with full knowledge

accepts the one, he cannot afterwards assert the other; he cannot affirm and

disaffirm.”

In view of the doctrine of approbation and reprobation enunciated by the

Supreme Court in Ranasinghe Vs. Premadharma and Others(Supra), if the

Appellant in the instant appeal seeks to rely on the Rule 49(xii)(a) of the Co-

operative Societies Regulations 1973 read in conjunction with section 72(2) of

the Central Province Co-operative Societies Statute of No. 10 of 1990 as

amended to contend that he had complied with Rule 49(xii)(a) of the Co-

operative Societies Regulations 1973 when he had furnished Rs. 50/- as

security deposit together with his appeal to the 1st Respondent thereby

affirming that, the said rule is intra-vires, and when the 1st Respondent

proceeds to reject it for non-compliance of the same, he cannot afterwards,

disaffirm it namely; Rule 49(xii)(a) of the Co-operative Societies Regulations

1973 read in conjunction with section 72(2) of the Central Province Co-

operative Societies Statute of No. 10 of 1990 as amended which requires Rs.

CA/PHC/0117/2018

Page 16 of 17

50/- or 10% of the value of the Arbitral award whichever is higher to be

deposited along with his appeal as security deposit, by contending that it is

ultra vires, for; he cannot in law, affirm and disaffirm the same inasmuch as if

the Appellant to whom the choice belongs irrevocably, and with full knowledge

accepts the one, he cannot afterwards assert the other.

In the circumstances, I would hold that the Appellant is now, debarred from

asserting that the Rule 49(xii)(a) of the Co-operative Societies Regulations 1973

is ultra vires, for; he had once, affirmed it to be intra-vires by partly, complying

with the same by depositing Rs. 50/- as security deposit as required by the

said rule.

I would therefore hold that, the contention so advanced by the Appellant,

cannot sustain in law and as such it ought to have been rejected in-limine on

this ground too, as rightly contended by the 1st and 3rd Respondents.

With regard to the ground urged in paragraph 10(ඇ) of his petition furnished

by the Appellant to the High Court of the Central Province holden in Kandy, as

well as the ground urged in paragraph 10(ඇ) of his petition of appeal furnished

to this Court by the Appellant, I would hold that in the light of the law set out

above, it too, cannot sustain in law in view of the judicial dicta pronounced by

the Supreme Court in Weerakkody Pathirennehelage Somarathne Vs. D.D.

Premachandra, Comissioner of Co-operative Societies and Others(Supra) that

the Rule 49(xii)(a) of the Co-operative Societies Regulations 1973 is intra-vires

and as such it too should be rejected in-limine.

In view of the reasons enumerated above, I would hold that the appeal is not

entitled to succeed both in fact and law.

CA/PHC/0117/2018

Page 17 of 17

In the result, I would proceed to dismiss the appeal with costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL