1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal under and in terms of Section 331 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

Hon. Attorney General, Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12.

Complainant Court of Appeal Case No. CA 147/2020 Vs. High Court of Colombo Case No. HC 7457/2014

Abdul Hameed Mohammed Niyaz

Accused AND NOW BETWEEN

Abdul Hameed Mohamed Niyaz Accused-Appellant

Vs. Hon. Attorney General, Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12.

Complainant-Respondent

2

Before: B. Sasi Mahendran, J. Amal Ranaraja, J.

Counsel: Nayantha Wijesundara for the Accused-Appellant. Azard Navavi, S.D.S.G. for the State. Argued on: 25.03.2025 Decided on: 28.03.2025

JUDGMENT

AMAL RANARAJA, J.

1. The Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Appellant) has been

indicted in the High Court of Colombo in High Court case no. HC

7457/2014.

2. The charges in the indictment are as follows;

(a) On or about 13.08.2011, the appellant did traffic 2.59 grams of

heroin without a license or permission of the director, an

offence punishable in terms of Section 54(a)(b) of the Poisons,

Opium, and Dangerous Drugs Ordinance as amended by Act

No.13 of 1984.

(b) During the course of the same transaction, the appellant did

possess 2.59 grams of heroin without a license or permission of

the director, an offence punishable in terms of Section 54 A(d)

3

of the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs Ordinance as

amended by Act No.13 of 1984.

3. When the indictment had been forwarded to the High Court of Colombo,

the Learned High Court Judge have caused the appellant to be produced

in Court by the prison authorities. Thereafter, has handed over a copy of

the indictment together with the annexures to the appellant. Upon the

appellant pleading not guilty to the charges the matter has been taken up

for trial. At the conclusion of the trial, the Learned High Court Judge has

found the appellant guilty of the charges, convicted and sentenced him to

life imprisonment in respect of each charge.

4. The appellant being aggrieved by the disputed judgement and the

sentencing order, has preferred the instant appeal to this Court and

prayed that the conviction and the disputed sentencing order be set aside

and the appellant to be acquitted of the charges.

The case of the prosecution

5. PW1 (IP Chandana) and PW2 (PS10757 Fonseka) have been attached to

the Kotahena Police Station at the relevant period of time. PW1, PW2

together with PC61072, PC61115 and PC33936 have at 09.05 hrs on

13.08.2012 set out from the Kotahena Police Station to engage in routine

surveillance activity. Accordingly, PW1 and the officers have travelled to

Maha Vidyala Mawatha in Colombo and halted the vehicle they travelled

4

in, at a spot in the locality. While PC61072 Bandara had remained in the

vehicle the officers travelled in, the others have proceeded on foot to a

shanty town referred to as the 146waththa. When the officers were about

to move into the shanty town, a person had come from the direction of the

146waththa and such person has aroused the suspicion of PW1. PW1 has

proceeded to search the person, PW1 has recovered a pink coloured plastic

bag from the possession of the person. The pink coloured plastic bag had

contained a brown coloured powdered substance. PW1 through the smell,

texture and the colour of the powdered substance has distinguished it to

be a heroin mixed powder. Thereafter the person has been questioned, his

identity verified and arrested. PW1 has also recovered a sum of Rs. 63,000

from the possession of such person. The person arrested has been

identified to be the appellant by PW1 and PW2.

6. The officers together with the appellant have in due course travelled to a

pawning centre named Venkateshwara. The heroin mixed powder has been

weighed, while in the pink coloured plastic bag and then it has been placed

in an envelope with a label and the envelope sealed. The sealed envelope has

been purportedly registered as a production in Sri Lanka Police property

receipt no. 19/2011. Upon the sealed envelope being handed over to the

reserve officer on duty at the Kotahena Police Station, it has been kept in safe

and proper custody until it was taken to the Government Analyst Department

for analysis. The Government Analyst has conducted the necessary tests and

prepared a report. Such report has been marked -7. The money recovered

5

from the possession of the suspect has been purportedly registered in the

suspect property receipt no.15/2011.

The case of the accused

7. The appellant has maintained that he was taken into custody at the

146waththa when he went there to perform manual labour. Upon the

appellant being arrested, he has been taken to the Kotahena Police Station

and detained overnight. The appellant has realised that he has been falsely

implicated when an officer proceeded to obtain his fingerprints the following

day.

Grounds of appeal:

8. The following grounds of appeal were urged by the Learned Counsel for the

appellant when the matter was taken up for argument;

i. The chain of custody has not been proved by the respondent

due to the unexplained loss of the production and property

receipts.

ii. The notes on the raid are vague, therefore, the prosecution

version is improbable.

9. The Learned Counsel for the appellant has contended that as the

prosecution has failed to forward to Court the Sri Lanka Police property

receipt no. 91/2011 and the suspect property receipt no. 15/2011

6

therefore, the appellant has been denied an opportunity to challenge the

chain of custody of the production.

10. Though the Sri Lanka Police property receipt and the suspect property

receipt have been listed as items of evidence at the back of the indictment,

the prosecution has failed to produce those receipts in Court. In the

circumstances, the prosecution has made a formal request to Court that

it be granted further time to inquire into the matter and report to Court its

outcome. On 15.02.2016, an additional application has been made by the

prosecution to add the Officer-in-Charge at the Kotahena Police Station as

PW10 in order to advance an explanation through such witness the state

of affairs of the receipts in issue. However, PW10 has not testified in Court

though the Learned State Counsel has simply revealed that the particular

receipts have been misplaced. The Police property receipt and the suspect

property receipt being important documents to manifest the inward

journey of the production and the taking into custody of a suspects

property, it is my view that the prosecution should have demonstrated to

Court through cogent evidence that those receipts have been misplaced.

However, the prosecution has failed in that regard.

11. Additionally, the Learned State Counsel has not made a formal

application to produce the copies of those receipts as evidence at the trial.

Consequently, it could be inferred that such request has not been made

7

because the prosecution did not possess copies of the receipts in its

docket. This situation raises a doubt as to whether the production was

registered at all and whether it was subsequently handed over to the officer

on reserve duty at the Kotahena Police Station. It is also unclear as to

whether the copies of the Police property receipt and the suspect property

receipt have been forwarded to the Attorney General along with the IB

extracts for his advice. For these reasons, I believe it is fraught with danger

to rely solely on the oral testimony of the officers on duty at the reserve of

the Police Station regarding the chain of custody of a production especially

when the prosecution has failed to establish through compelling evidence

that the particular Police property receipt and suspect property receipt

have been misplaced.

12. Due to the aforesaid reasons, the Learned High Court Judge has

misdirected himself when he concluded that the prosecution has proved

beyond a reasonable doubt the inward journey of the production.

13. The incident referred to in the charge has occurred in the year 2011.

Fourteen years have lapsed since the offence has been purportedly

committed. Therefore, it does not seem just to call upon the appellant to

defend himself again after such an unconscionable lapse of time.

8

In The Queen vs. G.K.Jayasinghe 69 NLR 314 at page 328, Sansoni, J,

has stated,

we have considered whether we should order a new trial in

this case. We do not take that course, because there has been a

lapse of three years since the commission of the offences, and

because of our own view of the unreliable nature of the

accomplices evidence on which alone the prosecution case rests.

We accordingly direct that the judgment of acquittal be entered.

14. Hence, having considered the matters referred to above, I am of the view

that this is not a fit case to order a re-trial, I set aside the conviction

together with the disputed sentencing order and acquit the appellant of

the charges preferred against him.

Appeal allowed.

15. The Registrar of this Court is directed to communicate the judgment to

the High Court of Colombo for compliance.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

B. SASI MAHENDRAN, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal