..

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

CA (Writ) Application No. 324/2017

In the matter of an application for the issuance of Writs of Certiorari and Mandamus under Article 140 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

Dr. Abdul Hassan Mohamed Mawjood,

623/8A, Rajagiriya Garden, Nawala Road, Rajagiriya.

Petitioner

Vs.

1. Dr. S.D. Happuarachchi, Chairperson and Director, (Member of Board of Management), Institute of Indigenous Medicine University of Colombo, Rajagiriya.

1a. Professor Priyani Paranagama, Chairperson and Director, (Member of Board of Management),

Institute of Indigenous Medicine, University of Colombo, Rajagiriya.

2. Dr. P.R. Waratenna, Head of Ayurveda Section, (Member of Board of Management), Institute of Indigenous Medicine, University of Colombo, Rajagirya.

1

2a. Dr. L.P.A. Karunathilake,

Head of Ayurveda Section,

(Member of the Board of Management)

Institute of Indigenous Medicine

University of Colombo, Rajagiriya.

3. P.H. Ariyaratne,

Deputy Registrar,

(Secretary to the Board of

Management),

Institute of Indigenous Medicine

University of Colombo, Rajagiriya.

3a. T.M.H.P.K. Gunathilake,

Deputy Registrar,

(Secretary to the Board of

Management),

Institute of Indigenous Medicine,

University of Colombo, Rajagiriya.

4. L.H. Thilakarathne, Additional Secretary (Administration),

Ministry of Health Nutrition and

Indigenous Medicine, (Member of Board of Management),

Institute of Indigenous Medicine,

Suwasiripura, Colombo 10.

5. Dr. Dammika Abeygunawardena,

(Member of Board of Management),

Provincial Commissioner of Ayurveda,

Provincial Department of Ayurveda,

Pallakele, Kundasala.

6. Prof. Jeniffer Perera,

Dean, Faculty of Medicine,

2

University of Colombo,

(Member of Board of Management)

Institute of Indigenous Medicine,

No. 25, Kynsey Road, Colombo 8.

7. Prof. S.S.B.D.P. Soysa,

Faculty of Medicine, University of

Colombo, (Member of Board of Management),

Institute of Indigenous Medicine

No. 25, Kynsey Road, Colombo 8.

8. Dr. S.M.H. Sena Banda,

(Member of Board of Management)

Institute of Indigenous Medicine

Ayurveda Medical Council,

Old Kottawa Road,

Navinna, Maharagama.

9. M.D.D. Peiris,

(Member of Board of Management),

Institute of Indigenous Medicine, University of Colombo, Rajagiriya.

10. Dr. Tharaka Prasad Hendawitharana,

(Member of Board of Management),

Institute of Indigenous Medicine,

University of Colombo, Rajagiriya.

11. C. Maliyadde, (Member of Board of Management), Institute of Indigenous Medicine,

University of Colombo, Rajagiriya.

12. Dr. J.C.K.D. Kumarasekera, (Member of Board of Management),

Institute of Indigenous Medicine

3

Director, Ayurveda Teaching

Hospital, Colombo 8.

13. Mrs. J.M.C.J. Wijetunga,

State Secretary,

Ministry of Higher Education and

Highways, Higher Education

Division,

(Member of Board of Management),

Institute of Indigenous Medicine,

University of Colombo, Rajagiriya.

14. Mr. K.D.C.S. Kumaratunga,

Commissioner of Ayurveda,

(Member of Board of Management),

Institute of Indigenous Medicine,

Old Kottawa Road,

Navinna, Maharagama.

15. Dr. M.D.J. Wijayabandara,

Director,

(Member of Board of Management),

Institute of Indigenous Medicine,

Bandaranayake Ayuveda Research

Institute, Navinna, Maharagama.

16. Dr. M.S. Chamari Weeraratne,

(Faculty of Medicine)

(Member of Board of Management),

Institute of Indigenous Medicine,

University of Colombo, Rajagiriya.

17. Dr. U.R.P.P. Wimalasooriya,

(Medical Officer NATH), Member of Board of Management,

Institute of Indigenous Medicine,

University of Colombo, Rajagiriya.

4

18. Dr. T. Weeraratne,

(Director Technical Ministry of

Health, Nutrition & Indigenous

Medicine)

Member of Board of Management,

Institute of Indigenous Medicine,

University of Colombo, Rajagiriya.

19. Dr. B.M. Rishad,

(Medical Officer NITM),

(Member of Board of Management),

Institute of Indigenous Medicine,

University of Colombo, Rajagiriya.

20. Prof. Kapila Senaviratne,

Department of Chemistry,

University of Kelaniya,

(Member of Board of Management),

Institute of Indigenous Medicine,

University of Colombo, Rajagiriya.

21. A.V. Janadara,

(Director, Department of National

Budget),

(Member of Board of Management),

Institute of Indigenous Medicine,

University of Colombo, Rajagiriya.

22. T.P. Liyanarachchi,

(Deputy Bursar), (Member of Board of Management),

Institute of Indigenous Medicine,

University of Colombo, Rajagiriya.

23. Dr. M.1. Manuha,

Senior Lecturer Gr. 1, Sectional Head,

5

Institute of Indigenous Medicine,

University of Colombo, Rajagiriya.

24. Dr. N. Fahamiya,

Senior Lecturer Gr. II,

Institute of Indigenous Medicine,

University of Colombo, Rajagiriya.

25. Dr. M.S.M. Shiffa,

Senior Lecturer Gr. II,

Institute of Indigen.ous Medicine,

University of Colombo, Rajagiriya.

26. Dr. M.H.M. Nazeem

Senior Lecturer Gr. II,

Institute of Indigenous Medicine,

University of Colombo, Rajagiriya.

27. Dr. B.M. Nageeb,

Senior Lecturer Gr.I,

Institute of Indigenous Medicine,

University of Colombo, Rajagiriya.

28. Senior Prof. Laxman Dissanayake,

Vice-Chancellor,

University of Colombo,

No. 94, Cumaratunga Munidasa

Mawatha, Colombo 3.

29. University Grants Commission, of Sri Lanka, 20, Ward Place,

Colombo 7.

30. Hon. Wijeyadasa Rajapaksha,' Ministry of High Education,

20, Ward Place, Colombo 7.

6

Before:

Counsel:

31. Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

Respondents

P. Pad man Surasena, J / President of the Court of Appeal Arjuna Obeyesekere, J

G. Sureshkumar for the Petitioners

Sobhitha Rajakaruna, Senior Deputy Solicitor General for the 1st -22nd and 29th - 31 st Respondents

M.S.M.Falim for the 24th - 2ih Respondents

Supported on:

Written Submissions of the Petitioner

tendered on:

Written Su bmissions of the 1st - 22nd, 24th - 27th and 29th - 31st Respondents

tendered on:

Decided on:

ARJUNA OBEYESEKERE, J

01 st August 2018

28th August 2018

13th September 2018

28th September 2018

By an amended petition dated 3rd January 2018, the Petitioner has sought the

following relief:

a) A Writ of Certiorari to quash the decision of the Board of Management of

the Institute of Indigenous Medicine taken at its meeting held on 24th July

7

2017 to reject the recommendation of the 1st Respondent to reappoint

the Petitioner as the Head, Department of Unani of the said Institute1;

b) A Writ of Certiorari to quash the election held on 10th August 2017 to

elect the Head, Department of Unani;

c) A Writ of Certiorari to quash the appointment of the 23rd Respondent as

the Head, Department of Unani;

d) A Writ of Mandamus compelling the 1st to 22nd Respondents to reappoint

the Petitioner to the post of Head, Department of Unani.

The Institute of Indigenous Medicine has been established in terms of the

Institute of Indigenous Medicine Ordinance No. 7 of 1979, published in

Extraordinary Gazette No. 67/14 dated 21st December 1979. A copy of the said

Ordinance has been produced by the Petitioner marked 'Pl0'. The said

Institute is attached to the University of Colombo.

In terms of paragraph 12(1) of the said Ordinance, the Board of Management

of the Institute shall exercise, perform and discharge the powers, duties and

functions conferred or imposed on, or assigned to, the Institute by the said

Ordinance. Paragraph 12(3) of 'Pl0' sets out in detail the powers, duties and

functions of the Board of Management and includes the power to regulate and

to determine all matters concerning the Institute in accordance with the

provisions of the Universities Act2 and the broad power to exercise all.other

1 The said decision of the Board of Management of the Institute of Indigenous Medicine has been annexed to the petition, marked 'Pll',

2 Paragraph I2(3)(b) of 'RIO'

8

powers of the Institute, the exercise of which is not otherwise provided for in

the Ordinance.3

The Director of the Institute shall be its principal executive officer, the principal

academic officer4 and is the Chairman of the Board of Managements. In terms

of paragraph 8(3) of the said Ordinance, 'it shall be the duty of the Director to

give effect, or to ensure that effect is given, to the decisions of the Board of

Management'.

The Petitioner is a Unani Medical Doctor. By letter dated 30th May 20146, he

had been appointed as the Head, Department of Unani of the Institute of

Indigenous Medicine for a period of 3 years, by the Board of Management of

the said Institute. By letter dated 24th May, 2017 annexed to the petition

marked 'pg', the Petitioner had been re-appointed as the Head of the said

Department for a second term of three years7 by the 1st Respondent Director

of the Institute, subject to the approval of the Board of Management.

The Board of Management, at its meeting held on 24th July 2017 had

considered the board paper8 relating to the re-appointment of the Petitioner

as the Head of Department for a further period of three years, and rejected the

said appointment made by the 1st Respondent. The Board of Management had

decided that the 1st Respondent should summon a meeting of the board of

lecturers of the Unani Section and choose a suitable candidate. The Board of

3 Paragraph 12(3)(t) of 'R10'.

4 Paragraph 8(1) of 'R10'.

s Paragraph 11(1) of 'R10'.

6 The letter of appointment has been produced with the petition, marked 'P6'.

7 The three year period was from 1st June 2017 to 31st May 2020.

8 The Board paper has been produced with the petition, marked 'P9a'.

9

Management had also proposed that a secret ballot be taken in the event of

there being more than one candidate. The relevant decision of the Board of

Management has been produced with the petition, marked 'Pll,9 and reads as

follows:

"Cfo~ QCJ)6). O)en~o ~tS ~g Cf@~~ @O)k: G>~ ~tS CfQ~~Q@m

QCJ)6)~<!COtl5 ~en18 Cfo~@aS Cf)E)ldc.oflrlm@~ oz;cl !) <!COJdei ~orn~

~g Cf@CO~ @O)Jo) G>tl5en) @@eorn ~~ ~tlS en1mC:> 00) @~Jdei e>tl5~ en

O{5)Q d6S~~tlS oz;e)z;~ e>m) ~g IDe>rn tl)~en)tl)Q flrlm~ !>&D 8>o~

tll6en @~."

In pursuance of this decision of the Board of Management, the 1st Respondent

had summoned a meeting of all the lecturers for 10th August 2017 to discuss

the appointment of the Head of Department.10 At this meeting, the name of

the Petitioner and the 23rd Respondent had been proposed as candidates and

therefore, a secret ballot had been taken of the permanent confirmed

lecturers who were present at the said meeting. The 1st Respondent had not

permitted the probationary lecturers the opportunity of voting. The 23rd

Respondent had received 11 votes while the Petitioner received 9 votes.

Accordingly, the 23rd Respondent had been selected as the Head of

Department. Although the 23rd Respondent had been subsequently appointed

as the Head of Department, material relating to the said appointment has not

been presented to this Court.

9 The said decision has also been marked as 'P1S',

10 The minutes of the meeting has been annexed to the petition, marked 'P18',

10

Being dissatisfied with the appointment of the 23rd Respondent as the Head of

the Department, the Petitioner invoked the jurisdiction of this Court seeking

the aforementioned relief.

The grounds urged on behalf of the Petitioner before this Court are three fold.

The Petitioner's first ground is that the Board of Management ought to have

afforded the Petitioner a hearing prior to rejecting his re-appointment as Head,

Department of Unani and that no reasons have been given for the said

rejection.

Provision with regard to the appointment (and re-appointment) of the Head of

Department is found at paragraph 14(1) of the Ordinance 'P10' and reads as

follows:

"Each Department of study shall have a Head of Department, who shall be

a full-time officer of the Institute and the administrative and academic

head of that Department. He shall be appointed by the Board from

among the teachers of that Department upon the recommendation of

the Director." [emphasis added]

It is clear from the above provision that the appointment must be made by the

Board of Management on a recommendation by the Director. However,

according to 'pg', the Petitioner has been re-appointed as Head by the 1st

Respondent Director, subject to the approval of the Board of Management.

Thus, it is clear that the 1st Respondent has exceeded her powers when she

issued the letter of appointment marked 'pg'. Therefore the said appointment

made by 'pg' is void ab initio. In these circumstances, this Court is of the view

11

that the Board of Management was right when it rejected the said

recommendation marked 'P9a'.11 Given the fact that the appointment made in

'P9' was clearly wrong, this Court is of the view that the necessity to give the

Petitioner a hearing or to adduce reasons, as claimed by the Petitioner, does

not arise. In these circumstances, this Court does not see any merit in the first

complaint of the Petitioner and is of the view that a Writ of Certiorari does not

lie to quash the decision reflected in 'Pll'.

The Petitioner's second ground is that the conducting of an election to select a

person to be appointed as the Head, is an abdication by the 1st Respondent of

her right to recommend a person to be appointed as the Head of Department.

The third ground of the Petitioner is that the probationary lecturers have been

wrongfully excluded from voting at the election. Both these grounds urged by

the Petitioner relate to the conducting of the election that led to the selection

of the 23rd Respondent and her subsequent appointment.

In this regard, this Court observes that the Petitioner has been conferred an

alternative remedy by way of paragraph 23 of the Ordinance of the Institute

marked 'PlO' which reads as follows:

'If any question arises as to whether any person has been duly elected,

appointed, nominated or co-opted as, or as to whether any person is

entitled to be, a member of any Authority or other body of the Institute,

such question shall be referred to the (University Grants) Commission,

whose decision thereon shall be finaL'

11 Vide the decision of the Board of Management, marked 'Pll'.

12

This Court has consistently taken the view that this Court will not exercise its

writ jurisdiction, which is discretionary in nature, where there exists an

effective alternative remedy.12 This Court is of the view that the above remedy

provided to the Petitioner is not only an effective and satisfactory alternative

remedy but a remedy which is more convenient and beneficial to the

Petitioner and that the Petitioner's purported grievance with regard to the

election and appointment of the 23rd Respondent should have been referred to

the University Grants Commission. The Petitioner has not only failed to do so

but has not explained why he did not avail himself of this remedy.13 In these

circumstances, this Court is of the view that the Petitioner is not entitled to the

Writ of Certiorari to quash the holding of the election and the subsequent

appointment of the 23rd Respondent. Therefore, this Court is of the view that

this is not a fit case in which notices should be issued.

However, as the Petitioner is complaining of a purported illegality in the

election process and for the purpose of completeness, this Court would

proceed to consider the second and third grounds urged by the Petitioner.

Paragraph 14(i) of the Ordinance 'Pi0' only specifies that the recommendation

for the appointment of a Head of department shall come from the Director.

Paragraph 14 is silent on the manner in which the Director shall make the

recommendation and therefore, it is within the power of the Director to device

a suitable scheme. The decision of the Board of Management in 'Pil' that a

suitable candidate be selected by the 1st Respondent in consultation with the

Staff members and that it would be preferable to conduct an election where

lZ See the judgment of this Court in Thajudeen v Sri Lanka Tea Board and another (1981) 2 SLR 47l.

13 See the judgment of this Court in Halwan and Others v. Kaleelul Rahuman (2000) 3 SLR 50.

13

there is more than one candidate does not result in the Director abdicating her

power to recommend a suitable candidate for appointment by the Board of

Management. This Court must note that the management of the said Institute

has been structured in such a manner where the Board of Management will

issue directions and the responsibility of implementing them will be with the

Director. The course of action proposed by the Board of Management has

ensured the effective participation of all the important bodies and persons at

the Institute in the selection of the Head, Department of Unani. Thus, this

Court is of the view that the decision of the Board of Management in 'Pll' has

ensured transparency in the selection of the Head, Department of Unani.

This Court must observe that the person selected as the Head must have the

support of the majority of the staff and therefore obtaining their consensus is a

healthy practice. Having an election where there is more than one candidate is

a manifestation of such practice and is within the power conferred on the 1st

Respondent to recommend a suitable candidate.

In exercising her discretion to select a suitable candidate, the 1st Respondent

can decide who is entitled to vote in the event of there being an election.

When one considers the fact that only teachers and other staff who have been

confirmed in their appointments are eligible to be members of the

Departmental Committee14, this Court does not find the decision of the 1st

Respondent to exclude probationary lecturers as being arbitrary.

In this background, the selection and subsequent appointment of the 23rd

Respondent as the Head is not illegal. Therefore, this Court is of the view that

14 Paragraph 15(1) of the Ordinance 'P10'.

14

the second and third grounds urged by the Petitioner are without merit and

that the Petitioner is not entitled to a Writ of Certiorari to quash the election

and the subsequent appointment of the 23rd Respondent.

There is one other matter that this Court would like to advert to. The

Petitioner has annexed with the petition material relating to the selection of

the Head of Department in the past. According to a Board paper dated 1 i h July

2009 marked 'P21', it was the Unani Academic Staff Committee that had

unanimously decided to propose to the Director the appointment of Mrs.

M.S.S. Fawmiya as the Head, Department of Unani. After Mrs. Fawmiya

refused to accept the appointment, the Unani Academic Staff had been

summoned for a meeting on 13th August 2009 by the then Director 'to get the

decision (of the staff) for appointing a new person as the Head of the Unani

section.' The minutes of the said meeting has been annexed to the petition

marked 'P19'. This Court has examined 'P19' and finds that the proposal that

the academic staff nominate a suitable candidate from among themselves had

come from the Petitioner himself. Thus, the 1st Respondent consulting the staff

members of the Unani Department in 2018 is not a new phenomena but

something that has happened even in 2009 with the full knowledge and

participation of the Petitioner.

In view of the decision of this Court that the Petitioner is not entitled to the

Writs of Certiorari prayed for, the necessity to consider the Writ of Mandamus

does not arise, suffice to say that the Petitioner has no legal right to be

appointed as the Head of Department and therefore, would not be entitled to

a Writ of Mandamus in any event.

15

For the reasons set out in this Order, this Court sees no legal basis to issue

notices on the Respondents. This application is accordingly dismissed, without

costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P. Padman Surasena, J/ President of the Court of Appeal

I agree.

President of the Court of Appeal

16