1 1

1 1 ! ,

!

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

CN177/2010

HIC Colombo case No. 105412002

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of Section 331 (1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No 15 of 1979.

Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo 12.

COMPLAINANT

Ranasinghe Arachchige Lionel alias Ariyapala

ACCUSED

And,

Ranasinghe Arachchige Lionel alias Ariyapala

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs,

Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENT

Before: Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J (PICA) &

H.C.J. Madawala J

Counsel: J. Tenny C. Fernando for the Accused-Appellant S'hq,,,,: \ k~\"''(l~-tl''\.fl-l}ilafl Ratflayake SSC for the AG

Argued on: 16.10.2015,20.10.2015

Written Submissions on: 27.11.2015, 30.11.2015

Judgment on: 26.02.2016

Order

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J

2

Accused-appellant to the present appeal Ranasinghe Arachchige Lionel alias Ariyapala was indicted

before the High Court of Colombo under section 54 A (d) of the Poisons Opium and Drugs Ordinance

as amended by Act No. 13 of 1984 for possession of 2.3 grams of Heroin at Peliyagoda.

After trial before the Judge, the accused-appellant was found guilty on the Indictment and was

sentenced to life. Being dissatisfied with the above conviction and sentence the accused-appellant has

preferred this appeal.

During the appeal before us the Learned Counsel for the accused-appellant raised the following

grounds of appeal.

1. Has the Learned Trial Judge erred in law by failing to consider Senerathne's evidence as

not credible enough to prove the case beyond reasonable doubt in the absence of evidence

of chief investigating officer

2. Has the Learned High Court Judge addressed his mind to the effect of the fact that

Senarathne has admitted that he read notes of Thennakoon in contrary to section 159 (2) of

the Evidence Ordinance which has caused immense prejudice and that itself creates a

reasonable doubt?

3

3. Learned Trial Judge has failed to give due consideration to the fact that inward journey of

the production has not been proved beyond reasonable doubt by the prosecution.

4. Learned Trial Judge has failed to consider the lengthy dock statement made by the accused-

appellant in the proper context which clearly creates a reasonable doubt on the prosecution

case.

5. Failure of the prosecution to adduce evidence of chief investigation office or witnesses to

affirm the position of the prosecution, which has curtailed the ability of the defence to

attack the veracity of the witnesses and there by denied a fair trial.

6. Learned Trial Judge erred in law by imposing burden on the accused-appellant to prove his

defence (where it was not the defence) which is clearly misdirection of law and fact, both

caused miscarriage of justice.

Before considering the above grounds of appeal raised by the Learned Counsel for the accused-

appellant I would like to first discuss the prosecution case as presented by the state before the High

Court.

At the High Court trial the prosecution had led the evidence of the following witnesses

1. PC 30762 Senarathne

2. Deputy Government Analyst Sakunthala Tennakoon

3. IP Dayananda

4. Sub Inspector Kulasena

5. PS 13775 Nandasena

It was revealed during the trial that the chief investigating Officer of this detection, SI Dinesh

Tennakoon was not available to give evidence since he had vacated post and had gone abroad at the

time the case was taken up for trial.

4

According to the evidence of witness Senarathne, he had received the information with regard to the

present detection from his private informant and had recorded the said information in his pocket note

book and thereafter produced the same before SI Dinesh Thennakoon. The said information to the

effect "Lionel alias Ariyapala of old Kandy Road, Peliyagoda had left to bring some Heroin. He will

come back between 11- 12 and he can be shown when he is returning" was received by him at 9.17

hours on 11/04/2001.

On the Directions of SI Tennakoon a police party led by SI Tennakoon, comprising of PC Senarathne,

PS Pushpakumara. PC Bandara, PC Ranil, PC Ovitigala, PC Amarasinghe and PC Somaweera had left

the Police Narcotic Bureau at 9.40 hours along with the informant.

The Jeep in which they were travelling was stopped at the Thotalanga Police Barrier and the witness

along with SI Tennakoon and the informant got down from the Jeep and went up to Sithijaya timber

mill on the old Kandy road by a three-wheeler. Around 11.45 the informant pointed out the person

called Lionel and went inside the timber mill to avoid being seen by the suspect. Thereafter

SI Tennakoon stopped the person, divulge the identify of them and searched the person. A light green

cellophane bag was recovered from his waist between the sarong and the body with a brown colored

powder. The arrest was made by SI Tennakoon with the assistance of the witness, got down the jeep

near the timber mill and returned to the Police Narcotic Bureau around 12.30 pm.

Mter return to the Police Narcotic Bureau the production which was in the custody of SI Tennakoon

was weighed and tested in the presence of the accused and thereafter sealed them with SI Tennakoon's

private seal and thumb impression of the suspect. On the instructions of SI Tennakkon the witness had

made the relevant entries on the sealed parcel in his hand writing. The said production was handed

over to PS Kulasena by SI Tennakoon in his presence and the witness had identified the signature of

SI Tennakoon in the productions register. The witness had signed as a witness to the said entry.

Witness had identified the entries he made and the production during his evidence.

~f

5

Sakunthala Tennakoon, the Deputy Government Analyst was called as the next witness by the

prosecution and she had given evidence with regard to the parcel she received for examination as

follows;

G:-

g:-

G:-

g:-

She had finally identified 2.3 grams of Diacetyl Morphine from the 18.5 grams of Brown Powder

which was inside the said parcel.

In order to establish the inward production chain the prosecution had led the evidence of

IP Dayananda who had handed over the production to the Government Analyst. According to him the

I

!I,1

I

I!

~

6

productions were received with seals of SI Tennakoon and the thumb impression of the suspect intact

from PS Nanadasena on 12.04.2001 at 12.30 pm and thereafter handed over the parcel to the

Government Analyst Department on 23.04.2001.

According to the evidence of SI Liyanarachchi he received the sealed parcel and the suspect from

SI Tennakoon on 11.04.2001 at 13.10 hours and handed over the parcel to PS Nandasena on

12.04.2001 at 6.35 hours PS. Nanadasena in his evidence confirmed receiving the production from

SI Liyanarachchi at 6.35 hours and handing over it to IP Dayananada at 10.45 hours. Both those

witnesses confirmed that seals of SI Tennakoon and the thumb impression of the suspect were intact

when the parcel was received by them and handed over to the next officer.

At the conclusion of the prosecution case the rights of the accused was explained to the accused when

calling the defecne and the accused had opted to make a statement from the dock. It is observed by the

court that the accused had given a lengthy dock statement which runs in to 32 typed pages. This court

intends to consider this statement at a later stage of this Judgment.

Out of the several grounds of appeal raised on behalf of the accused-appellant 1st, 2nd and 5th grounds

of appeal raised by the Learned Counsel points at one single issue, that is the admissibility and the

evidentiary value of the evidence given by witness Senarathne.

As admitted before this court, the chief investigating officer Sub-Inspector of Police Dinesh

I: I

Tennakoon was not available to give evidence in this case. In the absence of any other witness to

corroborate the evidence the prosecution has totally relied on the evidence of Senarathne.

In the case of The Attorney General V. Mohomed Saheeb Mohamed Ismath CA 87/97 (Court of

II Appeal minutes dated 13.07.1999) Jayasuriya J observed that" There is no requirement in law that

evidence of a police officer who has conducted an investigation in to a charge of illegal possession of

~Ii

Heroin, should be corroborated in regard to material particulars emanating from an independent

7

source, section 134 of the Evidence Ordinance states that, 'No particular number of witnesses shall in

any case be required for the proof of any fact."

In the case of Devunderage Nihal V. The Attorney General SC Appeal 154 /10 (Supreme Court

minutes dated 12.05.2011) Suresh Chandra J after considering several judgments on the same issue

had observed that "Therefore it is quite clear that unlike in the case where an accomplice or a decoy is

concerned in any other case there is no requirement in law that the evidence of a police officer who

conducted an investigation or raid resulting in the arrest of an offender need to be corroborated in

material particulars. However, caution must be exercised by a trial judge in evaluating such evidence

and arriving at a conclusion against an offender. It cannot be stated as a rule' of thumb that the

evidence of a police witness in a drug related offence must be corroborated in material particulars

where police officers are the key witnesses. If such a proposition were to be accepted it would impose

an added burden on the prosecution to call more than one witness on the back of the Indictment to

prove its case in a drug related offence however satisfactory the evidence of the main police witness

would be."

As observed by this court, witness Senarathne had received the first information with regard to the

present detection from his private informant and recorded the same in his pocket note book. Thereafter

brought to the notice of the said information to Sub-Inspector Dinesh Tennakoon, who decided to

carry out the raid. Witness had accompanied SI Tennakoon with his informant up to the place where

the detection took place, and had assisted Tennakoon to search and arrest the suspect. He had seen the

recovery being made and thereafter came back to the Police Narcotic Bureau and engaged in testing

and sealing process on the instructions of SI Dinesh Tennakoon and entered details on the sealed

parcel from his own hand writing. Therefore when the production was handed over to the reserve he

signed as one of the witness to the productions Register. Thereafter it is clear that from the time the

information received, witness Senerathne was actively involved in the investigation up to handing over

of the production and the suspect to the reserve. Under these circumstances this court will have no

1 I \ 1 1 1 1 1 I I i

, i

I l I 1 I I I I I I I

J I

, .

8

reason to reject the evidence of witness Senarathne or decide that his evidence is insufficient to

establish this case unless the evidence of witness Senarathne is found to be unsatisfactory in nature.

Whilst challenging the evidence of witness Senarathne, the learned Counsel for the accused-appellant

submitted that the evidence given by witness Senarathne is contrary to the provisions in section 159

(2) of the Evidence Ordinance. It was the positions of the Learned Counsel for the accused-appellant

that a reasonable doubt arises as to how Senarathne gained knowledge with regard to very specific

matters only IP Tennakoon would have known. Therefore it was argued that this witness, while giving

evidence prior to coming in to court had gone through notes of IP Tennakoon which is contrary to

section 159 (2) of the Evidence Ordinance and the Trial Judge should have discarded such evidence.

When going through the said argument, I observe that the counsel had raised the said objections

without properly understanding the provisions of section 159 (2) of the Evidence Ordinance.

Section 159 (2) of the Evidence Ordinance reads thus;

"The witness may also refer to any such writing made by any other person, and read by the

witness within the time afore said, if when he reads it he knew it to be correct."

As observed by me earlier in this judgment, witness Senarathne had worked very closely with

SI Tennakoon from the inception of this inquiry and therefore the prosecution could have made use of (,i

~ this provisions to in fact refresh the memory of the witness under the provisions of section 159 (2) but

!what I observe in his evidence is that the witness had always tried to refrain from giving evidence with t

I

[

regard to specific matters only IP Tennakoon would have known. One area the Learned Counsel

highlighted during his argument before us was the contents of the out entry. Witness Senarathne in his

evidence had given names of all officers assisted the raid and other administrative measures from his

memory and his subsequent notes, but when specific questions were put to him he has refrained from

answering those questions.

\

t

9

(Page 89 of the brief)

However, when analyzing the evidence given by witness Senarathne this court is of the view that the

said witness had given credible evidence in all material points. As raised by the Learned Counsel for

the accused-appellant the exact amount paid for the three-wheeler by SI Tennakoon and failure by

witness Senarathne to say to which direction the three-wheeler proceeded after dropping them at

Sithijaya Timber Mill, this court is reluctant to consider as important lapses in the evidence of witness

Senarathne since these areas does not go to the root of the case.

As observed by this court witness Senarathne was subject to lengthy cross-examination by the defence

but his evidence on all material points remained unchallenged. It was the contention of the Learned

Counsel for the accused-appellant that the Learned Trial Judge had misdirected himself when he

accepted the evidence of the sole witness when the defence was deprived of contradicting his evidence

with the evidence of other evidence, in the absence of any other witness being summoned by the

prosecution. I see no merit in this argument for several reasons. Firstly I observe that the court had not

curtailed the defence when they continued with the cross-examination of the sole witness. We observe

that he was firm, credible and trustworthy. Secondly section 134 of the Evidence Ordinance does not

require a particular number of witnesses for the proof of any fact. When the evidence before the trial

..

10

judge is credible and can be acted upon without any hesitation I see no reason for the judge to look for

further material. Therefore I see no merit in this argument.

It was further argued by the accused-appellant that the prosecution in this case had failed to establish

the inward journey of the production. In this regard I am mindful of the decision in Perera V. Attorney

General 1998 (1) Sri LR 378 where J. A. N. de Silva J (as he was then) held that "The most important

journey is the inwards journey because the final analyst report will depend on that."

1 I I I

In this regard the accused-appellant had not challenged the entire production chain but challenged two

entries made by witnesses Nandasena and Dayananda and argued that due to the said inaccuracies, the

prosecution had failed to establish the production chain. ,

According to the evidence of witness Nandasena he handed over the production to SI Dayananda on

12.04.2001 at 10.15 hours where as SI Dayananda in his evidence stated that he took over the

production on 12.04.2001 at 12.30 hours from PS Nandasena.

As observed by this court every witness who summoned to give evidence in order to establish the

production chain including the Deputy Government Analyst Sakunthala Tennakoon confirmed that all

the seals in the parcel were intact at the time the productions were received by them. From the

evidence of witness Nandasena it is clear that he handed over the production to SI Dayananda and in

turn SI Dayananda confirms that he received the production in fact from PS Nandasena but the only

issue is the time different entered by them. The main purpose of establishing the production chain in a

drug related case is to establish that no opportunity was available to interfear with the production when

it is in custody. This is mainly established through change of hands and if the changes of hands are

established through reliable evidence, this court is not inclined to declare that the prosecution has

failed to establish the production chain meanly due to the said inaccuracy.

As observed by this court earlier in this Judgment, the accused-appellant had made a long statement

from the dock. In the said dock statement he referred to several allegations against the officers of the

.

11

Police Narcotic Bureau including the 2nd witness for the prosecution. Even though he does not referred

to who this second witness was, in his evidence it appears that by referring to 2nd witness he had

referred to witness Senarathne.

During the cross-examination it was suggested to the said witness Senarathne that, the police party

carne to arrest the son of the accused-appellant namely R. Chamila Suranga but since he was not at

horne, the suspect was arrested, even though it was also suggested to the witness at an earlier stage of

the cross-examination that the witness did not take part in raid.

However in his dock statement, he referred to the conduct of the 2nd witness who carne to his house,

including assaulting him and thereafter arresting him on a plan of the mistress his own son. We

observe that none of these issues were put forward before the witness when he was under cross-

examination.

Learned High Court Judge after considering the above dock statement observed that the accused-

appellant had taken up the defence of alibi in his dock statement. In his dock statement the position

taken up by the accused-appellant with regard to his arrest was that he was taken in to custody at his

son's house on the instigation of his son's mistress. When witness Senarathne was under cross-

examination the defence took up the position that the accused was arrested since his son who deals

with drugs was not at horne when the police raided the place.

However, the arrest took place was according to the defence not near Sithijaya Timber Mill as stated

by the prosecution witness. In this regard the Learned High Court Judge had concluded that this is a

defence of alibi since the suspect denies the fact that he was arrested near Sithijaya Timber Mill, but

accused admits that he was arrested by police around the same time at a different place.

In a defence of alibi, the position taken up by the accused is that, since he was elsewhere at that time,

he could not have committed the offence as explained by the prosecution. In the present case the

position taken up by the accused is quite different. He denies the fact that he was arrested near

I ! I \ I I I

.. .. 12

Sithijaya Timber Mill, but states that he was arrested around the same time by the same officers near

his son's house. We cannot agree with the contention of the Learned High Court Judge that the

accused had taken up a defence of alibi in the present case. Therefore with regard 4th and 6th ground of

appeal taken up by the accused-appellant, I am of the view that the Learned High Court Judge had

misdirected himself with regard to the defence taken up by the accused-appellant, but I conclude that

no prejudice had been caused to the accused-appellant from the above misdirection for the reasons that

the Learned High Court Judge after concluding that the accused-appellant had taken up a defence of

alibi had proceeded to evaluate the dock statement and subsequently come to a conclusion to reject the

dock statement for deferent reasons.

As I observed by me earlier in this judgment the dock statement made by the accused-appellant was

contradictory to the defence taken up by the accused-appellant during the trial and therefore I see no

reason to reject the decision taken up the Learned High Court Judge in rejecting the dock statement.

For the reasons discussed above, I see no merit in this appeal and therefore decide to dismiss this

appeal. Appeal is dismissed Conviction and the Sentence is Affirmed.

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

H.C.J Madawala J

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

[ (

!I

1

~ [

%iI

fI1