Page 1 of 9

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA.

The Divisional Secretary,

C.A (PHC) 44/2016 Divisional Secretarial Office,

HC Revision/Kandy/25/16 Harispatthuwa.

MC Kandy /82777/15 Applicant

Vs.

Abusali Jeyilabdin Manafkin,

No.7/1, Mikathanna,

Katugastota.

Respondent

AND

Abusali Jeyilabdin Manafkin,

No.7/1, Mikathanna,

Katugastota.

Respondent-Petitioner

Vs.

The Divisional Secretary,

Divisional Secretarial Office,

Harispatthuwa.

Applicant-Respondent

Page 2 of 9

AND NOW

Abusali Jeyilabdin Manafkin,

No.7/1, Mikathanna,

Katugastota.

Respondent-Petitioner-

Appellant

Vs.

The Divisional Secretary,

Divisional Secretarial Office,

Harispatthuwa.

Applicant-Respondent-

Respondent

Before : Prasantha De Silva J.

S.U.B Karaliyadde J.

Counsel: P.K. Prince Perera with R.M.C Ekanayake and K.K. Farooq for the

Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant.

R. Gooneratne S.C for the Applicant-Respondent-Respondent.

Written Submissions 08.01.2020 by the Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant.

tendered on: 07.01.2020 by the Applicant-Respondent-Appellant.

Argued on: 10.03.2021

Decided on: 30.04.2021

Page 3 of 9

Prasantha De Silva J

Judgment

The Applicant being the Divisional Secretary-Harispaththuwa filed an Application under the

State Lands (Recovery of Possession) (amending) Act No 07 of 1979 as amended in the

Magistrate Court of Kandy against the Respondent namely Abusali jeyilabdin Manafkin,

seeking to eject the Respondent and his dependants in occupation of the land described in the

schedule to the said Application; on the basis that the said land is a state land and the

Respondent is in unauthorized or illegal occupation of the land and he has failed and

neglected to act in accordance with the provisions of the Section 4 (b) of the State Land

(Recovery of Possession) (amending) Act as amended [hereinafter referred to as the Act].

It appears that the Applicant exhibited the Notice of Quit on the land in question and after

receiving summons, the Respondent filed an Affidavit and stated that;

a. No proper Quit Notice was served on the Appellant as mandated by the provisions of

the State Land (Recovery of Possession) Act and by not sending the Notice of Quit,

the Respondent has prevented the Appellant from obtaining a writ;

b. The corpus had not been properly identified by the Respondent.

c. Previously the Respondent had made an identical Application in the Magistrate Court

of Kandy in case bearing No. 59106/2012 against the father of the Appellant on the

same land and the said Application was correctly dismissed and the Respondent never

made an Appeal against the said Order.

d. The Respondent having failed to eject the father of the Appellant, created a land

without proper identification and filed this case.

e. The conduct of the Respondent is mala fide.

Page 4 of 9

Applicant was allowed to reply to the Affidavit of the Respondent, thus counter Affidavit was

filed by the Applicant. Together with the said counter Affidavit, the Respondent produced a

purported Notice to Quit marked as P4 and a report of the Grama Niladhari marked as P3.

It is seen that in the said report P3, the said Grama Niladhari has stated that although he

visited the Respondent to deliver the Quit Notice, but the Respondent did not accept the

same, thus it was accordingly affixed on the new construction.

However, the Learned Magistrate had taken up the matter for inquiry and allowed parties to

file Written Submissions.

Thereafter, the Learned Magistrate of Kandy delivered the Order on 31.03.2016 directing to

evict the Respondent from the subject land.

Being aggrieved by the said Order the Respondent-Petitioner has invoked the Revisionary

Jurisdiction of the High Court of the Central Province Holden in Kandy.

The said Revision application was supported on 23.05.2016 and the learned High Court

Judge of Kandy, refused to issue notice on the Respondent-Petitioner, on the basis that;

a. The Appellant has failed to take up the position that the failure to issue due Quit

Notice by the Respondent to the Appellant in terms of the State Land (Recovery of

Possession) Act as a Preliminary issue,

b. A preliminary issue raised for the 1st time cannot be considered in a Revision

Application,

Page 5 of 9

c. Thus, the Appellant had failed to adduce any exceptional circumstances before the

Court to issue Notice to the Respondent,

Being aggrieved by the said Order dated 23.05.2016, the Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant

[hereinafter referred to as the Appellant] has preferred this appeal to this Court.

On behalf of the Appellant, it was submitted that the Learned High Court Judge has

erroneously refused to issue Notice on the Applicant-Respondent-Respondent [hereinafter

referred to as the Respondent] on the basis that on the ground as to the non-service of Notice

to Quit, as it has been raised for the first time in appeal.

On the contrary, the Respondent together with the Counter Affidavit, produced a purported

Notice to Quit marked P4 and a report of the Grama Niladhari marked as P3. As such, it is

apparent that the issue regarding the non-service of the Quit notice was raised at the inquiry

before the Magistrate, thus the said findings of the learned High Court Judge is ex-facie

erroneous.

It was the contention of the Appellant that in terms of Section 3 of the Act, when Notice to

Quit cannot be served in such manner, the Competent Authority is vested with Power to serve

the Notice to Quit and the Power must be exercised in the manner set out in Section 3 of the

Act. Nevertheless, in the instant case the said Power has been wrongly assigned to the said

Grama Niladhari and/or the Grama Niladhari has taken over the Power of the Competent

Authority.

Apparently, the said section enacts that where the competent authority considers such

service impracticable or inexpedient, exhibit such Notice in a conspicuous place in or upon

that land.

Page 6 of 9

It was further submitted that the Grama Niladhari himself had decided that service of Notices

impracticable and inexpedient.

As such, it was submitted by the Appellant that the assumption of Power under Section 3 of

the Act by Grama Niladhari is contrary to the specific provisions of Law which require only

the competent authority to exercise such power.

In this respect, the Court draws the attention to the Judgment of Alwis Vs Additional

Director General U.D.A reported in [1997 (3) S.L.R 417]. In this case, the Appellant has

failed to establish that she was in fact the competent Authority at the time of the Order of the

Magistrate.

Jayasuriya J. imposed a requirement in this Judgment that the Petition and Affidavit filed in

the Magistrates Court ought to have set out and pleaded such delegation or appointment.

There is no averment in the Affidavit and in the documents filed that the powers of the

Director General have been delegated.

In this instance, it is worthy to note that in the Notice of Quit signed by the Divisional

Secretary as the competent authority had delegated powers to the Grama Niladhari namely

S.M.S.R Samarakoon in view of P4.

The said Grama Niladhari had informed by his letter dated 26.03.2015 [P3] to the Divisional

Secretary, who is the competent authority that since the Respondent refused to accept the

Notice to Quit, it was affixed on the new construction.

Page 7 of 9

As such, the competent authority has exercised powers in the manner set out in Section 3 of

the said Act thus the Notice of Quit was properly served on the Respondent in compliance

with Section 3 of the Act.

However, the learned Magistrate dealt with the said issue and decided not to consider the said

ground as a ground to reject the Application of the Applicant-Respondent-Respondent.

It was established in the Case of Muhandiram Vs Chairman JEDB reported in 1992 (1)

S.L.R 110 by Justice Grero which held that;

In an inquiry under the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act, the onus is

on the person summoned to establish his possession or occupation that it is possessed or

occupied upon a valid permit or other written authority of the state grant according to any

Written Law if this burden is not discharged, the only option open to the Magistrate is to

Order ejectment.

Similarly, Justice Dehideniya held in the case of M.C Margaret Perera Vs Divisional

Secretary Naula [C.A/ PHC/41/2010] (C.A Minutes 31.01.2017) the scope of an inquiry

under section 9 of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act is limited to;

1. Occupying the land on a permit or a written authority.

2. It must be a valid permit or a written Authority.

3. It must be in force at the time of presenting it to Court.

4. It must be in force at the time of presenting it to Court.

5. It must have been issued in accordance with any Written Law.

Further it was held that the party noticed is not entitled to challenge the opinion of the

competent authority on any matters stated in the Application.

Page 8 of 9

Therefore, it is clear that in an action to recover Possession of a State Land, the only available

defense for the Possessor sought to be evicted from the subject Land, is to establish that he is

in Possession or Occupation of the land upon a valid Permit or other Written authority of the

State granted according to any Written Law.

Apparently, the Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant has not submitted any document, valid

permit or grant to substantiate the fact that he had written permission or authority to occupy

the state land in question.

Therefore, in the absence of Written authority or a valid permit to occupy the State land at the

time of serving the Notice of Quit, the Learned Magistrate has correctly issued the eviction

order against the Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant.

Be that as it may, it appears that in Section 9 (1) stipulates another restriction on the

Respondent which was dealt by Justice Wengappuli in the Case of J.M Chandrika

Priyadharshani [The competent authority] Vs Loku Hettiarachchige Seneviratne. [C.A

Minutes 13.07.2018].

At such inquiry, the person on whom summons under section 6 has been served

shall not be entitled to contest any of the matters stated in the application under

Section 5 except that he is in Possession or occupation of the land upon a valid

permit or other written authority of the state granted in accordance with any written

Law and that such permit or authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise

rendered invalid.

Furthermore, Section 5(1) imposes a duty on the Competent Authority to set out certain facts

in his Application for ejectment and has included these factors in Section 5 (1)(a) and (b).

Page 9 of 9

Section 5 (1) (a) (i) of the Act reads that he is a Competent Authority for the purpose of this

Act.

In terms of Sections 5 (1) (a) (i) and Section 9 (1) it is clear that the intention of the

Legislature is to impose a restriction on the Respondent in an application for ejectment, the

Respondent is precluded by contesting before the Magistrates Court against the claim by the

Competent Authority, in terms of the Application made under Section 5 of the Act.

In view of the foregoing reasons, we are of the view that the grounds of Appeal raised on

behalf of the Appellant are without merit thus the Appeal has to be dismissed.

As such, we are not inclined to interfere with the Order dated 31.03.2016 by the Learned

Additional Magistrate and the Order dated 23.05.2016 by the Learned High Court Judge.

Hence, the said impugned Orders are affirmed and the Appeal is dismissed with costs fixed at

Rs.25,000/-.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

S.U.B Karaliyadde J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL