IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRAIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

Court of Appeal Case No : CA HC/177/2013

D.M.Prakash.

Mulakahena,

Thalawa.

Petitioner

Vs.

Hon Attorney General.

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondents

CA. No.177-2013

BEFORE

COUNSEL

DECIDED ON

S. Thurairaja. PC. J.

H.C. Galle No.3429/10

S.Devika de L. Tennekoon, J. &

S. Thurairaja, pc. J.

Asanka Dissanayaka for the Accused-

Appellant.

Chethiya Gunasekara D.S.G.for the

Respondent.

09.11.2017.

Accused-Appellant is present in Court produced by the Prison Authorise.

Counsel for the Accused-Appellant takes up a preliminary issue and

submits as follows.

There were two indictments against the Accused-Appellant

before the High Court and one is High Court case No. 3429/10

relevant to this matter and there was another indictment that is

3429/10 A. In the High Court when these two cases were taken up for

trial the learned State Counsel has made an application that both

matters be heard together (at page 58 and 59 of the brief). The defence

counsel also consented to that application. (at page 60 of the brief).

However there are two distinct offences in those two matters.

Regarding this matter the offence was grave sexual abuse. The other

matter was statutory rape. Both matters have been taken together

1

i

I

iI!

!

,IJ

iIII !

~

and simultaneously heard by the learned High Court Judge.

Proceedings also same in both cases. The learned High Court Judge

has delivered one Judgment for both matters and my respectful

submissions to Court is that there are provisions for joinder of

charges in the Code of Criminal Procedure but there are no

provisions for joinder of cases. My respectful submissions is that it is

illegal and not a mere irregularity, capable of being cured. Accordingly

grave and substantial miscarriage of justice has been caused to the

accused -appellant. In this matter I would like to raise it as preliminary

issue as indicated by the learned Deputy Solicitor General. I

respectfully move that this matter be sent back for re-trial.

Learned Deputy Solicitor General Chethiya Gunasekara states as follows:

This incident was happened within the Jurisdiction of High Court of

Galle. At the time of the incident the girl had been 14 years and 10

month and the application with regard to the amalgamation had been

made on 08.08.2012 at page 58 and as my learned friend very

correctly pointed out there is no provision in the Criminal Procedure

Code to amalgamate cases although there is provision to joint

chargers and I agree with my learned friend's submissions. So I have

no objections sending the case back for re-trial.

Order

In this case the Accused is Dematamulla Gamage Prasan. The

Attorney General had preferred an indictment containing 03 counts of grave

2

sexual abuse occurred somewhere in January 2007. The learned High Court

Judge has combined this case together with another indictment forwarded

by the Attorney General under case No. 3429/10/ A at High Court of Galle.

The Accused is a same person and we find that the learned trial Judge had

combined both indictments and held one trial and passed Judgment and

two sentences. We inclined to agree with the counsels because there is no

provisions under the Code of Criminal Procedure Act and Judicature Act to

combine a trial as combined in this case. In our view the procedure followed

is patently wrong. Therefore we pronounce that there is no trial. Hence this

matter is referred back to the High Court of Galle to commence a fresh trial

against the Accused-Appellant. Since the alleged date of offence was in

2007, the Registrar of the Court of Appeal is directed to inform the Registrar

of the High Court of Galle to give priority in listing this case for trial

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

S. Devika de L. Tennekoon. J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

CN/-

3

IIII

f!!l

IIrtf,,!

,