IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

10. Ranjani Hettiarachchi,

(now deceased),

No.15, Sarana Mahal,

Kurunduwatta Road,

Izadeen Town,

Matara.

10A. Sarana Guptha Hettiarachchi

Gamage,

No.15, Sarana Mahal,

Kurunduwatta Road,

Izadeen Town,

Matara.

And Several Others

Substituted 10th Respondent-

Appellants

CASE NO: CA/196/2000/F

DC MT. LAVINIA CASE NO: 89/1994/T

Vs.

Suranjith Abeysekara,

No. 224/9,

High Level Road,

Nugegoda.

Petitioner-Respondent

And Several Other Respondent-

Respondents

2

Before: A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Ranjan Gunaratne for the 10th Respondent-

Appellant.

Romesh De Silva, P.C., with Sugath Caldera

for the Petitioner-Respondent.

Argued on: 28.10.2019

Decided on: 14.11.2019

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The petitioner filed this action in the District Court of Mt.

Lavinia in order to prove the Last Will of her mother and to have

it admitted to probate. In addition to the petitioner son, the

testator has had ten daughters, who are the respondents to the

case. Out of them, nine have consented to the application of the

petitioner, and only one, who is the 10th respondent, has

objected to it on the basis that the Last Will is a forgery.

After trial, the learned District Judge by order pronounced on

11.01.2000, decided that the Last Will has been duly proved as

an act and deed of the capable testator, and issued Probate to

the petitioner who is the executor of the Last Will. Being

dissatisfied with the said order, the 10th respondent (hereinafter

the appellant) has filed this appeal seeking to set aside that

order.

3

At the argument before this Court, the learned counsel for the

appellant candidly admitted that the appellant failed to prove

the allegation of forgery, and therefore the impugned order of the

learned District Judge can stand and the appeal can be

dismissed.

However, the learned counsel further submitted that, once the

appeal is so dismissed, the petitioner, who is the sole beneficiary

of the Last Will, shall confine his claim to the properties

described in the schedule to his original petition tendered to the

District Court, which the learned counsel described as the

inventory.1

It is the submission of the learned counsel that the petitioner

cannot deal with the properties of his father who predeceased

the mother (the testator in this case) until the petitioner

produces the Probate in respect of the fathers Last Will.

As the learned Presidents Counsel for the petitioner submitted,

this is not the proper forum to canvass that matter.

This appeal is against the order of the District Court whereby

the Last Will was declared proved and Probate issued to the

petitioner. If the appellant now decides not to challenge the said

order, appeal shall be dismissed, and the matter shall end there.

What is described in the schedule to the original petition is not

the inventory. The inventory is required in law to be filed

subsequent to the issuance of the Probate, which has not

happened in this case yet, notwithstanding the order has been

1 Vide page 66 of the brief.

4

made by the learned District Judge. The inventory, according to

section 539(1) of the Civil Procedure Code, shall be tendered to

Court within one month from the date of the taking oath of an

executor.

Section 539(1) of the Civil Procedure Code reads as follows:

In every case where an order has been made, by a District

Court declaring any person entitled to have probate of a

deceased persons will, or administration of a deceased

person's property granted to him it shall be the duty of the

said person, executor or administrator, in whose favour

such order is made, to take within fifteen days of the

making of such order, the oath of an executor or

administrator as set out in form No. 92 in the First

Schedule, and thereafter to file in court within a period of

one month from the date of taking of the oath, an inventory

of the deceased persons property and effects, with a

valuation of the same as set out in form No. 92 in the First

Schedule and the court shall forthwith grant probate or

letters of administration, as the case may be.

Whether disputed proprietary claims can be decided in the

testamentary case itself is another issue, which need not be

gone into in this appeal.

The submission of the learned counsel for the appellant

regarding what shall be included in the inventory cannot be

entertained by this Court in this appeal. That is a premature

submission.

5

The appeal of the 10th respondent-appellant is dismissed with

costs.2

Judge of the Court of Appeal

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

2 The appeal of the substituted 3rd respondents (CA/195/2000/F) has been dismissed by this Court by order dated 10.05.2018.