IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRAIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

Court of Appeal Case No : CA HC/271/2015

Sudath Kumara peprera

Petitioner

Vs.

Hon Attorney General.

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondents

\

CA / 271 / 2015 HC Colombo Case No. HC /2281 /05

BEFORE s. Devika de L. Tennekoon, J

s. Thurairaja, P.C, J

COUNSEL Dr. Ranjith Fernando for the Accused Appellant.

Rohantha Abeysooriya SDSG for the AG.

DECIDED ON 11.12.2017

s. Thurairaja, P .C, J

Accused Appellant is present in Court produced by the Prison authorities.

The counsel for the Accused Appellant takes up an objection that there is no

fair trial for the Accused Appellant because the Learned Trial Judge has pre

judged the case. She had invoked the presumption under Section 114 (f) of the

evidence ordinance, saying, that the Accused Appellant should give evidence.

Counsel submits that there is no fair trial offered to the Accused Appellant

therefore he moves that the matter be sent for fair trial. Senior Deputy Solicitor

General, Mr. Rohantha Abeysooriya who is appearing for the State maintaining

the highest tradition of the attorney General's Department and submits that

there are certain misdirection by the Learned Trial Judge therefore, he

concedes to the application by the Appellant.

Considering submissions of both Counsels the Court invites to attention to

article 13 of the Constitution. We find that the Accused is entitled for a free

and fair trial as enshrined in the constitution. In this case the Learned Trial

Judge by inviting a presumption under Section 114(f) she had come to a Pre-

conclusion of which had denied fair trial to the Accused Appellant. Therefore

the Court hold with the submissions of the Accused Appellant and vacate the

present conviction and the sentence and Order a afresh trial.

We direct the Registrar of the Court of Appeal to inform the Registrar of High

Court of Colombo to bring to the notice of the Judge that this incident alleged

to have happened in 2002 and to give priority in listing the case for Trial tried

and conclude as soon as possible.

Re - trial ordered.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

s. Devika de L. Tennekoon, J

I agree

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

YD/-

i !l ! tI iI! i

tIIi

I1