1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal under and in terms of Section 331 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 as amended.

The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka Complainant

CA HCC 186/23 Vs. High Court of Colombo Case No. HC 7844/15

Mohamed Rafaideen Mahomed Irfan Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN Mohamed Rafaideen Mahomed Irfan

Accused-Appellant

Vs. Hon. Attorney General, Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12.

Complainant-Respondent

2

Before: B. Sasi Mahendran, J. Amal Ranaraja, J.

Counsel: Kasun Liyanage for the Accused-Appellant.

Sudharshana De Silva, S.D.S.G. for the Respondent. Argued on: 12.03.2025 Decided on: 04.04.2025

JUDGMENT

AMAL RANARAJA, J

1. The AccusedAppellant (hereinafter referred to as the appellant) has

been indicted in the High Court of Colombo in High Court case no. HC

7844/2015.

2. The charges in the indictment are as follows;

i. That on or about 23.08.2013, at Mattakkuliya, within the

jurisdiction of this Court, you did traffic 480.92 grams of Diacetyl

3

Morphine (in other words heroin), an offence punishable in terms

of section 54 A (b) of the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs

Ordinance as amended by Act No.13 of 1984.

ii. During the course of the same transaction, you did possess 480.92

grams of Diacetyl Morphine, an offence punishable in terms of

section 54 A (d) of the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs

Ordinance as amended by Act No. 13 of 1984.

3. At the conclusion of the trial, the Learned High Court Judge has

convicted the appellant of the charges in the indictment and sentenced

him to life imprisonment for the first and second charges respectively.

The appellant being aggrieved by the conviction and the sentencing order

has forwarded the instant appeal to this Court.

Case of the prosecution;

4. On August 23.08.2013, PW1 (Sub-inspector Amarasinghe) has received a

tip from an informant regarding a person involved in narcotics

trafficking. Determined to take action, PW1 has decided to conduct a

raid. He has assembled a team of officers and together they have

travelled to the Mattakkuliya area. Upon arriving PW1 has met the

4

informant, who identified and pointed out the appellant near a childrens

park adjacent to Eliyas road close to the main Mattakkuliya road. PW1

with PW4 have thereafter, approached the appellant, identified himself

and conducted a search. During the search, PW1 has discovered the

plastic bag labeled Sale House which the appellant was holding in his

left hand. Inside the bag there had been a parcel wrapped in brown

paper. Upon inspection of that parcel, PW1 has found that it contained

13 smaller parcels. These smaller parcels have been made from green

plastic bags and contained a powdered substance that PW1 has

identified as a heroin mixed powdered substance. The appellant has been

arrested and brought to the Narcotics Bureau for further investigation.

The powdered substance has been subsequently sent to the Government

Analyst for examination. Upon conducting tests, the Government Analyst

has found that the gross weight of the powdered substance to be 1293.56

grams and it to contain 480.92 grams of pure heroin mixed in it. The

Government Analyst report has been marked -14.

Case of the appellant;

5. The Learned High Court Judge has conducted the case in absentia.

Subsequently has found the appellant guilty of the charges. Following

5

the verdict, the Learned High Court Judge has sentenced the appellant

accordingly.

6. The Learned Counsel for the appellant has contended that the narratives

of PW1 and PW4 are inconsistent and therefore not credible. The Learned

Counsel in those circumstances has drawn the attention of this Court to

the following discrepancies;

i. As to the place where the vehicle in which the team of

officers travelled in was brought to a halt when it reached its

destination.

ii. As to the time, the informant of PW1 arrived at the location;

the team of officers was temporarily stationed to provide

further information regarding the appellant.

iii. As to the side of the road the appellant had walked on with

the powdered substance in his possession.

iv. As to the initial reaction of the appellant when he was

accosted by PW1 and PW4.

v. As to the manner in which the powdered substance

purportedly recovered from the possession of the appellant

was examined prior to the arrest of the appellant.

6

vi. As to the manner in which the appellant was handcuffed

upon his arrest.

Grounds of appeal;

7. When the matter was taken up for argument, the Learned Counsel for

the appellant has urged the following grounds of appeal;

i. The Learned Trial Judge has failed to consider the

inconsistencies per se and inter se in and between PW1 and

PW4.

ii. The Learned Trial Judge has failed to consider

improbabilities in the prosecutions case.

8. Witness testimony plays a crucial role in the judicial process serving as a

fundamental source of evidence in legal cases. The reliability of such

testimony can be significantly undermined when contradictions arise. A

contradiction occurs when a witness statement is inconsistent with the

testimony which may manifest as discrepancies in the details of an

event, variations with timelines, or conflicting accounts of actions.

7

9. The location where the vehicle carrying a team of officers came to a halt

upon reaching their destination is not contradictory. However, the

presence of a security guard in the car park is a point of divergence in

the witness account. This discrepancy nonetheless does not undermine

the core of the prosecutions case.

10. PW1 has observed the informant, prior to the vehicle in which the team

of officers travelled came to a halt. On the other hand, PW4 has

witnessed the informants attempt to enter the vehicle in which the

officers were travelling. The informants prior acquaintance with PW1

combined with PW4s lack of familiarity with the informant, accounts for

the difference in their narratives.

11. Further, though PW1 had opened a packet containing the powdered

substance at the scene, PW4 has not seen this incident as he had been

assigned to guard the appellant and was focused on that responsibility.

12. Both PW1 and PW4 have confirmed that the appellant had approached

the location where he was arrested from the opposite side of the road

from where the officers were originally situated.

8

13. Further, PW1 has summoned the remaining officers to the scene where

the appellant was arrested and has instructed PC 717139

Wickramasekara to handcuff the appellant. Both PW1 and PW4 have

attested to this fact.

14. In legal proceedings, contradictions in the evidence presented must be

material, otherwise they can be disregarded.

15. The discrepancies in this case as referred to above do not primarily

pertain to the identity of the appellant, his arrest, the recovery of the

powdered substance or the safe custody of the production. Therefore, the

inconsistencies found in the testimonies of PW1 and PW4 are not

materially significant to the prosecutions case.

16. In The Attorney General vs. Sandanam Pitchi Mary Theresa [2011]

2 SLR 292 at pages 300-304, Shiranee Tilakawardane, J, has stated

that,

Whilst internal contradictions or discrepancies would

ordinarily affect the trustworthiness of the witness statement,

it is well established that the Court must exercise its judgment

on the nature tenor of the inconsistency or contradiction and

9

whether they are material to the facts in issue. Discrepancies

which do not go to the root of the matter and assail the basic

version of the witness cannot be given too much importance

(vide, Boghi Bhai Hirji Bhai v. State of Gujarat. AIR (1983) SC

753.

17. The primary concern of PW1 as the officer in charge of the raid had been

the safety of the other officers and the appellant. Before sealing the

parcel that contained the other parcels with the powdered substance, at

the scene of arrest, PW1 has conducted a risk assessment. Such

assessment has been aimed to determine whether there was a risk of

conflict with the members of the public. Upon concluding that it was not

safe to proceed, PW1 has decided against sealing the production at the

scene of arrest. Therefore, PW1 has acted within his authority in making

such a decision.

18. Furthermore, while the appellant has questioned the time taken to seal

the productions once it was brought to the Bureau, he has not raised this

issue during the trial. Consequently, no explanation regarding this

matter has been provided by PW1.

10

19. Due to the matters discussed above, I am not inclined to interfere with

the disputed judgment together with the sentencing order and dismiss

the instant appeal.

Appeal dismissed.

20. The Registrar of this Court is directed to communicate the judgment to

the High Court of Colombo for compliance.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

B. SASI MAHENDRAN, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal