1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

Orders in the nature of Writs of

Certiorari, Prohibition and Mandamus

under Article 140 of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Sanjaya Thavanesan,

No. 20/2,

28th Lane,

Flower Road,

Colombo 03.

CA (Writ) App. No. 735/2025

PETITIONER

Vs.

1. Harin Fernando,

Minister of Tourism and Land, “Mihikatha Medura”, Land Secretariat, No. 1200/6, Rajamalwatta Avenue, Battaramulla. 2. H.M.B.P. Herath,

Secretary, Ministry of Tourism and Land, “Mihikatha Medura”, Land Secretariat, No. 1200/6, Rajamalwatta Avenue,

2

Battaramulla. 3. Sri Lanka Land Development Corporation, No. 03, Sri Jayawardenepura Mawatha, Welikada, Rajagiriya. 4. The Chairman,

Sri Lanka Land Development Corporation, No. 03, Sri Jayawardenepura Mawatha, Welikada, Rajagiriya. 5. The Divisional Secretary,

Divisional Secretariat- Kelaniya, No. 23/5D, Bangalawatta Road, Kadawatha. 6. Dr. Bandula Gunawardene,

Minister of Transport and Highways, 7th Floor, Sethsiripaya Stage II, Battaramulla, Sri Lanka. 7. The Secretary,

Ministry of Transport and Highways, 7th Floor, Sethsiripaya Stage II, Battaramulla, Sri Lanka. 8. W.A.D.S. Gunasinghe,

General Manager Railways, Sri Lanka Railways Department, Sri Lanka Railway Headquarters, PO Box 355, Maradana, Colombo 10.

3

9. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department, Hulfsdorp, Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

Before: S. U. B. Karalliyadde, J

Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Counsel:

Avindra Rodrigo, P.C. with Ashiq Hassim, Shamalie Jayathunga and Nishika Fonseka

instructed by W.A. Ashan Indika for the Petitioner.

Jemial Sourajah, S.C. for the Respondents.

Argued on: 15.09.2025

Delivered on: 09.10.2025

4

Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Judgement

Introduction

According to the Petition, the Petitioner had become the owner of the land (the three plots of land)

sought to be divested in this application as far back as in 2006. However, the three plots of land

had been acquired by the Government. As such, the Section 2 notice had been issued in 1979 for

the acquisition of a public purpose, followed by the decision to take immediate possession of the

land by the Government in terms of Section 38(a) of the Land Acquisition Act, No. 9 of 1950 (as

amended) (hereinafter referred to as the “LA Act”) .

After taking over the possession, the Government has not utilized the land (the three plots of land)

for the public purpose for which it had been acquired. Therefore, the Petitioner has sought a

divesting order from the 1st Respondent on the basis that the public purpose for which the land was

acquired had been abandoned by the Government; no improvement has been made by the

Government on the land upon acquisition, and no compensation for the acquisition had been paid

to the Petitioner. In those circumstances, the Petitioner had sought an order for a divesture in terms

of Section 39A of the LA Act from the Minister; failing which the Petitioner has filed this

application, and has sought inter alia the following reliefs;

“(d) grant and issue a mandate in the nature of Writ of Mandamus compelling and/or

directing the 1st Respondent to make order divesting unto the Petitioner, in terms of Section

39A of the Land Acquisition Act. The subject land of the Petitioner described in the

Schedule to Deed of Gift No. 80 dated 07.11.2006 attested by Sandun Gamage N.P (P1)

and depicted in Plan No. 677 dated 03.10.1968 prepared by S.Lokanthan, L.S (P2) and/or

5

in Preliminary Village Plan Nos. 140 (P23A), 2792 (P23B) and 2793 (P23C) in so far as

it reflects and relates to the land of the Petitioner;”

The Respondents, after formal notices, have filed limited objections, and according to the

objections, the Petitioner cannot maintain this application as formulated, since he became the

owner or entitled to the land long after the acquisition. This was argued before us on 15.09.2025;

hence this judgement.

Arguments

The thrust of the main contention of Mr. Rodrigo, the learned President’s Counsel for the Petitioner,

is that the Petitioner seeks a Writ of Mandamus for a divesting order from the 1st Respondent, in

terms of Section 39A of the LA Act on three grounds; namely, nonpayment of compensation in

respect of the plots of land that the Petitioner is seeking to divest, the plots have not been utilized

for 46 years after the issuance of the Section 2 notice by the Respondents, and no improvement

has been effected by the public authority who has acquired the land for a particular public purpose.

Elucidating on the same contention, Mr. Rodrigo contended that no compensation has been

claimed either by the Petitioner, and no compensation has been paid in respect of which the

Petitioner seeks a divesting order; additionally, after the acquisition for a particular public purpose

by the Government, no improvement whatsoever has been effected on the acquired land. Therefore,

the Petitioner is entitled to the main relief prayed for in the Petition.

However, on the other hand, Ms. Sourajah, the learned State Counsel, contended that

compensation was not claimed by the Petitioner or his predecessor, as they have slept over their

rights at the correct stage. She contends that he should have claimed compensation when the claim

for compensation was called for in terms of Section 9 of the Land Acquisition Act.

6

The next contention of Ms. Sourajah is that except for Lot No.1 and Lot No.44, compensation has

been claimed and paid by the Government for Lot No.8. Therefore, the Petitioner cannot seek any

divesting order now, although the Petitioner may not have received compensation.

The next contention of Ms. Sourajah is that the Petitioner became entitled to the 3 plots of land

somewhere in 2006, whereas the acquisition had taken place long before that. Therefore, the

Petitioner cannot now ask for a divesting order for not paying compensation. Further, she

contended that namely, not utilizing the land for the purpose for which it was initially acquired,

and non-effecting of improvement, do not arise in this application if the Court decides the

compensation issue in favour of the Petitioner.

However, she conceded that compensation had not been claimed by the Petitioner or the

predecessors-in-title in respect for the three plots of land sought to be divested.

In reply, Mr. Rodrigo contended that in terms of paragraphs 24, 25, and 26 of the Objections, the

Respondents have clearly admitted that no compensation has been paid in respect of the three plots

of land. Therefore, he argued that his client is entitled to a divesting order.

The Petitioner’s claim

The Petitioner became entitled to the three plots of land by virtue of the Deed of Gift executed on

8th November 2006, marked as P1. The said parcels of land are depicted in P2, which is in extent

of 2 Acres 1 Rood and 19 Perches. The devolution of title is also indicated in the titled report

marked as P3 along with the Petition. The said land is also registered in the folios marked as P3(a)

along with the Petition. The relevant lands are also depicted as Lot No.44 of the Preliminary

Village Plan No. 140, Lot No.8 of Preliminary Village Plan No. 2792, and Lot No. 1 of Preliminary

Village Plan No. 2793, attached to the letter annexed to the Petition as X4A to X4C, which had

been obtained from the Sri Lanka Engineering Department.

7

Acquisition

It is an undisputed fact that the same parcels of land had been acquired under the LA Act by the

Respondents for a public purpose. The said acquisition had commenced as way back as in 1979,

as borne out by the document marked as P27. However, the Petitioner later found that the public

purpose for which the land was acquired is abandoned. Therefore, the Petitioner moves this Court

to obtain the reliefs as prayed for in the Petition, seeking a Writ of Mandamus directing the

Respondents to divest the land in terms of Section 39A of the LA Act on three grounds: One is

that the land has not been utilized for which it was acquired for 45 years ago. Second matter is that

no compensation has been paid to the Petitioner as the owner of the said land, and the third matter

is that the Government has leased it out to a private party without effecting any improvements on

the lands. Accordingly, the Petitioner has sought a Writ of Mandamus directing the Respondents

to divest the same in terms of Section 39A of the LA Act.

Now I will consider whether the Petitioner is entitled to have a divesting order in relation to the

above-mentioned grounds. As mentioned above, the Petitioner is the owner of the land as depicted

in document marked as P1 to the Petition. The chain of title is also indicated in P2, a title report

given by a lawyer for the Petitioner. The said land and its relevant deeds have been registered

according to the document marked as P3.

Since the Petitioner is unaware of the notices published in terms of the LA Act, he has written to

the relevant ministry to obtain information under the Right to Information Act, No. 12 of 2016

(RTI Act). Accordingly, 3rd Respondent has responded to the said request and given the relevant

information. According to the relevant information, the notice under Section 2 had been published

on 11th February 1979. Thereafter, the possession of the land had been taken over by the Minister,

who has given directions to the acquiring officer to take immediate possession under Section 38(a)

8

of the LA Act, and the same decision has been published by Gazette No. 67/16 dated 21.12.1979,

annexed as R15 and R16 marked by the Respondents with their limited objections.

The Section 5 notice is thereafter issued; accordingly, the land has been identified and published

in Gazette No. 949/19, dated 14.11.1996 (R3 marked by the Respondents with their limited

objections). In addition to that, the Section 7 notice was also published by Gazette No. 1072/9,

dated 25.03.1999 (same is marked as R6 by the Respondents), calling for claims in respect of the

lands so taken possession, and the relevant information so given with the covering letter is marked

as P27 annexed to the Petition. The relevant plots of land claimed by the Petitioner is depicted in

the Plans bearing No. 98/SLLRDC dated 27.10.2012, and No.107/SLLRDC dated 07.05.2013,

both prepared by Mr. P.A.S Fernando, and the information thereof was given by the Sri Lanka

Land Development Corporation to the Petitioner (the 3rd Respondent). The relevant plans are

annexed to the Petition along with the document marked as P30.

However, since the parcels of land has now been given to a private party, the Petitioner has

requested to divest the lands by P34 in terms of Section 39A of the LA Act. It is also established

by the Petitioner that the land has been given to a private party to store certain pre-prepared

concrete beams and columns, as established by the relevant correspondence between the Petitioner

and the relevant government departments. The said documents are marked as P5 to P13, and P15

annexed to the Petition. The Respondents have not disputed the fact that the parcels of land are in

possession of a private party.

It is an undisputed fact that first, the Section 2 notice has been issued as way back as in 1979, and

the immediate forcible possession has taken place in the same year. Thereafter, the parcels of land

had not been utilised for the public purpose for which it was acquired. In addition to the said

abandonment, the land had not been utilised, or no improvement has been effected on the land so

9

acquired. In addition to that, it has been given to a third party as well. I will further elaborate on

this.

No compensation

In this application, it is the Petitioner’s position that the Petitioner was not paid or awarded any

compensation for the parcels of land acquired by the Government. Although acquisition

proceedings commenced in 1979, the Petitioner became the owner of the land by virtue of the deed

marked as P1, which was executed on 8th November 2006. The Petitioner’s predecessors-in-title

were his parents, who were in possession of the land in question, and in fact, they participated in

the acquisition process and claimed some compensation, though compensation was never paid for

the land acquired by the Government. Therefore, the Petitioner or the Petitioner’s predecessors

have not been paid compensation. As such, this is one of the grounds contemplated by Section

39A of the LA Act for a divestiture.

Non-utilisation of the lands

The second matter to be considered for a divestiture is whether the land has been utilized for the

particular public purpose for which it was acquired or any other public purpose after its acquisition.

The land was acquired in 1979, exactly 45 years ago. However, though it was acquired to widen a

certain rail road, this has not yet been executed, and the Government has abandoned the land

without utilizing it for the said purpose or for any other suitable public purpose. Therefore, as

argued for and on behalf of the Petitioner, and also to that extent conceded by the learned State

Counsel, Ms. Sourajah, it is my view that the Petitioner is entitled to have a divesting order

compelling the Respondents to divest in terms of Section 39A of the LA Act on the second ground

as well.

10

No improvements effected

Thirdly, the said land acquired by the Government in 1979 has now been leased out to a private

entity for commercial purpose. Therefore, a land acquired for the particular public purpose cannot

be utilized for a commercial purpose by the acquiring authority, which is totally irrational.

Accordingly, on the third ground as well, the Petitioner is entitled to obtain a Writ of Mandamus

for a divestiture.

Accordingly, it is clear that after taking immediate possession under Section 38(a) of the LA Act,

the three parcels of land have been left without utilising it for any public purpose. In addition to

that, it is common ground that no improvement has been made to date from the time the immediate

possession took place in 1979, and presently, the land has apparently been given to a private party

on a contract for a private venture, entered into with the 3rd Respondent and the private party.

Accordingly, though it is stated in the course of the argument that it had been acquired for the

purpose for utilising the three parcels of land for the Railway Department, nothing has happened

so far, without even utilising it at least as a source for a junk yard of the Railway Department.

Thus, it is my view that all three conditions required for a divestiture set out in Section 39A of the

LA Act are satisfied.

I will now reproduce Justice Andrew Somawansa’s dicta in the case of Mahinda Katugaha v.

Minister of Lands and Land Development and Others1 in similar circumstances;

“It is my considered view that before the 5th respondent leased the appellant's lands to the

4th respondent for a purported private hospital and resort project which is a profit making

venture of a commercial nature the 5th respondent should have offered the appellant's land

to the appellant himself to develop the land for the public purpose, for development of

1 Mahinda Katugaha v. Minister of Lands and Land Development and Others [2008] 1 SLR 285

11

public utilities. In fact the appellant had submitted an affidavit with his counter objections

in the Court of Appeal wherein he and several persons who claimed to be owners of the

land acquired and leased to the 4th respondent had stated that they can develop the land

for a public purpose and that they have the money to do so. Though counsel for the 4th

respondent contends that this proposal is unacceptable on the face of it as no mention is

made of what the project is or how the financing is to be had, it appears to me that it would

have been just and fair if the appellant was given the opportunity to place before the 5th

respondent the proposal for development of public utility before leasing out the appellant's

land to a profit-making private venture of a commercial nature.”

On the perusal of the notice published under Section 2, I found that there is no specific purpose

for which the several parcels of land were proposed to be acquired, except for mere mention of a

public purpose. Therefore, it is very clear that the use of a Section 2 notice is illegal; because it

always requires the acquirer to mention a specific public purpose for which a land is to be acquired,

as explained by Justice Mark Fernando in the cases of Manel Fernando and Another v. D.M.

Jayaratne 2 and De Silva v. Atukorale 3 as well as in the above-mentioned case of Mahinda

Katugaha v. Minister of Lands and Land Development and Others by Justice Andrew Somawansa.

Further, a decision in terms of Section 38(a) had been made to take immediate possession of the

three parcels lands that the Petitioner seeks to divest. The so-called immediate possession of the

lands has taken place as way back as in the year 1979, as reflected in the documents filed by the

Petitioner along with the Petition marked as P27, for which the Respondents have confirmed the

same by filing R15 and R16 with their objections.

2 Manel Fernando and Another v. D.M. Jayaratne, Minister of Agriculture and Lands and Others [2000] 1 SLR 112 3De Silva v. Atukorale, Minister of Lands, Irrigation and Mahaweli Development and Another [1993] 1 SLR 283

12

Therefore, it is very clear that all the ingredients set out in Section 39A of the LA Act for the

issuance of a divestiture is established and satisfied.

Thus, the Petitioner has requested the Minister, by document marked as P35, for a divestiture,

which the Minister appears to have been dilly-dallying on, having correspondence between him

and various departments, including several Respondents cited in this case.

Conclusion

Thus, it is my view that the Writ of Mandamus sought by the Petitioner compelling the 1st

Respondent to issue a divesting order lies in this case, and accordingly, I grant the same. In addition

to that, I wish to grant certain costs since the Respondents ventured to challenge these proceedings

without painting the true picture to conclude on the Petitioner’s right to a divestiture. Therefore, I

wish to grant Rs. 52,500/- (Fifty-Two Thousand Five Hundred Rupees) as cost of litigation in this

application.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

S. U. B. Karalliyadde, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL