HCC-0081-21

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal in terms of

Section 331 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal Case No. Complainant

CA/HCC/0081/2021

High Court of Hambantota Vs.

Case No. HC 22/2011

Dilwella Vidana Kankanamlage

Chamila Priyanga.

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Dilwella Vidana Kankanamlage Chamila

Priyanga.

Accused-Appellant

Vs.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondent

HCC-0081-21

Page 2 of 23

BEFORE : P. KUMARARATNAM, J

K.M.G.H. KULATUNGA, J

COUNSEL : Nalin Ladduwahetty, PC, with Vajira Ranasinghe and

Kavithri Hirusha Ubeyesekera for the Accused-

Appellant.

Shanil Kularatna, PC, ASG for the Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 11.02.2025

DECIDED ON : 27.03.2025

K.M.G.H. KULATUNGA, J.

JUDGEMENT

1. The accused-appellant, Dilwella Vidana Kankanamlage Chamila

Priyanga (also referred to as the accused) was indicted in the High

Court of Hambantota with the following two counts:

i. for the unauthorised possession of an automatic firearm,

punishable under Section 22(3) of the Firearms Ordinance; and

ii. for the unauthorised possession of 125 Nos. of live ammunition

(90 Nos. of 9 mm calibre live cartridges and 35 Nos. of 7.65 mm

calibre live cartridges) punishable under Section 27(1) of the

Explosives Act.

2. He was found guilty and convicted of both counts as indicted and

sentenced to life imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 25,000 respectively.

This appeal against the said convictions entered and the sentences

imposed on 06.08.2021.

Facts

3. Facts that led to the recovery of the firearm and cartridges are as

follows. In the course of an investigation under the PTA the accused-

HCC-0081-21

Page 3 of 23

appellant was arrested at the Manning Market in Colombo on 1st of May,

2009 and a statement was recorded. Then recoveries inter alia of a

firearm and cartridges were made on 2nd May 2009 in consequence of

information received on a statement made by the appellant under

Section 27(1) of the Evidence Ordinance. The appellant led the Police

Officers to a house at Hambantota. The key to the house was in a pot

concealed in the roof of an outer toilet in the compound of the house

which the appellant himself retrieved and the rear door was opened.

The appellant then pointed out a cylindrical plastic container in which

inter alia dismantled parts of a weapon and live cartridges were found.

PW-01, IP Kaluarachchi, has then assembled the said components and

it constituted into a complete firearm of the make MP5. The ballistics

expert Mr. Madawala confirms that this is a submachine gun of the type

MP5 with a distinctive serial number 00823. The accused was then

indicted for the unauthorised possession of the said firearm and the live

ammunition in respect of which the accused-appellant was convicted.

4. The prosecution led the evidence of eight witnesses, out of which, PW-

01, IP Kaluarachchi, and PW-04, PS 20342 Karunathilaka testified as

to the arrest, recording of the Section 27 statement, and the recovery of

the weapon at Hambantota. These two witnesses are the main

witnesses who narrate the entire sequence of events and the recovery.

PW-07 to PW-11 were called to establish the chain of productions. PW-

12 is the Government Analyst who is a ballistics expert, who testified

as to the examination of the firearm and the ammunition and produced

the report. As for the defence, the accused gave evidence and called two

Officers to produce court records and documents.

Grounds of Appeal

5. The appellant did initially raise several grounds of appeal in the written

submissions, but learned Presidents Counsel Mr. Ladduwahetty, for

HCC-0081-21

Page 4 of 23

the appellant, abandoned the said grounds and reframed the following

grounds of appeal;

i. that the High Court Judge failed to consider the applicability of the

Section 27 of the Evidence Ordinance;

ii. that the production recovered was not produced in the same form

and substance (recovery was parts but what was sent to the

Government Analyst was a complete gun);

iii. that the High Court Judge failed to consider if the accused had

exclusive possession of the weapon;

iv. that the High Court Judge erred in deeming knowledge as

possession;

v. that the High Court Judge erred in concluding that the chain was

proved; and

vi. that the defence case was wrongly evaluated.

Grounds of appeal (i), (iii) and (iv)

6. Grounds (i), (iii) and (iv) will be considered together as they are inter-

connected. They are that the High Court Judge failed to consider the

applicability of the Section 27 of the Evidence Ordinance; if the accused

had exclusive possession of the weapon; and that the High Court Judge

erred in deeming knowledge as possession.

Section 27 of the Evidence Ordinance

7. Mr. Ladduwahetty, PC, urged that the High Court Judge had wrongly

construed the effect and import of Section 27 of the Evidence Ordinance

in coming to the conclusion that there was exclusive possession of the

firearm solely based on the Section 27 recovery. The argument

advanced is that the High Court Judge has simply accepted and acted

upon the Section 27 recovery as being sufficient proof to bring home

the charges of possession (counts No. 01 and 02). It was argued that

the only inference that may emanate from a Section 27 recovery is that

HCC-0081-21

Page 5 of 23

the accused had the knowledge as to the existence of the weapon or

thing so recovered, and that it was kept at the place from which it was

found. In support, he cited the case of Heen Banda v. The Queen 75

NLR 54, where Sirimane, J., Samarawickrama, J., and Weeramantry,

J., held where part of a statement of an accused person is put in

evidence under section 27 of the Evidence Ordinance, it is the duty of

the Trial Judge to explain to the Jury that such a statement is only

evidence of the fact that the accused knew where the article discovered

could be found, and nothing more.

Following the above dicta, in Ranasinghe v. Attorney General (2007)

1 Sri L.R 218, Sisira de Abrew, J., reiterated that,

discovery in consequence of a section 27 statement only leads

to the conclusion that the accused had the knowledge as to the

weapon being kept at the place from which it was detected.

8. Then, Mr. Ladduwahetty, PC, developed his argument and submitted

that to prove the charges of possession as alleged, it is required and

necessary to prove exclusive and conscious possession, in support of

which he cited Banda vs. Haramanis 21 NLR 141, Muttaiah

Siriyalatha Saraswathie vs. Attorney General. (CA/212/95, decided

on 30.06.1999) and Sundaralingam Sankar Kumar vs. Attorney

General (CA/12/2008 decided on 26.01.2018), all of which basically

followed Banda vs. Haramanis (supra), where De Sampayo, J cited with

approval the following passage from page 1892 of the second volume of

Gour, that;

Possession to be criminal must be actual and exclusive, for

criminal liability does not attach to constructive possession

[w]here property is found in a house in the possession of more than

one inmate, none of them could be said to be in possession of it for

the purpose of this offence, unless there is evidence of exclusive

conscious control against them (emphasis added).

HCC-0081-21

Page 6 of 23

9. Then, exclusive and conscious possession were considered in Muttaiah

Siriyalatha Saraswathie vs. Attorney General (CA No. 212/95,

decided on 30.06.1999). Justice F.N.D. Jayasuriya, considering an

allegation of possessing heroin, where the narcotic was found

embedded in the coconut scraper in a house occupied by the accused

together with three other families and the doors and windows were

generally kept open, it was opined that criminal liability attaches only

to possession on which it is proved to be in actual, exclusive and

conscious possession on a part of a person. This opinion was based on

the dicta of Banda vs. Haramanis (supra).

10. Sundaralingam Sankar Kumar vs. Attorney General (CA No.

CA/12/2008, decided on 26.01.2018), concerned also a charge of

possessing heroin of which the facts are as follows. The accused was

arrested at a lodge at Colombo 12. The accused led the Police to a

communication shop at Dehiwala, and at the shop a bunch of keys was

found concealed a drawer that of a house. When a nearby house was

opened and searched. The heroin was found in a cupboard in a room.

The accused was convicted in the High Court. In appeal, the main

ground of challenge was that the evidence has failed to prove exclusive

possession and knowledge cannot be deemed as possession.

11. Thus, for possession to suffice to entail criminal liability it must be

actual and exclusive. De Sampayo J., in Haramanis (supra) did say that,

for criminal liability does not attach to constructive possession. This

was so stated in the context of the thing or drugs found in a house in

the possession and occupation of more than one inmate. However, this

was qualified by stating that none of them could said to be in possession

of a thing found in the house, unless there is evidence of exclusive

conscious control against them. The sum total of this exposition is that if

a thing or property is found in a house as opposed to actual physical

possession, there should be further and additional evidence to prove

exclusive conscious control to prove possession that entails criminal

HCC-0081-21

Page 7 of 23

liability. Therefore, even if there be several persons in possession of a

house exclusive possession may be proved, provided that there is

additional material or evidence to infer and conclude that the particular

accused had control of a conscious and exclusive nature. This will be

so when a thing is recovered on a section 27 statement in a house in

which the accused may have not been physically present as in this

appeal.

Conscious possession

12. The sum total of the authorities cited is that conscious and exclusive

possession is required to be proved to establish criminal possession.

Consciousness, in context, will mean no more than the knowledge of the

accused as to the offensive item, i.e., the firearm. This ingredient of

knowledge may be inferred from a Section 27 recovery. This proves the

element of knowledge or consciousness but is not sufficient as it is only

knowledge and knowledge is not possession.

Exclusive possession

13. Possession is also required to be exclusive to establish criminal

possession. Exclusive possession, would in the strict sense be, personal

and actual possession of the accused. However, criminal liability does

attach to persons who would have control with the requisite knowledge

of any offending item found at a place physically away and distinct from

where such person was. Criminal possession may be proved on the basis

of control and knowledge.

14. That being so, I will now consider as to what may constitute possession,

for the purposes of the Firearms Ordinance and the Explosives Act. It

goes without saying that if a person is found to be in physical

possession, that would clearly suffice to prove conscious possession

unless the circumstances throw a doubt as to the knowledge. Similarly,

if a person had, in his control a thing with the requisite knowledge, that

to my mind would also be sufficient to prove criminal possession under

HCC-0081-21

Page 8 of 23

the Firearms Ordinance. If possession is strictly limited to actual

physical possession only, it would lead to an absurdity. For instance, if

the firearm was found in the house of the accused, and if such accused

was at a different place when or at the time the recovery was made, he

could not be held liable. Can this be so? I think not.

15. To my mind, if the prosecution is able to prove control and knowledge,

it would suffice to prove possession as required by the Section 22 (1) of

the Firearms Ordinance. This would require proof of consciousness or

knowledge in the first instance and then, in the absence of actual

physical possession, proof of control will establish criminal possession.

If not, an owner of a house with the requisite knowledge who has an

unlicenced weapon in his house would go scot-free. The question of

possession is one of fact. When a person keeps a thing in his house or

on his land, he will have the benefit of the attributes of ownership such

as sanctions against trespass and the general respect for them may be

relevant to the factual basis of such persons control. If such premises

is under lock and key of such person then possession may become

exclusive. This may be proved either by direct evidence, or inferentially,

by circumstances.

16. Control, will necessarily be, and mean effective control. In this context,

Section 31 of the Firearms Ordinance, of which the side note is Proof of

possession becomes relevant:

31. Any occupier of any house or premises in which any gun shall

be found shall for the purposes of this Ordinance be deemed to be

the possessor of such gun, unless he proves

(a) that such gun was in such house or premises without his

knowledge or privity; or

(b) that some other person is the possessor of the gun

(emphasis added).

Therefore, Section 31 contains a deeming provision and also there is a

reverse evidential burden placed on an occupier. Who is then an

HCC-0081-21

Page 9 of 23

Occupier? Blacks Law Dictionary, 11th Edition defines an occupier

as one who has possessory rights in or control over certain property or

premises. To my mind, possession in this context contemplates

exclusive occupation, whereas control involves exercising dominion over

the property having a measure of control over the property.

17. To sum up, the first prerequisite to establish an offence under Section

22(1) is the proof of the element of consciousness or knowledge that such

person possesses a firearm. In the instant matter, the Section 27

recovery proves this element. Then, such possession is not required to

be physical possession, but having power and control over such weapon,

if proved, should suffice to bring home a conviction under Section 22(1).

18. That being the law, it was argued in this appeal that exclusive

possession has not been proved. The Trial Judge has held otherwise. It

is correct that the Section 27 recovery as proved in this case will

establish only the knowledge of the accused as to the existence of and

the place where the items were. In this case it is the MP5 weapon,

magazines and the live ammunition found in the storeroom of the

Hambantota house. The house at Hambantota was locked. The MP5

weapon was concealed in a store room within the house in a plastic tube

of which the two ends were closed with endcaps. It is also relevant to

note that, at the point of recovery, all the constituent components of the

MP5 weapon were in the dismantled form. PW-01 had, upon its recovery,

assembled the components, which according to him was a complete

weapon of the said description.

19. The Section 27 statement was that of a large firearm and ammunition.

What was pointed out and found was in a dismantled form and the said

components put together constituted a complete weapon. This leads to

a very significant and relevant inference that when the accused made

the Section 27(1) statement he knew that the said dismantled

components would constitute a complete weapon. This leads to the

HCC-0081-21

Page 10 of 23

additional inference that either the accused himself had dismantled or

it was dismantled with his knowledge, as opposed to merely having seen

some dismantled components of a weapon. This should necessarily be

so, as he otherwise could not have positively stated that it was a weapon.

Control of the weapon

20. As considered above, in view of the recovery based on Section 27 of the

Evidence Ordinance, the knowledge of the accused as to the weapon,

can be inferentially proved. However, as it was not recovered from his

personal possession, there should be other evidence to prove beyond

reasonable doubt the aspect of control of the said item.

21. It is common ground that the Police went to a house at Tissamaharama,

at No. 302/A, Alabagahawatta, Udasgama, Tissamaharama. The

accused also gave evidence and refers to this house as his house. The

accused under cross-examination admits that during the relevant time,

namely at the time of the recovery, he spent much of his time and lived

at his house as No. 302/A, Alabagahawatta, Udasgama, Tissamaharama

(vide page 256, . 302/,

, , . ).

22. Further, the accused in his evidence-in-chief has specifically stated that

at the time of the recovery, his parents were living in a hut in their fields,

and his only sibling, his sister, was married and living elsewhere, and

that the parental home is his. He also admits that there was no one else

in that house (vide page 203,

.

.

).

23. The fact of the existence of a house of this description, in that location,

is confirmed by PW-01 and PW-04. At the time the accused led the police

HCC-0081-21

Page 11 of 23

to the said house, it was locked and there was no one present in that

house. This is confirmed by the accused himself and is common ground.

The key to the house had been retrieved by the accused from a concealed

place, as narrated above. What would the necessary inference be from

these proved circumstances? In the normal course of events, the

accused admittedly happens to be the owner of this house, and at this

point of time, there had been no other in occupation, and the accused

also admits that he spends much of his time and lived in this house.

That, considered with the fact of it being kept locked, and the key being

available to the accused, clearly leads to the only inference that the

accused had exclusive control and possession of this premises. Then,

the weapon was found in a storeroom concealed in a plastic tube, of

which the two ends were covered with end caps, the sum total of this

evidence necessarily leads to the only inference that the accused had

control of the weapon and other items kept in and recovered from the

said house. The evidence has thus clearly established knowledge and

control of the weapon and therefore it is clear and sufficient proof of

exclusive possession.

Proof of knowledge

24. The prosecution has led circumstantial evidence to prove and establish

both knowledge as well as control. The Section 27 recovery is based on

the statement that the accused is able to point out a big weapon (

). Based on this portion of his statement, the accused had led

the Police to a house at Tissamaharama. Admittedly, the house belongs

to, and at that time was generally occupied by the accused and no other.

It was locked. The accused had then retrieved the key of the house from

a concealed place located on the roof of a toilet. This key had opened the

door of the house. These items of evidence lead to the necessary

inference that the accused was privy to the location of the key and he

was aware that the said key would open the door. The accused, in his

evidence, had admitted that the said house is now owned by him; and

his parents, at that point of time, were residing elsewhere in a hut close

HCC-0081-21

Page 12 of 23

to their paddy field. The accused also admits that his only sister does

not live there. It is also relevant to note that he admits that his

permanent residence is at this address. Then it is also admitted that he

spent most of his time at this house during this period.

25. It is on this evidence that the learned Trial Judge has come to the

finding of conscious and exclusive possession of the accused, (vide pages

23 and 26 of the judgement). In paragraph 2 of page 23, the Trial Judge,

in determining exclusive possession, has considered the said

circumstances referred to above. Having adverted to these items, the

Trial Judge has drawn the inference that the accused had the knowledge

as to the concealed place of the key to the house, and pointing out the

improvised container in which the dismantled components of the firearm

and the ammunition was found. Then, having so adverted and

considered the said items of evidence the Trial Judge has at page 26 of

the judgement comes to the finding that the prosecution has presented

cogent evidence to establish conscious and exclusive possession. I find

that these findings and inferences are reasonable and possible on the

evidence.

26. The learned Trial Judge had not compartmentalised this evidence and

considered in that manner. However, he had certainly arrived at this

conclusion, which is a reasonable inference and a correct conclusion,

any trier of fact can reach on this evidence. Therefore, the submission

that the Trial Judge had erred in coming to the finding of exclusive

possession, is misconceived. Accordingly, grounds of appeal (i), (iii) and

(iv) are misconceived.

Ground of Appeal No. (ii)

That the production recovered was not produced in the same form and

substance (recovery was parts but what was sent to the Government

Analyst was a complete gun);

HCC-0081-21

Page 13 of 23

27. It was submitted that at the point of making the recovery, the weapon

was in a dismantled condition, and PW-01 had assembled the same at

that point, and then dismantled, brought it to Colombo, and once again

assembled the parts into a complete weapon. The contention is that this

is a change in the form and substance of the item recovered, which

amounts to tampering, and as such, the production forwarded to the

Government Analyst is in a different form from that which was

recovered. According to the evidence of PW-01 and PW-04, the aforesaid

sequence of events is submitted. This process had taken place in the

presence of the accused. After it was assembled at Colombo, the same

had been sealed inter alia with the left thumb impressions of the

accused. What has been forwarded to the Government Analyst, as

referred to in the notes, and the Government Analysts Report, is a

complete weapon of the type MP5.

28. If this assembly or putting together of the components caused any

change of form and substance of the item that was recovered on the

Section 27 statement is to be considered now. What prompted and why

was it necessary to assemble the components of the weapon as done by

PW-01? It is apparent that the Section 27 statement refers to a

weapon/firearm. Proceeding on the said Section 27 statement, the

recovery made was of parts of a weapon, which PW-01, with his training

and experience, has identified. When the suspect has in the Section 27

statement made a specific reference to the existence of a firearm, it is to

that extent necessary to ascertain if the components found constitute a

complete weapon. Therefore, with the experience and the training of PW-

01, putting it together is quite natural in the circumstances, and in fact

to my mind, is necessary.

29. Further, Section 2 of the Firearms Ordinance defines a gun as follows;

"gun" includes

(a) any barrelled weapon ...; or

(b) any component part of any such weapon; or

HCC-0081-21

Page 14 of 23

(c) any accessory to any such... (emphasis added).

Accordingly, a gun" includes any component part of any such weapon.

Thus, any component part of a weapon (firearm) comes within the

meaning of a gun as defined under Section 2 of the Firearms Ordinance.

So, even if a component part was recovered, that would suffice to come

within the meaning of a firearm as aforesaid. That being so, assembly

of the components in the context of the Firearms Ordinance has not

caused any prejudice or a change of form or substance that affects the

liability under Firearms Ordinance so to say.

30. This immediate step taken to put together these components in the

presence of the accused, on the one hand confirms that the components

recovered constituted parts of a complete weapon. This weapon having

a distinctive serial number is very relevant and significant. This was

observed and noted by PW-01 at the point of recovery, and, in cross-

examination, clearly states that notes were made at the scene

immediately upon the recovery. Accordingly, in view of the definition of

firearm and for the aforesaid reasons, I hold that putting together the

dismantled components, has not in any way changed the character of

the item recovered vis--vis the definition in the Firearms Ordinance.

Ground of Appeal No. (ii) is thus misconceived and lacks merit.

Ground of Appeal (v)

That the High Court Judge erred in concluding that the chain was

proved.

31. It is admitted that the sealing of the production, the firearm as well as

the ammunition had taken place in Colombo. However, it had been

sealed on 02.05.2009. As adverted to above, the sealing had included

wrapping of the weapon and other productions with paper, tying with

twine and sealing with sealing wax, vide evidence at page 109:

: ?

HCC-0081-21

Page 15 of 23

: 6 .

.

, ,

.

, ,

, 35 ,

121/09 .

32. The paper used for the said sealing had been produced in evidence. This

evidence the proper sealing was done in the presence of the accused.

The counsel for the appellant did point out to some inconsistencies in

respect of the chain of productions in respect of the inward journey. In

this instance, what is significant and relevant is that the recovered

components of the firearm had a distinctive number, which was

engraved. It is unchallenged that the MP5 weapon which constituted

when the components were put together had this distinctive serial

number 00823. It is in evidence that this distinctive number is unique

to a weapon. The said number had been observed and identified when

this production was examined by the Government Analyst as well as

when it was produced in court, during the trial.

33. The object and purpose of proving the chain of productions is to ensure

that what was recovered is sent to the Analyst and to exclude any mix-

up or tampering with the production. The prosecution must prove the

chain relating to the inward journey. The purpose is to establish that the

productions have not been tampered with and that the very production

taken from the accused-appellant was examined by the Government

analyst. To this end, the prosecution must prove all the links of the chain

from the time it was taken from the accused-appellant to the Government

HCC-0081-21

Page 16 of 23

Analyst's Department [vide Witharana Doli Nona vs. Republic of Sri

Lanka (CA 19/19) and Perera vs. Attorney General (1998) 1 SLR 378].

34. The evidence in this appeal clearly proves that the weapon,

ammunition, and other items recovered along with the improvised

container was in the custody of PW-01, from the time of recovery up

until they reached the Police Station at Slave Island. At this point, the

weapon had been assembled once again, and productions sealed,

placing the left thumb impression of the accused. It is the evidence of

PW-01 that these sealed parcels were forwarded to the Government

Analyst. The prosecution had endeavoured to lead all the witnesses who

handled the production from the point of sealing until it was taken to

the Government Analyst.

35. In Thushara Jayasinghe vs. Attorney General (CA/HCC/255/2019),

Justice Wickum Kaluarachchi opined that, the serial number is the

best method of identifying a gun. Certain discrepancies, which as I see

are not significant, in the chain evidence was emphasized by the

appellant. Be that as it may, when there is a distinctive or a serial

number which is fixed, as on the MP5 weapon marked P5, the identity

can be clearly established with reference to this number.

36. The evidence is that this is a number unique to this weapon. The

existence of the said serial number 00823 had been observed and noted

at the very inception at the point of recovery. There is no dispute that

the production marked and produced at the trial as well as examined by

the Government Analyst has this same number. This is confirmed by the

evidence of the ballistic expert Mr. Madawala, and the Government

Analysts Report. The same number appears in the relevant production

registers. Therefore, the identity of the firearm is clearly and positively

established with reference to and by the said distinctive serial number.

In such circumstances, establishing the chain in that context may not

be critical and significant in respect of this matter.

HCC-0081-21

Page 17 of 23

37. The live ammunition along with the other two weapons recovered from

two others, have been sealed along with the MP5 firearm P5 and then

taken to the Analyst and brought back to Court together. In these

circumstances, once again, the credibility and the authenticity of the

items recovered being examined is confirmed by this itself. The object

and purpose of this requirement is to ensure that there is no tampering

with the productions intentionally or a possible mix-up between the

recovery and the examination by the expert. When the recovered item

clearly can be identified with an exclusive and distinctive marking or a

number, this requirement of the chain is not critical or significant.

Therefore, considering the totality of the evidence, the argument based

on proving of the inward journey is misconceived. Therefore, this

submission, in the present context, is not relevant and Ground of Appeal

No. (v) is thus misconceived and is devoid of merit.

Ground of Appeal No. (vi)

That the defence case was wrongly evaluated.

38. The complaint of the appellant is that the rejection of the defence is

made on a comparative basis with the prosecution evidence. At pages

313 and 314, the Trial Judge has made the following observations: that

the prosecution has placed before court evidence sufficient to prove

beyond reasonable doubt the charges; then the Trial Judge has also

observed that, the accused is required to explain his innocence only when

the prosecution has placed such cogent evidence may be sufficient to

prove its case beyond a reasonable doubt. Having so observed, the Trial

Judge proceeds to consider the accuseds evidence. Having summarised

the accuseds evidence, the Trial Judge comes to the finding that the

evidence is not consistent as he had failed to complain to any relevant

authority of the alleged assault by the Police, then concluded that the

evidence of the accused is not credible and trustworthy (vide page 319).

On that basis, the Trial Judge has considered the totality of the evidence

HCC-0081-21

Page 18 of 23

and come to the finding that the defence version has failed to create any

reasonable doubt on the Prosecution evidence as a whole.

39. At the very commencement of the judgement, at pages 291 and 292,

the Trial Judge has clearly laid down the principles pertaining to the

burden of proof, the standard of proof and the presumption of

innocence. He observes that the prosecution is required to prove the

charges beyond reasonable doubt, on its own evidence. He also observes

that the presumption of innocence would remain until the prosecution

proves the case beyond reasonable doubt. (

(vide page 5 of the judgement, page 292 of the

brief).

40. However, he does state that an accused may require to explain his

innocence only if the prosecution has placed before court, cogent

evidence that may suffice to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt.

When the Trial Judge asserts that an accused may be required to explain

his innocence it in context it is no more than a reference to the evidential

burden in the lines with the Ellenborough dictum. However, the learned

Trial Judges narration of the burden of proof and the standard has

emphasised that it is the prosecution that is required to prove the case

beyond reasonable doubt and that the presumption of innocence would

remain until the prosecution proves the case beyond reasonable doubt.

41. A misstatement of law by the learned Trial Judge as to the burden of

proof or the standard of proof to that matter would tantamount to a

denial of the benefit of the presumption of innocence. A misdirection on

the burden of proof is so fundamental in a criminal trial that it may

vitiate a conviction. [Nandana vs. Attorney-General (2008) 1 Sri L.R

51].

42. However, whilst writing a judgment a Judge must have in his mind the

principles of law for example the principles relating to presumption of

HCC-0081-21

Page 19 of 23

innocence, the accuseds right to remain silent, the burden cast on the

prosecution to prove the case beyond reasonable doubt which stays

throughout the case etc. [Sarath vs. Attorney General (Eric Basnayake

J.) (2006) 3 Sri L. R96].

43. The Trial Judge has in fact adverted to the correct burden and standard

of proof beyond reasonable doubt and the presumption of innocence at

the commencement the judgment,

(page 5 of the judgement, page 292 of the brief), but has then

also stated that

. The Trial Judge has certainly been

mindful of the required burden and the standard of proof in a criminal

case and the presumption of innocence. Hence, this is not an instance

of a blatant unequivocal misdirection. It is, if at all, ambiguous. In this

regard, I find the following dicta of the Canadian Supreme Court

enlightening, that, trial judges are presumed to know the law: That

presumption must apply with particular force to legal principles as

elementary as the presumption of innocence. Where a phrase in a trial

judge's reasons is open to two interpretations, the one which is consistent

with the trial judge's presumed knowledge of the applicable law must be

preferred over one which suggests an erroneous application of the law.

[R. vs. Burns, 1994 CanLII 127 (SCC): [1994] 1 S.C.R. 656 at pp. 664-

65, 89 C.C.C. (3d) 193 at pp. 199-200.: R. vs. Smith (D.A.) (1989), 1989

ABCA 187 (CanLII), 95 A.R. 304 (C.A.) at pp. 312-13, affirmed 1990

CanLII 99 (SCC), [1990] 1 S.C.R. 991].

44. The Trial Judge has in fact adverted to the correct burden and standard

of proof of beyond reasonable doubt and the presumption of innocence

at the commencement of the judgment. Then upon considering the

prosecution evidence, the Trial Judge has merely stated that the

prosecution has placed before court cogent evidence that may suffice to

HCC-0081-21

Page 20 of 23

prove its case beyond reasonable doubt. However, there is no positive

finding that the prosecution has proved its case beyond reasonable

doubt at this stage. Thereafter, the Trial Judge summarises and

evaluates the accuseds evidence. It is at the end, upon considering the

accuseds evidence that the learned Trial Judge has come to the finding

of proof beyond reasonable doubt (vide page 319). As a matter of rule,

there is no fixed process or sequence fixed by law or otherwise as to how

a Judge should come to a finding in a criminal judgement. One of the

methods would be to consider the prosecution evidence, and if there be

a case established on cogent evidence, then to consider the defence

version, and finally, consider the totality and determine if there be any

reasonable doubt or otherwise. The learned Trial Judge has followed this

process. He had not placed any burden on the accused as stated by the

Appellants counsel. Hence this ambiguity has not prejudiced the

substantial rights of the parties or occasioned a failure of justice.

Contradiction inter se

45. PW-01, IP Kaluarachchi, and PW-04, PS 20342 Karunathilaka are the

main witnesses who narrate the entire sequence of events from the

arrest, recording of the Section 27 statement, and to the recovery of the

weapon and the other recoveries at Tissamaharama, Hambantota. It

was submitted that PW-01 denied stopping at Ambalantota whilst PW-

04 admited stopping at Ambalantota. This according to the Learned

Counsel for the appellant is a serious contradiction which goes to the

root of the case, especially in view of the defence position that this

weapon was obtained or introduced by the police at Ambalantota.

46. It was suggested to PW1 in cross-examination that the accused was

taken to Ambalantota, approximately an hour before they reached

Tissamaharama. Which PW-01 denied, and specifically stated that their

journey to Tissamaharama was via Ratnapura, Udawalawa, and

Thanamalwila. The relevant portion is as follows:

HCC-0081-21

Page 21 of 23

:

,

?

: . ,

, . (vide page

101).

When PW-04 was under cross-examination, he was specifically

questioned as to whether they did not go towards Ambalantota. His

answer was that they did go to Ambalantota. The said questions and

answers are as follows:

: ?

: .

: ?

: . .

(vide page 123)

47. PW-04 has thus stated that their journey to Hambantota was through

Ratnapura, Godakawela and Udawalawa, and then admitted going to

Ambalantota along with the team of Police Officers, the accused and

three other suspects. It is common ground and the Accused too admits

that the other suspects were apprehended after reaching

Tissamaharama, and on their return journey ( .)

If so, stopping at Ambalantota as admitted by PW-04, should necessarily

be during their return journey to Colombo, after searching the house at

Tissamaharama, Hambantota. But what was suggested to PW-01 was

that the accused was taken to Ambalantota an hour before they reached

Tissamaharama. That is on their way to Hambantota, which PW-01

denied. PW-04 specifically has given the route taken to Tissamaharama,

Hambantota, as being through Ratnapura and Udawalawa. This is

consistent with the evidence of PW-01. Both witnesses deny stopping at

Ambalantota on their way to Tissamaharama, Hambantota. What is

HCC-0081-21

Page 22 of 23

admitted by PW-04 was stopping at Ambalantota on their return to

Colombo and what was denied by PW-01 is stopping at Ambalantota on

their way to Hambantota. Therefore, there is no contradiction inter se

and this submission is baseless and misconceived.

Credibility of PW-01 and PW-04

48. The sum total of the defence position is that nothing was recovered at

the Tissamaharama, Hambantota house, but a weapon was introduced

by the Police. If that be so, there would be no rational or logical reason

or any necessity for such a Police Officer to concoct and complicate his

recovery by spinning a fictitious story that the gun was in a dismantled

form. Therefore, the suggestion and the defence position become

inherently improbable. Correspondingly, the testimony that it was in the

dismantled form and the fact that PW-01 has documented the condition

in which the weapon was recovered and the procedure adopted by him,

buttresses and enhances his credibility and the probability of his

version. It is a clear indicator that PW-01 has narrated the events

truthfully in the very manner they happened and transpired. Thus, the

Trial Judges finding that the prosecution evidence is cogent, convincing

and reliable is correct and justified.

Conclusion

49. An Appellate Court exercises a jurisdiction to examine the effect of the

grounds raised in appeal. However, the Appellate Court will not step into

shoes of the trier of fact and revisit the evidence afresh and substitute

its own findings. The defects or insufficiency in the evidence and errors

of law and procedure are required to be tested and considered in the

context of the totality of the evidence and trial. Upon so endeavouring I

am satisfied that the convictions are not unsafe and there is no

miscarriage of justice that warrant the intervention of this Court.

HCC-0081-21

Page 23 of 23

50. On an appeal from a conviction by a Judge alone, where the issue is

whether the verdict is unreasonable, an Appellate Court must determine

whether the verdict is one that a properly instructed jury or judge could

reasonably have reached. The question whether a verdict is reasonable

is one of law but the evaluation of evidence is one of fact. This court

cannot interfere with those assessments of fact unless it cannot be

supported on any reasonable view of the evidence. [vide R. v. Burke,

1996 CanLII 229 (SCC)].

` 51. In the above premises, we see no merit in the grounds of appeal raised

on behalf of the accused-appellant. There is overwhelming evidence to

prove the two charges beyond reasonable doubt. Hence, we see no

reason in law or otherwise to interfere with the findings of guilt and the

convictions.

52. Accordingly, the appeal of the accused-appellant is dismissed, and the

convictions entered and sentences imposed on the accused-appellant

are affirmed.

This appeal is accordingly dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

P. Kumararatnam, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL