IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

C.A.(PHC) No. 59/2013 P.H.C. Colombo No. HCRA 54/2011 M.C. Fort No. S72342/11

In the matter of an application under Article 154P (6) of the Constitution and the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions)Act No.19 of 1990.

J.A. Seetha No.64/ A, Karagalla, Kosgama Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant

Vs.

Ariyadasa Gamage Mahanama, General Manager of Railways, Office of the General Manager Railways, No.355. Colombo10. App licant-Respondent-Respondent

Hon. Attorney General Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12. Respondent-Respondent

1

.,

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

DECICEDON

JANAK DE SILVA, J. &

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant is absent

and unrepresented.

Maithri Amarasinghe S.5.C. for the Applicant-

Respondent-Respondent.

19th March, 2018

04th May, 2018

*************

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

This is an appeal against the order of the Provincial High Court

holden in Colombo, pronounced in a revision application filed against an

order made under the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act No.7 of

1979 as amended, (hereinafter referred to as the said Act)by the Fort

Magistrate's Court.

The Applicant-Respondent-Respondent (hereafter referred to as the

Respondent), the General Manager of Railways, moved the Fort

Magistrate's Court for an order of eviction of the Respondent-Petitioner-

Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the" Appellant") from the portion of

State land described in the schedule to his application. After an inquiry,

the Magistrate's Court made order for evicting the Appellant from the

said portion of State land. The Appellant then invoked revisionary

jurisdiction of the Provincial High Court holden in Colombo to set aside

2

the said order. The High Court by its judgment dated 2nd April 2013

dismissed the petition.

In challenging the legality of the said judgment, the Appellant has

stated in her petition of appeal that the High Court was in error when it

considered only the Respondent's case and it has failed to consider all the

applicable laws. It is further stated by the Appellant that since 1990 she

has paid rent annually to the Respondent for the boutique she has

constructed on the said State land and she had a valid lease agreement

with the Respondent, when he instituted these proceedings.

When this appeal was taken up for hearing on 19th March 2018, the

Appellant was absent and unrepresented. She was present in Court with

her Counsel on 12th January 2018, when her appeal was fixed for hearing.

The Appellant was absent and unrepresented on 21st November 2017 as

well, having had sufficient notice of the later date. Nonetheless, this Court

will consider her appeal.

The complaint of the Appellant that the High Court has failed to

consider the applicable laws and has only considered the Respondent's

case needs to be considered in the light of the applicable legal principles.

It is clear from the record that the Magistrate's Court has issued

summons on the Appellant in compliance of section 6(1) of the said Act

and to show cause as to why she should not be evicted from the said

premises. It is also clear that when the Appellant appeared before it, the

Magistrate's Court has held an inquiry.

The scope of such an inquiry is clearly demarcated in the provisions

of section 9(1) of the said Act. It has clearly been held by this Court in 3

Muhandiram v Chairman, J anatha Estates Development Board (1992) 1 Sri

L.R. 110, Nirmal Paper Converters v Sri Lanka Ports Authority (1993) 1 Sri

L.R. 219 and Perera v Divisional Secretary, Naula CAjPHQ41/2008 (CA.

minutes of 31.01.2017), that in such an inquiry, the only ground on which

the Appellant is entitled to remain on the State land is upon a production

of a valid permit or other written authority of the State, granted according

to any written law, which is currently in force.

There was no such permit or any other written authority that was

produced enabling the Appellant to occupy the said land in the

Magistrate's Court or in the Provincial High Court. In fact, the Appellant

has clearly averred in the affidavit filed before the High Court that she

occupied the State land without payment of rent or lease rental.

In view of these considerations, we find that the appeal of the

Appellant is devoid of any merit and therefore ought to be dismissed.

The appeal of the Appellant is accordingly dismissed without costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JANAK DE SILV At J.

I agree.

\...1' ~ ~ JUDGROFTHE COURT OF APPEAL

4