==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 18

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

In the matter of an application for mandates in

the nature of Writs of Certiorari and

Prohibition in terms of Article 140 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

CA Case No: CA WRIT Application No:

WRT 354/2022

Pallewaththa Gamaralage Maithreepala Yapa

Sirisena,

C79, Hector Kobbekaduwa Mawatha,

Colombo 07

Accused- Petitioner

Vs.

1. Honorable Magistrate,

Fort Magistrate's Court,

Colombo 01.

2. The Registrar, Fort Magistrate's Court,

Colombo 01

Respondent

3. Rev. Cyril Gamini Fernando,

The Residence of His Eminence the Cardinal,

Gnanartha Pradeepaya Mawatha’

Colombo 08

Page 2 of 18

4. Jesuraj Ganeshan

No/75/16 Paramananda Vihara Mawatha,

Colombo 13

Complainant-Respondents

Before: Dhammika Ganepola, J,

Mayadunne Corea, J,

P.Kumararatnam, J,

B. Sasi Mahendran, J,

Amal Ranaraja, J.

Counsel: Faisz Musthapha, P.C., with N Bandara, P.C., Faiszer Musthapha,

Keerthi

Tilekaratne and Bishran Iqbal for the Petitioner

Suren Gnanaraj with Rashmi Dias Goonewardena for the Intervenient-

Petitioner

Rienzie Arsecularatne, P.C., with Thilina Punchihewa for the 3rd

Respondent

Raid Ameen with Ra’na Farouk and Vishakan Sarreswaran for the 4th

Respondent

Sajith Bandara, S.C. for the State

Written

Submissions: 26.11.2025 (by the Petitioner)

On 31.12.2025 (by the 3rd Complainant-Respondent)

19.01.2026 (by the State)

Argued On: 21.05.2025, 27.06.2025, 25.07.2025, 04.08.2025, 28.08.2025,

22.10.2025 and 27.10.2025

Judgment On: 03.02.2026

Page 3 of 18

JUDGMENT

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

In the instant application, the Petitioner challenges the legality of the Order dated

16.09.2022 marked P4, delivered by the Learned Magistrate of the Magistrate Court, Fort,

in the case bearing No. B 23084/22, by issuing process on the petitioner, upon being named

the accused in that case. The Petitioner seeks, inter alia, a Writ of Certiorari to quash

the impugned order made by the 1st Respondent, i.e., the Learned Magistrate of Fort

(hereinafter referred to as the 1st Respondent), and a Writ of Prohibition preventing

further proceedings in the said case.

The 3rd and 4th Complainant-Respondents (hereinafter referred to as the Complainants)

have instituted proceedings before the 1st Respondent by way of a Private Plaint in terms

of Section 136(1)(a) of the Criminal Procedure Code Act No. 15 of 1979 as amended

(hereinafter referred to as the CCPA). In the above complaint marked as P3,

Complainants alleged that the Petitioner has failed to order or supervise the arrest of

Zaharan Hashim and his followers and also due to negligence failed to prevent the deaths

and injuries of the individuals named in the complaint, thereby committing offences

punishable under the sections of the Penal Code and referred to in the complaint.

Upon hearing the submissions of the Complainants, the 1st Respondent, acting under

Section 139 (1) of the CCPA, has issued process on the Petitioner requiring his attendance

before the Fort Magistrates’ Court on 14th October 2022. I hereby reproduce the impugned

order of the 1st Respondent, which is challenged by this application.

“මෙෙ නඩුමේ 1, 2 පැමිණිලිකරුවන් විසින් "පල්මෙවත්ත ගෙරාළොමේ මෙත්‍රීපාෙ යාපා

සිරිමසේන " යන විත්ිකරුට එමරහිව අපරාධ නඩු විධාන සංග්‍රහ පනමත් 136(1) (අ) වගන්ිය

ප්‍රකාරව මෙෙ පැමිණිල්ෙ ඉදිරිපත් කරනු ෙබයි. පැමිණිල්ෙ ඉදිරිපත් කරමින් උගත් ජනාධිපි

නීතීඥ රියන්සි අර්සකුෙරත්න ෙහතා අධිකරණය හමුමේ කරුණු දක්වමින් සඳහන් කර සිටිමේ

පැමිණිල්ෙ සෙඟ ඉදිරිපත් කරනු ෙැබූ මල්ඛන වලින් ද තහවුරු වන පරිදි මෙෙ නඩුවට අදාළ

ප්‍රසේුත කරුණ වන පාසේකු ඉරු දින ත්‍රසේත ප්‍රහාර ොොව සම්බන්ධමයන් මෙෙ නඩුව අසා නිෙ

කිරීෙ සඳහා මෙෙ අධිකරණයට අධිකරණ බෙය ඇි බවටයි. ඒ අනුව, මෙෙ නඩුවට අදාළව

ත්‍රසේත ප්‍රහාරයන් සිදු වූ සිනෙන් ග්‍රෑන්් මහෝටෙය, ෂැන්ිො මහෝටෙය, කින්සේන්සේබරි

මහෝටෙය යන සේථානයන් මෙෙ අධිකරණමේ බෙ සීොව ුළට ගැමණන බවත්, මෙෙ නඩුමේ

චූදිත තැනැත්තා එවකට ජනාධිපි සහ ආරක්ෂක අොතයවරයා මෙසට මකාළඹ - 01

ජනාධිපි මල්කම් කාර්යාෙය ුළ සිටිමින් රාජකාරී සිදු කිරීෙ කළ බැවින් එකී ජනාධිපි

Page 4 of 18

මල්කම් කාර්යාෙයත් මෙෙ අධිකරණ බෙ සීොව ුළට අයත් සේථානයක් බවටත් තීරණය කරමි.

එමසේෙ මෙෙ පැමිණිල්ෙ ෙඟින් දීර්ඝ මෙස විසේතර මකාට ඇි පරිදි ජනාධිපිවරයා, ආරක්ෂක

අොතයවරයා සහ නීිය හා සාෙය පිළිබඳව වූ අොතයවරයා වශමයන් එකී තීරණයන් ගනු

ෙැබුමේ සහ මහෝ ගනු මනාෙැබුමේ සහ අදාළ මනාකර හැරීම් කරනු ෙැබුමේ සහ ආරක්ෂක

ෙණ්ඩෙය රැසේ කරනු ෙැබුමේ මපර කී ජනාධිපි මල්කම් කාර්යාෙය ුළ වන බැවින් ඒ

සම්බන්ධමයන් මෙෙ නඩුව අසා නිෙ කිරීෙට මෙෙ අධිකරණයට අධිකරණ බෙය ඇි බවට

තීරණය කරමි. මකමසේ මවතත්, මම් ප්‍රහාර ොොමේදී මකාච්චිකම් ශාන්ත අන්මතෝනි

මේවසේථානය, කටුවාපිටිමේ ශාන්ත මසබසේියන් මදවසේථානය සහ ෙඩකෙපුමේ සිමයෝන්

මේවසේථානය මෙෙ අධිකරණ බෙ ප්‍රමේශමයන් පිටත පිහිටි සේථානයන් වුවත්, මෙෙ ප්‍රහාරය

එකෙ සිේධි ොොවක සිදු වුණු ක්‍රියාවක් බැවින් එය අපරාධ නඩු විධාන සංග්‍රහ පනමත් 132(1)

වගන්ියට අනුව මෙෙ අධිකරණයට මෙෙ සෙසේත ක්‍රියාදාෙය සම්බන්ධමයන්ෙ මෙෙ නඩුව

අසා තීරණය කිරීෙට හැකි බවට තීරණය කරමි.

පැමිණිලිකරුවන් මවනුමවන් උගත් ජනාධිපි නීතීඥ ෙහතා විසින් කරුණු දක්වමින් සඳහන්

කර සිටිමේ චූදිත විසින් ජනාධිපිවරයා, ආරක්ෂක අොතයවරයා සහ නීිය සහ සාෙය පිළිබඳ

අොතයවරයා මෙසට කටයුු කරමින් සිටිය දී මෙෙ ප්‍රහාරයට මපරාුව ඒ පිළිබඳව බුේධි

මතාරුරු සහ ප්‍රොණවත් වාර්තාවන් ිබිය දී එෙ ප්‍රහාරය වළක්වා ගැනීෙට කටයුු මනාකිරීෙ

ුළින් අපරාධෙය මනාසැෙකිලිෙත්කමින් ක්‍රියා කිරීෙ සහ මනාකර හැරීම් සිදු කර ඇි බවයි.

විමශේෂමයන්ෙ මෙෙ ප්‍රහාරක ොොමේ අදාළ ත්‍රසේත කණ්ඩායම් පිළිබඳව නම් වශමයන්ෙ හඳුනා

මගන ඔවුන්මේ මතාරුරු ෙබා දී ිබිය දී ඔවුන්ට එමරහිව නීිය ක්‍රියාත්ෙක කිරීෙට කටයුු

මනාකිරීෙ පිළිබඳව ද අධිකරණමේ අවධානය මයාමු කරන ෙදී. එමසේෙ සහරාන් හෂීම් ඇුළු

එකී ත්‍රසේත සංවිධානය විසින් ත්‍රසේත ප්‍රහාරයක් දියත් කිරීෙ සඳහා කටයුු කරමින් සිටින බවට

ප්‍රොණවත් තරම් කරුණු අනාවරණය වී ඇි අවසේථාවක සහ එවැනි පිළිගත හැකි කරුණු

අනාවරණය වී ඇි අවසේථාවක චූදිත ඊට දින 5කට මපරාුව විමේශගත වී ඇි බවටද

අධිකරණමේ අවධානය මයාමු කරන ෙදී. එමසේ විමේශගත වීමම් දී ඔහු විසින් වැඩ බෙන

ආරක්ෂක අොතයවරමයක් මහෝ වැඩ බෙන ෙහජන ආරක්ෂාව පිළිබඳ අොතයවරමයක් පත්

කිරීෙක් සිදු මනාකර ඇි බවට ද පැමිණිල්මෙන් කරුණු දක්වයි.

එමසේෙ මම් සම්බන්ධමයන් එවකට අභියාචනාධිකරණ විනිසුරු ජනක් ද සිල්වා ෙැිුොමේ

සභාපතීත්වමයන් යුක්ත ජනාධිපි මකාමිෂන් සභාවක් පත්කර ඇි අතර එකී මකාමිෂන්

සභාමේ අවසන් වාර්තාමේ පිටපතක් " පැ. 2 " වශමයන් සෙකුණු කරමින් උගත් ජනාධිපි

නීතීඥවරයා සඳහන් කර සිටිමේ එකී වාර්තාමේ " පැ. 2 (අ)' හි සඳහන් වන පරිච්චමේදය යටමත්

මෙෙ චූදිත සම්බන්ධමයන් වන නිර්මේශයන් සඳහන්ව ඇි එහිදී වූදිතට එමරහිව දණ්ඩ නීි

සංග්‍රහය යටමත් නැඟිය හැකි මචෝදනාවන් යටමත් නඩු පවින මෙසට නීිපිවරයා මවතට

එකී මකාමිසෙ ෙඟින් නිර්මේශ කර ඇි බවටත් මෙෙ අධිකරණමේ කරුණු දක්වන ෙදී.

Page 5 of 18

ඉහත දක්වන ෙද කරුණු අනුව සහ පැමිණිල්ෙ විසින් ඉදිරිපත් කරන ෙද මල්ඛන අනුව මම්

නඩුමේ චූදිත මම් ප්‍රහාරය සිදු වූ අවසේථාමේ ශ්‍රී ෙංකා ජන රජමේ ජනාධිපිවරයා මෙසත්,

ආරක්ෂක අොතයවරයා මෙසත් නීිය හා සාෙය පිළිබඳව අොතයවරයා මෙසත්

මනාසැෙකිලිෙත්කමින් සිය වගකීම් ඉටු කිරීෙ සඳහා අමපාමහාසත් වී ඇි බවටත්, ඒ

මහේුමවන් මෙෙ ප්‍රහාර ොොව සිදු වී ඇි බවටත් එය ුළින් පැමිණිල්මල් විසේතර කර ඇි

දණ්ඩ නීි සංග්‍රහය යටමත් ගැමණන අපරාධයන් ගණනාවක් සිදු වී ඇි බවටත් වන කරුණ

මකමරහි සෑහීෙකට පත් මවමින් මෙෙ පැමිණිල්ෙ භාරගැනීෙට තීරණය කරමි. ඒ අනුව, වුදිතට

සිතාසි නිකුත් කරමි.

කැඳවන්න :-2022.10.14. "

This application has been filed disputing the impugned order on the basis that the 1st

Respondent has failed to form an opinion that there was sufficient ground to proceed

against the Petitioner before he issued process on the latter.

The Petitioner submits that the said Order of the 1st Respondent is,

1. It is wholly unsupported by the evidence, as there was no material before the 1st

Respondent on which an opinion could have been formed that there existed

sufficient ground to proceed against the Petitioner, as required under Section

139(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

2. In any event, the 1st Respondent was not entitled to act upon the report submitted

by the Commission of Inquiry in the absence of all the material collected by the

Commission, as contemplated under Section 24 of the Commission of Inquiry Act

No. 17 of 1948, as amended.

3. Furthermore, any material collected in the course of such investigation or inquiry

can only be used or tendered by the Attorney General in terms of Section 26 of the

said Act.

4. The order is vitiated by misdirection, in that the 1st Respondent acted under a

misconception as to the contents of the report.

However, the Complainants contended that,

1. At the stage of issuing summons, the 1st Respondent is only required to determine

whether there exists sufficient ground for proceeding in terms of Section 139(1) of

Page 6 of 18

the Code of Criminal Procedure and is not required to evaluate evidence or

determine guilt. In the instant case, the 1st Respondent has judicially evaluated

the legal requisites and necessary ingredients of the offences and lawfully formed

the requisite opinion before issuing process.

2. The 1st Respondent was entitled in law to rely on the report of the Commission of

Inquiry, which contains evidence given on oath and is not hearsay. Any

determination as to the admissibility or weight of such evidence is a matter to be

decided at the trial and not at the process of issuing stage.

3. The Commission of Inquiry appointed by the Petitioner himself has found that the

Petitioner failed in the discharge of his duties and responsibilities, that such

failure transcends mere civil negligence, and that there is criminal liability arising

from his acts and omissions. The Petitioner never challenged or impugned the said

report at the time it was issued.

4. If aggrieved by the disputed order of the 1st Respondent, the proper remedy

available to the Petitioner was to invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of the

Provincial High Court or the Court of Appeal. The present writ application is

procedurally improper and has been filed without explaining the failure to seek

the remedies referred to before.

5. The criminal proceedings have been properly instituted under Section 136(1)(a) of

the Code of Criminal Procedure, and the 1st Respondent was entitled to rely on the

affidavit of the complainants and the accompanying material without calling

witnesses. In the totality of the circumstances, the issuance of process was lawful,

proper, and in accordance with settled principles of criminal procedure, and the

instant petition is an attempt to avoid facing a criminal trial before a court of law.

During the stage of argument, the Learned counsel for the Petitioner pointed out that the

final report of the Commission of Inquiry to investigate and inquire into and or take

necessary action on the bomb attacks on 21st April 2019 (hereinafter referred to as the

Commission of Inquiry Report) consists of two volumes, and he emphasized that the 2nd

volume, which consists of several parts contains of the record of proceedings of such

inquiry i.e. the material collected and evidence of witnesses recorded before the

commission, had not been submitted to the 1st Respondent for his consideration.

Furthermore, the Petitioner has also contended that, in any event, Sections 24 and

Section 24(a) of the COIA only permit the Attorney General and the Director General of

the Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption institute criminal

Page 7 of 18

proceedings in accordance with the law in respect of any offence based on the record of

proceedings of such inquiry.

Additionally, the Learned Counsel pointed out that Section 26 (2) of the said COIA enables

the Honourable Attorney General to make a request to the commission to furnish the

record of proceedings of an inquiry, statements and testimonies recorded at the inquiry in

an instance where the Attorney General decides to institute criminal proceedings based

on such material.

For easy reference, I reproduce Sections 24, 24(a) and 26 of the COIA (as amended)

Section 24 - Institution of Criminal Proceedings.

“Notwithstanding anything to the country in the Code of Criminal procedure Act

No. 15 of 1979 or any other law, it shall be lawful for the Attorney- General to

institute criminal proceedings in a court of law in respect of any offence, based on

material collected in the course of an investigation or inquiry or both an

investigation and inquiry, as the case may be, by a Commission of inquiry

appointed under this act.”

Section 24 (a)

“24A. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Commission to

Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption Act or any other written law,

where the Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption, on a

consideration of material collected in the course of an investigation or inquiry or

both an investigation and inquiry as the case may be a Commission of Inquiry

appointed under section 2, is satisfied that an offence under the following laws has

been committed, it may direct the Director General to institute criminal

proceedings in terms of the

a. Bribery Act; or

b. Declaration of Assets and Liabilities Law,

(2) The Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption may

prior to the institution of proceedings under subsection (1) -

(a) conduct further investigations into the commission of any offence;

Page 8 of 18

(b) consider material that may have been collected in the course of an

investigation conducted by the Commission to Investigate Allegations of

Bribery or Corruption prior to the receipt of the material referred to in

subsection (1); and

(c) consider material the Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery

or Corruption may have received from any other law enforcement authority.

Section 26 - Powers of the Attorney General states,

“(1) In the conduct of an inquiry or investigation under the provisions of this Act,

the Attorney-General may-

(a) appear before any Commission;

(b) place before the Commission any evidence or other material, which in the

opinion of the Attorney-General is relevant to the investigation or inquiry as the

case may be;

(c) examine any witness summoned by the Commission if it appears to him that

the evidence of such witness is material to, or has disclosed information relevant

to, the investigation or inquiry as the case may be.

(2) On a request made by the Attorney-General, the Commission shall make

available to the Attorney-General copies of all statements and testimonies

recorded and any other material collected or received by such Commission in the

course of the conduct of such inquiry or investigation as the case may be.”

In response, the Learned State Counsel, appearing as amicus curiae, drew the attention

to the fact that the report of the commission of inquiry appointed to report or take

necessary actions on the bomb attacks on 21st April 2019 has been tabled on 8th April 2021

and preserved in the Parliamentary Library. That such an outcome necessarily makes

such a document a public document, privy to the public at large.

Page 9 of 18

Relying on the submissions advanced by the Attorney General, it is my considered view

that, should the commission of inquiry report be regarded as a public document, as it in

accessible to the public, the record of proceedings contained in such report may be relied

upon by any member of the public to institute proceedings by lodging a complaint either

orally or in writing to a Magistrate Court, in accordance with Section 136(1)(a) of CCPA,

alleging that an offence has been committed within the Court’s jurisdiction.

It is indeed the case that the Petitioner, who was the president of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka at that time, directed the relevant commission of inquiry to submit

a report setting out the findings of the inquiry, together with their recommendations, with

the Petitioner designated as the custodian thereof. In this instance, the report of the

Commission of Inquiry was presented to Parliament on or about 23rd February 2021. This

fact was highlighted by the Learned State Counsel in the written submission tendered by

him on 19th January 2026. Furthermore, in his submissions, the Learned State Counsel

informed the Court that, according to the hansard, the said report had been included in

the Order Paper and was tabled before Parliament on 8th April 2021 for debate.

Once a report is lawfully released to the public, it enters the public domain.

Following the amendment by Act No 3 of 2019 to the COIA, the Honourable Attorney

General and the Director General of the Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery

or Corruption (CIABOC) were vested with the authority to institute criminal proceedings

based solely on the material contained in the record of proceedings of such inquiry, i.e.

evidence recorded and conducted by a Commission of Inquiry. Sections 24 and 24(a) of the

COIA as such empower both the Attorney General and the Director General of CIABOC

to act accordingly.

I also note that the amendment introduced by Section 24(A)(2) of the amending Act No. 3

of 2019 empowers the CIABOC to conduct further investigations into the commission of

any offence.

However, when a report is made public and it converts into a public document, the

Provision in Section 24 of the said Act cannot be interpreted as precluding anyone from

instituting proceedings based on the material in such a report under Section 136 of the

CCPA. Section 136 (1) (a) of the CCPA permits any individual to lodge a complaint, either

orally or in writing, before a Magistrate regarding the commission of an offence. In the

Page 10 of 18

present case, the complainants have relied on Section 136 (1)(a) of the CCPA in filing their

complaint based on the material contained in the said Commission of Inquiry report.

Then, the question arises as to whether the 1st Respondent, before issuing process,

examined the material placed before him and considered the essential ingredients of the

offences with which the petitioner is to be charged.

The petitioner has also contended that the 1st Respondent has failed to follow the dictum

considered in the case of Malini Gunaratne v Abeysinghe et al 1994 3 SLR 196. In the

said case court held that Section 139 (1) of the CCPA makes it mandatory for a Magistrate,

before issuing any process, to form the requisite opinion that there are "sufficient grounds"

comprised of two elements, to wit,

1. That the opinion on which the Learned Magistrate acts should be "verifiable"

2. Such material should be assessed objectively

As the Complainants have instituted proceedings against the Petitioner in terms of

Section 136 (1) (a) of the CCPA. It is necessary to look into whether the 1st Respondent

has taken the steps as set out in Section 139 (1) of the CCPA.

The said Section is as follows:

“139.(1) where proceedings have been instituted under paragraph (a)

or paragraph (b) or paragraph (c) of section 136 (1) and the Magistrate

is of opinion that there is sufficient ground for proceeding against

some person who is not in custody-

(a) If the case appears to be one in which according to the forth column

of the First Schedule a summons should issue in the first instance, he

shall, subject to the provisions of section 63, issue a summons for the

attendance of such person;

b) If the case appears to be one in which according to that column a

warrant should issue in the first instance, he shall issue a warrant for

causing such person to be brought or to appear before the court at a

certain time.

Provided that -

(i) the Magistrate may in any case, if he thinks fit, issue a summons

Page 11 of 18

in the first instance instead of a warrant;

(ii) in any case under paragraph (a) or paragraph (b) of section 136(1),

the Magistrate shall, before issuing a warrant, and may, before

issuing a summons, examine on oath the complainant or some

material witness or witnesses; and

(iii) in any case under paragraph (c) of section 136(1), the Magistrate

shall, before issuing process, record a brief statement of the facts

which constitute his means of knowledge or of the grounds of his

suspicion, as the case may be.

(2) Where proceedings have been instituted under paragraph (d) of

Section 136 (1), the Magistrate shall forthwith examine on oath or

affirmation the person who has brought the accused before the court

and any other person who may be present in court able to speak to the

facts of the case;

Provided that such examination shall not be necessary where the

Magistrate has before him a report of the facts of the case or a

complaint in writing has been filed.

(3) Where proceedings have been instituted under paragraph (e) or

paragraph (f) of section 136 (1), the Magistrate shall issue a summons

for the attendance of the person named in the warrant or complaint,

or a warrant for causing such person to be brought or to appear before

the court at a certain time, according as the fourth column of the First

Schedule provides that the case is one in which a summons or a

warrant should issue in the first instance.”

In my considered view, before issuing a process on a person named an accused, the

Learned Magistrate should remain mindful of his duty to ascertain whether sufficient

material exists to proceed against such a person. This obligation serves to prevent the

harassment of innocent persons through the actions of unscrupulous complainants or the

initiation of vexatious proceedings.

Page 12 of 18

Section 139 (1) of the CCPA requires a Magistrate to form an opinion whether there is

sufficient ground for proceeding against a person named an accused in a complaint

against a person, process is to be issued. What is ‘sufficient ground’? The ‘sufficient ground’

was explained by S.N. Silva J (as he was then) (with Dr Ranaraja J agreeing) in Malinie

Gunaratne, Additional District Judge, Galle v. Abeysinghe and Another (Supra):

“The words “sufficient ground” embraces both, the ingredients of the offence and

the evidence as to its commission.”

He further held that:

“I am of the view that the proper test is to ascertain whether on the material before

Court, prima facie, there is sufficient ground on which it may be reasonably

inferred that the offence as alleged in the complaint or plaint has been committed

by the person who is accused of it. In this case the learned Magistrate has set off

on the right track by calling for the record, which is alleged to have been incorrectly

framed and recording the evidence of the complainant.”

This dictum was considered by His Lordship Arjuna Obeyesekere J in Aruna Iddagoda v.

Hon. Magistrate, Magistrates Court No. 04, Colombo 12 and another, WRT 211/2020,

decided on 14th June 2021, held that;

“The primary argument of the learned president’s counsel for the petitioner was

that the learned magistrate had not considered the material that was before him,

nor had he considered the ingredients of the offence that the Petitioner was

charged with in the context of the material that was before him, and therefore the

decision of the Hon. Magistrate to issue summons on the Petitioner is illegal and

unreasonable.

Further held that;

there must be due consideration to these issues even at the stage the Magistrate

is called upon to issue summons. As held by this Court in Malinie Guneratne vs

Abeysinghe and another, the decision of the Magistrate must withstand an

objective assessment and hence the necessity for the Magistrate to set out the basis

for his opinion.

Taking into consideration all of the above circumstances, I am of the view that the

Hon. Magistrate has acted outside the jurisdiction conferred on him and the

Page 13 of 18

decision to issue summons is clearly illegal and is therefore liable to be quashed by

a Writ of Certiorari.”

Recently, His Lordship Sampath B. Abayakoon J the case of Taian Lanka Steel Company

Private Limited v Weerya Raja, CA (PHC) 0035/21, Decided On 06.02.2024, followed the

dictum of Malini Gunaratne v Abeysinghe (supra) case.

““Judge should look before issuing summons based on a private plaint filed in

terms of section 136(1)(a) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act. It appears that

the learned Chief Magistrate has considered the reported case of Malani

Gunaratne, Additional District Judge, Galle Vs. Abeysinghe and Another (1994) 3

SLR 196 as guidance for her considerations, and has come to a correct finding that

the requirement should be to look whether there are sufficient reasons to issue

summons and not to go into deep consideration of the evidence that can be adduced

in proving the charges mentioned in a private plaint.”

Further, his lordship held that,

“It is clear that the necessary ingredient to prove a charge in terms of section 25

(1)(b) is to prove that the drawer of the cheque in relation to this case made an

order to the banker to pay a sum of money, which payment is not made by reason

of there being no obligation on the such banker to make payment.

It is apparent from the copy of the Magistrate's Court case record tendered along

with this appeal, that the appellant has tendered along with the plaint, the draft

charge sheet and the earlier mentioned affidavit, a list of witnesses and a list of

documents, which the appellant would be relying on to prove the charges. He has

also tendered to the Court the two cheque return notifications relating to the two

cheques issued by the accused.

In the said notifications, the relevant bank has informed the reasons for not

honouring the cheques as the relevant account had been closed at the time the

cheques were presented. This goes on to show that there had been no obligation to

the banker to honour the cheques due to the said fact.

Page 14 of 18

I am of the view that this has provided enough information to the learned Chief

Magistrate to satisfy herself as to the necessary consideration that should be

looked into in issuing summons to an accused in a case filed as a private plaint.

Since the appellant has tendered a list of witnesses that he intends to call at the

trial, which includes an official from the relevant bank to prove the details as to

the account through which the cheques have been issued, I am of the view that the

appellant has provided sufficient information as to the way he intends to prove the

charges against the accused.”

The principle enunciated in the above judgments, which I acknowledge to be sound,

elaborates on the manner in which the Learned Magistrate must first form an opinion

prior to issuing summons based on the sufficient material placed before him in a private

complaint.

According to the Written Submission filed by the Complainants, they have, with the

complaint and the supporting affidavit, forwarded to the Magistrate Court and have

averred the following. The Parliamentary Select Committee Report dated 23.10.2019,

marked 'පැ 1', (annexed to the Plaint), the Final Report of the Commission to Investigate

and Inquire into and Report or Take Necessary Action on the Bomb Attacks on 21.04.2019

Volume-l dated 31.01.2021, marked 'පැ 2' (annexed to the plaint), the Gazettes of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka marked ‘පැ 3 (අ), පැ 3 (ආ), පැ 3 (ඇ), පැ 3 (ඈ), පැ

3 (ඉ), පැ 3 (ඊ) and පැ 3 ( උ)’ (annexed to the Plaint), the report dated 06.05.2019 marked

"P4' (annexed to the plaint), the copies of Magistrate Court case records of cases bearing

Nos. MC Fort B 13099/19 MC Fort B 13100/19, MC Colombo B 10193/06/19, MC Negombo

L and MC Batticaloa 401/2009 marked ‘පැ 5 (අ), පැ 5 (ආ), පැ 5 (ඇ), පැ 5 (ඈ), පැ 5 (ඉ) and පැ

5 (ඊ)’ respectively.

Among the said documents, particularly Volume 01 of the final report of the Commission

of Inquiry has been annexed to the petition marked P2 (where in the Magistrate Court

marked as 'පැ 2'). This volume contains solely the recommendations made by the

Commission of Inquiry. At page 589 of the document marked as P 2 in the petition, it is

indicated that the Commission of Inquiry, based on the evidence placed before it, formed

the opinion that there was criminal liability on the part of the Petitioner. Furthermore,

the Commission has recommended that the Attorney General institute criminal

proceedings against the Petitioner.

Page 15 of 18

As stated before, the Learned Counsel for the Petitioner submitted to the Court that

Volume 1 consists of only determinations, whereas Volume 2, Part 1, contains the record

of proceedings, i.e. the testimony recorded by the commission. However, part 1 of Volume

2 has not been annexed to the complaint for the consideration of the 1st Respondent. In

addition, part 4 of Volume 2 of the report, marked as X, contains intelligence-related

information. Thus, the 1st Respondent was armed only with Volume 1 of the Commission

of Inquiry report, together with the Parliamentary Select Committee report, which only

sets out the following recommendations.

1. Essential reforms in the security and intelligence sector

2. Establishment of an enhanced financial supervisory mechanism

3. The need to control and monitor the rise of religious extremism

4. Addressing delays with justice: reforming the Attorney-General’s Department.

5. Wahabism and the need for action.

6. Media reporting, fake news and other areas of concern

7. Holding politicians/ peoples’ representatives accountable

8. Reforming the education sector to counter growing extremism.

I am also mindful of Section 182 of the CCPA. Further, Section as per the proviso 2, to

section 139(1)(a)(b) empowers a Magistrate to examine witnesses under oath prior to

issuing process to a person named an accused. In other words, a Magistrate, if he thinks

fit, may form an opinion that there are sufficient grounds to proceed against a person

named an accused after recording the evidence of a material witness or witnesses.

Moreover, it must be noted that this is a private plaint filed by the complainants under

Section 136(1)(a) of the CCPA.

A Magistrate who is called upon to decide whether sufficient grounds exist to proceed

against an individual named an accused on a complaint made by a private individual must

exercise great caution and diligence. This is because such a complaint is not preceded by

an investigation ordinarily conducted by an investigator. Therefore, before issuing process,

a Magistrate must take precautions to ascertain whether there is evidence against the

individual named as an accused, and whether there is any evidence of the commission of

the offence by the person accused of the same and also to establish the ingredients of the

offence that such person has been accused of committing.

According to the written submissions filed by the Learned State Counsel, it has been

indicated that under Section 7 of the COIA, a Commission of Inquiry is not necessarily

Page 16 of 18

bound by the principles or the provisions of the Evidence Ordinance. Consequently, the

Commission may have considered unverified electronic evidence which, under ordinary

circumstances, would not be admissible in criminal proceedings. Therefore, it is also

dangerous for a Learned Magistrate to act on the mere recommendations of a Commission

of Inquiry report. If a Magistrate tends to act in that manner, it would result in him not

forming his own opinion but merely acting as a rubber stamp, which is not the intention

of the legislature.

In any way, Part 1 of Volume 2 of the Commission of Inquiry report, which consists of the

record of proceedings (evidence of witnesses led at the inquiry), has not been tendered to

the 1st Respondent for his consideration.

If process is issued to an individual named an accused and he appears in Court under

Section 182 of the CCPA, the learned Magistrate is required to frame charges against

such an accused. Section 182(1) reads as follows,

182. (1) Where the accused is brought or appears before the court the Magistrate

shall if there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused, frame a

charge against the accused.

The requirements of “sufficient grounds” referred to in Section 139(1) must be carefully

considered. When forming such an opinion, a Magistrate should bear in mind that he is

proceeding to frame charges against a person named an accused and therefore must be

satisfied that sufficient material exists to form such an opinion.

In this regard, I also draw my attention to the judgment in Pepsi Foods Limited v Special

Judicial Magistrate (1998) 5 SCC 749, in which it stated as follows,

“Duty of magistrate in passing summoning order in complaint case: As regards the

duty of a Magistrate while passing summoning order in a complaint case, the

Hon'ble Supreme Court has ruled thus: "Summoning of an accused in a criminal

case is a serious matter. Criminal law cannot be set into motion as a matter of

course. It is not that the complainant has to bring only two witnesses to support

his allegations in the complaint to have the criminal law set into motion. The order

of the Magistrate summoning the accused must reflect that he has applied his

mind to the facts of the case and the law applicable thereto. He has to examine the

nature of allegations made in the complaint and the evidence both oral and

documentary in support thereof and would that be sufficient for the complainant

Page 17 of 18

to succeed in bringing charge home to the accused. It is not that the Magistrate is

a silent spectator at the time of recording of preliminary evidence before

summoning of the accused. The Magistrate has to carefully scrutinize the evidence

brought on record and may even himself put questions to the complainant and his

witnesses to elicit answers to find out the truthfulness of the allegations or

otherwise and then examine if any offence is prima facie committed by all or any

of the accused."

Upon perusal of the impugned order made by the 1st Respondent, it appears that as the

Learned Counsel for the complainants has alleged that the petitioner has acted

negligently. However, the specific nature of such negligence has not been articulated or

described in the impugned order. Moreover, the 1st Respondent has relied entirely on the

recommendations of the Commission of Inquiry, which is contained in the report marked

P2, merely indicating that charges could be brought against the Petitioner under the

Penal Code.

However, in the absence of an objective assessment of the material produced before the

court, the mere recommendations of the Commission of Inquiry do not constitute

“sufficient grounds” for the issuance of process under Section 139(1) of the CCPA as per

the interpretation adopted in Malini Gunaratne v Abeysinghe (supra) case.

There is no indication from the 1st Respondent as to what material he has considered, nor

how he formed the opinion that the complaint contained material establishing the

ingredients of an offence of criminal negligence. Be that as it may, in light of the fact that

the 1st Respondent has issued his Order immediately following the oral submissions made

by the learned President’s Counsel for the Complainants, the question arises before us as

to whether the 1st Respondent had sufficient time to consider the plaint, which comprises

380 charges, and the other documents submitted by the Complainants. Furthermore, I

am mindful that the 1st Respondent has not specified accurately upon which material he

relied on in forming his opinion.

In the foregoing circumstances, this Court issues a Writ of Certiorari quashing the order

of the 1st Respondent, marked as P4, as prayed in prayer ( c ), and I am not inclined to

issue the relief sought in prayer ( d ).

However, the instant order should not be considered a bar to the learned Magistrate in

the Magistrate Court of Fort Case No. B 23084/22 from making a fresh order in terms of

Page 18 of 18

Section 139 (1) of CCPA upon the availability of any further material, including

proceedings of the Commission of Inquiry that could be submitted by the Complainants.

I make no order with regard to costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Dhammika Ganepola, J,

I AGREE

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Mayadunne Corea, J,

I AGREE

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

P.Kumararatnam, J,

I AGREE

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Amal Ranaraja, J,

I AGREE

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL