1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Case No: CA (Writ) 0804/2008

In the matter of an Application for mandates in the nature of Writs of Certiorari and Mandamus in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution.

Dr. K.K.N.C. Premaratne,

No. 105, Amarathunga Mawatha,

Mirigama.

PETITIONER

Vs.

1. The University of Colombo,

Munidasa Cumarathunga Mawatha,

Colombo 03.

2. Prof. S.S.M.K. Hirimburegama,

The Vice-Chancellor,

University of Colombo,

Munidasa Cumarathunga Mawatha,

Colombo 03.

3. Prof. Amal Jayawardena,

4. Prof. S. Sandarasegaram,

5. Prof. T.R. Ariyarathna,

6. Prof. Harsha Senevirathne,

7. N. Selvakumaran,

8. Dr. N.R. de Silva,

9. LJ.P. Alexis Silva,

10. S. J. Amarasekara,

11. Ramance Amarasuriya,

12. Dr. P. S. M. Gunarathne,

13. Prof. Dulitha Fernando,

14. Prof. D.M.S.S.L. Dissanayake,

2

15. Prof. N.D. Gunawardena,

16. Dr. K. Wickramasuriya,

17. Prof. A.H.M. Nussain.

18. R. Asirwatham.

19. K. Kanag-Iswaran P.C.,

20. N. Attygalla,

21. Dr. Y.L.H. Yakandawala,

22. Malani Peiris,

Members of the University Council,

University of Colombo.

Munidasa Cumarathunga Mawatha.

Colombo 03.

23. University Grants Commission,

No. 20, Ward Place,

Colombo 07.

24. The Post Graduate Institute of Medicine,

No. 160, Norris Canal Road,

Colombo 07.

25. Prof. Rezvi Sheriff.

Director,

Post Graduate Institute of Medicine,

160, Norris Canal Road,

Colombo 08.

26. Prof. Susirith Mendis,

Chairman,

Board of Management,

The Post Graduate Institute

of Medicine of the University of Colombo,

160, Norris Canal Road,

Colombo 08.

3

27. Prof. Lalitha Mendis.

28. Prof. Carlo Fonseka.

29. F.R. Maligaspe

30. A. Abeygunasekara.

31. Dr. Ajith Mendis.

32. Dr. S. T. G. Rde Silva,

33. Dr. C. D. A. Goonasekara.

34. Dr. K. Sivapalan.

35. Prof. P. L. Ariyananda,

36. Prof. Jayanatha Jayawardana,

37. Prof. H. J. de Silva,

38. Prof. R. L. Wijaeyeweera.

39. Prof. Nimal Senanayake.

40. Prof. V. Arsaratnam,

41. Prof. P. S. Wijesinghe,

42. Prof. Mohan de Silva,

43. Prof. A. N. L. Ekanayake,

44. M. D. D. Peiris,

45. Dr. Lucian Jayasuriya.

46. Dr. E. D. Rodrigo,

47. Dr. Deepthi Atyygalle,

48. Dr. S. Sivakumaran,

49. S. A.C. M. Zubyle,

All members of the Board of

Management of the Post Graduate

Institute of Medicine,

No. 160, Norris Canal Road,

Colombo 08.

4

50. Prof. Rohan Jayasekara,

51. Dr. B. J. C. Perera,

52. Dr. Hilary W.M. Cooray,

53. Dr. Geethnajana Mendis,

54. Dr. Shayam Fernando,

55. Dr. Raveen Hanwella,

56. Dr. N. Pinto,

57. Dr. H. J. S. Suraweera,

58. L. K. Jayaweera,

59. Dr. Lalith S. Wijayarathna,

60. Dr. C. Thureiraja.

All members of the Board of Study in Sports

Medicine of the Post Graduate Institute of

Medicine

No. 160. Norris Canal Road,

Colombo 08.

61. Dr. Jaspal Singh Sandu

C/o The Post Graduate Institute of Medicine

of the University of Colombo.

160, Norris Canal Road, Colombo 08.

62. Dr. Upali Banagala,

C/o The Post Graduate Institute of Medicine

of the University of Colombo.

160, Norris Canal Road, Colombo 08.

63. Dr. Athula Kahandaliyanage,

Secretary,

Ministry of Health and Nutrition,

"Suwasiripaya".

Baddegama Wimalawansa Mawatha, Colombo 10.

5

Before: M. T. Mohammed Laffar, J.

S. U. B. Karalliyadde, J.

Counsel: Uditha Egalahewa, P.C. with Ranga Dayananda for Petitioner.

N. Wigneswaran, DSG for the Respondents.

Written submissions tendered on:

30.08.2022 by the Petitioner

Argued: By way of written submissions

Decided on: 10.08.2023

S.U.B. Karalliyadde, J.

The Petitioner to this Writ Application is a Medical Officer. The Postgraduate

Institution of Medicine (the PGIM) decided to conduct a Postgraduate Diploma in

Sports Medicine and issued the prospectus (marked as P2) specifying the scope of the

subject, eligibility criteria, rules of examination etc. Having been successful in this

selection test, the Petitioner was selected to follow the Diploma. Altogether 20

applicants were selected to follow the Diploma and it was a distance learning program.

At the end of the course, an examination was held and it consisted of three components;

written, clinical and oral components. By the letter dated 21. 07. 2008 (marked as P10)

the Petitioner was informed that he failed to obtain the minimum required marks for the

clinical component although, he has obtained the required marks for the other two

components as well as the total aggregate marks to pass the examination. According to

64. Dr. N. J. Nonis,

Registrar,

Sri Lanka Medical Council,

31, Norris Canal Road,

Colombo 10.

RESPONDENTS

6

clause II of the prospectus marked as P2, a doctor who follows the course should obtain

a minimum percentage of 50 in each of the three components of the examination, and

if not obtained 50% in each component, even though the aggregate marks for the whole

examination is 50% or above he/she will be considered as failed. The Petitioner has

averred in the Petition that many irregularities were taken place in conducting the

Diploma as well as during the examination and he has complained in writing about the

same before and after the examination was held and even before the results were

released.

When the case was taken up for argument on 14.06.2010, the learned DSG appearing

for the Respondents raised preliminary objections about the maintainability of the

action and thereafter on 07.03.2011, the learned Counsel for the Petitioner informed

Court that the Petitioner will not proceed with the reliefs sought in prayers (c) and (d)

and will restrict himself only to the reliefs prayed for in prayers (e) to (g) in the Petition.

When the matter was taken up for argument on 06.06.2022, parties consented to dispose

of the matter on written submissions and accordingly, only the Petitioner has tendered

written submissions on 30.08.2022.

The substantive reliefs prayed for in the Petition dated 06.10.2022 are as follows;

(e) issue a mandate in the nature of a Writ of Certiorari to quash the decision/results to

fail the Petitioner by the 24th Respondent (the PGIM) as reflected in the letter dated 21st

July 2008, marked as P10

(f) issue a mandate in the nature of a Writ of Mandamus directing the 24th Respondent

to include the Petitioner's name in the past list

(g) issue a mandate in the nature of a Writ of Mandamus directing the 24th Respondent

to award the Diploma in Sports Medicine to the Petitioner

Now I will address my mind to the reliefs sought by the Petitioner in prayers (e) to (g)

of the Petition which he is pressing upon. In prayer (e) the Petitioner seeks to issue a

Writ of Certiorari to quash the decision of the PGIM contained in P10 to fail him from

the examination. The learned DSG appearing for the Respondents argues that the relief

sought in prayer (e) is futile for the reason that the marks awarded in respect of the

clinical component have not been sought to be quashed.

7

In Samastha Lanka Nidahas Grama Niladhari Sangamaya Vs Dissanayake1 Saleem

Marsoof J. held that,

It is trite law that no court will issue a mandate in the nature of writ of certiorari or

mandamus where to do so would be vexatious or futile.

Marsoof, PC. J (P/CA) in the case of Ratnasiri and others Vs Ellawala and others2 held

that;

"This court is mindful of the fact that the prerogative remedies it is empowered to grant

in these proceedings are not available as of right. Court has a discretion in regard to

the grant of relief in the exercise of its supervisory jurisdiction. It has been held time

and time again by our Courts that "A writ... will not issue where it would be vexatious

or futile."

In the case of Siddeek Vs Jacolyn Seneviratne3 Soza J. observed that,

The Court will have regard to the special circumstances of the case before it before

issuing a writ of certiorari. The writ of certiorari clearly will not issue where the end

result will be futility, frustration, injustice and illegality.

Vide; Rev. Nehinwela Piyadassi Thero Vs National Water Supply and Drainage Board4;

Credit Information Bureau of Sri Lanka Vs Messrs Jafferjee & Jafferjee (Pvt) Ltd.5; De

Silva Vs University Grants Commission6; P.S. Bus Co. Ltd. Vs Members and Secretary

of Ceylon Transport Board7; Pushpakumara Vs Lt. Commander Wijesuriya.8

In the case at hand, the Petitioner is seeking a Writ of Certiorari to quash P10, by which

the PGIM informed the Petitioner that he had failed the clinical component of the

Diploma. Therefore, even if the Court decide to quash the decision mentioned in P10,

the decision taken by the PGIM to fail the Petitioner will remain unchanged. Therefore,

I hold that the relief sought in prayer (e) is futile.

1 [2013] BLR 68. 2 (2004) SLR 180. 3 [1984] 1 Sri LR 83. 4 [2011] 2 BLR 470. 5 2005 (1) Sri LR 89. 6 [2011] 2 BLR 474. 7 (1960) 61 NLR 491. 8 [2010] 2 Sri LR 393.

8

The Petitioner has stated in the Petition that two examiners interviewed him on two

clinical cases (two patients) at the clinical component and alleges that out of those two

cases, one case was not relevant to the subject matter of the Diploma. Further, the

Petitioner alleges that both examiners who interviewed him were not qualified in the

relevant field of study as required by the applicable rules for the examiners issued by

the PGIM and therefore, they are disqualified to be the examiners and for that reason,

the examination panel was not properly constituted. The Petitioner alleges that even

though there should be two examiners at the examination and the evaluation of the

clinical cases (the two patients), when the Petitioner had the consultation with the

patient in the second clinical case and when discussing the case with the examiners one

of the examiners (Dr. C. Thurairaja) was not at the bedside. The Petitioner further

alleges that there were many irregularities and deficiencies involved in conducting the

Diploma and in the relevant examination and he had protested and complained against

the same (P11 and P6a). The Petitioner argues in terms of clause 4.1.1. of the P8 that

the two examination panellists (the 59th and the 60th Respondents) were not qualified to

function as examiners for the reason that they functioned as course supervisors as well

as main clinical trainers other than their role as examiners. Clause 4.1.1 states that;

4.1 The examiners should

4.1.1. disclose to the Chief Examiner if assessing a candidate causes a conflict of

interest (i.e. immediate family, supervising trainee) in order that alternative

arrangements can be made for the assessment, if necessary.

The Petitioner states that he was a supervising trainee of one of the panellists and

therefore he (the panellist) could not have been appointed as his examiner. The

Respondents deny the allegations of the Petitioner and taken up the position that the

59th and the 60th Respondents were only batch supervisors and not clinical trainers in

the training program.

The Petitioner argues that he is entitled to full marks for the clinical component and by

prayers (f) and (g) he seeks Writs of Mandamus compelling the Respondents to pass

him from the examination. The learned President's Counsel appearing for the Petitioner

has restricted the written submissions only to satisfy Court why the Petitioner should

have given full marks in respect of the clinical component. In that regard, the Petitioner

has averred that the Respondents failed to adhere to the procedure and guidelines as

9

contained in the Prospectus, Regulations and Training Programme issued by the PGIM

regarding the Diploma (marked as P2), General Regulations and Guidelines of the

PGIM (marked as P5) and Code of Conduct and Guidelines for Examiners issued by

the PGIM (marked as P8). Furthermore, the Petitioner has averred that hereinbefore

mentioned irregularities that took place at the clinical component have resulted in him

failing the clinical component. The Petitioner argues that the Respondents made an

express representation to the Petitioner that they would follow the instructions

mentioned in P2, P5 and P8 and the failure of the Respondents to adhere to the

procedure and guidelines laid down in the P2, P5 and P8 amounts to a violation of his

legitimate expectation. The concept of legitimate expectation derives from the

administrative law principle that public authorities must act fairly and reasonably. It

was held in Manufacturers (Pvt) Ltd Vs Commissioner General of Excise9 at page 4

that,

Legitimate expectation arises to protect a procedural or substantive interest when a

public authority rescinds from a representation made to a person. It is based on the

principles of natural justice and fairness, and seeks to prevent authorities from abusing

power.

Lord Neuberger held in the Privy Council decision of The United Policyholders Group

Vs AG of Trinidad and Tobago10 at para. 37 that,

In the broadest of terms, the principle of legitimate expectation is based on the

proposition that, where a public body states that it will do (or not do) something, a

person who has reasonably relied on the statement should, in the absence of good

reasons, be entitled to rely on the statement and enforce it through the courts.

However legitimate expectation will not be protected by judicial review, inter alia,

where the granting of the expectation would have an unfair or unjust result. In the case

of Regina Vs Inland Revenue Commissioners, Ex parte M.F.K. Underwriting Agents

Ltd. and Others,11 Bingham L.J. at page 1569 held that,

In so stating these requirements I do not, I hope, diminish or emasculate the valuable,

developing doctrine of legitimate expectation. If a public authority so conducts itself as

9 CA Writ 242/2015 CA Minutes of 15th December 2016. 10 [2016] 1 W.L.R. 3383. 11 [1990] 1 W.L.R. 1545.

10

to create a legitimate expectation that a certain course will be followed it would often

be unfair if the authority were permitted to follow a different course to the detriment of

one who entertained the expectation, particularly if he acted on it. If in private law a

body would be in breach of contract in so acting or estopped from so acting a public

authority should generally be in no better position. The doctrine of legitimate

expectation is rooted in fairness. But fairness is not a one-way street. It imports the

notion of equitableness, of fair and open dealing, to which the authority is as much

entitled as the citizen. (Emphasis added)

The argument of the Petitioner is that if the Diploma had been conducted adhering to

the prospectus and guidelines mentioned in P2, P5 and P8 he could have obtained full

marks for the clinical component and failure to adhere to P2, P5 and P8 amounts to a

breach of his legitimate expectation. The Court cannot agree that a person who faces an

interview or examination will have a legitimate expectation that the interview board or

examiners would give him full marks. Therefore, I am of the view that Petitioner is not

entitled to relief on the ground of legitimate expectation. Furthermore, the Court neither

has the expertise to decide on the relevancy of the 1st case to the Diploma nor the

qualifications of the panellists on the field of study nor their qualifications to be in the

examination panel nor whether the panel was properly constituted. Therefore, the Court

is not in a position to issue writs of Mandamus compelling the Respondents to pass the

Petitioner from the clinical component and award him the Diploma.

In the case of Abeysinghe and 3 others Vs. Central Engineering Consultancy Bureau

and 6 others12 the court had to consider whether a foreign degree in engineering is

equivalent to a degree in engineering or its equivalent in Sri Lanka. Fernando, J. held

that "Learned Counsel for the Petitioners submitted that the 5th Respondent's Leningrad

Diploma could not be regarded as being a degree in Engineering, or its equivalent, as

it was a qualification in Geology, and not in Engineering as understood in Sri Lanka.

The Respondents produced details of the subjects offered for that Diploma, and Counsel

submitted that these could not be considered equivalent to those prescribed for a local

degree in Engineering. It is not for us to determine, on the merits, whether the

Diploma conferred by the Leningrad Institute of Mining was the equivalent of a

degree in Engineering from a recognized University; that was a matter for the 1st

12(1996) 2 Sri L. R. 36.

11

Respondent and the Interview Board, and as long as their decision was not perverse

or unreasonable, or tainted by procedural error, this Court would not seek to substitute

its views" (Emphasis added).

In the case of Dr. C.J.A. Jayawardena Vs. University of Colombo and 28 Others13, his

Lordship Justice Arjuna Obeyesekere investigated whether academic issues are outside

the jurisdiction of this Court. In delivering his judgement Justice Arjuna Obeyesekere

observed the followings:

"The issue that this Court must decide in this application is whether the decision of the

1st Respondent not to appoint the Petitioner to the post of Associate Professor /

Professor is illegal, irrational or unreasonable. In considering the above issue, this

Court would first like to lay down the parameters within which Courts have previously

acted when faced with decisions by academic institutions, especially since this is a

matter on which a great deal of emphasis has been placed by the learned Senior State

Counsel in resisting this application.

In Administrative Law by Wade and Forsyth14, it has been pointed out that Courts will

be reluctant to enter into "issues of academic or pastoral judgment which the University

was equipped to consider in breadth and in depth but on which any judgment of the

Courts would be jejune and inappropriate. That undoubtedly included such questions

as what mark or class a student ought to be awarded or whether an aegrotat was

justified."

In Abeysundara Mudiyanselage Sarath Weera Bandara Vs University of Colombo and

others15, having considered several English cases in this regard, this Court held as

follows:

"The consistent judicial opinion, therefore, is that in matters which lie within the

jurisdiction of the educational institutions and their authorities, the Court has to be

slow and circumspect before interfering with any decision taken by them in connection

therewith. Unless a decision is demonstrably illegal, arbitrary and unconscionable,

their province and authority should not be encroached upon. This is mainly because of

want of judicially manageable standards and necessary expertise to assess, scrutinise

13 CA (Writ) Application No. 137/2018; CA Minutes of 22 of June 2020. H.W.R. Wade, 14 C.F, Forsyth, Administrative Law (11th Edition, Oxford University Press 2014), page 537. 15 CA (Writ) Application No. 844/2010; CA Minutes of 8th June 2018.

12

and judge the merits and/or demerits of such decisions. Dealing with the scope of

interference in matters relating to orders passed by the authorities of educational

institutions, the Courts should normally be very slow to pass orders in regard thereto

and such matters should normally be left to the decision of the educational authorities."

Observing the aforementioned authorities Justice Arjuna Obeyesekere held as follows;

"This Court is therefore of the view that while due recognition will be given to the view

of the decision maker, whether the decision relates to academic matters or otherwise,

this Court can, and will, in the exercise of the jurisdiction vested in it by Article 140 of

the Constitution, examine whether the impugned decision of the 1st Respondent is

tainted with illegality, irrationality or procedural impropriety. This Court would

however exercise extreme caution if asked to consider, for example as in this case

whether a decision of a selection board or panel to award less marks than what a

petitioner claims is rightfully due, is irrational or unreasonable."

Under the above-stated circumstances in the instant Application, this Court cannot issue

Writs of Mandamus compelling the PGIM to pass the Petitioner from the examination

and award him the diploma. Considering the above-stated facts and circumstances, I

hold that the Petitioner is not entitled to the reliefs sought in the prayers (e) to (g).

Therefore, I dismiss the Application without costs.

Application dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

M.T. MOHAMMED LAFFAR, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL