IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

CA. No.109{2017

In the matter of an Appeal under Section 331 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

H.C. Tangalle No. 01/2005

BEFOI-<'E

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

DECICEDON

Kodikarage Chaminda Indunil

I, Accused-Appellant

Vs.

Hon. Attorney General Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12 Respondent ********

DEEP ALI WIJESUNDERA, J. & ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

S.T. de Zoysa for the Accused-Appellant

A.R.H. Bary SSC for the Respondent.

22nd June, 2018

13th July, 2018

*************

1

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

The accused-appellant was indicted before the High Court of

Tangalle for committing rape on Jeewani Inoka Kodippiliarachchi on 25th

February 2001. He opted for a trial without a jury and after trial was

convicted as charged. He was imposed a sentence of 7 year term of

imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 5,000.00. In default of the fine, he was

further imposed a six mouths term of imprisonment.

Being aggrieved by the said 'Co:q~"iction and sentence, the accused-

appellant sought to challenge its validity on several grounds of appeal.

One such ground of appeal is that the trial Court has failed to consider his

defence of consent. In f.Ur port of this ground of appeal, learned Counsel

for the accused-appellant invited attention of this Court to the evidence led

by the prosecution.

The cOLlplainant was not u.vailable to give evidence before the High

Court and after an inquiry, her deposition was tendered under Section 33

of the Evidence Ordinance, upon an order of the trial Court.

Her husband, the medical officer who examined the complainant

and the investigating officer gave evidence for the prosecution and after

2

the defence was called, the accused-appellant and his witness gave

evidence.

Learned Counsel for the accused-appellant referred to the evidence

of her husband who admitted that although he was married to her for

three months when this incident was reported, he did not know that she

was carrying a pregnancy of 7 weeks. He admitted since their marriage she

has left him twice to live with two other men. In 2003 she left him for the

third time with yet another man and never heard about her whereabouts

since then. He is not a witness to the incident and was only told by his wife -upon his return from Sunday fair about:- the incident. He further admitted

that they opted not to complain to the Police as the accused-appdlant is a

close relative.

However, they complained to Police of rape on the following day.

What prompted for them to lodge a complaint against the accused-

appellant was an incident of assault on the complainant by him. According

to the witness, on the following day after the incident, his wife went to the

gc.rment factory where she was employed at that time. The accused-

appellant was also employed there as a supervisor. During lunch intervat

the accused-appellant has assaulted the complainant and also has

threatened to assault the witness as well.

3

In her deposition, the complainant has stated that the accused-

appellant carne to her house when her husband was away and had then

committed rape on her forcibly. She raised cries for ten minutes but no

one C::tlne to her rescue. She saw a fellow villager Culled Hinni Ukkun near

her window and then told the accusdappellant to go away. Thereafter,

the accused-appellant was seen seated by the wayside.

Th.e z:ccused-appellant, in his evidence stated that he went to rer

house and she invited him to follow her to the only room the house had.

She laid herself on the bed and the accused-appellant retun1ed to close the

front door. Then he saw llkkun (Liyanage Sunil) corning to that house. He

carne up to the front door and spoke to the accused-appellant. Seeing

Ukkun, the complainant got up from the bed.

He called Liyanage Sunil in support of his evidence. According to this

witness, he has gone to the complainant's house to ask her husband to

accompany him to their farm. He saw the accused-appellant trying to shut

the main door and that arose suspicion in him. He also saw the

complalnant coming out of a room.

Learned High Court Judge, in dealing with the evidence in relation

to the element of lack of consent, rejected the position of the accused-

appellant, purely on the basis that he has failed to suggest it to the

prosecution witnesses. And then she used it as an instance where the

4

\

accused has lied in Court and held that it has corroborated the prosecution

version.

It IS unfortunate that the trial Court did not note that the

complainant did not give evidence before it and only her deposition was

tendered before it. Only she could provide an answer to the suggestion on

the issue whether there was consent or not. Her husband merely narrated

what he was told by the complainant upon his return from the Sunday fair.

Others are official witnesses.

On the other hand, there are no contradictions or omissions marked -off the evidence of either the accused-appellant or his witness. The trial

Court rejected the evidence of Sunil solely upon his admission that he lied

to Police when he made his statement to them as the parties are related.

Considering the evidence placed before the trial Court, it is our

considered opinion that the rejection of the accused-appellant's evidence

purely on his failure to put the issue of consensual intercourse to the

complainant's husband is an instance of misapplication of the test of

ccnsistency. It is clear that the cross examination of the complainant's

husband by the accused-appellant was mainly focussed on the issue of

consent as it was clearly shown that the complainant was of II generally

immoral character" as per Section 155(d) of the Evidence Ordinance.

\

After due consideration of the evidence presented before the trial

Court, it is our view that the evidence led by the accused-appellant is more

than sufficient to raise a reasonable doubt as to the element of lack of

consent and therefore is entitled to its benefit.

In view of this finding, consideration of other grounds of appeal

raised by the accused-appellant does not arise.

Therefore, we allow the appeal of the accused-appellant by setting

aside his conviction and sentence.

I,

Appeal of the accused appellant is allowed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

DEEP ALI WITESUNDERA, T.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

6