,

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A. Application No. T axlOl/200S

BEFORE

COUNSEL

Argued on

In the matter of an Application for a Case Stated under Section 122 of the Inland Revenue Act No. 28 of 1979 and presently under Section 170 of the said Act No. 10 of 2006.

The Commissioner General of Inland Revenue,

Department of Inland Revenue,

Sir Cittampalam A Gardiner Mawatha,

Colombo 02.

APPELLANT

Koggala Garments (Pvt) Ltd.,

No. 929/929B, Main Road,

Nawagamuwa,

Ranala.

RESPONDENT

Vijith K. Malalgoda, P.C.], (P/CA) &:

A.H.M.D. Nawaz,j.

Farzana J ameel, PC, ASG with Arjuna Obeysekera

SDSG for the Appellant.

Dr. Shivaji Felix for the Respondent.

05.11.2014,12.11.2014,8.12.2014,23.07.2015,

28.9.2015 and 20.01.2017

Written Submissions on :

Decided on

A.H.M.D. NAWAZ,j.

19.09.2016 and 20.02.2017 (For the Appellant)

19.09.2016 and 08.02.2017 (For the Respondent)

05.04.2017

3n the case at bar an argument has been put forward by the Respondent (Koggala

Garments (Pvt) Ltd.) to the maintainability of the case stated namely the Appellant

(the Commissioner General of Inland Revenue) must have come, by way of a writ of

certiorari to quash the determination of the Board of Review and sought a mandamus on

the Board of Review compelling it to determine the appeal made by the Respondent

Company, instead of using the case stated procedure. This Court is called upon, in the

circumstances, to rule on our own jurisdiction to hear and determine the case stated. Is

it judicial review (an application for orders in the nature of writs of certiorari and mandamus) that the

Commissioner General of Inland Revenue should have sought? or Is it a case stated against the decision

of the Board of Review that has to be preferred as has been done in this case under Section 122(1) of the

Inland Revenue Act, No. 28 of 1979? This is the principal question before us. The

Commissioner has chosen to invoke the appellate jurisdiction of this Court in terms of

Section 122(1) of the Inland Revenue Act, No. 28 of 1979 as amended and it is the

argument of the Respondent taxpayer that this invocation is patently wrong.

The above are the two questions that have engaged the arguments presented before us

and I must once again reiterate the diametrically rival arguments. While the learned

Additional Solicitor General has contended that the case stated as has been adopted by

the Commissioner is the right procedure, the learned Counsel for the Respondent

Company Koggala Garments (Pvt) Ltd. has called in question such an invocation of this

Court's jurisdiction and argued to the contrary that this Court has no jurisdiction to

quash the determination of the Board of Review on a jurisdictional issue, by way of a case stated.

2

I I I t r , t \ i t !l

I I I i f ! f I

r I II

It is undeniable that this case also brings to the fore the traditional divide between

appeal and review, given that the case stated to this Court proceeded on the basis that it

is an appeal and even the marginal note to Section 122(1) of the Inland Revenue Act, No.

28 of 1979 as amended is entitled "Appeal on a question of law to the Court of Appeal".

Even the latest written submissions presented by the Senior Deputy Solicitor General

proceeds on the basis that the case stated that has been presented before this Court is in

the form of an appeal and this argument is also strengthened by the title to Section 122

which refers to Appeals to the Court of Appeal as does the marginal note thereof.

Whilst both the section and its marginal note refer to appeals, I observe that sub~

sections (3) and (8) of 122 of the Inland Revenue Act, No. 28 of 1979 as amended are

declaratory in that the case stated is regarded as an appeal. The decision given by this

Court on a case stated is deemed to be a final judgment in a civil action in terms of

Section 122(8) of the Inland Revenue Act, No. 28 of 1979 as amended and I must

straightaway observe that the decision on the issue before this Court depends on the

construction of Section 122(6) of the fiscal legislation that is engaged in this case~Inland

Revenue Act, No. 28 of 1979 as amended. This sub~section which delineates the powers

of this Court on a case stated sets out the remit of the powers of this Court on a case

stated as follows:

"Any two or more judges of the Court of Appeal may hear and determine any question of law

arising on the stated case and may in accordance with the decision of the Court upon such

question, confirm, reduce, increase, or annul the assessment determined by the Board, or may

remit the case to the Board with the opinion of the Court of thereon. Where a case is so remitted

by the Court, the Board shall revise the assessment in accordance with the opinion of the Court."

The question before us is whether we can hear and determine the questions of law that

have been stated to this Court on this case stated, when none of the questions of law

pertain to the assessments in the case. The Board of Review ruled on a jUrisdictional

issue of time bar and it was a determination on time bar. The determination of the Board

of Review does not deal with the assessments that were before the Board and it was

3

i f I I I ! t t i I I

\ , i i I t f

~

I f t t I I I

!

\

fairly and squarely a decision on time bar. On this case stated the Commissioner~

General of Inland Revenue seeks to quash this determination by having stated to this

Court eight questions of law and none of them deals with the assessments in the case. In

such a situation~ Is a case stated which is akin to an appeal a proper remedy? or should

the determination of the Board of Review be quashed by certiorari? This is the issue

before us.

I have said that none of the questions of law set out in the case stated deals with

determinations of the Board on assessments, because the Board never went into the

merits of the assessments. So no questions of law could have been stated to this Court

arising on assessments because there was no decision on assessments and the questions

of law stated to this Court focus on the determination of the Board on its jurisdiction. It

was a decision on jUrisdiction sans a decision on assessments. If there is a decision on

jurisdiction without a decision on assessment, the question before us can once again be

encompassed in a nutshell ~can this decision be quashed on a case stated non obstante? or

Should this threshold decision on jurisdiction made by the Board be quashed by

certiorari?

Before we look at the questions of law stated to us, let me set out the lis between the

parties.

Proceedings before the Board of Review

Koggala Garments (Private) Limited, the Appellant before the Board of Review raised

the follOwing objections in limine when its appeal was taken up.

"(i) The Board of Review is prevented from reopening this case since Section 4(3) of the Inland

Revenue (Special Provisions) Act, No 10 of2003 (read with Section 4(4) of the Inland Revenue

(Regulation of Amnesty) Act, No 10 of2004, and Section 6(3) of the Interpretation Ordinance,

No 21 of 1901 (as amended), makes it clear that the amount specified by the Appellant must be

treated as its final tax liability.

4 I II

(li) The first proviso to Section 140(10) of the Inland Revenue Act, No 38 of2000 (as amended by

Section 52 of Inland Revenue (Amendment) Act, No 37 of 2003), makes it imperative that the

Board of Review arrives at its determination within two years from the commencement of the

hearing of the appeal. Consequently, since this two year period has lapsed the appeal

must be deemed to have been allowed and the Board of Review is functus

officio as far as the appeal made by this Appellant is concerned"

As one could see, the preliminary objection (li) is based on time bar and seeks to

contend that the appeal preferred by Koggala Garments cannot be heard because the

Board of Review is denuded of its jurisdiction to go into the merits of the appeal. The

Board of Review upheld the second preliminary objection and allowed the taxpayer's

appeal. However, in view of its determination on this matter, it did not consider it

necessary to examine the first preliminary objection. There was no substantive hearing

before the Board on the decision of the Commissioner~General's decision on

assessments. The upshot of the determination of the Board of Review was that since

time had lapsed, they would not look into the appeal~vide the determination of the Board

of Review dated 11.01.2008. In coming to this conclusion on time bar, the Board of

Review interpreted the first proviso to Section 140(10) of the Inland Revenue Act, No.

38 of 2000 (as amended by Section 52 of Inland Revenue (Amendment) Act, No. 37 of

2003. So admittedly no hearing took place on the assessments. If there is a statutory

provision on which the Board of Review placed a wrong interpretation, it is axiomatic

that it would amount to illegality which would give rise to judicial review. In the GCH~

case (R v. Minister for the Civil Service ex p Council of Civil Service Unions), Lord

Diplock gave a brief description of illegality:

"By illegality as a ground for judicial review I mean that the decision~maker must understand

correctly the law that regulates his decision~making and must give effect to it."

1 (1985) 1 AC 374 at 410

5

t I

,IIIi I

f l f !

\

The pith and substance of the argument of the learned Additional Solicitor General is

that the Board of Review misinterpreted the provisions relating to time-bar and if that

was the case, the learned Counsel for the Respondent has contended that the proper

remedy is judicial review by way of mandates in the nature of writs and not a case

stated. The learned Additional Solicitor General has put forward a contrary argument

that even in a case stated which is akin to an appeal, this Court can quash a

determination on jurisdiction for illegality because the misinterpretation on time bar

would fall within the words "any question of law" in Section 122(8) of the Inland

Revenue Act, No. 28 of 1979. Any question of law need not arise from a determination on

an assessment under appeal but rather it can equally flow from a jurisdictional

determination on jurisdiction-so contended the learned Additional Solicitor General.

Thus this Court can go into the questions of law as stated to this Court-she argued. At

this stage it becomes apposite to look at the questions of law stated to this Court.

Questions of Law on the Stated Case

The following questions of law have been raised by the Commissioner General of Inland

Revenue (the appellant in the case) and stated to this Court for an opinion.

(a) Whether the Board has erred in law to determine the appeal on the matters raised as preliminary

objections by the Appellant'S Counsel.

(b) Whether the Board was empowered by the Hon. Minister of Finance who appointed it to hear and

determine the appeal preferred by the Appellant to give its determination without hearing the

matters raised in the appeal.

(c) Whether the Board erred in law in determining that the provisions of the Inland Revenue Act No.

38 of2000 are applicable retrospectively for the assessments under the Inland Revenue Act, No.

28 of 1979 for years of assessment 1992/1993 and 1993/1994.

(d) Whether the Board misdirected itself in law on deciding on the meaning to be given to the words

"within two years from the date of commencement of hearing of such appeal"

of sub section (10) of Section 169 of the Inland Revenue Act, No 10 of2006.

6

( e) Whether the Board has erred in law in detennining that the two years given statutorily to the

Board to detennine an appeal commenced from the date of acknowledgement of the appeal by the

Secretary of the Board.

(f) Whether the Board has erred in law in detennining a question of law and failed to give due

consideration to the judgment of the case A. M. Ismail Vs CIR - (SLTC Vol. vi page 156) that

questions of law have to be decided by Courts and the Board can decide on questions of fact.

(g) Whether the Board properly instructed as to the relevant law would reasonably have come to the

conclusion which the Board has drawn since the legal position does not justify such conclusion.

(h) Whether the Board acted in excess of its limited jurisdiction as it cannot assume jurisdiction it

does not possess to decide on questions of law.

As I pointed out before, none of these questions of law impinge and impact upon the

assessments which were under appeal to the Board of Review. The majority of the

questions, when one reads between the lines, partakes of the character of grounds on

which judicial review is sought. For instance the last question (h) is virtually a

complaint that the Board acted ultra vires. The question (g) complains of illegality in that

the question connotes the import that that Board committed an illegality by

misinterpreting the relevant law, thus harking back to Lord Diplock's brief description

of illegality. In fact the argument is to the effect that the Board cannot even consider the

question of time bar and rule on its jurisdiction. If one looks at the question of law (h),

it suggests that questions of law cannot be gone into at all by the Board of Review. The

words in the question of law (h) " ...... it cannot assume jurisdiction it does not possess to decide on

questions of law .. " are also supplemented by the written submissions of the Appellant

dated 20.02.2017 wherein it is stated in paragraph 21 that "it is respectfully submitted that the

jurisdiction of the Board of Review is limited to confinning, redUcing, increasing or annulling the

assessment as detennined by the Commissioner-General on appeal or else, to remit it to the

Commissioner General for the revision of the assessment. It is therefore respectfully submitted that the

7

Board of Review does not have the power to entertain and/or deal with questions of law challenging the

jurisdiction of the Board of Review itself on the basis of a time bar which the Appellant alleges denudes

the jurisdiction of the Board."

Any Tribunal can Rule on its Jurisdiction

The argument is that the Board of Review could not have considered the jurisdictional

objection. Its jurisdiction circumscribed by Section 121(10) of the 1979 Act which states;

"After hearing the appeal,

the Board shall confirm, reduce, increase or annul the assessment as determined by the

Commissioner~General on appeal, or

may remit the case to the Commissioner~General with the opinion of the Board

thereon.

Where a case is so remitted by the Board, the Commissioner~General shall revise

the assessment as the opinion of the Board may require.

The decision of the Board shall be notified to the Appellant and the

Commissioner~General in writing"

I hasten to point out that the law is to the contrary. H. W. R. Wade and C. F. Forsyth, in

their well known tome, Administrative Law [Oxford: Oxford University Press, nth ed.,

2014], explain that a statutory tribunal is lawfully entitled to examine a jurisdictional

issue that has been raised before it. They state, at p. 210, as follows:

"Where a jurisdictional question is disputed before a tribunal, the tribunal must necessarily

decide it. If it refuses to do so, it is wrongfully declining jurisdiction and the court will order it to

act properly. Otherwise the tribunal or other authority 'would be able to wield an absolutely

despotiC power, which the legislature never intended that it should exercise. It follows that the

question is within the tribunal's own jurisdiction, but with this difference, that the tribunal's

decision about it cannot be conclusive."

Wade and Forsyth clearly support the proposition that a tribunal is fully entitled to

decide a jurisdictional question that has been raised before it. However, if the tribunal

8

~ i ! I t , i ! ,

! I i II

( , [ ,

I ,

\ I1 i II , t ~ f f

\ 1

has got its answer to the jurisdictional question wrong, it is open to the aggrieved party

to canvass the wrong answer on jurisdiction by way of judicial review.

Can the questions of law stated to this Court be answered on a case stated?

I have pOinted out at the beginning of this judgment that this all important issue has to

be resolved by recourse to Section 122(6) of the Inland Revenue Act, No. 28 of 1979 as

amended which reads as follows:

"122 (6) Any two or more Judges of the Court of Appeal may hear and determine any question

of lawarising on the stated case and may in accordance with the decision of Court

upon such question, confirm, reduce, increase or annul the assessment

determined by the Board, or may remit the case to the Board with the opinion

of the Court thereon. Where a case is so remitted by the Court, the Board

shaD revise the assessment in accordance with the opinion of the Court. "

The argument on behalf of the Appellant Commissioner~General is that any question of

law would include the eight questions of law that have been stated to this Court on this

case stated. It has been contended that a literal interpretation of Article 138 of the

Constitution vests the Court of Appeal with the power to correct all errors of fact and

law committed by a tribunal. Since the Board of Review has erred in law, it is within the

Constitutional power of this Court to correct such wrongs.

This argument ignores the well established principle that the right of appeal is a

statutory right and it must be expressly created and granted by statute. In Martin v.

Wijewardencl the Supreme Court held that Article 138 of the Constitution is only an

enabling Article and it confers jurisdiction to hear and determine appeals to the Court

of Appeal. Article 138 does not per se create a right of appeal. J ameel, J. expressed the

applicable principles, at p. 419, as follows:

"In the light of these authoritative statements it is not possible to accept the contention that there

is implied in Article 138 an unfettered "RIGHT OF APPEAL" to the Court of Appeal. Nor, is it

2(1989) 2 Sri.LR 409

9

I. f

r 1 1 1 I ! t

I,

r l f f , , , f I I I f ..

\

r t II

t !!

possible to accept the contention that this alleged "RIGHT OF APPEAL" under this Article 138

is only fettered to the extent provided for in the Constitution or other Law. An Appeal is a

Statutory Right and must be expressly created and granted by statute. It cannot be implied.

Article 138 is only an enabling Article and it confers the jurisdiction to hear and determine

appeals to the Court of Appeal. The right to avail of or take advantage of that jurisdiction is

governed by the several statutory provisions in various Legislative Enactments. That is to say,

for appeals from regular courts, in the Judicature Act, and the Procedural Laws pertaining to

those courts. For the various Tribunals and other Quasi -Judicial Bodies, in the

respective statutes that created them. "

See the affirmation of this principle in Gunaratne v. Alan Thambinayagam and

Other~, Bakmeewewa v. Raji, Gamhewa v. Maggie Nona5, Mudiyanse v. Bandara6,

and Malegoda v.Joachinl

So it is Section 122(6) of the Inland Revenue Act, No. 28 of 1979 as cited above, that

would govern the ambit and scope of the orders that this Court could make on a case

stated. This provision is substantially mirrored in the subsequent fiscal enactments

namely Section 141(6) of the Inland Revenue Act, No. 38 of 2000, Section 170(6) of the

Inland Revenue Act, No 10 of 2006.

No Nexus between the Questions of Law and the Assessments

Upon a careful perusal of Section 122(6) of the Inland Revenue Act, No. 28 of 1979, it

becomes patently clear that if the question of law stated to this Court does not arise on

the assessments, this Court is denuded of jurisdiction to hear and determine that

question of law. The appellate power needs recapitulation.

"122(6) Any two or more Judges of the Court of Appeal may hear and determine any question

of lawarising on the stated case and may in accordance with the decision of Court

3(1993) 2 Sri.LR 355 4(1989) 1 Sri.LR 231 5(1989) 2 SrLLR 250

6 SC Appeal 8/89 S.C minutes of 15.03.1991 7(1997) 1 SrLLR 88

10

upon such question, confirm, reduce, increase or annul the assessment

determined by the Board, or may remit the case to the Board with the opinion of the Court thereon. Where a case is so remitted by the Court, the Board

shall revise the assessment in accordance with the opinion of the Court. "

The above provision makes it clear that upon the question of law stated to this court,

this court is required to confirm, reduce, increase or annul the assessment

determined by the Board, or remit the case to the Board with the opinion of the

Court thereon.

In other words, the Board of Review must have gone into the assessment in the first

instance and thereafter the Board must state questions of law that arise or impinge on

the assessment. The question of law must relate to the assessment. Thereafter this

Court, in accordance with a decision of Court upon such question, confirms, reduces,

increases or annuls the assessment determined by the Board, or remits the case to

the Board with the opinion of the Court thereon.

In this case, it needs recalling that the Board never went into the assessments. It only

considered a jurisdictional objection and made its decision. So none of the eight

questions of law that have been stated to this Court impacts on the assessments.

Section 122(6) of the Inland Revenue Act, No. 28 of 1979 mandates a question of law

arising on the assessment to be stated to this Court for an opinion. Only then this Court

can finally confirm, reduce, increase or annul the assessment determined by the

Board, or remit the case to the Board with the opinion of the Court thereon.

It is not any question of law that this Court can go into in a case stated. It is only a

question of law impacting on the assessment that this Court can hear and determine on

a case stated. I am fortified in this interpretation by the words in Section 122(6)

" ......... any question of law arising on the stated case and may in accordance with the

decision of Court upon such question, confirm, reduce, increase or annul the

assessment ..... '~ The conjunction "and" connotes that the words any question of law have

to be read conjunctively with the requirement to confirm, reduce, increase or annul the

11

j' t ! I ! i Ii I i f , f 1 , t

I

~ ! 1 ; I I

~ , ! t

assessment upon such question of law. This shows that the question of law has to pertain

to the assessment. In the case before us, none of the questions pertain to the

assessments which went up in appeal before the Board of Review. The questions of law

pertain only to a decision on jurisdiction which is susceptible to a challenge by way of

judicial review.

The contention on behalf of the Appellant that this Court can go into any question of

law is an invitation to read the section disjunctively. It is an invitation to substitute the

word or in the room of the word and in Section 122(6). This argument is patently

unsustainable and would be tantamount to driving a coach and horses through the

section. In the end we hold that the case stated jUrisdiction is limited in that it is only

available to appeal against an assessment on a question of law which impinges on an

assessment. Section 122(6) makes it plain as a pikestaff.

The appropriate time for stating a case on a point of law is after the conclusion of

the substantive hearing. Where a tribunal has made an interim ruling which is

challenged it is inappropriate for a case to be stated and the aggrieved party should

seek permission to obtain judicial review. That is also the most appropriate mode of

challenge where the complaint is that the inferior court misunderstood its role or

functions-see the pronouncement in R v. Chief Commons Commissioner, ex p

Winnington8

In the circumstances we hold that the case stated procedure has been wrongly invoked.

This Court accordingly proceeds to dismiss the case stated.

Vijith K. Malalgoda, P.C. J. (PICA) I agree

a,-he TImes, November 26 1982.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

12