IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA CA WRIT 135/2017

Wathukarage Rohana Kumarasiri Gunaratne "Ramya Sandella" Munagama, Horana.

Petitioner Vs. 1. National Transport Commission 241, Park Road, Colombo 5. 2. M. A. P. Hemachandra Chairman, National Transport Commission 241, Park Road, Colombo 5.

Respondents

Court of Appeal case No. CA 135/2017 Writ

Before

Counsel

Decided on

L.T.B. Dehideniya J, (PICA)

&

A.L.S. Gooneratne J,

Thishya Weragoda with I. Seneviratne for the Petitioner.

03/08/2017

A.L.S. Gooneratne J,

1

This is an application seeking the grant of a mandate in the nature of a writ of

Certiorari to quash the decision of the 1 st Respondent to transfer the Petitioner

from the Administration Division to the Finance Division of the 1 st Respondent

Commission, contemplated in terms of document A 9 (a) and the transfer of the

Petitioner from the Finance Division to the Bastian Street Office as contemplated

in document A 11. Further relief has been sought to the grant of a mandate in the

nature of a writ of mandamus compelling the 1 sl Respondent to re transfer the

Petitioner to the Administration Division or to any other Division as seen suitable

with the competencies of the Petitioner.

Heard Counsel for the Petitioner in support of the application.

1I

\ I1I , Ii , ! i i i I

IIIi Ift! !!

tft

{

t f

2

It is observed that according to a new service minute of the 151 Respondent

Commission, the Petitioner and several other Executive Officers in the Grade IV

category, have been placed in the Management Assistant (MA-4) salary scale.

Since the service minute had not taken in to account the status of the Petitioner

and the said Executive Officers, a fundamental rights application has been

preferred to the Supreme Court to quash the said decision.

The Petitioner's grievance is that the attachment in terms of document marked

A 9 (a) and A 11, has not given the petitioner the due recognition of his

educational background, capacity and competence.

Document A 9 (a) refers to the attachment of the Petitioner and the other

Executive Officers to various departments within the 151 Respondent Commission

with effect from 261h December 2016.

As noted earlier the Petitioner is before the Supreme Court seeking relief to

quash the decision of the 1 sl Respondent regarding the placement of the Petitioner

and other Executive Officers in the Management Assistant (MA-4) category.

By letter dated 281h March 2017, marked A 11, the Petitioner is informed to

report for duty at the Bastian Street Office of the 1 sl Respondent Commission. A

11 has no reference to a work description entrusted to the Petitioner. By the said

letter the Petitioner has been informed the place of transfer, with effect from 1 sl

April 2017.

\

r f i ,I

I l II

3

Therefore, we are of the opinion that this court should not interfere with the

internal attachment of the Petitioner contemplated in documents marked A 9 (a)

and A 11 which would arise out of necessity, to the functioning of the I sl

Respondent Commission. In the circumstances the Petitioner would not be entitled

to any relief prayed for in the petition.

Accordingly refuse notice and dismiss without costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

L.T.B. Dehideniya J, (PICA)

I agree.

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL