1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIS REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

CN246/2009

HC-KURUNEGALA HC 220/04

In the matter of an application for Appeal under section 331 (1) of the Criminal Procedure Code Act No 15 of 1979.

Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo 12.

COMPLAINANT

1. Pallawa Lekamlage Gayan Sanjeewa alias Asanka

Wewellawela,

Bopitiya.

2. Pallawa Lekamlage Gayan alias Chaminda

Pahathmulle,

Labbala.

3. Balayalage Ranjith alias Upali,

Watawela,

Bopitiya.

RESPONDENTS And,

1.Pallawa Lekamlage Gayan Sanjeewa alias Asanka

Wewellawela,

Bopitiya.

2. Pallawa Lekamlage Gayan alias Chaminda

Pahathmulle,

Labbala.

I II

,I

it

I

t!,i

rf

3. Balayalage Ranjith alias Upali,

Watawela,

Bopitiya.

2

RESPONDENTS-APPELLANTS

Before

Vs,

Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo 12.

: Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J (PICA) &

H.C.J. Madawala J

COMPLAINANT - RESPONDENT

Counsel: Suranga Bandara for the lSI Accused-Appellant,

Dr Rajith Fernando with Samantha Rajapakshe for the 2nd Accused-Appellant,

Indika Mallawarachchi for the 3rd Accused-Appellant,

Shanaka Wijesinghe DSG for the Respondent

Argued On

Written Submission On

Ordered On

Order

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J (PICA)

: 25.05.2015, 10.06.2015

: 18.06.2015

: 01.09.2015

Three Accused- Appellants were indicated before the High Court of Kurunegala for committing the

offence of gang rape on Wijelath Pedige Devika Priyadharshani an offence punishable under 362 (2) of

the Penal Code as amended by Act No. 22 of 1995.

3

After trial, all three Accused were found guilty by the Learned Trial Judge and imposed a sentence of 15

years rigorous imprisonment with fine of Rs.5000/- and Rs.50, 000 compensation with default terms of six

months and one year respectively Prosecution in this case has mainly relied on the evidence of the

Medical officer Dr. Senanayake, Sub -Inspector Lincon and few other police officers who assisted the

prosecutrix Devika Priyadharshani. In addition to her evidence her mother Kusumawathy, Judicial

investigation, were summoned as witnesses for the prosecution.

i:

The main argument raised by all three counsels before this court was that it is unsafe to act upon the

uncorroborated evidence of the prosecutrix.

However the Learned Deputy Solicitor General who represented the Attorney General was confident that

the evidence of the prosecutrix alone is sufficient to find the three accused guilty, when considering very

strong nature of the evidence given by her.

of witness Pathirennahalage Kusumawathy and her husband Pedris Appuhamy, her mother Kusumawathi 1

According to the evidence of the prosecutrix Devika Priyadharshani who was a 13 years old adopted child

i had found an employment as a house maid in Hettipola and before she left for Hettipola, she kept the

victim in the house of one Pathma Ranjani. But the victim decided to come back to her house and stayed

with her father. The house they lived did not have any doors and the room she occupied was divided from

her father's room from a half wall and covered up to the roof using polythene sheets. As a habit her father

took alcohol every evening before goes to bed.

On the day in question her father came drunk and went to bed. She went to sleep in her room around

10.00 pm. After same time she got up after hearing the noise of some dogs, but again she went to sleep. At

that time a bottle lamp was burning in her room. Few minutes later she got up after hearing some sound

and thereafter she saw the three accused namely Asanka, Upali and Chaminda coming to her room with

the aid of the light of the bottle lamp. Asanka (IA) had a razor with him and he threatened her not to shout

and when the other two were holding her from the legs and hands Asanka got on to her body and raped

4

her. Others took turns and had committed the same act to her whilst the other accused took turn in holding

legs and hands.

In examination in chief she took up the position that the bottle lamp was burning right through out. She

further stated that she did not inform this to anybody due to fear until one Pushpa inquired from her

regarding this incident. Pushpa is the wife of 2nd Accused. However the Learned Counsel for the Accused

-Appellants have challenged the evidence of the prosecutrix by drawing the attention of several

contradictions marked during her evidence.

The counsel drew the attention of court to the following contradictions which were marked during the

evidence of the Prosecutrix,

Whilst drawing the attention to the above contradictions, it was submitted by the counsel that, the

evidence of the prosecutrix is contradictory with her police statement on the question of identity. The

counsel argued that, if the bottle lamp was blew off by Asanka and then, the prosecutrix could not have

indentified the others without the help of a burning bottle lamp. The fact that she sawall three suspects

and identified them at once, was also challenged using 2 eJ 6 and submitted that the witness could only

identify Asanka at that time and submitted that the poor light condition was confirmed by 2 eJ 10.

It was further argued that there was no sufficient light which was sufficient for a person to identify another

at that time, and therefore it is unsafe to act on the evidence of the prosecutrix even with regard to the

identity of Asanka.

, IIII!

I i 1 I ! ! 1 i I 1 I i 1 I

5

Learned Deputy Solicitor General whilst challenging the above argument rested his argument mainly on

three points.

Learned Deputy Solicitor General took up the position that three accused -appellants are person from the

same village and in fact Prosecutrix had stayed in the house of the 2nd Accused's mother in law (page 100)

she had further admitted that she had an affair with one Saman who is the brother of the 2nd accused.

During this period the 2nd Accused was married to one Pushpa and it is Pushpa who inquired from the

prosecutrix about this incident. It was further revealed that he 3rd Accused is the brother of Pushpa. When

the prosecutrix was asked as to how she identified the three Accused, she answered the said question as

follow (page 67).

c: ~D.

C:~D.

He further argued that the prosecutrix was not depending solely on the identification by the burning bottle

lamp but also depending on voice identification.

6

In support of his contention the Learned Deputy Solicitor General referred to the following evidence (page

95)

The prosecutrix is a thirteen years old village girl. Her house did not have separate rooms except for few

half walls. There was no electricity in this house. We have to analyse her evidence having in mind those

circumstances.

In the case of Machli Singh V. State of Punjab AIR 1983 SC 957. Supreme Court of India held that "The

Villagers living in villages where electricity has not reached as yet get accustomed to seeing things in the

light shed by the lantern. Their eye sight gets conditioned and become accustomed to the situation. Their

powers of seeing are therefore not diminished by the circumstances that the incident is witnessed in the

light shed by the lantern and not electric light."

In the case of Kalilro Tiwari V. State of Bihar AIR 1997 SC 2186 Supreme Court oflndia held "where the

only source of light at place of occurrence which was village where dacoit in question took place where an

earthen lamp, the identification of Accused even in such light would not be problem for villagers

especially when many of dacoits were direct relations of complainant. The visibility capacity of urban

people who are acclimatized to fluorescent lights or in candescent lamps is not the standard to be applied

I 1 I i I 1 j 1 1 I i I I ! 1

j I

~ I I I I

7

to villagers whose optical potency is attuned to country- made lamps. Their visibility is conditioned to

such lights and hence it would be quite possible for them to identify men and matters in such light.

In the present case the three accused were people known to the prosecutrix. She admits to have spoken to

them previously, and had stayed in a house with the mother -in- law of the 2nd accused.

In the land mark case on identification Regina V. Turnbull and another 1977 (1) QB 224 at 228 the

question of visual identification in Criminal cases was discussed as follows; ............. Secondly the

judge should direct the jury to examine closely the circumstances in which the identification by each

witness came to be made. How long did the witness have the accused under observation? At what

distance? In what light? Was the observation impeded in anyway, as for example by passing traffic or a

press of people? Had the witness ever seen the accused before? How often? If only occasionally, had he

any special reason for remembering the accused ......... .

In the present case, according to the prosecutrix the three accused were known to her previously but the

same principles discussed in the Turnbull case will apply to her identification as well, except for having an

identification parade.

Prosecutrix evidence before the High Court was that she could identify all three accused with the aid of

burning bottle lamp. The accused -appellants challenged the above evidence making "E) 8". If E) 8 is

accepted she could only identify the 1st accused before the 1st Accused blew off the bottle lamp. However

the prosecutrix speaks of her being raped by all the suspects taking turn. If that is accepted, all three

accused have stayed with her for a considerable time. According to the prosecutrix the house she lived did

not have doors and the walls were half walls, all three suspects were known to her very well. When

considering all these factors, along with the background from which the prosecutrix is coming from

specially in the light of the two Indian decisions I have discussed above, it is safe to conclude that the

prosecutrix had positively identified all three suspects in this case.

f!

~i ,

~tf

t

tt I

\t

8

The prosecutrix had further referred to the fact that their voices too had helped her to identify the suspects

will strengthen her identification, under the circumstances of the present case,

In the case of Kirpal Singh V. T State Uttar Pradesh AIR (1965) 712 the Indian Supreme Court held thus

"It is true that the evidence about identification of a person by the timbre of his voice depending upon

subtle variation in the overtones when the person recognizing is not familiar with the person recognized

many be somewhat risky in a criminal trial. But where the accused is intimately known to the witness

and for more than a fortnight before the date of the offence he had met the accused on several occasions in

connection with the dispute, it cannot be said that the identification of the assailant by the witness

from what he heard and observed was so improbable that the Supreme Court would be justified in

disagreeing with the opinion of the court which saw the witness and formed its opinion as to his credibility

and of High Court which considered the evidence against the appellant and accepted the testimony"

(emphasis added)

I see no reason to disbelieve the prosecutrix when she said that the voices of the accused too have helped

her to identify the accused when considering the relationship she had with all three accused.

In response to the Arguments by the counsel for the Accused- Appellants with regard to the credibility of

the evidence of the prosecutrix based on the several contradictions including the three main contradictions

placed by the counsel, as El 2, El 6, El 8, Learned Deputy Solicitor General, requested court to Act under

section 110 (4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No 15 of 1979 and to peruse the statement of the

prosecutrix and consider whether, the contradictions which are produced by the Accused -Appellants

warrants rejection of the evidence of the prosecutrix.

Section 110(4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act 15 of 1979 [Section 122 (3) of the earlier code]

deals with the power of a Criminal Court to send for statement recorded in a case under inquiry or trial in

such court and to use such statements or information "not as evidence in the case, but to aid it in such

inquiry or trial.'

9

In Keerthi Bandara V. Attorney General 2002 (4) Sri LR 245 at 251 the use of the above provision was

discussed as follows;

"Thus when defence contends that, there is a vital omission which militates against the adoption of the

credibility of the witness, it is the trial judge who should peruse the Information Book and decide on that

issue. When the matter again raised before the Court of appeal, the Court of Appeal Judges are equally

entitled to read the contents of the statements recorded in the Information Book and determine whether

there is a vital omission or not. .... "

When looking at the police statement of the prosecution I observe that, the prosecutrix had relied upon the

light emanating from the bottle lamp and the voice of the accused in the order to identify them. This court

is not going to consider the above as substantial evidence in the case but it will certainly assist this court to

evaluate the above contradictions.

The main argument of the counsel for the accused-Appellants by drawing the attention of court to the said

contradictions were, to attack the identification made by the prosecutrix, but when looking at the evidence

of the prosecutrix, to which I have already referred to in my judgment I prefer to conclude that the said

contradictions are not sufficient to reject the evidence of the prosecutrix.

Counsel for the Accused - Appellants has further argued that it is unsafe to act on the uncorroborated

evidence of the prosecutrix.

In a rape case courts have looked for corroboration only if the evidence of the prosecutrix is not

convincing. As I have pointed out before, the prosecutrix had given convicting evidence before the High

Court.

In the case of Premasiri V. Attorney General 20006 (3) Sri LR 106 at 110 Eric Basnayake (J) held; "there

is no rule that there must be in every case, be corroboration before a conviction can be allowed to stand. It

is well settled Law that a conviction for the offence of rape can be based on the sole testimony of the

, \

~

II!!,

10

prosecutrix if it is reliable, unimpeachable and there is no infirmity. If the evidence of the prosecutrix

inspires confidence it must be relied upon without seeking corroboration of her statement in material

particulars.

Learned counsel for Accused -Appellants further submitted that the delay in making the complaint will

aggravate the weakness in this case. The Prosecutrix was 13 years old adopted girl who lived only with the

adopted father when the alleged offence took place. Her father was a drunkard. Her adopted mother was

employed as a domestic servant in a different village. She was threatened by the Accused when they raped

her. Until Pushpa, the wife of the 2nd Accused and sister of the 3rd Accused inquired from her, she did not

inform the incident to anybody. When all these circumstances are taken together we have no reason to

disbelieve her. It was not even suggested to her that there is a reason for her to implicate the accused. If

the girl was not questioned by Pushpa she wouldn't have complained against the accused at all.

In such a situation it is wrong to conclude that the delay in making the complaint in the present case will

affect the prosecution case.

For the reasons adduced above I see no reason to interfere with the findings of the Learned High Court

Judge in convicting all three accused for committing gang rape on the prosecutrix Wijelath Pedige Devika

Priyadharshani. I therefore affirm the conviction and sentence imposed by the Learned High Court Judge

of Kurunegala on 13.lD.2009.

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

H.C.J. MADAWALA,

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE CUORT OF APPEAL

Appeal Dismissed

~c!t! ,i Ii

I