IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

High Court of Trincomalee

Case No. BCT 622/2014

Court of Appeal Case No.

CA 128-129/2015

In the matter of an Appeal under

and in terms of Section 331 of No.

15 1979 Code of Criminal

Procedure Act read with Article

138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of

Sri Lanka read also with the

Provisions of No. 19 of 1990 High

Court of the Provinces (Special

Provisions) Act.

Hon. Attorney General

COMPLAINANT

Vs.

1. Vairamuthu Rasa Alias

Kunjan

2. Kapilarathna Devadhas

ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

1

1. Vairamuthu Rasa Alias

Kunjan

2. Kapilarathna Devadhas

ACCUSED - APPELLANTS

AND

Hon. Attorney General

COMPLAINANT -

RESPONDENT

Before : P.R. Walgama, J

: K.K. Wickremasinghe, J

Counsel : Dr. Ranjith Fernando for the Accused -

Appellants.

: D.S. Soosathas SSC for the State.

Argued on : 09.01.2017

Decided on : 14.06.2017

P.R. Walgama, J

The tenure of the instant application by the counsel

for the Accused - Appellants is that the failure on the

part of the Learned High Court Judge to comply with

the Section 195 (ee) of Criminal Procedure Code, and

thereby resulted the conviction a nullity.

2

The above section postulates that the trial judge should

inquire from the accused whether he elects to be tried

by a jury and the Trial Judge has to inform the

Accused that he has the option to elect.

The above section 195 was amended by Act No. 11 of

1988 to reads as thus;

" (ee) if the indictment relates to an offence triable by

a jury, inquire from the accused whether or not he

elects to be tried by a jury".

It IS seen from the hosts of cases decided on this

Issue had followed the judicial pronouncement In the

case of THE ATIORNEY GENERAL .VS. VIRAJ APANSO-

decided 12.09.08, which concluded that non observance

of this procedure IS an illegality and not a mere

irregularity. Hence the case was sent back to the

Original High Court to comply with the above mandatory

requirement.

The facts emerged from the instant appeal and the

genesis and the origin as per case for the prosecution

is as here under;

3

That on 14.09.2009 the 1st and the 2nd Accused did

cause injury to one Kariyaperumal Ganeshan and there

by attempted to murder punishable under section 300

of the Penal Code. It IS also alleged that the both

accused had acted in furtherance of a common intention

to cause Injury to the afore said injured.

In the trial at the High Court it was urged by the

Counsel for the Attorney General that the gravity of

the injuries sustained by the injured is such that the

murderous intention of the Accused is so apparent that

when . . ImposIng a sentence to consider a sufficient

punishment as the maxlmum punishment under section

300 of the Penal Code IS 20 years of Rigorous

Imprisonment.

After the appraisal of the Court below the Learned

High Court Judge, handed down the judgment for a

conviction and imposed the following sentence;

10 years of Rigorous Imprisonment for the 1 st and the

2nd accused

4

A sum of Rs. 150,000/ as compensation by each

accused, carryIng a default sentence of 3 years of jail

term and Rs. 10,000/ as a fine with a default

sentence of 6 months jail term.

As per document marked PI the short history gIVen by

victim is to the effect that he was assaulted by Davedas

and Ranjan with a club due to a financial problem on

14.09.2009 at 7.10 p.m. It is also seen from the column

which described the nature of the injuries that non of

the injuries would have not resulted In a death. At

best it was only a grIevous hurt which IS punishable

under section 311 of the Penal Code. In addition it IS

salien t to note that the weapon that was used to

assault the injured was a club which IS a blunt

weapon.

Although the Counsel for the Accused - Appellants raised

the afore said legal issue, was also agreeable to accept

a lesser sentence. It was submitted to Court that

Accused - Appellants will not challenge the conviction,

but plead for clemency from Cou.rt.

5

i t' !!

~ , j l i

~ II, II,

( ii

f f I

"I . ~. f I , t t

, Il , t ! l !

Considering the fact that the Accused - Appellants had

served a period of 2 years, in remand custody this court

is inclined to reduce the sentence for 3 years, and the

sentence to be effective from the date of the judgment.

In addition, the Accused - Appellants shall pay the

compensation as stated in the judgment pronounced on

27.07.2015, carrying a default team of 3 years Rigorous

Imprisonment.

Thus the sentence is varied accordingly. Subject to the

above variation appeal stands dismissed.

K.K.Wickremasinghe, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

6