==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 6

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

In the matter of an appeal under Section 331 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 as Amended.

CA Case No: CA -HCC- 218/ 24

HC of Balapitiya Case No: HC-CRI /2972/22

The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka

Complainant

Vs.

Duminda Dinesh Liyanage

(Presently at Welikada Prison)

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Duminda Dinesh Liyanage

(Presently at Welikada Prison)

Accused-Appellant

Page 2 of 6

Vs.

The Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department

Colombo 12

Complainant-Respondent

Before: B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

Amal Ranaraja, J

Counsel : Geeth Karunaratne for the Accused- Appellant

Dishna Warnakula, DSG for the Respondent

Argued On : 12.11.2025

Judgment On: 03.12.2025

JUDGEMENT

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

The Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Appellant’) was indicted before the

High Court of Balapitiya on one count of abduction and two counts of rape committed on

Sashani Chamarika Wijesiri Gunawardana, punishable under Section 354 and Section

364 (2)(e) of the Penal Code as amended by Act No. 22 of 1995.

It should be noted that when the matter was first taken up for trial, the Accused-

Appellant was absent, and the court accordingly issued a warrant against him.

Subsequently, on 21st September 2023, the Learned High Court Judge, acting under

Section 241 of the Criminal Procedure Code, ordered that the trial proceed in absentia on

05th January 2024. On that date, however, the Appellant appeared and informed the

court that he had been unaware of the case pending before the High Court. The Learned

High Court Judge rejected this explanation, remanded the Appellant, and fixed the trial

for 08th February 2024.

Page 3 of 6

Thereafter, a pre-trial conference was conducted on 25th April 2024. On 2nd May 2024,

when the trial commenced, the Appellant pleaded guilty to the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd counts

of the indictment.

Following submissions by both parties, the Learned High Court Judge, by a sentencing

order dated 02.05.2024, imposed the following sentences: one year of rigorous

imprisonment together with a fine of Rs. 5,000 for the first count, with a default sentence

of three months’ simple imprisonment; ten years of rigorous imprisonment for each of the

second and third counts; a further fine of Rs. 5,000, with a default sentence of three

months’ simple imprisonment. Further, the Learned High Court Judge directed that all

three sentences run concurrently. Furthermore, payment of Rs. 200,000 compensation to

the victim, in default, two years of simple imprisonment.

Being aggrieved by the afore-mentioned conviction and the sentence, the Appellant has

preferred this appeal to this Court. However, on 12th November 2025, when the matter

was taken up for argument, Geeth Karunaratne, AAL, for the Appellant, informed that

the Appellant intends only to pursue the Appeal against the sentence and accordingly

abandoned and withdrew the appeal against the conviction.

We note that generally, when sentencing, the Courts consider the aggravating and

mitigating factors along with the gravity of the offence. At the inquiry before sentencing,

the Counsel for the Appellant had pleaded for mitigation on the following grounds:

1. The Appellant has no previous criminal record.

2. At the time of the instance, the Appellant had pleaded guilty without going for a

trial

3. The parties involved were in a consensual romantic relationship at the time of the

incident.

4. Considering the case of SC 03/2008 based on similar facts, and accordingly, even

if the legislature has prescribed a minimum sentence, the Supreme Court can act

leniently towards the appellant.

Further, before sentencing, the Counsel for the Prosecution pleaded the following factors

as aggravating:

1. The victim has stated that there was a relationship with the appellant, but she

had no consent to engage in any sexual activities with him.

Page 4 of 6

2. The victim was 14 years of age when the crime was committed.

3. And the age of the appellant was 28 when the crime was committed.

In the instant case, the said sentence or penalty prescribed by written law is found in

Section 354 and Section 364 (2)(e) of the Penal Code;

Section 354 of the Penal Code reads as follows,

“Whoever kidnaps any person from Ceylon or from lawful guardianship shall be

punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to

seven years, and shall also be liable to fine”

Section 364 (2)(e) of the Penal Code reads as follows,

(2) “Whoever—

(e) commits rape on a woman under eighteen years of age; shall be punished with

rigorous imprisonment for a term not test than ten years and not exceeding twenty

years and with fine and shall in addition be ordered to pay compensation of an

amount determined by court to the person in respect of whom the offence was

committed for the injuries caused to such person;

Provided, however, that where the offence is committed in respect of a person

under sixteen years of age, the court may, where the offender is a person under

eighteen years of age and the intercourse has been with the consent of the person,

impose a sentence of imprisonment for term less than ten years.

Our Courts have considered that when the Learned Trial Judge considers the mitigatory

and aggravating factors, there is a duty cast on the Judge to give reasonable consideration

to such factors. We are mindful that the starting point of the sentence for this rape is 10

years.

His Lordship S.N. Silva J (as he was then) in the case of Attorney General v. Ranasinghe

and Others (1993) 2 SLR 81 had referred to the judgment of Kieth Billiam (1986) Volume

Criminal Appeal Report 347, where the Court had identified the following instances as

aggravating features.

Page 5 of 6

1. Violence is used to commit the rape.

2. A weapon is used to frighten the victim.

3. Rape is repeated.

4. The Defendant had a previous conviction of rape or other serious offences.

5. The victim is either very old or very young.

Further held that “where any one or more aggravating factors are present, the

sentence should be substantially higher than the figure suggested as the starting

point.”

In the instant case, the starting point for sentencing in respect of the offence is ten years.

Thereafter, it is incumbent upon the Learned Judge to exercise his discretion by striking

a balance between the aggravating and mitigating factors relevant to the circumstances

of the case. In the instant case, the Learned High Court Judge has considered the

following factors,

Page 58 of the brief,

“මෙෙ නඩුමේ චුදිත මෙෙ වරද කරන අවස්ථාව වන විට වයස අවුරුදු 28 ක තැනැත්මතකු වන අතර,

පැ.සා. 01 එයින් හරියටෙ භාගයක වයසකින් යුත් එනම් වයස අවුරුදු 14 කටත් වඩා අඩු තැනැත්ියක්

මේ. ඒ අනුව වයවස්ථාදායකය ඇත්ත වශමයන්ෙ මෙෙ නීිය මම් ආකාරමයන් සකස් කර ඇත්මත්

මෙවැනි වයසක සිටින දරුමවකුට ලිංගික සිංසර්ගයක් සඳහා කැෙැත්ත ලබා දීමම් හැකියාවක් මනාෙැි

බවට පූර්ව නිගෙනය කරමින් මේ.

හුමදක් මේෙ සම්බන්දතාවයක් ිබීෙ යන්න ලිංගික එක් වීෙක් සඳහා කැෙැත්ත දීෙක් මනාවන අතර,

ඇත්ත වශමයන්ෙ ලිංගික එක වීෙක් සඳහා කැෙැත්ත දීමම් දැනුෙක් මහෝ අවමබෝදයක් එවැනි දරුමවකුට

ිමේද යන්න මෙහිදී සලකා බැලය යුතුය. අමනක් අතට චුදිත ඒ වන විට වයස අවුරුදු 28 ක වැඩිෙල්

පුද්ගලමයකු වන අතර, ඔහු විසින් කරන ලද ක්‍රියාව පිලබන්ධව ඔහුට මහාඳ දැනීෙක් ිබී ඇි බව මපනී

යයි. තව දුරටත් අද දින මෙෙ නඩුමේ පැ.සා. 01 පැහැදිලව අධිකරණයට ප්‍රකාශ කර සිටින්මන් ඇය සහ

චූදිත අතර මේෙ සම්භන්ධතාවය ිබුනද චූදිත සෙග ඇි වූ ලිංගික එක් වීෙ සඳහා ඇයමේ කැෙැත්තක්

මනාිබූ බවයි.”

We are mindful that our courts have held that the Learned Trial Judge has a discretion

to decide an appropriate sentence notwithstanding the minimum mandatory sentence

prescribed by law (vide SC/03/2008). We note that, in addition to that Appellant was

absent, and the court has issued a warrant.

Page 6 of 6

It is evident that the Learned High Court Judge has given careful consideration to both

mitigating and aggravating factors relevant to the case. The sentencing decision clearly

reflects a measured and balanced evaluation, with appropriate weight given to the

mitigating circumstances.

The Learned High Court Judge carefully weighed all mitigating and aggravating factors

before imposing a sentence of 10 years’ rigorous imprisonment. This decision reflects the

broader concern about the risk of such injustices recurring, and underscores society’s

dependence on the justice system to uphold a deterrent effect, preserving social order and

preventing the escalation of crime.

Considering all these aspects, we find no justification to interfere with the sentence

handed down by the Learned High Court Judge on 02.05.2024.

The Sentence is backdated to the date of conviction, namely 02.05.2024. Furthermore, we

make no change in the fine and the compensation imposed on the Appellant.

The Registrar of this court is directed to send this judgment to the High Court of

Balapitiya for compliance.

Appeal dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Amal Ranaraja, J.

I AGREE

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL