IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A. No.270/97(F)

D.C. Colombo Case No.11228/MR

1. R.T. Wijetillake

2. (Mrs.) D.R. Wijetillake

Both of No.23, Independence Avenue,

Colombo 7.

Defendants-Appellants

Vs.

1. N.D. Paranavithana

No.4/ 1, Col. T.G. Jayawardena

Mawatha, Colombo 03.

2. (Miss) S.R. Paranavithana (Deed)

No.100, Kynsey Road,

Colombo 08.

3. Dr. (Mrs.) M.E. Wijesinghe nee

Paranavithana

No.55, Hullsyde Parade, Strathmore,

Victoria 3041, Australia.

(Appearing by her Attorney Mahinda

Wijesinghe (holder of Sri Lanka

National Identity Card No,400982619V)

Of Talangama South)

Plaintiffs-Respondents

1

.'

\ '

C.A. No.270/97(F)

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

D.C. Colombo Case No.11228/MR

M.M.A. GAFFOORJ.

Palitha Kumarasinghe PC, with Priyantha

Alagiyawanna and Asanka Ranwala for the

Defendan ts-A ppellan ts

Suren de Silva for the Plaintiffs-Respondents

04.07.2017

WRITIEN SUBMISSIONS TENDERED ON 24.11.2017 (Plaintiffs-Respondents)

13.12.2017 (Defendants-Appellants)

DECIDED ON 10.05.2018

M.M.A. GAFFOOR J.

This is an appeal from the judgment of the District Court of

Colombo dated 30th May 1997. The plaintiffs-respondents (hereinafter

called as respondents) originally instituted this action in the District Court

to recover damages and loss caused to them by the defendant's conduct.

2

The Respondents became the owners of property described in

the 1st schedule to the plaint and the 2nd defendant (2nd appellant) is the

owner of the property described in the 2nd schedule to the plaint.

The defendants (hereinafter called as appellants) demolished

their old house in order to construct a multi-storied building on it.

The respondents pleaded that, the conduct of the appellant by

earth-filling operations and using heavy machinery like bull dozers and

road rollers to consolidate earth caused damage to the house belonging to

them and it was rendered useless. Further damage due to the negligence

of the appellants' ignorance, the protest of the respondents' and the failure

to take adequate precautions resulted the respondents to suffer loss and

damages amounting to a sum of Rs. 1, 180,000/ = assessed on the basis

that -

a) damage caused to the building Rs.l ,000,000/ =

b) loss of rental receivable from the said building rate of 10,000/= per

month for 18 months.

The appellants argued that work was done by an independent

contractor, denied the liability and stood up the position that the

respondents' building was very old and is about 40 to 50 years and there

3

were already several cracks on the building prior to the earth work done

by the 2nd appellant, adequate precautions were taken by them and also

the house was constructed in a flood-prone area with underlying peat soil.

According to the evidence led by the Engineer Hemachandra

(Report P3), he had photographed the premises and testified in detail of

the damages seen by him the filling was done in one setting. In his opinion

the load of the earth plus the load of the building, the land on which the

building stands was the cause of damage. P3 with the report and

appendices gives a clear picture of the cracks widened as a result of filling

operation and further he testified that the house could last for 60-70 years.

The learned Additional District Judge had held the appellants'

acts of negligence only accelerated the unworthiness of the house in suit

and appellants jointly and severally are liable for the damages suffered by

the respondents and he valued such damages in sum ofRs.450,000/- with

legal interests.

The appellants also disputed the quantum of damages

awarded by the Trial Judge to the respondents, namely a sum of

Rs.350,000/= or which has been through an inadvertent typographical

error being stated as Rs. 450,000/= in the body of the judgment.

4

In the said judgment the learned Additional District Judge

had come to a conclusion that the damages suffered, amounts to

Rs.350,000/=.

The main argument of the defendant-appellants are based on

the regularity and the way in which the issues that had been raised in the

case were decided by the learned Additional District Judge.

The bone of contention as regards is issue No.8, where the

defendant-appellants aver that there is a ex/ade irregularity in answering

the issues which amounts to an erroneous conclusion reached by the

learned Additional District Judge.

The plaintiffs main contentions are that due to the purported

and admitted acts of the defendant the house in issue had been rendered

useless and further it is uneconomical to bring it to the former position by

restoration or repair.

The plaintiff had sought Rs.l,OOO,OOO/- and a further sum of

Rs.180,000/- for loss of income caused by the acts of the defendants.

It is to be noted that the plaintiff who claims compensation

admits that the house in issue was 40 to 50 years old and there were

5

several cracks in the building prIor to the earth work done by the

defendant. And it is in evidence that the land on which the building in

issue stands is situated in a low level area where there is stagnation of

water due to rain. Furthermore, the house was constructed on a land

where the underlying soil is described as peat soil. It is to be noted that

none of the parties had done a soil test to ascertain the strength of the

underlying soil which could have been a very important piece of evidence

in regard to the nature of the soil which existed at the time of the incident.

It is submitted by both parties that the acts of filling of land

which underwent a new construction, the filling had been done by heavy

machinery such as tractors and road movers ,in the process of the

construction carried out. But the defendant-appellants submit that they

have taken precautionary measures to reduce the vibrations and had used

hand rollers in filling operations at the proximity of the plaintiffs land.

It is also to be noted the plaintiff had prayed for damages as

regards the value of the house and the rental, but the plaintiff had not

prayed for cost of repairing.

In this case 8 issues were raised by the plaintiff. Issues No.9-23

were raised by the defendant respectively. In order to substantiate

their case 2 Civil Engineers Rodrigo and Hemachandra and

6

Marasinghe the Municipal Valuer had gIven evidence. The

documents marked PI to P9 were read in evidence and the plaintiff

closed his case. At the trial the Balaraja Arunasalam (neighbour of

the plaintiff and defendant) Gamini Karunarathna a Chartered

Architect and another Karunarathna a structural engineer testified

for the defendants and closed their case reading in evidence

documents marked from Dl to D12.

It is to be noted in the case of Surangi vs. Rodrigo 2003 (3)

SLR 35 His Lordship Gamini Amarathunga held that,

1. No court is entitled to or has jurisdiction to grant reliefs to

a party which are not prayed for in the prayer to the plaint.

In the above case the court has referred to undernoted judgments.

1. Sirivansa Thero v. Sudassi Thero - 63 NLR 31

2. Martin Singho v. KuZarathne-CA 248/95 CAM 18.12.96

3. Wijesuriya v. Senaratne - (1997) 2 Sri LR 323

4. Dinoris Appuhamy v. Sopinona - 77 NLR 188 (Distinguished)

In the above said judgments the learned Judges had

referred to Section 40(e) of the Civil Procedure Code and come to a

conclusion "no court is entitled to or has jurisdiction to grant relief

to a party which is not prayed for in the plaint. Further, mere

7

assertion of damages in the body of the plaint does not provide for

relief which had not been specifically prayed.

It is to be noted that the Supreme Court in the case of

J.R. Punchi Appuhamy and another vs. Dingiri Banda BASL

Law Journal 2016 Vol. 22 page 40 where the court has to decide

"whether the plaintiff is entitled to a lesser relief than prayed for ... "

In this case HjL Eva Wanasundera J had held thus,

2. Applying the principle that the fact that the plaintiff has

prayed for a greater relief than what he is entitled to,

should not prevent him from gettirg a lesser relief which

he is entitled to .......... "

In the similar vein in the case of Aththanayaka vs.

Ramyawathie (2003 1 SLR 401) HjL Shirani Bandaranayake J had to

decide whether the claimant should establish his claim to the extent he

had prayed for. Court observed although a larger claim had been made a

lesser claim can be awarded by court.

This court observes that although the plaintiff had claimed for

a larger amount of damages this court has inherent powers to award a

justifiable and an equitable judgment.

8

In the case of Wilson vs. Kusumawathie 2015 BLR 49, it

was held that it is undoubtedly incumbent upon the court to utilize the

statutory provisions and grant the relief embodied therein if it appears to

court that it is just and fair. Recently referred to in SC Appeal 96/17,

SC/HCCA/LA/630/16 D.C. Colombo 4415/09 SC appeal decided on

06.03.2018.

Therefore, this court has to consider the above said line of

authorities as enumerated by the Supreme Court and come to a

conclusion on the quantum of damages. Because, it is seen by this court

that ex facie, damages had been caused by the construction according to

the evidence that had been led.

Therefore, on the above said judgments and the facts of this

case cry for justice which cannot be ignored by this court.

Another contention of the defendant-appellants is that the

principle based on Ryland vs. Fletcher enunciated by His Lordship

Blackburn J is not applicable in this case. The basis of this argument is

that there is no evidence relating to any damages directly resulting from

construction of the building. Furthermore, it is submitted by the

defendant-appellants that the above concept in Ryland vs. Fletcher is

9

based on negligence arising out of strict liability. Therefore, we agree with

the contention that the learned trial Judge had not considered the rulings

on Ryland vs. Fletcher in comparison to the facts of this case.

It is to be further noted when a trial Judge in his judgment in

p.824 had very correctly observed that the filling of the land is not an

unnatural use of the land. Therefore, this observation and the application

of Ryland vs. Fletcher are contradictory. Therefore, we have to dissent

from this finding of the learned trial Judge on this point.

It is further submitted by the appellants that the learned trial

Judge had not properly analyzed the evidence of the witnesses brought

before court.

Balraj Arunasalam has been considered as worthy of credit

and not a partial witness. He had submitted to court that on 10.09.1989

the 1 st defendant had purchased the old house which was demolished

within a period of one month. Furthermore, the structural engineer had

suggested that a soil test should be done and accordingly it had been

carried out. At page 582 the appellants have filling work under the

supervision of Consultants S.A. Kularathna and Gamini Karunarathna.

The plaintiff-appellants have been mindful of the complaint and had used

10

.'

hand rollers for the purpose of filling land, page 635. Witness S.A.

Karunarathna had testified that he advised the appellants not to use heavy

machinery and to use manual roller in order that the operations will not

harm the adjoining property. The vibrations emanating from the

machines had been minimized. Therefore, when perusing the evidence of

the expert engineers we observe that the evidence conforms to the fact that

the defendants have taken adequate precautions in filling operations.

Although, the defendant-appellants had contended that a

detailed report of the cost of damages have not been tendered and the

learned District Judge had awarded cost of repairing, we see no reason to

split hairs on this issue as the learned District Judge had considered the

cumulative effect on the evidence led before him and had come to this

decision regarding the value of the said house/cost for repaying the said

house. It may be that what has been considered by the learned District

Judge is not the grammatical connotations of the claim but the facts that

had been elicited before court in the form of evidence.

Furthermore, we note that filling the land for construction

purposes is not using the land for unnatural purpose. As said above the

defendant-appellants have taken all possible precautions to avoid

vibrations which may have caused damages to the adjoining property. We

observe that the learned trial Judge had come to a conclusion that the

11

'

filling earth using heavy machinery tractors and road rollers which is not

the real state of affairs that prevailed in the defendant's land.

It had also been submitted that even prior to the operation of

filling and construction the land in dispute there had been numerous

cracks in the premises No.24. The said house had been built on peat soil

which had been subject to floods at various intervals.

The learned trial Judge had awarded a sum of Rs.350,OOOj-

the cost of repairs of the house, but had not taken into consideration the

value of the building or the rentals. The value of the house and the rentals

had not been claimed in issue No.8. The cost of repairs is not an issue.

Therefore, what had not been asked for cannot be awarded which is not

relevant to the evidence.

But Section 189 of the Civil Procedure Code provides in a situation of this

nature.

189. (1) The court may at any time, either on its own motion or

on that of any of the parties, correct any clerical or

arithmetical mistake in any judgment or order or any

error arising therein from any accidental slip or omission,

or may make any amendment which is necessary to bring

a decree into conformity with the judgment.

12

'

(2) Reasonable notice of any proposed amendment under this

section shall in all cases be given to parties or their

registered attorneys.

The Privy Council judgment of Jayawickrama vs.

Amarasinghe 20 NLR 289 and the proviso to Article 138 (1) of the

Constitution states that no judgment, decree or order of any court shall be

reversed or varied on account of any error, defect or irregularity, which

has not prejudiced 'the substantial rights of the parties or occasioned a

failure of justice.

In a recent case of CA 1171/99(F) decided OD 2.2.2018

Devika Livera Thennakoon J. delivering the judgment of the court observed

that in the case of Mohamad Iqbal vs. Mohamad Sally 1995 2 SLR 310

"Section 189 of the Civil Procedure Code is exhaustive for the causes

for which a decree may be amended. In the above judgment court

has cited HjL Ranaraja J- where he had observed "the power of court

under Section 189 is to be exercised entirely at the discretion of

court, and the discretion should be exercised sparingly and in

general to avoid a miscarriage of justice; if not the principle of the

finality of a judgment and decree will have no meaning."

13

The contention of the appellants was the issue No.7 had not

been properly answered. But taking into consideration the above

authorities and the recent trends enunciated in these judgments the

powers of this court are not restricted to strictly abide by the provisions,

but as HjL Ranaraja J had very clearly enunciated corrective action should

be taken within the framework of the law, to remedy the injury caused

thereby. The modalities are best left to court and would depend on the

nature of the error.

The appellants had invited this court to the observations and

findings of the learr:).ed District Judge as regards issues No.4 and 5. As a

matter of completeness we had made our observations in that regard a

repetition of those facts is unnecessary and will burden the case record. In

answering these contentions, the court is empowered under the provisions

of the Civil Procedure Code Section 189 to rectify errors and deliver a

justifiable order.

We are mindful of the evidence of Consultant Engineer

Hemachandra at page 317 of the brief, it is observed that the cracks are

not mere cracks but gaping holes. These damages had caused the building

uninhabitable. The observations are reflected in page 921 of the brief sub

paras 3.1 to 3.8 demonstrate the damages in detail. These observations

are not disputed in evidence. In light of the above, we see no ground to

14

dismiss the plaintiffs case but to hold that the damages awarded by the

learned District Judge amounting to Rs.350,OOOj= although not the real

value for the damages caused we have no alternative but to award the said

cost of Rs.350,OOO /.= and legal interests.

Subject to these variations this appeal is dismissed with costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

15