1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal under and in terms of Section 331 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

Hon. Attorney General, Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12.

Complainant Court of Appeal Case No. CA 72-73/20 Vs. High Court of Balapitiya Case No. HCB 1779/15

1. Kaluduru Wisaka Thabrew,

Wilochana, Madombe, Kosgoda. 2. Agampodi Upul Susantha De Zoysa alias Loku

Raja, Duwemodara, Kosgoda. Accused AND NOW BETWEEN

1. Kaluduru Wisaka Thabrew,

Wilochana, Madombe, Kosgoda. 1st Accused-Appellant

2

2. Agampodi Upul Susantha De Zoysa alias Loku

Raja, Duwemodara, Kosgoda.

2nd Accused-Appellant

Vs. Hon. Attorney General, Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12.

Complainant-Respondent

Before: B. Sasi Mahendran, J. Amal Ranaraja, J.

Counsel: Anuja Premaratna, P.C. with Nayana Dissanayake, Senal Madugama, R. Durusinghe, V. Rathnayake, Natasha De Alwis and Hashan Bhanu for the 1st Accused-Appellant.

Kapila Waidyaratne P.C. with Akkila Jayasundara and Akhila Mathushi

for the 2nd Accused-Appellant.

Hiranjan Pieris, S.D.S.G. for the Respondent. Argued on: 10.03.2025

Decided on: 26.03.2025

JUDGMENT

AMAL RANARAJA, J.

1. The Accused-Appellants (hereinafter referred to as the appellants) have

been indicted in the High Court of Balapitiya in High Court Case No.

HCB/1779/15.

3

2. The charge in the indictment is as follows;

That on or about 12.10.2001, at Duwemodara, within the

jurisdiction of this Court, the first accused-appellant and the

second accused-appellant caused the death of one Appuwadura

Rohana Kumara De Zoysa, thereby committed the offence of

murder punishable in terms of section 296 of the Penal Code

read with section 32 of the Penal Code.

3. The Learned High Court Judge has caused the indictment and the

annexures to be served on the appellants. The appellants thereafter have

pleaded not guilty to the charge and the matter has been taken up for trial

before the Learned High Court Judge without a jury. At the conclusion of

the trial, the Learned High Court Judge has found the appellants guilty of

the charge, convicted and sentenced the appellants to death.

4. The appellants being aggrieved by the disputed judgment and the

sentencing order has preferred the instant appeal to this Court.

Grounds of appeal:

5. The Learned Presidents Counsel for the first accused-appellant urged the

following grounds of appeal when the matter was taken up for argument:

i. The Learned High Court Judge has not taken the infirmities

of the prosecutions case in favour of the accused.

ii. The learned High Court Judge erred in not considering the

probability of the prosecution witnesses.

iii. The Learned High Court Judge erred in concluding that an

alibi has to be proved by an accused.

4

iv. The Learned High Court Judge erred in not considering that

the accused has lost a right to a fair trial in that the

investigators have failed to record the statements of

purported witnesses who refused to make statements.

6. The Learned Presidents Counsel for the second accused-appellant urged

the following grounds of appeal when the matter was taken up for

argument:

i. The Learned High Court Judge has failed to judicially determine

whether the prosecution has proved its case beyond a reasonable

doubt.

ii. The Learned High Court Judge has not legally considered the

improbable evidence of prosecution witness No.1. iii. The Learned High Court Judge has failed to consider the dock

statement made by the second accused-appellant.

iv. The Learned High Court Judge has failed to judicially evaluate the

contradictions and omissions which cast a doubt in the

prosecutions case.

The case of the prosecution

7. At about 09.00 hrs, on 13.10.2001, PW1 has gone in his bicycle with a

friend of his named Subash to purchase groceries for his eatery. When PW1

had proceeded about 200 metres he had heard two or three gunshots being

fired. Thereafter, PW1 has stopped on the side of the road and seen the first

and the second appellants chasing behind a person named Jayantha. The

first appellant had been armed with a gun and the second appellant with a

knife. The second appellant upon seeing PW1 on the side of the road has

stopped giving chase to the person named Jayantha, moved towards PW1

and stabbed him. PW1 has thereafter started running in the direction of

5

Galle on the Old Colombo-Galle Highway. While running in the direction of

Galle, PW1 has seen the deceased lying on the ground near a boutique.

PW1 has also seen the first appellant handing over his gun to the second

appellant and the second appellant firing the gun in the direction of PW1.

PW1 has however not suffered gunshot injuries, though he had sustained a

stab injury previously. PW1 has also seen the second appellant getting on

top of the body of the deceased, who was lying on the ground and allegedly

stabbing the deceased.

8. Upon receiving the distressing news that her son had been shot, PW3 has

rushed to the scene. She has arrived to find her son lying on the ground,

where he was being stabbed by the second appellant.

9. A person named Kasun has informed PW9 (IP Gnanasiri), the Officer-in-

Charge of the crime branch of the Kosgoda Police Station about the incident

involving the stabbing of the deceased and another person. The information

has been provided to PW9 at 09.20 hrs on 13.10.2001. PW9 has thereafter

visited the scene of the incident. PW9 has observed the deceased lying by

the side of the road on the Old Galle-Colombo Highway. PW9 has also

observed five stab injuries on the back of the chest of the deceased and one

other injury which could have been caused from a firearm.

10. Dr. S. N. K. W. Samarasinghe has conducted the post-mortem examination

of the deceased and prepared a post-mortem report. The post-mortem

report has been marked -8.

The case of the accused

11. The first appellant has maintained that he was not present at the scene of

the incident. However, upon learning that he was suspected of being

involved, he had voluntarily surrendered himself to Court.

6

12. The second appellant has made a statement from the dock denying the

allegation and has maintained that he has been falsely implicated to the

incident.

13. When PW1 had stopped on the side of the road the first and the second

appellants have approached him. Thereafter, the second appellant had

allegedly stabbed PW1 with a knife that was in his possession. The first

appellant has had in his possession a gun. Upon purportedly being stabbed

by the second appellant, PW1 has started running in the direction of Galle.

The first and the second appellants have chased after him. PW1 has seen

the first appellant, hand over the gun which was in his possession to the

second appellant. The second appellant has fired the gun in the direction of

PW1. PW1 has also supposedly seen the second appellant stop at the place

the deceased was lying and stabbed the deceased.

14. In a setting where the second appellant was supposedly in possession of

the gun of the first appellant, it is unclear as to how the second appellant

instantaneously proceeded to stab the deceased with a knife. No evidence

has been led to explain such disparity. Further, on an occasion, PW1

has testified, that he saw both, the first and the second appellants,

stabbing the deceased in his neck. The post-mortem report does not

disclose that the deceased had suffered stab injuries to his neck. The

attention of this Court has been drawn to the same as an omission.

Further, though PW1 had suffered a stab injury and purportedly

hospitalised for treatment, no medico-legal report has been produced to

corroborate the same. PW3 has stated that two other people also fled the

scene of the incident with the first and the second appellants, though

PW1 has stated that only the first and second appellants were present at

the scene of the incident. Additionally, though PW3 has stated that she

saw a gun in the possession of the first appellant in her examination-in-

chief, she has failed to state the same in the statement given to the

investigating officer. Such detail has been brought to the attention of

Court and an omission recorded in that regard. PW3 has also not seen

7

PW1 being chased after by the appellants. Further, when a person named

Jayantha testified on being listed as a witness by the second appellant,

he has not mentioned about an incident of being chased by the

appellants on Galle road on the date of the incident.

15. The irreconcilable difference in the testimony of PW1 and PW3 being as

referred to above, it makes this Court query as to whether PW1 and PW3

were actually present at the scene of the incident as stated by them. The

discrepancies being material, the benefit of the doubt need to be given to

the appellants. PW1 and PW3 lack creditworthiness, hence, it would be

unsafe to act on the evidence of those witnesses.

16. Chapter XI of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 provide

for the investigation of offences.

Section 109(6) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979

provides as follows,

Any police officer or inquirer making an investigation under this

Chapter may by order in writing require the attendance before

himself of any person being within the limits of the station of such

police officer or any adjoining station or within the local limits of

the jurisdiction of such inquirer who, from the information given or

otherwise, appears to be acquainted with the circumstances of the

case, and such person shall attend as so required.

If any person when required to attend by an inquirer refuses or

fails to do so, the inquirer may thereupon in his discretion issue a

warrant to secure the attendance of such person as required by

such order as aforesaid.

8

17. A person by the name of Kasun has informed PW9 about the incident

referred to in the charge in the indictment. The person who provided the

first information however has not been listed as a witness. Such a move

demonstrates the fact that the inquiring officer has not questioned the

person named Kasun but has only proceeded to reduce into writing the

statement made by him. The evidence presented indicate that the shop of

Lewis located near the site of the alleged attack was closed at that time.

Further, Regina Gunasekaras house has had a hedge in front of it. The

hedge had obstructed the view of the site of the alleged incident. Hence,

resulted in Regina Gunasekaras inability to see the incident. In those

circumstances, the said Lewis and Regina Gunasekara were unlikely to

be able to give worthwhile evidence with regard to the incident stated in

the charge.

18. Further, the Learned High Court Judge in the disputed judgment has

stated as follows,

[Vide page 19 of the High Court judgment and page 292 of the Brief]

19. The Learned High Court Judge thereby has placed a burden on the first

appellant to prove his defence of alibi.

20. An alibi is not an exception of penal liability like the general and special

exceptions laid down in the Penal Code. When an alibi is raised, there is

9

no burden of proof on the appellant. The evidence on alibi has merely to

be weighted in the balance with the prosecution evidence. If the evidence

of alibi is not believed, it fails. If it is believed, it succeeds, but if it is

neither believed nor disbelieved but creates a reasonable doubt to the

prosecutions case, the appellant is entitled to be acquitted.

In Punchi Banda vs. The State [1973] 76 NLR 293 the following were

held to be indispensable directions required to be given to the jury

whenever an alibi is raised,

(i) even if they (the jury) fully disbelieved the defence of alibi that had

been set up, the prosecution was not absolved from the duty of proving its

case beyond reasonable doubt;

(ii) the falsity of an alibi does not strengthen the case for the prosecution.

21. The Learned High Court Judge has also failed to evaluate the dock

statement of the second appellant. I now consider the principles relevant

to the evaluation of a dock statement. When evaluating a dock statement,

the following guidelines must be considered;

i. A dock statement should be considered as evidence

subject to infirmities that it was not a sworn statement

and not tested by cross-examination.

ii. If the dock statement is believed, it must be acted upon.

iii. If the dock statement creates a reasonable doubt in the

prosecutions case, the defence of the accused must

succeed.

iv. The dock statement of one accused person should not

be considered against the other accused.

22. Further, a period of twenty-three years has lapsed since the offence has

been purportedly committed. Therefore, it does not seem just to call upon

10

the appellants to defend themselves again after such an unconscionable

lapse of time.

In The Queen vs. G.K.Jayasinghe 69 NLR 314 at page 328, Sansoni, J, has stated,

we have considered whether we should order a new trial in this case. We do not take that course, because there has been a lapse of three years since the commission of the offences, and because of our own view of the unreliable nature of the accomplices evidence on which alone the prosecution case rests. We accordingly direct that the judgment of acquittal be entered.

23. Having considered the above matters of fact and law, I am of the view

that this is not a fit case to order a re-trial.

Hence, I proceed to set aside the disputed judgment along with the

sentence and acquit the first and second appellants of the charge

preferred against them.

Appeal allowed.

24. The Registrar of this Court is directed to communicate the judgment to

the High Court of Balapitiya for compliance.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

B. SASI MAHENDRAN, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal