==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

Orders in the nature of Writs of

Certiorari, Prohibition and

Mandamus under Article 140 of the

Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

1. Center for Eco-Cultural Studies,

No. 1613, Malabe Road,

Kottawa, Pannipitiya,

P.O. Box 03, Diyakapilla,

Sigiriya.

2. Elephant X (Elephas Maximus

Maximus) residing in the Gal Oya

and Minneriya area.

CA (Writ) App. No. 318/2025

PETITIONERS

Vs.

1. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department, Hulfsdorp, Colombo 12.

2. Mr. Ranjan Marasinghe,

Acting General Director, Conservation of Wildlife, Department of Wildlife Conservation, No. 811A, Jayanthipura, Battaramulla.

3. J.I.D. Jayasundara,

General Manager Railways,

2

P.O. Box 355, Olcott Mawatha, Colombo 10. 4. Central Environmental Authority,

Department of Excise, No. 104, Denzil Kobbekaduwa Mawatha, Sri Jayawardenepura Kotte.

RESPONDENTS

Before: Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Counsel:

Dr. Asanga Gunawansa, P.C., with S.F. Aluwihare, C. Kannangara and S.

Kariyawasam instructed by Paul Ratnayeke Associates for the Petitioner.

Nayomi Kahawita, S.S.C. for the Respondents.

Argued on: 20.01.2026

Delivered on: 10.09.2026

3

Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Judgement

Introduction

This Application has been instituted by the 1st Petitioner, who is a body corporate limited by

guarantee, in dual capacity. On one hand, this Application is filed as a Public Interest Litigation

(PIL), whilst on the other hand, it represents the 2nd Petitioner as the next friend, who physically

cannot come and make an application before this Court, despite the fact that the 2nd Petitioner

is considered as one of the most intelligent animals on Earth; the main differences between a

human and the 2nd Petitioner and its relatives are that humans communicate with its own species

using its own language whilst the 2nd Petitioner cannot understand and communicate using this

human language, except when trained to respond in a specific way to commands received in

the human language, and the 2nd Petitioner does not have hands similar to humans to perform

certain activities.

However, animals are considered property in Sri Lanka; even ownership of an elephant can be

acquired or transferred once a wild elephant is domesticated. However, there is still a question

as to whether an elephant can seek to have rights declared by a court of law, unless such rights

are recognised by the courts depending on the source of law. Although, there is a debate on this

issue, in some jurisdictions, their rights have been recognised, including the right to life, despite

the fact that they cannot appear before a court and make a complaint.1

1 Case “Mona Estrellita” (Rights of Nature and Animals as Subjects of Rights) [253-20-JH/22] Constitutional Court of Ecuador, 27.01.2022); Cuqui Brown [Habeas Corpus 789-22-JH] (Provincial Court of Justice of Napo, Ecuador, 09.08.2022); Narayan Dutt Bhatt v. Union of India 2018 SCC OnLine Utt 645 (Uttarakhand High Court, 4 July 2018); Karnail Singh and Others v. State of Haryana CRR-533-2013 (Punjab and Haryana High Court, 31 May 2019); AFADA v. Mendoza Zoo (Cecilia) Expte. NRO. P-72.254/15 (Third Court of Guarantees of Mendoza, 3 November 2016); AFADA (Sandra the Orangutan) Orangutana, Sandra s/ Habeas Corpus Case No 18491/14 (Federal Chamber of Criminal Cassation, Buenos Aires, 14 November 2014); Islamabad Wildlife Management Board v. Metropolitan Corporation Islamabad and Others PLD 2021 Islamabad 6 (High Court of Islamabad, 21 May 2020).

4

Therefore, 2nd Petitioner is represented by the 1st Petitioner as a next friend.

After issuance of formal notice, this was argued before me on 20.01.2026; hence, this

judgement.

The Petitioners' grievance

The 1st Petitioner is a body corporate incorporated under the Companies Act No. 7 of 2007,

and it is limited by guarantee. The 2nd Petitioner is an elephant X, whose biological name is

identified as “Elephas Maximus Maximus”, and resides in the Gal Oya-Minneriya area, freely

moving around and having access to the protected areas declared under the Fauna and Flora

Protection Ordinance.

The 1st Petitioner inter alia has undertaken to protect the environment and raise environmental

issues in courts and with other authorities, and to protect the environment's fauna and flora for

the present and future generations.

Furthermore, in the course of its activities, it has already undertaken litigation in the nature of

Public Interest Litigation (PIL) before this Court, as well as before the Supreme Court in

Fundamental Rights applications. Thus, the 1st Petitioner dedicates its services to the public to

protect the environment.

As for the Respondents, the 1st Respondent is the Attorney General, who is cited in this

Application as a party representing the Republic of Sri Lanka. The 2nd Respondent is the

Director General of Wildlife Conservation, the 3rd Respondent is the General Manager of

Railways, and the 4th Respondent is the Central Environmental Authority established under the

National Environmental Act No. 47 of 1980.

The immediate issue arising in this Application has arisen due to the accident that took place

by the collision of a certain herd of elephants with a moving train, popularly known for

5

identification purposes as the “Meenagaya” train, being an express train operated by the

Railway Department, where the 3rd Respondent is the head, which was coming from Batticaloa

bound Colombo.

In this regard, it is alleged by the Petitioners that the 2nd Petitioner, who was also part of the

said herd, met with the said accident which occurred on 25.04.2025 and was severely injured

by the said accident. Six or more elephants of the same herd died on the spot, having succumbed

to injuries sustained in the said accident, while some died later.

Accordingly, the 2nd Petitioner has a personal interest in the litigation, whilst the 1st Petitioner,

representing the people of this country, is moving the Court in the cause of the 2nd Petitioner

and the rest of the wildlife, mainly including elephants.

Furthermore, it is also asserted in the Petition by the Petitioners that the 2nd Respondent is under

a statutory duty to prepare national plans for the purpose of protecting wild animals,

particularly wild elephants, living in the protected areas declared as national reserves or strict

nature reserves, which are meant basically for elephants and other species.

In addition, it is also stated in the Petition that the Northern Railway Line and Eastern Railway

Line pass through protected areas, where on either side of the said lines, there are jungles

roamed by elephants and other species, and particularly, the Eastern Line passes through dense

jungle, famous mainly for elephants inter alia other species of animals.

It is further alleged by the Petitioners that the 2nd Respondent has not taken any action or

implemented any national plan until the accident took place, while the 3rd Respondent also has

failed to take steps or actions to avoid such accidents.

Therefore, it is alleged that a Writ of Mandamus lies against the Respondents, compelling them

to prepare a national plan, if there is none, and to implement the national plan if there is one.

6

In particular, a writ lies against the 2nd Respondent to take action for the protection of wild

elephants where trains operate on the Northern and Eastern Lines, where elephants and other

species of animals freely roam around in the protected areas through which the said lines lie.

After the issuance of formal notice, no Objections were filed, despite several dates were

obtained for that purpose.

The Petitioners assert that on February 19th, 2025, Wednesday at around 11.30 p.m., the

Colombo-bound "Meenagaya" express train travelling from Batticaloa to Colombo collided

with a herd of elephants, of which the 2nd Petitioner was a member; thereby, the said collision

resulted in six of the elephants dying on the spot, whilst the remaining two elephants were

seriously injured, including the 2nd Petitioner. Later, the other injured elephant also died,

thereby resulting in the deaths of seven elephants all together. Thus, to establish this, the

Petitioner has annexed P2-A, P2-B, and P2-C, including reports and photographs of the

derailed train engine, with the Police and Railway teams investigating the matter.

Furthermore, it is alleged that collisions between elephants and trains frequently happen on the

Northern Railway Line, particularly around Elephant Pass, which is popularly known as the

Northern Line and on the Mannar Line, in addition to that, very often on the Eastern Line. A

summary of the study published is marked as P3.

In addition to that, to establish the same, a news item with relevant photographs which appeared

in the 'Sunday Times' is marked as P4.

Thus, it is alleged that the 2nd Petitioner and its relatives and its species are in real danger, in

addition to the other species of animals who cannot come forward and make complaints in the

Courts of Law, where the law courts are supposedly meant for humans.

It is further alleged that there has been dereliction of performance of the duties by the 2nd to 4th

Respondents, resulting in the said collision. In furtherance, it is asserted that the reconstruction

7

of the Northern and Eastern Railways, particularly the Northern Railway, including the Mannar

Line, which branches off at Madawachchi from the Northern Line and goes right up to Mannar,

lies through dense jungle areas where the Government has identified and declared elephant

habitats and strict natural reserves as protected areas for elephants and other species to roam

around.

After the war, with the setting up and reconstruction of infrastructure, the railway operation

timetable has been in full operational after 2012; to establish the same, the Petitioners have

filed two documents marked as P6 and P7, respectively, the reports from the printed media that

the Northern and Eastern Lines operate at full operational capacity.

The Petitioners further assert that there are several other national parks and protected areas for

elephants and other species; Kaudulla is one national park established in 2002 by the Gazette

Notification made under the Flora and Fauna Protection Ordinance. Kaudulla is located under

the irrigation plan led by King Mahasen, and from time to time, the Department of Irrigation

is also involved in maintaining it; the Kaudulla Park is located around Minneriya National Park,

Hurulu Eco Park, Gal Oya Eco Park and Wasgamuwa National Park, where elephants are

constantly roaming.

Further, the Eastern Railway Line from Colombo to Batticaloa also passes through the said

dense jungle where elephants roam; copies indicating the active railway network and national

parks situated in close proximity are indicated in the two maps marked as P8 and P9, annexed

to the Petition.

The Petitioners further annex the Extra Ordinary Gazette marked as P10, to establish the

regulations published under the National Environmental Act.

8

The Petitioners further annexed P11A and P11B, illustrating two study reports on the problems

of accidents which resulted in elephant killings, to establish the gravity of the complaint of the

Petitioners.

To further establish this, the Petitioners have annexed letters written to the relevant authorities,

to establish the complaints made by them, marked as P12 and P13.

In addition to that, the Petitioners have referred to the Fundamental Rights application filed

before the Supreme Court, to establish the rights of the 2nd Petitioner and certain parties.

Relief sought

Therefore, for the dereliction of duties on the part of the Respondents, the Petitioners seek the

intervention of this Court by this Application, seeking inter alia the following relief;

b) Issue a mandate in the nature of a writ of Mandamus directing the 2nd and/or 4th

Respondents to call on the 3rd Respondent to submit an Initial Environmental

Examination and/or Environmental Impact Assessment for the railway lines and

railway operations in the North, East and North Central and Wayamba Provinces in

terms of the Fauna and Flora Protection Ordinance and the National Environmental

Act and to condition permission for the operation of the said railway lines with

appropriate and meaningful preventive and mitigatory measures with regard, among

others, train-elephant collisions;

c) Issue a mandate in the nature of a writ of Mandamus directing the 2nd Respondents

to prepare a Management Plan for all National Reserves including a plan for protection

of wildlife and avoiding deaths and injuries to animals due to development of public

transport infrastructure in areas within close proximity to National reserves, in

accordance with the Fauna and Flora Protection Ordinance;

9

d) Make an Order;

a. Report periodically to this Court on the action taken by the 2nd and/or the 4th

Respondents with regard to the above orders and the subsequent action taken by the

2nd and/or the 4th Respondents;

b. As an interim measure pending the final determination of this application, order the

establishment of a Committee comprising of the 2nd, 3rd and 4th Respondents, a nominee

of the Honourable Attorney General, and other civil society organizations and elephant

experts as to the 1st Respondent shall seem appropriate to formulate an emergency

framework to encompass inter alia, the following;

i. Identification of High-Risk elephant-train collision Railway Stretches and the

development of appropriate mitigation measures, including

"go slow" zones with speed specification;

ii. Take appropriate disciplinary action against railway locomotive and Wildlife

Protection Officers who fail to respect the speed specifications that exist and

are put in place now or in the future, including prosecuting railway locomotive

drivers for "killing" and/or "injuring" elephants under the Fauna and Flora

Protection Ordinance;

iii. Interdepartmental Coordination between the office of the 2nd Respondent

and 3rd Respondent;

iv. Strengthening the role and responsibility of the liaison officers of the 2nd

Respondent on board trains operated under the 3rd Respondent, including

publicly recording and reporting train speeds between identified elephant-train

conflict areas;

10

v. Sensitization and Training of the officials of the 3rd Respondent to minimize

train collisions with elephants;

vi. Speed Regulations in proximity to Elephant Corridors and National

Reserves;

vii. Adoption of Technology-based and non-technology-based Mitigation and

preventive Measures; and

viii. To file the same in Your Lordship's Court by way of a report and thereafter

to monitor implementation of the mitigatory and preventive measures and their

success and update Your Lordship's Court periodically by way of monitoring

reports;

The Respondents have not filed any Objections. Instead, the Senior State Counsel, Ms.

Kahawita has only filed post-argument Written Submissions for and on behalf of the

Respondents.

In the Written Submissions filed by Ms. Kahawita, she has referred to the fact that there is a

recognised human-elephant conflict which has been there for decades. To minimise the said

conflict, a committee had been appointed in 1957, headed by Mr. K. Somasuntharam as the

Chairperson, and the said Committee also included personalities such as Dr. R.L. Spittel, who

was an environmentalist wildlife enthusiast, wildlife flora and fauna conservationist, and above

all, a prolific writer. In the report filed by the said Committee, the human-elephant conflict has

been identified, and therefore, certain measures have been suggested in the same.

Further, Ms. Kahawita brought to our notice that the same issue has been raised in the Writ

Application bearing No. 420/423/430 & 433/2021, where His Lordship Justice Dr. Sobitha

Rajakaruna (as he then was) had given a judgement.

11

Action taken by the Respondents

It is also the Respondents' position that the Respondents have identified the main areas where

this human-elephant conflict is seriously affected due to train accidents.

Furthermore, Ms. Kahawita has also referred to the steps taken by various State agencies

pursuant to the meetings held on 15.02.2025 and 18.03.2025 after the collision of the train

resulting in the death of several elephants including causing injury and pain to the 2nd Petitioner.

Therefore, not only the Department of Railway, but even the Wildlife Department has taken

actions with regard to eliminating or at least minimising such accidents; this is also summarised

in the Written Submissions filed for and on behalf of the Respondents.

In addition to that, the Railway Department has also taken various steps, including installing

Luminous signals, clearing railway tracks to allow the train drivers to see the wild elephants

better, identifying places where wild elephants use for crossing the railway lines, effecting

appropriate changes to the train timetable especially to the train travelling at night from the

Colombo Fort to Trincomalee route, and identifying high-risk areas where accidents normally

take place with the elephants, and the brake systems that have been changed in the locomotives

particularly of "Meenagaya", which allows the trains to halt quickly.

Room for action

However, as brought to our notice by the Counsel for the Petitioners, that even in the Written

Submissions of the Respondents, nowhere is it mentioned that train drivers have been properly

educated, and no speed limit has been indicated for between the sections identified as "elephant

corridors" or where the elephants choose as crossings; no action plan has been implemented to

minimise the speed between sections. Therefore, there is still room for further actions to be

taken by the Railway Department.

12

As such, it is my view as sought by the Petitioners, from time-to-time, reports must be called

for by the Railway Department; therefore, the writs sought by the Petitioners lie in that respect.

On the other hand, the Petitioners have argued, both orally as well as in their written

submissions, as to why they have filed this Application in this Court; although the 2nd to 4th

Respondents would have taken action within the purview of their respective mandates in

protecting the 2nd Petitioner and the species to which it belongs, including other animal species

and flora and fauna, further intervention of this Court has become necessary as accidents

continue to take place.

Before the entire country became a Crown Colony in 1815s, there were no proper roads

anywhere in the country except footpaths. The Kandyan territory was secluded and remained

a natural fortress and remained protected from invasion because of its natural situation. Even

during the Kandyan campaigns to conquer the Kandyan Provinces, which took place in the

1815s, troops marched only on footpaths through three different routes.

However, after the Kandyan Rebellion of 1818, the British Government decided to establish a

proper road network in order to keep the Kandyan areas under control. Thereafter, with the

development of coffee plantations, as well as tea, rubber, and coconut cultivation, a plantation

economy developed under British rule, and, with the increasing need for transport services, the

railway system was introduced.2

However, the Northern and Eastern railway lines were laid during the latter phase of British

rule, particularly in the early 1900s, when railway lines were constructed through thick jungle

areas where there were numerous encounters with wildlife, some of which remain recorded in

folklore and popular literature, including the “Leopard of Punani”. Then, the rulers were not

2 S.V. Balasingham, The Administration of Sir Henry Ward: Governor of Ceylon 1855-1860 (Tisara Prakasakayo 1968).

13

interested in paying any attention to animal life, in whose benefit certain areas were declared

as protected areas, sanctuaries, or natural reserves; nevertheless, they built the railway lines

through the very same protected areas where the 2nd Petitioner and his relatives and other

species of animals use as their natural habitat.

However, during the War which escalated in 1983 up until 2009, the railroads on the Northern

Line beyond Vavuniya and the Eastern Line did not operate; even the Eastern Line was not in

full operational status. However, with the cessation of hostilities between the warring parties,

there was a resumption of railway operations on those lines officially from 2012, as reflected

in P6 and P7 annexed to the Petition.

However, with the development of the railway and roadway network, human habitation

gradually, not only encroached upon, but also started invading animal habitats, particularly in

the buffer zones of these jungle areas, and from the very beginning the human-elephant conflict

came to the forefront.

However, other animals also faced the same threat of extinction.

Nevertheless, the elephant is a symbolic icon in Sri Lankan culture, and therefore, in the late

1980s, the Government proclaimed the elephant as the 'National animal' due to its historical

and cultural importance, where it remains an iconic and symbolic figure.

I wish to juxtapose to quote from a poem titled, "Elephant", written by the famous English

writer of the novel, "Lady Chatterley's Lover" (1928), D.H. Lawrence, on the ceremonial

elephants who participate in the Esala Perahera of Kandy;3

More elephants, tong, tong-tong, loom up,

3 D.H. Lawrence, Birds, Beasts and Flowers (Martin Secker Limited 1923), 169-175 <https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/60337/pg60337-images.html#ELEPHANT> accessed 08 September 2026.

14

Huge, more tassels swinging, more dripping fire of new cocoa-nut cressets

High, high flambeaux, smoking of the east;

And scarlet hot embers of torches knocked out of the sockets among bare feet of

elephants and men on the path in the dark.

And devil dancers luminous with sweat, dancing on to the shudder of drums,

Tom-toms, weird music of the devil, voices of men from the jungle singing;

Endless, under the Prince.

The 2nd Petitioner's grievance before this Court epitomizes the threat that the 2nd Petitioner and

his relatives face, not only of death but also of extinction. Therefore, it is our duty to protect

the 2nd Petitioner.

Therefore, the 2nd Respondent, being the Director General of Conservation of Wildlife, should

take action and must inform and report to this Court at regular intervals as to the measures he

has taken to implement the national plan, if any, or prepare one and implement the same in due

course.

Secondly, the 3rd Respondent, being the General Manager of Railways, should also report from

time to time as to the measures he has taken to minimize railway accidents involving animals,

particularly elephants, within the identified zones, especially along the Northern and Eastern

railway lines, where several elephant passes or crossing areas have been identified as depicted

in documents P8 and P9 (the plans).

Action recommended

Therefore, it is my view that the 3rd Respondent, being the General Manager of Railways,

should be directed to report to this Court as to the action the Railway Department has taken at

all levels to train locomotive drivers, whom they refer to as pilots, who are responsible not only

for the safety of the passengers whom they transport daily but also for minimizing

15

environmental damage caused by reckless driving at excessive speeds without considering the

impact on the environment and animal life. They should not remain oblivious, or purposely

oblivious, to the fact that there are elephant crossings along the railway lines. The same should

be extended to the Railway guards who are responsible for managing the trains.

The General Manager of Railways should take steps to identify the relevant stretches of railway

track where elephant crossings or elephant passes have been identified, and drivers should be

instructed and provided with continuous training, including simulator-based training similar to

that provided to aeroplane pilots, in order to avoid accidents and minimize the impact on flora

and fauna, including that caused by noise pollution.

Further, the drivers and guards must also be trained to regulate speed appropriately within such

identified zones, allowing sufficient time to travel from the point of commencement to the point

of end of those areas while complying with prescribed speed limits. Those who fail to follow

such instructions should be subjected to disciplinary action in accordance with the applicable

regulations.

Therefore, since I have decided to issue the writs, I am of the view that this matter should be

called in three months' time from today in order to consider the action taken by the 2nd and 3rd

Respondents and ascertain their progress.

Conclusion

Based on the reasons adumbrated above, I grant relief as prayed for in prayers (b), (c), and (d)

of the Petition, without costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL