IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application under the Article 140

of the Constitution for mandates in the nature of

Writs of Certiorari, Prohibition and Mandamus.

C.A. Writ ApplicationNo: 487/2015

T .R. Ratnasiri,

No. 2314, Makola South, Makola.

Petitioner

Vs

1. Director General of Customs,

"Customs House",

No: 40, Main Street, Colombo 11.

2. Mr. Raveendrakumar,

Deputy Director of Customs,

"Customs House",

No: 40, Main Street, Colombo 11.

3. Colombo Dockyard Limited,

Graving Docks, P.O. Box 906,

Port of Colombo, Colombo 15.

4. Managing Director,

1

I

iI!

I j I , I ! I I I ! ! I I I ! I

! ! I j I I I I I ! I I I

I ! I I ! I i I I ! 1 I , I

\ I I ! i \

Colombo Dockyard Limited,

Graving Docks, P.O. Box 906,

Port of Colombo, Colombo 15.

5. The Commander of Navy,

6.

7.

8.

Sri Lanka Navy, Naval Head

Quarters, Upper Chatham Street,

Colombo 01.

The Chairman,

Sri Lanka Ports Authority,

No. 19, Church Street, Colombo 01.

The Chairman,

Board of Investment,

West Tower, World Trade Centre,

Echelon Square, Colombo 01.

Commissioner General of Inland

Revenue,

Department of Inland Revenue,

Inland Revenue Building,

P.O. Box 515,

Sir Chiththampalam A. Gardiner

Mawatha, Colombo 02.

9. Hon. Attorney General,

2

Before:

Attorney General's Department,

Hulfsdorp, Colombo 12.

Respondents

L. T.B. Dehideniya, J. (PICA)

Shiran Goonerathne, J.

Counsels: Shehan Ananda with Pasan Weerasinghe for

the Petitioner instructed by Derrick

Samarasekara Associates.

Damayanthi Silva for 3rd and 4th Respondents.

M. J ayawardane for the 7th Respondent.

F. J ameel SASG PC for all the Respondents

except 3rd and 4th Respondents.

Argued on: 05112/2017

Decided on:11/01l2018

L.T.B. Dehideniya J (PICA)

The Petitioner instituted this action seeking for mandates

in the nature of Writs of Certiorari and Writs of

Mandamus. The Petitioner was a Customs Officer by

profession. He stated that he received an information

regarding a custom fraud and initiated an inquiry. The 3rd

Respondent, Colombo Dockyard constructed and sold

several boats and tugs to the Sri Lanka Navy and to the

Port Authority of Sri Lanka. The Petitioner's case is that

the 3rd Respondent had collected the custom duty from its

t

3

clients but had not paid to the Customs. The Petitioner is

not satisfied with the order made by the Customs in the

said inquiry. He moved this court to issue a Writ of

Certiorari to quash the order of the said inquiry and to

issue Writs of Mandamus compelling the 3rd Respondent

to pay the Customs duty and a Writ of Mandamus against

the 1 st Respondent to pay the reward to the Petitioner and

his informant.

While the case was pending the Petitioner departed from

his life. His wife made an application seeking permission

to substitute herself in place of the Petitioner. The

Respondents objected to this application on several

grounds.

The party to be substituted filed a motion dated 29th June

2017 with a petition affidavit seeking permission to herself

substitute in the room of the Petitioner. In the said motion

she stated that the Petitioner filed this Writ application

claiming inter-alia the cash reward for which he is entitled

to. She further says that since the Petitioner is deceased his

heirs have the right to claim the reward and for the said

purpose it is necessary to substitute the widow. This

motion indicates the sole purpose of making the substitute

is to claim the reward that the Petitioner claimed.

4

In the Court of Appeal (Appellate Procedure) Rules 1990

no provision made to substitute a Petitioner in a Writ

application. The rule clearly provide for the substitution of

the Respondents. Part IV of the Court of (Appeal

Appellate) Procedure Rules 1990 provides for the

substitution. The Rule IV (a) provides

In respect of an act or omission done in

official capacity by a public officer who has

thereafter ceased to hold office, such

application maybe made and proceeded with

against his successor, for the time being, in

such office, such successor being made a

respondent by a reference to his official

designation only, in terms ofsub rule (2).

In this rule substitution of a petitioner is not provided for.

A substitution can be done only if the cause of action

survives. In the instant case the Petitioner is claiming a

reward. It is personal to the Petitioner. It is true that if the

reward money comes to the Petitioner his heirs will be

benefited, but it doesn't mean that the heirs become

entitled or the authorities are under a legal duty to pay the

reward to the heirs. There's no statutory duty cast on the

1 st Respondent to pay the reward to the widow. In the case

of Perera and 3 others vs Abeyrathne 79(2) NLR 99 at 103

Sharvananda J. held that the Writ of Mandamus was not

5

available to the wife of the deceased claiming rights on a

pension's scheme.

The Learned Counsel for the 3rd and 4th Respondents cited

a case decided in the Republic of Philippines where it has

been held that

"the substitution prayed for calls for the

determination of the question whether upon

the death of the Petitioners, the action

brought in this proceeding's survival to their

heirs or legal representatives. The action

survived if the cause of action survived. "

(Ernando Gueverra and Marcos Guevarra vs Vicente Del

Rosario, G.R. No. L 49252 November 13, 1946, in the

Supreme Court of the Republic of Philippines.)

Further the counsels cited the cases of Walter V. Bd. Of

Education 95 III. App. 3d 313 (1981) 420 N.E. 2D 175

Appellate Court of Illinois - Fourth District where it is

held that

"A Mandamus action is treated like other actions at

law and that if a cause of action is so personal that

a party couldn't assign it during life, then it cannot

survive to his representatives at the death unless a

statute specifically provides for its survival. "

6

,

In the instant case the reward is so personal he cannot

assign it during his lifetime.

The counsel for the 3rd and 4th Respondents further submits

that the Petitioner has not demanded the authorities to

perform the public duty and there is no denial of the said

duty. Therefore the counsel submits that the Petitioner

hasn't established a cause of action for a Writ of

Mandamus. Further he submits that the reward is paid only

after 5 months of the order. But this application was filed

prior to the expiry of 5 months. These are matters on merit

of the application. Therefore it is not necessary to consider

these matters at this stage.

Under these circumstances I'm of the view that Petitioner

cannot be substituted by his widow.

I uphold the objections and terminate the proceedings.

Shiran Gooneratne, J

I agree

President of the Court of Appeal

Judge of the Court of Appeal

7

II

I

i

I! I III I!Ii,

,I II,Ii

iitII!