Page 1 of 11

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRETIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of

section 331 (1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No- 15 of 1979, read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Court of Appeal No: Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

CA/HCC/0074/2015 COMPLAINANT

Vs.

High Court of Tangalle Case No: Mana Bandanage Premasiri

HC/03/2006 Kosgahagoda Durage Champika Manoj

Kosgahagoda Durage Chandana Sujeewa

ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

Kosgahagoda Durage Champika Manoj

2nd ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department

Colombo 12

RESPONDENT

Page 2 of 11

Before : Sampath B Abayakoon, J.

: P. Kumararatnam, J.

Counsel : Indika Mallawaratchy for Accused Appellant

: Riyaz Bary, D.S.G. for the Respondent

Argued on : 20-05-2022

Written Submissions : 11-09-2017 (By the 1st Accused-Appellant)

: 04-10-2017 (By the Respondent)

Decided on : 19-07-2022

Sampath B Abayakoon, J.

This is an appeal by the second accused appellant Kosgahagoda Durage

Champika Manoj (hereinafter referred to as the appellant) on being aggrieved by

the conviction and the sentence of him by the Learned High Court Judge of

Tangalle, where he was sentenced to death.

The appellant was indicted along with Mana Bandanage Premasiri who was the

first accused and now deceased, and Kosgahagoda Durage Chandana Sujeewa

who was the third accused, but absconded during the trial. The trial has

proceeded against the third accused after taking due steps in terms of Section

241 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.

After trail without a jury, the appellant along with the third accused were

convicted as charged and were sentenced accordingly.

The facts that led to the incident, briefly, are as follows:

This incident has happened on 26-01-2003. According to the evidence of PW-02

Balage Lucina, she was at her home which is situated on an upper elevation to

Walasmulla-Weerakatiya main road and her husband was away from the house

around 6.00 and 7.00 in the evening. While attending to her household work,

Page 3 of 11

she has heard somebody shouting , meaning her

husband.

When looked at the main road, she has seen Susantha, the deceased, who was

a relative, running towards her house and being pursued by three others. She

has clearly identified all of them as there was good light condition at that time.

One of the persons who pursued the deceased was Premasiri, who was also a

relative, and the now deceased first accused. She has seen him carrying a manna

knife.

The deceased Susantha who came running inside the house has attempted to

hide under a bed in one of the rooms. However, the persons who came after him

had dragged him out, assaulted, and cut him with the knives they were carrying.

She has been specific that the appellant assaulted him physically.

Although the neighbours, including PW-03 Indrani has come and has attempted

to rescue the deceased, it has failed. In her evidence the witness has clearly

stated that the incident happened for about half an hour to forty-five minutes

inside and outside of her house. This shows that she had a good opportunity of

seeing and identifying the assailants clearly.

However, it was her evidence that apart from the deceased and the first accused

Premasiri, the other two came and assaulted the deceased were unknown to her.

At the trial, she has identified the second appellant as one of the persons who

came and caused injuries to the deceased. After they left, she has found the

deceased dead and has also found the two knives identified and marked as P-01

and P-02 near the body of the deceased.

It was also her evidence that she was able to identify the two unknown persons

who participated in the crime at the identification parade held in the Magistrate

Court of Wallasmulla. However, under cross examination, she has admitted that

she was shown some persons at the Walasmulla police station and was asked to

Page 4 of 11

identify whether any of the persons who came to assault the deceased are

present.

She has stated that she identified only the third accused at the police station

and the appellant was not shown to her at the Walasmulla police station.

PW-03 who was the other eye witness has given evidence consistent with the

version of events as stated by PW-02. It was her evidence that she was clearly

able to identify that the three persons who were assaulting the deceased in front

of the house of PW-02 which was at a higher elevation to the main road. It was

also her evidence that of the three persons, only the first accused Premasiri was

known to her and the other two were unknown. She has identified the unknown

persons at the identification parade held at the Magistrate Court for that purpose

as the persons who participated in the crime.

Apart from the above eyewitnesses, the police officers who conducted the

investigation as to the crime have given evidence in this matter. In his evidence,

the District Medical Officer (DMO) of Walasmulla (PW-07), has marked his Post

Mortem Report as P-06. He has observed four cut injuries on the body of the

deceased and had opined that death of the deceased was due to a deep cut injury

to the back of his head.

In this matter, I view the evidence of PW-11 Chief Inspector of Police Lakshman

Wettasighe, of paramount importance in relation to the identification of the

appellant at the identification parade held in that regard.

According to his evidence, while on routine patrol duty at about 5:10 a.m. on 25-

04-2003, he has arrested Kosgahagoda Durage Champika Manoj who is the

appellant in this case in the town of Beliatta on suspicion. This was a date three

months after the date of the incident where the deceased was killed. After his

arrest, the appellant has been taken to the Beliatta police station and later he

has been produced at Tangalle Magistrate Court as a person arrested on

suspicion that needed further investigations.

Page 5 of 11

The appellant has been thereafter remanded by the Magistrate of Tangalle. It

appears from evidence that subsequent to an application made by Walasmulla

police a statement from the appellant has been recorded while he was in remand

custody, and later produced for an identification parade before the Magistrate of

Walasmulla, where he was identified by PW-02 and PW-03 as one of the persons

instrumental in assaulting the deceased on the day of the incident.

After the conclusion of the prosecution case, the Learned High Court Judge of

Tangalle has decided to call for a defence from the appellant and the appellant,

making a dock statement, has stated that while was in remand custody officers

from Walasmulla police came and recorded a statement from him in relation to

a murder where he has no connection.

It was his position that he was shown to various persons and number of photos

of him was taken away by the police from his home before the identification

parade was held at the Walasmulla Magistrate Court. It has been his position

that he is innocent of the crime and is unaware of anything in relation to the

incident.

The Grounds of Appeal: -

At the hearing of this appeal, the learned Counsel on behalf of the appellant

formulated the following grounds of appeal for the consideration of the Court:

1. In the backdrop of the evidence of the eyewitnesses that the accused

appellant was a total stranger, the prosecution has failed to explain as to

the manner in which his name surfaced as a suspect at the crime scene,

thereby creating a serious doubt in the prosecution case.

2. The prosecution has failed to explain the unlawful detention of the accused

appellant for fourteen days.

3. The Learned High Court Judge has failed to address his judicial mind to

the above facts and therefore, the appellant was denied of a fair trial.

4. Admission by the eye witnesses that they were summoned to the police

station prior to the identification parade and shown several suspects

Page 6 of 11

creates a reasonable doubt with regard to the legality of the identification

parade.

It was the submission of the learned Counsel that the admission by the witnesses

that the suspects were shown to them before the identification parade was a

matter that goes into the root of the action which creates a doubt as to the

identification of the accused.

Referring to the evidence of PW-03 and PW-02, it was the submission of the

learned Counsel that the infirmities in the evidence of the said witnesses have

not been considered by the Learned High Court Judge and had that been

considered in the correct perspective, there was sufficient basis to conclude that

a reasonable doubt has been created as to the culpability of the appellant to the

crime, which should have been considered in favour of him. It was her contention

that the appeal of the appellant should succeed as the prosecution has failed to

prove the charge beyond reasonable doubt against the appellant.

It was the submission of the learned Deputy Solicitor General (DSG) that the

evidence clearly provides that the witnesses never had an opportunity of seeing

the appellant after the incident and before he was identified at the identification

parade. Although the identification parade had been held more than three

months after the actual incident since the incident has taken place over a period

of about forty-five minutes and the witnesses have had the clear opportunity of

looking at the assailants, was his position. It was his submission that the appeal

is devoid of any merit.

Consideration for Grounds of Appeal

As the above four grounds of appeal are interrelated, I will now proceed to

consider the said grounds of appeal together.

There cannot be any dispute that the deceased was attacked and killed on 26-

01-2003 in front of the house belonging to Balage Lucina, who was the PW-02

in this action. It is also undisputed that Balage Lucina and Manage Indrani (PW-

Page 7 of 11

03) are eye witnesses to the incident and that they have been able to witness the

incident clearly as there was sufficient light throughout. It is undoubted that the

now deceased first accused Premasiri has been clearly identified by both the

witnesses because he was a relative. According to the witnesses he is the person

who came armed with a Manna knife, and it was he and the third accused who

used sharp cutting weapons to attack the deceased.

It was their evidence that the appellant who chased after the deceased was

instrumental in physically attacking the deceased. Their evidence clearly

establishes the fact that all the three persons who came and attacked the

deceased were acting in pursuance of a common intention. The evidence of the

eyewitnesses is clear that the appellant as well as the third accused were persons

unknown to them. They have identified them at an identification parade held

before the Magistrate of Walasmulla some three months after the incident. I am

unable to conclude that there are infirmities in the evidence of PW-02 and PW-

03 as contended by the learned Counsel.

I am in no position to agree that the prosecution has a duty to prove that on

what basis the suspect was considered as a suspect for the crime before the trial

Court, because he was a total stranger to the witnesses.

Section 125 of the Evidence Ordinance reads as follows;

125. No Magistrate or police officer shall be compelled to say whence

he got the information as to the commission of any offence, and no

revenue officer shall be compelled to say whence he got any

information as to the commission of any offence against the public

revenue or excise laws.

It is obvious that once the appellant was arrested by the Beliatta police on

suspicion as they are legally entitled to do, that information has been passed on

to other police stations in order to find out whether the arrested person is wanted

in relation to any crime, following the usual practice. As a result, the Walasmulla

police who were investigating the crime where the death of the deceased

Page 8 of 11

occurred, has taken steps to record a statement from the appellant in that

regard, while he was in the prison custody. After he being named as a suspect,

the police have taken due steps to file further reports before the Magistrate of

Walasmulla and to hold a due identification parade through the Magistrate,

where PW-02 and PW-03 has identified the appellant as one of the two persons

who assaulted the deceased Susantha.

Although PW-12 who has recorded a further statement from the appellant has

stated in his evidence that he recorded the statement at the Walasmulla police

station, the original non-summary case record of the Walasmulla Magistrate

Court which is available before this Court provides that it was not so, and he

has given wrong evidence, which the prosecuting State Counsel has failed to

notice or correct. It is clear from the Magistrate Court record that the appellant

has never been released after his arrest on suspicion by the Beliatta police and

remanded. By the further B report filed by the OIC of Beliatta police on 04-05-

2003, he has requested the Magistrate to hold an identification parade in relation

to the appellant, who was in remand custody by then for identification parades

for several other cases as a suspect. This goes on to show that the witnesses

have had no opportunity of seeing him before the parade at any of the police

stations.

I find no basis whatsoever for the claim of the learned Counsel for the appellant

that he was detained unlawfully and it has denied him a fair trial, since he has

been duly produced within the legally stipulated period before a competent Court

after his arrest as a suspect, and remanded to proper legal custody.

In view of the admission by the eye witnesses that some persons were shown to

them at the Walasmulla police station and they identified the third accused at

the police station and never saw the appellant before the identification parade it

becomes necessary to consider whether the witnesses had an opportunity of

seeing the appellant as well, before the identification parade was held.

Page 9 of 11

If it can be so determined, the identification of the appellant by the witnesses

will be of no value, and it is a matter that needs to be considered in favour of the

appellant.

However, I find that as correctly pointed out by the learned DSG, the appellant

has been arrested on suspicion of being involved in crimes by PW-11 some three

months after the incident. It is clear that his initial arrest was not as a suspect

for the murder of the deceased. Following the normal practice, the appellant has

been sent for remand custody through Tangalle Magistrate until the further

investigations are being completed as to whether he is needed as a suspect of a

crime.

It appears that the Walasmulla police, when informed that such a person has

been arrested on suspicion has found after investigations, that the appellant was

a suspect in the killing that happened on 26-01-2003.

In the judgment of Regina Vs. Turnbul and Another (1997) QB 224, it was

held:

Where the case against an accused depends wholly on the correctness of

the identity of the accused, the judge should warn the jury of the special

need to for caution before relying on the correctness of the identification by

the witness.

The judge should tell the jury that;

Caution is required to avoid the risk of injustice.

A witness who is honest may be wrong even if they are

convinced, they are right.

A witness who is convincing may still be wrong.

More than one witness may be wrong.

A witness who recognizes the defendant, even when the

witness knows the defendant well, may be wrong.

Page 10 of 11

Some of the circumstances a judge should direct the jury to examine in

order to find out whether a correct identification has been made include;

The length of time the accused was observed by the witness;

The distance the witness from the accused;

The state of the light;

The length of time elapsed between the original observation

and the subsequent identification to the police.

E.R.S.R. Coomaraswamy in his book The Law of Evidence Volume 1 at page

663 discusses the mistaken identity in the following manner.

A fundamental requisite in a criminal case is to establish the identity of the

accused as the guilty party. The text-books abound with instances of what

were supposed to be clear identifications which proved to be fallacious and

defective. These include the case where an honest witness was deceived by

the broad glare of sunlight, (R. Vs. Wood and Brown [Ann-Reg. 1784])

Much of the value of direct evidence of identification will depend on the

personal appearance of the subject of identification. Many persons cannot

be easily distinguished from others. The liability mistake is greater where

the questionable identity is a matter of deduction and inference and the

expression of an opinion than where it is the subject of direct evidence.

(Wills, op. cit., 7th edition., pp 197-200)

Although this identification has happened more than three months after the

incident, it is clear from the evidence that the witnesses had ample opportunity

to see the assailants at the scene of the crime since the incident has continued

for about 45 minutes in front of them.

This gives a clear idea that the witnesses were in a clear position to identify the

appellant even after three months into the actual incident. It is also clear from

Page 11 of 11

the evidence that the witnesses never had any opportunity of seeing the appellant

before they were called for the identification parade by the Magistrate of

Walasmulla, as I have reasoned out before.

Although it is an admitted fact that the third accused named in the indictment

has been shown to the witnesses at the Walasmulla police station, the appellant

was never held at the Walasmulla police station as the evidence provides and

also admitted by him in his dock statement. It is to be noted the third accused

who was also convicted for the charge has not appealed against the conviction.

I am of the view that the appellant is in no position to take the advantage of the

fact that the third accused named in the indictment was shown to the witnesses

before the identification parade was held, as it is not a matter that has created

a doubt with regard to the identification of him by the witnesses.

Legality of the identification parade is a matter that has never been challenged

at the trial and in fact, an admitted fact, in terms of section 420 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act.

In view of the above findings, I find no merit in any of the grounds of appeal

urged. The appeal therefore is dismissed. The conviction and the sentence

affirmed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P Kumararatnam, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal