==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0091/2023

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal made in terms of

Section 331 (1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 (1) of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Angodage Janaka Sarath Kumara

1st Accused – Appellant

Vs

Hon. Attorney General

Respondent

Before : P. Kumararatnam, J.

Pradeep Hettiarachchi, J.

Counsel : Ershan Ariaratnam for the Accused – Appellant.

Hiranjan Peiris, ASG for the Respondent.

Argued on : 26.08.2025

Decided on : 07.11.2025

Pradeep Hettiarachchi, J

Judgment

Court of Appeal Case No:

CA/HCC/0091/2023

High Court of Rathnapura Case

No: 31/2016

CA/HCC/0091/2023

2 | P a g e

1. The Accused–Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Appellant) was indicted

before the High Court of Ratnapura along with one Hathwelthotage Randika (the

2nd Accused) under Sections 102 and 113B read with Section 296 of the Penal

Code, for abetting and conspiring to commit the murder of Rajapakshalage

Gamini Rajapakshalage alias Shantha, and for committing the murder of the said

Gamini Rajapaksha, an offence punishable under Section 296 of the Penal Code.

2. The 2nd Accused was also indicted for aiding and abetting the Appellant in

committing the murder of Gamini Rajapaksha.

3. The learned High Court Judge acquitted the 2nd Accused of all charges. The

Appellant, however, was convicted on the second count and sentenced to death.

This appeal has been preferred against the said conviction and sentence. The

prosecution case rested solely on circumstantial evidence.

4. On behalf of the prosecution, nine witnesses, namely PW1, PW2, PW3, PW4,

PW8, PW9, PW12, PW13, and PW16, testified at the trial. The Appellant and the

2nd Accused opted to make dock statements.

5. In the appeal, the following grounds were urged by the Appellant in impugning

the judgment of the learned High Court Judge.

a. The circumstantial evidence led at the trial was insufficient to sustain a

conviction.

b. There was no proper identification of the Appellant.

c. The learned High Court Judge had erroneously placed an unwarranted

burden on the Appellant.

d. The recovery made under Section 27 of the Evidence Ordinance was not

evaluated in its proper perspective.

6. The deceased and the 2nd Accused were husband and wife. The Appellant had an

illicit affair with the 2nd Accused. About a month prior to the alleged murder, the

2nd Accused had eloped with the Appellant.

7. It is noteworthy that none of the witnesses who testified on behalf of the

prosecution had witnessed the commission of the alleged murder. Hence, the

CA/HCC/0091/2023

3 | P a g e

prosecution relied entirely on circumstantial evidence to establish the charges

against the appellant.

8. The prosecution case rests entirely on circumstantial evidence, as there was no

eyewitness who saw the appellant shooting the deceased. The paramount

question, therefore, is whether the circumstantial evidence adduced by the

prosecution is sufficient to establish the guilt of the appellant beyond reasonable

doubt.

9. It is a well-settled principle that a conviction may lawfully be founded on

circumstantial evidence, provided that the circumstances relied upon are cogently

and firmly established, are consistent only with the hypothesis of the accused’s

guilt, and exclude every reasonable hypothesis of innocence.

10. In other words, the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to be

drawn must, in the first instance, be fully and conclusively established.

Furthermore, all such established facts must be consistent only with the

hypothesis of the accused’s guilt and must exclude every reasonable hypothesis of

innocence.

11. To elaborate further, there must be a chain of evidence so far complete as not to

leave any reasonable ground for a conclusion consistent with the innocence of the

accused and it must be such as to show that within all human probability the act

must have been done by the accused. It is therefore appropriate, at the outset, to

consider the principles of law governing circumstantial evidence.

12. It is well settled that when a conviction is based solely on circumstantial evidence,

such evidence must satisfy certain essential tests before it can be relied upon. The

circumstances, when taken together, must form a complete and unbroken chain

pointing unequivocally to the guilt of the accused and must be inconsistent with

any reasonable hypothesis of innocence. In other words, the proved circumstances

should be of a conclusive nature and tendency, excluding every possible inference

except that of the accused’s guilt. This principle has been affirmed in several

landmark cases.

CA/HCC/0091/2023

4 | P a g e

13. In King v. Appuhamy (46 NLR 128), the court held that

i. "In order to justify the inference of guilt from purely circumstantial

evidence, the inculpatory facts must be incompatible with the

innocence of the accused and incapable of explanation upon any

other reasonable hypothesis than that of his guilt."

14. Similarly, in Podisingho v. King (53 NLR 49), it was emphasized that

"in a case of circumstantial evidence, it is the duty of the trial Judge to

tell the Jury that such evidence must be totally inconsistent with the

innocence of the accused and must only be consistent with his guilt."

These decisions underscore the necessity for circumstantial evidence to

exclude every reasonable hypothesis except that of the accused's guilt.

15. Furthermore, in Nandasena v. The Republic of Sri Lanka (1994) 3 SLR 175, the

court reiterated that

“In a case which turns on circumstantial evidence it is essential that the

trial judge should explain clearly to the jury that circumstantial evidence,

if it is to support a conviction, must be altogether inconsistent with the

accused's innocence and explicable solely on the hypothesis of his guilt”

16. In Don Sunny Vs Attorney General [1998] (2) Sri.L.R. 1 it was held that:

When a charge is sought to be proved by circumstantial evidence the

proved items of circumstantial evidence when taken together must

irresistibly point towards the only inference that the accused committed

the offence.

On a consideration of all the evidence the only inference that can be

arrived at should be consistent with the guilt of the accused only.

2. If on a consideration of the items of circumstantial evidence if an inference

can be drawn which is consistent with the innocence of the accused, then one

cannot say that the charges have been proved beyond reasonable doubt.

CA/HCC/0091/2023

5 | P a g e

3. If upon a consideration of the proved items of circumstantial evidence if the

only inference that can be drawn is that the accused committed the offence

then they can be found guilty.

The prosecution must prove that no one else other than the accused had the

opportunity of committing the offence, the accused can be found guilty only

and only if the proved items of circumstantial evidence is consistent with their

guilt and inconsistent with their innocence.

17. In Krishantha De Silva vs The Attorney General [2003] (1) Sri.L.R, 162 it was

held inter alia that:

Circumstantial evidence can be acted upon only if from the circumstances relied

upon the only reasonable inference to draw is the inference of guilt. If the

circumstances are consistent both with guilt and with innocence then the case is

not proved on circumstantial evidence.

Per Edirisuriya, J.

The hypothesis of innocence must be excluded by the circumstance relied upon

and the circumstances must point to one conclusion alone, i.e. the guilt of the

accused"

18. Sir Alfred Wills in his book `Wills' Circumstantial Evidence' (Chapter VI) lays

down the following rules specially to be observed in the case of circumstantial

evidence:

(1) the facts alleged as the basis of any legal inference must be clearly

proved and beyond reasonable doubt connected with the factum

probandum;

(2) the burden of proof is always on the party who asserts the existence

of any fact, which infers legal accountability;

(3) in all cases, whether of direct of circumstantial evidence the best

evidence must be adduced which the nature of the case admits;

(4) in order to justify the inference of guilt, the inculpatory facts must be

incompatible with the innocence of the accused and incapable of

CA/HCC/0091/2023

6 | P a g e

explanation, upon any other reasonable hypothesis than that of his

guilt; and

(5) if there be any reasonable doubt of the guilt of the accused, he is

entitled as of right to be acquitted.

19. This reinforces the standard that circumstantial evidence must lead to an

inescapable conclusion of guilt. Therefore, in evaluating the sufficiency of

circumstantial evidence in the present case, this Court must ensure that the

circumstances adduced are consistent with the guilt of the Appellant and exclude

any reasonable hypothesis of innocence.

20. It is with these legal principles in mind that I proceed to consider the present

appeal. The first ground of appeal is that the circumstantial evidence adduced at

the trial does not warrant a conviction. As emphasized in the aforementioned

authorities, where a conviction is sought to be founded solely on circumstantial

evidence, the only reasonable inference that must be drawn from such evidence is

the guilt of the accused, and all other possible inferences must be inconsistent

with his innocence.

21. The first witness called by the prosecution was Palihawadana Arachchilage

Piyasena (PW2). On the day of the incident, he saw the deceased lying in the

compound of his house. Other than seeing the body of the deceased in the

compound, this witness had not observed anything of material relevance to this

case.

22. The next witness who testified on behalf of the prosecution was Rankiri

Pathirannehalage Pathirana (PW1). The deceased was the son of his mother’s

younger sister. On the date of the incident, PW1 was loading logs into a lorry that

was parked about 150 meters away from the deceased’s house. Thereafter, he had

a bath and was on his way home, passing by the deceased’s house. Upon reaching

home, his son ran towards him and shouted, “තාත්තත්, බාප්පා වැටිලා ඉන්නවා.

ළඟට යන්න බෑ. ත ොකක්ත ෝ සැර ගඳක් එනවා. තාත්තා ඉක් ණට ගිහින් බාප්පාව

තරෝහලට තගනියන්න.”

CA/HCC/0091/2023

7 | P a g e

23. Thereafter, he rushed to the scene with one of his workers and saw PW2 near the

body of the deceased. By using PW2’s torch, the witness identified the deceased.

According to his evidence, the body was lying on the by-road close to the

deceased’s house. However, this witness did not make any attempt to examine the

injuries on the deceased but immediately proceeded to the Kalawana Police

Station to make a complaint. The witness further stated that about four days prior

to the incident, the deceased had informed him that he had filed a divorce action,

as his wife, who is the 2nd Accused in this case, was having an illicit affair with

the Appellant. He further stated that during that period, the deceased was living

alone at his residence. When the witness returned from the Police Station, the

body had already been taken to the Kalawana Hospital.

24. The 2nd Accused is the daughter of PW1’s wife from her first marriage. According

to the evidence of PW1, the 2nd Accused had been separated from the deceased

during the relevant period. He further stated that on the date of the incident, the

Appellant, the 2nd Accused, and the child of the 2nd Accused visited his house and

left around 5.15 p.m. According to his evidence, the deceased and the 2nd Accused

were having matrimonial disputes, and on one occasion, the 2nd Accused came to

his house and stated that she would throw acid on the deceased and thereafter

commit suicide by consuming poison. About ten days after that incident, the 2nd

Accused had made a complaint to the Police and subsequently came to this

witness’s house, where she stayed with the Appellant.

25. PW 3, Upul Pushpa Kumara, is the son of PW 1, Karunarathna. On the date of the

incident, he was at a friend’s house, located about 250 meters from the deceased’s

residence, playing carrom around 7.45 p.m. Suddenly, he heard someone shouting

from the direction of the deceased’s house and believed it to be the deceased. He

immediately ran towards that direction carrying a torch. While running towards

the deceased’s house, he observed the Appellant and another person running away

from that direction. Although the second individual could not be identified, the

witness categorically identified the Appellant. He further stated that at that time,

the Appellant was wearing a black T-shirt and a black trouser.

26. When he reached the deceased’s house, he saw the deceased lying on the floor

and noticed a strong smell resembling acid. Some of his friends also arrived at the

CA/HCC/0091/2023

8 | P a g e

scene shortly thereafter. According to the witness, the deceased was screaming in

pain, but when he called out to him, the deceased was unable to respond. The

witness then ran back to his residence and informed his father of the incident.

Two days later, he made a statement to the Kalawana Police.

27. However, the witness admitted that he did not disclose all that he had seen to his

father, but only mentioned that the deceased was lying on the floor and that there

was a smell similar to acid. When questioned as to why he did not inform his

father that he had seen the Appellant at the scene, the witness explained that he

was frightened at that time. It also transpired that the witness was approximately

16 years of age at the time of the incident.

28. In her judgment, the learned High Court Judge placed considerable reliance on the

knife recovered under Section 27 of the Evidence Ordinance and drew an adverse

inference against the appellant based on that recovery.

29. However, there is no conclusive proof that the knife marked as P12, recovered

under Section 27 of the Evidence Ordinance, was in fact the weapon used to stab

the deceased. Therefore, even in the absence of an explanation from the Appellant

as to how he became aware of the location where the knife was concealed, no

adverse inference can be drawn against him. The evidence of the Judicial Medical

Officer has not conclusively established that the injuries found on the body of the

deceased were caused by the knife marked as P12. He merely stated that the

injuries observed on the deceased could have been inflicted by a sharp-cutting

weapon similar in nature to the weapon marked as P12. However, no significant

marks or imprints consistent with the knife were observed on the injuries of the

deceased. More importantly, no bloodstains or any other material linking the knife

to the murder were found on it.

30. Nevertheless, in his judgment, the learned High Court Judge concluded that there

was a high probability that the knife marked as P12 was used to commit the

murder and that, in the absence of any explanation by the appellant, the recovery

made under Section 27 of the Evidence Ordinance constituted strong

circumstantial evidence against him. In my view, this conclusion runs contrary to

the well-established legal principles governing circumstantial evidence.

CA/HCC/0091/2023

9 | P a g e

31. In the present case, only PW3, Upul Pushpakumara, stated in his evidence that he

saw the appellant running from the direction of the deceased’s residence.

However, that evidence is also not free from infirmities. Firstly, the issue of

identification remains in dispute. According to PW3, he observed the appellant

from a distance of about 15 meters at approximately 7.30 p.m. Therefore, the

pertinent question arises as to whether there was sufficient light in the area at that

time to enable PW3 to clearly and reliably identify the appellant.

32. Furthermore, according to the evidence of PW3, he saw the appellant from

behind, and that too at night, when there was no light in the vicinity except for the

torch he was carrying. There is no evidence to suggest that PW3 directed the

torchlight towards the appellant while he was running. What is more probable is

that he directed the torchlight towards his own path as he ran towards the

deceased’s house.

33. In the case of S v Mthethwa 1972 (3) SA 766 (A) at 768A-C, Holmes JA held as

follows:

"Because of the fallibility of human observation, the Courts approach to evidence

of identification with some caution. It is not enough for the identifying witness to

be honest; the reliability of his observation must also be tested. This depends on

various factors, such as lighting, visibility, and eyesight; the proximity of the

witness; his opportunity for observation, both as to time and situation; the extent

of his prior knowledge of the accused; the mobility of the scene; corroboration;

suggestibility; the accused's face, voice, build, gait, and dress; the result of

identification parades, if any; and, of course, the evidence by or on behalf of the

accused. The list is not exhaustive; these factors or such of them are applicable in

a particular case, are not individually decisive but must be weighed one against

the other in the light of the totality of the evidence and the probabilities

34. In Rex vs Turnbull (1977) QB 224, court established key principles and

safeguards to minimize the risk of wrongful convictions based on mistaken

identification. The central thrust of the case is based on the court’s

acknowledgement of the real risk of miscarriages of justice in visual identification

CA/HCC/0091/2023

10 | P a g e

cases and can be distilled from the following passages in the judgment of Lord

Widgery CJ:

How long did the witness have the accused under observation? At what distance? In

what light? Was the observation impeded in any way, as for example, by

passing traffic or a press of people? Had the witness ever seen the

accused before? How often? If only occasionally, had he any special

reason for remembering the accused? How long elapsed between the

original observation and the subsequent identification to the police? Was

there any material discrepancy between the description of the accused

given to the police by the witness when first seen by them and his actual

appearance?

35. In the present case, PW3’s evidence was that he identified the appellant from

behind, solely with the aid of his torchlight. This was at a time when the appellant

was running with another person who was not identified by the witness.

According to PW3, the area was in complete darkness except for the light from

his torch, as the incident occurred around 8.00 p.m. The duration of the witness’s

observation would have been very brief, as the identification was made while both

parties were in motion. The distance from which PW3 made this observation was

approximately 50 feet. The witness clearly stated that he directed the torchlight

and identified the appellant. He testified as follows:

ප්ර : තකොතහො ත ා අඳුනගත්තත් කු ාර කියන එක්තකනා කියලා ?

උ : තටෝච් එලිතයන් ැක්කා මීටර් 15 ක් ප ණ දුරින්.

ප්ර : ත ා දුවන් යනතකොට ත ා කිව්වා ත න්තනක් දුවන් යනවා කු ාර කියන

එක්තකනා ත ා ැක්කා කියලා ?

උ : ඔව්.

ප්ර : ඒ කු ාර කියන එක්තකනාව ත ා කින තකොට ත ා හිටපු තැන

ඉඳන් තපන්වන්න කු ාර කියන එක්තකනා තකොච්චර දුරකින් ැක්තක්

කියලා තේ උසාවිතේ තැනක් තපන්වලා ?

උ : ත තන ඉඳන් උතු ාණනි අර ැන්වීේ පුවරුව තිතයන්තන්.

CA/HCC/0091/2023

11 | P a g e

(සාක්ෂිකරු සාක්ෂිකූඩුතව් සිට විවෘත අධිකරණතේ සිර ැදිරිය තිතබන

ස්ථානතේ ඇති ැන්වීේ පුවරුව තිතබන ස්ථානයට දුර තපන්වා සිටී.

(එය අඩි 15 ක් ප ණ දුරකි.)

ප්ර : ඒ තවලාතව් තකොතහො ත ා කු ාර කියලා අඳුනගත්තත් ?

උ : තේ අතත් තිබුන විදුලි පන් ල්වමින් අඳුනගත්තා.

ප්ර : ඒ තවලාතව් ත ොනව ඇඳන් හිටිතේ කු ාර ?

උ : කු ාර කලුපාට ටීෂර්ට් එකක් ඇ තගන හිටියා. තව කලු කලිස ක්

ඇඳන් හිටියා.

ප්ර : කු ාර අතත් ත ොනවාහරි තිබුනා ත ා ැක්ක ?

උ : එතහ ැක්තක් නැහැ.

ප්ර : ැන් ත ා කිව්වා කු ාර කලු කලිස කුයි, කලුපාට ටීෂර්ට් එකකුයි

ඇඳන් හිටියා කියලා ?

උ : ඔව්.

ප්ර : ඔය කලු කලිස ආතයත් ැක්තකොත් අඳුරගන්න පුලුවන් ?

උ : පුලුවන් කලු කලිස ඒක කියන්න අ ාරුයි කලු කලිස ක් රාත්රීද

කාලතේ ැක්තක්. කලු කලිස ක් කියලා ං තහො ට ැක්කා.

Page 179

36. What is discernible from the above evidence is that PW3 had only a few seconds

to identify the appellant with the aid of his torchlight, while both were in motion.

The identification was made from behind, further diminishing its reliability. It is

also in evidence that some of PW3’s friends were following him when he was

running towards the direction of the deceased’s house. However, none of them

had seen the appellant, nor did PW3 inform any of them at that time that he had

identified the appellant.

CA/HCC/0091/2023

12 | P a g e

37. Hence, the possibility of a mistaken identity cannot be entirely ruled out.

Moreover, the witness admitted that he did not immediately disclose to his father

or to the police that he had seen the appellant running from the scene, which

further weakens the reliability of his testimony. His explanation that he was

frightened at the time, though plausible, does not satisfactorily account for the

delay in making such a crucial disclosure.

38. It is also pertinent to note that when PW3 was shown a trouser and a T-shirt said

to have been recovered pursuant to the appellant’s statement, the witness was

unable to identify them with certainty. He merely stated that they could be the

same clothes but that he was not sure. He testified as follows:

ප්ර : බලන්න සාක්ෂිකරු ත ා කිව්වා දිග කලු කලිස ක් ඇඳතගන හිටියා

කියලා කු ාර කියන අය බලන්න තේ කලිස අඳුනගන්න පුලුවන්

කියලා ත න්ට ?

උ : තේක තවන්න ඇති කියලා හිතතනවා උතු ාණනි.

ප්ර : ත ා කිව්වා ඔහු කලු ටීෂර්ට් එකක් ඇඳන් හිටියා කියලා?

උ : ඔව්.

ප්ර : ඒ අත් තකොතතන්ට විතර තිතයන ටීෂර්ට් එකක් ?

උ : තේ හරියට විතර වතේ (සාක්ෂිකරු ත ාතේ අතත් වැලමිතටන් ඉහල

ප්ර තශයය තපන්වා සිටී)

ප්ර : කර තකොතහො තිබුතන් ?

උ : එතහ නේ තක නැහැ උතු ාණනි ට.

(තේ අවස්ථාතව්දී පැ.3 වයතයන් ලකුණු කර තිතබන ටීෂර්ට් එක

සාක්ෂකරුට තපන්වා සිටී)

ප්ර : සාක්ෂිකරු බලන්න තේ ටීෂර්ට් එක අඳුනගන්න හැකියාවක්

තිතයනවා ?

උ : තේ වතේ ටීෂර්ට් එකක් ත යි උතු ාණනි.

Page 180 and 181

CA/HCC/0091/2023

13 | P a g e

39. Therefore, when the circumstances under which PW3 identified the appellant are

considered alongside his delay in disclosing the appellant’s identity, his evidence

becomes unsafe and unreliable. When, in the opinion of the trial Judge, the quality

of identification evidence is poor, as for example when it depends solely on a

fleeting glance, it is unsafe to allow a conviction to stand without any independent

corroborative evidence.

40. This entire case revolves around the issue of identification and the inherent risks

of error, contamination, and mistaken recollection. PW3’s failure to disclose the

identity of the appellant to his father at the very first instance, and his subsequent

disclosure only two days later, when considered together, inevitably creates

serious doubt as to the reliability of PW3’s evidence regarding the identification

of the appellant.

41. In Hanumant Govind Nargundkar v. State of M.P., AIR (1952) SC 343, it was

observed thus;

"It is well to remember that in case where the evidence is of a

circumstantial nature, the circumstances from which the conclusion of

guilt is to be drawn should be in the first instance be fully established, and

all the facts so established should be consistent only with the hypothesis of

the guilt of the accused. Again, the circumstances should be of a

conclusive nature and tendency and they should be such as to exclude

every hypothesis but the one proposed to be proved. In other words, there

must be a chain of evidence so far complete as not to leave any reasonable

ground for a conclusion consistent with the innocence of the accused and

it must be such as to show that within all human probability the act must

have been done by the accused."

42. In State of U.P. v. Ashok Kumar Srivastava, (1992) Crl LJ 1104 it was pointed

out that great care must be taken in evaluating circumstantial evidence and if

the evidence relied on is reasonably capable of two inferences, the one in favour

of the accused must be accepted. It was also pointed out that the circumstances

relied upon must be found to have been fully established and the cumulative

CA/HCC/0091/2023

14 | P a g e

effect of all the facts so established must be consistent only with the hypothesis of

guilt.

43. In C. Chenga Reddy v. State of A.P., [1996] 10 SCC 193, wherein it has been

observed thus:

"In a case based on circumstantial evidence, the settled law is that the

circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is drawn should be fully proved

and such circumstances must be conclusive in nature. Moreover, all the

circumstances should be complete and there should be no gap left in the chain of

evidence. Further, the proved circumstances must be consistent only with the

hypothesis of the guilt of the accused and totally inconsistent with his innocence."

44. In Padala Veera Reddy v. State of A.P., AIR (1990) SC 79 it was laid down that

when a case rests upon circumstantial evidence, such evidence must satisfy the

following tests:

(1) The circumstances from which an inference of guilt is sought to

be drawn, must be cogently and firmly established;

(2) Those circumstances should be of a definite tendency unerringly

pointing towards guilt of the accused;

45. In the present case, the evidence relating to the identification of the appellant is

unreliable due to several infirmities discussed in this judgment. Therefore, it

would be unsafe to allow the conviction to stand solely on the evidence of PW3.

Moreover, when the identification itself is unreliable, the most vital link in the

chain of circumstantial evidence inevitably fails. Hence, in accordance with the

established legal principles, it is impossible to conclude that the guilt of the

appellant has been proved beyond reasonable doubt based solely on the

circumstantial evidence adduced.

46. Regrettably, the learned High Court Judge has failed to properly assess the above

infirmities which tainted the prosecution evidence, rendering it unreliable and

unsafe to base a conviction upon. A meticulous evaluation of the evidence should

have revealed that the inconsistencies and weaknesses in the identification

testimony were fatal to the prosecution case.

CA/HCC/0091/2023

15 | P a g e

47. In view of the foregoing analysis, it is evident that the prosecution has failed to

establish the guilt of the appellant beyond reasonable doubt. The circumstantial

evidence led at the trial does not form a complete and unbroken chain pointing

only to the guilt of the appellant and excluding every reasonable hypothesis of

innocence. The evidence relating to identification being unreliable and the

recovery made under section 27 of the Evidence Ordinance being inconclusive,

the conviction of the appellant cannot be sustained. Accordingly, I set aside the

conviction and sentence imposed by the learned High Court Judge and acquit the

appellant from the charge.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P. Kumararatnam, J

I agree,

Judge of the Court of Appeal