==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0192/2023

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal No: The Democratic Socialist Republic of

CA/HCC/0192/2023 Sri Lanka

High Court of Homagama

Case No: HC/122/2018

COMPLAINANT

Vs.

1. Bamunusinghe Arachchige

Dayananda

2. Kariyawasam Katuwana

Vithanalage Ajantha Kariyawasam

ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

Kariyawasam Katuwana Vithanalage

Ajantha Kariyawasam

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

CA/HCC/0192/2023

2 | P a g e

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

COUNSEL : Keheliya Alahakoon for the appellant.

Shanil, Kularatne, PC, ASG for the

Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 11/02/2026

DECIDED ON : 08/05/2026

******************************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

CA/HCC/0192/2023

3 | P a g e

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) with the 2nd Accused were indicted in the High Court of

Homagama on the following charges:

1. On or before 21st June 2000 the Accused committed attempted

murder by shooting Ladduwage Yoshin Yasodara De Silva an offence

punishable under Section 44A of the Firearms (Amended) Act No. 22

of 1996 read with Section 300 of the Penal Code.

2. In the course of the same transaction, the accused armed with a gun

attempted to commit robbery by trying to snatch a gold chain worn by

Sali Fernando an offence punishable under Section 44A of the

Firearms (Amended) Act No.22 of 1996 read with Section 490 and 380

of the Penal Code.

As the 1st Accused absconded the court in this case, after an inquiry, his

case was fixed in absentia of him under Section 241(1) of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

The prosecution had called PW5, PW6, PW7, PW10 and marked the

deposition of PW1 and PW3 under Section 33 of the Evidence Ordinance and

closed their case. After the conclusion of the prosecution’s case, the Learned

High Court Judge had called for the defence, and the 2nd Appellant had made

a dock statement denying the charges. After considering the evidence

presented by both parties, the Learned High Court Judge had convicted the

Appellant and the 1st Accused as charged, and sentenced them as follows:

For both the 1st and 2nd counts, the Appellant and the 1st Accused were

sentenced to life imprisonment. Further, the Appellant and the 1st Accused

were separately ordered to pay a compensation of Rs.100,000/- with a

default sentence of 01-year imprisonment each. An open warrant had been

issued against the 1st Accused.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court. The Learned Counsel for the Appellant

CA/HCC/0192/2023

4 | P a g e

informed this court that the Appellant has given consent to argue this matter

in his absence. Also, at the time of the argument the Appellant was connected

via the Zoom platform from prison.

Background of the Case.

In this case when the High Court trial started, PW1 had gone abroad and

PW3 was dead. Acting under Section 33 of the Evidence Ordinance, the

evidence given at the non-summary was adopted through the Mudaliar of

the Court.

According to PW1, Yasodara Silva, who was only 14 years of age, when they

were watching television, two persons had entered the house and tried to rob

the gold chain worn by PW4. At that time the Appellant and the 1st Accused

who had possessed guns, had held PW3 and PW4 at gunpoint and threatened

them. Due to fear, when PW1 tried to run from the scene, one of the persons

had opened fire which had struck his buttock. As such he was hospitalised

and he had received treatment. According to PW1, the 1st Accused was

known to him before this incident. This witness had identified the Appellant

and the 1st Accused at the identification parade.

PW3, Sandya Jayalath who too had been deceased before the commencement

of the trial, had corroborated the evidence of PW1 and had identified the

Appellant and the 1st Accused at the identification parade. At the trial the

defence had admitted the identification parade notes under Section 420 of

the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

PW5, Jayalath Fernando who was sleeping in the house at the time of the

incident, had only awakened upon hearing the cries of PW3. By that time,

PW1 had sustained a gunshot injury. As soon as he had awakened, he had

locked the door first and had remained in the house for about five minutes.

Thereafter, with the help of PW6 Ratnapala he had taken PW1 to the hospital.

According to PW7 Dr. Gabadage, who had examined PW1, it was identified

that the injury sustained by PW1 is a firearm injury.

CA/HCC/0192/2023

5 | P a g e

At the hearing of this appeal the Counsel for the Appellant had raised

the following grounds of appeal.

1. The Learned High Court Judge has erred in law by convicting the

Appellant for count number one in the indictment, disregarding the

fact that common intention has not been established by the

prosecution.

2. The Learned High Court Judge has erred in law by convicting the

Appellant for both counts under Section 44A of the Firearms Act,

whereas the prosecution has failed to prove that the alleged weapon

falls under the legal definition of a gun.

3. The Learned High Court Judge has failed to analyze the glaring

improbabilities and contradictions and omissions with regard to the

incident and the alleged usage of guns.

4. The Learned High Court Judge has misdirected himself by

disregarding the effects of infirmities and gaps of evidence in the

prosecution’s case.

5. The Learned High Court Judge has failed to correctly analyze the dock

statement of the Appellant.

The identity of an accused is very important in a criminal trial. Wrong

identity may cost irreparable damage to the accused. Hence, the prosecution

has to prove the correct identity of an accused to secure a criminal

conviction. If the identification evidence is challenged successfully, where

there is no or limited other evidence, the outcome will be an acquittal of the

accused.

This was highlighted in the case of Attorney General v. Joseph Aloysius

and Others (1992) 2 Sri L.R. 264 as follows:

“The identity of the accused, as a person who committed the offence is

a fact in issue at a criminal trial and evidence as to identification of the

accused by a witness, is relevant and admissible”.

CA/HCC/0192/2023

6 | P a g e

In the case of Jayatissa v. Attorney General (S.C. (Spl) L.A. No. 229/2009,

decided on 09.02.2010) it was noted that:

“If the alibi evidence is neither believed nor disbelieved, but would

create a reasonable doubt as to the prosecution case on identity, the

Accused is entitled to get the benefit of the doubt.”

In this case identity is not an issue as the Appellant had admitted the

identification parade notes under Section 420 of the Penal Code. At the time

of holding the identification the Appellant raised concerns that he was shown

to the witnesses at the police station.

In the 1st ground of appeal, the Learned Counsel for the Appellant contended

that the Learned High Court Judge has erred in law by convicting the

Appellant for count number one in the indictment, disregarding the fact that

common intention has not been established by the prosecution.

In this case the evidence given by PW1 and PW3 very clearly mentioned that

the Appellant and the 1st Accused had entered their house and held PW3 and

PW4 on gunpoint and tried to rob the chain of PW3. This position was not

contradicted by the defense. Further, when the 1st Accused shot at PW1, the

Appellant, who was also in possession of a gun, had tried to snatch the chain

of PW4.

The concept of Common Intention and its applicability have been discussed

in depth in several important judgments by local courts. Hence, I consider,

it is important to discuss this concept before resolving the grievance of the

Appellant.

Common Intention is depicted under Section 32 of the Penal Code of Sri

Lanka. It reads:

“When a criminal act is done by several persons in furtherance of the

common intention of all, each of such persons is liable for that act in the

same manner as if it were done by him alone.”

CA/HCC/0192/2023

7 | P a g e

Common Intention implies a pre-arranged plan and acting in concert

pursuant to the plan. Common Intention comes into being prior to the

commission of the act, but a long gap in time need not be present. To bring

this section into effect a pre-concert is not necessary to be proved, but it may

well develop on the spot between a number of persons and could be inferred

from the facts and circumstances of each case.

In The Queen v. Mahatun 61 NLR 540 the court held that:

“Under section 32 of the Penal Code, when a criminal act is committed

by one of several persons in furtherance of the common intention of

all, each of them is liable for that act in the same manner as if it were

done by him alone. If each of several persons commits a different

criminal act each act being in furtherance of the common intention of

all, each of them is liable for each such as if it were done by him alone.

To establish the existence of a common intention it is not essential to

prove that the criminal act was done in concert pursuant to a pre-

arranged plan. A common intention can come into existence without

prearrangement. It can be formed on the spur of the moment”.

In Wimalasena v. IP Hambantota 74 NLR 176 the court held that:

“Mere presence of an accused person is not sufficient to establish

common intention within the meaning of section 32 of the Penal Code”.

In S. Fernando v. H. De Silva 68 NLR 166 the court held that:

“In order to sustain the charge based on common intention it is

essential that both the accused persons must have participated in the

offence, in the sense that they must be physically present at or about

the scene of offence”. Although the accused did not commit any

physical act, yet liability could be imposed on him on the basis that

his presence was a participatory presence. All these are generally

established through circumstantial evidence.

CA/HCC/0192/2023

8 | P a g e

In King v. Assappu 50 NLR 324 the court held that:

“In a case where the question of common intention arises the

Jury must be directed that-

(i) the case of each accused must be considered separately.

(ii) the accused must have been actuated by a common

intention with the doer of the act at the time the offence

was committed,

(iii) common intention must not be confused with same or

similar intention entertained independently of each other,

(iv) there must be evidence, either direct or circumstantial, of

prearrangement or some other evidence of common

intention,

(v) the mere fact of the presence of the accused at the time

of the offensive is not necessarily evidence of common

intention.

It may also be added that for a charge of murder, it is imperative that the

accused entertained a murderous intention along with the perpetrator of the

offending act. With the guidance of the above cited judicial decisions, now I

consider the singular ground of appeal advanced in this case by the

Appellant.

Analysing the sequence of events described by the lay witnesses, the

Appellant and the 1st Accused had come together to the house of PW1,

threatened the witnesses with guns, tried to rob the gold chain of PW4 and

shot at PW1 in furtherance of common intention. The weapons they

possessed and the way that both had behaved clearly indicate that they had

common intention in committing the crime. Further, carrying deadly

weapons and using them to frighten the witnesses and firing at PW1 clearly

established their common intention at the time of committing the offence.

CA/HCC/0192/2023

9 | P a g e

The Learned High Court Judge in his judgement had very correctly

considered the concept of common intention. The relevant portion is re-

produced below:

Page 355 of the brief

;jÿrg;a fuu wmrdOhg n`ÿka jQ ;eke;a;shl f,i me'id' 03 idlaIsldrsh úiska fok ,o

idlaIsfha oS b;d meyeos,sj m<jk pQos; f,i tkï" ta jk úg wêlrKfha fkdue;s pQos;

úiska ;udf.a ud,h lvd .ekSug ;e;a l< nj;a" wfkla pQos; ;u ujf.a lf¾ t,af,ñka

ud,h lvd .ekSug ;e;a l< nj;a hk ldrKd ms<sn`oj idlaIs oS we;' ta wkqj b;d

meyeos,sju Tjqka fuu idlaIslrejkaf.a f., ne`os ud, lvd .ekSug" fkdtfia kï

fld,a,lEug ;e;a lr we;s nj tu`.ska ;yjqre fõ' tfukau wdhqO ikakoaOj hful= ksjila

;=<g meñfKkafka wksjd¾fhkau tjeks fld,a,lEfï fyda >d;kh lsrSfï wruqKla we;sj

nj fmkS hhs' ta wkqj fuu kvqfõ pQos;hska fofokd tlaj wdhqO ikakoaOj fuu m%Yak.;

wjia:dfõ wod, idlaIslrejkaf.a ksji ;=<g rd;%S we;=,a ù we;s nj iy fuu l%shdoduhka

isÿ ù we;s njg meñKs,a, idOdrK ielfhka f;drj lreKq ;yjqre lr we;s njg fuu

wêlrKh ks.ukh lrhs'

As the prosecution had sufficient evidence to prove common intention, this

ground has no merit.

In the second and third ground, the Learned Counsel for the Appellant

strenuously argued that the Learned High Court Judge has erred in law by

convicting the Appellant for both counts under Section 44A of the Firearms

Act, whereas the prosecution has failed to prove that the alleged weapon falls

under the legal definition of a gun and failed to analyze the glaring

improbabilities and contradictions and omissions with regard to the incident

and the alleged using of guns.

The recovery of the gun is not essential to successfully prove armed robbery.

Such physical recovery is ideal; however, a conviction can still be secured by

way of testimonial evidence, which includes reliable victim or witness

testimony regarding the weapon and its use. The primary focus would be the

victim’s belief on whether a weapon was used.

CA/HCC/0192/2023

10 | P a g e

In this case PW1 and PW3 had clearly seen that the Appellant and the 1st

Accused had carried guns. Further, the witnesses had described the

appearance of the guns.

PW7, the Doctor who examined PW1 clearly said the injury sustained by PW1

was a gunshot injury. Further, police investigations revealed of recovering a

nose of the bullet (Busiya). Hence, I hold that the non-recovery of the guns

is not fatal as the prosecution witnesses had given plausible evidence that

the Appellant had possessed a gun and that the 1st Accused had shot at PW1.

No contradictions or omissions were highlighted during the trial. The High

Court Judge had very correctly considered the evidence given by the

prosecution witnesses without any contradictions or omissions.

Hence, these two grounds also have no merit.

In the fourth ground of appeal, the Appellant contends that the Learned High

Court Judge has misdirected himself by disregarding the effects of infirmities

and gaps of evidence in the prosecution’s case.

In this case the Learned High Court Judge had very correctly and accurately

analyzed the evidence given by prosecution witnesses and their legal

implication. Accepting evidence given by prosecution witnesses has not

caused any prejudice to the Appellant. The Learned High Court Judge has

not ignored improbabilities and contradictions when he analyzed the

evidence. Therefore, I conclude that this ground also has no merit.

In the final grounds of appeal, the Appellant contends that the Learned High

Court Judge has failed to correctly analyze the dock statement of the

Appellant.

I totally disagree with the Counsel for the Appellant. The Learned High Court

Judge in his judgment had very correctly considered the dock statement of

the Appellant and given plausible reasons as to why he rejected the same.

The relevant portion is re-produced below:

Page 357 of the brief.

l=uk ;;a;ajhla hgf;a fyda fuu wêlrKfha fmkS fkdisák ohdkkao keue;s pQos;hd

;udf.a ys;jf;l= nj iy Tyq ;udf.a ksjig wd .sh ;eke;af;l= nj;a" Tyq iu`. hï

CA/HCC/0192/2023

11 | P a g e

iïnkaO;djhla ;snQ nj;a hk lreKq fukau ;uka fmd,Sish úiska w;awvx.=jg .;a nj

hk ldrKd pQos;f.a ú;a;s l+vqfõ isg lrk ,o m%ldYfhka lshefjk nj i`oyka l< hq;=h'

Bg wu;rj oS¾> f,i hï hï úia;r i`oyka lr we;s kuq;a pQos;f.a ú;a;s l+vqfõ isg

lrk ,o m%ldYfha iuia;hla f,i i,ld ne,Sfï oS tu ldrKd tf,i i;H hehs ms<s.ekSug

fuu wêlrKhg fkdyelsh' ta wkqj tu`.ska pQos; ú;a;s l+vqfõ isg lrk ,o m%ldYh u`.ska

meñKs,af,a kvqlrh flfrys hï ielhla we;s lsrSug th Yla;su;a yd m%udKj;a hehs

lsisúgl is;sh fkdyelsh' tfia fyhska pQos;f.a ú;a;s l+vqfõ isg lrk ,o m%ldYh wi;H

hehs fuu wêlrKh ks.ukh lrñka th neyer lrhs'

Hence, I conclude this ground also sans any merit.

Considering the evidence presented in this case by the prosecution, a prima

facie case had been established against the Appellant.

Having considered the evidence led by the prosecution I am inclined to accept

that the prosecution had adequately established the charges levelled against

the Appellant beyond reasonable doubt. Thus, I am of the view that the

Learned High Court Judge has rightly convicted the Appellant as charged.

Therefore, I affirm the conviction and dismiss the Appeal of the Appellant.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgement to the High

Court of Homagama along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R.P.Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL