I I

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

CA(PHC) No: 194/2009

CA(PHC) No: 195/2009

Provincial High Court

D.L. Jayasinghe Arachchi,

'Sampatha' Ittademaliya,

Walasmulla. (dead)

Plaintiff

of Hambantota Case No: 30/2007

Vs.

01.P. Don Migel,

Palukotartwala, Ambalanth'Ota';Road,

10th Mile post,

Suriyawewa. (dead)

o lA. Abeysinghe Gamachchige

Wimalawathi, PaJukotan~~,

Ambalanthota Road,

10th Mile Post, Suriyawewa.

02.Hettiarachchige Gunapala,

'Chamara'Iththademaliya,

-.. ~\~, ..... ~.~.i';~~~~"" . Walasmulla.

Respondents

AND NOW

Hettiarachchige Gunapala,

'Chamara' Iththademaliya, Walasmulla.

1

I

I

1 I !

~ j j l I I I t

I

1 ! I I I I I I ! I

Before : P.R.Walgama, J

2nd Respondent - Petitioner-

Appellant

Vs.

Jayasingha Arachchige Chandradasa,

'Chamara' Iththademaliya, Walasmulla.

Substituted Plaintiff - Respondent -Respondent

03. P. Don Migel,

Palukotanwala, Ambalanthota Road,

10th Mile post,

Suriyawewa. (dead)

. :' , ........... J ~ .... 01A. Abeysinghe Gamachchige< :-

Wimalawathi, Palukotanawala,

Ambalanthota Road,

10th Mile Post, Suriyawewa.

Respondent - Respondents .......... 1:~. Respondent

Assistant Commissioner ot Agrarian

Development,

The Officer of the Agrarian Development,

Hambanthota.

Respondent - Respondent

: L.T.B. Dehideniya, J

, ........... ~.!,"

t; it ,

!I

t IiI,

II,,t! i,

Ir

~ ! f , I

~ ; i I I; i ! ,\

t,Ii

2

l

I j I I I

J I 1 I I 1 ! I 1 ! ! I I

i

I

Counsel : Gamini Hettiarachchi for the 2nd Respondent -

Petitioner - Appellant.

: Asthika Devendra with Lilan Warusuvithana for the

Plaintiff - Respondent - Respondent.

Argued on : 16.02.2016

Decided on: 21.06.2016

CASE NO- CA (PHC)- 194/ 2009- JUDGMENT- 21.06.2016

P.R.Walgama, J

The instant appeal lies against the order of the Learned High

Court Judge dated 08.10.2009, in the Provincial High Court

holden at Matara, by which order the Learned High Court has

dismissed the application of the 2nd Respondent -Petition.~r, for

a Writ of Certiorari to quash the decision of the Respondent,

the Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Development,

Hambantota.

The facts emerged from the petition to the J:Iigh CQ1j:L~by the

2nd Respondent - Petitioner reveal thus;

A complaint was made by the original Plaintiff to the

Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Services in terms of Section

5(9) of the Agrarian Services Act No. 58 of 1979, amended by

.-.."-....... ~,~ ... Act No. 4 of 1991, complaining that the tenant' cultivator

namely Don Migel had let the paddy field to the Appellant

without the consent of the Plaintiff (the owner of the paddy

field)

, .......... r,~ '.".

3

............ ~.~ : ...

In pursuant to the above application of the Plaintiff an inquiry

was held by the Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Services

delivered his order on 1.1.2007, and determined that the

Appellant is not the tenant cultivator in the disputed paddy

land, and he had entered illegally.

Being aggrieved by the said order the 2nd Respondent-

Appellant has applied to the High Court for a writ of

Certiorari to quash the above decision of the Assistant

Commissioner of Agrarian Services.

Th .. I PI ff thO fl d ,. t-. t-h e ongma amtI m IS case I e an app.lca ... wn v:~w._

Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Services - Qf Ham~~a,

the

in

terms of the Section 5 (9) of the Agrarian Services Act No. 58

of 1979 as amended by the Act No. 04 of 1991.

The Section 5 (9) of the above Act states thus;

"where a person (referred to as the lessor) lets any::'~extent of

paddy land to any other person (referred to as lessee) and

the lessee does not become the tenant cultivator thereof, then

if the lessee lets such extent by reason of the fact that he is

not the cultivator thereof, then if the lessee lets such extent

,~ ........... foT' .... to any person (referred to as the subtenant)'aitd the

subtenant becomes the tenant cultivator of such extent oy

reason of his being the cultivator thereof, the subtenant's

rights as the tenant cultivator of such extent shall not be

affected m any manner by the termination of the lease

'.' granted by the lessor to the lessee" It is to be noted that

the Plaintiff in this case and another who also claimed

ownership to the disputed land had complaint to the Assistant

4

{

t

t

1,

\

t!I

j

i 1 !

J I ! I I j , I

~ 1 i ! I I I I

I I

Commissioner, of Agrarian Services against the Respondent-

Petitioner for having entered the disputed paddy land and

worked the same.

Being aggrieved by the said order of the Respondent the 2ND

Respondent - Appellant moved the High Court to exercise the

jurisdiction to issue a mandate in the nature of a writ of

certiorari to quash the said order of the Respondent.

The Appellant had adverted Court to Section 11 (3) of the

Agrarian Services Act and stated that the Plaintiff aiiJ Lhe

other person called K.P.Don Dionis have not made application

in terms of Section 11 (3) of the said Act.

Section 11 (3)

"any transfer or cession by the tenant cultivator in violation

of the provision of Subsection (1) or (2) shall be null and

void and shall render the person in occupation ofSo-ch':-extent

to be evicted in accordance with the of provisions of Section

6 and on such eviction the provisions of subsection 5 of

section 4 shall apply."

It is also alleged by the 2ND Petitioner:-AppeJla~t: J:~t the

Plaintiff has not proved in evidence that he is the land lord

of the paddy land in suit. Further it is asserted by the

Petitioner - Appellant that as per document marked XIS he is

the rightful tenant cultivator of the disputed paddy land.

Pursuant to the above determination of the Respondent a quit

notice has been sent by and same has been marked as X16.

5

t' II

(

II

f! !

!-

IIi

\i ,

;-

~\f!)

j I i I

J I I i

Further it is brought to the notice of Court that the Petitioner

- Appellant is still the tenant cultivator of the paddy field in

suit.

In opposing the said application of the Petitioner- Appellant, it

is the categorical position of the Respondent that the

Petitioner- Appellant was a trespasser who entered the paddy

field in violation of section 5(9) of the Agrarian Services Act

No. 58 of 1979 (corresponding Section 7(10) of the Agrarian

Development Act No. 46 of 2000)

That the Petitioner was never substituted as a Sub Tenant

Cultivator by non of the owners of the paddy field or by

any other tenant cultivator, >~>.;>:. ,

That the Petitioner's predecessor Tenant Cultivator under whom

he is claiming his rights had left the paddy land and settled

down in Suriyawewa area 17 years before the Petitioner

enrolled his name illegally in the Agricultural ,Land list. ,;,"

The Respondent has adverted Court to the fact that the

Petitioner- Appellant had refrained from adducing any evidence

at the afore said inquiry nor did he produce any of the

documents which he moves to tender before this court.(Vl-V8).

,' ........... ,:,.. '-

It is alleged by the Plaintiff- Respondent that the Petitioner-

Appellant has failed to pay rent through out, to the lawful

owners by 2ND Petitioner - Appellant

The Learned High Court Judge in dealing with the contentions

' ....... """ ... of the Petitioner - Appellant had recognised the fact that the

legal position of Section 99(2)(e) of No. 46/2000 wherein the

6

i II! !! , l ! I

I

I

f I i I \ 1 I i I I I I

I

i ,

powers vested with the Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian

Services under the Agrarian Services Act No. 58 of 1979, is

embodied in Act No.46 of 2000.

Section 99(2)(e) of No. 46/ 2000 states thus:

It all proceedings pending before an inquiring officer or a

Board of Review under the provisions of the Agrarian Services

Act No. 58 of 1979 on the day preceding the date of

commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to be proceedings

instituted before the corresponding .Agrarian .. :~.l'.ri.bunal

established by this Act, and may be continued and concluded

before such Agrarian Tribunal under this Act."

Therefore it is crystal clear that any inquiry commenced

before the new Act came to being the same inquiry could

.-........... -::-~.,. ~ , continue in terms of the present Act too.

Hence the Learned High Court Judge was of the view that the

argument planked by the Petitioner - Appellant on issue of

conversion of the section 5(9) 11(3) and to act in terms of

Section 99 (2) (e) is now recognised and there

-;;,. ..... '", ...... is no" merit in

the said argument of the Petitioner - Appellant.

It is apparent from the facts surfaced in the Petition of the

Petitioner - Appellant that he has forcibly entered this paddy

field after his father in law has left the same., if ,..-~:.,. ..

It was the observation of the Learned High Court Judge that

the Petitioner has entered his name illegally in agricultural

land list as a tenant cultivator and as such he was never the

tenant cultivator under any of the owners of the land . .............. ;,.. ...

7

t II

IIf

tt If!\t

If,

\

J

r I

}

I 1

J ! I

It is also being noted that the Petitioner - Appellant had

objected to the amalgamation of two applications made by two

owners to the same land to eject the Petitioner - Appellant

from subject land. But the Learned High Court Judge has held

the view that the said amalgamation is not in violation of any

law relating to the above subject and thus held that the

Commissioner has correctly amalgamated the said inquires.

Therefore in the above setting it is abundantly clear that the

Petitioner - Appellant has failed to establish that he is the

tenant cultivator of the land in issue, besides the objection as

to the amalgamation of the two inquires has no merits and

should be rejected accordingly.

For the reasons set out herein before this Court is of the

view that the Appeal should fail

Accordingly the appeal is dismissed subject to a cost of

Rs.5000/-

L.T.B. Dehideniya, J I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

8 J!r!Ii

li i