1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPIBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal pertaining to Section 331 of the Criminal Procedure Code No: 15 of 1979

Court of Appeal Case No: CAl33/2013

Embilipitiya High Court No: HCE 48/2009

Before

Counsel

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Complainant

Vs

Herath Mudiyanselage Thusitha Sampath

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Herath Mudiyanselage Thusitha Sampath

Accused-Appellant

Vs

The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Complainant-Respondent

: L.T.B. Dehideniya J. (P/C.A.)

: S. Devikac De Livera Tennakoon J.

: Anura Maddegoda PC with M. Perera for the Accused

Appellant

: Chaya Sri Namuni SC for the AG.

\I

2

Argued on : 05.06.2017

Decided on : 20.10.2017

L.T.B. Dehideniya J. (P/C.A.)

The Accused Appellant (hereinafter sometimes called and referred

to as the Appellant) was indicted before the High Court of Embilipitiya

on a charge of committing murder of Karavita Arachchige Lalith Saman

Kumara on or about 10th May 2007 at Mudunmankada in the Uda

Walawa police area, an offence punishable under section 296 of the Penal

Code. After serving the indictment on the Appellant, he kept himself

away from Court. Thereafter evidence led under section 241 of the

Criminal Procedure Code and the trial proceeded in absence of the

Appellant and he was convicted and sentenced to death. Being aggrieved

by the said judgment, the Appellant presented this appeal.

The grounds of appeal urged by the Appellant are,

The prosecution had failed to prove its case beyond

reasonable doubt.

The trial judge had failed to properly evaluate the

evidence.

The trial judge had misdirected himself on the

evidence pertaining to the subsequent conduct of the

Appellant and placed undue reliance thereon.

The trial judge had misdirected himself pertaining to

the principles of Burdon of Proof and principles of

mens rea and actus reus. The Appellant was denied a fair trial.

fl

I

t

f I! lI

3

In proof of prosecution case the wife of the deceased, H.R.Deepani,

was called as the first witness. According to her the deceased had rented

out a newly built house to the father of the Appellant and their family

lived there. This house is few feet away from the house where the

decease's family was living. After few months, the deceased had asked

the Appellant's family to hand back the house. On the day of the incident,

the deceased, after returning from work, had inquired from the PW 1

whether the tenants left the house and the PW 1 answered negatively.

Thereafter, the deceasec ~ad gone to the house of the Appellant to inquire

about not vacating the premises. The witness had followed the deceased

to a point but she had to return on hearing her children crying. Since the

deceased had not come back, she had telephoned her father to look for the

deceased. He had come and found that the deceased was injured at the

house of the Appellant. Thereafter she too had gone to the house and

found that the appellant was lying in a pool of blood. Immediately he was

removed to the hospital but he succumbed to the injuries.

The investigation officer I.P. Sarath Kumara said that he visited the

crime scene. There was a pool of blood in the house and two blood

stained mats. He further said that there were no doors or windows fixed.

A tin sheet made out of a tar barrel has been used as the door. He found

that the said tin sheet in the compound. Rusted pieces of tin sheet were

found inside the house.

The P. S Wickramapala in giving evidence said that the Appellant

came to the police station at 1.10 hrs an surrendered himself with a blood

stained katty (knife) and he has taken the katty in to his custody and

produced it marked P 1 in his evidence.

The JMO testified to the fact that the death was due to the cut

injuries and the injuries could have inflicted by the katty marked Pl.

trfltIiI

II I!

4

The only eye witness to the incident is the PWl, the wife of the

deceased. According to her the deceased had gone to the Appellant's

house. She had seen that the deceased going in to the house. In few

minutes time she found that the decease lying on the floor in the house

with injuries. The only conclusion that the Court can come into is that the

injuries were received inside the house. The learned Counsel for the

Appellant submits that the rusted metal pieces inside the house suggests

that there was a forcible entry by the deceased and the Appellant had

acted in self defence. Under normal circumstances, a door is fixed from

inside of the house. This door, being one made out of a tar barrel, has to

be kept from the inside of the house. If the rusted metal shattered inside

the house due to the forcible entry, there must be an explanation as to

how the door was on the compound without being inside the house. There

is no explanation.

The Appellant surrendered to police with the katty and the JMO

testified that the injuries could have inflicted by the Katty. The murder

weapon was in the possession of the Appellant and he surrendered it to

the police within a short period of time. The Appellant has not explained

as to how the murder weapon came to his possession.

The evidence in this case leads only to one conclusion. The

deceased went in to the house of the Appellant and in few minutes it was

found that he was lying in the floor with the injuries. The Appellant

surrendered to police with the katty and the JMO confirms that the

injuries could have inflicted by the said katty. Only the Appellant knew

what happened inside the house and without any explanation, the only

conclusion that the Court can come into is that the Appellant had

committed the murder.

t

ffr

t [

[l

r I

J

5

As I pointed out earlier, that the Appellant had failed to explain as

to what happened inside the house. The only conclusion that the can

come into is that the Appellant inflicted the injuries with knowledge that

they could cause the death of the deceased in the ordinary cause of nature.

The Appellant kept himself absent from the trial knowing that the

case is fixed for trial. The indictment was served on the Appellant. Before

taking up the trial in absentia the Court inquired under section 241 of the

Criminal Procedure Code and satisfied itself that the Appellant is

absconding from the trial proceedings. Therefore the Appellant cannot

complain that he was denied a fair trial.

I see no reason to interfere with the findings of the learned High

Court Judge.

The conviction and the sentence is affirmed.

Appeal dismissed.

President, Court of appeal

s. Devika De Livera Tennakoon J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of appeal

fI

f

I Ir i ! ! I!l

t I t I r t t r ! I It ( I I