IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

U.G. Simon (deceased),

U.G. Ranjith,

Ambagamuwa Road,

Gampola.

(Substituted Plaintiff-Appellant)

CA CASE NO: CA/895/1999/F

DC GAMPOLA CASE NO: 2240/L

Vs.

1. Gamini Amarathunga,

Vingulwatta,

Gampola.

2. Urban Council (discharged)

Gampola.

Defendant-Respondent

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Senura Abeywardena for the Appellant.

Nilantha Kumarage for the Respondent.

Decided on: 12.10.2018

2

Samayawardhena, J.

The plaintiff filed this action on 03.11.1992 against the two

defendants in the District Court of Gampola seeking declaration

of title to the building standing on the land described in the

schedule to the plaint, ejectment of the 1st defendant therefrom

and damages. The defendants filed answers seeking dismissal of

the plaintiffs action. The 2nd defendant, Urban Council of

Gampola, was discharged before the trial by order dated

18.06.1996. After trial, the learned District Judge dismissed the

plaintiffs action. Hence this appeal by the plaintiff.

According to paragraph 2 of the plaint, the premises in suit

belong to the Urban Council and the Urban Council has given

the premises on lease to the plaintiff. This Lease Agreement has

been marked at the trial as P10 and as per the said Agreement,

the premises, consisting of a parcel of land with a boutique

standing thereon, have been rented out by the Urban Council to

the plaintiff for a period of one year from 01.01.1966.

According to paragraphs 9 and 10 of the plaint, when these

premises were in occupation of one Jayasinghe, who the plaintiff

says was his business partner, the 1st defendant forcibly entered

into possession of the premises on or around 12.12.1984 by

evicting Jayasinghe with the full patronage and blessings of the

Urban Council. Jayasinghe was not called as a witness and this

alleged dispossession has taken place nearly 8 years before filing

of the action.

Then in paragraph 12 of the plaint the plaintiff says that the

Urban Council has thereafter leased out the premises to the 1st

defendant.

3

According to the plaint, the principal grievance of the plaintiff is

against the Urban Council. However, as I stated earlier, the

Urban Council has been discharged from the case, as in terms of

section 220(2) of the Urban Councils Ordinance, the action has

not been filed against the Urban Council within 6 months from

the date of accrual of the cause of action. There is no appeal

against that order.

The plaintiff shall conduct the trial as he has pleaded in the

plaint and he cannot at the trial take up a materially different

position to what he has taken up in the plaintExplanation 2 of

section 150 of the Civil Procedure Code.

It is my considered view that the plaintiff cannot maintain this

action the way he has pleaded, without the Urban Council being

a party to the action.

His main relief to seek a declaration that he is the owner of the

building cannot obviously be granted as according to the Lease

Agreement P10 the Urban Council has leased out the land and

the building standing thereon to the plaintiff, and as per P1

what the plaintiff has been permitted is to repair the building

without doing any structural alterations.

No Judgment against the 1st defendant can be entered as the 1st

defendant has come into possession of the premises admittedly

with the permission of the Urban Council, which is the owner of

the premises.

Appeal is dismissed with costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal