1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRETIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of

section 331 (1) of the Criminal Procedure

Code No- 15 of 1979, read with Article 138

of the Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Court of Appeal No: Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

CA/HCC/0102/2019 COMPLAINANT

Vs.

High Court of Puttalam Case No:

HC/45/2018 Rathnasekaralage Nimal Anthony

ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

Rathnasekaralage Nimal Anthony

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department

Colombo 12

RESPONDENT

2

Before : K Priyantha Fernando, J.

: Sampath B Abayakoon, J.

Counsel : I.B. Sachitra Harshana for Accused-Appellant

: Sanjeeva Dissanayaka D.S.G. for the Respondent

Argued on : 26-03-2021

Written Submissions : 12-05-2020 (By the Accused-Appellant)

: 22-03-2021 (By the Respondent)

Decided on : 27-04-2021

Sampath B Abayakoon, J.

This is an appeal by the accused-appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

appellant) on being aggrieved by the conviction and the sentence of him by the

learned High Court Judge of Puttalam.

The appellant was indicted before the High Court of Puttalam for causing the

death of one Manikkuge Gunathilaka, thereby committing the offence of

murder punishable in terms of section 296 of the Penal Code.

After trial without a jury, the appellant was found guilty as charged, and was

sentenced to death by the learned High Court Judge from his judgment dated

27-06-2019 and the sentence of even date.

This is a conviction solely based on the dying declaration of the deceased

person, and the attendant circumstantial evidence, and hence, the only ground

of appeal urged by the learned counsel at the hearing of this appeal was that

the learned High Court Judge has failed to consider the infirmities of the dying

declaration of the deceased in its correct perspective and the conviction

therefore is bad in law.

3

The only eyewitness to the incident has not been called as a witness against

the appellant because of the statutory bar imposed by the provisions of section

120 of the Evidence Ordinance as she was the legal wife of the appellant at the

time of the incident.

According to the evidence led before the High Court, the incident where the

deceased received cut injuries has happened on the night of 13th April 2016

and the statement of the deceased had been recorded by PW-05, namely, PC

41239 Susantha Kumara on the 17th of April 2016 at the Puttalam hospital.

The deceased succumbed to his injuries on the 27th of April 2016 while

receiving treatment at the same hospital.

It is under the provisions of section 32 (1) of the Evidence Ordinance a

statement made by a person who cannot be called as a witness when it relates

to the cause of death or as to any other circumstances of the transaction which

resulted in his death, in cases in which the cause of that persons death comes

into question becomes relevant.

Such statements are relevant whether the person who made them was or was

not at the time when they were made under expectation of death.

According to the evidence of PW-05, on receiving orders from the Head

Quarters Inspector of Puttalam Police, he had visited the Puttalam Base

Hospital on 17-04-2016 in order to record the statement of the deceased. He

had found him in the intensive care ward of the Hospital under bed head No-

14713. After inquiring from the nurse in charge of the ward, and with his

permission, the witness has spoken to the deceased and the deceased had told

the witness that he was well enough and, in a position to speak. PW-05 has

commenced the recording of the statement at 1015 hours and has recorded the

same for about half an hour. He had recorded the statement in the way the

deceased had narrated the incident. After the recording of the statement, it has

been read over and explained to the deceased and the deceased has placed his

signature. After returning to the station, the statement has been pasted in the

4

Crime Information Book on the same day at 1400 hours, a certified copy of

which has been marked as P-01 at the trial.

Before considering the contents of the deceaseds statement and its relevancy, I

would like to address my mind to the relevant legal principles that governs the

acceptance of a dying declaration as evidence in a trial.

It was held in the case of Somasundaram and Others Vs. The Queen 76 NLR

10 that;

When evidence is given under section 32(1) of the Evidence Ordinance of

statements made by a person as to the cause of his death or as to the any

of the circumstances of the transaction which resulted in his death, it is the

duty of the trial judge to give the jury the necessary caution with regard to

how they should approach the consideration of the statements made by a

deceased person.

After being guided by the judgment of H.N.G.Fernando, J. in the case of Queen

Vs. Anthony Pillai 68 CLW 57, where it was stated that;

The failure on the part of the learned trial judge to caution the jury as to

the risk of acting upon a dying declaration, being a statement of a person

who is not a witness at the trial, and as to the need to consider with

special care the question whether the statement could be accepted as true

and accurate had resulted in a miscarriage of justice.

Sisira de Abrew, J. held in CA-106/2002 decided on 22-08-2007, that when

a dying declaration is sought to be produced as an item of evidence against an

accused person in a criminal trial, the trial judge or the jury as the case may

be must bear in mind of the following weakness;

(1) The Statement of the deceased person was not made under oath.

5

(2) Statement of the deceased person has not been tested by cross

examination. Vide- King Vs. Asirivadan Nadar 51 NLR 322 and

Justin Pala Vs. The Queen 66 NLR 409

(3) That the person who made the dying declaration is not a witness at

the trial.

Per Sisira de Abrew, J.

As there are inherent weaknesses in a dying declaration which I have stated

above, the trial judge or the jury, as the case may be, must be satisfied beyond

reasonable doubt on the following matters;

(a) Whether the deceased in fact made such a statement.

(b) Whether the statement made by the deceased was true and accurate.

(c) Whether the statement made by the deceased person could be accepted

beyond reasonable doubt.

(d) Whether the evidence of the witness who testifies about the dying

declaration can be accepter beyond reasonable doubt.

(e) Whether the witness is telling the truth.

(f) Whether the deceased was able to speak at the time the alleged

declaration was made.

(g) Whether the deceased was able to identify the assailant.

It is very much apparent from the judgment of the learned High Court Judge

that he was well possessed of the relevant legal principles that should be

considered in deciding a matter upon a dying declaration. Apart from

considering the relevant principles as to the dying declaration, the learned

Judge has also well considered the relevancy of any circumstantial evidence in

such a scenario.

6

When it comes to the facts of the instant action, it is very much clear that the

deceased has in fact made a statement to PW-05 and there was no reason for

PW-05 to not to speak the truth about the circumstances under which he

recorded the statement of the deceased. Although the deceased was in the ICU

of the Hospital at the time of the recoding of the statement, he has been in a

position to make a statement on his own free will and was not in the

expectation of death and has even signed the statement. The Judicial Medical

Officer (JMO) who conducted the post mortem examination of the deceased has

clearly expressed the opinion that the deceased had the ability to speak as his

injuries were not injuries that cause any impediment to the ability of the

deceased to speak. He has also expressed his opinion that the death of the

deceased was a result of the injuries he suffered. The evidence of the JMO was

never subjected to any challenge by the defence.

PW-05 was an officer who was not involved in the investigations as to the

incident and apparently, he has had no prior knowledge as to the facts of the

incident. I am unable to find any reason to doubt that he has not recorded or

wrongly recorded what was said to him by the deceased.

It is very much apparent from the dying declaration marked P-01, that the

deceased has never attempted to exaggerate the incident, but has described as

to what really happened on the day of the attack. There cannot be any doubt as

to the identity of the person who attacked the deceased either. According to the

statement of the deceased and other witnesses, the deceased and the appellant

are well known to each other. It is well established that the legally married wife

of the appellant was the paramour of the deceased and that they were living

together at the place where the stabbing incident took place. The deceased has

clearly stated that due to this animosity, the appellant came at night towards

his house and scolded him in filth threatening to kill him. Although it was

night time, there would have been no difficulty for the deceased to identify the

appellant when he threatened him as they were well known to each other. I find

7

that in the statement, the deceased has only described how he saw the knife

carried by the appellant saying that due to the available moonlight, he

managed to see that the appellant was carrying a white-coloured pointed knife.

In explaining his injuries, the deceased person has given an accurate

description, which was in line with the evidence of the JMO and has stated

that he fell unconscious after receiving the injuries. This explains very well the

reason why the person who came to the scene of the incident subsequently,

and who took the deceased to the hospital, namely, PW-01 Ranjith Lowes,

failure to ask the deceased about the incident as the deceased would not have

been in his proper senses.

PW-01 in his evidence has identified the paramour of the deceased who was

with him when he reached the scene of the incident as one Baby, but has

identified her as the wife of the appellant Nimal Anthony. The deceased in his

statement has named his paramour as Hettige Dushanthi De Silva and has

stated that she is the legal wife of Nimal. It is therefore clear that the female

referred by PW-01 as Baby and by the deceased as Dushanthi refers to one and

the same person, namely, the paramour of the deceased.

I find that the learned High Court Judge has well considered the relevant legal

principles before coming to his finding that PW-05 was telling the truth as to

the recording of the statement of the deceased and he has recorded the same

accurately. After deciding so, the learned trial judge has proceeded to consider

the statement and the other circumstantial evidence to test the accuracy and

the truthfulness of the statement and has come to a firm finding that it relates

to the cause of the death of the deceased and the circumstances that led to the

death, in deciding to accept the same as relevant under section 32(1) of the

Evidence Ordinance, for which I find no reasons to disagree.

I am unable to agree with the contention of the learned counsel for the

appellant that not calling the male nurse who was in charge of the ICU at the

time the statement was recorded by PW-05 as a witness relevant, as the

8

prosecution has led sufficient evidence to establish that the deceased had the

ability to talk and to make a statement on the day the statement was recorded.

I find no relevancy of the provisions of section 114(f) of the Evidence Ordinance

for the instant situation as contended by the learned counsel.

I am also unable to agree with the learned counsels argument that the

deceased telling the PW-05 that the incident happened around 8.30pm and

PW-01 saying that he came to the place of the incident around 7.30pm create a

reasonable doubt as to the correctness of the statement. It is very much

obvious that neither the deceased nor the PW-01 has referred to actual times,

but to what they thought the time was, when the incident happened at night

time, which does not create any doubt as to the evidence of the PW-01 and the

dying declaration of the deceased.

At this juncture, I would also like to mention that it was the same judge who

has heard the case in its entirety. It is well settled law that an appellate forum

would not lightly disturb the findings of facts by a trial judge.

In the case of Fradd Vs. Brown and Co. Ltd. 20 NLR, 282 it was held:

Immense importance attaches, not only to the demeanour of the

witnesses, but also in the course of the trial and the general impression

left on the mind of the judge present, who saw and noted everything that

took place in regard to what was said by one or other witness. It is rear

that a decision of a judge so express, so explicit, upon a point of fact

purely, is over-ruled by a Court of Appeal, because Courts of Appeal

recognize the priceless advantage which a judge of first instance has in

matters of that kind, as contrasted with any judge of a Court of Appeal,

who can only learn from paper or from narrative from those who were

present.

9

I find that the learned trial judge who had the benefit of listening to all the

witnesses of this action had reached his verdict after well considering the facts

and the relevant law, which needs no disturbance.

The appeal therefore is dismissed, as I find no merit in the same. The

conviction and the sentence is affirmed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

K. Priyantha Ferando, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal