IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA Writ Application 35/2017

1. Perpetual Treasuries (Private) Limited

Level 03, Prince Alfred Tower, No:10, Alfred House Gardens, Colombo 03. 2. Perpetual Asset Management (Private) Limited

Level 03, Prince Alfred Tower, No:10, Alfred House Gardens, Colombo 03. 3. Perpetual Capital Holdings (Private) Limited

Level 03, Prince Alfred Tower, No:10, Alfred House Gardens, Colombo 03.

Petitioners Vs. 1. Central Bank of Sri Lanka

P.O. Box 590, No.30, Janadhipathi Mawatha, Colombo 01. 2. Monetary Board of Central Bank of Sri Lanka

P.O. Box 590, No.30, Janadhipathi Mawatha, Colombo 01. 3. Dr. Indrajit Coomaraswamy,

Governor, Central Bank of Sri Lanka, P.O. Box 590, No.30, Janadhipathi Mawatha, Colombo 01. 4. Dr. R.H.S. Samaratunga,

Official Member, Monetary Board, Central Bank of Sri Lanka, P.O. Box 590, No.30, Janadhipathi Mawatha, Colombo 01.

Respondents

1

C.A. (Writ) Application No. 35{2017

Before P.R.Walgama, J (PICA) and S. Thurairaja P.C. J.

Counsel S.Parathalingam, PC with N. Parathalingam and

G.G. Arulpragasam for the 1st Petitioner.

Nihal Fernando, PC with M. Perera for the 2nd and 3rd Petitioners.

Milinda Gunathilaka, DSG for the 1st to 10th, 12th and 13th Respondents.

Faisz Musthapha PC with Faisza Marker for the 11th Respondent.

Decided on 01.06.2017.

Counsel for the petitioner submits as follows:

It is respectfully submitted that consequent to the institution of this

case and on or about the 30th of March 2017 the 2nd Respondent has issued

a direction. In view of the aforesaid, it has been decided to institute a fresh

application. Therefore, the Petitioners respectfully move to withdraw this

case.

Counsel for the 2nd and 3 rd Petitioners associates with the

submissions of the Counsel for the 1 st Petitioner.

Deputy Solicitor General Mr. Milinda Gunathilaka objecting to the

application for withdrawal and submits as follows:

The learned President's Counsel appearing on behalf of the 1 st

Petitioner stated to your Ladyship and Lordship that a new direction has

been issued. There is no document before this Court to establish that

f IIi

f: t i t ! I! I

f It t I

~

IIiII

f

fI

II I

I I i

2

position. My instructions are that the existing directions were merely

extended for another period of 3 months. There was no new direction

issued. The party coming before this Court as the 1 st Petitioner namely

Perpetual Treasuries (Pvt.) Limited does not exist. The documents filed by

the 2nd and 3rd Petitioners are companies that are purportedly before this

Court as the holding company of the 1st Petitioner, Perpetual Treasuries

(Pvt.) Limited. Given that, there is no entity in existence name Perpetual

Treasuries (Pvt.) Limited, the 2nd and 3rd Respondents have no standing

before your Ladyship's and Lordship's Court. This objection was raised on

behalf of the Respondents during the course of submissions when this

matter was being supported for notice. In the absence of a legal entity

before your lordship's Court, I refer in particular to the 1st Petitioner,

learned President's Counsel appearing for the 1 st Petitioner has no right to

make any application on behalf of that entity. In these circumstances, I

respectfully move that the only course of action open to Court is to dismiss

this application. There is no question of withdrawing. It may be dismissed

and I will reserve my right to ask for costs. I say this, because as was

mentioned the Petitioners have now filed a fundamental rights application

on the same matter. This is mUltiplicity of litigation on behalf of a company

which purportedly came to Court on the basis that unfair allegations were

made against in the press and that the Directions were based on such

allegations. Having made such a serious allegation against the Monetary

Board of Sri Lanka the Petitioners cannot be permitted to merely withdraw

this application. The conduct of the Monetary Board in issuing the

Directions was impugned in very strong terms. Clearly those submissions

had no basis in law or fact. Accordingly, I respectfully move that the

application to withdraw this writ Application 35/2017 be refused and this

Writ Application be dismissed with costs.

II

ff

3

S. Thurairaja, PC, J.

Three Petitioners came before this Court seeking a Writ of Certiorari

and restraining orders regarding a Directive issued by the Central Bank

marked P6. The said document was dated 7th November, 2016 addressed to

the Chief Executive Officer, Perpetual Treasuries Limited, Level 03, Prince

Alfred Tower, No.10, Alfred House Gardens Colombo 03. The case was

listed on 20.02.2017 as an urgent request and on that day it was agreed to

serve notice on the Respondents and to support, including the interim

relief. The matter was taken up on 03.03.2017. On that day the counsel for

the 1 st Petitioner made submissions in support of his application. The

matter was again postponed to be resumed on 08.03.2017. That day the

matter was postponed due to the personal grounds of the Counsel for the

11th Respondent. Then again it was taken up on 10.03.2017 to be resumed.

The counsel for the 1st Petitioner continued his submissions and further

submissions were fixed on the 21.03.2017 and 22.03.2017. On 21.03.2017

the counsel for the 1 st Petitioner made submissions and concluded his

submissions and for the 2nd and the 3rd Petitioners submissions were put

off for the following day namely 22.03.2017. That day it couldn't be reached

and on 24.03.2017 it was taken up for submissions and the Counsel for

the 2nd and the 3rd Petitioners made submissions and moved that he had

only little time to prepare and he wants to make submissions on the next

date. So time was granted till 30.03.2017. On that day also the counsel

made his submissions and moved for time till today to me necessary

information and documents before this Court. On perusing all the

documents relating to the incorporation filed by the Petitioners, the Court

was unable to understand the Company structure of the Petitioners.

I

rII

\

4

Therefore, the Court requested counsels for the 1st, 2nd and 3rd Petitioners

to submit the company structure chart identifying the structure and the

establishment of their company. This was asked in the light of the

objections raised by the learned Deputy Solicitor General and the Senior

President's Counsel who appeared for the 11th Respondent. Today, when

the matter is mentioned the counsel for the 1st Petitioner moves to

withdraw the application and made extensive submissions. The 2nd and

the 3rd Petitioners associated with the application of the 1 st Petitioner and

moved to withdraw the petition. The Senior Deputy Solicitor General

vehemently objecting to the withdrawal and submits that the petition per se

is bad in law. Therefore it should be dismissed in-limine. The President's

Counsel appearing for the 11 th Respondent says that this involved in

professional hours of preparation. Therefore he moves substantial cost be

awarded for the 11 th Respondent.

Considering the facts of this case this Court is required to answer the

question, namely, the legality of the entity named as the 1st Petitioner

namely, Perpetual Treasuries (Pvt.) Limited. In the course of the

submissions made by the counsel for the 1 st 2nd and 3rd Petitioners and it

was found that there is a incorporation certificate fIled before the Court.

According to the incorporation certificate of the 1 st Petitioner which has

been marked as PIB bearing a registration No. PB 88550, on 15.01.2013,

the company called Perpetual Treasuries (Pvt.) Limited has changed it's

name to Perpetual Treasuries Limited. Perpetual Treasuries (Pvt.) Limited

was a Private Limited Liability Company. Perpetual Treasuries Limited is a

Public Limited Liability Company. In accordance with the Companies Act,

07 of 2007 the Company is incorporated as Perpetual Treasuries Limited.

As per our understanding that, this company is known since then as

! [ !

I

\

[

i

~ I I ! ! III IIf t I!IIf !

l

5

Perpetual Treasuries Limited, as per the law. We find that the proxy which

was flled on 08.02.2017 bears the name of Perpetual Treasuries (Pvt.)

Limited signed by two persons as Directors. No names are mentioned. But

the National Identity Card of two people have been mentioned. The 1st

! I

Director bearing National Identity Card No.5882552398V and the 2nd

Director bearing a National Identity Card NO.723013321V. Both Directors I

have signed on behalf of Perpetual Treasuries (Pvt.) Limited. The Court

finds a rubber stamp on the proxy. The rubber stamp may be a Company

seal. It says Perpetual Treasuries Limited bearing a number PB 88550

which corresponds with P1B, the Incorporation Certificate. Regarding the

2nd and the 3rd Petitioners there are two proxies flled that will be dealt little

later.

Now the question, the learned Deputy Solicitor General raises is, that

there is no company called Perpetual Treasuries (Pvt.) Limited. Hence the

person purportedly appearing before this Court to make an application has

no legal existence. Therefore, he moves that the petition be dismissed, as

such application is a nullity. Now the next question is about the 2nd and

the 3rd Petitioners. Again the documents are not sufficient for the Court to

decide whether they were existing or non existing entities. It is

questionable. Submissions of the Counsel for the 2nd and the 3rd Petitioners

does not help the Court to come to a conclusion. The counsel for the

Respondents submit that there is no 1st petition in existence. Therefore,

this case cannot be maintained, taking up an objection, that this cannot be

maintained. Therefore it is now a question of maintainability. Considering

the papers before us and the judicial hours taken in support of this

application and preparing the briefs by the Court, the Court is compelled to

make a decision. The President's Counsel for the 1st Petitioner submits that

II

! I

~ I IIItI

f

I

t

6

he has flied a petition, therefore he is entitled to withdraw it at any time.

The question of substantive issues cannot be gone through or looked into

at the preliminary stage. The 2nd and the 3rd Petitioners also associate

themselves with the same submission.

The learned Deputy Solicitor General submits that in this matter,

1

since there is no Petitioner existing in law, the Court cannot entertain an

application. Further, hypothetically the counsel for the Respondents

submit that if the cost is ordered who is going to pay the cost. Because

there is non-existent person is before the Court. The Senior President's

Counsel for the 1st Petitioner submits that the Attorney on record is a very

senior person and with high integrity will take the responsibility of paying

the cost. The next questions before the Court are;

1. Can the Court allow the application to be withdrawn at this stage?

2. If the Court decides to impose a cost, is it entitled to do so?

This question appears to be an academic question and there is a practical

issue also involved. Commonly there are two types of people come before

Court. On is direct, the litigant by himself. The other, person comes

through Attorney-at-Law commonly known as instructing Attorney. When a

person comes direct the Court takes steps to fmd out the identity of such

person and proceed with the matter. When a person comes through the

instructing Attorney the Court place reliance on the Attorney and proceeds

with the papers. Court expects the Attorney to check and verify the identity

of the person who is before him. It is the professional duty of the Attorney

who is an officer of Court. Time and again our Courts confirmed this view.

This does not mean that the Attorney cannot appear for all persons. He has

a professional right to appear for any person but at his duty to identity and

introduce the correct person to the Court. This is applicable to both natural

1I

I! I t I

1, I! ! IIlII l

f

7

and justice persons. The lawyer has to satisfy himself before he represents

the person in Court.

Considering the objections raised by the learned Deputy Solicitor

General, the Court is compelled to come to a decision. The Court at this

juncture finds there is no valid answer on behalf of the 1 st Petitioner who is

coming in the name of a Company which had ceased to exist somewhere in

2013. And further confusion is added in the proxy, the name was given as

Perpetual Treasuries (Pvt.) Limited and a bearing a company seal of

Perpetual Treasuries Limited. The proxy is signed by two unnamed

Directors on behalf of Perpetual Treasuries (Pvt.) Limited. The Court

anticipates and expects more responsible attendance by the Instructing

Attorneys.

Considering all documents available and which were in length

discussed in the arguments, the Court decides not to issue notice. The

application stands dismissed.

Since the 1 st Petitioner's existence is not proved by documents and

there is an undertaking by the Counsel on record to pay the cost, the 1st,

2nd and 3rd Petitioners are ordered to pay the cost as below stated. The

Court wishes to place it on record that this does not mean, recognizing

these persons are in existence. This is only for the purpose of awarding the

cost. Respondents are requested to submit the assessment of legal cost

including the professional charges to the Court and the cost will be paid

accordingly, namely to the Senior Deputy Solicitor General who is

appearing for the 1st to the 10th Respondents and 12th and 13th

Respondents. And a special order is given regarding the Senior President's

Counsel who is appearing for the 11th Respondent who can submit a

separate claim.

8

Issuance of notice is refused.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

P.R.Walgama, J.

I agree.

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Lwmj=

t I t I ! t I,