IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

1. Rizleigh Bertram Grand,

2. Needra Grand of

No.A1, Tayer Motores,

P.O. Box 7310,

Dubai.

Appearing by Power of Attorney

Holder Indrani Ursula Grand of

No.31/43B,

Balagalawatta Road,

Hendala, Wattala.

Petitioners

CA CASE NO: CA/RI/6/2016

HC GAMPAHA CASE NO: WP/HCCA/GPH/217/2003(F)

DC NEGOMBO CASE NO: 4904/L

Vs.

1. Portia Kekulawala of No.491,

Mosko Street, San Francisco,

Uniterd States of America

(Present address Nore Street,

No.363, Apartment House, No.31,

California) appearing by her

2

Power of Attorney Holder Anthony

Osmand Dushantha Kekulawala

alias Anthony Dushantha

Kekulawala, No. 20,

Turner Road, Colombo 8.

Plaintiff-Appellant-Respondent

2. Suranganee Kolonne nee Mary

Thiris Suranganee Sumithra Devi

Kakulawala,

No.72/19, Canel Road,

Hendala, Wattala.

Now at

No. 556/15,

Negombo Road,

Kapuwatta, Jaela.

Defendant-Respondent-

Respondent

3. Pradeetha Thilakaratne,

No. 428/5A,

Kandaiyaddapaluwa.

Respondent

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Jacob Joseph for the Petitioner.

Dr. Sunil Cooray for the Respondents.

(No written submissions were filed on behalf

of the Respondents.)

Decided on: 24.06.2019

3

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The petitioners have filed this application for restitutio in

integrum seeking in the prayer to the amended petition dated

14.06.2016 (a) to set aside the Judgment of the Civil Appeal

High Court of Gampaha dated 14.05.2009, the decree entered

thereon by the District Court, ejectment of them in execution of

the said decree; and (b) to grant restitutio in integrum and restore

the petitioners in possession.

This application of the petitioner in my view cannot be

maintained on two threshold grounds.

The first one is that, restitutio in integrum or restitution, as its

name implies, requires that the party be restored to its former

position. The application for restitutio in integrum can only be

filed by a party to the action, and it is not available to a third

party, such as the petitioners in this application. (Vide Perera v.

Wijewickreme (1912) 15 NLR 411, Menchinahamy v. Muniweera

(1950) 52 NLR 409, Dissanayake v. Elisinahamy [1978/79] 2 Sri

LR 118, Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation Ltd v. Shanmugam

[1995] 1 Sri LR 55, Fathima v. Mohideen [1998] 3 Sri LR 294 at

300, Velun Singho v. Suppiah [2007] 1 Sri LR 370)

The history of the application is concisely as follows: The

plaintiff-respondent filed the land action against the defendant-

respondent in the District Court. The District Court held with

the defendant-respondent. This was revered by the Civil Appeal

High Court in appeal. The defendant-respondent did not prefer

an appeal against the Judgment of the High Court. In the

meantime, the defendant-respondent sold the land to the

4

petitioners by two deeds. With the strength of that Appeal

Judgment decree was entered and the petitioners were ejected.

The main relief of the petitioners is to set aside the Judgment of

the Civil Appeal High Court. This Court has no jurisdiction to

set aside the Judgement of the Civil Appeal High Court and only

the Supreme Court has jurisdiction to do it. Let me now explain

it.

According to Article 154P to the Constitution introduced by the

13th Amendment, there shall be a High Court for each Province.

The High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No.19 of

1990, made provisions regarding the procedure to be followed in,

and the right to appeal to and from, such High Court, and for

matters connected therewith. By this Act, the High Courts of

the Provinces were given original criminal jurisdiction as well as

appellate jurisdiction basically against the Judgments and

Orders of the Magistrates Courts, Primary Courts and Labour

Tribunals of the relevant Provinces.

By the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provinces)

(Amendment) Act No. 54 of 2006, sections 5A, 5B and 5C were

introduced to the aforesaid Principal Act No. 19 of 1990. This

was done to confer appellate and revisionary jurisdiction to the

said Provincial High Courts against the Judgments and Orders

of the District Courts of the relevant Provinces. Those High

Courts, although it is a misnomer, are conveniently known as

High Courts of Civil Appeal.

5

After the said amendment by Act No. 54 of 2006, section 5A of

the Principal Act No.19 of 1990 (without the proviso) reads as

follows:

5A(1) A High Court established by Article 154P of the

Constitution for a Province, shall have and exercise appellate and

revisionary jurisdiction in respect of judgments, decrees and

orders delivered and made by any District Court or a Family

Court within such Province and the appellate jurisdiction for the

correction of all errors in fact or in law, which shall be committed

by any such District Court or Family Court, as the case may be.

(2) The provisions of sections 23 to 27 of the Judicature Act, No. 2

of 1978 and sections 753 to 760 and sections 765 to 777 of the

Civil Procedure Code (Chapter 101) and of any written law

applicable to the exercise of the jurisdiction referred to in

subsection (1) by the Court of Appeal, shall be read and construed

as including a reference to a High Court established by Article

154P of the Constitution for a Province and any person aggrieved

by any judgment, decree or order of a District Court or a Family

Court, as the case may be, within a Province, may invoke the

jurisdiction referred to in that subsection, in the High Court

established for that Province:

According to section 5A(2), the procedure to be adopted in the

High Court of Civil Appeal is the same procedure which is being

adopted in the Court of Appeal.

Section 5C deals with the subject of appeals from the

Judgments and Orders of the High Court of Civil Appeal.

According to this section, there is only one direct appeal to the

6

Supreme Court, with leave obtained, against the Judgments and

Orders of the High Court of Civil Appeal. That section reads as

follows:

5C (1) An appeal shall lie directly to the Supreme Court from any

judgment, decree or order pronounced or entered by a High Court

established by Article 154P of the Constitution in the exercise of

its jurisdiction granted by section 5A of this Act, with leave of the

Supreme Court first had and obtained. The leave requested for

shall be granted by the Supreme Court, where in its opinion the

matter involves a substantial question of law or is a matter fit for

review by such Court.

(2) The Supreme Court may exercise all or any of the powers

granted to it by paragraph (2) of Article 127 of the Constitution, in

regard to any appeal made to the Supreme Court under

subsection (1) of this section.

The learned counsel for the petitioner will accept that a party

cannot by way of a final appeal come before this Court against

the Judgment or Order of the High Court of Civil Appeal. But

the argument of the learned counsel seems to be that,

nevertheless, a party can come before this Court against the

Judgment or Order of the High Court of Civil Appeal by way of

revision and/or restitutio in integrum in terms of Article 138 of

the Constitution.

If that argument is accepted, section 5C becomes meaningless,

and the intention of the legislature will blatantly be defeated, as

any party dissatisfied with any Judgment or Order of the High

Court of Civil Appeal can come before this Court by way of

7

revision and/or restitutio in integrum. Then the party

dissatisfied with the Judgment or Order of the District Court will

have three appealsfirst to the High Court of Civil Appeal,

second to the Court of Appeal, and third to the Supreme Court.

That was obviously never the intention of the legislature. One of

the main objectives of setting up High Courts of Civil Appeal is

to curb laws delays in civil litigation and not to expand it.

Article 138(1) of the Constitution (without the proviso) reads as

follows:

The Court of Appeal shall have and exercise subject to the

provisions of the Constitution or of any law, an appellate

jurisdiction for the correction of all errors in fact or in law which

shall be committed by the High Court, in the exercise of its

appellate or original jurisdiction or by any court of First Instance,

tribunal or other institution and sole and exclusive cognizance, by

way of appeal, revision and restitutio in integrum, of all causes,

suits, actions, prosecutions, matters and things of which such

High Court, Court of First Instance, tribunal or other institution

may have taken cognizance:

It is significant to note that Article 138 does not confer

unrestricted, unfettered, absolute power for revision and

restitutio in integrum on the Court of Appeal against Judgments

and Orders of the High Courts. If I may repeat, it says: The

Court of Appeal shall have and exercise subject to the provisions

of the Constitution or of any law, an appellate jurisdiction..

Any law encompasses the laws introduced by Act Nos. 19 of

1990 and 54 of 2006.

8

The question whether the Court of Appeal has jurisdiction to sit

on Judgments and Orders made by the High Courts of Civil

Appeal was particularly dealt with by Justice Salam (with

Justice Rajapaksha agreeing) in the Court of Appeal case of

Stephan Gunaratne v. Thushara Indika Sampath [CA (PHC) APN

54/2013 (REV)] decided on 23.09.2013.

That is a case where the plaintiff-petitioner in a partition action

came before this Court by way of revision against the Judgment

of the High Court of Civil Appeal at Ratnapura. Dismissing the

application in limine without issuing notice, Justice Salam

stated:

The question that now arises for consideration is whether the

Court of Appeal can exercise its revisionary powers under Article

138 of the Constitution in respect of a judgment of the High Court

pronounced under the Provisions of Act No 54 of 2006 when the

proper remedy is to appeal to the Supreme Court. Appreciably,

Section 5A of Act No 54 of 2006 quite specifically states that all

relevant written laws applicable to an appeal, in the Court of

Appeal are applicable to the High Court as well. This undoubtedly

demonstrates beyond any iota of doubt that the scheme provided

by Act No 54 of 2006 to facilitate an appeal being heard by the

Provincial High Court is nothing but a clear transfer of jurisdiction

and in effect could be said that as far as appeals are concerned

both the High Court and the Court of Appeal rank equally and are

placed on par with each other. Arising from this statement of law,

it must be understood that if the Court of Appeal cannot act in

revision in respect of a judgment it pronounces in a civil appeal,

then it cannot sit in revision over a judgment entered by the High

9

Court in the exercise of its civil appellate jurisdiction as well, for

both courts are to be equally ranked when they exercise civil

appellate jurisdiction.

Hence I hold that the Court of Appeal has no appellate

jurisdiction to set aside Judgments or Orders of the High Court

of Civil Appeal by way of final appeal, revision or restitutio in

intergrum. That is vested exclusively in the Supreme Court.

Application of the petitioner is dismissed without going into the

merits. No costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal