IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

CIA Application No. 846/97 F

D.C. Kegalle 21022/P

1

Hapan Pedige Piyatilleke

Pallegama

Deewala.

Substituted Plaintiff-AppellalJt

Vs

H. Nelie Enert

Rangallehena

Pallegama

Deewala.

1 A Defendant-Respondent

And 11 others

Respondents

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

DECIDED ON

Deepali Wijesundera J.

: Deepali Wijesundera J.

M.M.A. Gaffoor J.

: S.A.D.S. Suraweera for the

Substituted Plaintiff-Appellant

D.M.G. Dissanayake with

B.C. Balasooriya for the 4A,

9A and 12th Defendant-

Respondents.

: 25th March, 2015

: 20th November, 2015

The plaintiff appellant instituted a partition case in the District

Court of Kegalle against the defendant respondents to partition the land

described in the schedule to the plaint. The corpus shown in the

preliminary plan was admitted by both parties. The two original owners

Wattuwa and Kirisaduwa was also admitted by both parties the contest

was the devolution of title of the said original owners.

According to the defendant respondent's pedigree Wattuwa who

had Y:z share of the property had three children by the mames of Hapie

2

Salelu and Menika rights of Kirisaduwa the defendant respondent

claimed from deeds marked as 4V1 to 4V5.

According to the plaintiff appellant's pedigree Wattuwa had only

two children and Hapie was not one of Wattuwa's children and

Wattuwa's % share devolved on Salelu and Menika.

The only contest at the District Court trial had been limited in the

said fact. The learned District Judge accepted the pedigree of the

defendant respondents and made order to partition the land on the basis

that the % share of Wattuwa had devolved around three children instead

of two as claimed by the plaintiff appellant, placing his reliance on the

deed marked as 401.

The learned counsel for the plaintiff appellant stated in his

argument that there is no description of the land with its boundaries and

that the extent of the land described in the said deed differs in extent

from the land sought to be partitioned. He further submitted that the only

fact considered by the District Judge when arriving at his finding that

Hapie was a child of Wattuwa is the statement contained in the said

deed 104 and no other evidence had been considered by him.

3

The appellant stated that the said deed does not state paternal

inheritance but simply states through inheritance, hence the deed has to

be considered with other evidence specially the evidence of the 9th

defendant who raised the contest as to the pedigree. Referring to the

evidence of the 9th defendant respondent the plaintiff appellant's

counsel stated that Hapie was a child of Kirisaduwa and not of Wattuwa

according to the evidence of 9th defendant respondent. The plaintiff

appellant stated that the findings of the learned District Judge as to the

heirs of Wattuwa are erroneous and not sustainable in law or in fact and

should be set aside.

The learned counsel for the defendants submitted that the learned

District Judge has carefully examined the rights of the parties based on

the title deeds and evidence placed before court. He further stated deed

marked as 4V1 attested in 1861 which was strongly contested by the

plaintiff appellant which has not been registered had been referred to in

the subsequent deeds which fact the District Judge has considered and

analysed the evidence given is support of the same.

The learned District Judge has observed the demeanor of the

witnesses when giving evidence and has also analysed the evidence

placed before him before arriving at his findings. The contested deed

4

1V4 has been carefully considered in his judgment and this deed was

referred to in the subsequent deeds. The plaintiff appellant has

suggested to the defendants witness that the corpus is something else

but this is not correct since they have admitted the corpus at the

beginning of the trail in the District Court.

On perusal of the submissions made and the documents and the

learned District Judge's judgment I find that there is no merit in this

appeal. The appeal of the plaintiff appellant is dismissed with cost fixed

at Rs. 10,0001=.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

M.M.A. Gaffoor J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

5