J~==============================================~

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

C.A.(PHC)Appeal No. 48/2014

.J

In the matter of an ApEeal under

Article 154(P)(3) of the Constitution

of the Democratic Socialist Republic

of Sri Lanka read with Section 11 of

the High Court of the Provinces

(Special Provisions) Act No. 1990.

P.H.C. Kandy Case No. 0l/2013(Rev)

M.C. Case No. 53280/12

Commissioner of Local Government

Provincial Department of Local

Government - Central Province

Secretariat Building,

Kandy.

Applicant -Respondent-

Appellant

Vs.

Matiwala Kumbure Rajapakshe

Gedara Chandrasena,

No.09B, Malpana,

Kengalla.

Respondent-Petitioner-Respondent

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

DECICED ON

JANAK DE SILVA,J. & ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

Ranga Dayananda for the Respondent-

Petitioner-Appellant

H.P.Nimal Jayasinghe with Situ

Bandara Ratnayake for the Respondent-

Petitioner-Respondent.

23rd October 2018

16th January, 2019

*************

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

The Applicant-Respondent-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

"Appellant") invokes appellate jurisdiction of this Court seeking to set

aside an order of the Provincial High Court of the Central Province holden

in Kandy in revising an order of ejectment issued by the Magistrate's

Court of Kandy against the Respondent-Petitioner-Respondent

(hereinafter referred to as the "Respondent").

2

In making an application under Section 5 of the State Lands

(Recovery of Possession) Act No. 7 of 1979 as amended (hereinafter

referred to as the said "Act"), the Appellant has sought an order of

ejectment against the Respondent from the State land described in the

schedule to the said application.

The Respondent, in his show cause, has set up a prescriptive title to

the State land claiming possession over a period of fifty years. It is also

claimed by the Respondent that after their acquisition of prescriptive title,

previous owners of this property have transferred their rights over it to the

District Development Cemncil of Kandy by deed No. 1144, executed by

Notary Keppetipola on 28.08.1985.

After considering the position placed by the Respondent in his show

cause before it, the Magistrate's Court made order ejecting him from the

disputed State land since the Respondent has failed to satisfy him that he

has a "valid permit or other written authority of the State granted in

accordance with any written law and that permit or authority is in force

and not revoked or otherwise rendered invalid" as per Section 9(1) of the

State Lands (RecQvery of Possession) Act No.9 of 1979, issued an order of

eviction on 06.12.2012.

The Respondent moved in revision of the said order of ejectment

before the Provincial High Court. After an inquiry, it had set aside the

order of ejectment having observed that the impugned order of the lower

Court was issued based on the failure of the Respondent to produce a

valid permit or any other written authority authorising him to be in

possession of the said State land.

3

The Provincial High Court revised the said order of ejectment on the

basis that the Respondent has clearly established the fact that he was in

possession of the disputed land over 50 years and as per the judgment of

Senanayake v Damunupola (1982) 2 Sri L.R. 621in such a situation a

competent authority should not repossess a land placing reliance on the

provisions of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act. In addition, it

had relied on the unreported judgment of SC Appeal No. 138/96.

Being aggrieved by the said order of the Provincial High Court, the

Appellant lodged an appeal challenging its validity on the basis that it had

failed to properly apply legal provisions in the State Lands (Recovery of

Possession) Act.

In support of their ground of appeal, the Appellant contended that

Section 9 of the said Act places a limitation on the Magistrate's Court as to

the scope of the inquiry it should conduct when an application is made for

an order of ejectment. The Appellant relied on the judgments of

Muhandiram v Chairman, JEDB (1992) 1 Sri L.R. 110 and Nirmal Paper

Converters (Pvt) Ltd., v Sri Lanka Ports Authority (1982) 2 Sri L.R. 621

where it has been held that the only ground on which the Respondent in

an application of an order of ejectment is entitled to remain in the land, as

per the statutory provisions of Section 9(1) of the said Act, is to establish

that he is in possession or occupation upon a valid permit or other written

authority of the State granted according to the written law.

The Supreme Court in its judgment of Divisional Secretary of

Kalutara & Others Vs. Jayatissa SC Appeal Nos. 246 to 249 and 250 of

2014 - decided on 04.08.2017 where one of the questions that arose for

4

t

determination by their Lordships was" Has the Court of Appeal erred in law

by holding that the Competent Authority is required to prove whether the State

land was vested in the Government as acquired when section 9(2) of the State

Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act specifically precludes the Magistrate from

calling evidence from the Competent Authority to support the application for

ejectment ?",

After an analysis of the statutory provisions and judicial precedents,

the said question of law was answered by the apex Court by holding that

"The Court of Appeal erred in law by holding that the Competent

Authority is required to :prove that the land was vested in the Government

or acquired, in terms of Section 9 (2) of the State Lands (Recover of

Possession) Act."

The said judgment also considered the situation where it is alleged

that "the right or title of the State of the disputed land is doubtful" in

relation to the provisions of the said Act. Their Lordships have concluded

that even if it is the case, the provisions of the said Act "provides a remedy

to a legitimate owner to vindicate his rights by filing an action in the

District Court in terms of Section 12 of the Act and in terms of Section 13,

the State becomes liable to pay damages if it is established that the

property in issue does not belong to the State" and added that "The Court

of Appeal misdirected itself in holding that the title of the State is doubtful

when the ownership is beyond the scope of a Magisterial inquiry under

the provisions of the Act."

Thus, it is clear that the Provincial High Court had fallen in to grave

error when it considered the question of title in relation to an mqUIry

5

under Section 9(1) of the State Lands (Recover of Possession) Act and

decided to exercise its revisionary powers over a legally valid order of

ejectment.

In consideration of the above, we set aside the order of the

Provincial High Court dated 27.06.2014 by allowing the appeal of the

Appellant.

Parties will bear their costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JANAK DE SILVA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

6