1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for mandates in the nature of Writs of Certiorari and Mandamus under and in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

CA (Writ) Application No: 8/2020

Paramathasan Petson Mathews, 81, Annai Illam Road, Uppukulam North, Mannar.

PETITIONER

Vs. 1. University Grants Commission, No. 20, Ward Place, Colombo 7.

2. Additional Secretary, University Admissions, University Grants Commission, No. 20, Ward Place, Colombo 7.

3. Jawahir Fathima Rizafa, Karampai, Ulukkapallam, Kalpitiya.

4. Hansima Balasuriya, Boderagama, Dankotuwa, Wennappuwa.

5. H.A. Muhuththar, Principal, Ulukkapallam Muslim Maha Vidyalayam, Karampai, Kalpitiya, Puttalam.

6. Thanapalasingham Thaneswaran, Principal, Sithy Vinayakar Hindu College, Pallimunai Road, Mannar.

2

7. Professor K.M. De Silva, Chancellor, University of Peradeniya, Peradeniya. 8. Secretary, Ministry of Education, Isurupaya, Battaramulla. 9. Commissioner General of Examinations, Isurupaya, Battaramulla.

RESPONDENTS Before: Arjuna Obeyesekere, J / President of the Court of Appeal Mayadunne Corea, J Counsel: Rienzie Arseculeratne, P.C., with Ms. Chamindri Arseculeratne, Thejitha Koralage, Namal Karunaratne, Udaara Muhandiramge, Ganesham Premkumar, Thilina Punchihewa, Dilinthi Rodrigo and Angeline Moraes for the Petitioner

Ms. Nayomi Kahawita, Senior State Counsel for the 1st, 2nd, 6th, 7th and 9th Respondents Dr. U.L. Ali Zacky with A.L. Aazath, M.I.M. Riyaz and M.R.A.Haleem for the 3rd Respondent Argued on: 23rd February 2021 Written Tendered on behalf of the Petitioner on 30th March 2021 Submissions:

Tendered on behalf of the 1st, 2nd, 6th, 7th and 9th Respondents on 3rd May 2021 Tendered on behalf of the 3rd Respondent on 16th April 2021 Decided on: 21st May 2021

3

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J., P/CA

The Petitioner is currently following the course of study leading to the degree of

Bachelor of Dental Surgery at the Faculty of Dental Sciences, University of

Peradeniya.

The Petitioner had his entire primary and secondary education at St Xaviers Boys

School, Mannar. The Petitioner states that he obtained A grades in all nine subjects

that he offered at the General Certificate of Education [Ordinary Level] Examination

(O levels) held in December 2013. He had thereafter offered Physics, Chemistry and

Biology for the General Certificate of Education [Advanced Level] examination (A

levels) with a view of pursuing the study of medicine.

The Petitioner had sat for the A levels for the first time in August 2016 and had

repeated the exam in August 2017, while being a student at St Xaviers Boys School,

Mannar. The Petitioner admits that he did not have sufficient marks to enter the

Medical Faculty of a University on both occasions and that he declined the offer

made by the 1st Respondent, the University Grants Commission to pursue a degree

course in Agriculture.

The Petitioner states that having left St Xaviers Boys School, Mannar, he sat for the

A levels for the third time in August 2018 as a private candidate from the Mannar

District, and secured A grades for Chemistry and Biology and a C grade for Physics.

The Petitioner had obtained a Z score of 1.5781 and had been ranked 5th in the

Mannar District in the Biological Science Stream vide P5. The Z score of the

Petitioner had subsequently been reduced to 1.5779 as a result of re-scrutiny in the

marks of other candidates, but this had not affected the Petitioners ranking within

the Mannar District. The Petitioner states that he accordingly applied for admission

to University, having selected medicine as his first preference and dentistry as his

second preference.

The Petitioner states that on or around 19th March 2019, he found out that the 3rd

Respondent, Jawahir Fathima Rizafa, who had sat for the A level examination in

August 2018 for the third time as a private student from the Puttalam district had

secured entry to the Medical Faculty from the Mannar district, and that as a result,

4

the Petitioner would not gain entry into the Medical Faculty from the Mannar

District. By his letter dated 19th March 2019 marked P8a, the Petitioner had queried

from the 1st Respondent the basis on which the 3rd Respondent, who had sat for the

examination in August 2018 from the Puttalam District, was being considered for

University admission as a student of the Mannar district.

This would perhaps be a convenient point to set out briefly the relationship that the

3rd Respondent has with Puttalam and Mannar, prior to considering the response of

the 1st Respondent.

The parents of the 3rd Respondent, as well as her grandparents were born in Mannar

and had been residents of Mannar.1 The parents of the 3rd Respondent had been

displaced from Mannar by the LTTE in 1990. They had taken up refuge in a

Government managed centre in Puttalam soon thereafter and had continued to live

in different centres managed by the Government for a period of over ten years. The

3rd Respondent was born during this period in 1997 in Puttalam. It is admitted that

the 3rd Respondent had her schooling in Puttalam at the Ulukkapalam Muslim Maha

Vidayalayam until the O level examination in December 2013, which she

successfully completed, having secured 7 A grade passes.

In her Statement of Objections, the 3rd Respondent has explained that after the LTTE

was defeated, her parents had decided to move back to their home town Mannar

step by step. Her father had initially made an application to the Divisional Secretary,

Manthai West on 13th August 2011 seeking that a land be made available. This

application had been acknowledged by the Divisional Secretary. By letter dated 7th

May 2013 marked 3R5, her father had been summoned to attend a Land Kachcheri

that was being held for the purpose of selecting displaced persons for allocation of

land in Mannar.

The learned Senior State Counsel has submitted in her written submissions that

Ulukkapalam Muslim Maha Vidayalayam in Puttalam did not have an A level

Biological Science stream, thus creating a necessity for the 3rd Respondent to look for

a Government School offering the Science stream.

1 Vide Birth Certificate of the father of the 3rd Respondent, marked 3R2, and the Birth Certificate of the mother of the 3rd Respondent, marked 3R3

5

The 3rd Respondent states that it was her fathers brother who had sought admission

for the 3rd Respondent at the Sithy Vinayakar Hindu College by his letter dated 20th

April 2014 marked 3R6, which reads as follows:

My family left Mannar on 25th October 1990 when all the Muslims in the North

were forcibly evicted from their residencies by the LTTE. After that we settled in

Puttalam. As this situation has changed and now the resettlement situation has

arisen we have come to Mannar to resettle on our own village Vidathalthivu.

Therefore I request that my niece Fathima Rizafa who is studying in Puttalam,

be given the opportunity and permission on humanitarian grounds to study at

Sithy Vinayakar School.

In May 2014, the family of the 3rd Respondent had moved to Mannar. The 3rd

Respondent claims that her parents still cultivate their family paddy fields and that as

evidenced by the following documents, her family is permanently resident in

Mannar:

a) Food ration card - 3R9

b) Family registration Card issued in 2010 - 3R10

c) Family registration Card issued in 2019 - 3R11

d) Family details and Resettlement card 3R12

e) Samurdhi card issued in 2013- 3R13

f) Sipdora Educational Scholarship awarded to the 3rd Respondent for 2014 2016

- 3R14.

The 3rd Respondent had joined the A level Biological Science stream of the Sithy

Vinayakar Hindu College, Mannar in May 2014, where she continued with her

studies, offering the subjects of Physics, Chemistry and Biology. By letter dated 25th

November 2019 marked P20b, the 6th Respondent, the Principal of Sithy Vinayakar

Hindu College, Mannar has confirmed that the 3rd Respondent was educated at the

6

said School and had forwarded copies of the Student Admission Record, Attendance

Record for 2014 2016 and the Marks / Reports of the 3rd Respondent.

The 3rd Respondent had sat for the A level examination held in August 2016 and

August 2017 from the Mannar district, and had obtained a Z score of 1.2981 and

1.2889, respectively. Having left school in Mannar, the 3rd Respondent had sat for the

A level examination held in August 2018 as a private candidate from the Puttalam

district. The 3rd Respondent had obtained a Z score of 1.7899 vide 3R17.

Let me now refer to the response of the 1st Respondent to the query of the

Petitioner of the basis on which the 3rd Respondent was being considered as a

student who had qualified for University admission from the Mannar district.

The 1st Respondent, by letter dated 30th May 2019 marked P8b had informed the

Petitioner as follows:

It should be noted that the admission district of a candidate may not be the

same as the exam district of that particular candidate, as the admission district

is determined based on the admission rules stated in the University Admissions

Handbook published by the UGC valid for the relevant Academic Year.

The admission district of candidates is determined based on the evidence

provided in the application on the schooling period of the candidate during the

past three years (The three year period considered for the Academic Year

2018/2019 is from 01st August 2015 to 31st July 2018). The district of the school

in which the candidate has studied for more than one year during the three

year period considered, is taken as the admission district of the candidate. If

the candidate has studied in more than one school during the three year period

considered, the district of the school in which the candidate has studied most

number of dates is considered as the admission district. (However, that period

should compulsorily be more than one year).

In cases where the schooling period of the candidate from any district is lesser

than one year or the candidate has not enrolled in any school during the three

year period considered, the candidates district of permanent place of residence

7

is considered as the admission district. In order to confirm the district in such

cases, the candidate should submit the original of the School Leaving Certificate

and the original of the Grama Niladhari Certificate (counter signed by the

Divisional Secretary with the official)

I must observe at this stage that the above position has been clearly laid down in

paragraph 1.5 of the University Admission Handbook marked 1R1 issued by the 1st

Respondent for the year 2018-2019,2 and has been admitted by the Petitioner.3

Paragraph 1.5, as is relevant to this application, is re-produced below:

In order to decide the district of a candidate for university admission, the

candidate must provide evidence of enrolment in schools for a period of last

three years in his/her application form for university admission.

The three year period is calculated backwards from the last date of the month,

which is the month, immediately preceding the month in which the candidate

sat the Advanced level examination to qualify for university admission. For

example, if the advanced level examination is held in August, the three year is

calculated backwards from 31st July of that year

Accordingly, the district of the school of which the candidate has studied more

than one year during the three year period considered, will be considered as

the district of the candidate for university admission.

If the candidate has enrolled in more than one school during the said three year

period, then, the district of the school of which the candidate has studied most

number of dates is considered as the district of that candidate for the purposes

of university admission. However, that duration should be compulsorily more

than one year. For example, a candidate has studied in a school located in a

district for one year and three months and the remaining one year and nine

months in a school located in another district, then the district of the school in

which the candidate has studied for one year and nine months will be the

district for the purpose of university admission

2 Page 10 of 1R1 containing paragraph 1.5 has been marked P9. 3 Vide paragraph 14 of the petition.

8

What was important therefore from the view point of the 1st Respondent was to

determine if the 3rd Respondent had studied in a school in Mannar during the three

year period preceding 1st August 2018, and if so, whether such period exceeded one

year. According to the School leaving certificate issued to the 3rd Respondent marked

3R20, the Petitioner has been admitted to the Sithy Vinayakar Hindu College,

Mannar on 5th May 2014, and attended the said school until she left on 2nd

September 2017. The School Attendance records marked 6R1 confirms that the 3rd

Respondent has in fact attended the Sithy Vinayakar Hindu College, Mannar during

the period referred to in 3R20.

Therefore, out of the three year period that is relevant for purposes of determining

the admission district i.e. 1st August 2015 to 31st July 2018 the 3rd Respondent

had attended a school in Mannar for a period of Two years and One month i.e. the

period from 1st August 2015 to 2nd September 2017. The 3rd Respondent is therefore

eligible to be selected for University admission from the Mannar district in terms of

paragraph 1.5 of the University Admissions Handbook.

While the Petitioner had filed an appeal with the 1st Respondent seeking a re-

consideration of the above decision as well as admission to a Medical Faculty vide

P10- the Petitioner admits that he was informed by the 1st Respondents letter

dated 16th August 2019 marked P11 that he has been selected for the degree

programme in Dental Surgery at the University of Peradeniya. The Petitioner states

that he accepted the said offer, subject to challenging the said decision in a Court of

Law.

The present grievance of the Petitioner arises this way. The Petitioner states that the

Ministry of Education has issued Circular No. 2008/17 dated 30th April 2008, marked

P15 relating to the admission of students to the A level class of a school for the

purpose of following classes leading to the A level examination. Circular P15 has

been amended on four occasions,4 with the amendment which the Petitioner claims

is material to this application being found in Circular No. 2013/4 dated 29th April

2013, marked P14. The Petitioners argument, which I shall refer to in detail having

examined the relevant provisions of the Circulars, is that in terms of the amendment

4 Vide Amendment Circular Nos. 2008/17(i) marked P15a; 2008/17(ii) marked P15b; 2012/14 marked P15c; and 2013/4 dated 29th April 2013 marked P14.

9

introduced to paragraph 4.1 of P15 by paragraph 3 of P14, the 3rd Respondent was

not eligible to be admitted to the Sithy Vinayakar Hindu College, Mannar in 2014,

and therefore Mannar cannot be considered as the admission district of the 3rd

Respondent for purposes of University admission. In other words, the Petitioner is

claiming that the admission of the 3rd Respondent to Sithy Vinayakar Hindu College,

Mannar is illegal and thereby her admission to a Medical Faculty as a student of

Mannar is illegal.

It is in these circumstances that the Petitioner filed this application seeking inter alia

the following relief:

a) A Writ of Certiorari to quash the decision made by the 6th Respondent on or

about 05th May 2014 contained in P20(d) admitting the 3rd Respondent as a

student of Sithy Vinayakar Hindu College, Mannar;

b) A Writ of Certiorari to quash the decision of the 1st and 2nd Respondents

admitting the 3rd Respondent to a Medical Faculty of a University for the

academic year 2018/2019 on the basis that the 3rd Respondent is a student

from Mannar District;

c) A Writ of Mandamus directing the 1st Respondent to admit the Petitioner to a

Medical Faculty of a University for the academic year 2018/2019 as a student

from Mannar District.

The Petitioner states that by virtue of having obtained a Z score of 1.7899, the 3rd

Respondent would still be entitled for admission to the Medical Faculty from the

Puttalam District, as her Z score is higher than the minimum Z score required to

enter the Medical Faculty from the Puttalam District. This would however not be the

case, for the reason that the 3rd Respondent would not qualify for admission from

the Puttalam District in view of paragraph 1.5 of 1R1. Even if the Petitioners

position is accepted, the Petitioner himself concedes that this would mean that the

4th Respondent, who has been selected from the Puttalam District to the Medical

Faculty, will lose his place.

10

In considering whether the admission of the 3rd Respondent to Sithy Vinayakar Hindu

College, Mannar was contrary to P15 and P14, I shall adopt a two tiered approach.

I shall first consider if the admission of the 3rd Respondent is in terms of P15, and

thereafter I shall consider if the position has changed as a result of the amendment

effected thereto by P14.

It is admitted that Circular P15, which is titled, wOHdmk fmdoq iy;sl (Wiia fm,) mka;s

j,g isiqka we;=,;a lsrSu has been issued by the Ministry of Education and reflects the

policy of the Government in respect of admission of students to the A level class of

a school for the purpose of following classes leading to the A level examination.

While the learned Presidents Counsel for the Petitioner is relying solely on the

amendment effected to Paragraph 4.1 of P15 by P14 to support his argument, I am

of the view that it is important that the provisions of P15 must be considered in its

entirety, thereby avoiding any inconsistencies within the scheme set out in the said

Circular.

There are four paragraphs in P15 which are relevant to this application, which are

re-produced below:

Paragraph 4.1

12 fYaqKshg isiqka we;=,;a lsrSfus m%uqL;dj

wOHdmk fmdoq iy;sl (Wiia fm,) (12 fYaKs) mka;s j,g isiqka we;=,;a lsrSu i|yd

f;dard .ekSfus m%uqL;dj my; oelafjk mrsos jsh hq;=h. w) tu mdif,a wfmalaIlhka f,i [idudkH fm,] jsNd.hg fmkS isgs isiqka (pl%f,aLfha

2.0 j.ka;sh hgf;a i|yka tla tla jsIh Odrdjg ;snsh hq;= wju iqoqiqlus imqrd

f.k Tjqka tu jsIhOdrdj b,a,qus l<fyd;a th wksjdrahfhka u ,ndosh hq;= h). wd) wOHdmk fmdoq iy;sl (Wiia fm,) mka;s fkdue;s rcfha mdi,aj, isiqka (cd;sl

mdi,lg isiqka we;=,;a lsrSfus os tu mdi, wh;a l,dmh ;=< Wiia fm< mka;s fkdue;s cd;sl mdi,a fkdjk mdi,aj,ska whoqus lrk isiqkag m%uqL;dj ,nd osh hq;= h). we) ms<s.; yels idOdrK fya;= bosrsm;a lrk jsIh Odrd ;sfnk fjk;a rcfha

mdi,aj, isiqka.

11

wE) wOHdmk fmdoq iy;sl (idudkH fm,) jsNd.hg iudka;r iqoqiqlus iys; m%;sM, ,nd

we;s (wmf.a jsIh ixfhdackj,g wkql+, jk mrsos) jsfoaY.; j isg meusfKk

isiqka (iy;slj, iudka;r Ndjh meyeos,s fkdjk jsg wud;HdxY f,alusf.a Wmfoia

wkqj lghq;= l< hq;= hs). b) wOHdmk fmdoq iy;sl (Wiia fm,) mka;s fkdue;s fyda wod< jsIhOdr fkdue;s

cd;sl jsIh ud,dj W.kajk fmDoa.,sl mdi,aj, isiqka. (wod< l,dm wOHdmk

wOHlaI u.ska b,a,qus l< hq;= h.)

Paragraph 4.2

by; i|yka m%uqL;d f,aLkfha by,ska we;s lreKqj,g wod<j b,a,qus lrk ,o isiqka

fkdue;s jQ jsg muKla B<. lreKq .ek i<ld ne,sh hq;= h. (Wod : by; 4.1 (w) ys

i|yka isiqka we;=<;a lsrSfuka miqj mqrmamdvq mj;sS kus muKla (wd) i,ld ne,sh hq;=

h. Paragraph 6

6.0 wOHdmk fmdoq iy;sl (Wiia fm,) yeoErSu i|yd myiqlus iys;

osia;s%lalj,ska oqIalr osia;s%lalj, mdi,aj,g meusKSu 6.1 jsYaj jsoHd, m%fjsYfha oS kus lr we;s oqIalr osia;s%lal i|yd5 ,nd oS we;s iykh

jxl f,i ,nd .ekSfus wruqKska myiqlus iys; osia;s%lalj,ska wOHdmk fmdoq iy;sl (iudkH fm<) iu;a jS oqIalr osia;s%lalh ;=< Wiia fm< mka;s iys;

mdi,aj,g we;=<;a jSug W;aidy lrk isiqkag bv ,nd fkdosh hq;= h.

6.2 tfy;a my; i|yka jsfYaIs; fya;= u; tjeks b,a,Sula bosrsm;a jqjfyd;a ta ms<sn|

i,ld ne,sh hq;af;a ,smsf,aLk bosrsm;a lr wod< lreKq ;yjqre lrkafkakus muKs. fus ms<sn|j i;H jYfhkau wod< m%foaYfha ;u mjqf,a idudcslhka iu. mosxps jS isgsk nj jsoqy,am;s jsiska mosxps ia:dkhg f.dia mrSlaId lr ikd; lr .; hq;= h:

w). rcfha wjYH;d u; foudmshkaf.a ia:dk udre fya;= fldg wd) wdrlaIl fya;=ka u;

5 See page 9 of 1R1 for the Districts that have been identified by the 1st Respondent as educationally disadvantaged districts for purposes of admission to a University.

12

Paragraph 9

9.1 wOHdmk fmdoq iy;sl (Wiia fm<) mka;shlg we;=<;ajQ YsIHfhla/ YsIHdjla

ms<s.; yels idOdrK fya;= bosrsm;a lrkafka kus muKla tla mdi,lska ;j;a mdi,lg we;=<;a jSug wkque;sh ,nd osh yels h. tfy;a osia;s%lalfhka fjk;a osia;s%lalhl mdi,lg we;=<;ajSug n,dfmdfr;a;= jkafka kus i;H jYfhkau mosxpsh fjkia l< yd 6.0 j.ka;sfha i|yka lreKqj,g mgyeks fkdjkafka o

hkak mrSlaId lr n,d wkque;sh ,nd osh hq;= h. fuys oS we;=<;ajSug n,dfmdfr;a;= jk mdif,a jsoqy,am;sf.a ksrafoaYh u; cd;sl mdi,la kus cd;sl mdi,a wOHdmk wOHlaIf.a o m<d;a mdi,la kus m<d;a wOHdmk wOHlaIf.a o wkque;sh foujsmshka jsiska ,nd .; hq;= h.

For purposes of University admission, the 1st Respondent has categorized sixteen

Districts as being educationally disadvantaged vide page 9 of the University

Admissions Handbook marked 1R1. 5% of the available places in each course of

study are reserved to be allocated to the students of these districts, with the

allocation being done on the ratio of the population of each such district to the total

population of the sixteen districts. It is admitted between the parties that in terms of

1R1, both Mannar and Puttalam have been classified as educationally

disadvantaged districts for purposes of University admission.

The cumulative effect of the provisions of paragraphs 4.1, 4.2, 6.0 and 9, as are

relevant to this application, can be summarised as follows:

a) Paragraph 4.1 only deals with the priority that must be attached when

admitting students to an A level class of a school;

b) In admitting students to the A level class of a particular school, priority must

be given to students who have sat for the O level examination from that

School vide paragraph 4.1(a);

c) Thereafter, priority must be given to students from Government schools which

do not offer the A level stream vide paragraph 4.1(b);

d) The next in order of priority are students in Government schools where

satisfactory reasons for admission have been adduced, even though the existing

school offers the A level stream vide paragraph 4.1(c);

13

e) Having followed paragraph 4.1, if there are any vacancies remaining, such

vacancies may be filled from the next category vide paragraph 4.2;

f) It is therefore clear that Paragraph 4.1 of P15 only determines the priority

that must be attached when admitting students to an A level class.

g) A student studying in a school situated in a district classified as a privileged

district for purposes of University admission (myiqlus iys; osia;s%lal) will not be

permitted to seek admission to a school situated in a district classified as an

educationally disadvantaged district, unless one of the two exceptions in

Paragraph 6.2 applies;

h) A student who has the required results to be admitted to an A level class in a

school situated in one district can be admitted to a school situated in another

district, provided acceptable reasons for such admission is provided,6 the

change of residence is genuine,7 and it does not contravene the provisions of

paragraph 6 vide paragraph 9 of P15. This is the rule that applies in respect

of admission of a student from a school in one district to a school in another

district;

i) The Circular does not contain any restriction on a student studying in a school

situated in a district classified as privileged from being admitted to another

school so classified, subject to the provisions of paragraph 9 and the availability

of vacancies;

j) Similarly, a student studying in a school situated in a district classified as an

educationally disadvantaged district for purposes of University admission can

be admitted to the A level class of another district classified as an

educationally disadvantaged district, subject to the provisions of paragraph 9

and the availability of vacancies.

The 3rd Respondent is not seeking to be admitted into a school in Mannar under any

of the exceptions provided in paragraph 6.2. It is clear that the conditions in

6 ms<s.; yels idOdrK fya;= bosrsm;a lrkafka kus 7 i;H jYfhkau mosxpsh fjkia l<

14

paragraph 6.0 do not apply to the 3rd Respondent at all because those restrictions

are only applicable to students who are seeking admission to a school in an

educationally disadvantaged district whilst studying in a school situated in a district

classified as educationally advantaged.

I have already referred to in detail the relationship the 3rd Respondent had to

Mannar and the circumstances that prompted her to seek a school in Mannar. Taking

into consideration the said factual scenario in the light of the provisions of

paragraphs 4, 6 and 9 of P15, I am of the view that the admission of the 3rd

Respondent from Ulukkapalam Muslim Maha Vidayalayam, Puttalam to Sithy

Vinayakar Hindu College, Mannar:

a) Is permissible in terms of Paragraph 9;

b) Is not subject to the restriction in paragraph 6.0, as it is admitted between the

parties that both Mannar and Puttalam have been classified as educationally

disadvantaged districts for purposes of University admission.

I am therefore of the view that the admission of the 3rd Respondent from

Ulukkapalam Muslim Maha Vidayalayam to Sithy Vinayakar Hindu College, Mannar

does not contravene the provisions of P15.

I have already referred to the fact that paragraph 4.1 in P15 has been repealed and

replaced by paragraph 3 of P14. I shall now proceed to the second tier, and consider

if the admission of the 3rd Respondent to the Sithy Vinayakar Hindu College, Mannar

is contrary to the provisions of paragraph 4.1 introduced by P14.

The amendment introduced by P14 reads as follows:

2012/14 pl%f,aLfha 4.0 j.ka;shg wkqj 12 fY%aKshg isiqka we;=<;a lsrSu i|yd f;dard

.ekSfus m%uqL;djh my; mrsos jsh hq;=h.

(w) tu mdif,a wfmalaIlhka f,i jsNd.hg fmkS isgs isiqka (pl%f,aLfha 2.0 j.ka;sh

hgf;a i|yka tla tla jsIh Odrdjg ;snsh hq;= wju iqoqiqlus imqrd f.k Tjqka tu jsIh Odrdj yeoErSu i|yd b,a,qus l<fyd;a th wksjdrahfhkau ,ndosh hq;=h.)

15

(wd) tlu 1AB (Wiia fm< jsoHd, l,d, jdKsPH) mdi,la fyda fkdue;s m%dfoaYsSh f,alus

fldgsGdY j, msysgs mdi,a j,ska w;sjsYsIaG f,i idudkH fm< m%;sM, ,nd we;s .%duSh mdi,aj, isiqka.

(we) (w) yd (wd) hk j.ka;s j,g wkqj isiqka we;=<;a lsrSfuka miq ;joqrg;a mqrmamdvq

mj;S kus mdi, msysgs osia;%slalfha 1 AB fkdjk mdi,a j,ska jsYsIaG f,i iu;a jQ

isiqka.

By the amendment to paragraph 4.1 by P14, a category of schools classified as 1AB

schools has been introduced. A 1AB School is a school which has A level classes in all

three streams, namely Science, Commerce and Arts vide paragraph (wd). Thus, with

the introduction of P14, the position relating to priority in admitting students to a

school offering the A level stream can be summarised as follows:

a) When admitting students to the A level class, priority must be given to those

students who have sat for the O level examination from that school;

b) Thereafter, students who are studying in a school situated in a Divisional

Secretarys division which does not have a 1AB school and who have done

exceptionally well in the O level examination will be admitted;

c) If there are further vacancies, students from schools situated within the district

but which are not 1AB schools can be admitted.

It is important to note that:

a) The amendment effected by P14 only deals with, and determines the priority

that must be attached when admitting students to the A level class;

b) Paragraphs 4.2, 6.0 and 9 of P15 have not been amended by P14.

This is clearly stated in paragraph 4 of P14 which reads as follows:

ta wkqj Wiia fm< mka;s j,g isiqka we;=,;a lsrSug wod,j ksl=;a lr we;s 2008/17,

2008/17(I) yd 2008/17(II) yd 2012/14 hk pl%f,aLhkays wka Wmfoia fkdfjkiaj mj;sk

nj jevsoqrg;a okajus. fuu pl%f,aL jsOsjsOdk W,a,x.kh lrkq ,nk jsoqy,am;sjrekag

jsreoaOj jskhdkql+,j lshdudra. .kq ,nk nj o jevsoqrg;a okajd isgsus

16

Let me now advert to the specific argument of the learned Presidents Counsel for

the Petitioner. He submitted that there exists 1AB Schools in Kalpitiya where

Ulukkapalam Muslim Maha Vidyalayam is situated and for that reason the 3rd

Respondent was not eligible to gain admission to Sithy Vinayakar Hindu College,

Mannar. In my view, it is irrelevant whether Ulukkapalam Muslim Maha Vidayalayam

is a 1AB School (according to the written submissions of the learned Senior State

Counsel, Ulukkapalam Muslim Maha Vidyalayam is not a 1AB school as it does not

offer the Biological Science Stream) or whether there are other 1AB Schools within

the Kalpitiya Divisional Secretary area.

Both Mannar and Puttalam Districts are educationally disadvantaged, and there was

no undue benefit or advantage that the 3rd Respondent would have gained from such

transfer. Having returned to Mannar with her parents, which I must emphasise is the

village of her parents and grandparents, the 3rd Respondent was eligible to seek

admission to a School in Mannar in terms of paragraph 9 of P15, subject to the

availability of vacancies.

In my view, paragraph 6.0 of P15 was not an impediment to the 3rd Respondent

being admitted to Sithy Vinayakar Hindu College, Mannar, as both districts are

educationally disadvantaged districts for purposes of University admission. Nor is the

admission of the 3rd Respondent to Sithy Vinayakar Hindu College, Mannar contrary

to paragraph 3 of P14. Therefore, as provided by paragraph 9.1 of P15, the 3rd

Respondent was entitled to be admitted to Sithy Vinayakar Hindu College, Mannar,

subject to the availability of vacancies. It must be noted that the Petitioner has not

complained that the 3rd Respondent was admitted to Sithy Vinayakar Hindu College,

Mannar despite there being no vacancies or that the priority set out in P14 was

disregarded.

I must say that Clause 9.1 has been inserted to cater to the admission of students

such as the 3rd Respondent. I therefore cannot agree with the submission of the

learned Presidents Counsel for the Petitioner that the admission of the 3rd

Respondent to Sithy Vinayakar Hindu College, Mannar is in contravention of the

provisions of Circulars P14 and P15.

17

In the above circumstances, I am of the view that the admission of the 3rd

Respondent to Sithy Vinayakar Hindu College, Mannar and the subsequent admission

of the 3rd Respondent to the Medical Faculty of Jaffna as a candidate from the

Mannar district are within the provisions of the law that regulates and governs the

admission of students to A level classes, and University admissions, respectively.

The Petitioner has accordingly failed to satisfy this Court that he is entitled to the

relief prayed for.

This application is dismissed, without costs.

President of the Court of Appeal Mayadunne Corea, J I agree

Judge of the Court of Appeal