==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 7

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of

the Article 138(1) of the Constitution

together read with the Section 11(1) of

the High Court of the Provinces

(Special Provisions) Act. No. 19 of

1990 with the Section 331 of the Code

of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of

1979.

The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka

Complainant

CA HCC 136/2025

High Court of Avissawella Vs.

Case No. HC 03/19

MC Avissawella Case No. 96976

Seethawaka Soratha Thero

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Seethawaka Soratha Thero

Accused-Appellant

Vs,

Page 2 of 7

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondent

Before: B. Sasi Mahendran. J,

Amal Ranaraja. J,

Counsel: Seevali Amitirigala, PC with Pathum Wijepala instructed by

Asanka Senaratne for the Accused-Appellant.

Hiranjan Peiris, A.S.G. for the State.

Argued on: 20.03.2026

Judgment on: 22.05.2026

Judgment

Amal Ranaraja. J,

1. The Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the ‘appellant’) has

been indicted in the High Court of Avissawella in Case No. HC 03/19.

2. The charge in the indictment is as follows;

01. That on or around the 01st of March, 2016, within the

jurisdiction of this Court, in Namaldeniya, you in order to gain

some sexual gratification have used a certain part of your

body, on the certain body part of one Warnakula Ariyaratne

Page 3 of 7

Mudiyanselage Yumesh Dhanushka Bandara, a person under

16 years of age, by getting him to touch your male genital;

thereby you have committed an offence of “Grave Sexual

Abuse” punishable under Section 365B (2)(b) of the Penal

Code of Sri Lanka as amended by Penal Code (Amendment)

Act No.22 of 1995, Penal Code (Amendment) Act No.29 of 1998

and Penal Code (Amendment) Act No.16 of 2006.

3. At the conclusion of the trial the learned High Court Judge has

convicted the appellant of the charge and sentenced him as follows;

i. Imposed a fine of Rs. 25,000.00 with a term of 12 months

simple imprisonment, in default of the payment of the

same. Furthermore, the appellant has also been sentenced

to 10 years rigorous imprisonment.

The appellant has been further directed to pay a sum of

Rs.50,000.00 to PW01 as compensation with a term of 6

months simple imprisonment in default of payment of the

same.

4. The appellant aggrieved by the conviction, disputed judgement together

with the sentencing order has preferred the instant appeal to this Court.

Case of the Prosecution

5. During the relevant period, PW01 being aged thirteen, has been living

with his parents. The appellant, a monk, has resided in a nearby

temple.

6. It is alleged that on the day of the incident as PW01 was walking past

the temple, the appellant has invited PW01 into his ‘kutiya’ (a monk’s

living quarters). Once, inside, the appellant has initially requested

Page 4 of 7

PW01 to apply some oil on his legs. Following this a further request has

been made to apply oil to the appellant’s penis, which PW01 has

complied with.

7. Afterwards, PW01 has left the temple and recounted the incident to a

friend named Nuwan. Nuwan has then allegedly informed PW01’s

mother about the incident. The mother has subsequently approached

PW01, who has then revealed the full details of the incident to her.

8. PW01’s mother has filed a complaint with the Ehiliyagoda police. The

police have recorded PW01’s statement and arranged for a medical

examination. Dr. R.S. Deduwela, a Judicial Medical Officer has

examined PW01 and the medico-legal report prepared by him has been

produced as evidence marked පැ02.

Case of the Appellant

9. The appellant has maintained that his adversaries have falsely

implicated him.

Ground of Appeal

10. When the appeal was taken up for argument, the learned President’s

Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant urged the following

ground of appeal

i. Has PW01’s evidence been consistent with regard to the

incident, described in the charged.

11. In PW01’s statement provided to Dr. Deduwala, it has been stated that

on the day of the incident, the appellant has requested PW01 to caress

his legs and penis. Notably, PW01 has not mentioned any request to

apply oil in this account.

Page 5 of 7

12. Furthermore, PW01’s statement to the police also has detailed a request

to caress the appellant’s penis but similarly omitted any mention of

applying oil.

ප්‍ර:- දැන් එතක ොට තමුන් කියන හැටියට තමුන් කියන දවක ේ හොමුදුරුකවෝ

ඨො ලො ොමරයට එන්න කියලො?

උ:- ඔව්.

ප්‍ර:- තමුන් ඇහුවොද කමො ටද කියලො?

උ:- මම ඇහුවො. කතල් ටි ක් ගො ගන්න තිකයනවො කියලො තමයි කිව්කව්

කුල් කදකක්.

ප්‍ර:- ඒේ සිද්ධිය කපොලිසියට කිව්වොද?

උ:- ඔව්.

ගරු උතුමොනනී, කමම තැනත්තො එවැනි කිසිම අ ොරය ප්‍ර ොශයක්

හොමුදුරුවන්කගන් විම න ලද බවවත් කතල් ටි ක් ගො ගන්න එන්න කියල

කිව්වොවත් ඔහු කපොලිසීයට ලබො දුන් ටඋත්තකේ කියලො නැහැ. එම

තත්ත්වය ඌණතොවයක් කල ගරු අි රණකේ අවධොනයට කයොමු ර

සිටිනවො.

Page 6 of 7

ප්‍ර:- තමුන් කියන හැටියට කමො ක්ද ඒ කතල් වේගය?

උ:- දන්කන් නැහැ

ප්‍ර:- කබෝතලය ද තිබුකන්?

උ:- කපොඩි කුප්පියක් තිබ්කබ.

Vide Pages 10 & 11 of the Brief

13. These discrepancies highlight a significant inconsistency within PW01’s

narrative. Further, as PW01 has provided different versions of the same

event at various times, to different individuals, it has an impact on his

testimony. Consistent accounts are generally seen as more credible.

14. When details change, it raises questions about the accuracy of PW01’s

memory or the truthfulness of his testimony and statements. The

reliability of PW01’s narrative becomes questionable. When PW01

cannot consistently recall whether a request for oil application was

made it casts doubt on the other specific details of the incident. The

specific detail missing (the request to apply oil) is major in the broader

context of PW01’s testimony. It also suggests an intentional alteration

of the account.

15. In the case of Padmatilake v. Director General, Commission to Investigate

Allegations of Bribery or Corruption [2009] 2 SLR 151, Chandra

Ekanayake, J. has held that,

Credibility of prosecution witnesses should be subject to judicial

evaluation in totality and not isolated scrutiny by the Judge.

When a witness makes inconsistent statements in their evidence

either at one stage or at two stages, the testimony of such

witnesses is unreliable and in the absence of special

circumstances no conviction can be based on the testimony of

such witnesses.

Page 7 of 7

16. In such circumstances it is the view of this Court that PW01 is an

unreliable witness.

17. Accordingly, this Court is inclined to interfere with the conviction,

disputed judgement together with the sentencing order and set aside

the same.

18. Appeal allowed, but this court does not make any order regarding costs.

Appeal allowed.

19. The registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgement to the High

Court in Avissawella together with the original Case record for

compliance.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

I agree

Judge of the Court of Appeal