Page 1 of 13

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of

section 331 (1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No- 15 of 1979, read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Court of Appeal No: Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

CA/HCC-126-133-2014 COMPLAINANT

High Court of Colombo Vs.

Case No: HC/6228/12

1. Muththurasa Kamal Krishtian

2. Kirathirasa Kilsan

3. Gnanaprakashan Dushanthan

4. Mariya Loyela Yamarshan

5. Rayappan Wilson

6. Thulandasami Prasad

7. Sanprito Selvalangam

8. Jalendaran Augustan

ACCUSED

Page 2 of 13

AND NOW BETWEEN

1. Muththurasa Kamal Krishtian

2. Kirathirasa Kilsan

3. Gnanaprakashan Dushyanthan

1st, 2nd and 3rd ACCUSED-APPELLANTS

Vs.

The Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department

Colombo 12

RESPONDENT

Before : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

: P. Kumararatnam, J.

Counsel : Anil Silva P.C. with Isuru Jayawardana for the 1st,

2nd and 3rd Accused Appellants

: Rohantha Abeysuriya, P.C., ASG, for the Respondent

Argued on : 16-06-2022

Written Submissions : 19-10-2017 (By the 1st, 2nd and 3rd Accused-

Appellants)

: 14-09-2018 (By the Respondent)

Decided on : 29-07-2022

Sampath B Abayakoon, J.

The 1st to 8th accused appellants were indicted before the High Court of

Colombo on following counts.

Page 3 of 13

(1) Trafficking 955.4 grams of diacetylmorphine, commonly known as

Heroin, on or about 28th November 2011, within the territorial waters

of Sri Lanka, and thereby committing an offence punishable as

provided for in terms of Poisons Opium and Dangerous Drugs

Ordinance as amended by Amendment Act No 13 of 1984.

(2) At the same time and at the same transaction, importing the said

quantity of Heroin to Sri Lanka, an offence punishable in terms of the

same Act.

(3) At the same time and at the same transaction having in their

possession the mentioned quantity of Heroin, an offence punishable

in terms of the same Act.

The 1st to 3rd accused are Sri Lankans, while 4th to 8th accused are Indian

Nationals.

After trial, the learned High Court Judge of Colombo found all the accused

guilty as charged and they were sentenced to death in terms of the Poisons

Opium and Dangerous Drugs Ordinance by his judgment and the sentence

dated 30-10-2014.

Being aggrieved by the conviction and the sentence, the 1st to 8th accused

appellants filed their respective appeals. However, the 4th to 8th accused

appellants have withdrawn their appeals on 18-11-2014 and accordingly, this

Court had dismissed their respective appeals.

It has been intimated to this Court that the death sentences imposed on the

said 4th to 8th accused had been commuted to life imprisonment by the

President of the Republic under the powers vested in him in terms of Article 34

of the Constitution, and later commuted to a prison term of twenty years each.

It has also been informed that they have been deported to India thereafter.

It is therefore the appeals of the 1st to 3rd accused appellants (hereinafter

sometimes referred to as the appellants) that will be considered in this appeal.

Page 4 of 13

The facts in brief: -

On 28th November 2011 Lieutenant Commander Charitha Gunawantha (PW-

01) was functioning as the Commanding Officer of the Sri Lanka Navy fast

attack craft P.480, which was on surveillance duty in the northern seas of Sri

Lanka between Mannar and Delft Island within the maritime boundary line of

the country.

At around 21.10 hours, he and his officers have noticed the movements of a

suspicious dingy boat through the radar facility of their vessel. At that time the

dingy boat was around two nautical miles away from them. Using the onboard

night vision camera they have continued to observe the boat while getting

closer to it. They have switched off the lights of Navy vessel in order to avoid

their movements being detected. In his evidence the PW-01 has well explained

the reasons for the suspicions of the movements of the dingy boat and the

facilities his vessel had to closely observe the movements of the boat and the

methods they used to avoid detection of their presence. There were no other

fishing boats of this nature in the vicinity of the dingy they observed. There

were several Indian fishing vessels engaging in illegal fishing in the territorial

waters of the country at that time, which were some distance away.

They have then observed one Indian Fishing vessel braking away from the

group of Indian vessels and approaching the dingy boat they were observing

and coming parallel to it. He has then seen a person from the Indian vessel

handing over a parcel to one of the persons who were on board the dingy boat.

There were three persons in the dingy boat, while he has observed four persons

in the Indian vessel. Upon seeing this PW-01 had immediately approached the

vessels after switching on the onboard flash lights and warning them to stop.

While getting closer to the dingy boat, he has observed the person who was

seated near the outboard motor engine of the dingy biting open one parcel, and

throwing it into the sea. Immediately thereafter, two officers have boarded the

dingy while one officer has recovered the parcel which was thrown into the sea.

Page 5 of 13

Inside the boat they have found three more parcels of similar size near the

person who throw one of them to the sea. Upon inspection, brown coloured

powder has been discovered in the parcels and PW-01 had identified them as

Heroin and the three persons have been arrested. PW-01 has observed the

person who broke open one of the parcels before it was thrown into the sea

with a brown-coloured powder all over his face and the T-shirt he was wearing.

The witness has identified the appellants as the three persons arrested by him

from the dingy boat at the trial before the High Court.

After their arrest, PW-01 and his team of officers had pursued the Indian vessel

which was attempting to get away and stopped it as well, and arrested the

occupants of the boat, whom he has identified as the 4th to the 8th accused

before the High Court. He has identified the 8th accused as the skipper of the

vessel. He has recovered GPS mobile communication devices from both the

vessels among other things recovered. After the arrests, PW-01 has taken

arrested persons and the productions recovered under his custody and had

taken them to the Kankesanturai harbour, where they were stationed at that

time. They have reached the harbour at around 6.00 hours on the following

day, and after the initial Navy investigations into the detection, the productions

and the arrested persons have been handed over to the Kankesanturai police.

It was the evidence of the witness that all the relevant productions were sealed

by him following the due procedure, at the time of the arrest of the appellants.

At the trial, the PW-01 has marked a map of the area of detection as P-01,

where the movements of the two vessels arrested have been shown using the

GPS positional signal information obtained from the two GPS devises found. He

has marked and produced all the relevant productions recovered by him,

including the parcels of Heroin, which has been marked as P-21 to P-24. It is

clear from the evidence that the weighing of the Heroin had been done at the

Kankesanturai police station. The parcel marked P-21 has had a total weight of

506 grams and the parcel marked P-22 has had a total weight of 510 grams,

Page 6 of 13

while the parcel marked P-23 has had a total weight of 516 grams. The parcel

marked P-24 was the parcel recovered after it was broken open and thrown

into the sea, and it has had a total weight of 212 grams.

It needs to be noted that although the learned Counsel who represented the

appellants and the other accused has cross-examined the witness at length, it

has not created any reasonable doubt as to the truthfulness of his evidence.

In this matter, Lieutenant Herath, who was the second-in-command of the

naval vessel and naval rating Wijeratne, the two officers assisted the PW-01 in

the detection, has given evidence to corroborate his evidence.

Deputy Surveyor General, Jayaratne Dodampegama (PW-15) has explained at

length the map marked P-01, while PW-13 Senior Assistant Government

Analyst Kumuduni Rajapakse was the officer who analyzed and determined the

pure quantity of Heroin found in the parcels sent to the Government Analyst.

She has found a total weight of 955.4 grams of pure Heroin in the parcels sent

by the Magistrate of Mallakam to the Government analyst in relation to this

action.

After leading the evidence of the relevant police officers who conducted

investigations into this detection the prosecution has closed its case.

When the appellants were asked for a defence, the 1st and the 3rd accused

appellants have chosen to give evidence under oath, while the 2nd accused

appellant had made a statement from the dock.

It has been the evidence of the 1st accused appellant that he and the other two

appellants went to sea for fishing on the day of the detection and they laid their

nets as usual and waited for the nets to be taken in. He has admitted that they

used GPS technology to navigate and has claimed that while they were

attempting to take their nets into the boat, fearing that Indian vessels that were

in the vicinity will damage them, one Indian trawler approached them.

(Evidence given on 21-11-2013 at 11.00 a.m.-page 1130 of the appeal brief).

Page 7 of 13

It has been his evidence that on that instant a Naval vessel came and arrested

them and searched their boat but could not find anything illegal in the boat. It

was his position that two other Navy boats also came thereafter and an officer

from one of the other boats brought a bag into their boat and kept it near him

and took photographs. It was his claim that the bag had four parcels of similar

size, and one parcel was broken open by the Navy officer who brought them,

and the powder inside was applied on the faces of all three of them. He has

claimed further that they were assaulted and handed over to Kankesanturai

police and later produced before Mallakam Magistrate. He has stated that all

the persons on board the Indian vessel were also arrested and later produced

before the Magistrate. Under cross-examination, he has admitted that the GPS

device marked P-02 was the device they had in their possession at the time of

the arrest. He has also admitted that the covers marked P-19A, B, C, as the

covers of the parcels he claims that were introduced by the Navy when they

were arrested.

Making a dock statement, the 2nd accused appellant has taken the stand that

when he and the other two who went fishing with him were attempting to get

their net back into the boat fearing that the approaching Indian vessel will

damage it, they were arrested by the Navy. He has narrated a similar version of

events to that of the 1st accused appellant, claiming that he is innocent as he

has done nothing illegal.

The 3rd accused appellant, in his evidence has narrated the same version of

events as claimed by the 1st accused appellant pleading his innocence of any

crime.

The Grounds of Appeal: -

At the hearing of the appeal, the learned Presidents Counsel formulated the

following grounds of appeal for the consideration of the Court.

Page 8 of 13

(1) Has the learned High Court Judge failed to evaluate the evidence of

the expert witness, Deputy Surveyor General Dodampegama in the

correct perspective.

(2) Has the learned High Court Judge had not taken into consideration

matters favourable to the appellants.

(3) Has the prosecution failed to prove the case beyond reasonable doubt

against the appellants.

(4) In any event can the charges be maintained against the 2nd and the

3rd accused appellants.

The learned Presidents Counsel informed at the outset of the hearing that he is

not contesting the chain of custody of the productions and the report by the

Government Analyst.

It was his submission that based on the map marked P-01 and the evidence of

Deputy Surveyor General, which are scientific evidence, it cannot be concluded

that the dingy boat and the Indian vessel met during the time relevant to the

incident as claimed by the witnesses. It was his view that this is a situation

that completely cuts across the evidence of the prosecution, which should have

been considered in favour of the appellants by the learned High Court judge.

It was also his argument that since it was the evidence of PW-01 that the

parcels of Heroin were recovered from the possession of the 1st accused

appellant, the prosecution has failed to prove the joint possession, the basis

upon which the 2nd and the 3rd accused appellants were found guilty.

However, the learned Presidents Counsel admitted that the allocutus made by

the appellants in terms of section 280 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act

when they were required to make a statement was not in favour of the

appellants.

Page 9 of 13

It was also his submission that in the event of the grounds of appeal being not

considered in favour of the appellants, the Court may consider the revision of

the death penalty imposed on the appellants in view of the fact that the Indian

nationals who were found guilty along with the appellants are now free men

due to the commuting of their sentences and been deported.

It was the submission of the learned Additional Solicitor General (ASG) on

behalf of the respondent that he will not stand in the way if the Court decides

to reconsider the sentence imposed on the appellants given the fact that some

of the accused of the action who were found guilty along with the appellants

are now free, only due to the fact of they being Indian nationals.

However, it was his contention that the grounds of appeal advanced on behalf

of the appellants have no merit. He points out that the map marked P-01 has

been clearly established by the evidence, and the joint possession as well. He

also brings to the notice of the Court that the defence put forward by the

appellants when they were called for a defence has not been put to the relevant

witnesses when they gave evidence in Court, which makes such defence of no

value.

Consideration of the Grounds of Appeal

The 1st Ground of Appeal: -

This ground of appeal is based on the contention that the map marked P-01,

which supposed to show the paths of the two vessels do not show that the

vessels came side by side at any point, and therefore the evidence of PW-01

and other witnesses who gave evidence in that regard are not credible.

It is clear from the evidence of PW-01 who produced the map marked P-01 in

order to show the respective routes taken by the two vessels, and that of the

expert witness PW-15, that the said route has been identified using the data

that was available in the GPS devises found when the arrests were made and

the navigational data available in the attack craft. It was his evidence as well as

Page 10 of 13

the evidence of the 1st appellant that when at sea, fishermen often switch off

their GPS devices in order to save the battery power. It is therefore clear that

the data obtained from the GPS devices would not give an accurate picture as

to the route of the vessels in this instance. It can be assumed that once both

the vessels established contact and identified their respective positioning in the

sea, they had no need of using the GPS facility for that purpose. I am of the

view that not showing on the map marked P-01 that the two vessels came

closer to each other is a matter that needs to be considered in relation to the

facts of the matter, and not by taking the map reading in its isolation.

Besides that, there cannot be any doubt on this fact, as this is a fact that has

been admitted by the 1st and the 3rd appellant in their evidence and the 2nd

appellant in his dock statement. They have stated that while they were waiting

after laying their fishing nets, an Indian trawler came near them and at that

point the Navy officers came and ordered them to stop, and boarded the dingy

boat. This clearly establishes that what the prosecution witnesses are saying

are the true version of events that took place.

Therefore, I find no merit in the considered ground of appeal.

The 2nd ,3rd and the 4th Grounds of Appeal: -

As the mentioned grounds of appeal are interrelated, they will be considered

together. The main ground advanced by the learned Presidents Counsel to

argue that the learned High Court Judge failed to consider matters favorable to

the appellants was the earlier considered map readings shown in the map

marked P-01. As I have elaborated earlier, it is not a matter that can be

considered in favour of the appellants in any manner.

As pointed out correctly by the learned ASG, the question whether the

appellants are guilty on the basis of joint possession of Heroin is a matter that

needs to be considered by taking the facts and the circumstances in its totality

and not by taking certain facts in its isolation.

Page 11 of 13

The three appellants have left the Sri Lankan shores in a small dingy boat, and

when detected, were near the India-Sri Lanka maritime boundary. This is an

area where Sri Lankan fishermen do not normally fish during that time of the

day. The Navy craft which observed the suspicious movements of the boat had

been keeping the boat under surveillance for some time before they observed

the approaching Indian vessel towards the dingy boat. The Navy officers have

seen a parcel being handed over to the occupants of the dingy boat. When the

Navy officers reached the boat and stopped it, the parcel was near the 1st

appellant and it was he, who has opened one of the packets and thrown it into

the sea. That does not mean that it was he who had the sole possession of the

parcel, making him liable to be prosecuted and not the other occupants of the

boat. The proven facts provide ample evidence to show that it was an act done

by the appellants in connivance. If not for the help of each other, it is not

possible to travel so far into the sea in a small craft like a dingy. There is

nothing to conclude that the appellants were not privy to each other in

committing the crime. It is obvious that one has to hold on to the cargo they

received from the Indian vessel to make sure that it is not lost at sea in an

unstable small boat. I find that it was the reason why the parcel was near the

1st appellant when the Navy approached the boat and for no other reason. It is

my considered view that the prosecution has proven the joint possession

beyond reasonable doubt in this case.

The 1st and the 3rd appellants in their evidence and the 2nd appellant in his

statement from the dock, has taken up the position that they were assaulted

after their arrest and three other small Navy crafts also came thereafter, and a

parcel brought in one of the other Navy crafts was introduced to them. In

addition, it has been claimed that one parcel was opened by the Navy officers

and the powder that was there was applied on their bodies by the Navy officers.

However, I find that the appellants have failed to confront the relevant

witnesses when they had the opportunity of cross-examining the witnesses in

Page 12 of 13

Court giving them an opportunity to explain the claims. The only position

taken had been that they were assaulted when arrested and the Navy officers

applied the powder on the face of the 1st accused, which goes on to show that

the claims are after thoughts rather than things actually happened.

In the case of Sarwan Singh Vs. State of Punjab 2002 AIR Supreme Court iii

3652 at 3655,3656 it was stated thus;

It is a rule of essential justice that whenever the opponent has declined to

avail himself of the opportunity to put his case in cross examination, it

must follow that the evidence tendered on that issue ought to be accepted.

His Lordship Sisra de Abrew, J. in the case of Pilippu Mandige Nalaka

Krishantha Thisera Vs. The Attorney General, CA 87/2005 decided on 17-

05-2007 held:

.I hold whenever evidence is given by a witness on a material point is

not challenged in cross-examination, it has to be concluded that such

evidence is not disputed and is accepted by the opponent subject of course

to the qualification that the witness is a reliable witness.

I find that the learned High Court Judge has well considered all the relevant

evidence presented before the Court and the relevant law, when it was held

that the prosecution has proved the case beyond reasonable doubt against the

appellants, for which I find no reasons to disagree.

Hence, I find no merit in the considered grounds of appeal either.

I will now draw my attention to the sentence imposed on the appellants as

submissions were made by the learned Presidents Counsel as well as the

learned ASG based on what has taken place in relation to the accused who

withdrew their appeals against their convictions and the sentence.

The sentence that can be imposed on a person found guilty in terms of the

Poisons Opium and Dangerous Drugs Ordinance for having in his possession

Page 13 of 13

and trafficking of more than two grams of Heroin is either the death sentence

or a sentence of life in prison. I find that the learned High Court Judge was

justified in imposing the death sentence given the facts and the circumstances

of the matter and having considered the pure quantity of Heroin detected in

this instance.

However, as contended and agreed by the learned ASG, the death sentence

imposed on the 4th to 8th accused of the case has been commuted to life in

prison and subsequently to a term of 20 years by the President in terms of his

powers as stated before. This has happened within a short span of their

withdrawal of the appeals and they have been deported as well. The only

conclusion that can be reached is that this has happened because they are

Indian nationals.

As such, it is my considered view that given the special circumstances as they

stand now, the imposition of the death sentence on the appellants can no

longer be justified. Therefore, I set aside the death sentence imposed on the

appellants on each of the three counts for which they were found guilty, and

substitute sentences of life imprisonment on the appellants.

Subjected to the above variance to the sentence, the appeal is dismissed as it is

devoid of merit.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P. Kumarartnam, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal