IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

D.M.T. Ranjani Dissanayake

Bandarathilake,

No. 138,

High Level Road,

Kandalanda,

Homagama.

And 4 Others

Petitioner

CASE NO: CA/WRIT/23/2014

Vs.

Janaka Bandara Tennakoon,

Minister of Land & Land

Development,

Ministry of Land & Land

Development,

Mihikatha Medura,

Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

And 8 Others

Respondents

2

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Rasika Dissanayake with Pasindu Silva for the

Petitioner.

Vikum De Abrew, Senior D.S.G., for the

Respondents.

Decided on: 06.11.2019

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

This application concerns the acquisition of lands by the State for

the purpose of widening and developing Kirulapone-Godagama

road.

Five Petitioners have filed this application seeking to quash by way

of writ of certiorari the order made by the 1st Respondent Minister

of Lands in terms of the proviso to section 38(a) of the Land

Acquisition Act marked P9 and the other steps taken in order to

take possession of the portions so acquired insofar as they affect

the lands owned by the Petitioners. They also seek to compel the

Respondents by way of writ of mandamus to use the road

reservation shown in P15 to widen the road instead of acquiring

their lands. Further they seek to prohibit the Respondents from

taking over possession of the Petitioners lands based on the

Tracing marked P12.

The principal argument of the learned counsel for the Petitioners is

that an Advance Tracing prepared by the Surveyor Generals

Department is a prerequisite to acquisition, and in this instance

P12 prepared by the Surveyor Generals Department is only a

3

Tracing and not an Advanced Tracing, and therefore the

acquisition is ultra vires. The learned counsel further states that

P12 is predated to Section 2 Notice, and on that account also P12

is void ab initio.

As seen from P12, portions of land along the High Level Road

belonging to a large number of persons have been acquired for this

road widening purpose. However only the five Petitioners in this

case and the Petitioner in CA/WRIT/63/2014 have challenged the

said acquisition in this Court. Counsel for the parties in both cases

are the same and therefore they agreed to abide by a single

Judgment to be delivered in this case.

Let me now consider on what basis the learned counsel for the

Petitioner states that Advance Tracing is necessary for acquisition

of lands, and why P12 cannot be regarded as an Advanced Tracing,

and how it affects the Petitioners in this case.

The learned counsel says that in terms of Regulation 263 of the

State Land Manual, an Advanced Tracing made by the Department

of Survey shall be obtained before proceeding to take over

possession of the acquired portions of land. He further says that

the requirement to have an Advanced Tracing has been reiterated

in the Circular No. LD/5/D/08 dated 07.10.2002 issued by the

Secretary of the Ministry of Lands marked P14.

The 9th Respondent Surveyor General in his statement of

objections has inter alia producing the request letter for a survey

marked 9R1 dated 07.11.2011 states that Detailed Tracing marked

P12 was prepared in terms of that request for the purpose of this

acquisition and therefore the 3rd Respondent Divisional Secretary

4

of Homagama was informed by 9R5, that P12 could be used as an

Advance Tracing for that purpose.

I cannot accept the argument that P12 made before Section 2

Notice renders P12 void ab initio. According to section 2(3) of the

Land Acquisition Act, after Section 2 Notice, the acquiring officer

may enter the land to be acquired for the purpose of survey. That

does not mean that no Tracing can be prepared before Section 2

Notice.

According to Regulation 263 as quoted by the learned counsel for

the Petitioners, before taking over possession there shall be an

Advance Tracing prepared by the Survey Department. However,

the term Advance Tracing has not been defined in the Regulation.

The Surveyor General in his affidavit tendered with the statement

of objections states that P12 could be used as an Advance Tracing.

Let me now consider why the Petitioners state that P12 is not an

Advance Tracing. The Petitioners state that, according to P12, Lot

198 belongs to the 1st Petitioner, Lot 204 to the 2nd Petitioner, Lot

196 to the 3rd Petitioner, Lot 207 to the 4th Petitioner and Lot 203

to the 5th Petitioner in this case. Lot 205 of P12 belongs to the

Petitioner in CA/WRIT/63/2014.

The complaint of the Petitioners is that no detailed description

about those Lots has been given in P12.

Out of these Lots, only the 4th Petitioner and the 2nd Petitioner in

this case have specific grievances. The 4th Petitioners grievance is

that although Lot 207 is depicted as a single Lot, it contains three

separate properties belonging to three separate owners, and her

5

house and well have not been shown. It is also said that a part of

the 2nd Petitioners house in Lot 4 is not depicted. It is not clear to

me that Lot 4 is a typographical error for Lot 204.

They say that in an Advance Tracing the details of the portions of

land are provided and that is very relevant in assessing

compensation payable to them. I think that is where their

grievance lies. Their grievance is that, because in the Tracing P12

sufficient details are not given, that will adversely affect in the

payment of compensation to them.

That grievance can easily be addressed by making a direction to

the 3rd Respondent Divisional Secretary to get another detailed

survey done from the Surveyor Generals Department only in

respect of the specific Lots which the Petitioners in both cases

claim, which are, if I may repeat, Lots 4, 196, 198, 203, 204, 205

and 207 in P12. That shall be done with notice to the Petitioners in

both cases. I make order to the 3rd Respondent accordingly. That is

for the purpose of assessing compensation payable to them in

future.

The Petitioners in paragraph 18 of the petition referring to another

Tracing marked P15 states that there is a Road Reservation along

the High Level Road on the opposite side of their allotments, which

can be utilized for widening the said road. How Tracing P15

establishes that position is not clear. However the 4th Respondent

Road Development Authority in paragraph 18 of its statement of

objections states that the extent has been calculated by including

the said Road Reservation. Those matters which are in dispute

cannot be looked into in this writ application.

6

Subject to the above direction given to the 3rd Respondent

Divisional Secretary of Homagama to resurvey the Petitioners Lots

in order to use in the computation of compensation to be payable,

application of the Petitioners is dismissed without costs.

The substituted Petitioner in CA/WRIT/63/2014 will abide by this

Judgment.

Judge of the Court of Appeal