==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/PHC/0078/2020

Page 1 of 19

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

The matter arising out of the final judgement dated 28.07.2020 made in the Revision application No. 225/2017 by the High Court of the Southern Province of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka holden at Galle.

Thushara Chaminda Kariyawasam, Deputy Chief Engineer, Sri Lanka Ports Authority Colombo.

Plaintiff Vs.

N. Samantha Prasanna De Costa, No.03, China Friendship Village, Kuruduwatta, Akmeemana. Now at No. 402, Matara Road, Magalla, Galle.

Respondent AND BETWEEN

N. Samantha Prasanna De Costa, No.03, China Friendship Village, Kuruduwatta, Akmeemana. Now at No. 402, Matara Road, Magalla, Galle.

Respondent-Petitioner

Court of Appeal Case No:CA/PHC/0078/2020 Galle High Court Case No: 225/2017 MC Galle Case No: 62680/Ports Authority

CA/PHC/0078/2020

Page 2 of 19

Vs.

Thushara Chaminda Kariyawasam, Deputy Chief Engineer, Sri Lanka Ports Authority Colombo.

Plaintiff-Respondent Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General Department, Colombo 12.

Respondent AND NOW BETWEEN

N. Samantha Prasanna De Costa, No.03, China Friendship Village, Kuruduwatta, Akmeemana. Now at No. 402, Matara Road, Magalla, Galle.

Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant Vs.

Thushara Chaminda Kariyawasam, Deputy Chief Engineer, Sri Lanka Ports Authority Colombo.

Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent

CA/PHC/0078/2020

Page 3 of 19

Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General Department, Colombo 12.

Respondent-Respondent Before : D. THOTAWATTA, J. K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J. Counsel : Sapumal Bandara with Gangulali de S. Dayarathna for the Respondent-Petitioner- Appellant.

N. Perera, A. S. A. for the Respondents. Argued on : 15.07.2025 Written Submissions of the Respondent-Petitioner -Appellant tendered on : 24.07.2024 and 27.08.2025 Written Submissions of the Plaintiff-Respondent -Respondent tendered on : 04.09.2024 Written Submissions of the Respondent -Respondent tendered on : 03.09.2024 Decided on : 20.11.2025

CA/PHC/0078/2020

Page 4 of 19

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

This is an appeal filed before this Court by the Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant

(hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the Appellant’) against the order of the

learned High Court Judge of the Southern Province holden at Galle dated

28.07.2020 made in an application in revision bearing No. 225/2017

(hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the order’).

The facts material and relevant to the instant appeal may be briefly, set out as

follows;

The Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the

Respondent’) had made an application to the Magistrate Court of Galle in case

bearing No. 62682/Ports Authority, under and in terms of the provisions of

Section 5 of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act No. 07 of 1979 (as

amended) (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the Act’) seeking eviction of the

Appellant from a State Land as morefully described in the schedule to the

application (hereinafter called and referred to as the ‘State Land’). The

Appellant appearing before the Additional Magistrate Court of Galle pursuant

to the summons issued on him by Court, had shown cause against the

application. However, the learned Additional Magistrate of Galle in her order

dated 24.08.2017 had while totally, rejecting the Appellant’s showing cause

against the application, allowed the application directing the Appellant to be

ejected from the State Land by holding that the Appellant had been in

unauthorized possession or occupation thereof. Being aggrieved by the said

order of the learned Additional Magistrate of Galle, the Appellant had invoked

the extra-ordinary revisionary jurisdiction of the High Court of the Southern

Province holden at Galle to revise and set aside it. The learned High Court

Judge of the Southern Province holden at Galle had in his order, dismissed the

application in revision preferred to it by the Appellant while affirming the order

of the learned Additional Magistrate of Galle by holding that the learned

Additional Magistrate of Galle had arrived at the order sought to be revised and

CA/PHC/0078/2020

Page 5 of 19

set aside in accordance with the provisions of the Act and hence, order sought

to be revised and set aside is not contrary to the law. The instant appeal has

thus, arisen therefrom on the grounds of appeal as morefully, set out in

paragraph 5 (අ) to (ඊ) of the petition of appeal amongst any other grounds of

appeal that may be urged by Counsel at the hearing of the instant appeal and

they may be reproduced verbatim the same as follows;

“(අ) ෙමම නƍෙɩ අȴයාවක ɪʆǦ ȿɢ ෙනරșෙȼ ආඥාවට අදාලව ඉǎɜපƮ කරන ලද ɀɣක ɪෙරʤධතාවය සහ කාəය පŹපාŹක ෙදʤෂ සȼ භǦධෙයǦ ǧʆ අවධානය ෙයʣȿ ෙනʣෙකʣට ưǦǐව ස්ǂර කර Ưȫම.

(ආ) ෙමම අȴයාචක අදාල ෙǊපෙළʢ ȶúƯය දැɝම සȼබǦධව ඉǎɜපƮ ෙකʣට ඇƯ ෛනƯක ɪෙරʤධතා සȼබǦධව තම ǧෙයʤගය මĵǦ ûʆǿ ෙහʢƱ දැúɫමú ʆǐ කර ෙනʣƯȫම. (ඇ) පැȽƝɣකාර ǧෙයʤජɕ ȝධාන ඉංŏෙǦɞ වරාය අǝකාɜය ɪʆǦ ȿɢ ෙනරșෙȼ ආඥාවට අදාළ පනෙƮ ȝƯපාදන ǧʆ පɜǎ අǩගමනය ෙනʣûɝම සȼබǦධව අවධානය ෙයʣȿ ෙනʣɫම. (ඈ) මෑතකǏ ɪǧශ්Ľත ǎස්Ƶú ෙɢකȼ කʚතර එǎɜව කʚපහන ෙමස්ƵෙĘ ජයƯස්ස. (SC APP.246/2014) සහ ලúෂ්මǦ වටවල එǎɜව චǦදන ජයƯලක (SC APP. 31/2009) නƍ වලǏ ưරණය කර ඇƯ පɜǎ අȴයාචක රජෙɏ අǩමත ȶúƯයú දරණ බවට ɭ කɞƟ සහ ෙɢඛන ෙකෙරʏ ȝමාණවƮ ɪශ්ෙɢෂණයú ʆǐ කර ෙනʣƯȫම. (ඉ) ෙමම නƍෙɩ ඉǎɜපƮ ɭ ෙɢඛන හා කɞƟ ෙකෙරʏ ෙමම ưǦǐව මĵǦ ǧʆ අවධානයú ෙයʣȿ ෙනʣɫම. (ඊ) ගɞ උගƮ අƯෙəක මෙහʢස්ƴාƮƱȽයෙĘ ưරණය සඳහා ෙහʢƱ පාදක ɭ කɞƟ ûʆවú ෙහʘදරɩ කර ෙනʣƯȫමƮ ඒ Șʘබඳව ෙමම ǧෙයʤගෙɏǏ ȝමාණවƮ අවධානයú ෙයʣȿ කර ෙනʣƯȫම.”

However, upon a careful analysis of the purported preliminary objections so

raised in paragraph 3 (අ) to (ඈ) of his showing cause furnished to the

Magistrate Court of Galle as required by section 8 of the Act, by the Appellant,

to the application of the Respondent made thereto under and in terms of

section 5 of the Act, together with the grounds of appeal so urged by the

Appellant in the petition of appeal as enumerated above, the Appellant’s

principal defence raised therein appears to be such that the Respondent is not

the competent authority within the meaning of Section 5 of the Act to be read

with section 18 thereof.

CA/PHC/0078/2020

Page 6 of 19

It may now, be examined.

The Respondent is not the competent authority within the meaning of

section 5 of the Act to be read with section 18 thereof.

It is in this context, I would think it expedient at this juncture to examine the

structure and/or the scheme embodied in the Act and the provisions contained

therein with regard to an application that may be made to a Magistrate Court

by a competent authority under section 5 thereof for the eviction of a person

who in his opinion, is in unauthorized possession or occupation of a state land

and for the recovery of the same.

Section 3 of the Act enacts thus;

“3. (1) Where a competent authority is of the opinion

(a) that any land is State land; and

(b) that any person is in unauthorized possession or

occupation of such land, the competent authority may serve

a notice on such person in possession or occupation thereof,

or where the competent authority considers such service

impracticable or inexpedient, exhibit such notice in a

conspicuous place in or upon that land requiring such

person to vacate such land with his dependants, if any, and

to deliver vacant possession of such land to such competent

authority or other authorized person as may be specified in

the notice on or before a specified date. The date to be

specified in such notice shall be a date not less than thirty

days from the date of the issue or the exhibition of such

notice.

(1A) No person shall be entitled to any hearing or to make any

representation in respect of a notice under subsection (1).

CA/PHC/0078/2020

Page 7 of 19

(2) Every notice under subsection (1) issued in respect of any

State land is in this Act referred to as a "quit notice ".

(3) A quit notice in respect of any State land shall be deemed

to have been served on the person in possession or

occupation thereof if such notice is sent by registered post.

(4) Every quit notice shall be in Form A set out in the

Schedule to this Act.”

Section 4 of the Act deals with the obligation to comply with a quit notice and it

enacts thus;

“4. Where a quit notice has been served or exhibited under section 3

(a) the person in possession or occupation of the land to whom such

notice relates or any dependants of such person shall not be entitled to

possess or occupy such land after the date specified in such notice or to

object to such notice on any ground whatsoever except as provided for in

section 9,

(b) the person in possession or occupation shall together with his

dependants, if any, duly vacate such land and deliver vacant possession

thereof to the competent authority or person to whom he is required to

do so by such notice.”

Section 5 of the Act deals with the effect of non-compliance with a quit notice

and it enacts thus;

5. (1) Where any person fails to comply with the notice provisions of

section 4 (b) in respect of any quit notice issued or exhibited or

purporting to have been issued or exhibited under this Act, any

competent authority (whether he is or not the competent authority who

issued or exhibited such notice) may make an application in writing in

CA/PHC/0078/2020

Page 8 of 19

the Form B set out in the Schedule to this Act to the Magistrate's Court

within whose local jurisdiction such land or any part thereof is situated

(a) setting forth the following matters

(i) that he is a competent authority for the purposes of this

Act.

(ii) that the land described in the schedule to the application

is in his opinion State land,

(iii) that a quit notice was issued on the person in possession

or occupation of such land or was exhibited in a

conspicuous place in or upon such land,

(iv) that such person named in the application is in his

opinion in unauthorized possession or occupation of such

land and has failed to comply with the provisions of the

aforesaid paragraph (b) of section 4 in respect of such notice

relating to such land, and

(b) praying for the recovery of possession of such land and for an

order of ejectment of such person in possession or occupation and

his dependants, if any, from such land.

(2) Every such application under subsection (1) shall be supported by an

affidavit in the Form C set out in the Schedule to this Act verifying to the

matters set forth in such application and shall be accompanied by a copy

of the quit notice.

(3) Every application supported by an affidavit and accompanied by a

copy of the quit notice under the preceding provisions of this section

shall be referred to as an "application for ejectment ".

(4) No stamp duties shall be payable for any application for ejectment.

CA/PHC/0078/2020

Page 9 of 19

Section 6 of the Act deals with the role of a Magistrate upon receipt of an

application made under section 5 thereof and it enacts thus;

“6. (1) Upon receipt of the application made under section 5, the

Magistrate shall forthwith issue summons on the person named in the

application to appear and show cause on the date specified in such

summons (being a date not later than two weeks from the date of issue of

such summons) why such person and his dependants, if any, should not

be ejected from the land as prayed for in the application for ejectment.

(2) The provisions contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure Act shall,

mutatis mutandis, apply to the issue of summons referred to in

subsection (1) and the service thereof and other steps necessary for

securing the attendance of the person summoned.”

Section 7 of the Act, makes provisions for an order for ejectment where no

cause is shown and it reads thus;

“7. If on the date specified in the summons issued under section 6 the

person on whom such summons was issued fails to appear or informs

the Court that he has no cause to show against the order for ejectment,

the Court shall forthwith issue an order directing such person and his

dependants, if any, to be ejected forthwith from the land.”

Section 8 of the Act, makes provisions as to the inquiry if cause is shown and it

enacts thus;

“8. (1) If a person on whom summons has been served under section 6

appears on the date specified in such summons and states that he has

cause to show against the issue of an order for ejectment the Magistrate's

Court may proceed forthwith to hear and determine the matter or may

set the case for inquiry on a later date.

(2) Where any application for ejectment has been made to a Magistrate's

Court, the Magistrate shall give priority over all other business of that

CA/PHC/0078/2020

Page 10 of 19

Court, to the hearing and disposal of such application, except when

circumstances render it necessary for such other business to be disposed

of earlier.”

Section 9 of the Act deals with the scope of inquiry and it reads thus;

“9. (1) At such inquiry the person on whom summons under section 6

has been served shall not be entitled to contest any of the matters

stated in the application under section 5 except that such person

may establish that he is in possession or occupation of the land

upon a valid permit or other written authority of the State granted

in accordance with any written law and that such permit or

authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered invalid.

(2) It shall not be competent to the Magistrate's Court to call for any

evidence from the competent authority in support of the application

under section 5.” [Emphasis is mine]

Section 10 of the Act makes provisions for order of ejectment and it reads as

follows;

“10. (1) If after inquiry the Magistrate is not satisfied that the person

showing cause is entitled to the possession or occupation of the land he

shall make order directing such person and his dependants, if any, in

occupation of such land to be ejected forthwith from such land.

(2) No appeal shall lie against any order of ejectment made by a

Magistrate under subsection (1).”

Upon a careful analysis of the Act as a whole, it becomes abundantly, clear

that “Urgency” appears to be the hallmark of this Act as observed by this Court

in Farook vs. Gunewardene-Government Agent, Amparai (Supra). Under

section 3, 30 days notice shall be given. Under section 4, the person in

possession is not entitled to object to notice on any ground whatsoever except

as provided for in section 9 and the person who is in possession is required to

CA/PHC/0078/2020

Page 11 of 19

vacate the land within the month specified by the notice. Under section 6, the

Magistrate is required to issue summons forthwith to appear and show cause

on a date not later than two weeks from the date of issue of such summons.

Under section 8(2) the Magistrate is required to give priority over all other

business of that court. Under section 9, the party noticed can raise objections

only on the basis of a valid permit issued by the State. Under section 10, if the

Magistrate is not satisfied, “he shall make order directing ejectment forthwith

and no appeal shall lie against the order of ejectment. Under section 17, the

provisions of this Act have effect notwithstanding anything contained in any

written law.

It was inter-alia, held by the Supreme Court in Senanayake Vs. Damunupola-

1982 (2) SLR 621, “The scope of the State Land (Recovery of Possession) Act

was to provide a speedy or summary mode of getting back possession or

occupation of ‘State Land’ as defined in the Act”, which was cited with approval

by this Court in case bearing No. CA (PHC) 140/2013-decided on

10.10.2019.

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in Farook vs. Gunewardene-Government

Agent, Amparai 1980 (2) SLR 243, at pages 245 and 246 that, “Section 9(2)

is to the effect that the Magistrate cannot call for any evidence from the

competent authority in support of the application under section 5....”

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA/PHC/41/2010 decided on

31.01.2017 that, “The party noticed is not entitled to challenge the opinion of

the competent authority on any of the matters stated in the application....”

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA (PHC) APN 29/2016-decided on

09.07.2018 that, “....He cannot contest any of the matters stated in the

application made under section 5 of the Act.”

It was further held by this Court in CA(PHC)APN 29/2016(supra) that “The

Petitioner submitted that the Respondent was not the competent authority in

CA/PHC/0078/2020

Page 12 of 19

respect of the lands vested with the SLSPC. Such an objection is not a matter

that can be taken up before the learned Magistrate or in these proceedings.

One of the factors to be stated in the application made under section 5 of the

Act is that the person making the application is a competent authority for the

purposes of the Act. In view of section 6 of the Act, a person who has been

summoned cannot contest that the claimant is not a competent authority. That

is an issue to be tested in appropriate proceedings.”

Upon a careful analysis of section 5 of the Act in conjunction with sections 9(1)

which enacts that “At such inquiry the person on whom summons under

section 6 has been served shall not be entitled to contest any of the

matters stated in the application under section 5 except that such person

may establish that he is in possession or occupation of the land upon a

valid permit or other written authority of the State granted in accordance

with any written law and that such permit or authority is in force and not

revoked or otherwise rendered invalid” and 9(2) thereof, which enacts “It

shall not be competent to the Magistrate's Court to call for any evidence

from the competent authority in support of the application under section

5.”, together with the principle laid down by the judicial precedent as

enumerated above, it would become manifestly, clear that where the Applicant

states in his application made to a Magistrate Court under section 5 of the Act

that he is the competent authority within the meaning of section 5 of the Act

to be read with section 18 thereof, the person on whom summons under

section 6 has been served shall not be entitled to contest such statement

that the applicant is the competent authority as stated in the application

and therefore, not open to judicial challenge at the ejectment stage in an

application made to Court by a competent authority under section 5 of

the Act except that such person may establish that he is in possession or

occupation of the land upon a valid permit or other written authority of

the State granted in accordance with any written law and that such

permit or authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered

CA/PHC/0078/2020

Page 13 of 19

invalid; and that It shall not be competent even to the Magistrate's Court

to call for any evidence from the competent authority in support of the

application under section 5. [Emphasis is mine]

In the light of the law set out in section 5(1) of the Act to be read with sections

9(1) and 9(2) thereof and in the light of the law established by the judicial

precedents as referred to above, it is my considered view that a dispute as to

the competency of the competent authority stated in an application made to

the Magistrate under section 5 of the Act, is wholly, foreign and utterly alien

to a proceedings that may be initiated before a Magistrate Court by a

competent authority for eviction of a person and therefore, such a defence

to an application made to Court by a competent authority under section 5 of

the Act is wholly, untenable in law, and therefore, not in any manner available

to such a person who in his opinion of the competent authority, is in

unauthorized possession or occupation of a state land for; the Legislature in

enacting section 9 of the Act had never intended a defence as such to be made

available to a person as such except only, for the defence expressly, and

explicitly, made available therein.[Emphasis is mine]

There is a further point which would in my opinion, fortify and strengthen my

view taken as aforesaid and let me now, examine it.

Upon a careful analysis of sections 9(1) and 9(2) of the Act in particular, it

clearly, appears that the Legislature in enacting this special piece of legislation,

had never intended for a protracted trial to be held by a Magistrate in an

application made to it by a competent authority under section 5 of the Act

when it had proceeded to enact section 9 thereto in such a manner as

expressly, and explicitly, setting out in unambiguous terms the very scope of

such an inquiry.

However, relying heavily, on the decision of this Court in Banda v President,

M.P.C.S. Ltd., Medirigiriya and another [2003] 1 SLR 193, it was contended by

the Appellant before us that the Magistrate can inquire into the question of

CA/PHC/0078/2020

Page 14 of 19

whether the Deputy Chief Engineer of Sri Lanka Ports Authority is a competent

authority or not and therefore, submitted that it was a matter that ought to

have been considered by the learned Additional Magistrate of Galle at the

inquiry held by him under section 9 of the Act.

Upon a careful analysis of the decision in Banda v President, M.P.C.S. Ltd.,

Medirigiriya and another(Supra), it becomes abundantly, clear that Court in

that case, had not in any manner, directed its judicial mind to the provisions

contained in sections 5, 9(1) and 9(2) of the Act and its legal effect, instead

Court in that case had proceeded to examine whether the land in dispute was

falling within the definition of State Land within the meaning of the Act and

that the competent authority therein, is a public officer within the meaning of

Article 170 of the Constitution, and hence, the decision in Banda v President,

M.P.C.S. Ltd., Medirigiriya and another(Supra) is if I may say so respectfully, a

decision not based on the relevant provisions of the Act, namely; sections 5,

9(1) and 9(2) and therefore, it is of little assistance to resolve the issue at hand

before us.

In the light of sections 5, 9 (1) and 9(2) of the Act, the person who has been

summoned is not entitled to contest any of the matters stated in the

application under section 5 of the Act and one of such matters to be stated in

the application made under Section 5 of the Act is that the person making the

application is a competent authority for the purposes of the Act.

The Respondent had in his affidavit filed along with his application under

section 5 of the Act before the Magistrate Court of Galle clearly, and

unequivocally, affirmed to the fact he is the competent authority within the

meaning of the Act which fact cannot in any manner, be contested by the

Appellant and therefore, not open to a judicial challenge in view of sections 5,

9(1) and 9(2) of the Act and the judicial precedents referred to above.

In the light of the law set out above, I would find myself unable to agree with

the principal contention so advanced by the learned Counsel for the Appellant

CA/PHC/0078/2020

Page 15 of 19

that both the learned High Court Judge of the Southern Province holden at

Galle and the learned Additional Magistrate of Galle had not directed judicial

mind to the pivotal question whether the Respondent was the competent

authority within the meaning of section 5 of the Act to be read with section 18

thereof.

Hence, I would hold that, the principal contention so advanced by the learned

Counsel for the Appellant, namely; the Respondent is not a competent

authority within the meaning of the “Act”, cannot in any manner, sustain both

in fact and law and therefore, it should be rejected in-limine.

The question that would next, arise for our consideration is with regard to the

scope of an inquiry under section 9 of the Act and section 9(1) thereof enacts

thus;

“9. (1) At such inquiry the person on whom summons under section 6

has been served shall not be entitled to contest any of the matters

stated in the application under section 5 except that such person

may establish that he is in possession or occupation of the land

upon a valid permit or other written authority of the State granted

in accordance with any written law and that such permit or

authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered

invalid.”[Emphasis is mine]

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in Farook vs. Gunewardene-Government

Agent, Amparai (Supra) that, “At the inquiry before the Magistrate, the only

plea by way of defence that the Petitioner can put forward is that he is in

possession or occupation of the land upon a valid permit or other written

authority of the State granted in accordance with any written law and that

such permit or authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered

invalid.”

CA/PHC/0078/2020

Page 16 of 19

It was inter-alia, held in Muhandiram v. Chairman, No. 111, Janatha

Estate Development Board 1992 (1) SLR 110 at page 112 that, “Under

section 9(1) of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act No. 7 of 1979, the

person on whom summons has been served (in this instance, the Respondent-

Petitioner) shall not be entitled to contest any of the matters stated in the

application under section 5 except that such person may establish that he is in

possession or occupation of the land upon a valid permit or other written

authority of the State granted in accordance with any written law and that

such permit or written authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise

rendered invalid...... The said section clearly reveals that at an inquiry of this

nature, the person on whom the summons has been served has to establish

that his possession or occupation is upon a valid permit or other written

authority of the State granted according to the written law. The burden of proof

of that fact lies on that particular person on whom the summons has been

served and appears before the relevant Court.”.

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA/PHC/41/2010(Supra) that, “Under

section 9 of the State Land (Recovery of Possession) Act, the scope of the

inquiry is limited to the person noticed to establish he is not in unauthorized

occupation or possession by establishing that;

1. Occupying the land on a permit or a written authority.

2. It must be a valid permit or a written authority.

3. It must be in force at the time of presenting it to Court.

4. It must have been issued in accordance with any written law.”

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA (PHC) APN 29/2016(Supra) that, “A

person who has been summoned in terms of section 6 of the Act can only

establish that, he is in possession or occupation of the land upon a valid

permit or other written authority of the State granted in accordance with any

written law and that such permit or authority is in force and not revoked or

CA/PHC/0078/2020

Page 17 of 19

otherwise rendered invalid. He cannot contest any of the matters stated in the

application under section 5 of the Act.”

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA(PHC)48/2016 (Supra) that, “.... the

only defence available is to prove possession is upon a valid permit or written

authority, issued in accordance with law, and which should be in force....”.

In the light of the law set out in section 9(1) of the Act and the judicial

precedent referred to above, at an inquiry of this nature, the person on whom

the summons has been served (in this instance the Appellant) has to establish

that his possession or occupation is upon a valid permit or other written

authority of the State granted according to the written law and that such

permit or written authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered

invalid.

In proof thereof, the Appellant had produced to Court some documents marked

ව1 to ව7 along with his showing cause. However, upon a careful consideration

of those documents as a whole, it becomes abundantly, clear that neither of

those documents constitutes a permit or an authority as such coming within

the meaning of section 9(1) of the Act and therefore, the Appellant had not in

any manner, established that he is in possession or occupation of the land

stated in the application made to Court by the Competent Authority under and

in terms of section 5 of the Act upon a valid permit or other written authority of

the State granted in accordance with any written law and that such permit or

authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered invalid as required

by section 9(1) of the Act as rightly, held by the learned Additional Magistrate

of Galle.

Besides, it had never been the position of the Appellant taken up in the

Magistrate Court or in the High Court or before this Court that his possession

or occupation of the land in dispute which in the opinion of the Respondent

being the competent authority is State Land, is upon a valid permit or other

written authority of the State granted according to the written law and that

CA/PHC/0078/2020

Page 18 of 19

such permit or written authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise

rendered invalid.

In view of the above, it clearly, appears to me that the Appellant had adduced

not even an iota of evidence to satisfy the learned Additional Magistrate of Galle

that he was entitled to the possession or occupation of the State Land as

rightly, held by the learned Additional Magistrate of Galle.

Hence, I would hold that, the contention advanced in paragraph 5(ආ), (ඈ) and

(ඉ) of his petition of appeal by the Appellant that, adequate analysis had not

been made with regard to the facts and documents which shows that the

Appellant holds a government approved possession, is not entitled to succeed,

both in fact and law and as such, it too, should be rejected in-limine.

With regard to the contention raised by the Appellant in paragraph 5(ඊ) of his

petition of appeal, even though it appears that the learned Additional

Magistrate of Galle had not made a detailed analysis of the facts and the law in

relation to the issue at hand before her, yet, for the reasons stated above, it

had not caused any prejudice to the Appellant’s legal rights. Besides, it is

significant to observe that it was not averred either in his application preferred

to the High Court or in the petition of appeal preferred to this Court by the

Appellant nor in his written submissions filed before this Court and below that

such failure on the part of the learned Additional Magistrate of Galle had

caused prejudice to his legal rights and therefore, the next contention so

advanced by the Appellant too, is without any merit and as such, it too, is not

entitled to succeed.

Hence, I would hold that the learned Additional Magistrate of Galle was

entirely, justified both in fact and law in making an order directing the

Appellant and his dependents, if any, in occupation of the State Land as

morefully, described in the schedule to the application made to Court by the

Respondent being the competent authority, to be ejected forthwith therefrom.

CA/PHC/0078/2020

Page 19 of 19

In the circumstances, I would see no error both in fact and law in the order of

the learned Additional Magistrate of Galle and therefore, it can sustain both in

fact and law as rightly, held by the learned High Court Judge of the Southern

Province holden at Galle.

Hence, I would see no error both in fact and law in the order of the learned

High Court Judge of the Southern Province holden at Galle too, when he had

proceeded to dismiss the application in revision filed by the Appellant before

the High Court inviting it to invoke its extra-ordinary revisionary jurisdiction to

revise and set aside the order of the learned Additional Magistrate of Galle by

holding that, the order sought to be revised is not contrary to law.

In view of the foregoing, I would hold that, the instant appeal is not entitled to

succeed both in fact and law.

Hence, I would proceed to dismiss the instant appeal with costs of this court

and the courts below.

In the result, I would affirm the orders of both the learned High Court Judge of

the Southern Province holden at Galle and the learned Additional Magistrate of

Galle.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL