f I I I

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCTRATIC

SOCIALIST REPURLIC OF SRI LANKA.

1

In the matter of an application for Writs of Certiorari, Prohibition and Mandamus under and in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

C.A. (Writ) Application No.83/2018

Solanga Arachchige Dhanushaka Anthony Perera. No.329/80, Lake Crescent, Attidiya, Dehiwela. Petitioner

Vs.

1. Sri Lanka Anti-Doping Agency,

100/7, Independence Avenue, Colombo 7.

2. Prof. Arjuna De Silva, Chairman, Sri Lanka Anti-Doping Agency,

100/7, Independence Avenue, Colombo 7

3. Dr. Seevali Jyawickreme, Director General

2

Sri Lanka Anti-Doping Agency,

100/7, Independence Avenue, Colombo 7

4. Sri Lanka Rugby (Formerly known as Sri Rugby Football Union), No.33, Torrington Place, Colombo 7.

5. Nizam Mohamed, Hon. Secretary, Sri Lanka Rugby, (Formerly known as Sri Rugby Football Union), No.33, Torrington Place, Colombo 7.

6. Rohan Gunaratne, Executive Director Sri Lanka Rugby, (Formerly known as Sri Rugby Football Union), No.33, Torrington Place, Colombo 7.

7. Dayasiri J ayasekera, Minister of Sports, No.9, Phillip Gunawardane Mawatha, Colombo 7.

Lanka

Lanka

Lanka

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED AND

DECIDED ON

8. Jayantha Wijeratne, Secretary, No.9, Phillip Gunawardane Mawatha, Colombo 7.

9. T. M. S. P. Bandara, Director General, Department of Sports Development, No.9, Phillip Gunawardane Mawatha, Colombo 7. Respondents ************

P.PADMAN SURASENA, J. (PICA) &

A. L. SHlRAN GOONERATNE, J.

Pulasthi Rupasinghe for the petitioner

instructed by R.A.Lanka Dharmasiri.

3

Sumathi Dharmawardane, S.D.S.G. for the 7th, 8th and 9th respondents.

21 st February, 2018

*************

4

P. PADMAN SURASENA, J. (PICA)

Court heard submissions of learned Counsel for the

petitioner as well as learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General

for the respondents.

One relief the petitioner has prayed for in this application

is a writ of mandamus to compel the respondents to provide a

reasonable opportunity for the petitioner to submit a fresh

urine sample.

This Court observes that after the respondents found

an adverse analytical finding report, they have communicated

the said finding to the petitioner by letter dated 02nd

February,2018 produced marked P 4. In the same letter

the 1 st respondent has afforded an opportunity for the

petitioner to repot to Sri Lanka Anti-Doping Agency at 10.30

5

a.m. on 06th February 2018 and to inform whether he would

proceed for the 'B Sam pIe' analysis or not. I t is the

submission of learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General that if

the petitioner was not satisfied with the adverse finding there

was an opportunity given to him to produce a 'B Sample' for

re-testing within a period of 07 days. This is manifest from

the "Analytical report (confidential) (Sample A)" report

annexed to the letter marked P 4.

Learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General brings to the

notice of this Court that the petitioner had in fact presented

himself before the Sri Lanka Anti-Doping Agency on 07th

February 2018 and tendered a letter written by his own hand

writing that he would not opt for a ' B Sample'. The

petitioner by that letter had requested the Authorities to

conduct an inquiry. This Court observes that this assertion

by the petitioner made in the letter dated 07th February 2018

runs counter to his present request contained in the prayer

(e) to issue a writ of mandamus to compel the respondents to

6

provide a reasonable opportunity for the petitioner to submit

a fresh urine sample. In view of the assertion by the petitioner

in the above letter this Court is of the view that the prayer (e)

of the petition does not simply arise. Learned Senior Deputy

Solicitor General pointed out to Court that the petitioner has

not divulged anything about the handing over of the said

letter. Thus, this fact seriously vitiates his credibility.

The petitioner has also prayed for a writ of

prohibition to prohibit the respondents in preventing the

petitioner from participating any sports related activity

without conducting an inquiry in compliance with the law. It

is the submission of the learned Senior Deputy Solicitor

General that in any case the issue whether to prevent the

petitioner from participating any sports related activity or not,

will be decided after the inquiry. The said inquiry is scheduled

to be held on 12th March 2018. Therefore, this Court if of the

view that even the prayer (d) also does not arise.

7

The petitioner has prayed for a writ of certiorari to

quash the decision contained in the document produced

marked P 4. Perusal of P 4 reveals that it has only

communicated to the petitioner about adverse analytical

finding arising out of his sample (Sample A) and had given

him also the option of going for the ' Sam pIe B'

The 1sT respondent had by the letter P 4 has provisionally

suspended the petitioner from taking part in any sports

related activities. This Court is of the view that this is a

temporary measure that has been implemented by the Sri

Lanka Anti-Doping Agency and the said decision is based on

adverse analytical finding report. I t is common ground that

the petitioner is anxious in participating the 'Cliford Cup'

Knock-out Tournament which has already commenced. This

Court is of the view that it cannot encourage a situation where

the petitioner whose sample is reported to have contained

II

f

~ f i Ii I ,

,

8

adverse analytical finding, is permitted in taking part in this

tournament at this stage.

Learned Counsel for the petitioner relies on

document P 5 to argue that the 2nd respondent had been

biased against the petitioner. However, we observe that the

said document namely, P 5 is only a news item published in

the 'Daily Mirror" newspaper. This Court is of the view that it

cannot act on such newspaper articles. In these

circumstances this Court decides to refuse to issue notices on

the respondents. The application must stand dismissed

without costs.

PRSIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

A. L. SHIRAN GOONERATNE, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Kwkj-