==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/CPA/0039/26

Page 1 of 19

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for

Revision in terms of Article 138(1) of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka read with section

11(1) of the High Court of the Provinces

(Special Provisions Act) No. 19 of 1990

(as amended) against the Order dated

28th April 2026 delivered by the High

Court of the Western Province Holden in

Colombo in Special Child Abduction

Case No. HC 01/2025 under Section 9

of the Civil Aspects of International

Child Abduction Act No. 10 of 2001 read

with the Hague Convention on the

Aspects of International Child Abduction

of 1980, Re: Kiara Maria Dissanayake.

ALAHANAWAN BANDARAGE AYESHA

JINASENA,

President's Counsel,

Secretary to the Ministry of Justice and

National Integration

No. 19, Sri Sangaraja Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

PETITIONER

-Vs-

Court (CPA) Application No: CA/CPA/0039/26 High Court of Colombo Case No: Special Child Abduction HC 01/2025

CA/CPA/0039/26

Page 2 of 19

1. MEGHA DASHINI WEERASEKARA,

No. 32/A/3/4, Alakeshwara Road,

Ethul Kotte, Kotte.

2. MARIUS ROSHAN WILLIAM

DISSANAYAKE,

No. 21, Simon Hewawitharana Road,

Colombo 03.

And presently of,

1018, Cambie Street, Unit 308,

Vancouver, British Columbia,

V6B 6J6, Canada.

RESPONDENTS

AND NOW BETWEEN

MARIUS ROSHAN WILLIAM

DISSANAYAKE

No. 21, Simon Hewawitharana Road,

Colombo 03.

2nd RESPONDENTS-PETITIONER

-Vs-

ALAHANAWAN BANDARAGE AYESHA

JINASENA,

President's Counsel,

Secretary to the Ministry of Justice and

National Integration

CA/CPA/0039/26

Page 3 of 19

No. 19, Sri Sangaraja Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

PETITIONER-RESPONDENT

MEGHA DASHINI WEERASEKARA,

No. 32/A/3/4, Alakeshwara Road,

Ethul Kotte, Kotte.

1st RESPONDENT-RESPONDENT

Before : D. THOTAWATTA, J.

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Counsel : Ali Sabry, PC for the 2nd Respondent-

Petitioner.

Hashini Opatha, SSC with Akila

Dalpatadu, SC and Ashara Seneviratna,

SC for the Petitioner-Respondent.

Kuvera de Zoysa, PC with Sajana De

Zoysa, Niranjan Arulpragasam

and Ashenka De Silva instructed by

Niroshi Paranagama for the 1st

Respondent-Respondent.

Written Submissions

of the 2nd Respondent-

Petitioner tendered on : 03.07.2026 and 02.09.2026.

Written Submissions

of the 1st Respondent

-Respondent tendered on : 06.07.2026 and 07.09.2026.

CA/CPA/0039/26

Page 4 of 19

Written Submissions

of the Petitioner-Respondent

tendered on : 26.06.2026 and 28.08.2026.

Decided on : 25.09.2026

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Instant application in revision has been preferred to this Court by the 2nd

Respondent-Petitioner seeking inter-alia, to set aside the order dated

28.04.2026, made in the exercise of the special jurisdiction vested in him by

Section 9 of the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction Act No. 10 of

2001 (hereinafter called and referred to as “the Act”) by the learned High Court

Judge of the Western Province holden in Colombo (hereinafter called and

referred to as “the learned High Court Judge”) in an action styled “Special

Child Abduction HC 01/2025” a certified copy of which was annexed to the

petition furnished to this Court by Petitioner marked as ‘A10’ (hereinafter

called and referred to as ‘the HC order”) (Vide- prayer ‘C’ of the petition) and

to uphold and sustain the preliminary objection so raised by the 2nd

Respondent-Petitioner and dismiss the Petitioner-Respondent’s application

dated 03.10.2025 in-limine (Vide- prayer ‘D’ of the petition), or in the

alternative to prayer ‘C’ and ‘D’, to direct the learned High Court Judge to

determine the said preliminary objection and adduce reasons therefor (Vide-

prayer ‘E’ of the petition).

Instant application in revision was on the other hand, vehemently, opposed

by both the Petitioner-Respondent as well as the 1st Respondent-Respondent

on the grounds enumerated in their respective statement of objections.

The facts material to the instant application in revision may be briefly, set out

below.

The Petitioner-Respondent being the holder of the office of the Secretary

to the Ministry of Justice and by virtue of the said office the Petitioner-

Respondent being the Central Authority within the meaning of section 4 of

CA/CPA/0039/26

Page 5 of 19

the Act; that, by virtue of the powers vested in her under and in terms of

section 9 of the Act as the Central Authority, the Petitioner-Respondent had

in her application dated 03.10.2025, made an application to the High Court

of the Western Province holden in Colombo (hereinafter called and referred to

as “the High Court of the Province”) praying inter-alia, for an interlocutory

order in terms of Sec 377(b) of the Civil Procedure Code in respect of the 2nd

Respondent-Petitioner (Vide- prayer ‘b’ of the petition); a declaration declaring

that the 2nd Respondent-Petitioner has contravened the provisions of Section

3 of the Act (Vide- prayer ‘d’ of the petition); an order for the return of the

child named in the petition (hereinafter called and referred to as “the child”)

to her habitual residence in Canada (Vide- prayer ‘e’ of the petition); together

with an interim order restraining the 2nd Respondent-Petitioner from taking

the child beyond the territorial limits of Sri Lanka until the final determination

of this matter (Vide-prayer ‘c’ of the petition); that, the 2nd Respondent-

Petitioner who had in his statement of objections, raised an array of

preliminary objections as to the maintainability of the application made to

the High Court of the Province by the Petitioner-Respondent in his statement

of objections, had raised a further preliminary objection as to the

maintainability of the application on 23.02.2026 on the premise, that the

affidavit dated 02.10.2025 which was filed in support of the application dated

03.10.2025, was defective in as much as it had been attested by a

Commissioner for Oaths who was an employee of the Central Authority, and

therefore had come within the prohibition embodied in the proviso to Section

12(2) of the Oaths Ordinance of No 09 of 1895 as amended (hereinafter called

and referred to as “the Oaths Ordinance”), and invited the Court to hear and

determine it in the first instance; and that, the learned High Court Judge who

heard the preliminary objection on the strength of the written submissions

furnished to Court by all the parties, had in the HC order, directed the

Petitioner-Respondent to furnish to Court a duly, attested affidavit in place of

the affidavit already furnished to the Court by the Petitioner-Respondent

along with her application. It is this order (HC order) that the 2nd Respondent-

Petitioner now, seeks to revise and set aside in the instant application in

revision on the purported exceptional circumstances urged in paragraph 13

CA/CPA/0039/26

Page 6 of 19

(a) to (h) of the petition which may be reproduced verbatim the same as

follows;

“a) The Impugned Order is ex facie bad in law in that the learned High

Court Judge failed to rule on or make any determination in respect of

the Preliminary Objection duly raised before the Court.

b) The Impugned Order is bad in law in that the learned High Court

Judge gave no reasons whatsoever for his decision and failed to deal

with the submissions presented to His Honor in support of the

Preliminary Objection.

c) The Impugned Order is contrary to and inconsistent with the binding

precedent of the Supreme Court of Sri Lanka in Case Land Reform

Commission v. Kandy Plantations Ltd - SC/HCCA/LA/35/2020;

SCM 06.06.2024, which was placed before His Honor for adjudication.

d) The learned High Court Judge failed to appreciate that once a

supporting affidavit is found to be bad in law, that defect goes to the

very root of the application itself and renders the entire application

invalid. As decided by the Supreme Court in the said case which His

Honor himself referred to in the Impugned Order - such a fatal defect

cannot be rectified by the tendering of a fresh affidavit, and that

determination constitutes binding precedent.

e) The Impugned Order is contrary to the express mandatory provisions

of Section 12(2) of the Oaths and Affirmations Ordinance No. 9 of 1895

and the clear and unambiguous rulings of the Supreme Court of Sri

Lanka on the said provision. The learned High Court Judge, in

overruling the Preliminary Objection, failed to appreciate and apply the

correct legal test. The order is, therefore, on its face, illegal.

f) The Impugned Order permits the Respondent who filed a supporting

affidavit that is a nullity in law - to cure that fundamental and incurable

defect by the mere expedient of filing a fresh affidavit. A defect of this

CA/CPA/0039/26

Page 7 of 19

nature goes to the very root of the application and strikes at its

evidentiary foundation. To permit its cure at this stage is directly

contrary to binding Supreme Court authority and shocks the

conscience of the Court.

g) The learned High Court Judge made the Impugned Order without

setting out any reasons therefor. An order made without reasons,

particularly one overruling a preliminary objection founded on a clear

and binding line of Supreme Court authority, is not a judicial

determination in any meaningful sense. The Impugned Order is, on that

basis, a nullity.

h) The Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction Act No. 10 of 2001

does not confer any right of appeal against an interlocutory order made

thereunder. There is accordingly no appellate remedy available to the

Petitioner. The revisionary jurisdiction of Your Lordship's Court is the

sole and only recourse, and its invocation is both necessary and

appropriate in the circumstances.”

The Petitioner-Respondent on the other hand, seeks to resist the instant

application in revision on the grounds urged in paragraph 5 of her statement

of objections which may be, re-produced verbatim the same as follows;

“a. By the Impugned Order dated 28th April 2026 marked as "A10" with

the Petition, the Learned High Court Judge, in part, agreed with the

Petitioner that the Affidavit is faulty and in part agreed with the

Respondent that it is a curable defect and could be rectified by the

Respondent filing a fresh Affidavit;

b. The said Order of the Learned High Court Judge is valid in law and

should be upheld also in view of any purported defect in the affidavit

dated 3rd October 2025 would not defeat the application made by the

Respondent under and in terms of the Child Abduction Act for the

following reasons and any other reason that the Counsel for the

Respondent may submit to Your Lordships during these proceedings:

CA/CPA/0039/26

Page 8 of 19

“

i. The Act provides in Section 9 (2) that the proceedings

before the High Court should be by way of summary

procedure in terms of the Civil Procedure Code (as

amended);

ii. In terms of Chapter XXIV of the Civil Procedure Code and

in particular, Section 373, filing of a Petition is sufficient to

institute proceedings by way of Summary Procedure.

iii. Section 376 provides that affidavits and/or other material

could be attached to the petition only so far as it is

convenient to do so, which confirms that it is not

mandatory to have an affidavit accompany the Petition so

filed.

iv. The contents of the affidavit/nature of evidence admitted

through the said affidavit falls within the exception to

Section 181 of the Civil Procedure Code, and thus permit

evidence other than direct evidence.

v. The matters which the High Court is called upon to

consider in considering the interlocutory order prayed for

under Section 377 (b) and the travel restriction in respect

of the Petitioner and the child are contained in the

Application of the 1st Respondent-Respondent (found at

pages 530-532 of the case record marked as 'A' attached to

the Petition). The said application is admissible as evidence

in terms of Section 15 of the Child Abduction Act. Thus,

any purported defect in the Affidavit by which the said

application was referred cannot be construed as

invalidating the proceedings filed before the High Court.”

Apart from the preliminary objection raised in paragraph 1 of the statement

of objections as to the maintainability of the instant application in revision,

the 1st Respondent-Respondent seeks to resist the instant application in

CA/CPA/0039/26

Page 9 of 19

revision on the grounds urged in paragraph 14 (a),(b) and (c) of her statement

of objections which may be, re-produced verbatim the same as follows;

“

a) The affidavit has been duly attested by the Assistant Secretary (Legal)

to the Ministry of Justice in her capacity as a Justice of the Peace;

b) Section 12 and the proviso to Section 12(2) of the Oaths Ordinance

only applies to the Commissioners for Oaths and is not applicable to a

Justice of the Peace;

c) In any event, the Assistant Secretary (Legal) to the Ministry of Justice

is not an "attorney-at-law to any of the parties" and does not have a

personal "interest" on the return of the minor child to the habitual

residence, and as such, the said proviso does not apply in law.”

It is in this context, I would think it expedient at this juncture to carefully,

examine the brief HC order.

The operative part of the HC order in its literal context, reads thus;

“අධිකරණයේදී යෙපාර්ශවය විසින් ඉදිරිපත් කරන ලෙ කරුණු සළකා බැලීයෙන් අනතුරුව

යෙෙ යේඛනයේ අවස්ථා සලකා බලා යපත්සම්කරු විසින් විධිෙත් යපත්සෙක් ඉදිරිපත් කිරීෙට

ඉඩදීෙ උචිත බව යපනී යන යෙයින් සති යෙකක කාලයක් තුළ යළි විධිෙත්ෙ අත්සන් තබන ලෙ

දිවුරුම් ප්‍රකාශයක් යගානු කිරීෙට නියයෝග කරමි.”

However, a cursory glance of the operative part of the brief HC order as quoted

above, does not explicitly, show as to whether the learned High Court Judge

had upheld or rejected the preliminary objection so raised by the 2nd

Respondent-Petitioner. However, upon a careful and close scrutiny of the brief

HC order, the irresistible inference that one may reasonably, draw from the

specific direction made by the learned High Court Judge on the Petitioner-

Respondent that she should furnish to Court a duly, attested affidavit in place

of the affidavit already furnished to the Court by the Petitioner-Respondent

along with her application is that he had thereby, implicitly, upheld the

preliminary objection so raised by the 2nd Respondent-Petitioner as to the

maintainability of the application of the Petitioner-Respondent on the said

premise that, the affidavit dated 02.10.2025 which was filed in support of the

CA/CPA/0039/26

Page 10 of 19

application dated 03.10.2025, was defective in as much as it had been

attested by a Commissioner for Oaths who was an employee of the Central

Authority, and therefore had come within the prohibition embodied in the

proviso to Section 12(2) of the Oaths Ordinance of No 09 of 1895 as amended

(hereinafter called and referred to as “the Oaths Ordinance”).

It is significant to observe that the Petitioner-Respondent in paragraph 5 (a)

and (b) of the statement of objections filed before this Court in resisting the

instant application in revision, had clearly, and unequivocally, admitted that

it was so when she stated therein, that, the Learned High Court Judge had in

the HC Order, agreed in part with the 2nd Respondent-Petitioner that the

Affidavit is faulty while agreeing in part with the Petitioner-Respondent that

the defect was curable and thus it could be rectified by the Petitioner-

Respondent in furnishing a fresh Affidavit duly attested and therefore,

purported defect in the affidavit dated 03.10.2025 would not defeat the

application made by the Petitioner-Respondent under and in terms of the

Child Abduction Act, hence, the HC order is valid in law and should thus, be

upheld.

Furthermore, the fact that the 1st Respondent-Respondent had not taken any

step to canvass the HC order, clearly, and unequivocally, shows that she too,

had admitted the correctness of the said findings of the learned High Court

Judge.

Moreover, the 2nd Respondent-Petitioner too, had admitted that it was so, in

view of the matters adverted to by him in paragraphs 6 and 7 of the synopsis

of submissions dated 01.09.2026, that, the Respondents are barred and

estopped from advancing the aforesaid contentions for the reasons that the

Learned High Court Judge, having heard the preliminary objection raised by

the Petitioner and the oral and written submissions made on behalf of all

parties, agreed, in part, with the Petitioner that the Affidavit was "faulty"; and

that the Petitioner-Respondent in paragraph 5 of the Statement of Objections,

has conceded that the order of the learned High Court Judge is correct in

part, by agreeing with the Petitioner that the Affidavit is faulty; and that,

CA/CPA/0039/26

Page 11 of 19

critically, the Respondent has not filed any appeal or application for revision

against the finding that the Affidavit is defective and thus, by deliberately

choosing not to challenge that finding before an appropriate Court, the

Respondent has unequivocally accepted and acquiesced in the finding that

the Affidavit is indeed defective.

Hence, the Petitioner-Respondent and the 1st Respondent-Respondent had

clearly, and unequivocally, admitted in no uncertain terms that the learned

High Court Judge, having heard the preliminary objection raised by the

Petitioner and the oral and written submissions made on behalf of all parties,

agreed, in part, with the 2nd Respondent-Petitioner that the Affidavit was

"faulty".

In the circumstances, both the Petitioner-Respondent as well as the 1st

Respondent-Respondent are now, debarred and estopped in law from re-

agitating the validity and/or legal soundness of the said findings before this

Court as rightly, contended by the learned President’s Counsel for the 2nd

Respondent-Petitioner.

However, it is regrettable to observe, that, both the Petitioner-Respondent and

the 1st Respondent-Respondent had nonetheless, made a futile attempt in the

course of the argument before us to re-agitate the same issue in respect of

which a clear and definite finding had admittedly, been so reached by the

learned High Court Judge as enumerated above, by contending that the

prohibition enumerated in proviso to section 12(2) of the Oaths Ordinance

would not be applicable to the affidavit in question for; it had been attested

by a Justice of the Peace and not a Commissioner for Oaths, which clearly,

and unequivocally, shows that the Petitioner-Respondent and the 1st

Respondent-Respondent had thus, attempted to contend that the findings of

the learned High Court Judge as enumerated above, is erroneous, thus, going

back on her own admission of the Petitioner-Respondent made in explicit

terms in paragraph 5 (a) and (b) of the statement of objections as enumerated

above and the 1st Respondent-Respondent upon her acquiescence of the said

findings of the learned High Court Judge as enumerated above.

CA/CPA/0039/26

Page 12 of 19

Hence, I would hold that the contention so advanced by the Petitioner-

Respondent and the 1st Respondent-Respondent cannot sustain in law and

therefore, it ought to be rejected as rightly, contended by the learned

President’s Counsel for the 2nd Respondent-Petitioner.

I would therefore, hold that the findings of the learned High Court Judge that

the affidavit in question is faulty, remains unchallenged and uncontroverted.

There now, remains for consideration only the question as to whether or not,

the defect in the affidavit of the Petitioner-Respondent filed along with her

petition under section 9 of the Act in support of the contents therein, is

curable in law as contended by the Petitioner-Respondent and the 1st

Respondent-Respondent or else, as to whether or not it is incurable in law as

contended by the 2nd Respondent-Petitioner.

It may now, be examined.

It was the position adverted to by the learned President’s Counsel for the 2nd

Respondent-Petitioner that a defect as such in an affidavit is one that would

go to the root of the action and therefore it is incurable and thus, be fatal to

the maintainability of the action and in the result, action should be dismissed

in-limine.

It was on the other hand, the position of both learned Senior State Counsel

for the Petitioner-Respondent as well as the learned President’s Counsel for

the 1st Respondent-Respondent that the defect is curable and therefore, it can

be cured by furnishing a fresh affidavit as directed by the learned High Court

Judge.

However, it is significant to observe that, both the Petitioner-Respondent as

well as the 1st Respondent-Respondent in the course of the argument before

us sought to contend further that, it is not a necessary requisite under the

summary procedure to attach by way of an exhibit, an affidavit to the written

petition presented to Court by the Petitioner under Chapter XXIV of the Civil

Procedure Code as amended, and therefore, non-attachment of an affidavit to

CA/CPA/0039/26

Page 13 of 19

the written petition or faulty affidavit attached thereto, will not affect the

validity of the application made thereunder, and therefore, the faulty affidavit

attached to the written petition will not vitiate the application or action

instituted under the summary procedure and as a result, the faulty affidavit

attached to the written petition filed in the High Court of the Province by the

Petitioner-Respondent will not vitiate the application and/or the action filed

thereat, under section 9 of the Act. On the other hand, it was contended by

the 2nd Respondent-Petitioner that it was a necessary requisite under the

summary procedure and non-compliance is fatal, and it would culminate in

the dismissal of the application and/or the action in-limine.

They may now, be examined.

With regard to the procedure to be adopted and followed in an action under

the Act, Section 9(2) thereof, provides that, “Every application under

subsection (1), shall be by way of summary procedure and shall be exempt

from the payment of any stamp duty under the Stamp Duty Act No. 43 of

1982.”.

Hence, in the instant action, the procedure to be adopted and followed as laid

down by section 9 of the Act, is the summary procedure as envisaged by

Chapter XXIV of the Civil Procedure as amended.

I would think it expedient at this juncture to examine the provisions of the

Civil Procedure Code as amended pertaining to the summary procedure.

Section 7 of the Civil Procedure as amended provides that,

“The procedure of an action may be either " regular " or " summary ".”.

Section 8 of the Civil Procedure as amended provides that,

“Save and except actions in which it is by this Ordinance or any other

law specially provided that proceedings may be taken by way of

summary procedure, every action shall commence and proceed by a

course of regular procedure, as hereinafter prescribed.”.

CA/CPA/0039/26

Page 14 of 19

Section 373 of the Civil Procedure as amended provides that,

“Every application to the Court, or action, of summary procedure shall

be instituted upon a duly stamped written petition presented to Court

by the applicant.”

Section 376 of the Civil Procedure as amended provides that,

“With the petition, and so far as conveniently can be attached thereto,

shall be exhibited such affidavits, authenticated copy records,

processes, or other documentary evidence as may be requisite to

furnish prima facie proof of the material facts set out or alleged in the

petition, or the court may in its discretion permit or direct the petitioner

to adduce oral evidence before the court for this purpose, which shall

be taken down by the court in writing.”

Section 377 of the Civil Procedure Code as amended provides that,

“If the court is satisfied on the evidence exhibited or adduced that the

material facts of the petition are prima facie established or is of opinion

that on the footing of these facts the petitioner is entitled to the remedy,

or to the order in his favour, for which the petition prays, or any part

thereof, then the court shall accordingly make either-

(a) an order nisi, conditioned to take effect in the event of the

respondent not showing cause against it on a day appointed by

the order for that purpose; or

(b) an interlocutory order appointing a day for the determination

of the matter of the petition, and intimating that the respondent

will be heard in opposition to the petition if he appears before the

court for that purpose on the day so appointed.”

Section 380 of the Civil Procedure Code as amended provides that,

CA/CPA/0039/26

Page 15 of 19

“If the court is not satisfied on the evidence exhibited or adduced that

the material facts of the petition are prima facie established or is of

opinion that on the footing of those facts the petitioner is not entitled to

the relief which he asks, then in either case the court shall refuse the

petition.”.

It is common ground that the instant action had been instituted by the

Petitioner-Respondent in the High Court of the Province under the summary

procedure as contained in chapter XXIV of the Civil Procedure Code as

amended, and as provided for by section 9 of the Act by presenting thereto, a

written petition as required by section 9(2) thereof, and hence, the application

of the Petitioner-Respondent is entirely, governed by the procedure laid down

by Chapter XXIV of the Civil Procedure Code as amended.

In the light of section 376 of the Civil Procedure Code as amended, it is a

mandatory requisite that with the Petition and so far as conveniently attached

thereto, shall be exhibited such affidavits, authenticated copy records,

processes, or other documentary evidence as may be requisite to furnish

prima facie proof of the material facts set out or alleged in the petition.

For; the affidavits, authenticated copy records, processes, or other

documentary evidence are the essential materials upon which the Court has

to be satisfied if the material facts of the petition are prima facie established

by the Petitioner. [Emphasis is mine]

What if, the affidavit attached to the petition is faulty or defective? Would the

dismissal of an action or application instituted under the summary

procedure, be automatic in such circumstances?

It may now, be examined.

It was inter-alia held by this Court in Damayanthi Abeywardene and

Another Vs. Hemalatha Abeywardene and others 1993 [1] SLR 272 at

page 277,

CA/CPA/0039/26

Page 16 of 19

“In terms of that section every application has to be made by way of

summary procedure and every person sought to be affected by the order

shall be named as a respondent in the petition. This leads us to a

consideration of the provisions of the Civil Procedure Code relating to

summary procedure. Section 376 states as follows :

“With the petition, and so far as conveniently can be

attached thereto,. shall be exhibited such affidavits,

authenticated copy records, processes, or other documentary

evidence as may be requisite to furnish prima facie proof of the

material facts set out or alleged in the petition, or the court may

in its discretion permit or direct the petitioner to adduce oral

evidence before the court for this purpose, which shall be taken

down by the court in writing”

It is to be seen from this section that a petition filed by way of

summary procedure should be supported by affidavits and other

documentary evidence necessary” to furnish prima facie proof of the

material facts set out or alleged in the petition.”. [Emphasis is mine]

In the light of the principle enunciated by this Court in the case in

Damayanthi Abeywardene and Another Vs. Hemalatha Abeywardene and

others (Supra), it is mandatory that, a petition filed by way of summary

procedure should be supported by affidavits and other documentary

evidence necessary, “to furnish prima facie proof of the material facts set out

or alleged in the petition.” [Emphasis is mine]

It was inter-alia, held by the Supreme Court in Gunaratne vs Translanka

Investments Ltd. and Another 1991 [2] SLR 1 at page 5 that, “Even in

applications of summary procedure, the Court has a discretion under section

376 to direct or permit the Petitioner to adduce oral evidence.”

Hence, the law as it stands now, as provided for by section 376 of the Civil

Procedure Code as amended and as enunciated by Supreme Court in

Gunaratne vs Translanka Investments Ltd. and Another (Supra) and by

CA/CPA/0039/26

Page 17 of 19

this Court in Damayanthi Abeywardene and Another Vs. Hemalatha

Abeywardene and others (Supra) is that it is mandatory that, a petition

filed by way of summary procedure should be supported by affidavits and

other documentary evidence necessary, “to furnish prima facie proof of the

material facts set out or alleged in the petition”, but, however, “Even in

applications of summary procedure, the Court has a discretion under

section 376 of the Civil Procedure Code as amended ‘to direct or permit’

the Petitioner to adduce oral evidence before the court necessary, “to

furnish prima facie proof of the material facts set out or alleged in the

petition” [Emphasis is mine]

The resultant position being that even though it is mandatory that, a petition

filed by way of summary procedure should be supported by affidavits and

other documentary evidence necessary, “to furnish prima facie proof of the

material facts set out or alleged in the petition”, but, however, “Even in

applications of summary procedure, the Court has a discretion under section

376 of the Civil Procedure Code as amended to direct or permit the Petitioner

to adduce oral evidence necessary, “to furnish prima facie proof of the

material facts set out or alleged in the petition” even in case, an affidavit

filed in support of the contents in the Petition presented to Court under the

summary procedure, is defective or faulty as in this case and hence, such a

defect in an affidavit is curable as provided for by section 376 of the Civil

Procedure Code as amended and as held by the Supreme Court in Gunaratne

vs Translanka Investments Ltd. and Another (Supra) [Emphasis is mine]

Hence, a defective and/or faulty affidavit filed in support of the contents in

the Petition presented to Court under the summary procedure, as in this case

is defective or faulty does not in any manner, give rise to an automatic

dismissal of an action or application instituted under the summary procedure

in Court for; defect as such is curable as enumerated above.

Even, in this instance too, the learned High Court Judge had ample power

under section 376 of the Civil Procedure Code as amended, to permit and/or

direct the Petitioner-Respondent to adduce oral evidence necessary, “to

CA/CPA/0039/26

Page 18 of 19

furnish prima facie proof of the material facts set out or alleged in the

petition”, instead of directing the Petitioner-Respondent to furnish to Court

a duly, attested affidavit afresh.

However, I would find no provision under Chapter XXIV of the Civil Procedure

Code as amended which prevent the learned High Court Judge from directing

the Petitioner-Respondent to adduce oral evidence necessary, “to furnish

prima facie proof of the material facts set out or alleged in the petition”

in the event, he would find the affidavit filed along with the petition, defective

or faulty for one reason or the other as done in this instance by the learned

High Court Judge. [Emphasis is mine]

This brings me to the pivotal and material issue that had been advanced by

the learned President’s Counsel for the 2nd Respondent-Petitioner in the

course of the argument and it may now, be examined.

Record shows that, the learned High Court Judge had in his initial order dated

13.10.2025 (hereinafter called and referred to as “the initial order”), granted

the Petitioner-Respondent the relief as prayed for in prayer ‘a’, ‘b’ and ‘c’ of

the petition dated 03.10.2025 (A1).

Significance here is that, there’s nothing in his initial order to show on what

material he was satisfied that the material facts of the petition (A1) were prima

facie, established before he had made the initial order, granting the Petitioner-

Respondent the relief as prayed for in prayer ‘a’, ‘b’ and ‘c’ of the petition dated

03.10.2025 (A1) even though it would be essential and obligatory on the part

of the learned High Court Judge so to do, in view of the fact that, the learned

High Court Judge in the HC order (A10) had by implication, found the affidavit

of the Petitioner-Respondent filed along with her application (A1) under

summary procedure, defective or faculty. Nevertheless, the learned High

Court Judge had not opted even to disclose and/or specify in the subsequent

HC order (A10) on what material he was satisfied that the material facts of

the petition (A1) were prima facie, established before he had made order dated

CA/CPA/0039/26

Page 19 of 19

13.10.2025, granting the Petitioner-Respondent the relief as prayed for in

prayer ‘a’, ‘b’ and ‘c’ of the petition dated 03.10.2025 (A1).

In the circumstances, it clearly, and unequivocally, appears that the initial

order of the learned High Court Judge cannot sustain both in fact and law.

Hence, I would consider it highly, unsafe to permit the initial order to stand

any further.

I would thus, consider this to be a fit and proper case to exercise the extra-

ordinary revisionary jurisdiction vested in this Court by Article 138(1) of the

Constitution in order to avert grave miscarriage of justice thus, occurred.

Hence, I would acting in revision, set aside the initial order.

I would thus, direct the learned High Court Judge to hear and determine the

application of the Petitioner-Respondent afresh, on the strength of the duly,

attested affidavit that may be furnished to Court by the Petitioner-Respondent

as directed by the learned High Court Judge in the HC order (A10) and the

other material that were furnished to Court by the Petitioner-Respondent

along with her petition (A1) and conclude it as expeditiously, as possible

strictly, in accordance with the law as enumerated above affording it top

priority.

Subject to the above, I would allow the instant application in revision.

In view of all the above circumstances, I would make no order for costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL