Page 1 of 6

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for a mandate in the nature of writ of Certiorari under and in terms of Article 140 of the constitution.

Angappuly Radage Mettananda Chandrawansha Manandola, Kahawatta.

PETITIONER

C.A. Case No. WRT- 0265/19

Vs

1. Director,

Plantation Management Monitoring Division, Ministry of Plantation, 11th Floor, Sethsiripaya 2nd Stage, Battaramulla.

2. Jayaweera Mudiyanselage Chandrika

Priyadarshani. Plantation Management Monitoring Division, Ministry of Plantation, 11th Floor, Sethsiripaya 2nd Stage, Battaramulla.

Page 2 of 6

3. Hon. Naveen Dissanayake. Minister of Plantations, Ministry of Plantation, 11th Floor, Sethsiripaya 2nd Stage, Battaramulla. 3(a). Hon. Ramesh Pathirana.

Minister of Plantation Industries and

Export Agriculture, 11th Floor, Sethsiripaya 2nd Stage, Battaramulla.

4. Secretary, Ministry of Plantation,

11th Floor, Sethsiripaya 2nd Stage, Battaramulla.

5. Agalawatta Plantation PLC. No. 19, Dudley Senanayake Mawatha, Colombo 8.

6. Hon. Attorney General, Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

BEFORE : M. T. MOHAMMED LAFFAR, J

WICKUM A. KALUARACHCHI, J

COUNSEL : Senaka De Saram, with Nirosha Bandara, and Aruna

Jayathilake, for the Petitioner.

Zehri Zain, DSG, for the 1st to 4th and 6th Respondents.

Kapila Liyanagamage, instructed by F.J and G. De

Saram for the 5th Respondent.

DECIDED ON: 31.10.2023

Page 3 of 6

ORDER

WICKUM A. KALUARACHCHI, J.

The petitioner has filed this application seeking a writ of certiorari

quashing the ejectment notice. (Filed with the petition marked P-21(D)).

The ejectment notice has been issued in terms of Section 3 of the State

Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act No. 7 of 1979.

The petitioner filed the petition dated 12th August 2023 requesting to

substitute the wife of the petitioner in place of the deceased petitioner. The

learned State Counsel appearing for the 1st to 4th and 6th respondents,

informed the court that the State has no objection for the substitution.

The learned Counsel for the 5th respondent filed a statement of objections

regarding the substitution. This order has to be made whether the

application for substitution will be allowed or not.

A preliminary objection was raised on behalf of the 5th respondent that the

writ application ought to be dismissed, as the deceased petitioner has

failed to file a Memorandum under and in terms of Part VI of the Court of

Appeal (Appellate Procedure) Rules 2018. In addition, the following

objections have been taken on behalf of the 5th respondent:

(a) After the death of the Petitioner, the 2nd Respondent could not take

any further step pursuant to the Quit Notice marked P21(D) served

on the deceased Petitioner under and in terms of Section 3 of the

State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act, No. 7 of 1979, which is

impugned in this Writ Application.

(b) After the death of the Petitioner, the 2nd Respondent could not

prosecute the application for ejectment filed against the deceased

Petitioner under and in terms of Section 5 of the State Lands

Page 4 of 6

(Recovery of Possession) Act No. 7 of 1979, in the Magistrates Court

of Pelmadulla.

(c) The State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act No. 7 of 1979, has not

provided for the substitution of a person named in an application for

ejectment filed before the Magistrates Court after the death of such

person.

The relevant provision in respect of the Memorandum in terms of Part VI

of the Court of Appeal (Appellate Procedure) Rules 2018 [Amendment to

Court of Appeal (Appellate Procedure) Rules 1990 by the Addition of Part

VI] reads as follows:

1. Every petitioner who files any application under Article 138, 140

and 141 of the Constitution to the Court of Appeal shall file

together with such application, a memorandum as set out in the

schedule of these rules nominating at least one person and not

more than three persons in order of preference to be his legal

representative for the purpose of prosecuting his application in

the event of the applicants death and/or change of status in cases

where the application and/or appeal survives the death and/or

change of status of the petitioner.

According to the aforementioned rule, when the writ application was filed,

the petitioner should have filed a Memorandum nominating at least one

person as his legal representative for the purpose of prosecuting the

application in the event of the petitioners death. Rule 3 of Part VI states

that If the petitioner does not file such a memorandum, the court may

dismiss the application in the event of the death of the petitioner or the

change of status of the petitioner." It is to be noted that what is stated in

Rule 3 is the Court may dismiss the application. Therefore, it is apparent

that the court has the discretion to dismiss the application for not filing

Page 5 of 6

the memorandum with the application or to allow the application to be

proceeded effecting the substitution. As the issue involved in the

application is to eject the petitioner and his dependents from the land that

they possessed, I decide that it is proper to go into the merits of the

application and determine the said issue. Accordingly, I hold that the

application should not be dismissed for the reason of not filing a

memorandum.

The 5th respondent has raised the other objections on the basis that the

writ application does not survive after the death of the petitioner. The

following objections have been raised in the statement of objections:

No further steps could be taken on the quit notice served on the

deceased petitioner after the death of the person to whom the notice

was served.

The 2nd respondent could not prosecute the application for

ejectment filed against the deceased petitioner in the Magistrate

Court of Pelmadulla after his death.

In an application for ejectment, the State Lands (Recovery of

Possession) Act has not provided for the substitution after the death

of the person named in the application.

Now, I procced to deal with the above objections. The ejectment notice

marked P-21(D) reads as follows:

( )

3

,

Page 6 of 6

() ;

() 2018.01.30 ,

.

(Emphasis added)

It is apparent from perusing the above ejectment notice that the 2nd

respondent has filed an application in the Magistrate Court of Pelmadulla

to eject not only the deceased petitioner but also all of his dependents.

Hence, it is clear that an order could be obtained in the Magistrate Court

case to eject the dependents of the deceased petitioner and get back the

vacant possession of the land to the State even after the death of the

petitioner. Therefore, after the death of the petitioner, this writ application,

which was filed to obtain an order quashing the quit notice, survives for

the dependents. To obtain the aforementioned relief, the substitution has

to be made, and substitutes must proceed with the application.

For the foregoing reasons, I overrule the objections taken on behalf of the

5th respondent. The application to substitute Kiribathgalage Champika

Priyadarshani, the wife of the petitioner in place of the deceased petitioner

is allowed. No costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

M. T. Mohammed Laffar, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL