IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

21. Wadduwage Lilinona,

23. Pathirage Gunasena.

24. Pathirage Piyasena,

25. Pathirage Sumanaratne,

All of Remuna.

DEFENDANT-APPELLANTS

CASE NO: CA/658/1996/F

DC HORANA CASE NO: 2808/P

Vs.

Wadduwage Nimal Jayasiri,

Remuna.

PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Atula Perera for the Appellant.

Ranjan Suwandaratne, P.C., with Anil Rajakaruna

for the Respondent.

Written submissions:

By the Respondent on 07.08.2018

By the Appellants on 05.10.2018

Decided on: 15.10.2018

2

Samayawardhena, J.

The plaintiff instituted this action in the District Court of

Horana seeking partition of the land known as Imewatta among

the plaintiff and the 1st-28th defendants. After trial, learned

District Judge delivered the Judgment on 29.08.1996. It is

against this Judgment the 18th, 19th, 21st-25th defendants have

preferred this appeal.

Learned counsel for the appellants and learned Presidents

Counsel for the plaintiff-respondent have, before the previous

Bench, agreed the appeal being disposed of by way of written

submissions. The written submission of the respondent was

filed before that of the appellants even though ideally it should

have happened vice versa.

In the written submission, learned Presidents Counsel for the

respondent moves to dismiss the appeal of the 18th, 19th and

22nd defendants in limine, as they have not filed a Notice of

Appeal before joining with the rest of the appellants in the

Petition of Appeal. Learned counsel for the appellants has not

responded to that threshold objection in his written

submissions. However, when I go through the brief, I am fully

satisfied that the 18th, 19th and 22nd defendants have not filed a

Notice of Appeal.

There cannot be any dispute that, without filing a Notice of

Appeal, a party cannot straightaway file a Petition of Appeal.

Filing the Notice of Appeal in terms of sections 754(3), 754(4),

755(1) and 755(2) of the Civil Procedure Code is a mandatory

prerequisite to filing the Petition of Appeal. Such a patent and

blatant omission is incurable even by invoking the provisions of

3

section 759(2) of the Civil Procedure Code. (Vide Paranatota v.

Napo Singho1, Arulampalam v. Fernando2, Sumanasekera v.

Yapa3)

The appeal of the 18th, 19th and 22nd defendants is dismissed in

limine.

Let me now consider the appeal of the 21st, 23rd, 24th and 25th

defendant-appellants.

The pivotal argument of learned counsel for the appellants in his

written submissions is that, irrespective of the Deeds tendered

by the parties at the trial, the learned District Judge should

have dismissed the partition action as, according to the extract

marked P1, the original owners of the land are Manis, Sadiris

and Thegis; and not the ones stated by the appellants and the

respondent.

According to the plaint, there are two original owners to the land

to be partitioned. They are Davith Appu and Singho Appu. The

plaintiff unfolded the pedigree and raised issues on that basis.

The appellants filed an amended statement of claim dated

04.09.1992 and raised issues on that statement of claim at the

trial.

They are as follows:

3. Was Wadduwage Singho Appu the original owner of a

share of the land sought to be partitioned?

1 [1986] 3 CALR 318 2 [1986] 1 CALR 651 3 [2006] 3 Sri LR 183

4

4. Was Wadduwage Kumatheris the original owner of a 1/8

share of the land by purchase upon Deed No.5315 dated

09.11.1915?

5. Was the said Kumatheris a son of Wadduwage Singho

Appu entitled to a further 1/8 share on Deed No.7781

dated 08.07.1919, apart from the rights derived by

inheritance?

6. Was Davith Appu entitled to only share of the land?

7. Is Manis entitled to only share that Davith had?

8. Should the balance share of this land go to the 21st-25th

defendants as set out in the plaint?

In brief, the position taken by the appellants at the trial as

crystallized in the said issues is that, Singho Appu, as an

original owner, was entitled to of the corpus and, Davith

Appu, as an original owner, was entitled to of the corpus

vide issue Nos. 3 and 6 above. In addition, the appellants seem

to be saying that Kumatheris, as an original owner, was entitled

to 1/8 of the corpusvide issue No.4 above. Then the

appellants say that balance share shall devolve on them

according to the pedigree of the plaintiffvide issue No.7 above.

I cannot understand their argument at the trial. If they admit

Singho Appu is entitled to , Davith Appu to , and

Kumatheris to 1/8, there is no balance share. It appears that

the appellants do not have a clear idea about their claim.

Having taken up such a position at the trial and also in the

Petition of Appeal, learned counsel for the appellants, reminding

this Court that this is a partition action and therefore an action

in rem, now, for the first time in appeal (by way of written

5

submissions and unknown to the respondent) states that the

original owners of the land are Manis, Sadiris and Thegis and

therefore the learned District Judge should have dismissed the

plaintiffs action.

I have no hesitation to reject that argument.

It is settled law that no party can be allowed to make at the trial

a case materially different from what he has placed on record.

(vide Hildon v. Munaweera [1997] 3 Sri LR 220, YMBA v. Abdul

Azeez 1997 BALJ 7, Ranasinghe v. Somawathie [2004] 2 Sri LR

154.) Explanation 2 to section 150 of the Civil Procedure Code

reads thus: The case enunciated must reasonably accord with

the party's pleading, i.e., plaint or answer, as the case may be.

And no party can be allowed to make at the trial a case materially

different from that which he has placed on record, and which his

opponent is prepared to meet. And the facts proposed to be

established must in the whole amount to so much of the material

part of his case as is not admitted in his opponents pleadings.

In parity of reasoning, Chief Justice G.P.S. de Silva in Candappa

nee Bastian v. Ponnambalampillai [1993] 1 Sri LR 184 stated that

the above principle is applicable in appeals too, if a party tries to

present a case materially different from the case presented

before the Trial Court. His Lordship commented:

Thus it is seen that the position taken up in appeal for the first

time was not in accord with the case as presented by the

defendant in the District Court. It is well to bear in mind the

provisions of explanation 2 to section 150 of the Civil Procedure

Code. It reads thus: The case enunciated must reasonably

accord with the party's pleading, i.e. plaint or answer, as the case

6

may be. And no party can be allowed to make at the trial a case

materially different from that which he has placed on record, and

which his opponent is prepared to meet ...... A fortiori, a party

cannot be permitted to present in appeal a case different from the

case presented before the trial Court except in accordance with

the principles laid down by the House of Lords in The Tasmania

(1890) 15 App. Cases 233 and followed by Dias, J. in Setha v.

Weerakoon 49 NLR 225, 228, 229. The question of licence or

subtenancy involved matters of fact which were not put in issue

at the trial. This was certainly not a pure question of law which

could have been raised for the first time in appeal.

In Janashakthi Insurance Co. v. Umbichy Ltd. [2007] 2 Sri LR 39

at pages 44 and 45 Justice Thilakawardane in the Supreme

Court stated: The defendant-appellant is prohibited from setting

up a different case from that set up at the trial..There is no

doubt that the defendant-appellant cannot take up a case in

appeal, which differs from that of the trial.

It is equally well settled law that questions of fact or mixed

questions of fact and law cannot be taken up for the first time in

appeal. (vide Hameed alias Abdul Rahman v. Weerasinghe [1989]

1 Sri LR 217, Simon Fernando v. Bernadette Fernando [2003] 2

Sri LR 158, Piyadasa v. Babanis [2006] 2 Sri LR 17 at 24, Leslin

Jayasinghe v. Illangaratne [2006] 2 Sri LR 39 at 47.)

There is no scintilla of doubt that what the appellants put in

issue for the first time in appeal is a pure question of fact.

Partition action is not an exception to those fundamental

principles.

7

In John Singho v. Pedris Hamy (1947) 48 NLR 345 it was held

that: Where in a partition action all parties agree on the points in

dispute and state them to Court the Judge should not consider

without giving due notice to the parties any other matters that

may appeal to him to arise between the parties in the course of

the proceedings. The position will however be different when the

points in dispute are not set down in the form of issues.

The principal argument of the appellants fails.

Without prejudice to the above, the next argument of learned

counsel for the appellants is that the land sought to be

partitioned was originally owned not by Davith Appu and Singho

Appu as claimed by the respondent, but only by Singho Appu as

claimed by the appellants. This is a misleading argument.

According to the issues raised by the appellants at the trial, it

was never the position of the appellants at the trial that Singho

Appu was the only original owner. If I may repeat, at the trial,

their position was that Singho Appu was entitled to only of

the land (which was conceded by the plaintiff). In appeal they

cannot say that Singho Appu was the sole original owner.

At the trial, the appellants have not given evidence nor called

any other witness on their behalf, but through the evidence of

the plaintiff, three Deeds 18V1-18V3 have been marked. Rights

derived from those Deeds have correctly been assigned to the

21st-25th defendants in the Judgment. There is no complaint

about it.

The alternative argument of the appellants must also fail.

This appeal is manifestly devoid of merits.

8

The Judgment of the District Court is affirmed and the appeal is

dismissed with costs which I fix at Rs.50,000/= payable by the

appellants to the plaintiff-respondent.

Judge of the Court of Appeal