==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0018-019/20

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979

Court of Appeal Case No. 1. Galle Hettiarachchige Anil Jayantha

CA/HCC/ 0018-019/2020 2. Ranasinghe Mudiyanselage Arawe

High Court of Colombo Gedera Neil Kumara

Case No. HCB/1939/2012

Accused-Appellants

Vs.

The Director General

Commission to Investigate

Allegations of Bribery or Corruption

No.36, Malalasekera Mawatha,

Colomb0-07.

Complainant-Respondent

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

Pradeep Hettiarachchi, J.

CA/HCC/0018-019/20

2 | P a g e

COUNSEL : Saliya Peiris, PC with Geeth Karunaratne

and Dhimansha Marso for the 1st

Appellant.

Kavindu D. Indatissa for the 2nd Appellant.

Janaka Bandara, DSG for the Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 24/09/2025

DECIDED ON : 03/11/2025

*********************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellants (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellants) were indicted by the Director General of the Bribery Commission

in the High Court of Colombo.

Count 01 on the indictment was against the 1st Appellant, that between the

11th and 12th of June 2012, he being a police officer, a public official

employed for the detection, prosecution and punishment of offenders

solicited an illegal gratification of Rs.10,000/- from one Wickramasinghe

Siriwardhana Piyapala for preventing, Rathnayake Mudiyanselage Leelasena

a suspect introduced for having Elk meat in his possession being prosecuted,

which is an offence punishable in terms of Section 16(b) of the Bribery Act.

Count 02 on the indictment was against the 1st Appellant for soliciting an

illegal gratification of Rs.10,000/- from the said Wickramasinghe

CA/HCC/0018-019/20

3 | P a g e

Siriwardhana Piyapala being a public servant and offence punishable in

terms of Section 19(c) of the Bribery Act.

Count 03 in the indictment was against the 1st Appellant for accepting an

illegal gratification of Rs.5,000/- from the said Wickramasinghe

Siriwardhana Piyapala for the purpose set out in Count 01, an offence

punishable in terms of Section 16(b) of the Bribery Act.

Count 04 on the indictment was against the 1st Appellant for accepting an

illegal gratification of Rs.5,000/- from the said Wickramasinghe

Siriwardhana Piyapala being a public servant and offence punishable in

terms of Section 19(c) of the Bribery Act.

Count 05 on the indictment was against the 2nd Appellant for abetting the

1st Appellant to commit the offence set out in Count 01 of the indictment, an

offence punishable in terms of Section 16(b) read with Section 25(2) of the

Bribery Act.

Count 06 on the indictment was against the 2nd Appellant for abetting the

1st Appellant to commit the offence set out in Count 02 of the indictment, an

offence punishable in terms of Section 19(c) read with Section 25(2) of the

Bribery Act.

Count 07 on the indictment was against the 2nd Appellant, that on the 19th

August 2009, he being a police officer, a public official employed for the

detection, prosecution and punishment of offenders accepting an illegal

gratification of Rs.5,000/- from one Wickramasinghe Siriwardhana Piyapala,

for preventing Rathnayake Mudiyanselage Leelasena a suspect introduced

for having Elk meat in his possession being prosecuted, which is an offence

punishable in terms of Section 16(b) of the Bribery Act.

Count 08 in the indictment was against the 2nd Appellant for accepting an

illegal gratification of Rs.5,000/- from the said Wickramasinghe

Siriwardhana Piyapala, for the purpose set out in Count 01, an offence

punishable in terms of Section 19(c) of the Bribery Act.

CA/HCC/0018-019/20

4 | P a g e

After the trial, the Appellants were found guilty for their respective counts

and the learned Judge of the High Court of Colombo has imposed the

following sentences on the Appellants by his judgment dated 24/10/2019.

For the 1st Count the 1st Appellant was sentenced to 07 years rigorous

imprisonment with a fine of Rs.5,000/- subject to a default sentence of 01

months simple imprisonment.

For the 2nd Count the 1st Appellant was sentenced to 07 years rigorous

imprisonment with a fine of Rs.5,000/- subject to a default sentence of 01

months simple imprisonment.

For the 3rd Count the 1st Appellant was sentenced to 07 years rigorous

imprisonment with a fine of Rs.5,000/- subject to a default sentence of 01

months simple imprisonment.

For the 4th Count the 1st Appellant was sentenced to 07 years rigorous

imprisonment with a fine of Rs.5,000/- subject to a default sentence of 01

months simple imprisonment.

The Court further ordered the jail sentences imposed on Counts 1-4 against

the 1st Appellant to run consecutive to each other.

For the 5th Count the 2nd Appellant was sentenced to 07 years rigorous

imprisonment with a fine of Rs.5,000/- subject to a default sentence of 01

months simple imprisonment.

For the 6th Count the 2nd Appellant was sentenced to 07 years rigorous

imprisonment with a fine of Rs.5,000/- subject to a default sentence of 01

months simple imprisonment.

For the 7th Count the 2nd Appellant was sentenced to 07 years rigorous

imprisonment with a fine of Rs.5,000/- subject to a default sentence of 01

months simple imprisonment.

CA/HCC/0018-019/20

5 | P a g e

For the 8th Count the 2nd Appellant was sentenced to 07 years rigorous

imprisonment with a fine of Rs.5,000/- subject to a default sentence of 01

months simple imprisonment.

The Court further ordered the jail sentences imposed on Counts 5-8 against

the 2nd Appellant to run consecutive to each other.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid convictions and sentences, the Appellants

preferred this appeal to this court.

The prosecution had called 08 witnesses and marked P1-P14 documents in

support of their case. The Appellants had made their statements from the

dock and closed their case.

All the Appellants were present in this Court on the day of the argument as

they were on bail pending appeal granted by the High Court.

On behalf of the 1st Appellant, the following Grounds of Appeal were raised.

1. Whether the charge can be substantiated in the light of Rathnayake

Mudiyanselage Leelasena being charged in the Magistrate Court of

Polonnaruwa on 10.08.2009.

2. The learned High Court Judge failed to recognize that PW1 was a

witness unworthy of credit, therefore, it was dangerous to act on the

uncorroborated testimony of PW1.

3. Whether the evidence of the Bribery Commission ought not to be relied

upon on the weight of the evidence.

On behalf of the 2nd Appellant, the following Grounds of Appeal were

raised.

1. The learned High Court Judge has failed to appreciate that, despite

there being several Bribery Officers around, the 2nd Appellant was not

arrested as soon as the money was allegedly handed over to him by

PW1, but much later, at the Police Station where the 2nd Appellant

CA/HCC/0018-019/20

6 | P a g e

worked at, creating a suspicion regarding the genuineness of the

prosecution evidence.

2. Failure to appreciate that PW1 and PW4 had malicious motive to create

false allegations against the 2nd Appellant as revenge.

3. The learned High Court Judge has failed to evaluate and appreciate

the falsehood uttered by PW1 and PW3 under oath.

4. The learned High Court Judge failed to appreciate that the evidence of

Lilasena, which is of utmost importance, was not led at the trail.

5. The learned High Court Judge who pronounced the judgment did not

have the benefit of observing any of the important witnesses of the

prosecution case.

Background of the case albeit briefly is as follows:

In this case the 1st and 2nd Appellants are Police officers attached to the

Aralaganwila Police Station at the time of the incident.

PW1, Piyapala was the owner of the hotel named ‘Ranga Hotel’ situated near

the Aralaganwila Police Station. On 09.08.2009 at around 11.30 p.m. the

Appellants had gone to the said hotel to conduct a search. When they opened

the deep freezer, they had found a parcel of meat, which according to the

Appellants was Elk meat. PW1 had countered that the meat so found was

not Elk meat but was beef for which he had a permit. At that time, the 1st

Appellant had scolded PW1 in foul language.

At that time the 1st Appellant had solicited a bribe of Rs.10,000/- from PW1

to favour PW1 during the legal process and a bribe of Rs.5,000/- was

accepted by the 1st Appellant at the hotel upon agreement to accept the rest

of the bribe later. Thereafter, a person named ‘Leelasena’ who was employed

under PW1 was arrested by the Appellants and produced before the learned

Magistrate of Polonnaruwa on the following day and was granted bail.

CA/HCC/0018-019/20

7 | P a g e

On 16.08.2009, PW1 with his son PW4 went to the Aralaganwila ASP’s Office

and lodged a complaint against the Appellants. On the following day, PW1

had lodged another complaint at the Bribery Commission, who organized a

raid to arrest the Appellants. PW2 and PW3 both from the Bribery

Commission came to Aralaganwila to organise the raid.

On 19.08.2009, as per instructions, PW1 had called the 2nd Appellant to

collect the balance money at the hotel. The 1st Appellant had gone to the

hotel and collected the balance money. After accepting the money, the 1st

Appellant and PW1 had gone to the police station and there, PW3 had

arrested the 1st Appellant but the 2nd Appellant was not arrested at that time.

According to the dock statement of the 1st and 2nd Appellants, they had

arrested a person called Leelasena and produced him before the Magistrate

of Polonnaruwa on the day following their raid of the hotel. The Appellants

denied their respective charge/s and had taken up the position that they

were arrested on fabricated evidence.

As all the grounds of appeal raised by the Counsels for the Appellant are

interconnected, I will hereby consider all grounds of appeal together as

follows.

In a criminal trial, it is incumbent on the prosecution to prove the case

beyond a reasonable doubt. There is no burden on the Appellant to prove his

innocence. This is the “Golden Thread” as discussed in Woolmington v. DPP

[1935] A.C.462. In this case Viscount Sankey J held that:

“Throughout the web of the English Criminal Law one golden thread is

always to be seen, that it is the duty of the prosecution to prove the

prisoner’s guilt…… If, at the end of and on the whole of the case, there

is a reasonable doubt, created by the evidence given by either the

prosecution or the prisoner…..the prosecution has not made out the case

and the prisoner is entitled to an acquittal.”

CA/HCC/0018-019/20

8 | P a g e

At the very outset, the learned Counsel for the 2nd Appellant informed the

Court that he would agree with the argument put forward by the learned

President’s Counsel for the 1st Appellant.

Each charge delves on the basis that the 1st Appellant had solicited and

accepted a bribe from the complainant, PW1 in order to prevent prosecution

of one ‘Leelasena’ for an offence that he had committed.

During the trial, it had come to light that the Appellants had arrested

‘Leelasena’ on 09.08.2009 for possession of Elk meat and that he was

produced along with the meat to the Polonnaruwa Magistrate Court on

10.08.2009 under case No. 72423. It is not disputed that the Appellants had

performed their official duties and entered relevant notes in the police book.

As such, there is no iota of evidence led by the prosecution that the

Appellants had protected or safeguarded ‘Leelasena’ by stalling his

prosecution in the relevant Magistrate Court.

Although ‘Leelasena’ is an essential witness he has not been called to give

evidence in the High Court. It is very important to note that ‘Leelasena’ was

not named as a witness on the back of the indictment.

A witness is an important constituent of the process of administration of

justice. By giving evidence linking to the charge of the offence, the witness

performs a sacred duty of assisting the court to discover the truth. To arrive

at a fair decision, all essential evidence must be produced by the prosecution.

In Stephen Seneviratne v The King [1936] 3 All ER 36 at 46 where Lord

Roche said:

“Witnesses essential to the unfolding of the narrative on which the

prosecution is based, must, of course, be called by the prosecution,

whether in the result the effect of their testimony is for or against the case

for the prosecution.”

CA/HCC/0018-019/20

9 | P a g e

Therefore, not calling ‘Leelasena’ to give evidence has caused great prejudice

to the Appellants as the charges were based on the Appellants having

committed the said offence in order to protect or safeguard ‘Leelasena’ by

preventing his prosecution for an offence. But ‘Leelasena was charged in the

Polonnaruwa Magistrate Court on the following day for being in possession

of illegal Elk meat.

Next, the learned President’s Counsel for the 1st Appellant argued that there

was a strong motive for false implication in this case. PW1 and PW4 in their

evidence admitted that they lodged the complaint due to the incident which

took place on 09.08.2009. PW4, the son of PW1 admitted in his evidence that

he lodged this complaint in the Bribery Commission as the Appellants

scolded him in filth in front of his parents. The learned High Court Judge

should have paid attention to these improbabilities and infirmities that

surfaced in the prosecution’s case.

In Kalinga Padmatilaka v The Director General of Commission to

Investigate Allegation of Bribery or Corruption SC Appeal 99/2007

decided on 30.07.2009 the Supreme Court held that:

“It has to be stressed here that credibility of prosecution witnesses

should be subject to judicial evaluation in totality and not isolated

scrutiny by the Judge. When witnesses make inconsistent statements

in their evidence either at one stage or at 2 stages, the testimony of such

witnesses is unreliable and in the absence of special circumstances, no

conviction can be based on the testimony of such witnesses. On the

other hand, one cannot be unmindful of the proposition that Court cannot

mechanically reject the evidence of any witness.

In Gurcharan Singh V. State of Haryana - Criminal Law Journal 1994 (2)

171 the Court held that:

“Where the material witnesses make inconsistent statements in their

evidence on material particulars, the evidence of such witnesses

CA/HCC/0018-019/20

10 | P a g e

becomes unreliable and unworthy of credence, thus making the

prosecution case highly doubtful.”

The prosecution had relied on the evidence given by PW1 to prove the charges

levelled against the Appellants. But on examination of his evidence, it is clear

that PW1 is an unreliable witness. PW1 took up the position that ‘Leelasena’

was discharged by the learned Magistrate of Polonnaruwa as the meat

recovered was not Elk meat, but was beef. PW8, the Registrar of Magistrate

Court of Polonnaruwa confirmed that ‘Leelasena’ was convicted for

possession of Elk meat after receiving the report from Department Zoology

that confirmed the meat sent for analysis was Elk meat. Further, PW4, the

son of the PW1 too confirmed that in order to treat his friends, they had Elk

meat in their possession and it was arrested by the police.

These contradictions is of great importance given that the Appellants had

consistently taken the stance that they have arrested ‘Leelasena’ with illegal

Elk meat on 09.08.2009.

Although the above mentioned inter se contradictions were not marked, it is

the duty of the Trial Judge to consider such evidence favourable to the

Accused with utmost care.

With this glaring contradiction, the learned High Court Judge has come to

his own conclusion that all the charges had been proved beyond a reasonable

doubt.

The Apex Court of Sri Lanka has established precedents in a number of cases

stating that the defense would prevail when there is a contradiction that

affects the core of the case.

When a witness gives evidence before the court upon oath, he or she is

expected to tell the truth in a court of law. If the person gives contradictory

evidence opposite to the statement, it is usually called a contradiction. It is

the duty of the trial judge to unearth the truth and to come to a conclusion

whether an Accused person is guilty or not.

CA/HCC/0018-019/20

11 | P a g e

In the case of State Rep. by Inspector of Police v. Saravanan AIR 2009 SC

152 the Court held that:

“The contradictions/omissions must be of such nature which materially

affects the trial. Minor contradictions, inconsistencies, embellishments

or improvements which do not affect the core of the prosecution case

should not be made a ground to reject the evidence of the witness in its

entirety.”

In the case of Shamal Ghosh Vs. State of West Bengal 2012 All. S. C. R,

1921the Court held that:

“Omission to state a fact whether it is a material contradiction or not is

a question of fact. The discretion is left with the Court to determine

whether it is a contradiction or material contradiction which renders the

entire evidence of the witness untrustworthy and affects the case of

prosecution materially.

As the contradictory evidence given by PW1 and PW4 certainly affects the

root of the prosecution’s case, I conclude that the prosecution has not proved

the case against the Appellants beyond a reasonable doubt. Therefore, the

grounds urged by learned President’s Counsel for the 1st Appellant have

merit.

The learned Counsel who appeared for the 2nd Appellant while endorsing the

argument put forward by the learned President’s Counsel, on behalf of the

1st Appellant, strenuously argued that the charges against the 2nd Appellant

in the indictment had not been proved beyond a reasonable doubt by the

prosecution. As such, the 2nd Appellant cannot be charged for aiding and

abetting the 1st Appellant in the committing the alleged crime.

Also, the prosecution has failed to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the

2nd Appellant had accepted the gratification on the date specified in the

indictment. Hence, the charges framed against the 2nd Appellant also fail.

CA/HCC/0018-019/20

12 | P a g e

When the Respondent was invited to place their argument, the learned

Deputy Solicitor General in keeping with the highest traditions of the

Attorney General’s Department, informed the Court that he is unable to

depend upon the judgment and he is in agreement with the contentions

raised by the learned Counsels for the Defense.

As the prosecution has failed to prove the charges beyond a reasonable doubt

against the Appellants, I allow the appeal and acquit them from all the

charges.

The Registrar is directed to send this judgment to the High Court of Colombo

along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Pradeep Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL