1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for mandates in the nature of Writs of Certiorari and Mandamus in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. CA(Writ) Application No: 294/2015

Ven. Handapangoda Mahinda Thero, Viharadhipathi and Trustee of the Kiriella Nadun Raja Maha Viharaya, Nadun Raja Maha Viharaya, Kiriella.

PETITIONER

Vs. 1. Hon. M.K.D.S. Gunawardane, Minister of Lands and Land Development. 1A. Hon. John Amaratunge,

Minister of Lands. 1AA. Hon. Gayantha Karunatilaka,

Minister of Lands and Parliamentary Reforms. 1B. Hon. S.M. Chandrasena,

Minister of Environment, Wildlife, Land and Land Development. 2. Hon. Karu Jayasuriya, Minister of Buddha Sasana and Public Administration. 2A. Hon. Dr. Wijedasa Rajapaksha,

Minister of Buddha Sasana. 2AA. Hon. Gamini Jayawickrema Perera,

Minister of Buddha Sasana. 2B. Hon. Mahinda Rajapaksha,

Minister of Finance, Economic Affairs,

2

Policy Development and Buddha Sasana. 3. Dr. I.H.K. Mahanama, Secretary, Ministry of Lands and Land Development. 3A. R.A.A.K. Ranawaka,

Secretary, Ministry of Lands and Land Development. 4. Piyumi Attygalle, Assistatn Secretary, (Bim Saviya) Ministry of Lands and Land Development.

5. Gamini Illangaratne, Former Commissioner General of Title Settlement, Chief Secretarys Office, Kurunegala. 6. Vijitha Nandana Kumara, Commissioner General of Title Settlement, Land Title Settlement Department. 6A. P.M.H. Priyadharshani,

Commissioner General of Title Settlement, Land Title Settlement Department. 1st, 1A, 1AA, 1B, 3rd, 3A, 4th, 6th and 6A Respondents at Mihikatha Medura, No. 1200/6, Rajamalwatte Avenue, Battaramulla. 7. Premachandra Gamage, Commissioner General of Buddhist Affairs. 7A. Sunanda Kariyapperuma,

Commissioner General of Buddhist Affairs, Department of Buddhist Affairs, 2nd, 2A, 2AA, 2B, 7th and 7A Respondent at No. 135, Dharmapala Mawatha, Colombo 7. 8. L.H. Prashan De Silva, Officer In Charge, Kiriella Police Station. 8A. W.M.J. Sudath Bandara,

3

Officer-In-Charge Kiriella Police Station, Kiriella. 9. K. Ranga Perera, Officer-In-Charge, Ayagama Police Station. 9A. K. Rangana Kosala Perera.

Officer-In-Charge, Ayagama Police Station, Ayagama. 9B. Rohana Chaminda,

Officer-In-Charge, Ayagama Police station, Ayagama. 10. D.M. Sumathipala,

Divisional Secretary, Ayagam. 10A. Anuradha Jayakody,

Divisional Secretary, Ayagama, 10B. Niranjan S. Jayakody,

Divisional Secretary, Ayagama. 11. National Gem and Jewellery Authority. 12. Aruna Gunawardena,

The Chairman/Chief Executive Officer, National Gem and Jewellery Authority. 12A. Asanka Welagedera,

The Chairman/Chief Executive Officer, National Gem and Jewellery Authority. 12B. Dr.Kithsiri Dissanayake,

The Chairman/Chief Executive Officer, National Gem and Jewellery Authority. 12C. Amitha Gamage,

The Chairman, National Gem and Jewellery Authority, No. 25, Galle Face Terrace, Colombo 3. 13. R.A.N. Sumanasiri,

Senior Superintendant of Surveys, District Survey Department, Ratnapura.

4

13A. P.S.N. Nimalaweera,

Senior Superintendant of Surveys, District Survey Department, Ratnapura. 14. W.P. Shanika Iroshini Perera,

Assistant commissioner. Land Title Settlement Department, Divisional Office, Kuruwita. 14A. L.K. Premaratne,

Assistant commissioner, Land Title Settlement Department, Divisional Office, Kuruwita. 15. N. Rupasinghe,

Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Renewable Energy, Sampathpaya, No. 82, Rajamalwatte, 1090, Sri Jayawardhanapura Mawatha, Rajagiriya. 16. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12. RESPONDENTS Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J Arjuna Obeyesekere, J Counsel: Gamini Marapana, P.C., with Navin Marapana, P.C., and Uchitha Wickremasinghe for the Petitioner Manohara Jayasinghe, Senior State Counsel for the Respondents Argued on: 2nd July 2020 Written Submissions: Tendered on behalf of the Petitioner on 3rd March 2020 Tendered on behalf of the Respondents on 14th February 2020 Decided on: 11th September 2020

5

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J

The Petitioner states that he is the Viharadhipathi and Trustee of the Kiriella Nadun

Rajamaha Viharaya, which he claims was earlier known as the Kiriella Viharaya and

prior to that as Dumbara Viharaya. The Petitioner claims that pursuant to an Order

made by the then King of Kandy, Sri Wickrama Rajasinghe, the Gilimale Ralahamy, by

a Sannasa / Thudapatha / Seettuwa bearing No. 13 dated 11th February 1801 had

gifted and donated as a Sanghika gift, the Dumbara Viharagama to the then

Viharadhipathi of the Dumbara Viharaya. The Petitioner claims that the said Sannasa

/ Thudapatha / Seettuwa had been registered under the provisions of the Old Deeds

and Sannasas Ordinance No. 6 of 1866.

The Petitioner claims that the said Dumbara Viharagama consisted of 8317A 0R 25P,

and that since 1801, the Chief Incumbent of the Viharaya and his pupillary successors

have exclusively possessed the Bandara / Maruvena lands of the said Viharagama.

The Petitioner states that the said Viharagama formed part of the sanghika property

belonging to the said Viharaya, and that the title of the Viharaya to the said lands

have been accepted by the Supreme Court, and other Courts. The Petitioner states

further that the fact that the said Viharagama belonged to the said Kiriella Nadun

Rajamaha Viharaya has been accepted by the Public Trustee and by the 7th

Respondent, the Commissioner General of Buddhist Affairs. The Petitioner admits

that the said Viharagama is now located and situated in the Grama Niladhari Division

No. 191 Dumbara Mahawalawatte, No. 191A Ketepola Ellagawa, No. 191B Dumbara

Manana and No. 191D Dekabadakanda.

The dispute that has given rise to this application has arisen as a result of the

implementation of the Bimsaviya Programme in the aforementioned Grama

Niladhari Divisions under and in terms of the provisions of the Registration of Title

Act No. 21 of 1998 (the Act). Hence, prior to considering the facts that culminated in

this application, it would be appropriate to consider the provisions of the Act.

In terms of Section 2 of the Act, the Commissioner of Title Settlement shall be

responsible for the due performance of the duties and functions assigned to him

under the said Act.

6

Section 1 provides that the Act shall apply to such Province, Administrative District or

Administrative Division as the Minister may from time to time, by Order published in

the Gazette, specify as an area to which the said Act shall apply. In terms of Section

11, on the publication of an Order under Section 1, the Commissioner of Title

Settlement shall request the Surveyor-General to prepare cadastral maps for the

areas specified in such Order and upon such request the Surveyor-General shall cause

such cadastral maps to be prepared and certified copies of the same to be issued to

the Commissioner of Title Settlement. Section 10 provides that, The registration of

title to every land parcel under this Act shall be in accordance with the cadastral map

prepared for that purpose.

Section 12 requires the Commissioner of Title Settlement, on receipt of such certified

copies of cadastral maps, to publish a Notice in the Gazette, calling for any claimants

to the land parcel specified in such Notice to submit their claims to him within a

prescribed period from the date of publication of such Notice. Section 13 of the Act

requires the Commissioner of Title Settlement to thereafter cause an investigation to

be conducted in order to determine the genuineness or otherwise of claims made in

response to a Notice under section 12. In terms of Section 21, If, during the course of

investigations, the Commissioner of Title Settlement forms the opinion that, due to

the disputed nature of the claims, it would be more appropriate for the investigations

to be carried out by the District Court, the Commissioner of Title Settlement may refer

such claims for investigation and determination to the District Court having

jurisdiction over the area where the land is situate.

Unless a reference is made in terms of Section 21 of the Act, Section 14 requires the

Commissioner of Title Settlement upon the conclusion of the investigation in terms

of Section 13 to publish in the Gazette his determination thereon. In terms of Section

22, Any claimant aggrieved by any Declaration of the Commissioner of Title

Settlement under section 14 may prefer an appeal against such declaration within the

prescribed period to the District Court having jurisdiction over the area where the

land parcel is situate.

The starting point of the dispute that has given rise to this application appears to

have arisen from a letter dated 20th March 2014 written by the then Secretary,

Ministry of Lands, which letter has not been produced before this Court. The 7th

7

Respondent, the Commissioner General of Buddhist Affairs has replied this letter by

his letter dated 17th April 2014, marked P15 under the heading, wh.u md%foaYsh

f,alus fldgsGdYfha oqusnr" oqusnrudkdk" lefgsfmd, fo;nvlkao .%du ks,Odrs jiusj, nsus

ijsh jevigyk l%shd;aul lsrSu. By P15, the 7th Respondent had informed the

Secretary, Ministry of Lands the manner in which the ownership of the

aforementioned Viharagama came to devolve on the Kiriella Nadun Rajamaha

Viharaya and concluded the said letter by stating as follows:

05. by; i|yka l, tu ysgmq fn!oaO lghq;= flduidrsiajrhd jsiska tjd we;s ,smsh yd

wfkl=;a ,sms f,aLk mrslaIdjg wkqj oqusnr jsydr.u lsrswe,a, jsydrhg whs;s nj

ms<s.; yels nj;a tfia fyhska Tn jsiska ud fj; tjd we;s 2014.03.20 oske;s ,smsfha

oekqusoSug wkqj oqusnr jsydr.u ;=, msysgs bvus ,shdmosxpsh w;aysgqjk f,i okajd ud

jsiska r;akmqr bvus ,shdmosxps lsrsfus ldrahd,hg hjd we;s ,smsh n,rys; lsrsug

fkdyels nj;a ldreKslj okajd isgsus'

It is clear from P15 that the 7th Respondent was interfering with steps being taken

in terms of the Act in respect of the Viharagama land which was said to be owned by

the Viharaya. Aggrieved by the interference by the 7th Respondent, the Secretary,

Ministry of Lands had sent the following letter dated 4th May 2014, marked P14 to

the Secretary, Ministry of Buddha Sasana:

02. wh.u m%dfoaYsh f,alus fldgSGdYfha oqusnr .fus bvus .eg 1998 wxl 21 orK ysuslus ,shdmosxps lsrsfus mk; u.ska jsiod .kakd f,i fn!oaO jsydr foajd,.us bvus j,g wod, .eg mrslaId lsrsfuS PkdOsm;s fldusIka iNdj ksrafoaY lr we;' ta wkqj lghq;= lsrsug ndOd lruska fn!oaO lghq;= flduidrsia Pkrd,a oqusnr .fus bvus ,shdmosxpsh w;aysgqjk f,i okajd r;akmqr bvus frPsiag%dra fj; ,smshla hjd we;' tu ,smsh bj;a lr .kakd f,i uf.a wxl 05$05$03$23 iy 2014$03$02 oske;s ,smsh u.ska okajd hejqjo tfia l, fkdyels njg Tyq jsiska by; ,smsfhka okajd we;' tu ,smsfhka fn!oaO lghq;= flduidrsia Pkrd,a bosrsm;a lr we;s lreKq my; i|yka fya;=ka u;

idjoH nj fmkajd fous

The Secretary, Ministry of Lands had thereafter gone onto explain the deficiencies in

the title of the Kiriella Nadun Rajamaha Viharaya to the said Viharagama and finally

taken up the position that the Sannasa / Thudapatha / Seettuwa relied on by the

Petitioner is a forged document. The final paragraph of P14 reads as follows:

8

fuu lreKq ish,a,u i,ld n,d 1909 os bvus ksrjq,a lsrsfuS fomdra;fuska;=j oqusnr

jeishkaf.a mrfjKs bvula f,i ksrjq,a lrk ,o wlalr 8317 mra' 25 la lsrswe,af,a

keoqka jsydrfha foam,la f,i jHdP iSgsgqjla u; whs;sh ;SrKh lsrSu bvus ksrjq,a

lsrSfus fomdra;fuSka;+j 1909 oS .;a ;Skaoqj m%;slafYam lsrSula jk w;r tfia lsrsug

ffk;sl n,hla o ke;' tu jiusj, uyPkhdg o lrk widOdrKhls' oqusnr.u bvus

ysuslus ,shdmosxps lsrSu 1998 wxl 21 orK mk; hgf;a l< hq;= nejska tfia lsrSug

ndOd fkdlrk f,ig fn!oaO lghq;= flduidrsia Pkrd,ag Wmfoia fok f,i ldreKslj

b,a,us' ;jo jHdP f,aLkhla mokus lrf.k nsusijsh jevigykg ndOd lsrsfuka

wh.u m%dfoaYsh f,alus fldgsGdYfha .%du ks,Odrs jiu 04 l uyPkhd ;=< rPh

wm%idohg m;ajk jd;djrKhla we;s jsug bv ;sfnk nj o ldreKslj okajus'

By letter dated 9th September 2014 marked P17, the Deputy Commissioner of Title

Settlement, Kuruwita, having referred to the representations made on behalf of the

Petitioner, had informed the Commissioner of Title Settlement as follows:

02. tu ,smsh u.ska oqusnr yd lefgSfmd, .%du ks,Odrs jiu ;=< msysgs foam< lsrswe,a,

jsydrh i;= idx>sl foam, nj m%ldY lr we;s w;r oqusnr jsydr.u i|yd lsrswe,af,a

jsydrh i;= whs;sh ms<s.kakd kvq ;Skaoqj wxl o i|yka lr we;' tfukau by; jius

j, nsus ijsh jevigyka l%shd;aul lsrSu ;=<ska idx>sl foam, jsydrhg wysus jsu

ms<sn|j jsfrdaOh o m<lr we;'

03' tnejska by; jius j, bvus fldgia j, whs;sh iusnkaOfhka ;SrK ksrafoaY ,nd osug fmr fn!oaO lghq;= flduidrsia" keoqka rPuy jsydrdOsm;s iajduska jykafia w;= wod< mdraYjhka le|jd weuqKqus ,smsfha i|yka kvq ;Skaoq yd wfkl=;a whs;sh ikd: lrk ,sms f,aLK wdosh mrslaId lr ne,Sfuka wk;=rej jevigyk l%shd;aul lsrSu iqoqiq

nj fhdaPkd lrus'

It is observed that the course of action suggested in P17, although conciliatory in

tone, may give rise to the impression that the provisions of the Act need not be

followed, if the title of the Viharaya to the Viharagama could be established.

Although it appears that surveying of the lands claimed by the Petitioner had

commenced, this Court has not been apprised whether the preparation of the

cadastral maps has been completed, and if so, whether the notice in terms of Section

12 of the Act calling for claims in respect of the Viharagama has been published, even

though the Petitioner states it did submit its claim, out of an abundance of caution.

9

Unfortunately, the Commissioner of Title Settlement appears to have lost sight of the

provisions of the Act he is required to administer, which requires him to cause an

investigation to be conducted in order to determine the genuineness or otherwise of

claims. I say this for the reason that by letter dated 11th November 2014 marked

P16, the Commissioner of Title Settlement had informed the Officer-in-Charge of

the Kiriella Police Station as follows:

02. 1909 oS bvus ksrjq,a lsrSfuS fomdra;fuSka;=j jsiska l+l+,a fldar,fha oqusnr .u

wlalr 8317 mrapia 25 m%fjsKs bvus f,i .eushkag ksrjq,a lr we;' tys lsisoq bvula

oqusnr jsydrhg fyda keoqka jsydrhg ksrjq,a lr ke;'

03. lsrswe,a, keoqka jsydrfha ikaki jHdP f,aLkhla nj bvus yd bvus ixjraOk

wud;HdxYfha f,alus jsiska nqoaOYdik wud;HdxYfha f,alusg hejq ,smshlska meyeos,s

fjs' ^msgm;lska wuqKd we;&' fus wkqj lsrswe,af,a keoqka jsydrhg wh;a hhs lshk fuu

bvu idx>sl foam,la jYfhka ms<sf.k we;ehs mj;sk jsYajdih i;Hfhka f;drh'

Thus, it is clear that the Commissioner of Title Settlement has been clearly influenced

by the contents of P14, which prompted the learned Presidents Counsel for the

Petitioner to complain to this Court that the Commissioner of Title Settlement has

pre-judged the issue of the title to the Viharagama.

The 4th Respondent, an Assistant Secretary in charge of the Bimsaviya programme,

by a letter dated 26th May 2015 marked P20 had informed the Petitioners

Attorney-at-Law of the following decisions arrived at a meeting held with officials of

the Land and Buddha Sasana Ministries, Title Settlement Department and

Commissioner General of Buddhist Affairs:

(a) The land claimed by the Viharaya has already been settled under the Land

Settlement Ordinance in 1909;

(b) Surveying of the lands in terms of the Act must continue without any

obstruction;

10

(c) Even though P14 has claimed that the Sannasa/ Thudapatha / Seettuwa is a

forged document, the Ministry of Lands cannot take a decision in this regard

and the matter must be decided by a competent Court of Law.

It is in the above factual circumstances that the Petitioner has filed this application,

seeking inter alia the following relief:

(a) A Writ of Certiorari to quash the letters marked P14, P16 and P20;

(b) A Writ of Mandamus directing the 1st and 3rd Respondents to inform officials of

the Land Title Settlement Department and all other officials involved with the

investigation of title in respect of the Dumbara Viharagama to disregard the

contents of P14, P16 and P20 with regard to the authenticity of the said

Sannasa / Thudapatha / Seettuwa.

Lord Diplock in Council of Civil Service Unions vs Minister for the Civil Service,1

identified (a) illegality, (b) irrationality and (c) procedural impropriety as the three

grounds upon which administrative action is subject to control by judicial review. I

shall now consider if each of the said letters are liable to be quashed by a Writ of

Certiorari, under any of the above three grounds.

I shall start with P14. As I have already noted, this letter has been precipitated by

the attempts of the 7th Respondent to prevent steps being taken in terms of the Act,

and the undue pressure sought to be brought upon the Secretary, Ministry of Lands

by the 7th Respondent in that regard. P14 serves two purposes. The first is, it is a

factual response by the Secretary, Ministry of Lands to the matters of fact that had

been set out in P15. The second is, it is only requesting the Secretary, Ministry of

Buddha Sasana to request the 7th Respondent not to obstruct the steps that are

being taken in terms of the Act. I am of the view that the writer of P14 was entitled

to write P14. As pointed out by the learned Senior State Counsel, it is only an inter-

governmental letter and was not meant to affect the rights of the Petitioner. The

Respondents have in fact stated in paragraph 20 of their Statement of Objections

that P14 was not intended to and does not have the effect of conclusively

1 1985 AC 374

11

determining the ownership of the Dumbara Village. This is a matter for (the)

Commissioner of Title Settlement.

The problem however arises from the fact that P14 has been copied to the

Commissioner of Title Settlement and several others, probably since the letter by the

7th Respondent was copied to the Commissioner of Title Settlement. This is where my

concerns with P14 begin. Although the Respondents have stated in their Statement

of Objections that, The Commissioner of Title Settlement is not bound by the former

Secretarys letter and is free to disregard its contents, and that P14 is merely an

interagency communication and not a conclusive determination of the Petitioners

rights.., what is worrying, and this is the complaint of the learned Presidents

Counsel for the Petitioner as well, is that the contents of P14 have not only been

acted upon by the Commissioner of Title Settlement, but he has already arrived at a

conclusion that the Sannasa / Thudapatha / Seettuwa is not authentic, a position

which is reflected by P16.

In his written submissions, the learned Senior State Counsel has stated that, P14 is

not intended to and does NOT have the effect of conclusively determining the

question as to who has title to the over Eight Thousand Acre property that is the

subject matter of this application. While P14 most certainly will not have the effect

of conclusively determining title, the learned Senior State Counsel has stated that the

determination of title, is a decision that will be made by the Commissioner of Title

Settlement after affording the Petitioner an opportunity to explain why the

observations in (P14) are untenable. I must state that P14 cannot be the starting

point and/or form the basis of an investigation that is carried out in terms of the Act,

and that the Petitioner cannot be placed on the backfoot by requiring him to respond

to P14. Such a course of action would clearly be to the disadvantage of the

Petitioner.

Thus, I am of the view that P14 is not liable to be quashed as it is not illegal or ultra

vires the powers of the Secretary, Ministry of Lands to convey his position to another

Ministry. The Commissioner of Title Settlement and all other Officers of the Land

Title Settlement Department shall however disregard the contents of P14 when

investigating the claim that the Petitioner may lodge in response to a notice under

Section 12, but shall be entitled to call upon the writer of P14 or his successors in

12

office to substantiate the contents thereof, and thereafter arrive at a determination

in terms of the Act.

I shall now consider P20. It is only a response to the Attorney-at-Law of the

Petitioner, informing him of the decisions taken at a meeting of all relevant Officials

with regard to the dispute. P20 does not contain any final decisions, except to state

that the provisions of the Act must be complied with. This Court cannot determine

the entitlement of the Viharaya to the land in issue nor can it determine whether the

Sannasa / Thudapatha / Seettuwa is genuine. However, in order to ensure that the

claim of the Petitioner is not prejudiced, the Commissioner of Title Settlement shall

call upon the relevant Officials to substantiate the matters set out in paragraph one

of P20.

I shall now come back to P16. As already expressed, I have a concern with P16. The

Commissioner of Title Settlement, acting solely upon the contents of P14, has

arrived at the conclusion that the land has not been settled in favour of the Viharaya

and that the Sannasa / Thudapatha / Seettuwa is a forged document which should

not have been acted upon, without conducting an investigation as required by the

Act. This is precisely the concern that I had with the Secretary, Ministry of Lands

copying P14 to the Commissioner of Title Settlement, which of course was

prompted by the 7th Respondent copying his letter to the Commissioner of Title

Settlement. I am of the view that any conclusion on the authenticity of the Sannasa /

Thudapatha / Seettuwa of the Viharaya must be determined only after an

investigation is carried out in terms of Section 13 of the Act, and that the conclusion

reached prior to that, as reflected in P16, on the genuineness of the title of a

potential claimant is illegal and therefore liable to be quashed by a Writ of Certiorari.

To my mind, the procedure that should have been followed in terms of the Act is

clear. Unfortunately, the unwarranted interference on the part of the Commissioner

General of Buddhist Affairs has brought about a situation where the provisions of the

Act have not been adhered to. Hence, I am of the view that the Commissioner of

Title Settlement shall, acting in terms of Section 12 of the Act, on receipt of certified

copies of cadastral maps relating to the Viharagama land publish a Notice in the

Gazette (if it has not already been done), calling upon any claimants to the lands

13

specified in such Notice to submit their claims to him within a prescribed period from

the date of publication of such Notice.

The Commissioner of Title Settlement shall thereafter, acting in terms of Section 13

of the Act, cause an investigation to be conducted in order to determine the

genuineness or otherwise of claims made in response to the Notice under section 12.

In investigating the claims of the Petitioner, the Commissioner of Title Settlement

and Officers of the Land Title Settlement Department shall disregard the contents of

P14, but shall be entitled to call upon the writer of P14 or his successors in office

as well as the writer of P20, to substantiate the contents thereof. The

Commissioner of Title Settlement may also have recourse to the procedure set out in

Section 21 of the Act, and cause a reference to be made to the District Court if he

forms the opinion that, due to the disputed nature of the claims, it would be more

appropriate for the investigations to be carried out by the District Court.

In the above circumstances, I issue a Writ of Certiorari quashing P16. I however see

no legal basis to grant the other relief prayed for by the Petitioner. Having taken into

consideration all the facts of this application, I make no order with regard to costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal Mahinda Samayawardhena, J I agree

Judge of the Court of Appeal