1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

C.A. No. 880/97(F) R. Nelson Seneviratne

D.C.Kegalle No. 23453/P

Detawala, Kegalle

Plaintiff Appellant

BEFORE

vs

T.A.S.Sampath Sugathadasa

50 Detawala, Kegalle

Substituted- 3rd Defendant

Respondent

V.Padmini Nissanka

Dattawala, Kegalla

2(A)(A) Defendant Respondent

N. D. Nissanka

Dattawala, Kegalla

2(A)(B) Defendant Respondent

G.P. Nissanka

Detawala, Kegalla

2(A)(C) Defendant Respondent

Deepali Wijesundera J.,

M. M.A. Gaffoor J.,

f

2

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON:

DECIDED ON:

Gaffoor J.,

Ershana Ariaratnam for the Plaintiff-Appellant

Bimal Rajapakse with D.Kuruppu for the 3rd Defendant

Respondent

Nizam Kariapper with M.I.M .Iynullah, M.C.M.Nawaz,

S.M.S.S.Sanfara for the sub.2{A){A),2A{B), 2A{C) Defendant

Respondents

07.09.2015

03.02.2016

The Plaintiff Appellant (hereinafter referred to as "the Appellant") filed

this action seeking to partition the land called "Kukuldeniyahena" alias

"Alawathupitiyahena" bounded on the North by Alawatupitiyahena, East by

Punchirala Aranthikawa Kukuldeniya hen a, South by a Kumbura Kukuldeniya

Asswedduma Ela and West by Ranhamy Pedige Hena, which land is morefully

described in the schedule to the Plaint.

After the plaint has been filed, a lispendens has been registered in Folio

No.151/194B at the Land Registry, Kegalle (see J.E of 17.06.1982). This is the

same folio in which the prior registration had been effected in respect of the

land described in the schedule (see page 304 of the appeal brief).

A commission has been issued to Surveyor K.K. Baddewela, whose plan

No. 4359 dated 3.12 1982 and his report are filed of record marked "X" and Xl"

3

respectively. In the said Plan X, the land morefully described in the schedule to

the Plaint has been clearly identified by the Surveyor as the land called

Kukuldeniyahena alias Alawatupitiyahena. This is the land which the Plaintiff

seeks to partition between him and the 1st Defendant.

Originally the Plaintiff has filed this action against the 1st Defendant who

is named as lIangakone Pathiranalage Dilini Seneviratne. When land was

surveyed on 26.11.1982, one Nissanka Arachchilage Ukkubanda appeared

before the Surveyor and claimed that he is in possession of the land and he who

started plantations on it and he is the owner of lots 1, 2 and 3 in Plan "X". The

said Ukkubanda was added as the 2nd Defendant, who has filed his Statement of

Claim on 25.04.1988 in which he has described a land totally different from the

land depicted in Plan X. When he filed an amended Statement of Claim on

11.05.1987, no schedule is given in the amended Statement of Claim.(see page

63 and 65 of the appeal brief).

The said Ukkubanda, in his original Statement of Claim has given a

schedule of a larger land and asked for a survey of this larger land. Upon his

application a second commission has been issued to Surveyor A.C.P.

Gunasekera, whose plan and report are marked as "V" and "V1" and filed of

record. According to the Report "V1", the Surveyor states that the land was

surveyed on the boundaries shown by the 2nd Defendant.

~

(tf,i

1

J I ! I 1 I I I

I

4

After the larger land has been surveyed and the Plan "Y" and Report "Y1"

are filed of record, the Court must have made order for a lispendens to be

registered in respect of the larger land.

Section 19(2)(b) of the Partition Law states:

"(b) where any Defendant seeks to have a larger land made the subject matter of the action as provided in paragraph (a) of this sub-section, the Court shall specify the party to the action by whom and the date on or before which an application for the registration of the action as a lispendens affecting such larger land shall be filed in Court."

Paragraph (c) of sub-section (2) of Section 19 states:

"where a party specified under paragraph (b) of this sub-section fails to comply with the requirements of that paragraph, the Court shall make order rejecting the claim to make the larger land the subject matter of this action."

Upon a perusal of the appeal brief, the above procedure has not been

followed. It appears that only the land described in the plaint has been

registered as a lispendens and not the land described in the Statement of Claim

of the 2nd Defendant, which is depicted as lots 1 and 2 in Plan "Y" and is not

registered as a lispendens. This omission vitiates the final and conclusive

character of the decree entered in this case.

The partition under the Partition Act No. 16 of 1951 and under the

present Partition Law No. 21 of 1977, in both statutes, registration of lispendens

I I I I I I I I I

! I

I

5

under Section 13 is compulsory. When the 2nd Defendant seeks a larger land to

be partitioned as shown in his Statement of Claim, his statement should be

treated as a Plaint under the Partition Law and he should file a lispendens as

stated in Section 6 of the Partition Law No. 21 of 1977.

In this case the Plaintiff has not amended his Plaint to include the land

claimed by the 2nd Defendant as the corpus to be partitioned. Nor the court

ordered a lispendens to be filed by the 2nd Defendant in respect of the land

sought by him to be the land that is to be partitioned. Hence, the trial Judge has

been misdirected himself as to the procedure followed in this case under the

law. Failure to register a fresh lispendens is a grave omission.

Section 48(1) of the Partition Law describes thus: "omission or defect of

procedure shall include;

a) Failure to issue summons on a party;

b) Failure to substitute the heir or legal representative of a party who

died;

c) Failure to appoint a guardian ad litem for a minor who is a party;

Notwithstanding the omission of failure mentioned above, the finality of

the decree is conclusive against any party. But failure to register a lispendens is

not a failure or defect coming under the above omissions or failure.

6

In the case of Uberis vs Jayawardena, 62 NlR 217, Basnayake C.J., held

that "an action in respect of one land cannot be converted into an action in

respect of another land by an amendment of pleadings."

Pulle )., observed: "when a plaint in a partition action is amended so as to

substitute a new corpus for the one described in the first plaint, a fresh

lispendens would be necessary. "

As stated above, when the lispendence affecting the larger land is not

tendered by the 2nd Defendant for due registration, the Court should have acted

under Section 19(2) of the Partition law and rejected the application for

partition of a larger land and proceeded with the plaint and the Plan "X" filed in

respect of the land described in the Plaint, which is depicted as 1, 2 and 3 in Plan

"x" of Surveyor Baddewela. The Court should have excluded the Plan "Y" and

the Report "Y1" and investigated the title of the Plaintiff and the 1st Defendant

and entered judgment accordingly. The 2nd Defendant should have been

ordered to seek his remedy in a different action, which the trial Judge failed to

do. Non observation of the essential steps render the judgment entered in this

case void and I therefore set aside the judgment entered in this case. Even with

hardships that have to be undergone by the parties, the correct procedure

should be adopted in this case.

1

1 .

I ! 7 I i .

I allow the appeal and send the case back to the District Court for trial to

proceed from after filing of the Plan "X".

Appellant entitled to costs in the action.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Wijesundera J.,

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL.

I

tf!,

\

[

IIt f f ; !