IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

C.A.(PHC)Appeal No. 58/2014

P.H.C. Kandy Case No. !7/2011Rev.

M.C. Kandy Case No. 13794

In the matter of an Appeal in terms

of Article 138 read wi th Article

154(P)6 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

The Univesity of Peradeniya

1st Petitioner

U daya Dewapriya Dodanwala

Acting Registrar

Univesity of Peradeniya

Peradeniya.

Petitioner-Respondent-Petitioner

Vs.

Herath Disawage Lalitha

No. 17, Halmahikandura

Rajawaththa,

Peradeniya.

Substituted Respondent-Petitioner-

Respondent

BEFORE

COUNSEL

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS

JANAK DE SILVA, J. &

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

Nayomi Kahawita SC for the 1st Petitioner

and Petitioner-Respondent-Petitioner

Sahan Kulatunga with Sameera Ekanayake

for the Substituted-Respondent -Petitioner-

Respondent.

TENDERED ON 01-10-2018( by the Appellant)

28-11-2018 (by the Respondent)

DECICED ON 16th January, 2019

*************

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

The 1st Petitioner and the Petitioner-Respondent-Petitioner

(hereinafter referred to as the "Appellants") invokes the appellate

jurisdiction of this Court, seeking to set aside the order of the Provincial

High Court of the Central Province holden in Kandy dated 09.06.2014 in

Rev /17 /2011, by which it has revised an order of eviction issued by the

Magistrate's Court of Kandy in respect of an application made by the

Appellants under Section 5(1) of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession)

Act No. 7 of 1979 as amended, against the Respondent-Petitioner-

Respondent and later substituted Respondent-Petitioner-Respondent

(hereinafter referred to as the "Respondent").

2

In their application to the Magistrate's Court the Appellants sought

an eviction order on the Respondent who failed to deliver vacant

possession of the State land upon service of a quit notice issued on

26.08.2008. This was after the quashing of an quit notice that had been

issued by the Appellants on 16.07.2001 by this Court by its order dated

25.05.2007 in CA. Application No. 1586/01. The Appellants have

thereafter made an application to the Magistrate's Court seeking an order

of ejectment on 11.11.2008.

, The Magistrate's Court had issued summons on the Respondent

who tendered his show cause to the said Court on 31.08.2009. During the

ensuing inquiry, the Respondent presented his claim on the basis that the

land in question belongs to Sri Lanka Railways Department and he

occupies it under a lease agreement, which claim is supported by a letter

issued by the Chief Engineer of Sri Lanka Railways Department. He

further claims that it was his father who initially obtained the said lease

and later succeeded as the lessee upon his father's demise.

Learned Magistrate, after considering the order issued by this Court

quashing the earlier quit notice issued by the Appellants, has correctly

applied the governing legal principles to the application of the Appellant

and since the Respondent has failed to satisfy him that he has a "valid

permit or other written authority of the State granted in accordance with

any written law and that permit or authority is in force and not revoked or

otherwise rendered invalid" as per Section 9(1) of the State Lands

3

I!.

(Recovery of Possession) Act No. 9 of 1979, issued an order of eviction on

05.11.2009.

The Respondent thereafter moved the Provincial High Court to

revise the said order of ejectment. In his petition to the Provincial High

Court, it was stated by the Respondent that there is an inquiry conducted

by the Land Commissioner over a dispute between the Appellants and the

Sri Lanka Railways upon a vesting order by which the 2nd Petitioner-

Respondent-Petitioner relied on to assert that he is the competent

authority.

In delivering its order, the Provincial High Court concluded that the

Respondent has claimed that he paid annual rent for the land to Sri Lanka

Railways Department and as per the reasoning of the judgment of the

Supreme Court in S.c. Appeal No. 138/96 acceptance of such payment

rebuts the presumption of unlawful occupation and therefore, the order of

eviction should be set aside.

The Appellants contended before this Court that the scheme of the

State Lands (Recover)[ of Possession) Act " ... which is executory simplicitor

in character does not operate on the premise of ascertaining or establishing

the title of the Competent Authority to a State land but rather on the

premise of calling upon and asserting the unlawful occupier to establish

his or her " entitlement to occupy" the State land by adducing evidence in

the form of written permit or written authority issued by the State./I

4

They relied on the judgments of Nirmal Paper Converters (Pvt) Ltd.,

v Sri Lanka Ports Authority (1993) 1 Sri L.R. 219 and Muhandiram v

Janatha Estates Development Board (1992) 1 Sri L.R. 110 to impress upon

this Court to their contention that the only ground on which the occupier

could remain in possession and occupation of a State land subject to the

recovery proceedings under the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act

is by the production of a valid permit or written authority issued to such

State land and that is the only consideration a Magistrate's Court could

take into consideration in such proceedings.

The Appellants also relied on the Judgment of the Supreme Court in

Divisional Secretary Kalutara & Others Vs. Jayatissa SC Appeal Nos. 246

to 249 and 250 of 2014 - decided on 04.08.2017 where the one of the

questions that arose for determination by their Lordships was "Has the

Court of Appeal erred in law by holding that the Competent Authority is required

to prove whether the State land was vested in the Government as acquired when

section 9(2) of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act specifically precludes

the Magistrate from calling evidence from the Competent Authority to support the

application for ejectment ?".

After an analysis of the statutory provisions and judicial precedents,

the said question of law was answered by the apex Court by holding that

"The Court of Appeal erred in law by holding that the Competent

Authority is acquired to prove that the land was vested in the Government

or acquired, in terms of Section 9(2) of the State Lands (Recovery of

Possession) Act."

5

II

In view of the judgment of the Supreme Court, it is thus reiterated

that the Magistrate's Court has no power to call upon the Appellant to

substantiate his opinion that the Respondent is in unlawful occupation of

State land, in view of the provisions contained in Section 9(2) 9f the State

Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act and even if the land considered to be

of private ownership, the Act has provided for such a situation in Section

12.

It is rather unfortunate that the Provincial High Court has ventured

into consider the validity of the quit notice and to disregard the opinion

formed by the Appellants that the Respondent is in unlawful occupation of

State land in a revision application where the issuance of an eviction order

is challenged.

In Nissanka v State(2001) 3 Sri L.R. 78, it was held that the power of

revision can be exercised for any of the following purposes viz;

1. to satisfy the Appellate Court as to the legality of any

sentence/ order,

2. to satisfy the Appellate Court as to the propriety of any

sentence/ order,

3. to satisfy the Appellate Court as to the regularity of the

proceedings of such Court.

The order of eviction issued by the Magistrate's Court is not tainted

with any of these considerations which makes it liable to be interfered

with. The judgment of the Supreme Court in S.c. Appeal No. 138/96 - S.c.

6

minutes of 26.02.1999, on which the Provincial High Court has relied on to

exercise powers of revision, was in fact made in respect of an application

to challenge the validity of the quit notice issued by the Competent

Authority. In quashing the quit notice, the apex Court held that due to the

payment and acceptance of rentals, it cannot be said that the appellants are

in "unauthorised possession or occupation".

However, the Magistrate's Court is not empowered to challenge the

opinion of the competent authority as per the judgments of Farook v

Gunewardene, Government Agent, Amparai (1980) 2 Sri L.R. 243 and

CA. (PHC) APN No. 46/2000 - CA. minutes of 19.11.2004 and its

jurisdiction is limited to the scope of Section 9. Therefore, the Provincial

High Court has fallen into error when it decided to overturn the order of

ejectment of the Magistrate's Court in the exercise of its revisionary

jurisdiction.

This finding derives validity from the judgment of the Supreme

Court in Divisional Secretary Kalutara & Others Vs. Jayatissa (Supra)

since it has been held that:-

"It must be noted that the Respondent had invoked revisionary

jurisdiction of the High Court, which is a discretionary remedy.

Thus, if relief is to be granted, the party seeking the relief has to

establish that, not only the impugned order is illegal, but also the

nature of the illegalihj is such, that it shocks the conscience of the

7

\I

11

Court. the High Court, it appears had not considered the criteria

aforesaid in setting aside the order of the Magistrate."

In view of the above reasoning, we are of the considered view that

the impugned order of the Provincial High Court ought to be set aside by

allowing the appeal of the Appellants.

Accordingly, we set aside the order of the Provincial High Court

dated 09.06.2014 as prayed for by the Appellants and affirm the order of

the Magistrate's Court dated 05.11.2009 for the ejection of the substituted

Respondent from the State land described in the schedule to the

application of the Appellants.

Appeal is allowed. Parties will bear their costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JANAK DE SILVA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

8