! I !

1

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SHI LANKA.

In the matter of an application for Writs of Certiorari and Prohibition under and in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Republic of Sri Lanka.

Diesel and Motor Engineering PLC, 65, lethawana Road, Colombo- 12.

Petitioner

Court of Appeal case

No. CA 43/2016 Writ Vs.

Before

Counsel

Consumer Affairs Authority of Sri Lanka, Levelland 2, CWE Secretariat Building, No.27, Vauxhall Street, Colombo 02.

W.P. Sumanawathie, No. 417/2, Near Bokotuwa, Ethpitiya, Walasmulla.

L.T.B. Dehideniya 1, (PICA)

& A.L. Shiran Gooneratne 1.

Respondents

Thishya Weragoda, Iresh Seneviratne with C. Sugathapala for the Petitioner.

Chaya Sri Nammuni SC for Respondents.

Supported on: 17/1 0/20 17

Decided on : 25/1 0/2017

2

Order

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

Heard both Counsel.

The Petitioner submits that a "TAT A ACE" mini lorry was provided to the

2nd Respondent on or about the 30th March 2012, subject to a "new vehicle limited

warranty" of 1 year or 36,000 km, whichever came first, in relation to certain

manufacturing defects. On several occasions the 2nd Respondent had brought the

said motor vehicle to the service center of the Petitioner at Matara, complaining of

various issues, where the Petitioner has attended to such concerns.

On or about 14th March 2013, the Petitioner received a letter from the 1st

Respondent regarding a complaint lodged by the 2nd Respondent for alleged

defects in the said vehicle and requested the Petitioner to be present for an inquiry.

Since there was no settlement reached, the matter was fixed for inquiry in terms of

Section 13(1) of the Consumer Authority Act No.9 of 2003. At the said inquiry a

settlement was reached between the parties. However the 2nd Respondent had

withdrawn from the settlement due to a disagreement of the conditions of

settlement. The proceedings of the inquiry held by the 1 st Respondent on 9th July

2013, is attached marked All.

Thereafter the Petitioner has received documents marked A13(a) and

AI3(b) in relation to order dated 29th May 2014, in terms of Section 13(4) of the

said Act, signed by the Chairman of the 1 st Respondent Authority, requiring the

t

3

Petitioner to pay a sum of Rs. 703,794/- to the 2nd Respondent. According to

document marked A 13 (b), the said order by the 1 st Respondent was given taking

into consideration the oral and written evidence which the parties had placed

before the said inquiry, held in terms of Section 13(1) of the Act.

The Petitioner submits that when an inquiry has commenced in terms of

Section 13(1), of the Act, and where the parties arrive at a settlement, the same

inquiry cannot recommence, as the Inquiry Panel of the 1 st Respondent is functus.

By letter dated 3rd September 2013, marked AI2, the Petitioner has informed the

1 st Respondent regarding the non effectuation of the settlement arrived between

the parties. The 1 st Respondent has not replied this letter. However after a lapse of

nearly a year, the Petitioner received order marked 13(a) by the lSI Respondent in

terms of Section 13(1) of the said Act.

Section 13(4) of the Act states,

"Where after an inquiry into a complaint, the Authority is of

opinion that a manufacture or sale of any goods or the

provision of any services has been made which does not

conform to the standards or specifications determined or

deemed to be determined by the Authority, or that a

manufacture or sale has been made of any goods not

conforming to any warranty or guarantee gIven by

implication or otherwise by the manufacturer or trader, it

shall order the manufacturer or trader to pay compensation to

I

,

4

the aggrieved party or to replace such goods or to refund the

amount paid for such goods or the provision of such service,

as the case may be."

It is observed that the parties before the Panel of Inquiry have not

consented to adopt the proceedings previously recorded and also have not

consented before the said Panel of Inquiry to make an order on the basis of the

said proceedings. Therefore the settlement reached between the parties on 9th July

2013, cannot be considered as an order in terms of Section 13(4) of the said Act.

To recommence an inquiry after a lapse of 1 year, without notice to the

parties, will necessarily deprive the legitimate expectations of a party to be heard.

In the circumstances the Petitioner has established that, if an interim order

to stay further proceedings in the Magistrate's Court of Colombo is not granted the

final order would be rendered nugatory. Therefore relief prayed for in prayer (e) is

granted.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

L.T.B. Dehideniya J, (PICA)

I agree.

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

\