==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka

Complainant

Court of Appeal Case No: Vs,

CA/HCC/0126/24

High Court of Kuliyapitiya

Case No. High Court/029/19 Jayasinghe Kankanamlage Premasiri

Jayasinghe alias Metiyagane Mahattaya

Mama

Accused

And Now Between

Jayasinghe Kankanamlage Premasiri

Jayasinghe alias Metiyagane Mahattaya

Mama

Accused-Appellant

Vs,

Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

Complainant-Respondent

2

Before: Amal Ranaraja, J.

Dr. Sumudu Premachandra, J.

Counsel: K.V.D.U.R. Wijegunaratne for the Accused-Appellant

Hiranjan Peiris, ASG for the State.

Argued on: 23 .07.2026

Judgment on: 11.09.2026

Judgment

Amal Ranaraja. J,

1. The accused-appellant (hereinafter referred to as the ‘appellant’) has

been indicted in the High Court of Kuliyapitiya in Case No.

HC/029/2019. The charges in the indictment are as follows;

01. That between the period of the 01st of January, 2013 and the

15th of February, 2013, within the jurisdiction of this Court,

in Dikirikawe Panapitiya, you in order to gain some sexual

gratification have used a certain part of your body on one

Rajapaksha Suriya Bandara Arachchilage Rachini Shalika, a

person under 16 years of age, i.e. by rubbing your male

genitalia in between her legs; thereby you have committed an

offence of “Grave Sexual Abuse” punishable under Section

3

365B (2)(b) of the Penal Code of Sri Lanka as amended by

Penal Code (Amendment) Act No.22 of 1995, Penal Code

(Amendment) Act No. 29 of 1998 and Penal Code (Amendment)

Act No. 16 of 2006.

02. That between the period of the 01st of January, 2013 and the

15th of February, 2013, at a separate occasion than that of the

above first charge, within the jurisdiction of this Court, in

Dikirikawe Panapitiya, you in order to gain some sexual

gratification have used a certain part of your body on one

Rajapaksha Suriya Bandara Arachchilage Rachini Shalika, a

person under 16 years of age, i.e. by rubbing your male

genitalia in between her legs; thereby you have committed an

offence of “Grave Sexual Abuse” punishable under Section

365B (2)(b) of the Penal Code of Sri Lanka as amended by

Penal Code (Amendment) Act No.22 of 1995, Penal Code

(Amendment) Act No. 29 of 1998 and Penal Code (Amendment)

Act No. 16 of 2006.

03. That on or around the 16th of February, 2013, at the location

mentioned in the above first charge, you in order to gain some

sexual gratification have used a certain part of your body on

one Rajapaksha Suriya Bandara Arachchilage Rachini

Shalika, a person under 16 years of age, i.e. by rubbing your

male genitalia in between her legs; thereby you have

committed an offence of “Grave Sexual Abuse” punishable

under Section 365B (2)(b) of the Penal Code of Sri Lanka as

amended by Penal Code (Amendment) Act No.22 of 1995,

Penal Code (Amendment) Act No. 29 of 1998 and Penal Code

(Amendment) Act No. 16 of 2006.

4

2. At the conclusion of the trial, the appellant has been convicted of the

first charge and acquitted of the second and the third charges. Upon

conviction the appellant has been sentenced as follows;

I. 7 years rigorous imprisonment and also has been imposed a fine

of Rs. 5000.00 with a term of 1 month simple imprisonment, in

default.

The appellant has also been directed to pay a sum of Rs.

100,000.00, as compensation to PW01 with a term of 1 year

simple imprisonment, in default.

Further, it has been directed that the term of 1 year simple

imprisonment in default, shall run consequent to the term of 7

years rigorous imprisonment.

Case of the Prosecution

3. PW01, born in October 2000, has lived in Dikirikawe Panapitiya, a town

located in the North-Western Province of Sri Lanka. She has attended

Mitiyagane Maha Vidyalaya and has been a year 7 student at that time.

She has resided with her parents and younger brother. Her

grandmother has also lived close by. Both her parents have been

employed and would return home after she and her brother came back

from school. It had been customary for her to complete her homework

upon returning from school. Afterwards, she and her brother would go

to their grandmother’s house until their parents returned from work.

4. On the day of the incident, PW01 and her brother have returned from

school. The brother had then left home to attend extra lessons, leaving

PW01 alone. At that time, the appellant, who was known to PW01 and

employed by her grandmother to clear an adjacent property has come

by and requested some water to drink. PW01 has obliged.

5

5. Thereafter, PW01 has returned to her room. The appellant has allegedly

followed her, subsequently, threatened her with a knife, has committed

sexual abuse as detailed in the first charge, i.e. engaged in intercrural

sex with PW01 against her will.

6. PW01 has shared the incident with a school friend. In turn, the friend

has notified a teacher about what had happened. The teacher has then

questioned PW01, who has provided a written explanation of the

incident involving the appellant. This written explanation has been

submitted as evidence and marked පැ 02. Following a police complaint,

an investigation has commenced.

7. PW01 has subsequently been presented to Dr. A.P. Karagampitiya, a

medical officer attached to the outpatient department (OPD) of the

Teaching Hospital in Kurunegala. Upon examining PW01, Dr.

Karagampitiya has prepared a medico-legal report. This report has

produced as evidence and marked පැ 03.

Case of the Appellant

8. The appellant has denied the incidents described in the charges. He has

also denied offering money to PW01, asserting instead that he provided

funds to PW01’s brother for the purchase of books.

Grounds of appeal

9. When the matter was taken up for argument, the learned counsel

appearing on behalf of the appellant has urged the following grounds of

appeal;

6

I. Failure to apply the judicial caution required in assessing the

evidence of child witness when there is overwhelming evidence

against;

i. Contradictions per se and inter se pf the evidence of PW01

and PW04.

ii. Authenticity of the letter පැ 02 and signs of tutoring.

iii. Teacher’s conduct in channelling the complaint.

iv. Police investigators unduly and culpably interested in the

outcome.

v. Lack of corroborative value of medico-legal evidence and

the inability of ‘short history given by the patient’ to

determine consistency.

II. Failure to consider an alternative narrative arising from PW01’s

attainment of menarche.

III. Failure to consider investigative lapses, leading to material

irregularities and denial of fair trial.

10. The written explanation submitted to the designated teacher by PW01

been produced as evidence, marked පැ 02. The appellant has contended

that the structure of this explanation is beyond the capacity of a child

of PW01’s age. Accordingly, PW01 is alleged to have been coached before

drafting the contents of පැ 02 and the statement given to the

investigator.

7

11. A reading of පැ 02 shows that PW01 has expressed in simple language

the incident involving the appellant. For the convenience of those

relevant, I reproduce the contents of පැ 02;

Vide පැ 02 on Page 271 of the Brief

12. PW01 has explained the manner in which the appellant had attempted

to familiarise himself with her. She has then recounted how, on the date

of the incident, the appellant has come to her house, requested a glass

of water and subsequently, engaged in the sexual act with her under

threat.

13. The explanation provided is, as stated above in simple language,

avoiding any legal jargon to clarify the incident. Although the appellant

8

has argued that the structure of this explanation was beyond the

capacity or understanding of PW01, he has not elaborated on this point

in a convincing manner.

14. The capacity to explain an incident as well as the understanding and

structure of the explanation is relative. There is no single universal

method for doing so. The ability to express oneself clearly is crucial in

this context. There is no evidence that PW01 was incapable of

expressing herself as demonstrated in of පැ 02. Hence, the contention

that PW01 has been coached before drafting the contents of පැ 02 and

the statement given to the investigator must fail.

15. The appellant has also argued that there are significant discrepancies

in the testimony of witnesses, PW01 and PW04 as well in the statements

they provided to the investigator. Consequently, the appellant asserts

that this inconsistency calls into question the reliability of their

testimonies, suggesting they should not be used as the basis for

convicting the appellant of the charges faced.

16. Marking a contradiction, in a witness’s testimony is a core cross-

examination technique used to impeach credibility. It involves

confronting a witness with his own prior inconsistent statements (such

as a previous police statement) to expose irreconcilable differences in

his account. Confronting and impeaching a witness by such technique

(the marking step) involves the following; the witness’s attention is to be

drawn to the exact part of the previous statement that contradicts his

current testimony. Quote the specific lines from the prior recorded

statement. Ask the witness to explain why his previous statement differs

from his current testimony. If the witness denies making the previous

statement, the cross examining attorney will officially mark that

specific, inconsistent portion of the previous statement as a Court

exhibit. The investigating officer or the person who recorded the

statement will later be called to prove it was actually made.

9

17. In the case of Agampodi Wijepala de Soyza vs Officer in Charge,

Ahungalla and Another SC Appeal 159/2018, decided on 07.07.2021, P.

Padman Surasena J (as he was then), has held as follows,

“Moreover, the Evidence Ordinance in section 145 specifically provides

for the manner in which a witness can be cross-examined and

confronted with the statements made by such witness previously and

the procedure to be adopted when proving such statements. It is

worthwhile to reproduce here the said section.

Section 145.

(1) A witness may be cross-examined as to previous statements

made by him in writing or reduced into writing and relevant

to matters in question without such writing being shown to

him or being proved; but if it is intended to contradict him

by the writing, his attention must, before the writing can be

proved, be called to those parts of it which are to be used for

the purpose of contradicting him.

(2) If a witness, upon cross examination as to a previous oral

statement made by him relevant to matters in question in the

suit or proceeding in which he is cross examined and

inconsistent with his present testimony, does not distinctly

admit that he made such statement, proof may be given that

he did in fact make it; but before such proof can be given the

circumstances of the supposed statement sufficient to

designate the particular occasion must be mentioned to the

witness, and he must be asked whether or not he made such

a statement

10

The scheme of the above section clearly demands that the following

mandatory steps must be adhered to, when marking and proving an

inconsistency.

Firstly, a cross-examining counsel who intends to show that the

evidence of the witness under cross examination is contradictory with a

previous statement made by him, must ask questions relevant to such

matters in question without such previous statements being shown to

him.

Secondly, if such witness comes out with something that is prima facie

inconsistent with any part of such statement, it is then only the section

allows such counsel to bring such parts of such statement which are to

be used for the purpose of contradicting him, to the attention of such

witness.

Thirdly, if such witness has stated something inconsistent with his

previous statement and does not distinctly admit making such previous

statement, then the cross-examining counsel is under a duty as per

subsection 2 of the above section to ask whether or not such witness has

made such a previous statement.

Fourthly, it is thereafter only the cross-examining counsel can proceed

to prove that such witness has in fact made such previous statement.”

18. However, trivial, minor inconsistencies, rarely impact the core of the

case. To successfully discredit a witness, the contradiction must be

material to a key fact in the issue.

11

19. In the case of Bandara Vs. The State (2001) 1 SLR 63, Kulathilake J, has

stated,

“Our Courts have laid down the principle that the discrepancies

and inconsistencies which do not relate to the core of prosecution

case ought to be disregarded especially when all probabilities

factor echoes in favour of the version narrated by a witness.”

20. PW01 has testified to the events described in the first charge. While the

appellant has contended that PW01’s testimony contains discrepancies,

such discrepancies have not been established as noted elsewhere in the

judgement.

21. In her history provided to Dr. A.P. Karagampitiya, Medical Officer, PW01

has stated as follows;

Vide Page 11 of the Case Brief

Accordingly, she has remained consistent in that regard. The testimony

of PW01 has been cogent and convincing.

22. The appellant has also sought to undermine the credibility of PW01’s

testimony by alleging that her account included a penile-vaginal

penetration involving the appellant and the credibility of such testimony

is not supported by the absence of evidence that PW01 had attained

menarche at the time.

12

23. Menarche is a girl’s first menstrual period, making the biological

capacity for reproduction. Penile-vaginal penetration is physically

possible before menarche because, the reproduction organs are present.

The vaginal canal exists and can allow penetration but, it carries severe

risks of physical trauma and emotional harm.

24. Research suggests that child witnesses often exhibit a tendency to

exaggerate when recounting events. This phenomenon can be attributed

to a variety of factors, including psychological development of children,

their emotional responses to traumatic events and the influence of

external circumstances.

25. Children perceive and interpret the world differently. Their

understanding of events particularly those that are distressing or

frightening can be influenced by their imagination and emotional state.

In moments of anxiety or fear, a child’s instinct may lead them to distort

experiences as a coping mechanism. This natural inclination to

exaggerate can stem from their attempts to make sense of overwhelming

situations, adding unnecessary details to their accounts to echo with

what they perceive as the seriousness of the event.

26. Children are also often eager to please adults and may feel pressure to

conform to perceived expectations. This pressure can lead them to

exaggerate their accounts in an attempt to create a narrative that aligns

with what they believe others want to hear.

27. Children’s memories are also easily influenced by suggestions,

discussions with family members or others of similar events. Such

factors may result in distortions and exaggerations as children attempt

to reconstruct memories that are not entirely accurate. Further,

traumatic events in particular can provoke strong feelings, resulting in

vivid recollections but these memories may not always reflect factual

accuracy. The intensity of emotions can blur the lines of reality for

13

young witnesses, prompting them to recount experiences with dramatic

flair even if such exaggeration diverges from actual events.

28. Section 134 of the Evidence Ordinance of Sri Lanka is as follows;

“134. No particular number of witnesses shall in any case be required

for the proof of any fact.”

29. The law focuses on the weight and credibility of testimony rather than

counting witnesses. A court can base a judgement or conviction on the

uncorroborated testimony of a single witness if the judge believes it.

Courts do not need multiple witnesses to verify a single event or fact.

30. In the decided case of Sumanasena vs Attorney General 1999 3 SLR 137,

Jayasuriya J, has stated,

“Evidence must not be counted but weighed and the evidence of a single

solitary witness if cogent and impressive could be acted upon by a Court

of law.”

Consequently, the learned High Court Judge was correct in considering

the testimony of PW01 and acting upon it. It also contradicts the claim

that the investigators have not performed a proper investigation, given

their failure to record relevant witnesses.

31. In those circumstances, I am not inclined to interfere with the

conviction, disputed judgement together with the sentencing order and

proceed to affirm the same. The term of 7 years rigorous imprisonment

shall commence from the date the instant judgement is read and

explained to the appellant in the High Court of Kuliyapitiya.

32. I dismiss the appeal but make no order regarding costs.

14

Appeal dismissed.

33. The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this Judgement to the

High Court in Kuliyapitiya for compliance.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Dr. Sumudu Premachandra, J.

I agree

Judge of the Court of Appeal