Page 1 of 7

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under Article 154P (3) (b) of the Constitution of Sri Lanka, read with Section 11 of High Court of the Provinces (Special Provinces Act No. 19 of 1990).

Officer-in-Charge, Police Station, Hanguranketha.

Plaintiff

Vs.

1. D.M.W.G. Danepola

Adikarigama, Gonaganthenna. 2. A.C.D. Ariywansa Fonseka,

Adikarigama, Gonaganthenna. 3. A.M. Sudumanika,

Walikada, Gonaganthenna. 4. D.M.M. Ranmanika,

Walikada, Gonaganthenna. 5. Dinesh Kulathunga,

Adikarigama, Gonaganthenna. Presently, 264/2B, Atigala Mawatha, Heeneti Kumbura Road, Battaramulla. Respondents

AND

Dinesh Kulathunga, Adikarigama, Gonaganthenna. Presently, 264/2B, Atigala Mawatha, Heeneti Kumbura Road, Battaramulla.

5th Respondent-Petitioner Vs.

1. Officer-in-Charge,

Police Station, Hanguranketha.

Court of Appeal Case No: CA (PHC) 21/2014 Kandy High Court Case No: Rev 27/2010 Kandy Primary Court Case No: 17943

Page 2 of 7

Plaintiff-Respondent 2. D.M.W.G. Danepola,

Adikarigama, Gonaganthenna.

3. A.C.D. Ariywansa Fonseka, Adikarigama, Gonaganthenna.

4. A.M. Sudumanika, Walikada, Gonaganthenna.

5. D.M.M. Ranmanika, Walikada, Gonaganthenna.

RespondentRespondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

Dinesh Kulathunga, Adikarigama, Gonaganthenna. Presently, 264/2B, Atigala Mawatha, Heeneti Kumbura Road, Battaramulla. 5th Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant

Vs.

1. D.M.W.G. Danepola,

Adikarigama, Gonaganthenna. 2. A.C.D. Ariywansa Fonseka,

Adikarigama, Gonaganthenna. 3. A.M. Sudumanika,

Walikada, Gonaganthenna. 4. D.M.M. Ranmanika,

Walikada, Gonaganthenna.

Respondent-Respondent-Respondents

Before: Prasantha De Silva, J. K.K.A.V. Swarnadhipathi, J.

Counsel: Shrinath Perera, PC with Anjela Josey for the 5th Respondent- Petitioner-Appellant.

Ranga Dayananda with A.Wickremasinghe for the 2(a)-2(c) Respondent-Respondent-Respondents.

Page 3 of 7

Both parties agree to dispose the matter by way of written submissions. Written Submissions 09.04.2022 for the 5th Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant. tendered on:

Decided on: 19.10.2022

Prasantha De Silva, J.

Judgment

This appeal emanates from the Order of the learned High Court Judge exercising revisionary

jurisdiction in case bearing No. /27/2010 made against the Order of the Primary Court

dated 04.01.2010. It appears that the Officer-in-Charge of Hanguranketha Police Station

had filed an information in terms of Section 66 of the Primary Courts Procedure Act No.

44 of 1979 in the Primary Court of Kandy in case bearing No. 17943.

The said information was filed consequent to a complaint made to the Police by the 1st

Respondent-Respondent-Respondent alleging that the 2nd Respondent-Respondent-

Respondent has obstructed the road used by him to access his parents house. Later, the

3rd and the 4th Respondent-Respondent-Respondents had intervened in the said case with

the 5th Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant [hereinafter referred to as the Appellant].

The Primary Court had issued an Interim Order on the submissions of the Appellant granting

right of way to the Appellant and to the 1st, 3rd and 4th Respondent-Respondent-

Respondents over a 10 feet wide road in terms of Section 67 of the Primary Courts

Procedure Act.

It was submitted by the Appellant that before the said Interim Order was enforced, the

wife of the Respondent had instituted action No. DLM/22/09 in the District Court of Kandy

and obtained an Enjoining Order and notice of Interim Injunction on 17.07.2009, prohibiting

felling of trees, cutting of roads, making roads and digging drains in the disputed land on

which the approach road is located.

Prior to the pronouncement of the Final Order of the Primary Court of Kandy in the said

case bearing No. 17943, the Enjoining Order and the notice of Interim Injunction issued by

the District Court of Kandy were brought to the notice of Court. On that account, the

Appellant alleged that the learned Primary Court Judge when pronouncing the Final Order

in case bearing No. 17943 had disregarded the Interim Order granted by himself on

Page 4 of 7

02.07.2009 and permitted the Appellant and other Respondent-Respondent-Respondents to

use an approach road 3 feet wide in accordance with the Interim Injunction issued by the

District Court in case bearing No. DLM/244/09.

Being aggrieved by the said Final Order of the Primary Court dated 04.01.2010, the

Appellant had invoked the revisionary jurisdiction of the Provincial High Court of Kandy

seeking to set aside the said Order dated 04.01.2010 and praying for a confirmation of the

Interim Order of the learned Primary Court Judge dated 02.07.2009 and to have it declared

that they have a right to use the access road 10 feet wide in terms of the said Interim

Order.

However, the learned High Court Judge having inquired into the said application of the

Appellant had pronounced the Order on 05.03.2014 in case bearing No. /27/2010

dismissing the said application and upholding the Final Order of the learned Primary Court

Judge.

Being aggrieved by the said Order in case bearing No. /27/2010, the Appellant had

preferred this appeal on the grounds stated in (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e) of paragraph 10 of

the Petition of Appeal.

a) The learned High Court Judge in pronouncing his Order has disregarded the

provisions in Section 66 of the Primary Courts Procedure Act No. 44 of 1979.

b) When pronouncing the Order, it is erroneous to apply the contents of the Interim

Injunction and the Enjoining Order of the Case No. DLM 244/09 of the District Court

of Kandy.

c) The Order made by the learned High Court Judge disregarding the facts of law stated

in the judgment of Kanagasabai Vs. Mylavaganam [1978 NLR 280] in relation to

concurrent jurisdiction pertaining to the Interim Injunction is erroneous.

d) Since the Interim Order issued by the Primary Court on 02.07.2009 has been issued

prior to the District Court Order in case No. DLM 244/09 made on 17.07.2009, it is

erroneous for the learned High Court Judge to pronounce his Order without deciding

that it was incorrect to apply the contents of the Interim Injunction and the

Enjoining Order in the said Interim Order.

e) Since the person named Charlet Abeygunasekara who filed case No. DLM/244/09 in

the District Court of Kandy was not a party to the immediate case No. 17943 of the

Primary Court, it is erroneous to pronounce the Order without determining that it is

Page 5 of 7

incorrect to make the contents of the said Order of the case, the basis of the dispute

between the parties.

In this respect the attention of Court was drawn to the Order of the learned Primary Court

Judge referring to the Judgment Kanagasabai Vs. Mylavaganam [supra].

68 69

.

As per the extract above, when an Order is made by a Magistrate under Section 68 or 69 of

the Act, the said Order should be restricted to/consistent with the Interim of Final Order

of the District Court.

The case of Kanagasabai Vs. Mylavaganam [supra] it was emphasized that the mere fact

of a suit pending in a Civil Court does not deprive the Magistrate of jurisdiction to make an

Order under Section 62 and 63 of the Administration of Justice Law No. 44 of 1973, which

corresponds to Act No. 44 of 1979; Primary Courts Procedure Act. In the said case,

Magistrate held that in view of the application pending before the District Court, he should

not proceed to act under Section 62 of the Administration of Justice Law.

However, in the instant Primary Court case, it was brought to the notice that the District

Court of Kandy had issued notice of Interim Injunction and an Enjoining Order, in case

bearing No. DLM/244/09.

Moreover, the said Enjoining Order was issued ex-parte and an Interim Injunction was not

granted but only notice of Interim Injunction was issued. Since the said District Court action

had not been concluded, the learned Primary Court Judge had misdirected himself and had

made his decision based on the Enjoining Order and notice of Interim Injunction issued in

the District Court case.

Moreover, it is apparent that the learned Primary Court Judge had erroneously concluded

by stating the said right of way should be subjected to the Interim Order issued by the

District Judge in case bearing No. 244/09.

It is important to note that the District Court had issued an Enjoining Order and notice of

Interim Injunction ex parte. At the Interim Injunction inquiry, if the Court refuses to grant

Page 6 of 7

an Interim Injunction, the Enjoining Order will have to be dissolved. In such a situation,

Enjoining Order cannot be considered as a permanent order. Thus, the Magistrate should

not bow out from his functions under the Primary Courts Procedure Act.

In the case of Kanagasabai vs.Mylwaganam [supra], it was emphasized that if the Civil

Court has already given a decision, Final or Interim, prior to Magistrate making an Order

under Section 63 of Administration of Justice Law, as the dispute between the parties is

decided by a competent Court, the Magistrate would be justified in making his Order on

the basis of such decision. Further, it was held that if the Magistrate has already made an

Order under Section 63 of the Administration of Justice Law, the Civil Court will not have

jurisdiction to make any Interim Order which will in any way prejudice the right of a party

who has succeeded in getting an Order in his favour under Section 63 of the Act.

In the case at hand, the learned Magistrate had issued an Interim Order granting a right of

way for a road 10 feet wide to the Appellant before the life interest holder of the

Respondent obtained an Enjoining Order from the District Court.

Moreover, it is significant to note the case of Kanagasabai vs.Mylwaganam [supra],

which held that in terms of Section 63(2) and 63(6), the successful party will be entitled

to be in possession until he is ejected therefrom under the Judgment, Order or Decree of

a competent court and all disturbances of such possession otherwise than by a Judgment,

Order or Decree of a competent court is prohibited.

In view of the findings of the case Kanagasabai vs.Mylwaganam [supra], it is imperative

to note that the learned Magistrate has misdirected himself and had disregarded the

Interim Order already issued by him on 02.07.2009 and adhered to the Enjoining Order

made by the learned District Judge permitting the Appellant and 1st, 3rd, and 4th

Respondents to use an approach road which was only 3 feet wide. Therefore, I hold that

the Order made by the learned Magistrate is erred in law. Thus, it ought to be set aside.

In this instance, Court draws attention to the investigation report and the observation notes

tendered to Court by the Officer-in-Charge of Police Station Hanguranketha. The

observation notes are as follows:

() .

.

Page 7 of 7

,

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

Furthermore, it is observable that the learned Magistrate, when making the said Interim

Order allowed the 5th Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant to adduce oral evidence.

It is apparent that the learned Magistrate had come to the correct finding of fact and

reached the conclusion that the 1st, 3rd, 4th Respondent-Respondent-Respondents and 5th

Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant are entitled to use 10 feet road way over the disputed

land.

Hence, we set aside the Order made by learned Magistrate on 04.01.2010 and the learned

High Court Judge on 05.03.2014 and hold that the 5th Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant is

entitled to use the disputed 10 feet wide road over the property in question as indicated

in the said Interim Order dated 02.07.2009 by the learned Magistrate.

Appeal allowed. Parties have to bear their cost in all litigations.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K.K.A.V. Swarnadhipathi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL