==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0005/2025

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal Case No. Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

CA/HCC/0005/2025 Lanka

High Court of Jaffna

Case No. 2812/2019 COMPLAINANT

Vs.

Stanley Sritharan alias Stalin Sriragan

alias Kutty

ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

Stanley Sritharan alias Stalin Sriragan

alias Kutty

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

CA/HCC/0005/2025

2 | P a g e

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

COUNSEL : Ershan Ariyaratnam for the Appellant.

Nishanth Nagaratnam, SC for the

Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 13/07/2026

DECIDED ON : 01/09/2026

*******************

CA/HCC/0005/2025

3 | P a g e

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam. J,

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) was indicted for committing the murder of Sritharan Shanthini on

20.06.2015 which is an offence punishable under Section 296 of the Penal

Code.

After a trial, the Learned High Court Judge has found the Appellant guilty of

the charge and sentenced him to death on 19/06/2024.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

At the hearing the Appellant was connected via the Zoom platform from

prison.

Background of the Case

According to PW1 Annaluxmi, the mother of the deceased, on the day of the

incident she had witnessed the Appellant pouring kerosene oil over the body

of the deceased and setting fire to her. The Appellant is the husband of the

deceased and the son-in-law of the witness. After extinguishing the fire by

pouring water, she called her son PW2 to take the deceased to the hospital.

She also said that the deceased had made a dying declaration to the doctor

who attended her at the hospital.

PW6 PC 81448 Terrance had recorded the statement of the deceased at the

hospital.

CA/HCC/0005/2025

4 | P a g e

The post mortem examination report was admitted under section 420 of the

Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of 1979. According to the JMO the

death was due to extensive thermal burn injuries and inhalational injuries.

As the Learned High Court called the defence, the Appellant made a dock

statement from the dock and denied the charge.

On behalf of the Appellant, the following grounds of appeal are raised:

1. The learned High Court Judge had failed to consider the credibility of

PW1.

2. The Learned High Court Judge had failed to consider the reliability of

the dying declaration.

3. The Learned High Court Judge had failed to consider the

circumstantial evidence and has failed to evaluate the same.

4. The Learned High Court Judge had failed to consider the defence case

and rejected the defence case unfairly.

5. The Learned High Court Judge had failed to comply with Section 280

of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

6. The Learned High Court Judge had failed to analyse whether the

injuries will cause death in the normal cause of events.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant strenuously contended that his client

was deprived of a fair trial. His argument was that the Appellant was not

properly arraigned in this case. The charge was not read to him and the jury

option was not given. The indictment was served on the Appellant on

20.02.2020. It was not read to him until the end of the trial. When this case

was called to deliver the judgment on 13.06.2024, the Learned High Court

Judge decided to re-call PW1 and PW2 and led their evidence. Both were not

cross examined. At this juncture, the learned State Counsel made an

application to amend the indictment by including the alias names of the

Appellant in the indictment. The Court allowed the application and included

CA/HCC/0005/2025

5 | P a g e

the alias names of the Appellant in the indictment. Thereafter, the amended

indictment was read out to him and the Appellant pleaded not guilty to the

indictment. At this point too, no jury option was given to the Appellant.

In criminal trials, a charge refers to the formal, written accusation by the

government stating that the individual has committed a specific crime. A

charge would serve as the foundation of the legal proceedings that follow,

and therefore would serve as the blueprint which determines factors such as

the relevance of evidence, what must be proven by the prosecution and the

defendant’s rights.

In Sri Lanka’s criminal courts, trial by jury is an option which is primarily

available for the most serious crimes heard in the High Court. As per the

Judicature Act, an accused would have the right to elect whether to be tried

by a jury or by a judge sitting alone.

In Attorney General v Segulebbe Latheef and Another [2008] 1 SLR 225

the Supreme Court held that:

“As long as it is in the statute book that the accused can elect to be tried

by a jury, the trial judge has an obligation not only to inquire from him

whether he is to be tried by a jury, judge must also inform that the accused

has a legal right to that effect. Non observance of this procedure is an

illegality and not a mere irregularity”.

In Jayasooriya and others v AG [2009] 1 SLR 101 the Court held that:

"To ensure a fair trial, the legislature in its wisdom from time to time has

promulgated several fundamental concepts and statutory duties into our

criminal law, the offering of the jury option is one such concept".

In this case when the charge was read to the Appellant the jury option was

not given. Further, when the charge was read to the Appellant after the

amendment to the indictment, the jury option was not given to the Appellant.

I consider this to be a serious omission. Appellate courts would consider

CA/HCC/0005/2025

6 | P a g e

such omissions to be fatal procedural defects rather than merely minor

technicalities. Therefore, the entire trial process may be declared void. In

situations where the charge has not been properly read and the process has

not been followed; the Appellate Court has the power to order a fresh trial.

Guided by the judgements mentioned above, I conclude that this is an

appropriate case to send for re-trial. Therefore, his appeal allowed.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgment to High Court

of Jaffna along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL