I j I 1 j i "

~ I I

t

I

I

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRAIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

In the matter of an application for Revision in

terms of Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Court of Appeal case no. CA/PHC/APN58/2015

H.C. Galle case no. 34/13

M.C. Galle case no. 4216/13

1. Lelio Orsetti,

No. 14, Flower Garden Hotel,

Welledewala Road, Unawatuna, Galla.

VIA. S. Sandera 32,

55100 Lucca, Italy. (Permanent address)

2. Kathiragamalingam Sasidaran,

No. 14, Welledewala Road, Unawatuna,

Galla.

Petitioners

Vs.

1. U magiliyage Rasika Chaminda,

Bodhiraja Mawatha, Unawatuna, Galla.

2. Nawadawa Withanage Gnanalatha,

Bodhiraja Mawatha, Unawatuna, Galla.

Respondents.

And

1. Lelio Orsetti,

No. 14, Flower Garden Hotel,

Welledewala Road, Unawatuna, Galla.

VIA. S. Sandera 32,

55100 Lucca, Italy. (Permanent address)

2. Kathiragamalingam Sasidaran, II I1 t

Before

No. 14, Welledewala Road, Unawatuna,

Galla.

Petitioner Petitioners

Vs.

1. Umagiliyage Rasika Chaminda,

Bodhiraja Mawatha, Unawatuna, Galla.

2. Nawadawa Withanage Gnanalatha,

Bodhiraja Mawatha, Unawatuna, Galla.

Respondent Respondents.

And Now

1. U magiliyage Rasika Chaminda,

Bodhiraja Mawatha, Unawatuna, Galla.

2. Nawadawa Withanage Gnanalatha,

Bodhiraja Mawatha, Unawatuna, Galla.

Respondent Respondent Petitioners.

Vs.

1. Lelio Orsetti,

No. 14, Flower Garden Hotel,

Welledewala Road, Unawatuna, Galla.

VIA. S. Sandera 32,

55100 Lucca, Italy. (Permanent address)

2. Kathiragamalingam Sasidaran,

No. 14, Welledewala Road, Unawatuna,

Galla.

Petitioner Petitioner Respondents

: P.R.Walgama J.

: L.T.B. Dehideniya J.

2

Counsel : Shantha Jayawardane with Camara Nanayakkara for the

Respondent Respondent Petitioners.

3

: W. Dayarathne PC with R.Jayawardane for the Petitioner

Petitioner Respondent.

Argued on : 04.03.2016

Written submissions filed on : 19.05.2016

Decided on : 09.12.2016

L.T.B. Dehideniya J.

This is a revision application filed against an order of the learned

High Court Judge of Galle.

The 15t and 2nd Petitioner Petitioner Respondents (the 15t and 2nd

Respondents), as a private party, filed information in the Magistrate

Court Galle under section 66( 1 )(b) of the Primary Court Procedure Act

indicating that a land dispute threatening breach of the peace has arisen.

The Respondent's contention is that the land in dispute called

Thibbatukanaththawatta with the house in it was purchased by the 2nd

Respondent and was transferred to a company owned by the 15t

Respondent. Thereafter the land and the house were developed by the 15t

Respondent. The 15t Respondent was in possession of the land and the

house and the 2nd Respondent was assigned to look after the house. On

22.02.2013 the 15t Respondent has come to Sri Lanka and found that the

Respondent Respondent Petitioner (the Petitioner) was in occupation of

the land and the house. The Respondents filed this action in the

4

Magistrate Court of 20.03.2013 under section 66(1 )(b) of the Primary

Court Procedure Act.

The Petitioners contention is that they have not sold the land called

Mahamesthrigawatta and house where they were residing. Their side of

the case is that they were residing in the said house for about fifty years.

The electricity and water connections were obtained by them. They are

not in possession of a land called Thibbatukanaththawatta but they are in

Mahamesthrigawatta.

The learned Magistrate after filing the affidavits, counter affidavits,

documents and written submissions held that the date of dispossession

has not established and dismissed the application. Being moved in

revision in the High Court of Galle, the order of the learned Magistrate

was set aside and held with the Respondents. This revision application is

from the said order of the learned High Court Judge.

Under the part VII of the Primary Court Procedure Act, the title to

the land is not the deciding factor. Section 68 of the Act provides;

68 . (1) Where the dispute relates to the possession of any land or

part thereof it shall be the duty of the Judge of the Primary Court

holding the inquiry to determine as to who was in possession of the

land or the part on the date of the filing of the-information under

section 66 and make order as to who is entitled to possession of

such land or part thereof

(2) An order under subsection (1) shall declare anyone or more

persons therein specified to be entitled to the possession of the land

or the part in the manner specified in such order until such person

or persons are evicted therefrom under an order or decree of a

5

competent court, and prohibit all disturbance of such possession

otherwise than under the authority of such an order or decree.

(3) Where at an inquiry into a dispute relating to the right to the

possession of any land or any part of a land the Judge of the

Primary Court is satisfied that any person who had been in

possession of the land or part has been forcibly dispossessed

within a period of two months immediately before the date on

which the information was filed under section 66, he may make a

determination to that effect and make an order directing that the

party dispossessed be restored to possession and prohibiting all

disturbance of such possession otherwise than under the authority

of an order or decree of a competent court.

(4) An order under subsection (1) may contain in addition to the

declaration and prohibition referred to in subsection (2), a

direction that any party specified in the order shall be restored to

the possession of the land or any part thereof specified in such

order.

The Court is vested with a duty under section 68 inquire in to the

fact that who was in actual possession on the date of filing of the

information and to protect his possession until the matter is adjudicated

before a competent court. The only exception is where a dispossession

has taken place within two months from filing the information. It has

been held in the case of Ramalingam V. Thangarajah [1982] 2 Sri L R

693 that;

In an inquiry into a dispute as to the possession of any land, where

a breach of peace is threatened or is likely under Part VIL of the

Primary Courts Procedure Act, the main point for decision is the

actual possession of the land on the date of the filing of the

6

information under section 66; but, where forcible dispossession

took place within two months before the date on which the said

information was filed the main point is. Actual possession prior to

that alleged date of dispossession. Section 68 is only concerned

with the determination as to who was in possession of the land or

the part on the date of the filing of the information under section

66. It directs the Judge to declare that the person who was in such

~~~~~~w~~~if~~~~~~

Section 68(3) becomes applicable only if the Judge can come to a

definite finding that some other party had been forcibly

dispossessed within a period of two months next proceeding the

date on which the information was filed under section 66. The

effect of this sub -section is that it enables a party to be treated to

be in possession on the date of the filing of the information though

actually he may be found to have been dispossessed before that

date provided such dispossession took place within the period of

two months next proceeding the date of the filing of the

information. It is only if such a party can be treated or deemed to

be in possession on the date of the filing of the information that the

person actually in possession can be said not to have been in

possession on the date of the filling of the information. Thus, the

duty of the Judge in proceedings under section 68 is to ascertain

which party was or deemed to have been in possession on the

relevant date, namely, on the date of the filing of the information

under section 66. Under section 68 the Judge is bound to maintain

the possession of such person even if he be a rank trespasser as-

against any interference even by the rightful owner. This section

entities even a squatter to the protection of the law, unless his

7

posseSSlOn was acquired within two months of the filing of the

information.

In the present case the Respondents alleged that they were

dispossessed by the Petitioner. On the date of filing of the information,

the disputed land was in the possession of the Petitioner. It was an

undisputed fact. The Respondents to regain the possession, they must

have established that the dispossession took place with two months

immediately prior to the date of filing of the information. If the

dispossession is not proved, the party who was in possession, the

Petitioners, becomes entitle to posses.

The burden of proving the fact that the dispossession took place

within the two months prior to the filing of the information is on the

Respondents. Under section 101 of the Evidence Ordinance, "Whoever

desires any court to give judgment as to any legal right or liability

dependent on the existence of facts which he asserts, must prove that

those facts exist."

The Respondents when they were dispossessed. The 1 st Respondent

in not residing in the country and the 2nd Respondent is not residing in the

disputed house. What the 1 st Respondent knows is that when he came to

Sri Lanka on 22.02.2013, he has been dispossessed by the Petitioners. In

paragraph 19 of the affidavit of the 1 st and 2nd Respondents dated

08.03.2013 stated that the 2nd Respondent visited the house "about one

week prior to 23.02.2013". This statement is the only evidence presented

to Court to establish that they were in possession till 15.02.2013. The

date, 23 rd February is the date where the 1 st Respondent came to the

country, but the date he visited the house is "about one week back" from

that date. The date he visited the house is not definite. Under section

68(3) of the Act, the date of dispossession is very material. The date

I I j \ I I I ! I I

I I

I

8

cannot be established by a loose and uncertain statement such as "about

one week", it has to be a specific and certain.

The 1 st Respondent, after coming to Sri Lanka and visiting the

disputed premises, made a complaint to the police on the same date. The

said complainant is marked and produced as 'P5'. What the 1 st

Respondent has said to the police is that the 1 st Respondent has locked the

premises and left the country but when came back, the Petitioners are

occupied the premises. This statement is silent on the involvement of the

2nd Respondent. If the 2nd Respondent was in charge of the premises, the

1 st Respondent would have reveled his name to the police and if so, it

would have given some weight to the statement of the 2nd respondent.

Punchi Nona v. Padumasena and others [1994] 2 Sri L R 117 at

121

Section 68(1) of the Act is concerned with the determination as to

who was in possession of the land on the date of the filing of the

information to Court. Section 68(3) becomes applicable only if the

Judge can come to a definite finding that some other party had

been forcibly dispossessed within a period of 2 months next

preceding the date on which the information was filed.

The Respondents have failed to establish the definite date that they

were dispossessed and by that they have failed to establish that they were

dispossessed within two months prior to the filing of the information.

The Petitioners submit that this case does not come under section

68 of the Primary Court Procedure Act but comes under section 69. The

section 69 is on "the dispute relates to any right to any land or any part

of a land, other than the right to possession of such land or part thereof'

but the dispute in this case is clearly on "the dispute relates to the

9

possession of any land or part thereof" where the section 68 of the Act

applies. The 1 st Respondent claims that the land was purchased by him

and on the strength of the ownership, he is entitle to posses. It is a matter

for a competent civil court to decide, does not come within the purview of

the Primary Court Procedure Act.

The learned Magistrate has correctly decided that the land in

dispute was in possession of the Petitioners on the date of filing of the

information and the Respondents have failed to establish that they were

dispossessed within a period of 2 months next preceding the date on

which the information was filed.

Accordingly, I act in revision and set aside the order of the learned

High Court Judge dated 16.02.2014 and affirm the order of the learned

Magistrate dated 07.08.2013.

Application allowed with costs fixed at Rs. 10,000.00

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P.R.Walgama J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal