1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for a

mandate in the nature of a Writ of

Mandamus in terms of Article 140 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka. .

C A (Writ) Application

No. 305/2012

1. Wanni Arachchige

Deshapriya

Cha ndratila ka

Wanniarachchi,

Thalgahamulawatta,

Wettewe,

I

I

I

I

I I I I j

I ! ! I j

J j , i

{ I I I

~

~ I 1 I i

2

Dambadeniya.

PETITIONER

-Vs-

1. Director General of Health

Services,

Ministry of Health,

Public Health Complex,

No.555/5,

Elvitigala Mawatha,

Colombo 5.

2. Ministry of Health,

"Sausiripaya",

No.385,

Rev. Baddegama Wimalawansa

Mawatha,

3

Colombo 10

3. Hon. Maithreepala Sirisena,

Hon. Minister of Health,

"Sausiripaya"

No. 385,

Rev. Baddegama Wimalawansa

Mawatha,

Colombo 10

4. Director of Environmental &

Occupational Health,

Ministry of Health,

Public Health Complex,

No. 555/5,

ElvitigalaMawatha,

Colombo 5.

5. Hon. Attorney Genaral,

4

Attorney Generals' Department,

Hulftsdorp Street,

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

Before: A H M D Nawazl

P. Padman Surasena 1

Counsel: David Weeraratne with Aloka De Silva for the Petitioner.

Niel Unamboowe PC Additional Solicitor General for the

Respondents.

Decided on: 2017 - 07 - 05.

JUDGMENT

P Padman Surasena 1

Learned counsel for all the Parties, when this case came up on 2017-02-03,

agreed to file their written submissions and requested this Court to

5

pronounce the judgment after considering their written submissions. They

dispensed with their necessity of making oral submissions.

The parties, pursuant to that agreement, have filed written submissions

setting out the respective positions taken up by them. This judgment would

thus be based on the material adduced by the parties in their pleadings

and written submissions.

The Petitioner claims to have constructed a well as a source of ground

water for bottling and packing drinking water. The Certificate of

Registration dated 2006-11-27, produced marked P 3, had been issued to

him by the 1st Respondent to carry on the said business. According to the

conditions of the said Certificate of Registration, the said registration would

be valid up to a maximum period of three years from the date of issue! and

any application for renewal should be submitted six months prior to the

expiry of validity of the existing registration2

1 Condition 3 mentioned in the Certificate of Registration marked P 3.

2 Condition 4 mentioned in the Certificate of Registration marked P 3.

6

However it is an admitted fact that the Petitioner had not submitted any

application for renewal of the said registration by the time the existing

registration expired on 2009-11-273

The Petitioner claims that he had made an application for renewal of the

said registration in February 2011. He further states that he had submitted

all the nec~ssary reports etc. It is the Petitioner's complaint to this Court

that the 1st and 4th Respondents acted arbitrarily to direct the Petitioner to

close down the existing water well and to build a new water well as no

such amendment was made to the existing regulations pertaining to the

requirement of maintaining a secured area the diameter of which is 50

Meters. It was the Petitioner's position that the said secured diameter of 50

Meters was never increased to 100 Meters. The Petitioner further claims

that in any case the secured diameter of his existing well is well over 100

Meters4

It is on this basis that the Petitioners have invoked the writ jurisdiction of

this Court praying for a writ of Mandamus directing the 1st Respondent to

issue a Certificate of Registration in the name of 'Sisila Mineral Waters'

3 Paragraph 10 of the affidavit of the Petitioner & paragraph 3 of the statement of objections filed on behalf of the 1st-5th Respondents.

4 Paragraph 32 of the affidavit of the Petitioner.

7

which is owned by the Petitioner. The 1st Respondent is the "Chief Food

Authority" referred to in the Food Act No. 26 of 1980. He possesses the

authority to issue Certificates of Registration for premises of bottling or

packing drinking water.

It would now be necessary to turn to the stance of the Respondents in this

case. Following positions have been taken up by the Respondents in their

pleadings;

I. that this application for a writ of Mandamus is premature as the

Petitioner has not up to date submitted an application requesting for

a Certificate of Registration in terms of regulation 3 of the Gazette

No. 1420/4 dated 2005-11-215.

II. that this Court should dismiss this application in limine as the

Petitioner has not exhausted the alternative remedy provided for in

the said regulations.

III. that the samples collected from the water source of the Petitioner is

unsatisfactory as it contains E coil, which indicates fecal

contamination,

5 Produced marked P 2.

8

IV. that the Petitioner's water source is situated outside the perimeter

protection zone of 30.5 Meters in violation of By Law 35 of the

Pradeshiya Sabha produced marked R 4 and the resolution stated

therein marked R 4 A.

it is clear from paragraph 32 of the petition that the basis the Petitioner

had filed this application was, as he had claimed, an arbitrary action of

the 1st-5th Respondents to insist that his well must be situated within a

zone the diameter of which must be 30.5 Meters (approximately 100

feet) declared as a protected zone. This is borne out by the document

the Petitioner had produced marked P 17. It is the position of the

Petitioner that there is no such regulation which required the

maintenance of a protected zone of that magnitude to be reserved

around a water source.

However the Petitioner, after R 4 was produced by the Respondents

with their statement of objections, had taken up the position that his

water source is well within the required limits. This is a deviation from

his original position. It is also a clear indication that the Petitioner had

9

misrepresented facts to this Court. This alone is sufficient for the

dismissal of his application.

As has been mentioned at the beginning of this judgment, the

Petitioner has presented this application on the basis that the

Respondents had acted arbitrarily to insist on a requirement to maintain

a secured zone the diameter of which should not less than 100 Meters.

It has now become clear before this Court that the Petitioner no longer

attempts to maintain such a position. The said purported arbitrary

action on the part of the Respondents therefore cannot be categorized

as an action that is arbitrary for all what the Respondents had done

was to insist on legal requirements to be complied with. This means

that the application of the Petitioner has to necessarily fail.

In addition to the above ground, the Petitioner has also not adduced

sufficient material to prove that his water source is well within the

protected zone. Further, the misrepresentation by the Petitioner above

referred to, affect the credibility of all the positions the Petitioner had

taken up.

10

According to Rule 3 (1) (at every application made to the Court of

Appeal for the exercise of the powers vested in the Court of Appeal by

Articles 140 or 141 of the Constitution shall be by way of petition,

together with an affidavit. Affidavits so filed in these proceedings are

treated as evidence adduced by the relevant party. Thus, the assertion

by the Petitioner in paragraph 32 of his affidavit that \ ... the conduct of

the 1st and 4th Respondents is highly arbitrary and unlawful to direct me

to close down the existing water well and to build another water well as

no such amendment was made in the regulations pertaining to the

secured diameter of a water well from 50 M to 100 M in a gazette

notification ... ' is clearly not true.

As per section 196 of the Penal Code, whoever in any declaration made

or subscribed by him, which declaration any Court of Justice, is

authorized by law to receive, makes any statement which is false, and

which he knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true,

touching any point material to the object for which the declaration is

made or used, shall be punished in the same manner as if he gave false

6 Court of Appeal (Appellate Procedure) Rules 1990

11

evidence. Thus, the false assertions made by the Petitioner in his

affidavit vitiates whole of his affidavit and renders it unworthy of credit.

In these circumstances and for the foregoing reasons we see no merit

in this application and hence deCide to dismiss this application with a

cost of Rs. 50,000/= payable to the State by the Petitioner.

Application dismissed with costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

A H M D Nawazl

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL