Page 1 of 12

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Restitutio

in Integrum and/or Revision under Article 138

of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

Hewa Usaranbage Shayamalie Aloka,

Pelemegedara,

Ketawalagama, Boralapanathara

Case No: CA/RII/05/2017 Petitioner

DC Matara Case No: P 14641

1. Siril Rajapakse

Rajasiri

Phalawitiyala

Thihagoda

2. Upatissa Pujitha Gunewardhana

Madiha

Matara.

3. Udapahalagedara Mudiyanselage

Rathnayaka

Wetagoda

Matara.

4. Yantrawaduge Siril Prenandu

Nupe

Matara.

5. Nawaimana Liyanage Sugathadasa

Nupe

Page 2 of 12

Matara

6. Pathma Gerlin Salgadu

Welegoda

Matara.

7. Kapugamage Davundiyas Appu

Welegoda

Matara.

8. Hewahalamulage Nandalal Chandrasiri

No.21,

Modal Lane

Rastmalana

9. Hewa Usarambage Karunadasa

Welegoda

Matara.

10. Edippili Arachchige Don Mithrananda

Welegoda

Matara.

11. Sudurikku Hennadige Gamini De Silva,

No 80A,

Sunanda Road,

Welegoda

Matara.

12. Kapugamage Bandula

No. 80 Sunanda Road,

WelegodaMatara.

Respondents

Page 3 of 12

Before : D.N. Samarakoon, J.

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

Counsel : Ashan Stanislaus with I. Jabir for the Petitioner

Upul Kumarapperuma with Muzar Lye and S. Gunaratne for

the 1st Respondent

Janaka Prathapasinghe for the 3A-3E Respondents

Written

Submissions : 17.06.2022(by the Petitioner)

On 17.06.2022 (by the 01st Respondent)

Argued On : 29.03.2022

Decided On : 26.07.2022

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

The Petitioner, by Petition dated 31st March 2017, seeks to invoke the

restitutionary jurisdiction of this Court in terms of Article 138(1) of the Constitution in

order to, inter alia, set aside the judgment dated 29th May 1990 and the final decree

entered on 09th November 2009 in Case No. P/14641 in the District Court of Matara and

to conduct a fresh trial which would enable her to participate in it.

The crux of the Petitioners case is that the partition case has been conducted in a

manner that raises suspicion because firstly, her father (her successor in title to the land),

the 1st Defendant in Partition Case No. P/14641, could not have granted proxy to his

Attorney-at-Law owing to his paralysis, and secondly, following her fathers demise,

although the record indicates that one Mr. Shirley Jayaweera, Attorney-at-Law, had

tendered a proxy on her behalf to substitute her in place of her father, she is completely

unaware of it.

In addition, she challenges Deeds numbered 616,619,628, and 642 on the ground

that her father could not have executed those due to his paralysis.

Page 4 of 12

A narration of the facts is necessary.

The 1st and 2nd Respondents, by Plaint dated 14th August 1989, instituted an action

in the District Court of Matara to partition a land named Pelawatta alias

Badullagahawatta in extent 02 roods and 38.994 perches, depicted as Lots 1-9 in Plan

No. 3660 dated 26.09.1989, prepared by S.L. Galappaththi, Licensed Surveyor. The

interlocutory decree was entered on 29th May 1990 and the final decree was entered on

09th November 2009. The Petitioners father was the 1st Defendant and the Petitioners

husband was the 7th Defendant in the said action. It should be noted that the summons

was served to both at the same address (Journal Entry No. 07 dated 31.10.1989 - Page 23

of the Brief).

The Petitioners father after obtaining title to the land from Partition Action No.

P/8462 had alienated several portions of the land to persons who were also named as

defendants in the partition action. For example, Deeds No. 7610 (dated 11th August 1985)

and 7611 (dated 11th August 1985). The Petitioners father also gifted, subject to the

fathers life interest, to the Petitioners husband, who is the 8th Respondent in the instant

application, title to a portion of the land by Deed of Gift No. 09 dated 22nd April 1988,

attested by H. Somadasa, Notary Public. Following which it was transferred to the 1st

Respondent by deeds numbered 616 (dated 01st August 1989), 619 (dated 14th August

1989), 628 (dated 13th September 1989), and 642 (13th December 1989). The father, who

had a life interest in the land, also signed all these deeds.

When we perused the signature of the Petitioners father on Deeds 7610, 7611 and

the Deed of Gift and the signature on the allegedly fraudulent Deeds of Transfer, by which

the 1st Respondent obtained title, the signature appears to be similar. It should be noted

that if the signature is alleged to be fraudulent, it should have been sent to the

Department of Examination of Questioned Documents to be verified. However, there is no

such report in this case.

However, the Petitioner contends that the deeds by which the 1st Respondent

obtained title could not have been validly executed, and the signing and authorizing of

the proxy to her fathers Attorney for the partition case could not have taken place because

her father was paralysed from around February 1989 until his demise on 09th October

1990. It was alleged that the signature on the fraudulent proxy was not her fathers.

Page 5 of 12

To substantiate this position, she submitted an affidavit (marked P3) of the

doctor who treated her father for this illness until his demise. A Medical Certificate

(marked P2 on Page 733 of the Brief) issued by one doctor (it is not clear if the Report

was issued by the same Doctor that gave the affidavit) notes that the Petitioners father

was suffering a case of hypertension with paralysis since February 1989.

Apart from these two documents, there is no evidence that the Petitioner has

submitted to establish the actual physical and mental condition in which her father was

at the relevant time. An applicant seeking an extraordinary remedy such as restitution,

which has extraordinary consequences if granted such as wiping the slate entirely clean,

ought to provide material that would substantiate his/her position at least on a balance

of probabilities. Without casting aspersions on the work of the Doctor, to a reasonable

person the Medical Certificate and the Affidavit, in the absence of any other evidence,

appears to have been created for the purpose of satisfying the claim.

We are of the view that these two documents alone do not meet that standard of

proof as clearer proof, including more contemporaneous ones such as hospital records or

prescriptions, would have helped to clearly establish matters such as the time period in

which the Petitioners father was paralysed (instead of a bare assertion that he was

paralysed from sometime around February 1989); whether he was bed-ridden or whether

he could move with the assistance of some person (which do not appear to be conclusive

in the Doctors affidavit and Medical Certificate), whether he was completely physically

and mentally incapable of signing the deeds and the proxy or giving consent to the same;

whether it was the same doctor that treated the Petitioners father. This is especially

because in all the deeds executed, as aforesaid, the Petitioners father seems to have been

ably present and signed in the presence of the Notary, other executants, and witnesses.

The Petitioners father had duly filed his statement of claim in the partition action as well.

The Petitioner further alleges that the purported substitution in the partition

action takes place only on the 26th of October 1992 (two years after her fathers death) and

that in the intermediary period between her fathers demise and the substitution two

years later the case proceeded as if no death had taken place. The proxy of the Petitioner

had been filed in Court on 26th October 1992 by Mr. Shirley Jayaweera, Attorney-at-Law,

as per Journal Entry No. 34 (Page 38 of the Brief) dated the same. Notice of the

Petitioners fathers demise is brought to Courts attention on the previous date when the

Page 6 of 12

matter was taken up in Court, which was 03rd October 1992, as per Journal Entry No. 33

(Page 38 of the Brief).

The Petitioner has submitted an affidavit of Attorney-at-Law Mr. Shirley

Jayaweera (marked P6) who denies ever having tendered a proxy on her behalf at the

District Court. This Affidavit is dated 10th January 2017, more than twenty-five years

after the date of submission of the proxy to the Court. A question then arises, as neither

the affidavit discloses nor is any material provided, as to how the learned Counsel was

able to ascertain that it was not him that submitted the proxy to Court.

If the correctness of the Journal Entry is to be challenged, then an application

ought to have been made to the respective Court to impugn such a record. However, years

later when the substantive matter has concluded, and the Petitioner is now before this

Court seeking to set aside the judgment and decrees of the lower court, we are unable to

verify the correctness of such an entry.

In Gunawardene v. Kelaart 48 NLR 522, his Lordship Canekeratne J. held:

He further objected to the reading of these belated affidavits and referred me to

the case of Orathinahamy v. Romanis, where Bonser C.J. said : With the appeal was

filed an affidavit which I have not read and I understand that the affidavit is to the effect

that the record of the evidence taken by the Magistrate does not give a correct account of

the statements of the witnesses, and it is sought to impeach the record, and to prove that

certain statements were made which do not appear on the record .... It seems to me to be

contrary to all principle to admit such an affidavit, and I certainly will not be the first to

establish such a novelty in appellate proceedings. The prospect is an appalling one if on

every appeal it is open to the appellant to contest the correctness of the record. [emphasis

added]

In Jayaweera v. Asst. Commissioner of Agrarian Services Ratnapura [1996] 2 SLR

70, his Lordship F.N.D. Jayasuriya J. held,

There is a presumption that official and legal acts are regularly and correctly

performed. It is not open to the Petitioner to file a convenient and self serving affidavit

for the first time before the Court of Appeal and thereby seek to contradict either a quasi

judicial act or judicial record. Justice Dias having considered a cursus curiae, which he

has collated for the benefit of the legal profession, has set down the principle that if a

Page 7 of 12

litigant wishes to contradict the record, he must file the necessary papers before the Court

of first instance, initiate an inquiry before the Court of first instance and thereafter raise

the matter before the appellate court so that the appellate court would be in a position on

the material to make an adjudication on the issues with the benefit of the order of the

Court of first instance. The Petitioner has filed a convenient and self serving affidavit and

is now seeking to contradict the record that notice or summons issued on him. The law

does not permit him to do so.

His Lordship Samayawardhena J. in the recent case of Bandaranayake

Liyanaarachchilage Premawathi v. Coranelis Wickremasinghe, CA/RI/133/2010 decided

on 02.05.2019, provides a helpful summary of this principle.

The Petitioner claims to have lodged a complaint to the Police as to the allegedly

fraudulent or forged deeds. That would be the first step a reasonable person would

undertake to impugn their validity. However, no certified copy of the complaint is

submitted to us. The reason given was the Police refused to issue one unless this Court

made an Order. Yet, the Petition is devoid of a prayer for such an Order. There is no

information as to the progress or status of the investigation as well.

Whether or not the deeds and proxies were fraudulent or forged could have been

challenged in the correct forum and thus proven. This should have been by way of a

separate action.

It is quite astounding that although the Petitioner complains of fraudulent deeds

and proxies, in that her father could not have conveyed title owing to his illness, the

Petitioner in the present application, as averred at Paragraph 3 of the Petition and

reiterated in the written submissions, does not seek to challenge the merits of the finding

in the judgment but rather seeks an order to rectify the procedural errors that had led

to a grave miscarriage of justice by virtue of an order for restoring the parties to their

original positions as existed on the date of the plaint.

In addition, in her statement of objections filed at the Civil Appellate High Court

in Matara it is seen that the Petitioner prays for a retrial of the partition case so that she

can participate in it, similar to the instant application, and in her written submissions

(dated 06th August 2015) before the said Court she asks to be allocated shares (24.914

perches) in the said land.

Page 8 of 12

It should be noted that the Petitioners husband derived title from his father-in-

law in April 1988, nine to ten months before the fathers paralysis. The Petitioner is not

challenging the validity of that Deed of Gift. Although it seems odd that the father decided

to gift his shares of the land to his son-in-law instead of his daughter (the Petitioner)

nevertheless, in the absence of a challenge to that deed by which the Petitioners husband

obtained title to the land, the Petitioner would not be entitled to claim that share of the

land as the Petitioners husband has lawfully obtained title to it and conveyed it to the 1st

Respondent, supposedly with the Petitioners father signing as the life interest holder.

Even if the Petitioner proves that her father did not sign the deeds as the life interest

holder, in the absence of the Petitioners father revoking the deed, the title remains with

his son-in-law. Either way, the Petitioner will not be entitled to claim shares to that

portion of the land.

The law frowns upon a person who both approbates and reprobates. One cannot

accept and reject the same instrument. This is a doctrine that is well known in our law.

As stated by his Lordship Samarakoon C.J. in Visuvalingam v. Liyanage [1983] 1 SLR

203, one cannot blow hot and cold.

In Ranasinghe v. Premadharma [1985] 1 SLR 63 his Lordship Sharvananda C.J.

held:

The rationale of the above principle appears to be that a defendant cannot

approbate and reprobate. In cases where the doctrine of approbation and reprobation

applies, the person concerned has a choice of two rights, either of which he is at liberty to

adopt, but not both. Where the doctrine does apply, if the person to whom the choice

belongs irrevocably and with full knowledge accepts the one he cannot afterwards assert

the other; he cannot affirm and disaffirm. Hence a defendant who denies tenancy cannot

consistently claim the benefit of the tenancy which the Rent Act provides.

The principle was considered by the House of Lords in Lissenden v. CAV Bosch

Ltd [1940] 1 All ER 425.

Browne- Wilkinson V.C. in Express Newspapers v. News (UK) Ltd [1990] 3 All ER

376 held:

There is a principle of law of general application that it is not possible to approbate

and reprobate. That means you are not allowed to blow hot and cold in the attitude that

Page 9 of 12

you adopt. A man cannot adopt two inconsistent attitudes towards another: he must elect

between them and, having elected to adopt one stance, cannot thereafter be permitted to

go back and adopt an inconsistent stance.

It is trite law that the remedy of restitutio in integrum is an exceptional one

granted by this Court only if the party applying for it can demonstrate that one of the

grounds for its invocation has been made out (assuming that the party is entitled to apply

for it). These grounds have been set out in the following cases:

In Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation v. Shanmugam, [1995] 1 SLR 55, his Lordship

Ranaraja J. held:

Superior courts of this country have held that relief by way of restitution in

integrum in respect of judgments of original courts may be sought where (a) the

judgments have been obtained by fraud, (Abeysekera-supra), by the production of false

evidence, (Buyzer v. Eckert), or non-disclosure of material facts, (Perera v. Ekanaike), or

where judgment has been obtained by force or fraud, (Gunaratne v.Dingiri Banda,

Jayasuriya v. Kotelawela). (b) Where fresh evidence has cropped up since judgment

which was unknown earlier to the parties relying on it, (Sinnethamby-supra), and fresh

evidence which no reasonable diligence could have helped to disclose earlier, (c) Where

judgments have been pronounced by mistake and decrees entered thereon,

(Sinnethamby-supra), provided of course that it is an error which connotes a reasonable

or excusable error, (Perera v. Don Simon). The remedy could therefore be availed

of where an Attorney-at-Law has by mistake consented to judgment contrary to express

instructions of his client, for in such cases it could be said that there was in reality no

consent, (Phipps-Supra, Narayan Chetty v. Azeez), but not where the Attorney-at-Law

has been given a general authority to settle or compromise a case, (Silva v. Fonseka)

Recently, his Lordship Nawaz J. in Edirisinghe Arachchilage Indrani

Chandralatha v. Elrick Ratnam, CA R.I. Case No. 64/2012 decided on 02.08.2017,

reaffirmed these grounds as follows:

Any party who is aggrieved by a judgment, decree or order of the District Court

or Family Court may apply for the interference of the Court and relief by way of restitutio

in integrum if good grounds are shown. The just grounds for restitution are fraud, fear,

Page 10 of 12

minority etc. Our Superior Courts have held that the power of the Court to grant relief by

way of restitutio in integrum, in respect of judgments of original Courts, is a matter of

grace and discretion, and such relief may be sought only in the following circumstances:-

a) Fraud

b) False evidence

c) Non-disclosure of material facts

d) Deception

e) Fresh evidence

f) Mistake

g) Fear

In the instant case, assuming that the Petitioner is entitled to apply for restitution,

although fraud is alleged, there is insufficient material, especially in the light of the

assertions of the opposing side, for this Court to grant the remedy of restitutio in integrum

and completely wipe out the judgment and decrees in the partition case.

The standard of proof for fraud was recently reiterated in C.A. Case No 1258/2000

(F) decided on 31.07.2019. His Lordship Priyantha Fernando J. held:

When fraud is alleged in signing of a deed, in a Civil Court it would require a

higher degree of probability although it does not adopt the standard of proof beyond

reasonable doubt.

His Lordship referring to the judgments of Kumarasinghe v. Dinadasa [2007] 2

SLR 203 and Peiris v. Siripala [2009] 1 SLR 75 further held:

On the above line of authorities, it is clear that in proving a fraud in a civil

transaction, although the standard of proof is balance of probabilities a strict proof is

required.

Further, this Court observes that the Petitioner has not been truthful in her

application. She has not stated anywhere that the property conveyed by her father was to

her husband, who is the 8th Respondent in the instant application.

As mentioned above, the address of the 1st and 7th Defendants in the partition case

(her father and husband respectively) was the same. She has not indicated that the

address given by the both Defendants was wrong or that summons was not served on

Page 11 of 12

them and when an appeal to this Court on a previous occasion was lodged (on 17th January

1997 by the 10th Defendant in the partition action) whether notice, which ought to have

been issued by registered post, was served on the Respondents. There is a presumption in

terms of Section 114 of the Evidence Ordinance that judicial and official acts have been

regularly performed. She cannot say that she was unaware of the action concerning the

land.

The absence of good faith when seeking exceptional remedies which lie at the

Courts discretion is a ground to dismiss an application. (Blanca Diamonds v. Wilfred Van

Els [1997] 1 SLR 360, Dahanayke v. Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation [2005] 1 SLR 67,

Siripala v. Lanerolle [2012] 1 SLR 105)

The Respondents also contend that the Petitioner is guilty of laches, as she lodged

the present application seven years after the final decree was entered in the partition

action.

The Petitioner claims that she became aware of the partition case, and all these

transactions, only in 2014 when she received notice, which was in her fathers name,

relating to the Revision case (bearing No. SP/HHCA/RA/08/2014) filed (by one Gamini de

Silva and Kapugamage Bandula) before the Civil Appellate High Court in Matara. It was

only then that she intervened and filed her statement of objections stating that her father

could not sign the proxy as he was paralysed and prayed for a re-trial.

Nevertheless, she waited for about two years before filing the instant application

in this Court. No explanation is forthcoming as to why she delayed. This Court also

observes that in the meantime she has not taken any steps to institute an action to

impugn the allegedly fraudulent deeds. A person seeking restitution must act with utmost

promptitude.

The contention of the Respondents would not be acceptable had fraud been made

out to this Court as delay cannot defeat this Courts inherent power to guard an innocent

party against an injustice perpetrated on such party.

This position was made manifest by his Lordship Jayasinghe J. in Kusumawathie

v. Wijesinghe [2001] 3 SLR 238:

Where a party appears before Court and complains that she has been wronged by

process of law this Court would not helplessly watch and allow the fraud practiced on that

Page 12 of 12

party to be perpetuated. Restitutio - In - Integrum provides this Court the necessary

apparatus to step in and rectify any miscarriage or failure of justice.

In Chandani Princy Mapitiya nee Epasinghe v. Irani Manorika Shrimalee, CA RI

12/2016 decided on 29.05.2019, his Lordship Samayawardhena J. held:

Delay shall not be a ground for dismissal of an action when there is a manifest

fraud, especially, abusing the process of the Court, proven before Court.

However, in the absence of cogent evidence to prove fraud and in the absence of an

explanation for the delay to institute this action the belated application must be

dismissed.

Therefore, for the foregoing reasons we dismiss this application with costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D.N. SAMARAKOON, J.

I AGREE

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL