i ,

l j I

1

J

1 I

i I

.1 1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OJ~ SRI LANKA

C.A. Case No: CA (PRC) 95/2012

H.C. Kandy Revision Application No: HCRAlll1201 t

M.C. Theldeniya Case No: 95535

In the matter of an application for Appeal made in terms of section 333(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 read with section 11 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990.

Range Forest Officer, Theldeniya. Complainant Vs. Ramachandran Gnaneshwaran, Greenwood Estate, Nawalapitiya. Accused

Kottasha Arachchige Ubhayaweera No. 3/26, Ganga Siri Road, Gampola. Claimant-Petitioner-Registered owner

AND BETWEEN

Kottasha Arachchige Ubhayaweera No. 3/26, Ganga Siri Road, Gampola. (Claimant-Petitioner-Registered owner) Petitioner

Page 1 of 19

1 I I t

\ I ;

Vs. Range Forest Officer, Theldeniya. 1 st Respondent

The Attorney General, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12. 2nd Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

Kottasha Arachchige Ubhayaweera No. 3/26, Ganga Sirl Road, Gampola. '}:l.'.

(Claimant-P~ioner-Registered owner)

Petitionertppellant (Deceased)

1. Kottasha .. Arachchige Iresha Kumari Ubhayaweera 2. Kottasha Arachchige Chathuranga Prasad Ubhayaweera Both of No. 3/26, Ganga Siri Road, Gampola. Substituted Petitioner-Appellants

Vs.

Range Forest Officer, Theldeniya. 1st Respondent-Respondent

Page 1. of 19

The Attorney General, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12. 2ndRespondent-Respondent U.

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

WRIITEN SUBMISSIONS

DECIDED ON

K.K.WICKREMASINGHE, J.

K. K. Wickremasinghe, J.

Janak De Silva, J ,

Wasantha Nawarathne Bandara, PC with AAL Pasan Weerasinghe for the Sub:,tituted-Petitioner-Appel1ants

Nay Jmi Wickremasekara, SSC for the 2nd

Respondent-Respondent

18.06.2018

The Substituted-Petitioner-Appel1ants - On 01.Og.2018 The 2nd Respondent-Respondent - On 24.08.2018

04.09.2018

The Claimant-Petitioner-Appellant had fil~d an appeal in this court seeking to set

aside the order of the Learned High Court Judge of Kandy bearing case No. HCRA

1112011 dated 10.07.2012 and seeking to set aside the confiscation order of the

Learned Magistrate of Theldeniya in the case No. 95535 dated 14.01.20] 1.

Subsequent to the institution of this actio 1, the Appellant succumbed to death on

] 0.02.20 17 and his two elder children hac )een substituted into this action.

Page 3 of 19

..

\

t !

FACTS OF THE CASE

The Claimant-Petitioner-Appellant (hereirlafter referred to as the Appellant), 15eing

an owner of two Lorries, was engaged in the business of providing transportation

services. The Appellant had instructed f~:: driver and the assistant of his lorry

bearing No. 68-9723 to transport tim~er belonging to a customer who had

requested the service from the Appellant, On or about 29.04.2010, the Lorry had

been taken into custody by the Range F~rest Officers of Theldeniya for illegally

transporting 16 Jogs of Eucalyptus Grandi" timber valued at Rs.158, 565/= without

a valid permit. Subsequently the driver w~.s charged before the Learned Magistrate

of Theldeniya on 04.05.2010, for committing an offence punishable under sections

24( 1 )(b), 25(2), 40 and 40( 1 )(b) of the Forest Ordinance as amended, read with the

provisions of Regulations published in Edraordinary Gazettes bearing No. 68/14

dated 26.12.1979, No. 8017 dated 20.03.1980, No. 1380/30 dated 18.02.2005 and

No. 1447/19 dated 31.05.2006. The Accused-Driver had pleaded guilty to the said

offence on 04.05.2010 and the Learned ~vhgistrate of Theldeniya had ordered a

fine of Rs.20, 000/= and if default a term (f 3 months imprisonment.

Thereafter a vehicle inquiry was held with regard to the confiscation of the Lorry,

in which the Appellant had given evidenc~ and written submissions had been filed.

After concluding the inquiry, on 14.01.2011, the Learned Magistrate of Theldeniya

had ordered to confiscate the vehicle. Being aggrieved by the said order, the

Appellant has filed a revision application in the High Court of Kandy bearing No.

HCRA 1112011. Pronouncing the order d~.ted 10.07.2012, the Learned High Court

Judge of Kandy had dismissed the said revision application stating that the

Petitioner had failed to demonstrate exceptional circumstances to invoke the

revisionary jurisdiction.

Page':f 19

\

I ! t 1 I I ,

I

l

Being aggrieved by the said dismissal, thE, Appellant has preferred an appeal in this

Court.

The Learned President's Counsel for the Appellant has submitted two grounds of

appeal as follows;

i) Absence of a legitimate convi~:tion,

ii) The Learned Magistrate of Theldeniya had failed to consider the

extent of burden on the Appe Ilant in discharging his duties.

I The Learned President's Counsel for th\~ Appellant contended that the Learned

Magistrate of Theldeniya had failed to comply with the mandatory requirements of

section 182 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, by failing to 'read over the

charge to the accused'. The Learned Pr~:sident's Counsel further contended that

according to the journal entry made by t1e Learned Magistrate on 04.05.2010, it

was evident that the Learned Magistrate had framed the charge sheet but had failed

to read over and explain the contents of the charge which is laid down in section

182(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979, thereby causing an

incurable defect in tenns of the Code of C liminal Procedure Act.

Following cases have been submitted in .)';lPPOrt of the said contention;

i) Godage and others V. OIC, Kahawatte Police (1992) 1 SLR 54

ii) Fernando V. AG (Srikantha Law Reports 1 CAl

iii) Abdul Sameem V. The Bribery Commissioner (1991) 1 SLR 76

However, aforesaid cases of Godage V. OIC Kahawatte and Abdul Sameem V.

The Bribery Commissioner had dealt with the issue of failure to frame a charge

sheet by the Learned Magistrates. In the case of Godage, there was no charge sheet

Page S of 19

,.

1

I

\

\ I

~

at all. Therefore we do not find these Judgments to be supportive of the contention

made by the Learned President's Counsel since the Learned Magistrate in the

instant case had complied with section 182 (l) by duly framing the charge sheet

which is attached in page 67 of the brief.

By going through the journal entry it is evident that the Learned Magistrate had

read over the charge to the Accused-Driver and he had pleaded guilty to the same.

Accordingly the Driver was convicted for the offence of illegally transporting

Eucalyptus Grandis timber valued at Rs.~158, 565/= without a valid permit.

The Learned President's Counsel for the Appellant has submitted that the

prosecution had not been able to prJduce and file of record the requisite

Extraordinary Gazettes which containe-d updated species of timber that were

prohibited to be transported without prior approval.

Since this is an appeal from the revision application in the High Court, we are

inclined to consider whether these grounds of revision were averred in the said

petition by the Appellant. Upon perusal of the petition and the oral submissions

made on behalf of the Appellant in the High Court, we find that the Learned

Counsel for the Appellant who appear.~d in the High Court had submitted the

following ground to invoke the revision~-y jurisdiction;

The Learned Magistrate of Theldeniya had misdirected himself in

ascertaining the knowledge of the vehicle owner about the committing

of offence.

Accordingly, neither the failure of the Learned Magistrate to read over the charge

to the Accused nor the absence of relevant Extraordinary Gazettes had been

averred by the Appellant as grounds of petition in the High Court.

Page 5 t)f 19

, I I r ! I

[ ,

(

~ f

( ! ,

1 \ I

~ I I

\ i

I J I

I I

Learned President's Counsel had referrec to the case of V.A. Bazeer V. Perera

(1978-1979) 2 SLR 185, in which it was hdd that,

II (1) the fact that a wrong gazette lJas mentioned in the charge sheet was a

defect which alone was sufficient toyitiate the conviction.

(2) Oral evidence of the contents of a Gazette, in the absence of the Gazette

itself is insufficient to establish the existence of or the boundaries of the

National Park. Hence, the relevant Gazette containing the Minister's Order

f pertaining thereto must be produced in evidence; and the failure to do so is

fatal to the prosecution case. "

However, that case had dealt with an issue about a Gazette that was mentioned in

the oral evidence of a trial. In the instant case, the Gazette numbers were

. mentioned in the charge itself.

In the case ofSivasampu V. Juan Appu (1937) 38 NLR 369, it was held that,

"Where a charge is laid under a statutory rule, regulation, or by-law which

is required by law to be published in the Government Gazette, the

prosecution is not bound to produce the -Gazette in which the rule or

regulation or by-law appears in proof thereof in order to establish the

charge. There would be a sufficient compliance with the requirements of the

law if in the complaint or report to Court there is a reference to the Gazette

in which the rule invoked appears... The production of the Gazette is

therefore not necessary. Nor will the non-production of the Gazette

embarrass the Court at all, for eve,y Court is provided with copies of every

Gazette and has, moreover, the r!ght to call for a Gazette in aid of its

memory or under section 57 of the Evidence Ordinance by way of proof of

the by-law or rule. That is the position asfar as the Court is concerned ... "

Page 7 of 19

f f ,

\ \ I f i

I I I I I I

\

~

! : i I I

\ J

~ I

I

Therefore in view of the above case the Prosecution was not bound to produce

relevant Gazettes before Court when prosecution has shown the existence of a

valid by-law.

The Learned President's Counsel in his oral submissions has mentioned that there , . was a defect in the charge sheet in which the section 40(a) of Forest Ordinance had

been mentioned instead of section 40(1 )(a) of Forest Ordinance. Therefore we are.

i inclined to consider whether the accused-driver had been misled by such error.

Section 164(4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act stipulates that the law and

section of the law under which the offence said to have been committed is

punishable shall be mentioned in the charge.

The Charge sheet reads as follows;

"q2:S1DeedC3''''~ qoZli) 68-9723 ~d2S) @e~83''''~ ~2SltBd~rI E)OCl)~c4 ~tE) 2Sl~~ 162.Gf

9~to2S)'" ~6."

" ... 2010 ~ Q q@gG e" 29 ~2S) 0W:/ dt) ~e,,~2S) ~2S)26)~ ... ~0",:r<D'" CGeoeo2S)'"

26)d!2rl 6tS"'G 158565/=:d E)a2S)~ ~26)tart)rI DO<D0c4 ~tE) ZIi)~2S'! 16:d qo26) 68-9723

j(d2:S1 @~8@",2S'! Deo,\? 6)e~~"'~ @~~It3E) w~E)d ~tJ~:dti)~c& 19~<DfD Q)(i)d.~e

~O<D@cJ W~<De~ 9E)ow~'" zfB6~2S'! ~~0():J2.GfZSl D~ If:J~3 ~~\9'zsr 40, 40(q) D<D2S'!~",

e,,CD ~"'\9'D~ 25(2) D~ E)<D2S'!~", "'~0zs! ~~E)e eta", e~ )d~:d s, Zli)d ~~6)E>~

0S2rl0E>:r~~~ Zli)d8." (Page 67 of the brief)

The omission to mention subsection one (01) of the section 40 of Forest Ordinance

appears to be of a typographical error since the Learned Magistrate has correctly

referred to section 40(1) of Forest Ordinance in the order dated 14.01.2014.

Page 8 )f 19

\

\

~

" ... <DtoZS) ~00cg:fw2S) ~2S)ZS) ~t2S)~C) Sd D2S) etltl ~2S)0zs! 40(1) (etl)

DGnrlzSJ", et~D Do~ S~ 2BH5083el ~)~",:ltJ2S)"'C) Q)~eQ)2S) Dlto2S)"'~ ... " (Pages

76, 77 & 81 of the brief)

The charge in the instant case contained relevant details of the offence such as

I specific name of the offence, date of ~;Je offence, vehicle number, name of the

timber which was transported without license, value of the timber, section of the

offence, name of the gazette notification and relevant amendments. That was

reasonably sufficient to give the accused notice of the matter with which he was

charged. Further we find that charge contained both sections 40 and 40(a).

Therefore it is our considered view that subsection 0 I was included in the charge

since section 40 was mentioned and the Learned Magistrate had duly framed the

charge, in compliance with Section 165(.) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.

In the case of Jayaratne Banda V. Attorney General (1997) 3 SLR 210, it was

held that,

" ... The defence the accused-appellant had taken was a simple denial of the

commission of the crime. There is nothing in the petition of appeal to

indicate that due to the mistake in the indictment the accused-appellant was

misled and thereby caused prejudice to his defence. In the circumstances it

is not difficult for us to conclude that the presence or absence of the 'error'

could not have made any difference to the general conduct of the defence

and therefore cannot be regarded as a material error in terms of Section

J 66 of the Code ...

In Molagoda v. Gunaratne (39 NI:R 226) Counsel for the accused-appellant

sought to elevate the question cf the wrong Gazette in the charge to a

fundamental defect 0/ procedure. He contended that an omission to frame a

Page,9 of 19

I t I

i I

, [

I )

~ i i

1 I

I

t, I I I I

charge in accordance with the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code

was an omission to frame a charge at all. This argument was rejected by the

Supreme Court which held that aoreach of a specific rule of law in the Code

was curable by the application of Section 425 of the Old Criminal

Procedure Code (which is equivc.:/ent to section 436 of the present Code) if

. , the breach had not caused a failw e of justice .. , " , It is noteworthy that in the instant appeoJ, the accused-driver had pleaded guilty to

the charge of illegally transporting timber.

In the case of Nandesena V. IP, Ragala (1961) 66 NLR 300, it was held that,

" ... There is an obvious error in respect of the section charged, for the

section should be section 68 (8) a~d not 69 (8), but that error is one which I

am satisfied, has not occasioned afailure of justice. Applying section 425 of

the Criminal Procedure Code I hold that the accused is not entitled to claim

an acquittal on that account ... "

In the case of D.R.M. Panditbakoralg~ V. V.K. Selvanayagam (56 NLR 143), it

was held that,

"There can be no doubt that the accused was in no way misled by the

mistake as regards the date in the plaint. In the case of William Edward

James (J 7 CAR 116) it was hel.1 that a mistaken date in an indictment,

unless the date is of the essence of the offence or the accused is prejudiced,

need not be formally amended ... ".

In the case of R.T. Wilbert and 3 otheL'"s V. Newman (75 NLR 138), it was held

that,

Pagt~ La of 19

J I I ! I I i f I

i

\

\ !

I I

)

!

\

I I

"However, a charge which is bad j')r duplicity is not necessarily fatql to the

conviction if it has not caused pre./tdice to the accused and is curable under

section 425 of the Criminal Procedure Code ... "

In the case of Weer asing he V. Samy Chettiyar (43 NLR 190), it was held that,

..... It is true that the attention of the appellant was not directed to the fact

I' , that he committed an offence under this particular section of the law. On the

other hand, I do not think that he .1as been prejudiced in any way by such

failure to direct hil!attention to the right section. I think the case is met by

section 171 of the Criminal Procedure Code ... "

We are of the view that section 40(a) of Fr:rest Ordinance being mentioned in the

charge instead of section 40( 1 )( a) of the C rdinance had not in fact caused prejudice

to the accused and such typographical error cannot be regarded as a material error

under section 166 of the Code of Crimina~ Procedure Act 15 of 1979 (equivalent to

I section I 71 of the previous code). We further find that such error is curable under

section 436 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act (equivalent to section 425 of

the Previous Criminal Procedure Code).

The Learned sse for the Attorney General has submitted that the Appellant is not

entitled to raise an objection as to the defe,cts in the charge after accused-driver had

pleaded guilty to the charge since the person who makes a claim under the proviso

to the said section 40 could not have made such an application unless and until the

accused are found guilty to a charge fram(.d under the Forest Ordinance.

In the case of H.P.D. Nimal Ranasinghl V. OIC, Police, Hettipola [SC Appeal

149/2017), it was held that,

Page 11 of 19

,

1 I I i

I

\ I I [ i 1 t 1

t I !

\ I

\

1

"The question that must be decid/?d is whether any prejudice was caused to

the accused-appellant as a result of the said defect in the charge sheet or

whether he was misled by the said defect. It has to be noted here that the

accused-appellant, at the trial, hdd not taken up an objection to the charge

sheet on the basis of the said dejl,?ct. In this connection judicial deGision in

the case of Wickramasinghe Vs 'Chandradasa 67 NLR 550 is important.

Justice Sri Skanda Rajah in the sa::d case observed the followingfacts.

"Where in a report made to Court under Section 148(l)(b) of.the

Criminal Procedure Code, the Penal Provision was mentioned but, in

the charge sheet from which the accused was charged, the penal

section was not mentioned. ~'

His Lordship held as follows;

"The omission to mention in a charge sheet the penal section is not a

fatal irregularity if the accz.:sed has not been misled by such omission.

In such a case Section 171 of the Criminal Procedure Code is

applicable. "

In the case of H. G. Sujith Priyanth.a V. OIC, Police station, Poddala and

others rCA (PHC) 157/2012J, it was held that,

"In this instance, the claim of the appellant who is not an accused in the

case had been made after the two accused were found guilty on their own

plea. Therefore, it is understood that the Court was not in a position to

consider the validity of the charge sheet at that belated point of time. Indeed.

an application under the ajores:.dd proviso to Section 40 in the Forest

Ordinance could only be made when confiscation has taken place under the

main Section 40 .of the Forest Ordinance. Aforesaid main Section 40 of the

Page 12 of 19

t I i !

J l

\

I i , I

Forest Ordinance imposes a dU~iJ upon the Magistrate who convicted the

accused under the Forest Ordl.wnce to confiscate the vehicle used in

committing such an offence. Furthermore, the word "shall" is used in thaI

main section and therefore the cohfiscation of the vehicle is automatic when

I the accused is found guilty. Accordingly, it is clear that the law referred to

in the proviso to Section 40 is applicable only thereafter. Therefore, I

conclude that the appellant who made the application relying upon the

proviso to Section 40 is not entitled to raise an issue as to the defects in the

charge after the accused have pleaded guilty 10 the charge under Section 40

of the Forest Ordinance. Furthermore, the person who makes a claim under

the proviso to the said Section 40 could not have made such an application

unless and until the accused are found guilty to a charge framed under the

Forest Ordinance. Hence, it is cM.lr that he is making such a claim, knowing

that the accused were already beJn convicted for a particular charge under

the Forest Ordinance. Therefore,: the appellant is estopped from claiming

the cover relying on the defects in the charge sheet, in his application made

under the proviso to Section 40 of the Forest Ordinance ... "

It was further held that,

"Moreover, in the event this court makes a determination on the issue as to

the defects in the charge sheet at this late stage, it may lead to raise

questions as to the conviction of the accused as well. Such a position is

illogical and certainly it will lead to absurdity. Such an absurdity should not

be allowed to prevail before the t)es of the law ... "

In the aforesaid case of Jayaratne Banda it was further held that,

Page t3 of 19

\ f

1 [ r

~ t I !

.1

i i \ l

~

\

\ .

..... Had the objection to the indic:ment been taken at the trial it would have , been open to Court to have acted.under Section 167 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act to amend the indic~'ment. Senior Counsel for the appellant too

conceded that is was open for the prosecution to have amended the

indictment at any stage before the, close of the prosecution case ... "

In the case of A.K.K. Rasika Amarasinghe V. Attorney General and another

[SC Appeal 14012010), it was held that,

"The Accused-Appellant has not raised an objection to the charge at the

trial. In the first place we note that at page 97, the Accused-Appellant has

admitted that he knows about the charge. As I pointed out earlier the

Accused-Appellant has failed to raise any objections to the charge at the

trial. In this regard I rely 01'; the judgment of the Court of Criminal

Appeal in 45 NLR page 82 in King V. Kitchilan wherein the Court of

Criminal appeal held as follows:

"The proper time at whichan objection of the nature should be taken

is before the accused has pleaded"

It is well settled law that if a charge sheet is defective, objection to the

charge sheet must be raised at the very inception."

Accordingly we are of the view that the Appellant should have raised his objection

with regard to the legality of the charge before the accused pleaded guilty. We

cannot allow the Appellant to stand on :he ground of defective charge at this stage

of appeal especially when the accuse9-driver had pleaded guilty to the charge.

Further we find that the accused-driver could have availed his right of appeal

separately against the said conviction on the ground of defective charge where an

Appellate court could have considered the merits of such case. We are not inclined

Page 14 of 19

i I

\

J ! I

I

to interfere with the conviction of the accused-driver in an appeal that was emerged

from a revision application made to the High Court against an order of a vehicle

confiscation.

The Learned President's Counsel for the' Appellant submitted that the Learned

Magistrate and the Learned High Court J~dge had failed to take cognizance of the

fact that the Appellant had taken all precautions to prevent his vehicle being

utilized for the commission of an offence.'

In the vehicle inquiry, only the Appellant (vehicle owner) had given evidence.

According to his evidence, the Appellant had admitted that his driver would take

his lorry in the morning and return in the evening and in some occasions the driver

had kept the vehicle and returned after two days.

The Learned President's Counsel for the; Appellant submitted that the Appellant

had sought and confirmed from the owner of the timber about the availability of a

permit and further he had confirmed from the government office of issuing permits

whether a permit had been granted to the ~;tock of timber in the instant case.

However, we find that the Appellant had failed to produce any evidence with

regard to the said contention. The Appellant had not called the said timber owner

to testify and had failed to give a prop.er name and address of the said timber

owner. We are of the view that the Appdlant, in the vehicle inquiry, could have

mentioned the permit number and the details of the owner of timber if the

Appellant in fact had inquired such details from the relevant government office.

In the case ofManawadu V. The Attorn~y General (1987) 2 SLR 30, it was held

that,

"By Section 7 of Act No. 13 of 198.~ it was not intended to deprive an owner

of his vehicle used by the offender in committing a forest offence' without

Page 1'; of 19

;

\ (

, , i I

i

;

\

I ,

I I I I I J

his (owner's) knowledge and without his participation. The word forfeited'

must be given the meaning 'liable to be forfeited , so as to avoid the injustice

that would flow on the construction that forfeiture of the vehicle is automatic

on the conviction of the accused .The amended sub-section 40 does not

exclude by necessary implication (he rule of 'audi alteram partem' . The

owner of the lorry not a party to; lhe case is entitled to be heard on the

question of forfeiture of the lorry, if he satisfies the court that the accused

committed the offence without his knowledge or participation, his lorry will

not be liable to forfeiture.

The Magistrate must hear the owner of the lorry on the question of showing

cause why the lorry is not liable to he forfeited. lf the Magistrate is satisfied

with the cause shown, he must restore the lorry to the owner. The Magistrate

may consider the question of releasing the lorry to the owner pending

inquiry, on his entering into a bond with sufficient security to abide by the

order that may ultimately be binding on him"

In the case of Orient Financial Services Corporation Ltd. V. Range Forest . Officer of Ampara and another [SC Appeal No. 120/2011), it was held that,

"The Supreme Court has consistently followed the case of Manawadu vs the

Attorney General. Therefore it is settled law that before an order for

forfeiture is made the owner should be given an opportunity to show cause. lf the owner on balance of probability satisfies the court that he had taken

precautions to prevent the commission of the offence or the offence was

committed without his knowledge nor he was privy to the commission of the

offence then the vehicle has to be released to the owner. "

Page 1 of 19

i , , I I

\

t

\ I

The Learned President's Counsel for J,le Appellant further submitted that the

Appellant had instructed the driver not te, use vehicle for transportation of timber

without a pennit and to refrain from driving the vehicle under the influence of

liquor.

However, in the case of Mary Matilda Silva V. P.H. De Silva ICA (PHC) 86/97)

Sisira De Abrew, J has stated that,

"For these reasons I hold that givfng mere instructions is not sufficient to

discharge the said burden. She mus.t establish that genuine instructions were

in fact given and that she took every endeavor to implement the

instructions ... "

Accordingly it is amply clear that sim;>ly telling the driver IS insufficient to

discharge the burden cast on the vehicle O'Nner by law.

In the case of Bank of Ceylon V. Kaleel and others 12004) 1 Sri L R 284, it was

held that;

"In any event to exercise revisional)' jurisdiction the order challenged must

have occasioned a failure of justice and be manifestly erroneous which go

beyond an error or defect or irregularity that an ordinary person would

instantly react to it - the order complained of is of such a nature which

would have shocked the conscience of court. "

In the case of Rasheed Ali V. Mohamed A.1i (1981) 2 SLR 29 it was held that,

"The powers of revision conferred on the Court of Appeal are very wide and

the Court has discretion to exercise them whether an appeal lies or not or

whether an appeal had been taken or not. However this discretionary

Page 1i' of 19

I

i

\

\

i

i \ I

\

I

remedy can be invoked only whel'e there are exceptional circumstances

warranting the intervention o/the CGurt ... "

We are of the view that the Appellant should have actively inspected and

confirmed about a valid permit of the s~id timber especially when he had prior

knowledge about his vehicle being used for such transportation from 70km away

i from his residence. As per the evidence of the Appellant in the vehicle inquiry, it is

observed that in some occasions he had no control over the vehicle for two days.

Therefore it is understood that the AppelJa'nt had failed to discharge the burden cast

on him.

Further, we find that the Appellant had failed to demonstrate exceptional

circumstances to the satisfaction of High Court of Kandy in order to invoke the

revisionary jurisdiction.

Considering above, we see no reason to i~terfere with the confiscation order made

by the Learned Magistrate of Theldeniya and the order of the Learned High Court

Judge of Kandy affirming the same.

The Appeal is hereby dismissed without costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Janak De Silva, J.

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Page 18 of 19

\

\

i

\ I

I

\ I i 1

~

I

Cases referred to:

1. Y.A. Bazeer v. Perera (1978-1979) 2 S LR 185

2. Sivasampu v. Juan Appu (1937) 38 NLR 369

3. Jayaratne Banda v. Attorney General (1997) 3 SLR 210

4. Nandesena v. JP, Ragala (1961) 66 NLR 300

5. D.R.M. Pandithakoralge v. V.K.Selvanayagam (56 NLR ]43)

6. R.T. Wilbert and 3 others v. Newman (i5 NLR 138)

7. Weerasinghe vs. Samy Chettiyar (43 NLR 190)

8. H.P.D. Nimal Ranasinghe v OIC, Police station. Hettipola [SC Appeal 14912017]

9. H. G. Sujith Priyantha v OIC, Police station, Poddala and others rCA (PHC) 157/2012]

10. A.K.K. Rasika Amarasinghe v Attorney General and another [SC Appeal 140/2010J

11. Manawadu v The Attorney General (1987) 2 SLR 30

12. Orient Financial Services Corporation Ltd. v Range Forest Officer of Ampara and

another [SC Appeal No. 120/2011]

13. Mary Matilda Silva v P.H. De Silva (CA (PHC) 86/97]

14. Bank of Ceylon v Kaleel and others [2004J 1 Sri L R 284

15. Rasheed Ali v Mohamed Ali (1981) 2 SLR 29

Pag' : .!J of 19

! r , , ,

I \ l t t r