IN THE COURTOF APPEAL_OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

CA Case No. 731-731A /1997 (F)

DC Kurunegala Case No. 31000/P

1. Jawarange Shoroma Priyadarshani

2. Jawarange Susantha Padmasiri

3. Jawarange Nishantha Samaraweera

All of Nelawa, Kohilagedara.

Defendant - Appellants

-Vs-

1. Jawarange Siyadoris (deceased)

of Kohilagedara~'

Plaintiff - Respondent

lA. Jawarange Sitha' Mallika,

3rd Mile Post, Kohilagedara,

Kurunegala.

Substituted Plaintiff - Respondent

2. Jawarange Ruwina (deceased)

of Kohilagedara.

3. Jawarange Baby of Kowana.

4. Jawarange Pod ina alias Podinona (deceased)

of Dewahera, Alf;ama.

1

'-',"

S. Jawarange Leelawathie

of Haltota, Kohilagedara.

\ 6. Jawarange Piyadasa (deceased)

of Ihalawatta, Nelawa,

Kohilagedara.

7. Jawarange Siriwardena (deceased)

No.89, Anuradhapura Road,

Puttalam.

, . ,

S. Jawarange Kamala

9. Jawarange Gunawardena

.. ~;. 10.Jawarange Jenita

11.Jawarange Keerthiratne

12.Jawarange Jennet Mallika

13.Jawarange Dushil Hemachandra

14.Jawarange Shimanthi Indrani

lS.Jawarange Nimal Rajaratne

16.Jawarange Kanthi Kusumalatha

17.Jawarange Srimathi Pushpa Mangalika

lS.Jawarange Ranjani Asoka Pushpakumari

19.Jawarange Meragalge Vitharbina

20.Jawarange Anura Ananda

21.Jawarange Uday;akantha

2

All of Kohilagedara

Defendant - Respondents

In the matteJ of an application for

Substitution in the room of deceased

Jawarange Pod ina alias Podinona the 3rd

Defendant-Respondent

Jawarange Sitha Mallika,

3rd Mile Post, Kohilagedara,

Kurunegala.

Substituted Plaintiff - Respondent -

Petitioner

-Vs-

1. Dewatha Pendige Sunethra Mallika,

No. 217A, Batalawatta,

Radawadunna.

2. Dewatha Pendige Nisantha Premasiri,

No. 181/03, Debahera,

Nittambuwa.

Respondents

1. Jawarange Shoroma Priyadarshani

2. Jawarange Susantha Padmasiri 3

BEFORE

COUNSEL

Written Submissions on:

Argued on

Decided on

A.H.M.D. NAWAZ, J,

. ,.

3. Jawarange Nishantha Samaraweera

All of Nelawa, Kohilagedara.

Defendant - Appellant - Respondents

And

1st to 20th Defendant - Respondent -

Respondents

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J.

W. Dayaratne, PC with R. Jayawardhena for

the Defendant-Appellant-Respondents.

C. De Silva with Sarath Walgamage for the

Substituted Plaintiff-Respondent.

26.09.2014 (for the 2Pt, 22nd and 23rd

Defe nda nt -Appella nt-Respondents)

09.29.2014 (For ~he Substituted Plaintiff-

Respondent)

08.07.2016

22.11.2016

The question for determination in this appeal is whether the failure to file a pedigree

along with a statement of claim is fatal to the prosecution of the claim in a partition

1

action. Under the part of Partition Law No.2 of 1977 as amended titled ((Procedure

4

after Service of Summons", one finds Section 19(1) which emphasizes the

requirement to file a pedigree along with a statement of claim. The relevant

provision of the Law goes as follows:

"On or before the day specified in the summons issued in a partition action or

on or before such later date as the court may fix for the purpose-

(a) any defendant in the action may file or cause to be filed in court a

statement of claim setting out the nature and extent of his right~ share

or interest in. of or in the land to which the action relates and shall, if he

disputes any averment in the plaint relating to the devolution of title

file or course to be filed in court~ together with the statement of claim~

a pedigree showing the devolution of title;"

The main thrust of the appeal before me raises the consequences of a failure to file

a pedigree along with the statement of claim. The appeal of the 5th Defendant bears

\ the number CA 731/97 (F), whilst the 2pt to 23rd Defe'~,dants appeals in CA 731A/97

(F). It is the contention of the 2pt to 23rd Defendants th'at their failure to comply with

Section 19(1) of Partition Law as amended would not render their statement of claim

liable to be rejected and such a course of action would result in non-investigation of

title.

Let me set out the factual template that forms the basis of this appeal.

Factual Matrix

The original Plaintiff-Respondent (hereinafter referredt.o as "the Plaintiff") instituted

this action in the DistrictCourt of Kurunegala on 21.08.1988 ,seeking a partition of

the land described in the'5chedule to the plaint. The 5th Defendant filed a statement

of claim dated 25.03.1992 disputing the title pleaded in the plaint. The 2Pt, 22nd and . ' ~ \ 23rd Defendant-Appellants (hereinafter referred to as "the 2Pt, 22 nd and 23 rd

Defendants") filed a joint statement of claim dated 05.04.1995 disputing the title

5

pleaded in the plaint and claiming title to shares in the'said land by virtue of deeds

bearing Nos. 5994, 5995 and 5993. This was the statement of claim that did not carry

with it a pedigree. A brief look at the proceedings that commenced on 20.11.1995

and thereafter, leading to the issue that has come up in this appeal, becomes

apposite now. Since the Plaintiff was unable to have hi,s issues raised due to a defect

in the devolution of title pleaded in the plaint, he made an application to amend the

plaint and the learned District Judge allowed the application-vide the proceedings

dated 20.11.1995 at p.12'? of the appeal brief. The amended plaint dated 24.02.1996

was thereafter filed and the 7th, 8th, 9th and 10th Defendants too followed suit by filing

an amended statement of claim dated 10.17.1996 claiming an undivided 1/36th share

of the said land.

The trial proper on the amended plaint commenced on 25.04.1997 with the parties

recording their admissions and issues.

The pivotal issue No.14 raised by the Plaintiff engaged the question of failure onthe

i part of the 5th and 2pt, 22nd, and 23rd Defendants to file a pedigree along with their

statements of claims.

OQe)e5) E)rn6>esl6~ 5)} 21@ 22 5)} 23 E)rn6>esl6~E)es5@Jcs3 @~ {;desl}(s) @JQ)~ oesJ@Jrn

19(1) fer) E)mes56>@Jd {;d6>o}~e5)~es50 er@f.1l@E) @~oorn ~6 esJ~~~?

The learned District Judge took the view that the failure to annex a pedigree,

disclosed in the statement of claim of the 2pt to 23rd Defendant-Appellants, is a fatal

irregularity and therefore decided issue No.14 in favour of the Plaintiff-Respondent

and rejected the statement of claim of the 21st to 23rd Defendant-Appellants.

In terms of Section 7 of the Partition Act states that if th,e Plaintiff in a partition action

fails to comply with Section 4, 5, or 6 the court may; .'

6

a) return the plaint so that the Plaintiff may, then ~nd there or within such time

as may be fixed by the Court, comply with those, requirements; or

b) reject the plaint

The learned District Judge having answered issue No.14 in the affirmative stated that

in view of his answer to issue No.14, the 2pt to 23rd Defendants could not proceed

with their statement of ~Iaim and hence they cannot proceed with their statement

" of claim to get a judgment according to issues No.10 to 13 raised by them at the trial.

In other words, the learned District Judge has rejected the statement of claim filed

by the 21st _23 rd Defendant-Appellants on the basis that a pedigree relating to their

title has not been attached to the statement of claim. The issue No 14 which had

been raised by the PlaintIff was treated as a preliminary question of law.

Thereafter the Plaintiff commenced his evidence narrating all that had been averred

in the Plaint and concluded the evidence marking the preliminary plan and the report

of the surveyor.

It has to be noted though that issues No.1 to 9 raised by the Plaintiff-Respondent

were not answered by the learned District Judge and the judgment is premised

entirely only on the oral testimony of the Plaintiff-Respondent.

'.

Furthermore the statement of claim filed by the 2pt to 23rd Defendant-Appellants is

not for a larger land, but for the same land described' in the schedule of the plaint

and the preliminary plan and as such there is not even ~ requirement to have a fresh

lis pendens.

The judgment dated 09.05.1997 has just allotted the shares as prayed for in the

,', plaint.

Thus it would appear thClt there has not been a propE:r investigation of title by the

learned District Judge of Kurunegala.

7

In the circumstances it was argued by the learned President's Counsel that the

judgment is liable to be impeached as due process has ~ot been observed in the case

of the Defendant-Appellants. ,

Non Compliance with Section 7 and 19 of the Partitio~ Law

Section 19(1) of the Partition Act no doubt refers to tHe necessity to file a pedigree , .

in the event that a Defendant disputes any averment in the plaint relating to the

devolution of title but that section does not prescribe the sanction of striking down

: . I the statement of claim when it does not comply with the requirement to file a

pedigree. The Section does not specifically say that thie Defendant who discloses a

different pedigree shall ~uffer the sanction of his statement of claim being struck

down merely because he- does not annex a pedigree. 'Nowhere in the law is such a -I

sanction predicated. ,

I So the learned District Judge fell into an error by trea~ing this failure as warranting

, a rejection of the statement of claim. Though the Lear~ed District Judge transposed

the failure to comply with Section 19 (1) vis a vis a i non compliance specified in

Section 7, it has to be re~embered that even Section 7 does not predicate a dismissal

of the Plaint. It does contain an alternative of giving an opportunity to file an

amended plaint, which was accorded to the Plaintiff in,the case.

There has to be parity of ~tatus for the parties and the question before the Court was

-I

whether the obligation tdfile a pedigree was mandator.y or directory. I must observe

I that all the rules of proc:dure are the handmaid of justice. The language employed ,

by the draftsman of procedural law may be liberal (may) or stringent (shall) , but the

, 1-fact remains that the object of prescribing procedure is to advance the cause of

justice. In an adversarial system, no party should ordinarily be denied the

opportunity of participating in the process of justice dispensation. Unless compelled

by express and specific language of the statute, the provisions of the CPC, or any

8

other procedural enactment ought not to be construed in a manner which would . leave the court helpless to meet extraordinary situations in the ends of justice. On

this basis, I take the view that the provision is not man'datory but directory, and the

Court could condone the non filing of pedigree and even grant time to rectify the

error in the event of an application.

In any event a partition action is sui generis as the Court has to determine the rights

of parties having regard to the rights of all parties and the rights of the 2rt to 23rd

Defendant-Appellants could not have been shut out along with those of their father

the 5th Defendant. In regard to Civil Procedure Code, Sarkar in his "Code of Civil

Procedure" (Vol. I, at p. 842) states:

"Where a contingency happens which has not been anticipated by the framer

of the Civil Procedure CodeJ and therefore no express provision has been made

in that behalf the Court has inherent power to adopt such procedureJ if

necessary to invei7t a procedureJ as may do substantial justiceJ and shorten

needless litigation. II

These comments are equally applicable to Partition Law which also contains a casus

omissus in Section 79 to bring in the procedure laid down in the Civil Procedure Code

in a like matter or question if such procedure is not inconsistent with the provisions

of the Partition Law.

What strikes me as far more fundamental is the absence of an investigation of title

in this case as it is trite that a partition decree binds the entire world.

Thus trial judges cannot abdicate such an important obligation in a case where they

have to determine rights in rem.

In the case of Peiris v. Perera 1 N.L.R 362 the Supreme Court held that the court

should not regard a partl~ion suit as one to be decided merely on issues raised by

and between the parties, and it ought not to make a decree, unless it is perfectly

9

satisfied that the persons in whose favour the decree is asked for are entitled to the

property sought to be partitioned.

This cardinal duty was again adverted to in Richard and Another v. Seibel Nona and

Others (2001) 2 Sri L.R. 1 wherein it was held that it was the duty of the judge to

fully investigate into title to the land and shares.

In the case of Gunathilake v. Murieal Silva 79 N.L.R 481, the Supreme Court held

that it is the duty of court in a Partition Action to investigate the title of parties under

Section 25 of Partition Act. Further the Court proceeded to hold that the original

court had failed to pay attention to the claims of the parties disclosed as having

Claims or rights in the property. Therefore interlocutory decree was set aside. :

In the case of Golagoda'li. Mohideen 40 N.L.R page 92, it was held that the court

~hould not enter a decree in a Partition Action unless it is perfectly satisfied that the

persons in whose favour it makes the decree are entitled to the property.

Investigation of title by court is a necessary pre-requisite to every partition decree.

In the case of Sopaya Si"!a and Another v. Magilin Silva (1989)2 SrLL.R lOS,: the

learned District Judge dismissed the case holding that the lis pendens was wrongly

~.. :\. registered. The Court of Appeal held that it was not bpen to the District Judge to

dismiss the case on the point of wrong registration of lis pendens- a point on which

there was no contest and no argument was heard. It is a violation of natural justice.

Therefore the Court permitted any of the Defendants to seek a partition of the larger

land as depicted in the preliminary survey plan.

An argument was mounted by the Counsel of the Plaintiff-Respondent that the 21st

to 23rd Defendant-Appellants had not challenged the order of the learned District

Judge rejecting their statement of claim by way of an application for Leave to Appeal

and therefore they were: estopped from challenging the same before this Court in

an appeal. " 10

I am afraid I would disagree. A question of law could be taken up in an appeal even

jf it had not been brought to this Court by way of a leae to appeal. It is noteworthy

that since the Learned District Judge treated the non filing of a pedigree as an issue

, of law it could be taken Lip in the main appeal-See Marsoof J in Jamaldeen Abdul

Latheef v. Abdul Maajeed Mohamed Mansoor and Another (2010) 2 Sri.LR 333.

Another contention of the Counsel of the Plaintiff-Respondent was that the 21st -

23rd Defendant-Appellants must have sought leave of court to cross examine the

Plaintiff. The learned District Judge had erroneously rejected the statement of claim

and a Defendant whose statement of claim had been rejected no doubt could have

I '

utilized Section 25 (2) ofthe Partition Law but that failure does detract from the right

: . "-(\ of the Defendant to impugn an erroneous decision on a question of law.

, The learned President's Counsel also invoked the maxim of "Actus Curiae Neminem

Grovabit" -No Court shall injure a party and it is open to a Defendant to contend

before this Court that an ,Act of the Court should cause no prejudice to him.

I take the view that for th~ reasons stated above I proceed to set aside the judgment

of the learned District Judge dated 09.05.1997 and order a retrial directing the

learned District Judge to conduct the retrial subject to'the right of the appellants to

l j

file a statement of claim only to bring in a pedigree if they wish to file one.

JUDGE OF.THE COURT OF APPEAL

11