IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

W.A. Anandalal,

No. 40,

Mahayaya,

Walasmulla.

Petitioner

CASE NO: CA/REV/77/2006

DC WALASMULLA: 380/P

Vs.

Don Edwin Dahanayake,

Walasmulla.

Plaintiff-Respondent

1. Atukorala Arachchige Don Charles,

Pahalagoda,

Walasmulla.

2A. Amarakoon Dissanayakage Dona

Sisiliyana,

Alawwa Multi-Purpose Co-Operative

Society,

Alawwa.

3. Land Reform Commission,

Colombo 7.

Defendant-Respondents

2

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Rasika Dissanayake for the Petitioner.

M.U.M. Ali Sabry, P.C., with Ruwantha Cooray for

the Plaintiff-Respondent.

Decided on: 01.03.2019

Samayawardhena, J.

This is a partition case. The petitioner filed this application in

2006 for revision and/or restitutio in integrum seeking to set aside

the Judgement dated 28.02.1996 and the order dated 07.07.2004

made by the District Court of Walasmulla. Even though the

petitioner has suppressed in the petition, not only the Judgment,

even the Final Decree has been registered long before he filed this

application in this Court. According to the Journal Entry No. 98,

Final Decree has been registered in 2002.

The petitioner was never a party to the partition action. The

contention of the petitioner in short is that a portion of the land

subjected to partition, belongs to the State, and he was given a

portion of it pending action by way of a Grant dated 25.08.1995

issued under the Land Development Ordinance by Her Excellency

the then President of the Republic (vide document marked E with

the petition), and therefore the Judgment is liable be set aside.

The said Grant has been issued a few months before the delivery of

the Judgment.

It is significant to note that the said Grant is in respect of a portion

of land known as Dunumadalawahena, and not a portion of the

3

land known as Galpoththehena, which was the subject matter of

partition. This has been admitted by the petitioner himself in

paragraph 20 of the petition. It appears from some of the deeds

marked at the trial (vide for instance, Deed No. 3377 marked 1V2)

that Dunumadalawahena lies to the south of Galpoththehena.

However that cannot be ascertained unless a superimposition of

the Surveyor Generals Plan is done on the Final Partition Plan.

Such a superimposition has neither been done nor is there any

application by the petitioner for such a thing to be done.

The partition action was filed in 1983. While the case was in

progress, the Land Reform Commission was made a partythe 3rd

defendant to the case. Even though a representative of the Land

Reform Commission was before the District Court (vide Journal

Entry No. 58) and obtained a date to file the proxy and the

statement of claim, they have not taken any interest to file the

same and contest the matter. The Court has done its part.

There is no collusion between the parties. As seen from the

Journal Entries, the 2nd defendant has even stabbed the plaintiff in

front of the surveyor at the preliminary survey. The preliminary

survey has been carried out under police protection. That was due

to disputes among the co-owners. Entering a partition decree in

those circumstances to end co-ownership is a dire necessity.

Upon entering the Judgment in 1996 after full trial, the Attorney-

General has made an application in 2003 before the District Judge

seeking inter alia not to execute the writ in terms of the Final

Decree until a commission is taken out to the Surveyor General to

show portions of State land if any in the corpus by way of a

superimposition on the Final Partition Plan. This has been refused

by the District Judge by order dated 07.07.2004. No appeal has

4

been filed by the Attorney General against that order

notwithstanding he had all the wherewithal at his disposal to do

so. The petitioner has no right to ask this Court to set aside that

order made in pursuant to an application by the Attorney General.

The petitioner cannot also ask this Court to set aside the

Judgment on his assumption that the portion of

Dunumadalawahena given to him by way of a Grant by the State is

included in the Final Partition Plan by which Galpoththehena was

partitioned. The fact that a part of Dunumadalawahena is

included in the land which was the subject matter of partition has

not been established either before the District Court or before this

Court.

The Attorney General is not a party to this application, and even

though the Land Reform Commission is made a respondent, it is,

as usual, not interested in the matter.

The petitioner cannot maintain a restitutio in integrum application

as he was not a party to the main case in the District Court. Only

a party to an action can come by way of restitutio in integrum

seeking restitution.

Revision is a discretionary remedy. It cannot be invoked as of

right. In the facts and circumstances of this case, I see no reason,

on the application of the petitioner based on assumptions, to set

aside the Judgment/Interlocutory Decree/Final Decree entered by

the District Court after full trial.

Application of the petitioner is dismissed. No costs.

Judge of the Court of appeal