IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Court of Appeal No. CA(PHC) 156/2012

S.Gunasiri De Silva

Mahagedara, Bopegoda,

Rathgama.

2nd Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant

Vs.

High Court of Galle Revision Application No. 44/2012

Magistrate Court of Galle No. 87286

1

01. Thenuwara Badalge

Swarnawathie

Anghandiya, Bopegoda,

Rathgama.

02. G.H.Magilin Nona,

Thotupola Watte,

Bopegoda,Rathgama.

03. Harumadura Rukmani de Silva,

Annasi Koratuwa,

Thotupola Watte,

Bopegoda, Rathgama.

04. Koralege Sumithra Perera,

Thotupola Watte,

Bopegoda, Rathgama.

05. The Officer in Charge,

Police Station,

Rathgama.

Respondents - Respondents - Respondents

Before: K.K. Wickremasinghe J.

Janak De Silva J.

Counsel:

Farook Miskin for 2nd Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant

Jagath Abeynayaka with Pradeep Abeyrathna for 1st Respondent-Respondent-Respondent

Written Submissions tendered on:

2nd Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant on 2nd April 2018

Argued on: 2nd February 2018

Decided on: 14th May 2018

Janak De Silva J.

This is an appeal preferred by the 2nd Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant (Appellant) against the

order of the learned High Court Judge of Galle dated 16th October 2012 by which he refused to

issue notice in a revision application filed to set aside the judgement of the learned Additional

Magistrate of Galle dated 21st September 2012 wherein it was held that the pt Respondent-

Respondent-Respondent (Respondent) had a right of way over the land owned by the Appellant.

The learned Additional Magistrate of Galle further ordered the removal of the fence that had

been put up obstructing this right of way.

The learned High Court Judge of Galle refused to issue notice on the basis that no exceptional

circumstances have been established for the exercise of revisionary jurisdiction.

The learned Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the learned High Court Judge of Galle has

arbitrarily and without assigning reasons refused notice. It is trite law that exceptional

circumstances must exist for revisionary jurisdiction to be exercised. It is observed that the

proceedings of 16.10.2012 [Appeal Brief page 44] only indicates that notice is refused. No reasons

are given therein. However, the journal entry of 16.10.2012 contains a hand-written statement

signed by the learned High Court Judge stating that notice is refused as there are no exceptional

2

circumstances. Hence, there is no merit in the submission of the learned counsel for the

Appellant that the learned High Court Judge has failed to assign reasons for refusing notice.

However, it must be emphasized that reasons for refusing notice must be contained in the order

refusing notice rather than in a journal entry. But even if the learned High Court Judge of Galle

was in error in setting out the reasons for refusing notice in a journal entry, the proviso to Article

138{1} of the Constitution states that no judgment, decree or order of any court shall be reversed

or varied on account of any error, defect or irregularity, which has not prejudiced the substantial

rights of the parties or occasioned a failure of justice. Therefore, if it is evident on a close

examination of the totality of the evidence that the learned High Court Judge was correct in

refusing notice, there is no prejudice to the substantial rights of the parties or occasioned a failure

of justice and the order of the learned High Court Judge should not be disturbed. 1 I will now

consider whether the totality of evidence supports the order made by the learned High Court

Judge.

This matter arises out of an information filed by the Officer-in-Charge of the Ratgama Police

under section 66{1}{a} of the Primary Courts Procedure Act {Act}. Information was filed on

16.03.2012. The parties were permitted to file affidavits, counter affidavits and documents. The

Respondent claimed that she had a right of way over the land of the Appellant to go to her house

and that it had been blocked by the Appellant. The Appellant did admit the existence of a

roadway over his land which was used by the Respondent as well as a few other families. He

contended that as the said roadway was narrow and at the request of the Ratgama Pradeshiya

Sabha and villagers he allowed part of his land to be used to construct a 12-foot roadway close

to the existing road so that the said 12-foot roadway could be used instead of the existing narrow

road. He further claimed that the Respondent has the ability to use the new road to go to her

house and that the existing roadway was closed by the villagers and not him.

1 Victor and Another v. Cyril De Silva [(1998) 1 Sri.L.R. 41]

3

The learned Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the learned Additional Magistrate of Galle

has failed to act in terms of section 66(7) of the Act which is a fatal irregularity. He relied on the

decision in Ali v. Abdeen2 where U.de Z. Gunawardena J. held that the Primary Court Judge was

under a peremptory duty to encourage or make every effort to facilitate a settlement of the

dispute before assuming jurisdiction to hold an inquiry into the matter of possession and impose

on the parties a settlement by means of Court order. The short answer to this objection is that

the journal entry of 15.06.2012 shows that learned Additional Magistrate of Galle had fixed the

case for 29.06.2012 to consider a settlement on which day it was informed that there was no

settlement.

The dispute in the instant case is a right of way. Where the dispute relates to any right to any

land such as a right of way or right to cultivate the Primary Court judge should make his order

under section 69 of the Act. 3 The learned Additional Magistrate of Galle after a careful evaluation

of the evidence correctly concludes that the dispute must be resolved by applying the provisions

in section 69 of the Act. The learned Additional Magistrate of Galle has concluded that there

exists a lO-foot roadway over the land owned by the Appellant which the Respondent used for a

long period to go to her house. I see no reason to disturb this finding of the learned Additional

Magistrate of Galle.

The learned counsel for the Appellant submitted that the learned Additional Magistrate had

failed to consider that the road had deviated and that the new road is more convenient.

The question of whether a right of way can be replaced by another roadway created by the owner

of the servient tenement without the consent of the owner of the dominant tenement did at one

time have a difference of judicial opinion.

2 (2001) 1 Sri.L.R. 413

3 Weerasinghe v. Sepa/a and another [(1996) 2 Sri.L.R. 229]

4

In Marasinghe v. Samarasinghe4 it was held by Alles and De Krester J. (Fernando c.J., dissenting),

that when a servitude of a right of way has been acquired by prescription, the owner of the

servient tenement is entitled to offer a deviation of the route or track along which the right was

acquired, provided that the proposed alternative route is equally convenient and serviceable to

the owner of the dominant tenement. Madanayake v. Thimotheus 5, Fernando v. Fernando6 and

Hendrick v. Same/is7 was overruled.

However, as the learned Additional Magistrate correctly pOints out this is not a question that the

Primary Court need to determine in terms of section 69 of the Act. Section 69(2) of the Act

enables the Primary Court judge to make order declaring that any person specified therein shall

be entitled to any such right in or respecting the land or in any part of the land as may be specified

in the order until such person is deprived of such right by virtue of an order or decree of a

competent court and prohibit all disturbance or interference with the exercise of such right by

such party other than under the authority of an order or decree as aforesaid. In Rama/ingam v.

Thangarajah 8 Sharvananda J. (as he was then) stated as follows:

"On the other hand, if the dispute is in regard to any right to any land other than right of

possession of such land, the question for decision, according to section 69(1), is who is

entitled to the right which is subject of dispute. The word "entitle" here connotes the

ownership of the right. The Court has to determine which of the parties has acquired

that right or is entitled for the time being to exercise that right. In contradistinction to

section 68, section 69 requires the Court to determine the question which party is entitled

to the disputed right preliminary to making an order under section 69(2)."9 (emphasis

added)

473 N.L.R. 433

5 3 C. Law Rec. 82 631 N. L. R. 126 741 N. L. R. 519

8 (1982) 2 Sri.L.R. 693

9 Ibid. page 699

5

The purpose of this jurisdiction is to prevent a breach of peace by restoring the person entitled

to the right to the enjoyment thereof until the dispute is determined by a competent court. In

the instant case, the dispute arose when the right of way used by the Respondent was blocked.

That has been addressed by the order made by the Primary Court. The contention of the

Appellant that the right of the Respondent can be replaced by a deviated route is a matter for a

competent court.

The learned Additional Magistrate also made order for the removal of the fence that had been

put up obstructing this right of way. In Jamis v. Kannangara10 Palakidnar J. held that the order

that can be made under section 69(2) of the Act in regard to a right to any land other than the

right to possession is a declaration of entitlement of such right after determination by the court

subject to a final determination by a competent court and prohibition of all disturbance or

interference with the exercise of such right by such a party. It was further held that the order is

of a prohibitory nature preventing an interference with the exercise of such a right and that this

cannot include a positive order of removal of a structure. However, in Tudor v. Anulawathie and

othersll Gunawardena J. held that the ultimate object of s. 68 and s. 69 being to restore the

person entitled to the right to the possession of land to the possession thereof or to restore the

person entitled to the right (other than the right to possession of land) to the enjoyment thereof

and that the said provision of the law must be rationally construed to authorize by necessary

implication if in fact they had not in terms done so, the removal of all obstructions if the need

arise, in the process of restoring the right to the person held to be entitled to such right. The

reasoning in Tudor v. Anulawathie and others12is compelling which I shall adopt.

In view of the above circumstances, the learned High Court Judge of Galle correctly held that

there are no exceptional circumstances which warrant the exercise of revisionary jurisdiction in

respect of the judgement of the learned Additional Magistrate of Galle dated 2pt September

2012.

10 (1989) 2 Sri.L.R. 350

11 (1999) 3 Sri.L.R. 235

12 Ibid.

6

For the foregoing reasons, I dismiss this appeal. No costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

K.K. Wickremasinghe J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

7