IN THE COUT OF APPEAL OF THE REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for revision of an

order of the Provincial High Court of the Southern

Province (holden in Galle)

Benthota Multi-purpose Co-operative Society

Limited, Elpitiya Road,

Bentota.

Petitioner

C.A. (PHC) APN No. 46/2018

PHC Galle Application No: Writ 38/2018

Vs

1. Commissioner/ Registrar of Cooperative

Development, Southern Province,

No. 147/3, Pettigalawata,

Galle.

2. Assistant Commissioner of Cooperative

Development - Galle,

Assistant Commissioner's Office,

No.111, Pettigalawata,

Galle.

1

t

3. I.G. Wimal Dharamsiri,

Co-Operative Development Officer

(Head Office),

No. 147/3, Pettiga lawata,

Galle.

4. N.T. Thanuja Nilanthi,

Cooperative Development Assistant

Commissioner's Office,

NO.lll, Pettigalawata,

Galle.

5. Jeewanthi Gunasekara,

Co-operative Development Officer,

Cooperative Development

Commissioner's Office, NO.lll,

Pettigalawata,

Galle.

Respondents

2

Assistant

Before

Counsel

Decided on

: P. Padman Surasena, 1 (PICA)

: A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J

: Chandana Wijesooriya Instructed by

Wathsala Dulanjani for the Petitioner.

: 04.04.2018

P. Padman Surasena, 1 (PLCA)

The petitioner in paragraph 8 of the petition has admitted that he

has filed a notice of appeal in order to exercise his right of appeal

to this court against the impugned order pronounced by the

Provincial High Court. This means that the grievances of the

petitioner could be adjudicated by this court in the appeal to be filed

by the petitioner.

When this court inquired from the learned counsel for the petitioner

as to the necessity of the instant revision application his reply was

that it is to obtain an interim relief suspending the relevant decision.

Then this court looked for exceptional circumstances. The learned

counsel for the petitioner drew the attention of this court to

3

paragraph 06 of the petition. When this court peruses the averments

in paragraph 06, it contains the followings:

i. The said order is contrary to the facts and he circumstances

of this case;

ii. The learned Judge of the Provincial High Court erred in law

by failing to consider that the 1st Respondent had no power

to authorize the 3rd, 4th and 5th Respondents by "Pe 12"

without withdrawing the earlier decision enumerated in "Pe

3" (attachment to the settlement marked "Pe 4a'') as per

the said settlement in the court marked "Pe 4a" in PHC

(Galle)Writ Application No.2/2009;

iii. The learned Judge of the Provincial High Court erred in law

by failing to appreCiate that the 1st Respondent was

concluded by his earlier decision and could not have

exercised powers under section 46(1) of the Act without

withdrawing or cancelling the earlier decision marked "Pe

3" and thereby the said decision was ultra vires;

4

iv. the learned Judge of the Provincial High Court erred in law

misdirected himself by holding that the 1st Respondent had

not violated the said settlement marked "Pe 4a" in

PHC(Galle)Writ Application No.2/2009;

v. the learned Provincial High Court Judge failed to appreciate

that the 1st Respondent authorized the panel officers by"Pe

12" to inspect in to the books of the Petitioner without

cancelling or revoking earlier the decision enumerated in

"Pe 7" authorizing the 3rd, 4th and 5th Respondents to

inspect the books of the Petitioner, purportedly in terms of

section 46 (1) of the Act;

vi. the learned Provincial High Court Judge misdirected himself

by holding that the Petitioner has suppressed the gazette

No.1589/19 referred to in "Pe 9" by which the 2nd

Respondent had been authorized to act under section

46(1), whereas the contention of the Petitioner was that

the said decision enumerated in "Pe 7" could not have

taken without complying with the said terms of settlement

marked "Pe 4a" in PHC Galle Writ Application No.2/2009;

5

vii. the learned Provincial High Court Judge has misdirected

himself by holding that the contention of the Petitioner to

the effect that the 3rd, 4th, and 5th Respondent had failed to

conclude the said inspection within the period of time they

were authorized on the basis that there had been an

extension of time by "Pe 16",

viii. the Learned Provincial High Court Judge failed to

appreciate that the entire endeavor on the part of the

Respondent was out of malice towards the Petitioner, its

Chairman and the Board of Directors;

ix. the said order is accordingly palpably wrong;

x. the said order has caused grave miscarriage of justice.

This court is of the view that all the above averments could best be

described as grounds of appeal and not as exceptional

circumstances. It is trite law that the petitioner is required to plead

exceptional circumstances clearly in the petition.

6

Further, although the petitioner has stated in paragraph 7 of the

petition that grave and irreparable loss could be caused to the

petitioner because the respondents are going ahead with the said

purported inspection and the submission of their report, the

petitioner has failed to explain why or how such grave and

irreparable loss would be caused to him.

It is the view of this court that this court can only ascertain the

legality, propriacy and regularity of the proceedings in a revision

application. The grounds for revision are restricted in that sense.

However, since the petitioner has stated that he has taken steps to

exercise his right of appeal, it is open for him to vindicate his rights

from this court through that appeal which will invariably have a

scope wider than the aforementioned grounds for revision.

This court also observes that although the petitioner has prayed for

an interim relief, he has failed to give adequate notice to the

respondents. The registered postal article receipt, the petitioner has

annexed to the petition, shows that the petitioner had posted the

7

notice to the respondents only on 02.04.2018. This court further

observes that the impugned judgment had been delivered by the

High Court on 26.02.2018. Therefore, in any case this court is not

in a position to consider an interim relief of the petitioner as he has

not sufficiently compiled with Rule 2(1) of the Court of Appeal

(Appellate Procedure) Rules 1990.

In these circumstances, it is the view of this court that no practical

purpose would be served by entertaining this application. (In view

of the appeal the petitioner is expecting to file in this court and this

court's inability to grant interim relief). Therefore, this court decides

to refuse to issue notices on the respondents. Application is

dismissed without costs.

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, 1

I agreed

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Na/-

8