==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

Orders in the nature of Writs of

Certiorari, Prohibition and

Mandamus under Article 140 of the

Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Lewpothdeniya Liyanage

Wimalawathie,

Grama 07, B/20, Muwangala,

Hingurana.

PETITIONER

Kalu Arachchige Dayawansha,

Grama 07, B/20, Muwangala,

Hingurana.

CA (Writ) App. No. 560/2023

SUBSTITUTED PETITIONER

Vs.

1. Mrs. A.M.A. Kumari,

Divisional Secretary, Divisional Secretariat, Damana. 2. Dr. Madhavi Jayasekera,

Government Medical Centre, Uksiripura, Muwangala, Hingurana.

RESPONDENTS

2

Before: Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Counsel:

Gamini Hettiarachchi for the Petitioner.

Medhaka Fernando, S.C. for the Respondents.

Argued on: 25.02.2026

Delivered on: 19.06.2026

3

Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Judgement

Introduction

The Petitioner, in this Application, seeks to obtain a Writ of Certiorari on the speculation that

the 1st Respondent, who is the Divisional Secretary, may have issued a permit under the Land

Development Ordinance to the 2nd Respondent, whom the Petitioner alleges came by force to

occupy a portion of the parcel of land that the Petitioner claims to have been in occupation of

since 1960.

After initially supporting this application and obtaining the issuance of notice, the Respondents

filed their objections and, together with the Objections, marked and annexed certain documents

and moved for the dismissal of this Application.

This was argued before me on 25.02.2026; hence, this judgement.

The Petitioner’s position

The Petitioner claims that she is the owner of the land in suit, and she further claims that she

and her late husband had been in possession of the said land in extent of 1.2144 Hectare

belonging to the Sri Lanka Sugar Corporation.

It is also her position that though the said land was initially vested in the Sugar Corporation,

since certain parcels of land were not arable for sugar cane cultivation, the Sugar Corporation

did not utilise such parcels of the land, and the parcel of land that has been occupied by the

Petitioner from 1960 is one such land. Therefore, with the permission of the Sugar Corporation,

the Petitioner and her husband had developed the land by having a coconut plantation.

4

It is also the Petitioner’s position that at one point of time during the 1990s, the Pradeshiya

Sabha of the area had encroached upon the land, and thereafter, the Petitioner had instituted a

vindicatory action against the same and obtained damages in the sum of Rs. 20,000/- (Twenty

Thousand Rupees) from the District Court. Thereafter, though the Pradeshiya Sabha had

appealed to this Court, the said appeal had been dismissed; therefore, the Petitioner claims that

her rights have been established.

In the meantime, the 2nd Respondent, acting in collusion with the 1st Respondent, has carved

out a certain portion of the land occupied and possessed by the Petitioner, and made attempts

to erect a building. The Petitioner explains that there may have been permit issued by the 1st

Respondent in respect of the said parcel of land now forcibly occupied by the 2nd Respondent.

In addition to that, the Sugar Corporation has given its consent to issue a permit only to the

Petitioner since the Petitioner along with her husband has developed the land from 1960, having

occupied the same; the said letter has been addressed to the Divisional Secretary of the area.

Therefore, the Petitioner has moved for inter alia the following relief;

“d. Issue a mandate in the nature of Writ of Certiorari quashing any permit issued by

the 1st Respondent to the 2nd Respondent to the land more fully described in the plan

marked as 'P1' if already such a permit is issued.”

The Respondents’ Objections

The 1st and 2nd Respondents have filed they Objections, and according to them, the land had

been released to the Sugar Corporation in terms of the Section 25 of the State Industrial

Corporations Act, No. 49 of 1957, by the State. Since it is exclusively released to the Sri Lanka

Sugar Corporation, such land should only be used for sugar cane cultivation and nothing else.

This has been further confirmed and established by the Supreme Court, by its judgement which

is marked and annexed to the Statement of Objections as 1R1. Accordingly, no other person

5

should be allowed to utilise or possess such land vested under the Sugar Corporation since it

does not have any title to such land other than possessing the land for the purpose of sugar cane

cultivation.

Therefore, it is the position of the 1st Respondent that the Petitioner does not have any right to

possess, occupy, or effect any improvements in the land in question; as such, the Petitioner

cannot maintain this Application as it is formulated and constituted.

Further, it is also the position of the 1st Respondent that the Land Commissioner has given

instructions under State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act, No. 7 of 1979 that the lands

released to the Sugar Corporation should not be utilised for any other purpose nor should it be

allowed to be occupied by any other person.

Therefore, it is the position of the 1st Respondent that no right has been accrued to the Petitioner

to obtain a writ against the Respondents, since the land belongs to the State and such land is

released to the Sugar Corporation only for it to be utilised for the purpose of sugar cane

cultivation.

As such, the Respondents have moved for the dismissal of this Application.

The Petitioner’s Application is speculative

The original Petitioner has come before this Court on the basis that she is in possession of the

property in suit from 1960 under the Sugar Corporation which is in possession of the larger

parcel of land which includes thousands of acres which was vested in it for the purpose of

planting and cultivating sugar cane for the production of sugar.

It is the Petitioner’s position that since the parcel of land that she came to possess since 1960

and continues to possess to date, is not an arable land for sugar cane cultivation, with the

6

permission and consent of the Sugar Corporation, she and her husband had developed the land

by planting coconut and other crops; thereby, they have developed the property.

It is also the Petitioner’s position that since the property belongs to the State, the Sugar

Corporation has recommended her application to the Divisional Secretary of the area to issue

a permit in her favour since she has been possessing and developing the land in suit from 1960.

However, pending the said application for a permit, the 1st Respondent, who is in-charge of

Government land, at the instigation of the 2nd Respondent, allowed her to carve out a portion

of the entire land and thus, allowed her effect certain developments; the said potion has now

been fenced off from the rest of the larger portion of land where the Petitioner is in possession,

and it is the Petitioner’s complaint that there may have been a permit issued to the said 2nd

Respondent by the 1st Respondent, without her knowledge and giving her a hearing, and

without considering the fact that she has been in possession of the land in suit.

Thus, if there is any permit issued, the decision to issue the same is irrational and against the

evidence, and without hearing her, such issuance is in violation of the rules of natural justice.

Additionally, since the land now belongs to the Hingurana Sugar Corporation, the Divisional

Secretary cannot issue such permit without permission of the Sugar Corporation. Therefore, it

is the position of the Petitioner that if there is any permit issued, it should be quashed.

However, the Petitioner does not exactly know whether such permit has been issued or whether

there is any action taken by the 1st Respondent to issue such permit. In such scenario, what the

Petitioner should have done was to write to the Respondents to ascertain whether such permit

has been issued under the Right to Information Act, which the Petitioner has failed to do.

Therefore, at a glance of the Petition, what can be discerned is that what the Petitioner’s very

Application and relief prayed for are based on mere surmises or speculation. As such, the relief

so sought in this Application cannot be granted.

7

Judgements are unwritten laws

The next matter that is asserted is that the 1st Respondent cannot issue a permit in favour of

anybody because the land in suit had been released to the Hingurana Sugar Corporation.

However, the Respondents’ objections are that the said land is State land. At some point of

time, the said land had been vested in the Sugar Corporation for the purpose of sugar cane

cultivation under the State Industrial Corporations Act; in addition to that, it is their position

that there is a Supreme Court judgement marked as 1R1, by which the guidelines are given to

the Sugar Corporation and the relevant authorities not to permit or allocate any land vested in

the Sugar Corporation under the said Act since such land released and vested in the Sugar

Corporation is only meant for sugar cane cultivation and nothing else. Therefore, it is the

position of the Respondents that the Petitioner’s position is futile, and the Petitioner cannot ask

for any writ in view of the said judgement.

Now I will consider this aspect.

It must be borne in mind that an interpretation or judgement given by a court, particularly the

Supreme Court of this country, is part of the unwritten law.1 This is well-recognised principle,

and the other branches of the Government are bound by that and are expected to follow the

same principles.

The Supreme Court, having interpreted the State Industrial Corporations Act, under which the

State has released certain lands in favour of the Sugar Corporation; thus, it is the view of the

Supreme Court, that the Sugar Corporation cannot allow or permit another to possess or

cultivate the said land other than for sugar cane cultivation. In addition to that, it also must be

appreciated that a violation thereof may amount to contempt of the Supreme Court. As such,

1 Walker Sons and Co. (U.K.) Ltd v. Gunatilake and Others [1978-79-80] 1 Sri L.R. 231.

8

the Sugar Corporation granting the Petitioner to possess the land from 1960 is in violation of

the said Supreme Court judgement. Thus, the relief sought by the Petitioner cannot be granted.

Further, whether the land is arable or not, is not a matter to be considered since such land cannot

be given or permitted to be possessed by another since such land belongs to the State; the Sugar

Corporation is only holding the said land temporarily for the purpose of sugar cane cultivation.

As such, unless the authorities who are entrusted with the subject of land take a decision to

allocate or alienate such land under the relevant laws, namely the State Lands Ordinance or the

Land Development Ordinance, the Sugar Corporation cannot permit anybody to possess the

same. Therefore, the Petitioner has not shown any right accrued to her under statutory or

common law to obtain the relief as prayed for.

Thus, it is my view that the Petitioner’s relief is baseless and cannot be granted.

Vindicatory action (in personam)

In addition to that, I must also hold that though the Petitioner claims that there had been a case

between the Petitioner and the Pradeshiya Sabha, and obtained a judgement in her favour, it is

only a vindicatory action, which is an action between the parties and not an action in rem but

in personam. Therefore, the rights and duties decided by the final judgement of the District

Court only operate between the parties and not against the true owner who holds absolute

ownership of the property. Thus, the Petitioner, without any right or title, is now trying to obtain

relief to obtain a title from the Court, which the Court is not empowered to grant.

As such, it is my view that this Application is liable to be dismissed.

9

Conclusion

Accordingly, for the reasons adumbrated above I dismiss this Application, without cost.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL