==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/PHC/0028/2021

Page 1 of 13

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal under and in terms of section 11 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990 and under Part 1 of The Court of Appeal (Procedure for Appeals from High Courts) Rules 1988.

Officer In Charge, Police Station, Kamburupitiya.

Plaintiff

Vs.

1. Yakalla Kankanamge Sumanasena,

"Samara", Gode Gedara, Karagoda, Uyangoda. 2. Yakalla Kankanamge Gnanathilaka,

"Samara", Gode Gedera, Karagoda, Uyangoda.

1st Party Respondents

1. Samarawickrama Liyanage Nalin

Randika, “Samaragiri”, Kadduwa, Karagoda, Uyangoda. 2. L. Bimal Priyankara "Samaragiri",

Kadduwa, Karagoda, Uyangoda.

2nd Party Respondents

Matara Magistrate Court Case No: 97118 (Section 66) High Court of Matara Revision Application No: HCRA 17/2019 Court of Appeal Case No: CA(PHC)0028/2021

CA/PHC/0028/2021

Page 2 of 13

AND

Somilat Kumanayake, “Samaragiri”, Kadduwa, Karagoda, Uyangoda.

2nd Party Intervenient-Respondent

AND

Yakalla Kankanamge Karunasinghe, No. 20, Madapara, Welegoda.

1st Party Intervenient-Respondent

AND

1. Yakalla Kankanamge Sumanasena,

"Samara", Gode Gedara, Karagoda, Uyangoda. 2. Yakalla Kankanamge Gnanathilaka,

"Samara", Gode Gedera, Karagoda, Uyangoda. Vs.

1. Samarawickrama Liyanage Nalin

Randika, "Samaragiri", Kadduwa, Karagoda, Uyangoda. 2. L. Bimal Priyankara,

"Samaragiri", Kadduwa, Karagoda, Uyangoda.

2nd Party Respondent-Respondents

CA/PHC/0028/2021

Page 3 of 13

Somilat Kumanayake, “Samaragiri”, Kadduwa, Karagoda, Uyangoda.

2nd Party Intervenient-Respondent-

Respondent

AND

1. Yakalla Kankanamge Karunasinghe,

No. 20, Madapara, Welegoda.

AND

1. Honourable Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12. 2. Officer In Charge,

Police Station, Kamburupitiya.

Plaintiff-Respondents

AND NOW BETWEEN

1. Yakalla Kankanamge Sumanasena,

"Samara", Gode Gedara, Karagoda, Uyangoda. 2. Yakalla Kankanamge Gnanathilaka,

"Samara", Gode Gedera, Karagoda, Uyangoda.

1st Party Respondent-Petitioner-Appellants

CA/PHC/0028/2021

Page 4 of 13

Vs.

1. Samarawickrama Liyanage Nalin

Randika, "Samaragiri", Kadduwa, Karagoda, Uyangoda. 2. L. Bimal Priyankara,

"Samaragiri", Kadduwa, Karagoda, Uyangoda. 2nd Party Respondent-Respondent-Respondents

AND

Somilat Kumanayake, “Samaragiri”, Kadduwa, Karagoda, Uyangoda. 2nd Party Intervenient-Respondent-Respondent-

Respondent

AND

Yakalla Kankanamge Karunasinghe, “Samaragiri”, Kadduwa, Karagoda, Uyangoda. 1st Party Intervenient-Respondent-Respondent-

Respondent

Before : D. THOTAWATTA, J.

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Counsel : Dr. Sunil Cooray with Buddhika Gamage

and Rangana Warnasinghe for the 1st

Party-Respondent-Petitioner-Appellants.

CA/PHC/0028/2021

Page 5 of 13

2nd Party-Respondent-Respondent-

Respondents, 2nd Party-Intervenient-

Respondent-Respondent and 1st Party-

Intervenient-Respondent-Respondent are

absent and unrepresented.

Argued on : 07.08.2025 Written Submissions of the Respondent-Petitioner -AppellantS tendered on : Not tendered. Written Submissions of the 2nd Party-Respondent- Respondent-Respondents, 2nd Party-Intervenient -Respondent-Respondent and 1st Party-Intervenient -Respondent-Respondent tendered on : Not tendered. Decided on : 03.12.2025 K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Instant appeal arises from an order dated 13.07.2021 made by the learned

High Court Judge of the Southern Province holden at Matara (hereinafter called

and referred to as the order) in an application in revision bearing No. මා / මහාධි/

නඩු අංකය/ ප්‍රතිශ ෝධන 17/19, preferred to it by the 1st Party-Respondent-

Petitioner-Appellants (hereinafter called and referred to as the Appellants)

against an order dated 11.12.2018 made by the learned Magistrate of Matara

(hereinafter called and referred to as the learned Magistrate) in the proceedings

commenced before her by the Officer in Charge, Police Station, Kamburupitiya

upon furnishing information to it under and in terms of section 66(1)(a) of the

Primary Courts Procedure Act No. 44 of 1979 (hereinafter called and referred to

CA/PHC/0028/2021

Page 6 of 13

as the Act) naming therein as parties the Appellants and the 2nd Party-

Respondent-Respondent-Respondents, 2nd Party-Intervenient-Respondent-

Respondent and 1st Party-Intervenient-Respondent-Respondent.

It is to be noted that the 2nd Party-Respondent-Respondent-Respondents, 2nd

Party-Intervenient-Respondent-Respondent and 1st Party-Intervenient-

Respondent-Respondent had made default in entering appearance before this

Court right throughout from the very inception of the instant appeal despite

notices being issued on them on several occasions as evident from the record,

and hence, this Court had proceeded to hear only the learned President’s

Counsel for the Appellants in support of the instant appeal when this matter

came up before us for argument.

The proceedings in the Magistrate Court of Matara commenced upon

information being filed by the Officer-in-Charge of the Kamburupitiya Police on

22.05.2018 under section 66(1)(a) of the Act.

The Officer in Charge of the Police Station, Kamburupitiya filing information in

Court states that, the dispute that was alleged to have arisen between the

parties was one with regard to the possession of a land referred to therein,

namely; Kaikawella High Land in extent of 25 perches (hereinafter called and

referred to as the land in dispute). This had been clearly, and unequivocally,

not only admitted but also, confirmed by Yakalle Kankanamge Sumanasena-1st

Party-Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant (hereinafter called and referred to as the

1st Appellant) in his 1st complaint made to Police on 16.04.2018 as well as by

Samarawickrama Liyanage Nalin Randika-the 2nd Party-Respondent-

Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter called and referred to as the 2nd Party-1st

Respondent) in his statement made to Police on 22.04.2018 pursuant to the

complaint so made by Yakalle Kankanamge Sumanasena-the 1st Appellant and

also in their affidavits and counter affidavits, filed in the Magistrate Court of

Matara in the instant action wherein, they both had made adverse and/or rival

claim against each other as to the possession of the land in dispute. It is

CA/PHC/0028/2021

Page 7 of 13

significant to observe that the learned Magistrate of Matara too, had in page 5

of her order, clearly, observed that dispute is with regard to the possession of

the land in dispute.

However, the 2nd Party-Respondent-Respondent-Respondents had raised a

jurisdictional objection as to the maintainability of the action on the basis that

the land in dispute is a paddy land within the meaning of the definition given

to the phrase “Paddy Land” in the Agrarian Development Act No. 46 of 2000,

hence, governed by the provisions of the Agrarian Development Act and not by

Part VII of the Act, and therefore, the Magistrate Court of Matara had no

jurisdiction to hear and determine the dispute referred to it by the Officer-in-

Charge of Police Station-Kamburupitiya. The learned Magistrate of Matara had

upheld it and dismissed the information filed before her by the Police and the

learned High Court Judge of Matara too, had dismissed the application in

revision filed by the Appellants before it against the order of the learned

Magistrate thereby, affirming the order of the learned Magistrate of Matara on

the same line of reasoning as adduced therefor by the learned Magistrate of

Matara and the reason adduced therefor, by both the learned Magistrate as

well as the learned High Court Judge being that since the land in dispute is a

paddy land, such a dispute has to be redressed through special means

provided for in the Agrarian Development Act No. 46 of 2000 and hence, the

general procedure laid down in part VII of the Act with regard to dispute

affecting land where a breach of peace is threatened or likely, is not applicable

in such situation and therefore, action was not maintainable in view of the

special provisions contained in the Agrarian Development Act.

It is these findings of both the learned Magistrate of Matara as well as the

learned High Court Judge of Matara, that the Appellants now, seek to canvas

before us by mainly, contending that it is erroneous for the learned Magistrate

and the learned High Court Judge to have misapplied the ratio decidendi of the

case in Mansoor and Another Vs. O.I.C. Avissawella Police and Another-1991(2)

CA/PHC/0028/2021

Page 8 of 13

SLR 75 and to have given their orders, when it becomes manifest from the

material on record that the dispute in this case is not a dispute between a

landlord and a tenant cultivator regarding the tenant cultivator's tenurial

rights and as such findings of both the learned Magistrate as well as the

learned High Court Judge cannot sustain both in fact and law and therefore,

they ought to be rejected in-limine.

It may now, be examined.

It is in this context, I would think it expedient and appropriate at this juncture

to carefully, examine the scheme embodied in the Agrarian Development Act

No. 46 of 2000.

Agrarian Development Act No. 46 of 2000 at the very outset delineates the

prime objective intended to be achieved by the legislature by enacting it in that

it recites that “An Act to provide for matters relating to landlords and tenant

cultivators of paddy lands, for the utilization of agricultural lands in

accordance with agricultural policies; for the establishment of agrarian

development councils, to provide for the establishment of a land bank; to

provide the establishment of agrarian tribunals, to provide for the repeal of the

agrarian services act. no. 58 of 1979. and for matters connected therewith or

incidental thereto.”

Preamble thereto, enacts that “whereas it has become necessary to set out a

national policy in relation to the rights of tenant cultivators" and the

restrictions to be imposed on persons using agricultural land for non-

agricultural purposes in order to ensure maximum utilization of agricultural

land for agricultural production”.

Part I of the Agrarian Development Act No. 46 of 2000 provides for the tenant

cultivator of paddy lands; Part IA provides for the rights of tenant cultivators of

paddy lands; Part II provides for the utilizing agricultural lands in accordance

with agricultural policies; and Part III provides for appointment and powers

CA/PHC/0028/2021

Page 9 of 13

and duties or the Commissioner General, Additional Commissioner General,

the Commissioners, the Deputy Commissioners, the Assistant Commissioners

and Agrarian Development Officers; Part IV provides for the establishment of

Agrarian Tribunals; Part IVA provides for Boards of Review; Part V provides for

institutional structure of farmers’ organizations; Part VI provides for Agrarian

Development Councils; Part VII provides for irrigation works and the

management of irrigation water; Part VIII provides for general provisions.

It was held in Mansoor and Another Vs. OIC Avissawella, Police and Another

(Supra) that, “It has to be noted that there is specific provision in the

Agricultural Lands Law and the Agrarian Services Act which gives a right to a

tenant as against the landlord and any other person to use and occupy the

paddy land and to secure restoration of possession if he is unlawfully evicted.

These provisions in the Agricultural Lands Law and the Agrarian Services Act

are in the nature of a special right and a remedy for the infringement of that

right. Therefore, I hold that the machinery under the Agricultural Lands Law

and the Agrarian Services Act is the only one available to a tenant cultivator of

paddy land to secure and vindicate his tenurial rights. The general procedure

obtaining in Part VII of the Primary Courts Procedure Act with regard to

disputes affecting land where a breach of the peace is threatened or likely, is

not applicable in such a situation.

See also; Loku Banda vs. Ukku Banda-1982(2) SLR 704

Upon a careful consideration of the scheme embodied in the Agrarian

Development Act No. 46 of 2000 in its totality, particularly, in conjunction with

its objectives and the preamble and the principle enunciated by Court in

Mansoor and Another Vs. OIC Avissawella, Police and Another (Supra) it

becomes abundantly, clear without any doubt that the machinery thereunder

is the one only available to a tenant cultivator of paddy land to secure and

vindicate his tenurial rights and in such a situation only, the Agrarian

CA/PHC/0028/2021

Page 10 of 13

Development Act of 46 of 2000 will oust the jurisdiction of a Magistrate vested

in him by Part VII of the Act.

Hence, nowhere in the decision in Mansoor and Another Vs. OIC Avissawella,

Police and Another (Supra) had it been laid down by this Court that not only a

dispute with regard to a tenurial right of a tenant cultivator but also any kind

of dispute with regard to the possession of a paddy land, is governed by the

provisions of the Agrarian Development Act No. 46 of 2000 and therefore, the

general procedure laid down in Part VII of the Act with regard to disputes

affecting land where a breach of the peace is threatened or likely, is not

applicable in such a situation.

In the result, I am of the view that the mere fact that the dispute that has

arisen between the parties is one with regard to the possession of a paddy land,

does not in any manner, oust the jurisdiction of a Magistrate vested in him by

Part VII by the provisions of the Agrarian Development Act of 46 of 2000 except

only when it relates to a dispute with regard to the tenurial rights of a tenant

cultivator.

Now, the pertinent question is; Was the dispute arisen between the

Appellants and the Respondents, a dispute with regard to the securing

and vindicating of the tenurial rights of the Appellants within the

meaning of Agrarian Development Act No. 46 of 2000? or else Was it a

dispute with regard to the possession of the land in dispute?

It may now, be examined.

As rightly, found by the learned Magistrate at page 5 of her order, the dispute

in the instant action being a dispute with regard to the possession of the land

in dispute within the meaning of section 68(1) of the Act and these findings of

the learned Magistrate had been fortified and well supported by the fact that

Yakalle Kankanamge Sumanasena-1st Party-Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant

(hereinafter called and referred to as the 1st Appellant) in his 1st complaint

CA/PHC/0028/2021

Page 11 of 13

made to Police on 16.04.2018 as well as Samarawickrama Liyanage Nalin

Randika-the 2nd Party-Respondent-Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter called

and referred to as the 2nd Party-1st Respondent) in his statement made to Police

on 22.04.2018 pursuant to the complaint so made by Yakalle Kankanamge

Sumanasena-the 1st Appellant as well as in their affidavits and counter

affidavits, had both made adverse and/or rival claim against each of them with

regard to the possession of the land in dispute and not with regard to any

dispute in relation to tenurial rights of the Appellants being tenant cultivator

and hence, the question as to the rights of the tenant cultivator did not in any

manner, arise before the learned Magistrate of Matara for her consideration

and therefore, the dispute was governed by the provisions of the Part VII of the

Act and not by the provisions of the Agrarian Development Act of 46 of 2000.

However, it is to be observed that the learned Magistrate who having even,

rightly, found at page 5 of her judgement that the dispute is one with regard to

the possession of the land in dispute, had nevertheless, erroneously, proceeded

by totally, misconstruing the ratio decidendi of the decision in Mansoor and

Another Vs. OIC Avissawella, Police and Another (Supra), to dismiss the

information filed before her by the Police under section 66(1)(a) of the Act on a

total misapprehension and/or total misconception that not only a dispute with

regard to a tenurial right of a tenant cultivator but also any kind of dispute

with regard to the possession of a paddy land, is governed by the provisions of

the Agrarian Development Act No. 46 of 2000 and therefore, the general

procedure laid down in Part VII of the Act with regard to disputes affecting land

where a breach of the peace is threatened or likely, is not applicable in such a

situation.

It is to be further observed that the learned High Court Judge of Matara too,

had proceeded to dismiss the application in revision filed by the Appellants

against the order of the learned Magistrate on the same line of reasoning as the

CA/PHC/0028/2021

Page 12 of 13

learned Magistrate did, thereby, gravely, misdirecting himself as to the correct

law applicable to the instant dispute between the parties.

I would therefore, hold that the learned Magistrate of Matara had gravely, erred

both in fact and law when she had proceeded to dismiss the information so

filed before her by Police under section 66(1)(a) of the Act on a total

misapprehension and/or on a total misconception of the law applicable to the

instant dispute between the parties as enumerated above.

Hence, I would, hold that the order of the learned Magistrate of Matara, cannot

in any manner, sustain both in fact and law and as such it, should not be

allowed to stand both in fact and law.

I would, therefore, proceed to set aside the Judgement of the learned

Magistrate of Matara dated 11.12.2018.

Hence, I would further, hold that the order of the learned High Court Judge of

Matara too, cannot in any manner, sustain both in fact and law and as such it

too, should not be allowed to stand both in fact and law.

I would, therefore, proceed to set aside the Order of the learned High Court

Judge of Matara dated 13.07.2021.

In the result, I would direct the learned Magistrate of Matara to hear and

determine as expeditiously, as possible, the instant action filed before her by

the Police on the strength of the material already, available on record, namely;

information filed by the Police together with the observations made by it, and

any other connected materials thereto, the 1st complaint made to Police by the

Appellants and the statement made thereto by the Respondents to the Police,

affidavits and counter affidavits filed by the respective parties before the Court

and the written submissions of the respective parties and any other material

having evidentiary value that may be available on record.

In the circumstances, I would allow the appeal however, without costs.

CA/PHC/0028/2021

Page 13 of 13

Registrar is directed to send the original case record to the Magistrate Court of

Matara in due course.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL