==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/69/2024

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979.

Court of Appeal Case No. Rathnayake Mudiyanselage Nimal

CA/HCC/ 0069/2024 Rathnayake

High Court of Puttalam

Case No. HC/74/2021 ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

COUNSEL : Shiral D.Wanniarachchi for the Appellant.

Suharshie Herath, DSG for the

Respondent.

CA/HCC/69/2024

2 | P a g e

ARGUED ON : 04/03/2026

DECIDED ON : 15/06/2026

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Appellant was indicted by the Attorney General for

following offences:

1. For committing an offence of Grave Sexual Abuse on Dissanayake

Mudiyanselage Suhanya Prabashini between the period of 01.07.2018

and 01.11.2018 an offence punishable under Section 365 B (2) (b) of

the Penal Code.

2. During the same time period, for committing an offence of Grave

Sexual Abuse on Dissanayake Mudiyanselage Suhanya Prabashini an

offence punishable under Section 365 B (2) (b) of the Penal Code.

The defence Counsel, before the start of the trial, raised a preliminary

objection with regard to the deficiency in the indictment. After the lengthy

submissions on the preliminary objection raised by both parties, the Learned

High Court Judge, discussing the legal position of presenting an indictment,

very correctly dismissed the preliminary objection and allowed the

prosecution to amend the indictment.

CA/HCC/69/2024

3 | P a g e

The trial commenced on 18/10/2022. After leading all necessary witnesses,

the prosecution closed the case. The Learned High Court Judge had called

for the defence and the Appellant opted to make a statement from the dock.

The Learned High Court Judge after considering the evidence presented by

both parties, convicted the Appellant for the 2nd Count and sentenced the

Appellant to 16 years of rigorous imprisonment and imposed a fine of

Rs.20000/- subject to a default sentence of 06 months simple imprisonment.

In addition, a compensation of Rs.200,000/- was ordered with a default

sentence of 01-year simple imprisonment.

Further, the Appellant was acquitted from the 1st Count by the Court.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and the sentence, the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the Appellant

has given consent to argue this matter in his absence. During the trial he

was connected via the zoom platform from the prison.

Although on perusal of the Written Submissions of the Appellant, it appears

no specific grounds of appeal had been urged, at the hearing the following

Grounds of Appeal were raised on behalf of the Appellant.

1. The evidence given by the victim is contradictory.

2. The Learned High Court Judge has delivered the judgment purely on

hearsay evidence.

The Facts of this case albeit briefly are as follows:

PW1, the victim of this case, was about 11 years old when she had undergone

this bitter ordeal. The Appellant, is well known to her as her family as he is

a neighbour of the victim. The Appellant is a married person with children.

At the time of committing the offence, the Appellant was attached to the Sri

Lanka Army. On the day of the offence, on the request of her brother, the

victim had gone to the Appellant’s house to borrow the air pump. At that

CA/HCC/69/2024

4 | P a g e

time, the Appellant, raising the volume of the audio player which was on at

that time, had pushed the victim on the bed and committed the offence as

described in the 2nd charge. Due to fear of the Appellant, she did not divulge

this incident to her parents. But she had told the incident to her class

teacher after two weeks of the incident fearing that the Appellant would

commit the offence again on her.

PW7, the JMO who examined the victim stated that the victim is free from

vaginal penetration. But he had not excluded intercrural or inter labial

penetration.

PW2, the mother of the victim testified that she came to know about the

incident from school and thereafter made a statement to the police.

PW7, JMO who examined the victim on 03. 11. 2018 had opined that even

though no injuries were observed on the victim’s body he could not exclude

an intra-crural act being committed on the victim.

PW4, the class teacher of the victim had confirmed that the victim had told

her about the incident that she underwent.

PW3, the brother of the victim confirmed that he sent his sister to borrow

the air pump from the Appellant on that day. Further, he had come to know

the incident from the school teacher.

According to PW6, the police officer who had conducted the investigation

stated that the investigation was commenced upon receiving a complaint

from the victim who had lodged her complaint along with her mother.

Thereafter, he had recorded the statement from the victim and arrested the

Appellant.

The Appellant in his dock statement, denied that he committed the offence

on the victim. He had further said that the victim had told her teachers that

her mother was having an affair with the Appellant and both the mother and

father usually fight over this problem.

CA/HCC/69/2024

5 | P a g e

In the first ground of Appeal the Appellant contends whether the Learned

High Court Judge considered the credibility of the evidence of the victim

properly as her evidence is contradictory.

In cases such as this, the testimonial trustworthiness, credibility and mainly

the probability of PW1 must be ascertained with proper care and caution by

the Trial Judge. In order to accept the evidence given by a child witness, the

Learned Trial Judge must be satisfied on such a child witness’s competence

and credibility after proper assessment. Therefore, I consider it extremely

relevant as per the appeal grounds of this case, that the following authorities

derived from other jurisdictions are discussed.

It was recognized in England as early as 1778 that children could be

competent witnesses in criminal trials.

In R v. Brasier168 Eng. Rep.202 [1779] the court held:

“…….that an infant, though underage of seven years, may be sworn in

a criminal prosecution, provided such infant appears, on strict

examination by the Court, to possess a sufficient knowledge of the

nature and consequences of an oath… for there is no precise or fixed

rule as to the time within which infants are excluded from giving

evidence; but their admissibility depends upon the sense and reason

they entertain of the danger and impiety of falsehood, which is to be

collected from their answers to questions propounded to them by the

Court; but if they are found incompetent to take oath, their testimony

cannot be received ….”.

CA/HCC/69/2024

6 | P a g e

In Ratansinh Dalsukhbhai Nayak v. State of Gujarat [2004] 1 SCC 64 the

court held that:

“The decision on the question whether the child witness has sufficient

intelligence primarily rests with the trial Judge who notices his manners,

his apparent possession or lack of intelligence, and said Judge may

resort to any examination which will tend to disclose his capacity and

intelligence as well as his understanding of the obligation of an oath.

The decision of the trial court may, however, be disturbed by the higher

Court if from what is preserved in the records, it is clear his conclusion

was erroneous. This precaution is necessary because child witnesses

are amenable to tutoring and often live in a world of make beliefs.

Though it is an established principle that child witnesses are dangerous

witnesses as they are pliable and liable to be influenced easily, shaked

and moulded, but it is also an accepted norm that if after careful scrutiny

of their evidence the Court comes to the conclusion that there is an

impress of truth in it, there is no obstacle in the way of accepting the

evidence of a child witness”.

In Ranjeet Kumar Ram v. State of Bihar [2015] SCC Online SC 500 the

court held that:

“Evidence of the child witness and its credibility would depend upon the

circumstances of each case. Only precaution which the court has to bear

in mind while assessing the evidence of a child witness is that the

witness must be a reliable one”.

CA/HCC/69/2024

7 | P a g e

E.R.S.R Coomaraswamy in his “Law of Evidence” Volume 2 Book 2 at page

658 has stated referring to child witness;

“There is no requirement in English law, that the sworn evidence of a

child witness needs to be corroborated as a matter of law. But the jury

should be warned, not to look for corroboration, but of the risks involved

in acting on the sole evidence of young girls and boys, though they may

do so if convinced of the truth of such evidence…….This requirement is

based on the susceptibility of children to the influence of others and to

the surrender to their imaginations”.

At page 659 it states “As regards the sworn testimony of children, there

is no requirement as in England to warn of the risk involved in acting on

their sole testimony, though it may desirable to issue such a warning,

though the failure to do so will generally not affect the conviction”.

The victim was 15 years old when she gave evidence before the court. The

Learned High Court Judge in her judgment has very correctly and

comprehensively considered the evidence given by the victim.

In an offence of this nature, the presence of 3rd person would be very rare,

as the perpetrator would usually commit the sexual act in isolation. In this

case too the Appellant had used the same modus operandi ensuring no 3rd

person was present at the time he committed the offence. Therefore, it is a

futile argument that the prosecution should have called corroborating

evidence.

In Inoka Gallage v Kamal Addararachchi [2002] 1 SLR 307 the court held

that:

“Corroboration is not a sine qua non for a conviction in a rape case. As a

general rule there is no reason to insist on corroboration”. It is only a rule

CA/HCC/69/2024

8 | P a g e

of prudence. If the evidence of the victim does not suffer from basic infirmity

and the probability factors does not render it unworthy of credence”.

In the case of Premasiri v Attorney General (2006) 3 Sri L R. 106, it was

held:

“There is no rule that there must be corroboration in every case, before a

conviction can be allowed to stand. It is well settled law that a conviction

for the offence of rape can be based on the sole testimony of the

prosecutrix, if it is reliable, unimpeachable and there is no infirmity;

If evidence of the prosecutrix inspires confidence, it must be relied upon

without seeking corroboration of her statement in material particulars. The

testimony of the prosecutrix must be appreciated in the background of the

entire case and the trial court must be alive to its responsibility and be

sensitive while dealing with cases involving sexual molestation;

The rule is not that corroboration is essential before there can be a

conviction in a case of rape but the necessity of corroboration as a matter

of prudence except w here the circumstances make it unsafe to dispense

with it, must be present to the mind of the judge.”

In the case of Sunil And Another v The Attorney-General [1986] 1 SLR

230 it was held:

“Corroboration is only required or afforded if the witness requiring

corroboration is otherwise credible. If the evidence of the witness requiring

corroboration is not credible his testimony should be rejected and the

accused acquitted. Seeking corroboration of a witness' evidence should not

be used as a process of inducing belief in such evidence where such

evidence is not credible. It is very dangerous to act on the uncorroborated

testimony of a woman victim of a sex offence but if her evidence is

CA/HCC/69/2024

9 | P a g e

convincing such evidence could be acted on even in the absence of

corroboration.”

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant argued that the prosecution had

placed hearsay evidence to support their claim. However, PW3, the brother

of the victim quite corroborated the evidence of the victim that she went to

borrow the air pump from the Appellant. The evidence given by PW4 is clearly

consistent with the evidence given by the victim. Therefore, it is incorrect to

say that the prosecution had placed hearsay evidence in this case.

The Learned High Court Judge had considered the evidence of the victim and

other witnesses fairly and squarely by analysing their evidence to decide this

case. Hence, no substantial rights of the Appellant had been prejudiced.

Therefore, the grounds raised have no merit. It is noteworthy to mention that

the evidence given by the victim did not suffer any contradiction or omission.

The Learned High Court Judge had properly considered the evidence

presented by the Appellant in her judgement. Although the Appellant gave a

lengthy dock statement, the stance taken in his dock statement was not put

to the relevant witnesses. Hence, it is very clear, what had come out in his

dock statement is an afterthought.

In this case, the victim had given firm evidence as to the atrocities committed

on her by the Appellant. Even though the incident had happened when the

victim was at a tender age, she had given evidence without any

contradictions or omissions.

Considering the evidence led in this case, I conclude that this is not an

appropriate case in which to interfere with the judgement delivered by the

Learned High Court Judge on 15/02/2024 against the Appellant.

In this case and with the existence of other circumstances, I think imposing

a 16-year sentence is excessive. As such, I set aside the 16 years rigorous

imprisonment imposed on the second count and replace it with 11 years

rigorous imprisonment.

CA/HCC/69/2024

10 | P a g e

The fine, compensation and default sentence imposed will remain same. I

further order the sentence imposed to be operative from the date of

conviction namely 15/02/2024.

I therefore, dismiss the appeal subject to the above variation in the sentence.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgment to the High

Court of Puttalam along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL