I I I

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRAIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

In the matter of an application for reVISIOn

under Article 138 of The Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Mahahennadige J ayasena,

Channel 3, Siyambalagaswita,

Court of Appeal case no. CAIPH CII 03/20 11

Ruhunu Ridiyagama, Ambalanthoata.

Aggriened Party Petitioner Appellant

Vs.

H.C.Hambanthota case no. 22/2009

1. Resident Priject Manager,

Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka,

Walawa Special Area, Ambilipitiya.

Before

Counsel

Applicant 1 st Respondent Respondent.

2. Liyana Arachchige Ariyasena,

Mahaara, gal wewa, Beragama,

Ambalanthota.

Respondent Respondent.

: H.C.J.Madawala J.

: L.T.B. Dehideniya J.

: Nayomi Kahawita for the Applicant 1 st Respondent

Respondent.

: The aggrieved Party Petitioner Appellant is absent and

unrepresented.

Argued on : 30.06.2016

Decided on : 30.11.2016

1 i 2

L.T.B. Dehideniya J.

This is an appeal from High Court of Hambanthota.

The Applicant 1 st Respondent Respondent the Resident Project

Manager of Sri Lanka Mahaweli Authority Walawa special area

(hereinafter called and referred as to the 1st Respondent) instituted an

action under provisions of the State Land (Recovery of Possession) Act

seeking an eviction order against the 2nd Respondent Respondent Liyana

Arachchige Ariyasena (hereinafter called and referred as to the 2nd

Respondent). After considering the objections tendered by the 2nd

Respondent, the learned Magistrate issued the order of eviction.

The Aggrieved Party Petitioner Appellant Mahahennadige

Jayasena (hereinafter called and referred as to the Appellant) not being a

party to the application made to the Magistrate Court by the 1st

Respondent, filed a revision application in the High Court of

Hambanthota as an aggrieved party to revise the order of the learned

Magistrate. The learned High Court Judge after inquiry dismissed the

application. This appeal is from the said order.

A party aggrieved by a decision of the Court can make an

application to Court to revise the impugned order if he can establish the

requirements that are necessary to invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of

the Court. The power of revision is an extraordinary jurisdiction of the

Court exercise on the discretion of the Court. it was held in the case of

Sunil Chandra Kumara v. Veloo [2001] 3 Sri L R 91 that;

"Revision is a discretionary remedy, it is not available as of

right. This power that flows from Art. 138 is exercised by the Court

of Appeal, on application made by a party aggrieved or ex mero

motu, this power is available even where there is no right of

appeal.

I

3

The original application was filed under State Land (Recovery of

Possession) Act. The scope of the inquiry in an application for ejectment

under section 5 is defined in the section 9 of the Act. The inquiry is

limited to establish that the possessor or the occupier is in possession or

occupation on the authority of a valid permit or a written authority issued

under any law.

In the present case the Appellant submits that he is in possession of

the land in dispute. He admits that this is a State land because he says that

he has been selected to issue a permit to a state land and further he says

that the 15t Respondent taking steps to give this land to a their person with

ulterior motives. That means that the Appellant indirectly admits that this

is a State land. His version is that he possessed this land for a long time.

But he does not submit that he has a permit to this land in dispute. If he

does not have a permit, he cannot establish any right to possess this State

land. The appellant cannot be categorized as a person aggrieved because

he has not established any right to possess the land in dispute. The

discretion of Court does not favour the Appellant.

The Appellant raised an argument that the 15t Respondent is not a

competent authority under the State land (Recovery of Possession) Act.

The section 23 of the Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka Act No. 23 of

1979 amended by Act No. 59 of 1993 endorses that the State Land

(Recovery of Possession) Act applies to special areas and employee of

the Authority as is authorized in that behalf by the Authority can exercise

the powers under the Act. The subsection (1) and (3) of section 23 reads

thus;

22. (1) The written laws for the time being specified in

Schedule B hereto shall have effect in every Special Area subject to

the modification that it shall be lawful for the Authority to exercise

and discharge in such area any of the powers or functions vested

I

II!f t! if~ I

4

by any such written law in any authority, officer or person in like

manner as though the reference in any such written law to the

authority, officer or person empowered to exercise or discharge

such powers or functions included a reference to the Authority.

(2) .....

(3) Any power or function which the Authority is authorized

by subsection (1) to exercise or discharge, may be exercised or

discharged on behalf of the Authority by any director of the

Authority or by any employee of the Authority as is authorized in

that behalf by the Authority.

The schedule 'B' includes the State Land (Recovery of Possession)

Act. The 1 st Respondent states that he has been authorized to act under

the said Act. (Paragraph 10 ( b) of the objection of the 1 st Respondent

dated 12.01.2010.) In his application for ejectment he states that he is the

competent authority. Under these circumstances, the argument that the 1st

Respondent is not the competent authority, fails.

I see no reasons to interfere with the findings of the learned High

Court Judge.

The appeal is dismissed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

H.C.J.Madawala. J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

!I

II

fE

~

r

tII