IN THE COURT OF APPEAS OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

In the matter of an application made under and in terms of Article 138 of the Constitution of the Democratic Republic of Sri Lanka seeking to revise and set aside the Order made in H C Panadura Case No. HC 2958/2013 on 21 st July 2014.

CA Application No. CA (PHC) APN

119/2014 Hon. The Attorney General, HC Panadura Case No. 2958/2013 Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

Complainant

Vs.

1. Aighandi Sanath Rumesh De Silva 2. Disanayade Mudiyanselage Aranda Dasanayake 3. Juwan Jemislage Suresh Priyantha

Fernando

Accused

AND

Meril Karunasagara, No. 352/1, Mabima, Heiyanthuduwa.

Claimant Vs.

Hon. The Attorney General, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

Respondent

1

\

1

AND NOW BETWEEN Meril Karunasagara, No. 35211, Mabima, Heiyanthuduwa.

Claimant - Petitioner Vs. Hon. The Attorney General, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

Respondent - Respondent

Before : W.M.M.Malinie Gunarathne, J

: P.R.Walgama, J

Counsel : RaniI Samarasuriya with Manjula Ranasinghe for the

claimant - Respondent.

: Himali Jayanetti s.c for the Respondent.

Argued on : 25.05.2015 Decided on: 18.12.2015

CASE-NO- CA (PHC)-119/2014- JUDGMENT- 18.12.2015

P.R.Walgama, J

The instant appeal concerns the validity of the order of the

Learned High Court Judge dated 21 st July 2014, by which order the

vehicle belongs to the Claimant- Petitioner was confiscated.

The Claimant- Petitioner was the Registered owner of the vehicle

bearing No. 301-3818. The three Accused stated In the Petition was

indicted for having used the said vehicle for the transportation of

750 grams of Cannabis, and there by committing an offence under

2

the provIsIOns of the Poison, Opium and Dangerous Drugs Act, No.

13 of 1984, in the case No. HC 2958/2013 in the High Court of

Panadura.

The said Accused pleaded guilty to the said charge, and the

Learned High Court Judge has imposed the sentence accordingly.

Pursuant to the afore said the Learned High Court Judge has fixed

the case for inquiry regarding the confiscation of the said vehicle.

Before the said mqUIry the High Court has issued notices to the

Absolute owner and the Registered owner of the said vehicle, and

the proceedings of 22.10. 2013 reveals that the Absolute owner will

have no claim as the Registered owner has paid the entire amount

due on the above vehicle to the Absolute owner.

The Learned High Court Judge by his order dated 21 5t July 2014

has confiscated the above vehicle. Being aggrieved by the said order

the Claimant- Petitioner made the instant application to this Court

seeking to set aside the said order of the High Court Judge.

In the said petition the Petitioner has unspooled the following;

That the Petitioner is an employee at the Ports Authority, and he

purchased the above vehicle on a Hire Purchase Agreement with

the Finance Company PLC. After the purchase of the said vehicle

the Petitioner has given the vehicle to Buddhi Cabs for hire. The

said Company was running a hiring service, and one Pradeep was

managing the said service.

It is specifically stated that the Petitioner after being satisfied that

the said servIce in not involve in any illegal activity had entered

into the Agreement with Buddhi Cabs which is marked as A2.

3

\

JfI

~

\

I i

i I

\

Pursuant to the afore said, the Petitioner has gIven the said vehicle

on rent to Buddhi Cabs from 11 th September 2009 to 11 th May

2010. It IS also stated that monthly rental of Rs. 35,0001 was paid

for the Month of September by cheque dated 2~th Uctober 2UUY,

which was dishonoured.

After collecting the said cheque on 28th October 2009, the Petitioner

on 31 st October 2009, learnt that the vehicle has been taken in to

custody by the police for illegal transportation of Cannabis, which is

an offence contrary to Section 54 of the Poison, Opium and

Dangerous drugs Act.

The Petitioner further states that he took all the necessary

precautions to ensure that the said vehicle would not be used for

any illegal activity.

The Petitioner has adverted to the fact that he never gave the

vehicle on hire to the 1 st Accused and further more the owner of

Buddhi Cabs had gone missing, and his whereabouts are not known.

Therefore it IS the position of the Petitioner that he should not be

held liable for the offence committed by the accused, for

transporting the Cannabis. In the above inquiry the wife of the wife

of the owner of Buddhi cabs had adduced evidence to the effect that

the he had left the family and was unable to say about the

business transaction he had with third party.

Therefore it is categorically stated by the Petitioner, that he has

taken necessary precautions to prevent the use of the said vehicle

for any illegal activity.

4

~ ,

\

t

It is also pertinent to note the relevant Section deals with the

forfeiture of the vehicle used in the commission of any offence

under the Poison, Opium and Dangerous Drugs Act No.13 of 1984.

For better appreciation of the relevant Section 79 is reproduced

herein below;

(1 )"where any person IS convicted of an offence against this

ordinance or any regulation made there under, the Court shall order

that all or any articles In respect of which the offence was

committed and any boat, vessel, vehicle, aircraft, or airborne craft or

equipment which has been used for the conveyance of such article

shall, by reason of such conviction, be forfeited to the State."

(2) Any property forfeited to the state under subsection (1) shall

(a) if no appeal preferred to the Court of Appeal against the

relevant conviction, vest absolutely in the state with effect from in

the State with effect from the date on which the period prescribed

for preferring an appeal against such conviction eXpIres;

(b) if an appeal has been preferred to the Court of Appeal against

the relevant conviction, vest absolutely in the State with effect from

the date on which such conviction is affirmed on appeal.

In this subsection "relevant conviction" means the conviction In

consequence of which any property is forfeited to the State under

subsection( (1).

The process of confiscation of a vehicle involved In the

commission of an offence particularly under Forest Ordinance,

Exercise Ordinance, Cruelty to the Animals Act and Poison, Opium

and Dangerous Act, it IS deemed that the same principle IS

5

I

\

f

J

applicable III respect of a third party to vit. The Registered owner

who did not have any involvement III the commISSIOn of the

offence.

The cardinal principle distilled in respect of the above proposition

is in the case of MANAWADU .VS. ATTORNEY GENERAL- (1987)

2 SLR-30 which has stated thus;

"If the owner of the lorry who IS not a party to the case IS

entitled to be heard on the of forfeiture of the lorry. If he satisfies

the Court, that the accused committed the offence without his

knowledge or participation, his lorry will not be liable to forfeiture"

The said salutary principle was also observed III the case of

ORINTIAL FINANCE SERVICES CORPORATION LIMITED .VS.

RANGE FOREST OFFICER AND ANOTHER- (2011) 51 SLR- 86-

which was held thus;

"it is therefore seen under the existing law a vehicle transporting

timber cannot be confiscated if the owner of the vehicle on a

balance of probability establishes one of the follO'.ving th,no-,,' .................. ,e,IJ,

(1). That he has taken all precautions to prevent the use of the

vehicle for the commission of the offence,

(2). That the vehicle has been used for the commISSIOn of the

offence without his knowledge.

Hence in the above setting it IS abundantly clear that the Petitioner

has rent the afore said vehicle to a cab service,

Agreement. It is noted in the said Agreement it

stated that the said vehicle should not be used

purpose. Therefore it is apparent that the petitioner

on

IS

for

has

a written

specifically

an illegal

taken all

6

\

precautions to avoid any offence been committed by USIng the said

vehicle.

In the said back drop this Court is of the VIew that the Petitioner

has proved his non involvement In the commISSIOn of the said

offence on a balance of probability, to have the said vehicle

released from confiscation.

Accordingly we are inclined to release the said vehicle, and set

aside the order of the Learned High Court Judge dated 21 st July

2014, made in the case bearing No. HC 2958/2013 In the High

Court of Panadura.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

W.M.M.Malinie Gunarathne, J

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

7

I

f

t