==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal in terms of

Section 331(1) of the Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

Complainant

CA HCC 188/25 Vs.

High Court of Balapitiya

Case No. HCB 2095/2017 Thempalan Nishantha alias Manju alias

Theppalani Nishantha

MC- Elpitiya

Case No. 85921 Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Thempalan Nishantha alias Manju alias

Theppalani Nishantha

Accused-Appellant

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondent

2

Before: B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

Amal Ranaraja, J.

Counsel: Thanuka Nandasiri for the Accused-Appellant.

Wasantha Perera, D.S.G., for the Respondent.

Argued on: 26.03.2026

Judgment on: 06.05.2026

Judgment

Amal Ranaraja. J,

1. The accused-appellant (hereinafter referred to as appellant) has been

indicted in the high court of Balapitiya in High Court Case No. HCB

2095/17.

2. The charges in the indictment are as follows;

01. That on or about 26th of October, 2014 at Elpitiya, within the

jurisdiction of this Court, you did kidnap Wijekumar Abisani,

a minor under 16 years of age, from the lawful guardianship

of Arumugam Muththukumari; and that you have thereby

committed an offence punishable under Section 354 of the

Penal Code.

02. That in the time, place, and course of action of the above first

charge, you did commit the offence of rape on Wijekumar

Abisani, a minor under 16 years of age; and that you have

3

thereby committed an offence punishable under Section 364

(2)(e) of the Penal Code as amended by the Penal Code

Amendment Act No. 22 of 1995.

03. That on a date between the 26th of October 2013 and the 25th

of October 2014, within the jurisdiction of this Court, in

Elpitiya, and at a time other than that of the second charge

above, you have committed the offence of rape on one

Wijekumar Abisani, a minor under 16 years of age; and that

you have thereby committed an offence punishable under

Section 364 (2)(e) of the Penal Code as amended by the Penal

Code Amendment Act No. 22 of 1995.

04. That on a date between the 26th of October 2013 and the 25th

of October 2014, within the jurisdiction of this Court, in

Elpitiya, and at a time other than that of the second and third

charges above, you have committed the offence of rape on one

Wijekumar Abisani, a minor under 16 years of age, and that

you have thereby committed an offence punishable under

Section 364 (2)(e) of the Penal Code as amended by the Penal

Code Amendment Act No. 22 of 1995.

3. At the conclusion of the trial the appellant has been convicted of the

first and third charges referred to above and acquitted of the others.

The learned High Court Judge had thereafter proceeded to sentence the

appellant as follows;

Charge 01

To a term of 1 year rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs.

3000.00 with a term of three months simple imprisonment in

default of the payment of the fine.

4

Charge 03

To a term of 10 years rigorous imprisonment and a fine of

Rs.10,000.00 with a term of 1 year rigorous imprisonment in

default of the payment of the fine.

The appellant has also been ordered to pay a sum of

Rs.300,000.00 as compensation to PW01 with a sentence of 2

years rigorous imprisonment in default of the payment of

compensation. Also, the learned High Court Judge has directed

that the terms of imprisonment shall run concurrently.

4. Being aggrieved by the conviction, the disputed judgement and the

sentencing order the appellant has preferred the instant appeal to this

Court.

5. When the matter was taken up for argument, the learned Counsel for

the appellant informed Court that he has obtained instructions to limit

the grounds of appeal to the following;

i. That the sentence is excessive therefore, could the learned High

Court Judge have applied the principles laid down in SC

Reference 3/2008.

6. The learned Counsel for the appellant has contended that the sentence

of 10 years rigorous imprisonment imposed in respect of the third

charge was a mandatory sentence imposed by statute. Additionally, he

has contended that the following mitigatory circumstances be taken

into consideration and a variation of the sentence be made in favour of

the appellant.

7. The following occurrences have been set out by the learned counsel for

the appellant in support of his contention; that the appellant was just

5

16 years and a few months old, a minor, when the alleged offences

occurred. A significant period, 12 years, have elapsed since then, during

which the prospect of criminal proceedings has cast a continual shadow

over the life of the appellant. The appellant’s limited education has left

him ill equipped to navigate his life, and the absence of his mother, who

has been compelled to seek employment overseas has deprived the

appellant of crucial parental guidance. Moreover, the appellant’s

decision not to challenge the conviction is a clear indication of remorse

and accountability. Taken together, these factors call for a

compassionate assessment of the sentence.

8. The learned Deputy Solicitor General has raised no objection to the

mitigating factors put forward nevertheless, he has maintained that the

Court should impose a sentence that is both proportionate to the gravity

of the offences and consistent with established sentencing principles.

9. To begin with, it is reasonable to consider the sentences prescribed by

law for the offences stated in the first and third charges set out in the

indictment;

354. Whoever kidnaps any person from Sri Lanka or from lawful

guardianship shall be punished with imprisonment of either

description for a term which may extend to seven years, and

shall also be liable to fine.

364.(2) Whoever-

(e) commits rape on a woman under eighteen years

of age;

shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term not less

than ten years and not exceeding twenty years and with fine and

shall in addition be ordered to pay compensation of an amount

determined by court to the person in respect of whom the offence

was committed for the injuries caused to such person;

6

10. Accordingly, a mandatory sentence has been prescribed in respect of

those convicted of committing the offence set out in the third charge in

the indictment.

11. Mandatory sentences represent a significant shift in the criminal justice

system, establishing fixed penalties for certain offences regardless of

the individual circumstances, whereby Judges are bound to impose

pre-determined sentences regardless of the specifics of the case.

12. However, the Supreme Court of Sri Lanka in SC Reference No. 3/2008,

has determined that a trial Judge’s discretion to reach a conclusion as

regards to a sentence is not inhibited or controlled by a mandatory

sentence imposed by a statute.

13. In SC Reference No.03/2008, the Supreme Court has held,

“In above circumstances, we hold that the minimum mandatory

sentence in Section 364(2)(e) is in conflict with Article 4(c), 11 and

12(1) of the Constitution and that the High Court is not inhibited from

imposing a sentence that it deems appropriate in the exercise of its

judicial discretion notwithstanding the minimum mandatory sentence”

14. In Warnakulasooriya Mudiyanselage Jayanth Warnasuriya vs. Attorney

General CA/HCC/169/2022, decided on 09.12.2024, Kulathunga, J,

discussing the connotations of the judgement in SC Reference 03/2008

has stated as follows;

“Certainly, in view of SC Reference 3/2008 though a trial Judge is

neither shackled nor inhibited by the said minimum mandatory

sentence, is required to have regard to the fact that a minimum

mandatory sentence is so fixed. A court now certainly has the discretion

to impose a sentence of imprisonment less than the prescribed

7

minimum. However, I am of the view that the judge should have and

there should be some adequate reason/s to go below the said minimum

sentence. The court should mention such reasons in the judgement

when awarding a sentence less than the prescribed minimum. In order

to exercise the discretion to impose a sentence less than the minimum

prescribed there should be and the court has to record such reason/s

which is adequate. This to my mind should necessarily be some tangible

and good reason which is not fanciful. Thus, to my mind it is necessary

and prudent to assign and give the reason if and when a Judge decides

to impose a sentence below the minimum mandatory fixed by law.”

15. Rape is a heinous crime that violates an individual’s bodily integrity and

inflicts deep, long-lasting psychological wounds. Survivors often

experience trauma related conditions, such as depression, anxiety and

difficulties with trust, which can persist for years or even decades after

the assault. The impact extends beyond the victim, affecting families,

workplaces and entire communities, as they struggle to support those

whose lives have been shattered. Because of its profound physical, and

emotional consequences, rape demands a strong multifaceted legal

response.

16. The seriousness of the offence necessitates a robust legal response that

serves not only to punish the offender but also to deter potential future

offences. Deterrent punishment aims to convey a strong societal

message that such behaviour will not be tolerated thereby, fostering a

sense of safety and justice.

17. In determining the appropriate punishment, the Court is required to

consider the same from the point of view of the convict as well as the

public.

8

In Attorney General vs. H.N. de Silva 57 NLR 121, Basnayake, ACJ,

explaining the matters that should be taken into consideration in

determining a sentence that should be passed on a convict has stated

as follows;

“In assessing the punishment that should be passed on an offender, a

Judge should consider the matter of sentence both from the point of

view of the public and the offender, Judges are too often prone to look

at the question only from the angle of the offender. A Judge should, in

determining the proper sentence, first consider the gravity of the

offence as it appears from the nature of the act itself and should have

regard to the punishment provided in the Penal Code or other statute

under which the offender is charged. He should also regard the effect of

the punishment as a deterrent and consider to what extent it will be

effective. If the offender held a position of trust or belonged to a service

which enjoys the public confidence that must be taken into account in

assessing the punishment. The incident of crimes of the nature of which

the offender has been found to be guilty and the difficulty of detection

are also matters which should receive due consideration. The

reformation of the criminal, though no doubt an important

consideration is subordinate to the others I have mentioned. Where the

public interest or the welfare of the State (which are synonymous)

outweighs the previous good character antecedents and age of the

offender, public interest must prevail.”

18. In determining the sentence, on the third charge, the learned High

Court Judge has carefully considered all relevant factors, including the

appellant’s status as a minor at the time of the offence. Exercising the

discretion available under the statute, the learned High Court Judge

has imposed the statutory minimum term of ten years imprisonment

rather than a sentence within the higher range of ten to twenty years.

9

Further, the learned High Court Judge has not departed below the

prescribed minimum hence, was not required to give further reasons for

the sentence. In these circumstances, the term imposed on the

appellant cannot be regarded as excessive, it is proportionate to the

seriousness of the third offence for which the appellant stands

convicted together with the first.

19. In those circumstances I am not inclined to interfere with the

conviction, disputed judgement and the sentencing order and proceed

to affirm the same.

20. I dismiss the appeal and make no order regarding costs

Appeal dismissed

21. The Registrar of this Court is directed to send a copy of this judgement

to the High Court in Balapitiya for compliance.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

B. Sasi Mahendran, J. I agree

Judge of the Court of Appeal