==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 9

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal under and in terms of Article 138 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka read along with the provisions in the High Court of Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No 19 of 1990.

CA-PHC-38-22

HC of Rathnapura Case No : HCR-RA-21-19

MC of Kalawana Case No:15071

Officer-in Charge,

Police Station,

Kalawana.

Complainant

Vs.

Kalaha Gamage Priyantha Nandanapala,

No. 105 B/1,

Rambuka,

Kalawana.

Accused

J.M. Manusha Nirmal Muhandiram,

No. 97/3,

Page 2 of 9

Thanabela, Rambuka,

Kalawana.

Registered Owner Of The Vehicle

AND

J.M. Manusha Nirmal Muhandiram,

No. 97/3,

Thanabela, Rambuka, Kalawana.

Registered Owner-Vehicle - Petitioner

Vs. Officer-in Charge

Police Station,

Kalawana.

Complainant- Respondent

Kalahe Gamage Priyantha Nandanapala,

No. 105 B/1, Rambuka,

Kalawana.

Accused- Respondent

Honorable Attorney General, Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

Page 3 of 9

Respondent

And Now Between

J.M. Manusha Nirmal Muhandiram,

No. 97/3,

Thanabela, Rambuka, Kalawana.

Registered Owner Of The Vehicle-Petitioner-Appellant

Vs. Officer-in Charge,

Police Station,

Kalawana.

Complainant- Respondent-Respondent

Kalahe Gamage Priyantha Nandanapala,

No. 105 B/1, Rambuka,

Kalawana.

Accused- Respondent-Respondent

Honorable Attorney General, Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondent-Respondent

Page 4 of 9

Before: B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

Amal Ranaraja, J

Counsel : Anushka Rajapakse with Apeksha Karunarathne for the Appellant

Oswald Perera, SC for the Respondent

Written

Submissions 13.10.2025 (by the Respondent-Respondents)

On : 02.10.2025 (by the Petitioner- Appellant)

Argument On: 13.10.2025

Judgment On: 14.11.2025

JUDGMENT

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

The Registered Owner -Claimant- Petitioner-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

“Appellant”) instituted this appeal against the order of the Learned High Court Judge of the

Provincial High Court of Sabaragamuwa Province holden in Ratnapura in case No. 21/2019

dated 28.10.2021 where the Learned High Court Judge affirmed the order of the Learned

Magistrate of Kalawana bearing No. 15071 dated 06.02.2019 where the Learned Magistrate

has confiscated a threeweeler bearing No. SG AAK 2006 consequent to an inquiry.

The accused, Kalaha Gamage Priyantha Nandanapala, was found guilty of the offence of

transporting illicit liquor in violation of Section 47(1) of the Excise Ordinance on his own plea.

Following the conviction, the Learned Magistrate proceeded to conduct an inquiry under

Section 54(2) of the Excise Ordinance in respect of the vehicle that had been seized for its

involvement in the unlawful transportation of illicit liquor, in contravention of the Excise

Ordinance.

Page 5 of 9

The Appellant, in their capacity as the registered owner of the vehicle, submitted evidence

seeking its release pursuant to Section 54(2) of the Excise Ordinance. In response, the Learned

Magistrate, exercising authority under Section 40(1)(a) of the Forest Ordinance, granted the

owner an opportunity to show cause as to why the three-wheeler should not be subject to

confiscation.

The Learned Magistrate held that, in circumstances of this nature, it is incumbent upon the

owner of the vehicle to satisfy the Court that all reasonable precautions were taken to prevent

its use in the commission of the offence. Upon consideration of the evidence presented, the

Magistrate ordered the confiscation of the vehicle bearing registration number SG AAK 2006

on 06.02.2019.

Aggrieved by the aforementioned order, the Appellant proceeded to file a revision application

before the High Court of Ratnapura. It is noteworthy that the vehicle in question was found

transporting illicit drugs, constituting an offence under the Excise Ordinance. In this context,

it is pertinent to refer to Section 54(2) of the Excise Ordinance, which provides the legal

framework for the confiscation of vehicles involved in such offences.

“54(2) Any excisable article lawfully imported, transported, manufactured, had in

possession, or sold along with, or in addition to any excisable article liable to

confiscation under this section, and the receptacles, packages, and coverings in which

any such excisable article, materials, still, utensil, implement, or apparatus as

aforesaid is found, and the other contents, if any, of the receptacles or packages in

which the same is found, and the animals, carts, vessels, or other conveyance used in

carrying the same, shall likewise be liable to confiscation.” (Emphasis added)

The above section was considered in Sinnetamby v. Ramalingam, 26 NLR 371 at page 373,

Sohneider, J held that;

“For the purpose of deciding this appeal, it is necessary to consider the position of the

owner of any of the things which are mentioned in section 51 as liable to confiscation

in those cases, where the owner himself is not convicted of any offence. Sections 51 and

52 contain no express provision by which the owner could be touched with notice before

an order of confiscation is made. In the special case contemplated in section 52 (2), it

is provided that any person claiming to be owner is to be heard. Our Excise Ordinance

was borrowed from the Bengal Excise and Licencing Act (VII. B. C. of 1878). Mr.

Page 6 of 9

Perera who appeared for the appellant in this appeal drew my attention to the case of

Golap Saha v. Emperor. In that case it was held that the boat in which the excisable

article was carried should not be confiscated under the provisions of section 75 of the

Bengal Act (which corresponds to section 52 of our Ordinance) unless it is found that

the owner of the boat was in some way implicated in the offence. ………….although the

section empowers the Court to confiscate the boat, yet, as a matter of sound judicial

discretion, such an order should not be passed in the absence of the owner of the boat.”

The above judgment was considered by Chithrasiri J in Aruna Pradeepa Prasanna v OIC

Special Crime Investigation Unit and Attorney General CA (PHC) 61/2012, decided on

28.11.2014 held that,

“The law referred to above shows that the vehicle claimed by the appellant is liable to

be confiscated since the said vehicle had been used to commit an offence under Section

47 read with Section 54 of the Excise Ordinance. However, it must be noted that the

words "be liable to confiscation" is specifically being mentioned therein. Therefore, in

such a situation the Court should take into account, those words mentioned in that

Section before making an order for confiscation of a vehicle under the provisions

contained in the Excise Ordinance.

The impression that comes to a judicial mind by looking at the manner, m which those

words are being used in that Section 54(2), is that it is to ensure holding of an inquiry

by the trial judge before he makes an order. Then only the trial judge becomes entitled

to make an appropriate order. However, such a decision should be made only after

having addressed his mind to the material before him in a judicious manner. [Inspector

Fernando Vs Marther (1932) 1 CLW 249, Sinnetamby Vs. Ramalingan 26 NLR 371]”

According to the above judgments, the owner of the vehicle, which has to be confiscated,

should be given an opportunity to be heard. It is incumbent upon the owner, during the inquiry,

to establish that the offence was committed without his knowledge or consent. However, in the

present case, the Appellant failed to discharge this burden.

His explanation was confined to stating that he had handed over the vehicle to a friend upon

request because he wanted to attend to a ‘Bana Gedara’, though he was unable to specify the

exact date of the handover. He further claimed that he was informed by the police that the

Page 7 of 9

vehicle was taken in to the custody. Additionally, he stated that he had cautioned the accused

not to engage in any unlawful activity. The relevant evidence pertaining to this is as follows:

Page 27 of the brief,

“2013 වර්ෂයේ සිට යේ රථය පාවිච්චි කරනවා. යේ ත්‍රිවිල් රථය මයෙන් යේ නඩුයේ

විත්තිකාරයා වන ප්‍රියන්ත නන්දපාල කියන තැනැත්තතා ඉල්ලායෙන ගියා. 2015.09.15 ත්ත 20ත්ත

අතර දිනයක ඉල්ලායෙන ගියා. දිනය හරියටම මතක නැහැ. ඉන් පසුව ත්‍රිවිල් රථයේ කසිප්පු

වෙයක් අරන් ගිහිල්ලා අහු යවලා කිඋයලා නට කලවාන යපාලිසියයන් පණිවිඩයක් ලැබුනා.

මම ඒ යවලායේ යපාලිසියට ආවා . යේ ත්‍රිවිල් රථය ප්‍රියන්ත නන්දපාල කියන යේ නඩුයේ

විත්තිකරුට මීට කලින් අවස්ථාවකවත්ත මම දීලා ියයනවා ළඟකට ගිහින් එන්න. ප්‍රියන්ත

නන්දපාල කියන්යන් මයේ යාලුයවක්. යේ සිදුවීම වුන දවයස් ඔහු ෙයේ එක්යකයනක්යේ

පින්කේ යෙයක් ියයනවා කියලා කිේවාම ත්‍රිවිල් එක ඉල්ලුවා. මම ත්‍රිවිල් එක දුන්නා. ප්‍රියන්ත

නන්දපාල කියන තැනැත්තතා මයේ ත්‍රිවිල් රථයේ නීිවියරෝධී මත්තපැන් ප්‍රවාහනය කරනවා

කියලා මම දැනයෙන හිටියේ නැහැ. මට ඒ සේබන්ධයයන් දැනුමක් ිබුයන් නැහැ. එයහම

දැනුමක් ිබුනා නේ මම ඔහුට ත්‍රිවිල් රථය යදන්යන් නැහැ. යමවැනි වැරදි වලට සේබන්ධ

යවලා නැහැ. ප්‍රියන්ත නන්දපාලට යේ ත්‍රිවිල් රථය යදනවිට ඔහුට යේ ත්‍රිවිල් රථය යේ වයේ

වැරදි වලට පාවිච්චි කරන්න එපා කියලා තමයි දුන්යන්.”

We note that the Appellant has not called his friend, who is the accused, to assert his version.

Having considered evidence that the Learned Magistrate has come to the conclusion that the

appellant has failed to discharge this burden, that he took precautionary measures to prevent

the offence or to prove that he didn't have the knowledge. We note that the arrest took place on

17 November 2015.

Generally, our courts require that the burden of proof concerning the owner's knowledge and

the precautions taken in relation to the act of transporting illicit liquor be discharged on the

standard of a balance of probabilities. But in the instant case, the only available evidence is the

evidence of the Appellant. When we analyse the evidence until the police informed him, he

was not aware of the crime. The Accused claimed that the vehicle was taken to attend a ‘Bana

Gedara’. It is undisputed that the Appellant had known the Accused for many years. However,

despite this longstanding relationship, the Appellant failed to summon the Accused to testify

in support of his evidence. This omission was duly noted and considered by the Learned

Magistrate in assessing the evidence of the Appellant.

Page 8 of 9

Page 15 of the brief,

‘යමම ත්‍රී යරෝද රථයේ අයිිකරුයේ සාක්ියද යමයම සාක්ිකරු විසින් පමණක් කියා සිටින

සාක්ියක් යේ. ඕනෑම ුද්ෙලයයකුට යමවැනි පියවර ෙත්තතා යැ යි කියා සිටිය හැක. නමුත්ත එම

සාක්ි වැඩි බර සාක්ි රීිය අණුව ඔප්පු කිරීයේ භාරය ඇත්තයත්ත යමම වාහනයේ ලියාපදිිංි

අයිිකරුටය. එබැවින් අඩු තරයේ යමම ලියාපදිිංි අයිිකරු ඔහු කියා සිටින අයුරින් කටයුතු

කලාද යන්න රියදුරු සාක්ියට කැඳවමින් ඒ බව අධිකරණයට අනාවරණය කිරීමට ඕනෑ තරේ

ඉඩ ිබුණි. නමුත්ත යමම ලියාපදිිංි අයිිකරු එයස් රියදුරු සාක්ියට කැඳවා නැත.’

When we consider the evidence, the vehicle owner, Appellant, has failed to establish that he

had taken the precautions to avoid the commission of the offence or he had no knowledge with

regard to the offence. He has merely allowed the Accused to take charge of the vehicle to attend

the ‘Bana Gedara’.

It is my considered view that the evidence led before the Magistrate with regard to that he has

no knowledge as to the commission of this offence does not release his burden as required by

the said Act which mandate ‘shall likewise b liable to confiscation’. The best person is the

Accused, who is the friend of the Appellant, who would have given evidence with regard to

the how the Appellant took precautions to avoid this crime.

And also, we note that the Appellant has failed to satisfy the Learned High Court Judge that

the order made by the Learned Magistrate shocks the conscience of the courts. Upon reviewing

the evidence, the Learned High Court Judge has decided that the Appellant he has failed to

establish on a balance of probability that the offence took place. It is pertinent to refer to the

order of the Learned High Court judge dated 28.10.2021,

Page 81 of the brief,

‘The above observations pertinent to this case too. In this case also the petitioner has

failed to established on a balance of probability that the offence of transporting illicit

liquor took place without his knowledge.’

Page 9 of 9

For the above-mentioned reasons, we are not inclined to interfere with the order of the Learned

Magistrate dated 06.02.2019 and the Order of the Learned High Court Judge dated 28.10.2021.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Amal Ranaraja, J.

I AGREE

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL