Page 1 of 17

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRETIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of

section 331 (1) of the Criminal Procedure

Code No- 15 of 1979, read with Article 138

of the Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Court of Appeal No: Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

HCC-0293-19

High Court of Kurunegala Case No:

HC/91/08

COMPLAINANT

Vs.

1. Pulihith Devayalage Douglas

Wickremapala

2. Pulihith Devayalage Senarath

Satharasinghe

3. Pulihith Devayalage Pradeep

Sanjeewa Jayaratne

ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

1. Pulihith Devayalage Douglas

Wickremapala

Page 2 of 17

2. Pulihith Devayalage Senarath

Satharasinghe

3. Pulihith Devayalage Pradeep

Sanjeewa Jayaratne

ACCUSED-APPELLANTS

Vs.

The Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department

Colombo 12

RESPONDENT

Before : K Priyantha Fernando, J. (P./C.A.)

: Sampath B Abayakoon, J.

Counsel : Palitha Fernando PC, for the 1st and the 2nd

Accused-Appellants

: Neranjan Jayasinghe, for the 3rd

Accused-Appellant

: Dileepa Peiris, SDSG for the Respondent.

Argued on : 11-11-2021

Written Submissions : 27-08-2020 (By the 1st and 3rd Accused-

Appellants

: 21-08-2020 (By the 2nd Accused-

Appellant)

: 30-09-2020 (By the Respondent)

Page 3 of 17

Decided on : 03-12-2021

Sampath B Abayakoon, J.

This is an appeal by the accused appellants (hereinafter referred to as the

appellants) on being aggrieved by the conviction and the sentence of them by

the learned High Court judge of Kurunagala.

The appellants along with the 4th accused named in the indictment were

indicted before the High Court of Kurunegala for committing the following

offences.

(1) That on or around 11th April 2005 at Pohorawatta in the High Court

jurisdiction of Kurunegala, along with persons unknown to the

prosecution conspired to cause the death of Batagollegedara Nissanka

Wijeweera and thereby committed an offence punishable in terms of

section 296 read with section 113B and 102 of the Penal Code.

(2) At the same time and in the same transaction, caused the death of

the above mentioned Nissanka Jayaweera and thereby committed

murder, an offence punishable in terms of section 296 read with

section 32 of the Penal Code.

(3) At the same time and in the same transaction caused injuries to one

Batagollegedara Ariyadasa by throwing stones at him and thereby

committed attempted murder, an offence punishable in terms of

section 300 read with section 32 of the Penal Code.

After trial without a jury, the appellants were found guilty for the 2nd and the

3rd counts against them and were acquitted on the 1st count, while the 4th

accused mentioned in the indictment was acquitted of all the charges preferred

against him. Accordingly, the appellants were sentenced to death on the 2nd

count and for a term of 10 years rigorous imprisonment on the 3rd count.

At the hearing of the appeal, the learned Counsel for the appellants urged the

following grounds of appeal for the consideration of the Court.

Page 4 of 17

(1) The learned High Court judge had failed to take into consideration the

special exception of sudden fight or grave and sudden provocation,

when there was evidence from the prosecution as well as for the

defence.

(2) The learned High Court judge had convicted the appellants for the

count of murder on contradictory and unreliable evidence of the sole

eye witness.

(3) The learned High Court judge convicted the appellants for the charge

of attempted murder on contradictory and unreliable evidence.

(4) The learned High Court judge failed to evaluate the evidence of the

defence and failed to reason out the grounds on which she rejected

the dock statements of the appellants.

(5) The learned High Court judge failed to adequately consider whether

the prosecution has proved the common intention of the appellants.

Facts that led to the incident as revealed by evidence briefly, are as follows;

PW-01 Wijekumara, his deceased brother Nissanka and his wife, the other

brother Somakumara, and their father Ariyadasa, were watching television at

about 8.30-9.00 in the night at their home, and suddenly someone started

pelting stones at the house from outside. They also used filthy language and

called for his brother Nissanka. Looking outside, he has identified Douglas the

1st appellant, Senarath the 2nd appellant and Pradeep the 3rd appellant with the

aid of the lights that were lit outside of their house and the light of the street

lamp post, which was near the house. After hearing the shouting, it was their

father Ariyadasa who went out of the house in order to inquire what was

happening, and soon thereafter, PW-01 heard a cry that the father was hit by a

stone. Hearing the cry, the deceased and the witness went near the father who

was fallen on the ground in front of the small boutique run by him in the

Page 5 of 17

compound of the house. At the same time the 1st and the 2nd appellants who

entered the compound started chasing after the deceased.

It was the evidence of PW-01 that the 1st appellant had knife with a long handle

in his hand and the 2nd appellant had a sword about 3-4 feet long. The

assailants who chased after the deceased along the road has attacked him from

behind. According to PW-01, it was Senarath the 2nd appellant who attacked

the deceased first, followed by the 1st appellant Douglas. Pradeep the 3rd

appellant who was also armed with a sword has attacked the deceased

thereafter. The witness has stated that although the 4th accused Nilmini, the

brother of Pradeep was also armed with a manna knife, it was he who

attempted to prevent the appellants from causing harm to the deceased. The

witness who went after the brother who was chased by the appellants has

observed what was happening by hiding near a termite mound which was by

the roadside.

After the attack, the appellants have prevented a neighbour from taking the

deceased and the injured to the hospital by attacking his three-wheeler.

Subsequently, the injured were taken to the hospital where the deceased was

pronounced dead. It was the evidence of the witness that during the attack on

his brother, the mothers sister of the 2nd appellant (PW-16) pleaded with them

not to cut the deceased but to no avail. After coming home from his hiding, the

witness has observed damage to their house due to the stone throwing and has

also seen household goods being thrown out of the house.

He has explained that the reason for the attack was his brothers providing of

information to Police as to the elicit liquor trade of the father of the 3rd

appellant and the 4th accused. During the cross examination of the witness

several alleged omissions and contradictions have been marked on behalf of

the appellants.

PW-02 was the other brother mentioned by PW-01 as the person who was at

home, he is the one who has come out of the house behind his father. It was

Page 6 of 17

his evidence that when he came out of the house, he saw the 3rd appellant

Pradeep using filthy language at them. When the father inquired from him, he

was kicked by the 3rd appellant, which resulted in him falling and the father

was struck with a stone while attempting to get back to the house. He has also

seen Douglas, the 1st appellant coming into the house and dashing the TV on

the floor and throwing it out. He has not seen what happened to his brother

the deceased or where he went, but has heard a cry from his brother from the

roadside.

PW-04 Nilmini Marasinghe was the wife of the deceased who was present in the

house at the time of the attack. She has corroborated the evidence of the other

witnesses.

PW 06 and PW-07 has been treated as adverse witnesses for the prosecution

hence, their evidence has not been considered by the learned High Court judge

for the purposes of the judgment.

PW-09, the Judicial Medical Officer Dr. Senanayake was the one who has

examined the injured Ariyadasa. He has observed two injuries on the head of

the injured and it was his opinion that the injury number 02 was an injury

that can cause the death in the ordinary course of nature. He has also opined

that the injury may be a result of being struck by a stone.

The injured Batagollegedara Ariyadasa giving evidence has stated that before

the incident, at around 7.30 in the night, Douglas the 1st appellant and one

Sarath came to the small boutique he operates in the compound of his house

and asked for 30 packets of gram. As they appeared to be threatening, it was

his evidence that he closed the boutique hurriedly and went home. He has

confirmed the evidence of the other witnesses as to what happened on that day

thereafter, and has stated that it was the 2nd appellant who struck him with a

stone.

Page 7 of 17

PW-08 was the then Judicial Medical Officer (JMO) of the Polgahawela hospital

who has conducted the postmortem examination on the body of the deceased

Nissanka. He has observed 17 injuries on the body out of which 11 have been

cut injuries. Injuries 1 to 5 have been deep cut injuries to the head and the

neck, while injuries 6,7,8 have also been cut injuries to the back of the head

and the back shoulder. Injury number 11 has been a cut injury to the front

chest area. Injury 17 was a cut injury to the face of the deceased. Apart from

the cut injuries other injuries had been contusions and lacerations. He has

opined that injury 1 and 5 are necessarily fatal injuries caused to the deceased.

On an application by the prosecution the earlier mentioned mothers sister of

the 2nd appellant has been called as a witness. It was her evidence that when

she went to her sisters house at about 8.30pm. on the date of the incident, she

saw the 2nd appellant consuming liquor with some of his friends. After advising

him to not to get involved in any quarrels she has returned home. After hearing

some noise from the direction of the house of Nissanka (the deceased) she has

gone towards the house. She has seen the 1st appellant with a club. The 2nd

appellant with a sword and the 3rd appellant with another club. She has stated

that when she reached the shrine room near the house of the deceased, she

saw some stones being thrown from the direction of the deceaseds house and

both sides were seen throwing stones against each other. She has come to

know about Nissankas death the following morning. Incidentally, she has not

been cross examined on behalf of the appellants.

Chief Inspector Ranjith Kulathunga (PW-10) was the main investigation officer

who has inspected the scene of the crime after the incident. He has observed

that there was sufficient light at the place of the incident from the street lamp

and the other sources at that time. He has found a television set dashed in

front of the house and other damages to the house.

When called for a defence at the end of the prosecution evidence, the

appellants have chosen to make statements from the dock.

Page 8 of 17

The 1st appellant in his dock statement has stated that on the day of the

incident, he, along with the 2nd and the 3rd appellants and another person

called Sarath consumed liquor, and when they were passing the house of

Ariyadasa on their return, stones were thrown at them. As a result, they too

threw stones at the direction of the house.

Both the 2nd and the 3rd appellants have taken the same stance as the 1st

appellant in their respective dock statements, while the 4th accused had denied

any involvement in the incident.

Grounds of appeal: -

It was submitted by the learned Presidents Counsel on behalf of the 1st and the

2nd appellants that, since all the appellants were acquitted of the charge of

conspiracy, it is clear that there had been no evidence of prior arrangement by

the appellants to cause injuries to the deceased and his father Ariyadasa. It

was contended that very fact that there had been no conspiracy establishes the

fact that the appellants had no prior common intention to commit the offences.

It was his argument that under the circumstances, the learned High Court

judge should have looked into the mitigatory circumstances which amounts to

culpable homicide not amounting to murder. The learned Presidents Counsel

relied on Exception 4 of section 294 of the Penal Code to formulate this

argument.

Exception 4 of the Penal Code reads as follows;

Exception 4- Culpable homicide is not murder if it is committed

without premeditation in a sudden fight in the heat of passion upon

a sudden quarrel, and without the offender having taken undue

advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual manner.

Explanation-

Page 9 of 17

It is immaterial in such cases which party offers the

provocation or commits the first assault.

It was his view that injured Ariyadasa suffered his injuries not due to a

planned attack on him as revealed in evidence. It was his submission that the

evidence of the witness Subaratne Menike, (PW-16) considered by the learned

High Court judge in the judgment as the only independent witness, establishes

that both parties were throwing stones at each other which accelerated into the

incident where injuries were caused to the deceased and his father.

Furthermore, it was submitted that the learned High Court judge has failed to

adequately consider the participation of each of the appellants with a common

intention to commit the acts alleged to have been committed, which amounts to

a misdirection by the learned High Court judge.

Commenting on the evidence of PW-01 it was the contention of the learned

Counsel for the 3rd appellant that there is an issue as to the credibility of his

evidence which has escaped the attention of the learned High Court judge.

Pointing to the evidence of PW-01 given before the High Court, where he says

that the 4th accused Nilmini, although was present at the scene of the crime, he

was the one who attempted to stop the assault, it was his position that his

evidence given at the Magisterial inquiry was in total contrary. It was brought

to the notice of the Court that at the inquiry, it has been the evidence of PW-01

that the 4th accused also cut the deceased using a manna knife. (The

contradiction marked V-05). It was his view that the learned High Court judges

consideration that contradiction as a minor contradiction was a misdirection.

He pointed to the alleged discrepancies of the evidence of PW-01 and PW-02

who was the younger brother of PW-01, where he says that it was, he who went

near his father and not the PW-01. He also points out to the evidence of PW-04

where she says that when the father was hit and fell all the family members

came out of the house and went near him.

Page 10 of 17

It was his view that the learned High Court judge should have considered the

grave and sudden provocation of the appellants by the members of the

deceaseds family by throwing stones at them, under Exception 1 of section 294

of the Penal Code.

Citing the judgment of Piyathilaka and 2 Others Vs. Republic of Sri Lanka

(1996) 2 SLR 141, it was submitted further, the evidence that the appellants

were under the influence of liquor at the time of the provocation should have

been considered as a relevant factor in favor of the appellants under the

circumstances.

It was the submission of the learned Senior DSG for the Attorney General that

there was no evidence of a provocation of the appellants at all, and the incident

was not a result of a sudden fight. Although the prosecution failed to prove the

conspiracy charge because of the treating of PW-07 as an adverse witness for

the prosecution, it was his position that the damages caused to the house and

household goods and the fact that the appellants even attacked the vehicle that

attempted to take the injured to the hospital establishes the common intention

of the appellants.

It was his contention that although the learned High Court judge has

considered PW-16 Subarathna Menike as an independent witness, she was not,

as she was the 2nd appellants mothers sister. The appellants argument that

stones were thrown at them was an afterthought in his view, as it was not the

position of the appellants when the main witnesses were giving evidence.

In terms of section 105 of the Evidence Ordinance it is up to an accused to

prove that the case of the accused comes within exceptions.

The relevant section 105 reads as follows;

When a person is accused of any offence, the burden of proving the

existence of circumstances bringing the case within any of the

general exceptions in the Ceylon Penal Code, or within any special

Page 11 of 17

exception or proviso contained in any other part of the Code, or in

any law defining the offence, is upon him, and the court shall

presume the absence of such circumstances.

However, our superior Courts have constantly viewed that even if an accused

person did not raise a defence based on exceptions to section 296 of the Penal

Code, it is the duty of a trial judge to consider whether there is evidence

available for such an exception, if there is evidence on record.

In the case of King Vs. Belana Withanage Eddin 41 NLR 345 Court of

Criminal Appeal held;

In a charge of murder, it is the duty of the judge to put to the jury, the

alternative of finding the accused guilty of culpable homicide not

amounting to murder when there is any basis for such a finding in the

evidence of record, although such defence was not raised nor relied upon

by the accused.

In King Vs. Vidanalage Lanty 42 NLR 317 the Court of Criminal Appeal

observed the following;

There was evidence in this case upon which it was open to the jury to say

that it came within exception 04 of section 296 of the Penal Code and that

the appellant was guilty of culpable homicide not amounting to murder. No

such plea, however, was put forward on his behalf. In the course of his

address the presiding judge referred to this evidence as part of the defence

story, but not as evidence upon which a lessor verdict might possibly be

based.

Held:

It was the duty of the presiding judge to have so directed the jury

and that in the circumstances, the appellant was entitled to have the

benefit of a lesser offence.

Page 12 of 17

In the instant action, although learned Counsel went on the basis of a sudden

fight and provocation to contend that the offence should have been considered

by the learned High Court judge as an offence of culpable homicide not

amounting to murder, I find that such a position has never been taken by the

defence when the prosecution witnesses gave evidence.

The appellants have not admitted that they were drunk at the time of the

incident and that they were provoked by the deceased or any member of his

family, until the appellants made their dock statements. As pointed out

correctly by the learned Senior DSG, this position appears to be an

afterthought due to the evidence of PW-07, who was later treated as an adverse

witness and PW-16 who says that the appellants were consuming liquor and

when she reached the scene of the incident stones were being thrown at each

other by the parties.

If it was the stand of the appellants that they were drunk and they were

provoked, which resulted in a sudden fight, that position should have been put

to the key witnesses when they gave evidence. Although the learned Presidents

Counsel for the 1st and the 2nd appellants put much emphasis on the evidence

of PW-16 based on the assumption of the learned High Court judge that she

was the only independent witness in this action, as pointed out, she cannot be

considered so by any means. Apparently, it appears to be that what the learned

High Court judge meant was that she was the only witness who was not a

member of the family of the deceased. Admittedly, she is the 2nd appellant's

mothers sister and she is the one who has advised not to quarrel when he was

consuming liquor. I find that this is a misdirection of facts by the learned High

Court judge which has not caused any prejudice to the appellants.

The evidence led in this action clearly establishes the fact that at the time of

the attack, the deceased, his father the injured, and his family members were

attending to their nightly affairs after retiring to their home for the day.

Page 13 of 17

It was only after hearing the appellants that the head of the household has

come out to inquire, which under any circumstances cannot be termed a

provocation.

There is no evidence of a sudden fight or provocation as contended by the

Counsel for the appellants, but an intentional attack on the house of the

deceased and his father by the appellants. Even though a dock statement has

some evidentiary value, the appellants cannot expect the court to give equal

value to their dock statements as against the evidence given under oath and

subjected to the test of cross examination.

I find that the appellants have no basis to claim the exceptions to section 294

of the Penal Code in their favour in view of the medical evidence on the injuries

of the deceased. As detailed earlier, of the 17 injuries found on the body of the

deceased 11 of them have been serious cut injuries. The way the injuries have

been inflicted on the deceased clearly suggests that he was chased and

attacked from behind, which establishes the cruel and inhuman nature of the

injuries inflicted on the deceased, which prevents the appellants claiming the

benefit of grave and sudden provocation.

In the case of King Vs. Marshal Appuhamy 51 NLR 140, where the accused,

who was indicted for murder, pleaded that his offence should be reduced from

murder to culpable homicide not amounting to murder for the reasons that he

acted on grave and sudden provocation and that he was so drunk that he was

unable to form a murderous intention.

Held:

That intoxication which fell short of the degree of intoxication contemplated

by section 78 of the Penal Code could be considered in dealing with the

Page 14 of 17

question whether the mans susceptibility to provocation was affected by

intoxication.

In the instant action there is no acceptable evidence to suggest that the

appellants were susceptible to provocation due to intoxication at the time of the

attack. The evidence of PW-16 speaks seeing the 2nd appellant consuming

liquor with friends before the incident. The dock statements where the

appellants say that they were after liquor, by no means provide cover for the

appellants to claim provocation due to intoxication under the circumstances.

It was the contention of the learned Presidents Counsel that the learned trial

judge has failed to give adequate consideration to the common intention before

finding them guilty on that basis.

In the case of The King Vs. Assappu 50 NLR 324 it was held by Dias,J. that;

In case where the question of common intention arises,

(1) The case of each accused must be considered separately.

(2) The accused must have been actuated by common intention with

the doer of the act at the time the offence was committed.

(3) Common intention must not be confused with same or similar

intention entertained independently to each other.

(4) There must be evidence, either direct or circumstantial, of pre-

arrangement or some other evidence of common intention.

(5) The mere fact of the presence of the accused at the time of the

offensive is not necessarily evidence of common intention.

It is apparent from page 23 (Page 381 of the appeal brief) of the judgment, that

the learned High Court judge has considered whether there was common

intention among the appellants to commit the offence. Although each

Page 15 of 17

appellants action has not been considered separately, what they were doing at

the time of the commission of the offence has been considered to conclude that

there was common intention.

I find that even if considered separately, there was ample evidence in this

action to determine the common intention of the appellants. As considered, the

evidence establishes each appellants presence and participation in throwing

stones at the house of the deceased and using foul language at the members of

the house. There is evidence that each of them was carrying weapons. Evidence

also establishes that each of the appellants have chased after the deceased and

cut him and the actions of each of the appellants in the process. It is clear that

the damages caused to the house and the attempt to prevent the injured being

taken to the hospital are also part of the same common intention. Hence, I am

of the view that even if there was a misdirection as claimed, it has not caused

any prejudice to the appellant or has occasioned a failure of justice.

It was the contention of the learned Counsel for the 3rd appellant that the

evidence of PW-01 was contradictory, and the learned trial judge was wrong

when she determined that they are minor in nature and inconsequential. He

also pointed out to the evidence of other witnesses, to argue that the evidence

was not believable as to what really happened on that day, which should have

been held in favour of the appellants.

I find that the learned High Court judge has considered each of the

contradictions except for the contradiction marked V-05, and the mentioned

omissions to form the conclusions reached by her. Although the contradiction

marked V-05 has some relevance, were PW-01 in his evidence at the inquest

held has stated that the 4th accused indicted also cut the deceased along with

others, I am unable to agree that it has resulted in denial of a fair trial to the

appellants.

Page 16 of 17

As considered correctly by the learned High Court judge, when the totality of

the evidence is taken into consideration the said contradiction makes no dent

in the testimonial trustworthiness of the evidence of PW-01.

When it comes to the alleged omissions and inconstancies of the evidence of

other witnesses, as considered correctly, it is natural for any witness to forget

some details of what happened due to the passage of time and is an expected

scenario in any trial, unless they go into the root of the matter.

Although the learned trial judge has considered the legal value that can be

attached to a dock statement of an accused and what was stated by them in

their statements, it appears that determining whether their statements can be

accepted or rejected has escaped the mind of the learned High Court judge.

All the appellants have made similar dock statements to claim that they were

after consuming liquor and stones were thrown at them from the direction of

the house of the injured Ariyadasa and they also threw stones at them. Apart

from that they have denied any connection to the crime.

I am of the view that even if considered in its correct perspective, their dock

statements would not have provided a reasonable explanation or created any

doubt as to the overwhelming evidence available against them in this action.

The proviso to Article 138 of the Constitution which confers jurisdiction on the

Court of Appeal to hear and determine appeals reads thus;

Provided that no judgment, decree or order of any court shall be

reversed or varied on account of any error, defect or irregularity,

which has not prejudiced the substantial rights of the parties or

occasioned a failure of justice

Page 17 of 17

Accordingly, I find that the mentioned misdirections and nondirections have

not prejudiced the appellants or has caused any failure of justice which

requires intervention from this Court.

For the aforementioned reasons, I find no basis to interfere with the findings of

the learned High Court judge.

The appeal therefore is dismissed, as it is devoid of merit. The conviction and

the sentence affirmed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

K Priyantha Fernando, J. (P./ C.A.)

I agree.

President of the Court of Appeal