1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal against

judgment of Provincial High Court

exercising its revisionary jurisdiction.

C A (PHC) / 160 / 2010

Provincial High Court

holden at Rathnapura

Case No. RA 74 / 2008

Magistrate's Court Balangoda

Case No. 18916

H Piyadasa,

NO.,D3,

Kithulgama,

Balangoda.

~

f

I , i -

2

RESPONDENT - PETITIONER -

APPELLENT

-Vs-

1. Divisional Secretary,

Balangoda.

COMPLAINANT -

RESPONDENT - RESPONDENT

2. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENT - RESPONDENT

Before: K K Wickremasinghe 1

P. Padman Surasena 1

3

Counsel; K V Sirisena for the Respondent - Petitioner - Appellant.

Nuwan Pieris for the 1st and 2nd Respondents.

Decided on: 2017 - 10 - 23

JUDGMENT

P Padman Surasena 1

The Complainant - Respondent - Respondent (hereinafter sometimes

referred to as the 1st Respondent) had issued a quit notice on the

Respondent - Petitioner - Appellant (hereinafter sometimes referred to as

the Appellant), in terms of section 3 of the State Lands (Recovery of

Possession) Act (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the Act).

As the Appellant had failed to respond to the said quit notice, the'l st

Respondent had thereafter made an application under section 5 of the Act

to the Magistrate's Court of Balangoda seeking an order to evict the

Appellant from the land described in the schedule to the said application.

4

Learned Magistrate after an inquiry had pronounced the order dated 2008-

06-20 evicting the Appellant from the said land on the basis that he had

failed to produce a permit or due authority to remain in the said land.

Being aggrieved by the said order made by the learned Magistrate, the

Appellant had filed a revision application in the Provincial High Court of

Sabaragamuwa Province holden at Rathnapura seeking a revision of the

order of the learned Magistrate.

The Provincial High Court after the conclusion of the argument, had

pronounced its judgment dated 2010 -10-15, holding that there is no basis

to deviate from the conclusions arrived at by the learned Magistrate. The

Provincial High Court in that judgment had on that basis proceeded to

dismiss the said revision application.

It is against that judgment that the Appellant has filed this appeal in this

Court.

The position taken up by the Appellant in this case is that it is not the

proper competent authority who has invoked the jurisdiction of the

Magistrate's Court in this case.

5

Section 18, which defines certain terms in the Act, defines the term

"Competent authority" as follows;

" .... "Competent authority" used in relation to any land means the

Government Agent, an Additional Government Agent or an Assistant

Government Agent of the district in which the land is situated .... "

This section has gone on to include a long list of other authorities also as

competent authority for the purposes of the Act.

A closer look at the scheme of the section shows that in any case, it is

primarily the Government Agent, an Additional Government Agent or an

Assistant Government Agent of the district in which the land is situated

should be the competent authority. In this case, the Divisional Secretary

has made the application to the Magistrate's Court as the competent

authority. Thus, there is no merit in the argument advanced by the

Appellant that it is not the proper competent authority who has filed the

said application.

It must also be noted that section 9 of the Act sets out the scope of the

inquiry to be held before the Magistrate in following terms;

t !

~ I t !!I I,

! I \,

t IJ i I

~ i II!!I! t I i I i II

6

" ... At such inquiry the person on whom summons under section 6 has

been served shall not be entitled to contest any of the matters stated in

the application under section 5 except that such person may establish that

he is in possession or occupation of the land upon a valid permit or other

written authority of the State granted in accordance with any written law

and that such permit or authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise

rendered invalid . ... ff

This Court in the case of Muhandiram vs. Chairman, No.11l, Janatha

Estate Development Board1 has re-iterated this position in following terms;

" ... Unless the respondent-petitioner had established before the learned

Magistrate that he was in occupation of the land stated in the schedule to

the application on a valid permit or other written authority of the State, he

cannot continue to occupy the said land and in terms of the State Lands

(Recovery of Possession) Act, NO.7 of 1979, the Magistrate has to make

an order directing the respondent and his dependents to be ejected from

the land . ... ff

In the instant case, it is clear upon consideration of the material adduced

before this Court, that the Appellant has failed to establish that he is in

possession or occupation of the said land upon any written authority of the

1 1992 (1) SLR 110

7

state granted in accordance with any written law and that such authority is

in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered invalid as required by

section 9 of the Act.

Thus, this appeal must necessarily fail.

For the foregoing reasons, this Court decides to dismiss this appeal with

costs.

Appeal is dismissed with costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K K Wickremasinghe J

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL