IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A. Case No. 358/2000

D.C. A vissawella Case No. 698/L

BEFORE

COUNSEL

Argued on

Written Submissions on :

Decided on

Weheragoda Arachchige Buddhika Weheragoda

No. 236/54, Horagollawatta,

Katulanda,

Dekatana.

Substituted DEFENDANT ~ APPELLANT

Mahara Pathirana Pathirannehelage

Pahalawatta, Eeheliyagoda

and others

PLAINTIFF~RESPONDENT

A.H.M.D. Nawaz,J.

Dhanasekara

Michael Wanniappa for the Substituted Defendant

~ Appellant.

Pubudu de Silva with D.D.P. Dassanayake for the

Plaintiff~ Respondent.

27.07.2016

02.09.2016 (Substituted Defendant~Appellant)

31.10.2016 (Plaintiff~ Respondent)

12.10.2017

1

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J.

When this matter was taken up for argument on 27.07.2016, Mr. Michael Wanniappa for

the Defendant~Appellant stated that he would not be contesting any other issues decided

by the learned District Judge of A vissawella other than the question of compensation. At

the end of the trial the learned District Judge had awarded a sum of Rs. 50,000/~ as

compensation for improvements. However in the answer filed in the District Court, the

Defendant~Appellant had claimed a sum of Rs. 200,000/~ (Rs. two hundred thousand) to

be paid for improvement. The learned District Judge did not award this sum as evidence

pertaining to this quantum had not been established before the learned District Judge.

However, Mr. Wanniappa stated that the Defendant~Appellant had been in occupation

since 1959 and the value of the building which he had put up appreciated by the time of

the action. Upon this contention being raised, Mr. Pubudu de Silva Counsel for the

Plaintiff~ Respondent informed this Court that the Plaintiff~ Respondent would not be

amenable to giving more than Rs. 50,000r as compensation if there was to be a

compromise. Mr. Wanniappa thereafter undertook to show from the proceedings any

evidence that would establish the Defendant's claim to a sum of Rs. 200,000/~.

A written synopsis of evidence pertaining to compensation to be awarded has since been

tendered to this Court.

The substituted Defendant~Appellant points out in the written submissions dated

02.09.2016 that the evidence of the original Defendant has been given to the follOwing

effect:~

"there is a five roomed house with toilet, well and boutique. I was residing in that house. In 1960 the

house was built up and about Rs. 40,000 to 50,000 was spent. Now it cannot be built up even for 5

lakhs (Rs. 500,000;)"~see page 3 of the proceedings.

Again at page 13 of the cross~examination of the Defendant, the Defendant had stated: "I

built up this 5 roomed house worth about 5Iakhs".

2

It is on the basis of the above items of evidence that the Counsel for the Substituted

Defendant~ Appellant has argued that compensation for improvements must be enhanced

to a sum of Rs. 200,000/~ vis~a~vis the sum of Rs. 50,000/~ that has been awarded by the

District Court.

The above items of evidence are conjectural and do not bear out a rational basis to the

enhancement that the Appellant has claimed. If the market value of the house was worth

about 5 lakhs, it has not been established by acceptable evidence. In the circumstances, it

is my view that the order of a sum of Rs. 50,000/~ as compensation cannot be assailed.

Thus I proceed to affirm the judgment of the learned District Judge of A vissawella dated

20.06.2000 and dismiss the appeal.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

3

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A. Case No. 385/2000 (F)

D.C. Colombo Case No. 19076/D

Indu Nilmini Urmila Ethapane nee Bodinagoda

No. 17, Don Carolis Mawatha,

Colombo 05.

PLAINTIFF

~Vs~

Nihal Indrajith Ethapane

No. 08, Botheju Avenue,

Colombo 05.

DEFENDANT

AND NOW

Indu Nilmini Urmila Ethapane nee Bodinagoda

No. 17, Don Carolis Mawatha,

Colombo 05.

PLAINTIFF~APPELLANT

Nihal Indrajith Ethapane

No. 08, Botheju Avenue,

Colombo 05.

DEFENDANT ~ RESPONDENT

1

BEFORE

COUNSEL

Argued on

Decided on

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J.

A.H.M.D. Nawaz,j.

Amila Perera for the Plaintiff~Appellant.

Sanjeewani Cabral Gunathilake for the

Defendant~ Respondent.

17.01.2017

14.12.2017

({jn this action instituted by a wife (the Plaintiff~Appellant, hereinafter sometimes J referred to as the "the Plaintiff") on 20.05.1997 against her husband (Defendant~

Respondent, hereinafter sometimes referred to as "the Defendant") the Plaintiff sought

a dissolution of her marriage with the Defendant.

The plaintiff's case was that she married the Defendant on 12.09.1972 and there were

three children born out of this marriage. She alleged in her plaint that;

1. the Defendant neglected her and the matrimonial home;

2. the Defendant was callous of the plaintiff's feelings;

3. the Defendant constantly quarreled and abused her in the presence of outsiders

and the children;

4. the Defendant did not heed any reasonable request of the Plaintiff and his

conduct brought an end to the marriage.

As a result of the above conduct of the Defendant, she averred that on 30.11.1994, she

was compelled to leave the matrimonial home with the children and that the Defendant

was guilty of constructive malicious desertion.

She sought a divorce a vinculo matrimonii on the ground of constructive malicious

desertion, a sum of Rs.75,000/~ as alimony and the legal and physical custody of the

three children.

2

The basis of the plaintiff's claim was that her husband's conduct was such as to amount

to constructive malicious desertion which brought an end to the marriage.

The Defendant on the other hand denied all allegations of the Plaintiff and stated that

immediately after the marriage they had been living in the U.K. and after returning to

Sri Lanka, they were living together and in the latter part of 1994 his business suffered

loss and due to this reason they mutually agreed to shift their living to the plaintiff's

parental home at No.27/3, Chandraleka Mawatha, Colombo 8.

After the said house was sold in 1998, the Defendant stayed in a room which could not

accommodate the entire family, but he regularly visited the Plaintiff and children and

took them out as well. He further stated that he was still attached to the Plaintiff and

children and he wanted to live with them happily. It would appear therefore that the

Defendant denied constructive malicious desertion and he was on good terms with the

children.

According to the plaint, the first child was born in 1976, the second in 1981 and the

third was in 1986. As one could see, the births of the children had been sexennial. In

other words the three children had been born once every six years. This is indicative of

the fact that both the Plaintiff and Defendant had enjoyed conjugal bliss and had been

in good family relationship until 1986. The Defendant expressed his willingness to

return to the Plaintiff in order to resume cohabitation thus displaying animus revertendi.

When the trial was taken up on 15.02.l999, the Plaintiff raised the following two issues:

namely:-

l. As per the matters mentioned in paragraph 5 of the plaint, on or about 30.11.l994,

was the Plaintiff compelled to leave the matrimonial home?

2. If so, is the Plaintiff entitled to the reliefs prayed for in the plaint?

The Defendant did not raise any issue. At the trial only the Plaintiff had given evidence

on her behalf and no other witnesses were called to support her story. At least the first

daughter who was 23 years old in 1999, and had been living with the Plaintiff, could

3

have been summoned to give evidence if the plaintiff's allegations against the Defendant

had been true.

If the Plaintiff left the matrimonial home with her children on 3l.11.1994, why did she

wait almost three years to institute this action on the ground of constructive malicious

desertion on the part of the Defendant? This is an irresistible question one is driven to

pose. The Plaintiff has not given any acceptable reason for this unusual delay. The only

reason given was that she wanted to discuss the matter with the children when they

had grown up. This is not an acceptable answer for the delay which this Court could

countenance. It shows that she too wanted the marriage to continue.

It is to be noted that even after the separation in November, 1994, the Plaintiff and the

Defendant, on many occasions, had been seen together. The Plaintiff has admitted these

events in her evidence under cross~examination. Firstly, she admitted that even after

the separation she had gone with her children and lived with the Defendant. She had

attended birthday parties with the Defendant. She had also gone to see a doctor with

the Defendant. This conduct on the part of the parties would show that neither of them

wanted to end their nuptial tie.

In the case of Rajeswararanee v. Sunthararasa, (1962) 64 N.L.R. 366, Basanayake c.J.

observed at page 369:

"Although the parties were at variance as to where they should reside there was no intention on

the part of either to break up the marriage because they were willing to continue to live as

husband and Wife".

This observation aptly applies to the instant case.

The testimony of the Plaintiff demonstrates that she went to her parents' house

because of financial difficulties the Defendant had, but it would be common ground

that a wife for this reason alone would not leave the husband for the abode of her

parents. There may be ups and downs and crests and troughs in life but it is an eternal

verity that at all times both parties would live together, shoulder the difficulties and

carry on in the interests of the children.

4

According to the evidence of the Plaintiff it is clear that though she had gone to her

parents' home with the children, she would often come to see the Defendant at his

place of abode during weekends. In front of society they comported themselves as

husband and wife without manifesting their differences. Did they put in an appearance

of a Darby and Joan? Yet the learned District Judge of Colombo did not believe the

plaintiff's story of constructive malicious desertion on the grounds she had urged in

paragraph 4 of the plaint. After having considered the evidence of the Plaintiff, the

learned District Judge has refused the reliefs prayed for by the Plaintiff. This appeal is

against that judgment dated 23.09.2000.

In my view the grounds averred by the Plaintiff in paragraph 4 of the plaint have not

been established by sufficient evidence. The subsequent conduct of both parties after

the alleged constructive desertion on 30.11.1994, clearly indicates that there was no

factum of constructive malicious desertion that could be deduced from any act on the

part of the Defendant. I would observe that there is not any tittle of evidence suggestive

of the fact that the Defendant ever neglected the welfare of his children.

In the event that the husband was at fault in driving the wife out of the matrimonial

home, the bona fide attempts made by the husband for reconciliation cannot be ignored

lightly. A Divisional Bench of the Supreme Court declared in Muthukumaraswamy v.

Parameshwary(l976) 78 N.LR. 488:

"Termination of malicious desertion can take place by a supervening animus revertendi, coupled

with a bona fide approach to the deserted spouse with a view to resumption of life together.

Where the deserting spouse makes a genuine offer to return to the matrimonial home with a view

to resumption of life together, the deserted spouse cannot lawfully refuse reinstatement. A

deserted spouse must always, until the presentation of his plaint, affirm the marriage and be

ready to take back the deserting spouse." ~ (per Sharvananda, J. [as he then was] with

Thomotheram, J. and Ratwatte, J. concurring)

Considering the evidence led in this case, I am of the view that the Defendant had

always demonstrated his animus revertendi with the intention of living together with the

5

I

Plaintiff and the children, and the Plaintiff has failed to establish constructive malicious

desertion on the part of the Defendant.

I therefore affirm the judgment of the learned District Judge and dismiss the appeal

without costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

6