IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRAIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

Court of Appeal Case No : CA HC /283/2008

Mapalagama Acharige Vajira

Laxmi

Petitioner

Vs.

The Director General

Commission to Investigate

Allegations of Bribery and

Corruption

Respondents

1

C.A.283/2008 H.C.B 1568/2005

Before S.Devika de L. Tennakoon, J and S. Thurairaja, P.C. J

Counsel Saliya Peiris, P.C. with Thanuka Nandasiri for the Accused Appellant.

Argued and

A.Nawavi, SSC with Lakmali Dissanayake SC, for the Respondent.

Decided on: 24.01.2018

S. Thurairaja. P.C. J

Accused Appellant is present in Court.

Heard counsels in submission. President's Counsel for the Accused

Appellant submits that there are several grounds of appeal that he raises

and submits that the defence also was not conducted properly in the trial.

The Accused Appellant submits that without prejudice to his submission he

wishes to urge the Court that this incident alleged to have happened in

2001 and the trial was concluded in 2008 and the Accused Appellant was

sentenced in 2008. It is ten years before. The children were small and now

they are on their tertiary education. Therefore she pleads to Court that she

be given a very lenient sentence. Even though there are shortfalls in the

judgment as well as in the case for the prosecution. The Counsel submits

t ,

I I II !II

f

2

that they want to save the time of the Court and seeks the mercy of the

Court. State Counsel submits that the prosecution case is strong and there

are certain shortcomings in the judgment. Anyhow he is not objecting the

submissions made by the President's Counsel regarding the sentence. And

he leaves sentencing to the hands of Court. Anyhow Court finds that there

certain shortcomings in the judgment. Considering all the submissions we

find that the incident had happened in 2001 and the Complaint was made

much later. Further the Accused Appellant was convicted in 2008 and

sentenced to four years rigorous imprisonment on each count to run

concurrently and a fine of Rs.5000/= on each count in default one year

simple imprisonment on each count. Further the Accused Appellant was

imposed of further fine of Rs.l 0,000/ = in default one year rigorous

imprisonment. After carefully considering the facts of the case especially the

judgment of the High Court Judge and other submissions by both Counsels

we set aside the sentence imposed earlier and we impose the following

sentence. We impose one year rigorous imprisonment on the first count and

the second count. We further impose a fine of Rs.5000/= on each count in

default 6 months simple imprisonment. Further as per the Bribery Act we

impose a fine of Rs.I0,000/= in default one year rigorous imprisonment.

We order both sentence one year on each count to be suspended for a period

of five years. If fines are not paid the default sentence will be implemented

consecutively.

3

Registrar is hereby directed to transfer the case record to the

Registrar of High Court of Colombo to implement the sentence and to take

steps under the Provisions of the Bribery Act.

Appeal partially allowed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL Devika de L. Tennakoon, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL Lwmj-