IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

1. Junaideen Mohamed Iqbal,

No. 359,

D. S. Senanayake Veediya,

Kandy.

2. Kalamegam Rajesweri,

No. 412, Balagolla,

Kengalla.

Petitioners

CASE NO: CA/WRIT/328/2015

Vs.

1. The Divisional Secretary,

Kundasale Divisional Secretariat,

Manikhinna.

2. Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka,

No. 500, T. B. Jayah Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

3A. Anura Dissanayake,

Director General,

Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka,

No. 500, T. B. Jayah Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

2

3B. D. M. S. Dissanayake,

Director General Mahaweli

Authority of Sri Lanka,

No. 500, T. B. Jayah Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

4. N. Rupasinghe,

Secretary to the Ministry of

Mahaweli Development and

Environment,

Ministry of Mahaweli

Development and Environment,

No. 500, T. B. Jayah Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

4A. Anura Dissanayake

Secretary to the Ministry of

Mahaweli Development and

Environment,

Ministry of Mahaweli

Development and Environment,

No. 500, T. B. Jayah Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

Respondents

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Faisz Musthapha, P.C., with Faisza Markar for

the Petitioners.

Vikum De Abrew, S.D.S.G for the Respondents.

Argued on: 17.01.2020

Decided on: 19.02.2020

3

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The immediate reason for the two Petitioners to file this writ

application on 10.08.2015 was the serving of the Quit Notice

marked P1 on the 1st Petitioner by the 1st Respondent Divisional

Secretary issued under section 3 of the State Lands (Recovery of

Possession) Act, No.7 of 1979, as amended, whereby the 1st

Petitioner was directed to vacate the land described in the Quit

Notice on or before 07.08.2014. As the 1st Respondent failed to

vacate the said land, proceedings had been instituted in the

Magistrates Court under section 5 of the said Act and an

eviction order was made by the Magistrates Court on

13.08.2015, which is the day on which this application was

supported for notice before this Court. That is, when this

application was supported, the eviction order had already been

made, and this may be the reason the interim relief sought in

the petition staying the Magistrates Court proceedings was not

sought.

To this extent, the relief sought by the Petitioners to quash the

said Notice to Quit by way of a writ of certiorari is no more a live

issue.

In addition to a writ of certiorari, the Petitioners in the prayer to

the petition sought a writ of mandamus compelling the 2nd-4th

Respondentsthe Mahaweli Authorityto grant the 1st or the

2nd Petitioner a long-term lease of the land.

The Mahaweli Authority in their statement of objections have

taken up the strong position that the land described in the Quit

Notice is not under the control of the Mahaweli Authority to

execute a long-term lease in favour of the Petitioners. Learned

4

Presidents Counsel for the Petitioners, at the argument,

informed Court that he does not pursue that relief, i.e.,

mandamus is not sought.

Against this background, learned Senior Deputy Solicitor

General for the Respondents moves to dismiss the application of

the Petitioners in limine on the ground of futility. Learned

Presidents Counsel for the Petitioners resists that application

and urges that the matter be disposed of on merits.

In the facts and circumstances of this case, as the Petitioners

are not entitled to succeed on merits, as I will explain in a

moment, I will abstain from making a ruling on that important

question of lawi.e. dismissal of the application in limine on the

ground of futilityand proceed to decide the matter on merits.

The entire case of the Petitioners is predicated on the concept of

Legitimate Expectation

What is Legitimate Expectation? In simple language, where a

public authority represents that it will or will not do something,

a person who has reasonably relied on that representation

should be entitled to enforce it, if the public authority later

attempts to rescind from the representation already made. This

doctrine is based on the principles of natural justice and

fairness, and seeks to prevent public authorities from abusing

power.1

1 Vide Perera v. National Police Commission [2007] BLR 14, Perera v. Building Materials Corporation Ltd [2007] BLR 59, Kurukulasooriya v. Edirisinghe [2012] BLR 66, Ariyaratne v. Illangakoon, SC FR Application No. 444/2012, SCM of 30.07.2019.

5

The Petitioners story, in my view, is not rational and is not

based on accepted or acceptable facts but on conjectures and

hypotheses.

No legitimate expectation which could form the basis for a

prerogative writ could have been had by the Petitioners on the

facts elicited by them in the petition.

There is no nexus between the Petitioners and the Mahaweli

Authority for the former to have such expectation arising from

what the latter is alleged to have represented.

Let me unfold the case of the Petitioners as set out by them in

the petition.

By virtue of the Crown Grant marked P2(a) dated 16.02.1970, a

land in extent of 20 Acres 1 Rood and 15 Perches, described in

the schedule thereto, was conveyed to a Company known as

Kandy Textile Industries Limited, which is not a party to this

application. What has been conveyed by the Crown Grant is

admittedly a different portion of land and has nothing to do with

the land described in the Quit Notice.

Parts of the said land belonging to the said Company, according

to the Petitioners, had subsequently been flooded and

permanently submerged by an overflow of the Mahaweli river

and/or been earmarked for acquisition by the Mahaweli

Authority. This the Petitioners state mainly based on P2(b)

dated 18.12.1981.

P2(b) is the principal document of the Petitioners case. Based

on P2(b), the Petitioners state that the Mahaweli Authority

agreed to give the said Company an alternative plot of land

6

behind the then existing site of the Company, as constituting

part of compensation for the lands which are submerged,

which includes the land described in the Quit Notice.

There is no acceptable evidence to suggest that the land

described in the Quit Notice formed part of the said alternative

plot of land promised to the Company. Nor is there evidence

that the Company was placed in possession of such plot of land

by the Mahaweli Authority or that the Company developed such

plot of land.

The Company went into liquidation and the District Court made

an Order winding up the Company under the provisions of the

Companies Act in the year 2000, as seen from P2(c).

Then the Petitioners state that the liquidators sold the aforesaid

submerged portion of the land described in the Crown Grant to

four people, including the late husband of the 2nd Petitioner, for

a sum as high as Rs. 13.5 million in 2005 by deed marked P2(f).

This deed is also a key document to the Petitioners case. The

contents of this deed are utterly confusing to me. It speaks of

various transactions among the parties and refers to several

Plans, sub-divisions etc. I cannot understand how and why a

liquidator who sells the assets of the Company would want to

get involved in the internal affairs of the parties, such as

subdividing land among the parties. The schedule of the deed

refers to Plan No.1483 dated 20.10.1993, which is different from

the Plan referred to in the Crown Grant marked P2(a). No such

new Plan has been tendered to the Court to understand the

nexus.

7

According to the petition, the submerged portion is permanently

submerged and earmarked for acquisition. I cannot believe a

permanently submerged land being bought for a sum of Rs. 13.5

million. For what?

There is no mention of submersion in the deed. There is no

mention of any promise by the Mahaweli Authority. There is no

mention of legitimate expectation of accrual of future rights.

The said deed is an outright transfer of the land described in the

schedule to the deed. Therefore, there is no room for argument

that the Company purchased the land with the expectation of

receiving a totally different land not described or referred to in

the deed.

On the other hand, if part of the land was permanently

submerged and the acquisition and compensation process was

set in motion, I cannot understand how the liquidators could

sell the submerged land as belonging to the Company under

liquidation.

The Petitioners tendered the advertisement marked P2(d)

published by the liquidators for the sale of the land. According

to the said advertisement the land sold was not submerged land

but valuable land with permanent buildings.

Then the Petitioners state that on the strength of the deed

marked P2(f), the transferees of that deed came into possession

of the alternative land which included the portion described in

the Quit Notice. As I have already stated, I fail to understand

how the transferees of the deed can claim another land on the

strength of the said deed.

8

Thereafter, according to the Petitioners, the late husband of the

2nd Petitioner entered into an Agreement marked P2(g) dated

17.02.2007 with the 1st Petitioner to sell a plot of land in extent

of 2 Acres and 0.94 perches. The Petitioners in paragraph 5(n)

of the petition say that The land described in the said

Agreement dated 17.02.2007 is the same land described in the

schedule to the impugned Quit Notice P1.

There is no proof to say the land described in the Agreement

P2(g) and the Quit Notice is the same, and, in fact, it cannot be,

for the simple reason that the land described in the Quit Notice

is 30 Perches and the land described in the said Agreement P2(g)

is 2 Acres and 0.94 Perches. Also, the land described in the

schedule to the deed P2(f) is the land depicted in Plan No. 1483

dated 20.10.1993, and the land described in the schedule to the

Agreement P2(g) is the land depicted in a different PlanNo. 1296

dated 15.06.2006which is part of Plan No. 5076 dated

21.03.2000. It relevant to note that in the Agreement P2(g),

there is no mention of the Deed of Transfer above referred to

marked P2(f) or the Crown Grant marked P2(a).

The 1st Petitioner had entered into possession of the land

described in the Quit Notice on the strength of the said

Agreement P2(g).

The 1st Petitioner states that he entered into possession of the

land on the legitimate expectation that the late husband of the

2nd Petitioner would convey all rights to the land described in

the Quit Notice to the 1st Petitioner after he (the husband of the

2nd Petitioner) realised his legitimate expectation of obtaining a

long term lease of the same in his favour from the liquidators of

the aforementioned Company, who in turn had an entitlement to

9

such long term lease being executed in its favour by the

Mahaweli Authority, as held out by the Mahaweli Authority.

This is in my view an unusual extension of the concept of

legitimate expectation. Can legitimate expectation pass to a

number of people over a period of time? Does it pass with the

land arguably like praedial servitudes? These are questions

which can be left open to be decided in a future case.

In the facts and circumstances of this case, I do not need to go

so far. The 1st Petitioner on whom Notice to Quit has been

served, which he seeks to quash by certiorari in these

proceedings, has not established that he had grounds for

legitimate expectation that the Mahaweli Authority would convey

the land in question to the liquidators of the Company and the

liquidators would convey the land to the late husband of the 2nd

Petitioner and the said husband would thereafter convey the

land to him. No nexus acceptable to this Court has been shown.

The Agreement which the Petitioner relies on to make a claim on

legitimate expectation to the land described in the Quit Notice

has nothing to do with the land in the Crown Grant which is

said to have been submerged.

Application dismissed with costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal