==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Restitution,in the nature of Restitutio-In-Integrum under and in terms of Article 138 of the Constitutionof the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Court of Appeal Case No: RII/0061/2023 NainangalaWidanelage Jayasena, Ambagahawatta, SP/HCCA/RAT/01/2022(RA) Kalawana. (Deceased) DC Ratnapura 01(අ). NainangalaWidanelage Shashika Case No: 19736/p Dulmini Jayasena Ambagahawatta, Ihalawatta, Kalawana Plaintiff VS 1. Dayawathi Jayawardhane, Ambagahawatta, Kalawana. 2. N.V Lalith Ananda Kumara Senevirathna, Amabagahawatta, Ihalawatta, Kalawana. 3. N.V. Upula Indika Kumara Senevirathna, Ambagahawatta, Ihalawatta, Kalwana. 4. N.VPremasiriGunawardhane, Rideewita, Ambagahawatta, Kalwana 5. N.V. Karunasena, Ambagahawatta, Kalawana. 6. N.V. Gunasena,

2

Ambagahawatta, Kalawana. 7. M.K. Jayarathne, Addaragoda, Gurulubedda, Kalugala. 8. N.V. Nandawathie 9. Soma Gunawardhane 10. GnanalathaGunawardhane, Three of them at Ambagahawatta, Kalawanna. Defendants AND BETWEEN NainangalaVidanelagePremasiri Gunawardhane, Rideewita, Ambagahawatta, Kalwana 4thDefendant-Petitioner Vs. N.V. Jayasena, Ambagahawatta, Kalawana. (Deceased) 01(අ). NainangalaWidanelage Shashika DulminiJayasena, Ambagahawatta, Ihalawatta, Kalawana 01(අ).Plaintiff-Respondent 2. DayawathiJayawardhane, Ambagahawatta, Kalawana. 3. N.V Lalith Ananda Kumara Senevirathna, Amabagahawatta, Ihalawatta,

3

Kalawana. 5. N.V. Upula Indika Kumara Senevirathna, Ambagahawatta, Ihalawatta, Kalwana. 6. N.V. Karunasena, Ambagahawatta, Kalawana. 7. N.V. Gunasena, Ambagahawatta, Kalawana. 8. N.V. Nandawathie 9. Soma Gunawardhane 10. GnanalathaGunawardhane, Three of them at Ambagahawatta, Kalawana. 2nd – 10th Defendant-Respondents AND BETWEEN NainangalaVidanelagePremasiri Gunawardhane, Rideewita, Ambagahawatta, Kalwana 4thDefendant-Petitioner-Petitioner Vs N.V. Jayasena, Ambagahawatta, Kalawana. (Deceased) 01(අ). NainangalaWidanelage Shashika DulminiJayasena, Ambagahawatta, Ihalawatta, Kalawana 01(අ).Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent

4

2. DayawathiJayawardhane, Ambagahawatta, Kalawana. 3. N.V Lalith Ananda Kumara Senevirathna, Amabagahawatta, Ihalawatta, Kalawana. 5. N.V. Upula Indika Kumara Senevirathna, Ambagahawatta, Ihalawatta, Kalwana. 6. N.V. Karunasena, Ambagahawatta, Kalawana. 7. N.V. Gunasena, Ambagahawatta, Kalawana. 8. N.V. Nandawathie 9. Soma Gunawardhane 10. GnanalathaGunawardhane, Three of them at Ambagahawatta, Kalawana. 2nd – 10th Defendant Respondent Respondents AND NOW BETWEEN NainangalaVidanelagePremasiri Gunawardhane, Rideewita, Ambagahawatta, Kalwana 4thDefendant-Petitioner-Petitioner-Petitioner Vs N.V. Jayasena,

5

Ambagahawatta, Kalawana. (Deceased) 01(අ). NainangalaWidanelage Shashika DulminiJayasena, Ambagahawatta, Ihalawatta, Kalawana 01(අ).Plaintiff-Respondent- Respondent-Respondent 2. DayawathiJayawardhane, Ambagahawatta, Kalawana. 3. N.V Lalith Ananda Kumara Senevirathna, Amabagahawatta, Ihalawatta, Kalawana. 5. N.V. Upula Indika Kumara Senevirathna, Ambagahawatta, Ihalawatta, Kalwana. 6. N.V. Karunasena, Ambagahawatta, Kalawana. 7. N.V. Gunasena, Ambagahawatta, Kalawana. 8. N.V. Nandawathie 9. Soma Gunawardhane 10. GnanalathaGunawardhane, Three of them at Ambagahawatta, Kalawana. 2nd – 10th Defendant-Respondent- Respondent-Respondents Before : R. Gurusinghe J &

6

M.C.B.S. Morais J Counsel : Rohan Sahabandu, PC with P. Weerasinghe for the 4thDefendant-Petitioner Prasangi Abeygunawardana For the9th and 10th Defendant-Respondent- Respondent-Respondents

Argued on : 04-03-2025

Decided on : 27-05-2025

R. Gurusinghe The 4th defendant-petitioner-petitioner-petitioner (hereinafter referred to as the 4th defendant) filed this application seeking the relief sought in the prayer to the petition. The original plaintiff instituted an action naming six defendants and sought to partition the land called Malgaha Pellessa, which was about three acres, among him and the 1st to 6th defendants. Later, the 7th to 10th defendants were also added to the action. The 4th, 9th and 10th defendants are children of Kirimudiyanse. At the beginning of the trial, the parties have recorded eight admissions. Those admissions are reproduced below. ....Page 77

01. බෙදීමට අබේක්ෂිතබමම නඩුවට අදාල ඉඞමගාමිනී ජයසිංහ මිනිනබදාරු තැන විසන

සම්පාදනය කළ අිංක: 720 හා 2007.06.03 දින දරණ පිඹුබේ මනාව දිස් වන ෙව පිළිගනී.

02. බෙදීමටඅබේක්ෂිතබේපබේ මුේ අයිතිකරු වුබේ නයිනනගල විදානලාබේ බිම්ෙරහාමි ෙව

පිළගනී.

03. එම බිම්ෙරහාමිමීට බොබහෝ කලකට බපර මුදේ කිරීමට තරම් බේපලක්ෂ බනාතො

නයිනනගල විදානලාබේඩිංගිරි මහත්මයා හා එමබේ කිරිමුදියනබස් තො මිය ගිබයන ඔවුන එක්ෂ අබයකුට බනාබෙදු 1/2 ෙැගින අයිති වු ෙවත් පිළිගනී.

7

Page 78

04. ඉහතකීඩිංගිරි මහත්මයාදමිය ගිබයනඔහුටඑන. වී. බපාඩ මහත්මයා, එම මැණික්ෂහාමි, එම

රනඑතනා, බසෝමාවතී, කලිගුහාමී බහ්වත්බසබනවිරත්න, රම්මැණිබක්ෂ, ගුණරත්න යන දරුවන සටි ෙවත්, එයිනගුණරත්නපැවැත්මකින බතාරව මිය ගිය ෙවත් පිළිගනී.

05. බපාඩ මහත්මයාබේඅයිතියදමැනික්ෂහාමිබේසහබසෝමාවතිබේඅයිතියදපැමිණිේබේ සඳහන

ප්‍රකාරව අිංක: 2119, 1541 සහ 1827, 2106 දරණ ඔේුවලින පැමිණිලිකරුට හිමි වු ෙව පිළිගනී.

06. කලිගුහාමීබේ අයිතිය තම වැනදඹුව වන දයාවතීබේ ජීවිත බුක්ෂතියටයටත්ව 2 වන විත්තිකාර

ලලිත් ආනනද ද, 3 වන විත්තිකාර උුේ ඉනදික බසබනවිරත්න යන අයට උරුම වු ෙව පාේශවකරුවන පිලිගනී.

07. කිරි මුදියනබස්බේ අයිතිය එන. වී. ගුණවේධන, කරුණාබස්න,එමකුලබස්නයන අපට

බනාබෙදු 1/6 ෙැගින හිමිවුෙවපිලිගනී.

08. බනාබෙදු 1/6ක්ෂ හිමිගුණවේධනබේඅයිතිය 4, 9, 10 විත්තිකරුවනට හීන මැණිබක්ෂබේ ජීවිත

බුක්ෂතියට යටත්ව බනාබෙදු 1/18 පිංගුවය ෙැගින හිමිවුෙවපිලිගනී.

All the parties have admitted that the original owner of the land sought to be partitioned was Nainangala Widanelage Bimbarahamy, and he had two children, namely, Dingiri Mahathmaya and Kirimudiyanse. Parties have also admitted that the said Kirimudiyanse died, leaving three children, namely Gunawardena, Karunasena and Gunasena. Admission no. 8 is that one of Kirimudiyanse’s children, Gunawardena’s undivided 1/6thshares were devolved on the 4th, 9th, and 10th defendants, undivided 1/18thshares each. No party raised any dispute to the devolution of the half share of Kirimudiyanse. The only dispute raised as points of contest was whether Dingiri Mahathmaya had seven children or eight children. The plaintiff in his plaint stated that 1/6th share of Gunawardena was devolved on N.V. Premasiri Gunawardena, the 4th defendant. Later, the plaintiff admitted that the 9th and 10th defendants are also children of Gunawardena. Plaintiff gave evidence and, in his evidence, inter alia stated that Bimbarahamy was the original owner and he died, leaving two children, Dingiri Mahathmaya and Kirimudiyanse. Kirimudiyanse died, leaving three

8

children: Gunawardena, Karunasena and Gunasena. Gunawardena’s rights were devolved on the 4th defendant, Soma Gunawardena (the 9th defendant) and Gnanawathie Gunawardena (the 10th defendant). Accordingly, they are entitled to a 1/18th share each. In the later part of the evidence, the plaintiff reiterated that the 4th, 9th and 10th defendants are entitled to an undivided 1/18thshare each. No party disputed the fact that the 4th defendant is entitled to a 1/18th undivided share of the land sought to be partitioned. No evidence was led before the Additional District Judge, who wrote the judgment dated 02-12-2015. All the evidence was presented before his predecessors. In the course of the judgment on page 14, it has been stated as follows: Page 14 බනාබෙදු 1/2 පිංගුවක්ෂ හිමිව සටි කිරිමුදියනබස්බේ අයිතිය ඇවෑබමන දරුවන වු ගුණවේධන, 05 වන විත්තිකාර කරුණාරත්න සහ 08 බවනි විත්තිකාර ගුණබස්න යන අයට හිමි වු ෙව පාේශවකරුවන පිළිබගන ඇති අතර, පැ.8, පැ.9 සහපැ. 10 බේඛන මගින ද එම කරුණ තහවුරු බේ. ගුණවේධනබේඇවෑබමන එම අයිතිය, වැනදඹුව වු හීනමැණිබක්ෂබේ ජීවිත බුක්ෂතියට යටත්ව, දරුවන වු 04 වන විත්තිකාර බේමසරි, 09 වන විත්තිකාර බසෝමලතා සහ 10 වන විත්තිකාර ඥාණලතාට හිමි වී ඇති අතර,බේමසරිසහ හීනමැණිබක්ෂබේ අයිතිය ද, 09 සහ 10 විත්තිකරුවනට හිමි වී ඇත. නනදාවති යන අය පිළිෙඳව ඇති හෙයට අමතරව බපළපත පිළිෙඳව පාේශ්වකරුවන අතර හෙයක්ෂ බනාමැති අතර ඉදිරිපත් වු ඔේු සහ අබනකුත් බේඛණ අනුව ද එම බපළපත තහවුරු බේ. ඒ අනුව ඉහත සඳහන කල පරිදි බෙදීමට අබේක්ෂිත ඉඩබම් අයිතිවාසකම් පාේශවකරුවනට හිමිවිය යුතු ෙවට තීරණය කරමි. ඒ අනුවබෙදීමට අබේක්ෂිත ඉඩබම් අයිතිවාසකම් පහත පරිදිපාේශවකරුවනටහිමිවිය යුතුය. In his judgment, the Learned Additional District Judge also observed that, except for the dispute raised regarding Nandawathie, there was no other dispute regarding the devolution of title or the pedigree. However, at the end of the judgment, the Learned District Judge had not given any share to the 4th defendant. 1/6th share of Gunawardena was given only to 9th and 10th defendants 2/24thshare each. There was an appeal against the judgment by the 2nd and 3rd defendants to the Civil Appellate Court of Ratnapura. After that, the 4th defendant made an application to the Learned District Judge under section 189 of the Civil Procedure Code to correct the shares of the 4th, 9th and 10th defendants. The Learned District Judge refused this application. Thereafter, the 4th defendant filed a Revision application before the Civil Appellate High Court of Ratnapura.The Civil Appellate High Court of Ratnapura dismissed that

9

application. Thereafter, the 4th defendant petitioner made this application to this court. This application of the 4th Defendant affects only to his two siblings, the 9th and 10th defendants. The 9th and 10th defendants filed objections to the petitioner's application and took up several preliminary objections and technical objections. But they have not disputed the facts pleaded by the 4thdefendant-petitioner. There is a glaring error and a clear miscarriage of justice caused to the petitioner for no fault of his own. Therefore, I would not hold with the objections of the 9th and 10th defendants. In the joint statement of claim of the 1st to 6thdefendants stated that the 4th defendant and his mother had transferred their rights to the 9th and 10th defendants by deed no. 11233 dated 31-03-1993. However, the 9thand 10thdefendants never filed a statement of claim or gave evidence before the court. In the evidence led before the District Court, there was no evidence to the effect that the rights of the 4th defendant were transferred to the 9th and 10th defendants. The deed referred to in the statement of claim was never produced. Such a title deed was not produced in the District Court,the Civil Appellate High Court, or in this Court. The Learned Counsel for the petitioner referred to it as a fictitious deed. Since such a title deed was never forthcoming, it is reasonable to conclude that there was no such deed. The Learned Additional District Judge would have relied on the statement of claim of a party without perusing the title deeds. The Learned Additional District Judge failed to notice the fact that by admission no. 8, all parties have admitted that 1/6thundivided share of Gunawardena was devolved on 4th, 9th and 10th defendants an undivided 1/18th share each. Section 58 of the Evidence Ordinance provides as follows: 58. No fact need be proved in any proceeding which the parties thereto or their agents agree to admit at the hearing, or which, before the hearing, they agree to admit by any writing under their hands, or which by any rule of pleading in force at the time they are deemed to have admitted by their pleadings: Provided that the court may, in its discretion, require the facts admitted to be proved otherwise than by such admissions. No party has made any application to withdraw the admission no. 8. Further, no issue has been raised to the effect that the rights of the 4thdefendant were transferred to the 9th and 10th defendants. The 9th and 10th defendants did not even participate in the trial. Sections 61 and 62 of the Evidence Ordinance provide that “the contents of documents may be

10

proved either by primary evidence or secondary evidence. Primary evidence means the document itself produced for inspection of the court.” As mentioned above, no such title deed was produced in court, nor was any application made to lead secondary evidence regarding a deed purported to transfer the rights of the 4thdefendant to the 9th and 10th defendants. In the above circumstances, if the Learned District Judge chose to disregard the admitted facts of the parties, it should have been clearly justified, giving reasons in the judgment. A mistake or inadvertence on the part of the District Judge should not prejudice the rights of the parties. In the case of Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation Limited vs Shanmugam and Another [1995] 1 Sri LR 55, it was held that, “relief by way of Restitutio-In-Integrum in respect of judgments of original courts may be sought:

A) Where judgments have been obtained by fraud, by production of false

evidence, non-disclosure of material facts, or by force; or B) Where fresh evidence has cropped up since judgment which was

unknown earlier to the parties relying on it or which no diligence would have helped to disclose earlier, or C) Where judgments have been pronounced by mistake and decrees

entered thereon, provided, of course, it is an error which connotes a reasonable and excusable error.” In the present case, there is a clear mistake made by the Learned Additional District Judge. It is a settled principle of law that “an act of court shall prejudice no man.” (Actus curiae neminem gravabit). A mistake on the part of the Learned Additional District Judge resulted in wiping out the petitioner's entitlement to the land and thereby causing prejudice to the petitioner's substantial rights. This is a fit case to use the discretionary powers of this court to remedy the error. For the reasons stated above, I allow the 4thdefendant's application. The judgment of the Additional District Judge dated 02-12-2016 is varied to the effect that the 4th, 9th and 10th defendants are entitled to 1/18th share each. The Learned District Judge of Ratnapura is directed to amend the interlocutory decree to the effect that the 4thdefendant is entitled to 1/18th share and the 9th and 10th defendants are entitled only to 1/18th share each, in the lands sought to be partitioned. If the final decree has already been entered, it is to be amended accordingly after a commission, which would, as far as practicable, without disturbing the allotments of land given to the other parties. No costs.

11

Judge of the Court of Appeal. M.C.B.S. Morais J. I agree. Judge of the Court of Appeal.