IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRAIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

C A Writ Application No. 362/2009

L.D.C. Jayantha Kumara,

No.120, Araliya Gahawatta,

N awuththuduwa, Mathugama.

And another

Petitioners

Vs.

1. Thilak Collure The Secretary, Ministry of Transport, No.1, D.R. Wijewardhana Mawatha, Colombo 10.

And 17 others

Respondents

Before : L.T.B. Dehideniya J.

Counsel : Manohara de Silva PC with Mrs. P. Wickramaratne for the

Petitioners.

Milinda Gunathilake DSC for the Respondents.

Argued on: 15.10.2015

Written submission filed on: 26.11.2015 and 30.11.2015

Decided on: 31.03.2016

L.T.B. Dehideniya J.

The Petitioners filed this application by way of the petition dated

Ith June 2009 against four Respondents; that is the Secretary to the

2

Ministry of Transport, General Manager of Railways, Additional General

Manager of Railways and the Minister of Transport in their personal

capacity, seeking a mandate in the nature of Writ of Mandamus to compel

the 1 to 4 Respondents to implement the selection made by the interview

board and to appoint 1 and 2 Petitioners to the post of Assistant

Divisional Transportation Superintendent of the Department of Railway,

a Writ of Mandamus to compel the Respondents to follow the scheme of

recruitment, a Writ of Prohibition preventing the 15t and/or 2nd and/or 3rd

Respondents from filling the carder vacancies from candidates of the

internal category, a Writ of Mandamus compelling the 4th Respondent to

submit a Cabinet Memorandum, and a stay order and costs. The

Respondents filed objections to this application.

The Petitioners tendered an amended petition dated 10th June 2013

to add the present holders of the office of 1 to 4 Respondents, to add the 5

to 13 Respondents who are the members of the Public Service

Commission who are now exercising the powers that were exercised by

the 15t Respondent at the time of the application was originally filed and

to make the consequential amendments to the paragraph 30 and to the

prayer to the petition. The Respondents filed a statement of objections

dated 19th March 2014 and stated that they have no objection to add lA to

4A Respondents as the present office holders of 1 to 4 Respondents. The

Respondents further stated that they have no objection to add the

members of the Public Service Commission, the 5 to 13 Respondents.

The Respondents admitted that the members of the Public Service

Commission were appointed after filling of this application. They

objected to the proposed amendment to the paragraph 30. The

Respondents stated in paragraph 5 of their statement of objection that

they do not object to the proposed amendment to the prayer to the petition

3

as the said amendments are consequential to the addition and substitution

sought to be effected.

The paragraph 30 of the petition discloses the causes of action

accrued to the petitioners. In the original petition paragraph 30 reads as

thus;

The Petitioners state that the decision to appoint 5 applicants from

the internal category and reserving the right to appoint 1 more

making it a total of 6 applicants is manifestly unjust and/or illegal

and/or irrational and/or discriminatory and/or ultra vires the

recruitment criteria and also the directions contained in the

aforementioned letter dated 19.11.2007 (P9). In the circumstances

aforesaid the Petitioners are entitled in law:-

(a) Grant and issue a mandate in the nature of a Writ of

Mandamus compelling the pt to 4th Respondents to

implement the selection made by the interview board on

10.07.2008 by P10 and to appoint Petitioners to the post

of Assistant Divisional Transportation Superintendent

(Non Mechanical) of the Department of Railways.

(b Grant and issue a mandate in the nature of a Writ of

Mandamus compelling the pt to 4th Respondents to

follow the criteria laid down in the said Scheme of

Recruitment dated 2001.02.12 (P1) and also the

directions set out in the said letter dated 19.11.2007 (P9)

and thereby fill 60% of the Carder vacancies from the

external category and 40% of the vacancies from the

internal category, when filling the Carder vacancies in

the said post of Assistant Divisional Transportation

4

Superintendent (Non Mechanical) of the Department of

Railways.

(c) Grant and issue a writ of Prohibition preventing the Ft

and/or 2nd and/or 3rd from jilling the Carder vacancies

from the candidates of the internal category.

(d) Grant and issue a Writ of Mandamus compelling the 4th

Respondent to submit a Cabinet Memorandum to give

effect to P9.

(e) Grant an interim/stay order preventing the Ft to 4th

Respondents from taking any further steps to jill the

existing Carder vacancies and/or appoint any other

candidate to the post of Assistant Divisional

Transportation Superintendent (Non Mechanical) of the

Department of Railways until the jinal hearing and

determination of this application.

The only amendment proposed to the paragraph 30 of the amended

petition dated 10.06.2013 is that the words "lA to 4A Respondents and/or

5 to 13 Respondents~~ to be inserted in place of the words "Ft to 4th

Respondents" in sub paragraphs of (a)~ (b), (c) and (e) of the original

petition. The Respondents admitted that the Public Service Commission

was appointed after the institution of this action and they have no

objection in adding the members of the Commission as parties to the

application. The Petitioners took up the position that the powers of the 1 st

Respondent exercised at the time of filling of this application are now

exercised by the Public Service Commission. This position was not

denied by the Respondents. As such, the relief sought against the 1 st

Respondent in the original petition, is now to be sought against the

members of the Public Service Commission, the 5 to 13 Respondents.

5

The Respondents in paragraph 6 of their statement of objections

dated 19.03.2014 said that they have no objection to the proposed

amendments to the prayer to the petition. They admitted that those

amendments are consequential to the addition and substitution of parties.

It is the same amendment that was proposed for the prayer too. That is to

inserted words "1A to 4A Respondents and/or 5 to 13 Respondents" in

place of the words "Ft to 4th Respondents" in sub paragraphs of (a), (b),

(c), (d) and (f) of the prayer to the original petition.

If the amendment to the prayer is consequential to the addition and

substitution of parties, there is no reason to object to the amendment of

the paragraph 30 of the petition, as it is the same amendment that was

proposed to the paragraph 30 too.

The Respondents, in paragraph 4 of the statement of objections,

raised several objections to the proposed amendment to the paragraph 30

of the petition. The first objection is that the proposed amendment is not

consequential to the addition and substation of parties. I have already

considered this objection. The second objection is that the matters relate

to the amendment took place prior to the institution of this action. The

Respondents admitted that the Public Service Commission was appointed

after institution of this action. Therefore this objection cannot sustain.

The next two objections are that the proposed amendment will bring in a

substantive change in the pleadings and a fundamental change in the basis

of the application. As I pointed out earlier, the Respondent do not object

to the amendment proposed to the prayer to the petition. If the substantive

reliefs that were prayed by the Petitioners were not changed by the

proposed amendment, the Respondents cannot argue that the basis of the

application is changed. The other objection is that the Petitioners are

guilty of laches. The Public Service Commission was appointed after

6

filling of this application. Therefore there was no possibility for the

Petitioners to add the members of the Commission as parties at the time

of filling this application.

Under these circumstances, the objections raised in the statement of

objections of the Respondents cannot sustain.

The members of the Public Service Commission were changed and

the Chairman and three members were appointed after filling the first

amended petition. The Petitioners filed the second amended petition on

10.09.2014 adding the new Chairman and the members and amending the

said paragraphs to include the added parties. It is the only amendment in

the second amended petition.

Whether the Petitioners can seek relief against the members of the

Public Service Commission in the Court of Appeal is a matter to be

considered separately. Allowing the proposed amendments will not have

any adverse effect on the said issue.

I overrule the objections and accept the amended petition dated

10.06.2013.

Judge of the Court of Appeal.