CA-PHC-APN-72-20 Page 1 of 11 08/02/2022 IJ-06-22

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

An application under Article 138 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka to act in revision against an order of a High Court of the western province acting in the exercise of its appellate jurisdiction under section 4 of the High Court of the Province (Special Provisions) Act, No 19 of 1990 (as amended) read with Article 154P (3)(b) of the Constitution. Officer in Charge, Crime Investigation Unit, Police Station, Panadura South.

Complainant Court of Appeal Application No: CA/ PHC/APN 72/20 High Court of Panadura No: 44/2018 Magistrate Court of Panadura No: 89219

Vs.

1. Diyagu Arachchige Deepal Udayange

Karunaratne 2. Diyagu Arachchige Nihal Keerthiratne

Silva 3. Diyagu Arachchige Suranga Kelum

Silva All at, Migahakovila Road, Pinwatta, Panadura

Accused And

CA-PHC-APN-72-20 Page 2 of 11 08/02/2022 IJ-06-22

1. Diyagu Arachchige Deepal Udayange

Karunaratne 2. Diyagu Arachchige Nihal Keerthiratne

Silva 3. Diyagu Arachchige Suranga Kelum

Silva All at, Migahakovila Road, Pinwatta, Panadura

Accused Appellants

Vs.

1. The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department Colombo 02.

Respondent 2. Officer in Charge,

Criminal Investigation Division, Police Station, Panadura South

Complainant-Respondent

And now between,

4. Diyagu Arachchige Deepal Udayange

Karunaratne 5. Diyagu Arachchige Nihal Keerthiratne

Silva 6. Diyagu Arachchige Suranga Kelum

Silva All at,

CA-PHC-APN-72-20 Page 3 of 11 08/02/2022 IJ-06-22

Migahakovila Road, Pinwatta, Panadura

Accused Appellants-Petitioners

Vs.

3. The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department Colombo 02.

4. Officer in Charge,

Criminal Investigation Division, Police Station, Panadura South

Complainant-Respondent-

Respondents

BEFORE : Menaka Wijesundera J Neil Iddawala J COUNSEL : Chinthaka Rankothge with Amith Rajapaksha for the Petitioner SC Chathurangi Mahawaduge for the respondents. Argued on

:

18.01.2022

Decided on

:

08.02.2022

CA-PHC-APN-72-20 Page 4 of 11 08/02/2022 IJ-06-22

Iddawala J

This is a revision application filed on 17.07.2020 impugning the judgment dated

23.07.2017 delivered by the Magistrate Court of Panadura in case No 89219 and order

dated 14.01.2020 delivered by the High Court of Panadura, which reaffirmed the former

in appeal. Aggrieved by both the judgement and the order, accused appellants-

petitioners (hereinafter referred to as petitioners) have invoked the revisionary

jurisdiction of this Court to revise and set aside he same and acquit the petitioners from

all charges.

At the outset, the nature and scope of the revisionary jurisdiction of this Court must be

outlined. In this regard, reference to Article 138, Article 145 of the Constitution and

Section 364 of the Criminal Procedure Code can be made. As per a plethora of cases,

the Court of Appeal in exercising its discretion in revision, will not interfere with the

impugned order unless exceptional circumstances are proven. As deduced by this Bench

in CA (PHC) APN 134/20 CA Minute dated 20.07.2021, which exhaustively analysed

precedent on the subject, if facts of a case reveal a miscarriage of justice, illegality, a

gross misdirection of law, an irregularity in procedure or by its very nature shocks the

conscience of the court, the Court of Appeal can use its discretion and intervene. In the

event one or more of those grounds are proved to be in existence, the Court of Appeal

will step in and deal with the said order in the appropriate manner.

Facts of the case

The petitioners were charged in the Magistrate Court of Panadura under two charges.

The first charge was for committing robbery on the person named in the indictment, an

offence punishable under section 380 of the Penal Code read with Section 32 of the said

Code and for committing grievous hurt with a knife on the ear of the said person while

committing robbery of a gold chain and thereby committing an offence punishable under

Section 317 of the Penal Code read with Section 32 of the said Code.

At the trial, three witnesses gave evidence for the prosecution, namely

1. PW1 Mahadura Sangeeth Thabrew Virtual Complainant, Victim of the

2. PW3 Police Constable 58801 Priyantha, Police Station, Wadduwa

CA-PHC-APN-72-20 Page 5 of 11 08/02/2022 IJ-06-22

3. PW4 Inspector of Police Ruparatne, Police Station Panadura South

Petitioners pleaded not guilty, and the case proceeded to trial where the victim (PW1)

was the sole lay witness produced by the prosecution. The petitioners gave evidence

under oath from the witness box when the defence was called, and an independent

witness was also called.

At the conclusion of the trial, the learned Magistrate convicted the petitioners for the

second charge of causing grievous hurt and acquitted them on the first charge of

robbery. The learned Magistrate imposed a term of 03 months rigorous imprisonment.

Being aggrieved by the said conviction and the sentence dated 23.07.2018 and

12.11.2018, respectively, the petitioners filed an appeal to the High Court Panadura,

which was disallowed on 14.01.2020. Dissatisfied with the said order, the petitioners

have preferred the present application invoking the revisionary jurisdiction of this Court.

Impugned High Court Order

In impugning the High Court order, the Counsel for the petitioners presented two main

arguments which were contended as amounting to a gross misdirection of the law

causing a miscarriage of justice and grave prejudice to the petitioners.

1. The treatment of the sworn testimonies of the petitioners as dock statements

2. Reliance upon the unamended version of a legal provision

With regard to the first point, the relevant portion of the impugned order is quoted as

follows

... .

, (fanciful doubt)

.

(Page 5)

CA-PHC-APN-72-20 Page 6 of 11 08/02/2022 IJ-06-22

A careful perusal of the brief makes it abundantly clear that the petitioners have given

evidence under oath from 2016.02.24 2017.06.28 and have subsequently been

subjected to cross examination. As opposed to a dock statement, the evidence given by

the petitioners in the present case was verified on oath and tested by cross-examination.

Characterization of one as the other is unacceptable given that dock statements and

sworn testimonies are per se different. The landmark judgment of Kularatne v The

Queen 71 NLR 529 clearly distinguished the manner in which an unsworn statement

from the dock must be treated in comparison to a sworn testimony holding that when

an unsworn statement is made by the accused from the dock, the jurors must be informed

that such statement must be looked upon as evidence, subject however to the infirmity

that the accused had deliberately refrained from giving sworn testimony.

Judicial precedent has further elaborated on the threshold by which a dock statement

should be relied upon or not, unlike in the case of sworn testimonies. Therefore, it is

evident that the learned High Court Judge had misdirected himself when he regarded

the sworn testimony of the petitioners as a dock statement, thereby relegating the degree

of value that can be attached to the petitioners evidence. It is the considered view of

this Court that the treatment of evidence as a dock statement, as opposed to a sworn

testimony, is a gross misdirection of the law and facts.

When examining the second contention of the Counsel for the petitioner that the learned

High Court Judge has relied upon an unamended version of a legal provision, the

relevant portion of the order is reproduced below:

03

302(2)

.

303(2) ""

303(1)

... 303(2)

.

(Emphasis added) (Page 7)

CA-PHC-APN-72-20 Page 7 of 11 08/02/2022 IJ-06-22

Here, the learned High Court Judge affirms the decision of the Magistrate Court in

imposing a term of 03-month rigorous imprisonment on the petitioners instead of a

suspended sentence and deals with the petitioners submission that the learned

Magistrate has failed to give reasons as to why a suspended sentence was not imposed.

In doing so, the learned High Court Judge refers to section 303(2)(b) of the Code of

Criminal Procedure. Section 303(2)(b) of the Code of Criminal Procedure states, A Court

shall not make an order suspending a sentence of imprisonment if- (a)..

(b) the offender is serving, or is yet to serve, a term of imprisonment that has not been

suspended. Section 303 of the Code of Criminal Procedure has been subjected to three

amendments namely by Act No 20 of 1995, Act No 19 of 1997 and Act No 47 of 1999.

However, the learned High Court Judge, in referring to the Section 303 seems to have

relied on the section prior to its amendment in 1999. As such, Section 303(2)(b) has no

relevance to the present case as none of the petitioners has previous convictions, let

alone suspended sentences. The learned High Court Judges reference to violence

() is erroneous and misdirected in law. Prior to the amendment of the section in

1999, Section 303 referred to threat of violence, or the use or possession of a firearm,

an explosive or an offensive weapon. However, after the amendment in 1999, Section

303 does not refer to violence as a ground when considering the suspension or

otherwise of a sentence.

In conclusion, there is an apparent distraction of law in the High Court order which

warrants the intervention of this Court acting in revision. Hence this Court holds that

the High Court Order has erred in law by relying on section 303(2)(b) when it held that

the circumstances of the present case fell within the ambit of the said section.

Impugned Magistrate Court Judgment

The learned Magistrate has carefully analysed the evidence given by PW1 on the charge

of robbery, deeming his narration of events as an impossibility. As such, the impugned

judgment held that the prosecution failed to establish a strong prima facie case on the

first charge. According to PW1s version, he was apprehended by three persons (whom

he identified as the petitioners) who demanded the gold chain PW1 was wearing at the

CA-PHC-APN-72-20 Page 8 of 11 08/02/2022 IJ-06-22

time. PW1 states that he reacted against such demand and sustained injuries during

the ensuing struggle. However, after scrutiny of the MLR and statements by officials,

which pointed to the lack of any indication of corresponding marks that ought to be

apparent subsequent to a struggle involving the snatching of a gold chain, the learned

Magistrate has correctly disregarded such evidence. The impugned judgment holds the

following on page 100 of the brief:

,

.

Although the learned Magistrate has refused to accept the evidence pertaining to the

robbery, he refers to the injuries delineated in the MLR to hold that the version of events

as narrated by PW1 regarding the subsequent assault is corroborated. To that end, the

Learned Magistrate applied the doctrine of divisibility of evidence by referring to Francis

Appuhamy v the Queen 68 NLR 437.

Francis Appuhamy (supra) was a case in which the witness in question misidentified

the fifth accused while correctly identifying the rest in a charge of unlawful assembly.

Therefore, the portion of evidence pertaining to the identification of the fifth accused

was divested from the rest of her evidence. The Supreme Court rejected the idea that

the entirety of the witnesss evidence should be disregarded merely because of a single

misidentification:

We do not think this remark can be the foundation for a principle that the evidence

of a witness must be accepted completely or not at all. Certainly, in this Country it

is not an uncommon experience to find in criminal cases witnesses who, in addition

to implicating a person actually seen by them committing a crime, seek to implicate

others who are either members of the family of that person or enemies of such

witnesses. it is, in our opinion, not permissible to infer that the jury considered

Irene's evidence in respect of her identification of the 5th accused to be false. The

CA-PHC-APN-72-20 Page 9 of 11 08/02/2022 IJ-06-22

high probability is that they concluded she was merely mistaken in regard to the

identity of the fifth man. (at page 443).

Hence, the circumstances of Francis Appuhamy (supra), in which a misidentification of

an accused prompted the application of divisibility of evidence, are quite different from

the present case's circumstances. The credibility of evidence that is in doubt presently

refers to the main event on which the witnesss complaint is based. PW1 uttered

falsehood deliberately. Such utterance was not due to an error of memory, faulty

observation, lack of skill in observation, exaggeration or mere embroidery or

embellishment (Samaraweera v The Attorney General 1990 1 SLR 256), warranting the

application of the doctrine of divisibility of evidence. The complaint of robbery is

intrinsically linked with that of the subsequent assault, as PW1, in his statement,

admitted that the assault was a result of him struggling against the demands made by

the petitioners to hand over the gold chain. In such a context, divesting the false

evidence given on a material point and accepting a portion of evidence on an ancillary

event is a misapplication of the doctrine.

Thus, it is the considered view of this court that the maxim falsus in uno falsus in

omnibus (He who speaks falsely on one point will speak falsely upon all), ought to have

been applied in the present case as it is not permissible, in a criminal case, to disbelieve

a witness on a material point and, at the same time, believe him on other points without

corroborative evidence - Kandaih vs. SI Police Norton Bridge - 66 NLR 424. While a line

of judgments has emerged which held that the maxim cannot be applied in all instances

where a witness has uttered falsehood, as held in Viraj Perera v Attorney General (2009)

20 SLR 251 the Judge in deciding whether or not he should apply the maxim must

consider the entirety of the evidence of the witness and the entire evidence led at the trial.

(at page 257). Hence, it is the considered view of this Court that the circumstances of

the present case do not warrant the application of the doctrine of divisibility of evidence

The Counsel for the petitioners further submitted that the impugned judgment of the

Magistrate Court has erroneously held that the version of the defence was not put

forward as suggestions to the prosecution witness, thus amounting to a belated defence.

For instance, on pages 106 107 of the Appeal Brief, the impugned judgment holds that

CA-PHC-APN-72-20 Page 10 of 11 08/02/2022 IJ-06-22

.

.

As contended by the Counsel for the petitioners, this is an erroneous conclusion by the

learned Magistrate who based such a conclusion on misdirection of facts. On page 58

of the brief, the Counsel for the defence has put forward two suggestions to PW1 with

regard to the version of the defence.

: 2009.11.28 7.30

,

?

:

:

?

:

As such, it is evident that the version of the defence was put to PW1 as suggestions at

the time the prosecution was leading evidence. The defence had suggested that the PW1

was injured as a result of him trying to commit robbery of a chain and whilst he was

fleeing, he was attacked by bystanders and that he was lying under oath. These

suggestions were consistent with the version presented by the petitioners from the

witness box as well.

Therefore, when considering the entirety of the evidence led in trial, a reasonable doubt

which goes beyond a fanciful doubt has been created by the defence in the

prosecutions case. As such the benefit of the doubt must rest with the petitioners, a

conclusion the impugned Magistrate Court judgment has failed to arrive at. Hence, it is

the considered view of this Court that the impugned judgment of the Magistrate Court

contains a grave miscarriage of justice which warrants its revision.

CA-PHC-APN-72-20 Page 11 of 11 08/02/2022 IJ-06-22

Prior to conclusion, the issue of delay in filing revision application without exercising

the petitioners statutory right of appeal to the Supreme Court must be examined. The

appeal against the High Court lie to the Supreme Court, and as such, the petitioner had

44 days to do the same. The impugned High Court Order was delivered on 14.01.2020,

and the present application for revision was filed on 17.07.2020. The contention of the

petitioner that the delay was due to the COVID pandemic cannot be accepted as the

repercussions of the pandemic with regard to the filing of applications only manifested

itself around March 2020. Even Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) (Temporary

Provisions) Act No. 17 of 2021 provides for relief in respect of inability to comply with

prescribed time periods, only commencing from March 1, 2020. Petitioners had ample

time to pursue an appeal to the Supreme Court. Nevertheless, in view of the grave

prejudice caused to the petitioners by the impugned Orders, this Court, in exercising

its discretion, will exercise its revisionary jurisdiction in furtherance of justice.

At this instance, it is pertinent to reiterate Article 145 of the Constitution, which

provides that this Court may ex mero motu or on any application made, call for, inspect

and examine any record of any court of First Instance and in the exercise of its

revisionary powers may make any order thereon as the interest of justice may require.

Application allowed. Petitioners acquitted.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Menaka Wijesundera J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL