Page 1 of 5

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

CA Revision Application No:

CA (PHC) APN 47/ 2021

High Court Bail Application No:

HCBAL 294/2020

In the matter of an application of

Revision in term of Article 138 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

Hettiarachchige Amila Rangani,

197/3/01.

Mahabuthgamuwa Road,

Angoda.

Petitioner.

Vs.

1. Officer in Charge,

Police Station Grandpass.

2. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12.

Respondents And Mohhomed Raheem Mohmmed Roshan

Suspect

Page 2 of 5

Before Menaka Wijesundera J.

Neil Iddawala J.

Counsel Janaka Bandara, SSC for the

Respondents Petitioner

Asthika Devendra with

Sajeewa Ruwan Pathirana

For the Suspect

Respondents.

AND NOW BETWEEN

1. Officer in Charge,

Police Station Grandpass.

1st Respondent Petitioner

2. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department. Colombo 12.

2nd Respondent Petitioner

Vs.

Mohhomed Raheem Mohmmed Roshan

197 / 3 / 01

Mahabuthgamuwa Road,

Angoda.

Suspect - Respondent

Page 3 of 5

Argued On 29.06.2021

Decided On 20.07.2021

MENAKA WIJESUNDERA J.

The instant application for revision has been filed by the Attorney General to set

aside the order of the learned High Court Judge of Colombo dated 16.3.21.

The application was supported by the Attorney General on 31.3.21 and this Court

decided to issue notices on the respondents and a stay order.

A motion was filed on 10.5.21 by the respondents seeking a date to object to the stay

order. Matter was mentioned on 11.5.21 and the inquiry was fixed for the 8.6.21.

At the inquiry the counsel appearing for the respondents took up the following

objections,

1) The petitioner has failed to add the petitioner in the High Court application

which is under review, 2) The petitioner has not pleaded exceptional circumstances in the petition, 3) The stay order has been issued for more than 14 days.

The counsel appearing for the petitioner conceded that the wife of the accused has

not been added as a party and that he is willing to amend and add if Court permits.

The petitioner further stated that the accused has been added and he has received

notices and therefore there is no serious prejudice caused to the respondents.

But the position of the respondents are that it is an incurable mistake because an

application for amendment was not made until inquiry stage, and has gone to cite

many cases where it has been held that if necessary parties are not added it is an

incurable defect in the petition.

Page 4 of 5

In view of the submission with regard to the first objection of the respondents, this

Court takes in to account the legal principles layed down in the cases cited by the

respondents and even in the cases cited by the petitioner in their written submissions

to this Court, notes that all parties whose rights are affected should be added in any

application especially in view of rule 12(1) of 1990 of Court of Appeal rules.

The second objection raised by the respondent is that the petitioner has not expressly

pleaded exceptional circumstances.

The position of the petitioner is that exceptional circumstances needs to be

demonstrated and explained and need not be expressly stated.

But it is the view of this Court that revision is a discretionary remedy available to any

party and it is not a right given by a statute, therefore a party canvassing the same

must convince Court that there are exceptional circumstances which shock the

conscious of Court.

The third objection raised by the respondent is that this Court by issuing interim relief

for more than fourteen days Court has violated the appellate court rules.

This Court will not go in to the merits of the third objection because the very first

objection of the respondent appears to be fundamental and although it can be

amended as pointed out by the petitioner, this Court is of the opinion that it should

have been done at an earlier stage and not at the inquiry stage. Therefore taking in to

consideration the case law cited above with regard to this objection and the case law

cited by the respondents this Court uphold the first objection of the respondent and

Moves to uphold the objection of the respondents and dismiss the application of the

petitioner.

Page 5 of 5

Judge of the Court of Appeal.

I agree.

Neil Iddawala J.

Judge of the Court of Appeal.