IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Case No: CA/649/97/F

D.C. Mt. Lavinia No. 2186/L.

1

Vadivelu Ambikabalan

35, Devala Road, Nugegoda,

Presently at

21/1A, Samudradevi Vidyalaya Mw

Nugegoda.

PLAINTIFF

Vs

Thusitha Sujatha de Lanarole

21/1, Samudradevi Balika Mw

Nugegoda.

DEFENDANT

AND NOW BETWEEN

Vadivelu Ambikabalan

35, Devala Road, Nugegoda,

Presently at

21/1A, Samudradevi Vidyalaya Mw

Nugegoda.

PLAINTIFF - APPELLANT

Vs

Thusitha Sujatha de Lanarole

21/1, Samudradevi Balika Mw

Nugegoda.

DEFENDANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : Deepali Wijesundera J.

M.M.A. Gaffoor J.

COUNSEL : Thishya Weragoda for the

Plaintiff - Appellant.

D.H. Siriwardhena for the

Defendant - Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 20th February, 2015

DECIDED ON : 11th December, 2015

Deepali Wijesundera J.

The defendant respondent was the owner of the land described in

the first schedule to the plaint filed in the District Court Mt. Lavinia in

case no. 21861L. By plan no. 2281 marked as P2 the land was divided

into two Lots as D2A and D2B. By deed no. 1269 dated 01/10/1989

marked as P4 the respondent had transferred Lot D2A to the appellant

2

for a consideration of Rs. 3,22,0001= but only Rs. 250,0001= has been

paid. A sum of Rs. 72,0001= was kept back by Mortgage Bond P5. On

the same day both parties have entered into an agreement (P3) in

respect of an access road to Lot D2A, the land purchased by the

appellant. It was agreed that at the time of execution of the agreement

that the respondent should give a temporary right of way to the

appellant until a permanent right of way was provided, within six

months. If the respondent failed to do so he had to cut down trees and

give access from Samudradevi Vidyalaya Mawatha to Lot D2A.

The appellant on the 21 st of Aug ust 1990 has installed an action

against the respondent in the District Court of Mt. Lavinia seeking

specific performance of clause D of the said agreement granting the

appellant right of way over the respondent's land, and for a permanent

injunction to prevent the respondent from obstructing the said right of

way and for damage. Upon conclusion of the trial the learned District

Judge has dismissed the appellant's application holding that a public

road exists on the western boundary of the appellant's land, and in the

circumstances he is not entitled to a roadway from the respondent's

land. The appellant has filed the instant application against the said

judgment.

3

The learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the District

Judge failed to appreciate that the rights of the parties and cause of

action has to be determine as at the date of institution of action and the

said judgment is erroneous in law. He further stated that it is

contradictory to answer issue 1 and 2 in favour of the appellant and

issue 7 in favour of the respondent. The appellant submitted the learned

District Judge has stated the respondent breached the agreement but

refused to grant specific performance of the said agreement which

makes the judgment erroneous in fact and in law.

The appellant citing the judgment in Eastern Hardware Stores

Vs Fernando (1958) 58 NLR at 570 said the cardinal rule of law is that

in an action rights of parties must be determined as at the date of action.

The respondent has stated in evidence that the public roadway was

created in 1991 after the institution of action in the District Court in 1990.

The argument of the appellant was that the learned District Judge

by first stating that the respondent has breached the contractual

agreement and later stating that since there is a public roadway to the

appellant's land therefore he was not entitle to specific performance as

prayed for in the plaint has erred in law.

4

The learned counsel for the appellant stated that a party had a

right to compel a person to give something which he has promised to

give and it has been recognized and given effect in our courts and cited

the judgments in Holms Vs Alia Marikkar (1896) 1 NLR 282 and

Noorul Asin Vs Podi Nona de Soyza (1989) 1 SLR 63.

The respondent stated that by agreement no. 1208 (P3) the

parties only agreed that the appellant be given a temporary roadway to

Lot D2A until a permanent roadway is provided as access to Lot D2A on

its western boundary after which the appellant is duty bound to pay the

balance Rs. 72,0001= to the respondent. He further stated the

permanent roadway referred to in the agreement always referred to

Samudradevi Vidyala Mawatha to the west of Lot D2A. He further stated

that at the time the appellant purchased the land there was a gate

opening onto the road on the west of D2A which the appellant had

blocked by building a wall across the gate. Referring to the original deed

by which the appellant bought the land the respondent sated that there

is no mention of a roadway therefore the appellant is not entitled to a

right of way over the defendant's land by deed no. 1209 marked P4.

The learned District Judge in his finding has observed that the

appellant while having an access road from the western boundary of his

5

land is seeking an access road across the respondent's land. He has

also observed that in the event of the respondent failing to provide a

right of way along the western boundary of his land within six months

there is no clause in the agreement to say that the appellant is entitled

to a permanent right of way over the respondent's land.

The agreement No. 1208 has the following clauses;

(a) The vendor shall sell and the purchaser shall purchase the

land in the second schedule hereto fully described at or for the

sum of Rupees Three Hundred and Twenty Two Thousand of

which a sum of Rupees Two Hundred and Fifty Thousand has

been paid by the purchaser to the vendor.

(b) The vendor shall on execution of this Agreement give the

purchaser a temporary right of way to drive heavy vehicles to

and from Samudradevi Vidyalaya Mawatha (formerly

Wickremasinghe Place) until a permanent right of way is

provided.

(c) Within a period of six (6) months from this date the vendor

shall give the purchaser permanent right of way to and from

Lot D2A aforesaid to Samudradevi Vidyala Mawatha

(formerly Wickremasinghe Place) that is Samudradevi

Vidyala Mawatha on the western boundary of Mawatha

(formerly Wickremasinghe Place).

6

(d) In the event of the failure on the part of the vendor to obtain

such right of way referred to in clause (c) above then the

vendor shall cut down such trees as are necessary and give a

right of way which should be a straight road from

Samudradevi Vidyala Mawatha (formerly Wickremasinghe

Place) to Lot D2A aforesaid, the said right of way being of the

same width as that of the eXisting roadway leading from

Samudradevi Vidyala Mawatha (formerly Wickremasinghe

Place) to Lot D2 described in the first schedule hereto and

depicted on a Survey Plan.

(e) If however the vendor obtains the right of way referred to in

clause (c) above then the vendor has the absolute right to

close the aforesaid temporary right of way given in clause (b)

above and the purchaser shall close the entrance from Lot

D2A to Lot D2B aforesaid and undertakes not to use the

temporary roadway thereafter.

(fl On the vendor giving a permanent right of way to the

purchaser then the purchaser shall pay to the vendor the

balance purchase price of Rupees Seventy Two Thousand (Rs.

72,000/=).

(g) The vendor and the purchaser shall be firmly bound by these

presents notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein

contained and shall be entitled to ask for specific performance

of this Agreement

7

Clause (e) clearly states that once the permanent right of way is

obtained the appellant has under taken not to use the temporary

roadway and the respondent had the right to close the said temporary

roadway.

The District Court case had been filed on 06/05/1991 and not in

1990 as mentioned by the counsel for the appellant. The respondent

has marked a document as 01 in the District Court which is dated

08/08/1990, this is a letter written by The Chairman, Sri

Jayawardenapura Kotte Urban Council to the respondent stating that

the Samudradevi Road is being repaired and once it is done the said

road could be used as a public road. This letter clearly shows that the

appellant had road access to his land from the western boundary at the

time he filed action in the District Court to get a roadway across the

respondent's land. The deed of sale makes no reference to a roadway

since there was access to the said land which was blocked by the

appellant to get access from the respondent's land.

The learned District Judge in his judgment has taken into

cognizance all aspects of the case touching evidence and facts and

legal aspects exhaustively and come to a correct finding. This court can

8

not see a single lawful reason to set aside the learned District Judge's

findings.

For the afore stated reasons the appeal of the appellant is

dismissed with costs fixed at Rs. 25,000/=. The judgment of the District

Court is affirmed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

M.M.A. Gaffoor J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

9