==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/201/2023

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal Case No. Mohamed Junaid Mohamed Nalir

CA/HCC/ 0201/2023 alias Dhore

High Court of Kegalle

Case No. HC/3963/2019

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

CA/HCC/201/2023

2 | P a g e

COUNSEL : Kalinga Indatissa, PC with for the

Waseemul Akram, Rashmini Indatissa

and Ovini Haththotuwa for the Appellant

Anoopa De Silva, DSG for the Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 18/11/2025

DECIDED ON : 20/01/2026

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Appellant was indicted in the High Court of Kegalle for

committing one count of grave sexual abuse on Mohamed Madeen Mohamed

Sanad, punishable under Section 365(B) 2 (b) of the Penal Code as amended

by Acts No.29 of 1998 and No.16 of 2006.

It was alleged that the Appellant had sexual gratification by inserting his

male organ into the mouth of the victim.

The trial commenced on 16/11/2021. After leading the evidence of the victim

and other lay witnesses, the prosecution had closed the case on

CA/HCC/201/2023

3 | P a g e

06/02/2023. The Learned High Court Judge had called for the defence. The

Appellant had made a dock statement and closed his case.

The Learned High Court Judge after considering the evidence presented by

both parties, convicted the Appellant as charged and sentenced the Appellant

to 08 years simple imprisonment and imposed a fine of Rs.20,000/- subject

to a default sentence of 08 months simple imprisonment. In addition, a

compensation of Rs.300000/- was ordered with a default sentence of 02-year

simple imprisonment.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

On behalf of the Appellant the following Grounds of Appeal were raised:

1. The prosecution had failed to prove the case beyond reasonable doubt.

2. That the learned Trial Judge failed to appreciate that the recording of

victim’s statement was contrary to the provisions of Section 109 of the

Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of 1979.

3. That the learned Trial Judge failed to consider the inter se

contradictions between the prosecution witnesses.

Background of the case albeit as follows:

PW1 was only 15 + when he encountered the unpleasant incident as he

described in his evidence. Every day, the victim used go to his aunt’s hotel

which is about 200 meters from his house and he would remain there till the

evening. On the date of the incident, he had gone to the hotel after sitting for

an exam at his school. First, he had gone to his house from his school,

changed his dress and had gone to the hotel thereafter.

The incident had taken place at about 2.00pm in a room of a shop located

adjoining the hotel of the victim’s aunt. The shop was owned by the

Appellant. The victim had referred to the Appellant’s name as ‘Nana’. When

CA/HCC/201/2023

4 | P a g e

the victim went to the Appellant’s shop to buy something, the Appellant had

forcibly taken the victim to a room, removed his sarong and requested the

victim to take his penis into the victim’s mouth. Thereafter, the Appellant

had poked his male organ into the mouth of the victim. At that time the

Appellant was standing and the victim was made to kneel down on the floor.

This act had lasted for 10 minutes and the victim had said he had done the

act due to fear for his life, as the Appellant had threatened him.

After the first act, the Appellant had taken the victim on to a bed and lowered

his underwear and had inserted his male organ into victim’s mouth again.

The second act also lasted about 10 minutes. Thereafter, the Appellant had

allowed the victim to go away. The victim had divulged this incident to his

father. Initially, his father had taken him to the mosque but he did not

divulge the incident to anybody there. On the following day, his father had

taken him to the police where he had lodged his complaint first.

The victim was taken to the Mawanella District Hospital where he was

examined by PW5, the JMO of the hospital. In his history to the JMO, the

victim had said that a known person had done to him. He did not reveal the

name of the Appellant. The JMO had not excluded the sexual abuse or child

abuse in his report.

In his dock statement, he had denied the charge.

Considering the Appeal grounds submitted, I think it is appropriate to

consider ground number two first. In the said ground, on behalf of the

Appellant, it was contended that the learned Trial Judge failed to appreciate

that the recording of the victim’s statement was contrary to the provisions of

Section 109 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 (Hereinafter

referred to as the CPC).

CA/HCC/201/2023

5 | P a g e

Section 109(2) of the CPC states:

If such information is given orally to a police officer or to an inquirer,

it shall be reduced to writing by him in the language in which it is

given and be read over to the informant:

Provided that if it is not possible for the officer or inquirer to record the

information in the language in which it is given the officer or inquirer

shall request that the information be given in writing. If the informant

is unable to give it in writing, the officer or inquirer shall record the

information in one of the national languages after recording the

reasons for doing so and shall read over the record to the informant or

interpret it in the language he understands.

According to PW1, he had given his statement in Tamil Language, the only

language he understands. But his statement was recorded in Sinhala

language by PW3, WPS 3773 Yapa. PW3 had not stated reasons as to why

she recorded the statement in Sinhala. This is a clear violation of Section

109(2) of the CPC.

Although PW1 said in his examination-in-chief that his father did not say

anything when recording his statement by the police, in his cross

examination, PW1 stated that certain words in Tamil were subsequently

translated in Sinhala by his father. (Page 129 of the brief). This position was

endorsed by PW3 as well (Page 129 of the brief).

PW3 under cross examination admitted that she recorded that the victim can

speak the Sinhala language. Whereas, PW1 in his evidence categorically said

that he cannot read or write the Sinhala Language. (Pages 55-56 of the brief).

Further, when the recording of his evidence commenced on 16.11.2021,

translation was provided by the court to the victim. Therefore, it is very clear

that the victim would not have the capacity of explaining the incident clearly

in Sinhala.

CA/HCC/201/2023

6 | P a g e

The learned High Court Judge in her judgement at page 164 of the brief

stated;

Page 164 of the brief.

me'id 1 f.a idlaIsh fmd,sia ks,Odrsf.a idlaIsj, oS ukd fia ;yjqre ù we;' fmd,sia

ks,OdrSka idlaIsfha oS yria m%Yakj,g ,la lsrSfï oS me'id 1 orejd uqia,sï cd;slhl= ùu

iy iuyr fou< jpk mshdf.ka wid mrsj¾:kh lrk ;snQ nj ms<sf.k we;' tys jrola

fkdue;' ta wkqj orejdf.a idlaIsh tu lreK u; neyer l< fkdyels njg ;SrKh lrñ'

tfukau fmd,sia ks,OdrSka orejd úiska lshk ,o fou< jpk muKla isxy,g mrsj¾:kh

lsrSu iïnkaOfhka muKla Tyqf.a mshdf.ka wid we;s nj yria m%Yakj, oS ;yjqre ù we;'

I conclude that this has caused great prejudice to the Appellant.

In the 3rd ground of appeal, the Appellant contends that the learned Trial

Judge failed to consider the inter se contradictions between the prosecution

witnesses.

According to PW1, the complaint was lodged at the police station on the

following day after the incident. But according to PW4, the investigation

commenced upon receiving a complaint from the Child Protection Authority.

As such, PW4 had gone to the victim’s house to record his statement. As the

victim was not at home, a message was left with a relative asking PW1 to

come to the police. This was not elicited from the evidence of PW1.

As stated above, PW3 had used the victim’s father as a translator, but PW1

in his examination-in-chief stated that his father did not utter anything when

his statement was recorded.

A contradiction was marked as V1 by the defence. In his statement, he had

stated that nothing came out from the Appellant’s penis when he had

inserted it into the victim’s mouth. But when giving evidence, the victim had

said that he felt something going into his mouth.

The victim did not utter a single word regarding ejaculation in his mouth in

his history to the JMO.

CA/HCC/201/2023

7 | P a g e

The following omissions were also highlighted from the evidence of PW1.

• That PW1 did not tell the police that ‘Naana’ pulled him into the shop

room and that there was a bed in the room.

• That PW1 did not tell the police that ‘Naana’ asked him to get on the

floor and kneel.

• That PW1 did not tell police that ‘Naana’ removed his trouser and

underwear and asked him to take it in his mouth.

In the recent Court of Appeal judgment CA HCC 190/2024, dated

28.03.2025 it was noted that:

“It is essential to recognise that while discrepancies may exist, they do not

necessarily reflect a lack of credibility and reliability; instead, it is quite

clear that they stem from the complexities of human memory or the detailed

nature of the events in question. Ultimately, these issues should not

distract from the comprehensive truth the prosecution seems to establish.

It is essential to understand the implications of such discrepancies and

the broader principles of justice that must prevail. Therefore, absence of a

precise date should not be viewed as a lack of credibility rather it

highlights the need for sensitivity and understanding the judicial process.

Moreover, the cornerstone of a fair trial lies in the comprehensive

examination of all evidence presented, rather than singular date. To

dismiss a case solely due to an imprecise date undermines the principal of

justice and the potential for truth to be revealed through crucial

examination.”

CA/HCC/201/2023

8 | P a g e

In the case of Mohamed Niyas Naufer and others v. Attorney General (Sc.

01/2006 decided on 08/12/2006), the Court observed that;

"when faced with contradictions in a witness's testimonial, the Court must

bear in mind the nature and significance of the contradictions, viewed in

light of the whole of the evidence given by the witness."

In Aadam Kasam Shaikh vs. The State of Maharashtra, 2006 Cr LJ 4585

(4589), the Court held that;

"the evidence of a witness cannot be discarded merely because he has

made improvements over his police statements by stating some of the facts

for the first time in his deposition before the court, if the facts stated for the

first time before the court is in the nature of elaboration, do not amount to

a contradiction, and the evidence of witness does not militate against his

earlier version"

The learned High Court Judge in considering the contradictions and

omissions, simply referred the history to the JMO by the victim to

corroborate the statement of the victim to the police. However, the

contradiction was marked as V1 upon the evidence given by PW1 and his

statement to the police. The learned High Court Judge simply used the

history to given to the doctor by the victim to corroborate the statement given

to the police. The relevant portion of the judgment is re-produced below:

Page 160 of the brief.

ú;a;sh úiska ,l=Kq lr we;s mriamr;djh f,i “taflka fudl=;a wdfõ keye” hk

mriamr;djh iïnkaOfhka wjOdkh fhduq l<úg fmkS hkafka tu mriamr;djhka

wêlrK i<ld ne,sh fkdhq;= nj;a thg fya;=j jkafka ffjoHjrhdg o ,nd oS we;s flá

b;sydifha orejd pQos;f.a mqreI ,sx.fhka iql%dKq msgùula iïnkaOfhka i`oyka fkdl<

nj;a tu flá b;sydifha ffjoHjrhd úiska i`oyka lsrSu wkqj orejd úiska “taflka fudl=;a

CA/HCC/201/2023

9 | P a g e

wdfõ keye” hkak m%ldY lsrSu ksjeros nj;a ta wkqj tu m%ldY mriamr;djhla f,i

i<lñka neyer l< fkdyels nj wêlrKfha ;SrKhhs'

The medical history provided by a victim to a doctor can be used by the

Court, however, its legal status is usually categorized as evidence of

consistency rather than corroboration, in a strict legal sense. As per Section

157 of the Evidence Ordinance, a previous statement made by a witness can

be used in order to corroborate their current testimony in court, by way of

demonstrating consistency. In other words, if the story told to the doctor is

the same as the story told in court, the witness’s credibility is strengthened.

In this case, the history narrated to the doctor did not match with the victim’s

evidence on material points. But the learned High Court Judge had used the

history given to the doctor to corroborate the statement given to the police.

This is a clear misdirection by the learned High Court Judge. This is a clear

testament that the learned High Court Judge had not considered the

contradictions marked and the omissions highlighted in evaluating the

evidence. Further, the JMO who had been listed as PW5 was not called to

give evidence in court. Instead, the Medico Legal Examination report was

marked as an admission under Section 420 of the CPC. This too has caused

great prejudice to the Appellant.

In King v Athukorala 50 NLR 256 the court held that:

“Where an accused is charged with rape, corroboration of the story of the

prosecutrix must come from some independent quarter and not from the

prosecutrix herself. A complaint made by the prosecutrix to the police in

which she implicated the accused cannot be regarded as corroboration of

her evidence.

The corroboration which should be looked for in cases of this kind is some

independent testimony which affects the accused by connecting or tending

to connect him with the crime”.

CA/HCC/201/2023

10 | P a g e

In Premasiri v. Attorney General [2006] 3 Sri.L.R held that:

“The rule is not that corroboration is essential before there can be a

conviction in a case of rape but the necessity of corroboration as a matter

of prudence except where the circumstances make it unsafe to dispense

with it, must be present to the mind of the judge”.

In Premasiri vs. The Queen 77 NLR the Court of Criminal Appeal held;

"In a charge of rape, it is proper for a jury to convict on the uncorroborated

evidence of the complainant only when such evidence is of such a

character as to convince the jury that she is speaking the truth "

In Sunil and another vs. The Attorney General 1986 I SLR 230 Court of

Appeal held thus;

"Corroboration is only required or afforded if the witness requiring

corroboration is otherwise credible. If the evidence of the witness requiring

corroboration is not credible his testimony should be rejected and the

accused acquitted. Seeking corroboration of a witness's evidence should

not be used as a process of inducing belief in such evidence where such

evidence is not credible. It is very dangerous to act on the uncorroborated

testimony of a woman victim of a sex offence but if her evidence is

convincing such evidence could be acted on even in the absence of

corroboration.”

Considering the evidence given by the victim, the prosecution should have

placed corroborative evidence, as the evidence given by the victim failed to

satisfy court the test of consistency, spontaneity and probability.

Hence, I conclude that all appeal grounds placed before this court have

merit.

CA/HCC/201/2023

11 | P a g e

The learned Deputy Solicitor General in keeping with the highest traditions

of the Attorney General’s Department informed that she is leaving the matter

to be decided by the Court.

As discussed above, the evidence adduced by the prosecution does not

support the conviction entered by the Learned High Court Judge of Kegalle

dated 06/07/2023. Hence, I set aside the conviction and acquit the

Appellant from the charges.

Therefore, the appeal is allowed.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgment to the High

Court of Kegalle along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL