I

t

1

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Mandates in

the nature of Writs of Certiorari and Prohibition

under and in terms of Article 140 of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

CA Writ Application 256/2015

David Pieris Motor Company Limited,

75, Hyde Park Comer,

Colombo 02

Petitioner

Vs

Consumer Affairs Authority,

CWE Secretariat Building,

27, Vauxhall Street, 966,

Colombo 2

& 5 others

Respondents

Before : L.T.B. Dehideniya J. (PICA)

Counsel : Suren Fernando with K. Wickramanayake for the Petitioner

: M. Jayasinghe SC for the Respondent.

Argued on : 28.07.2017

Written submissions filed on 19.09.2017

Decided on : 26.10.2017

1 1

1

2

L. T.B. Dehideniya J. (PICA)

This is an application filed by the Petitioner Company seeking for

a Mandate in the nature of Writ of Certiorari to quash the order of the 1 st

Respondent and for a Writ of Prohibition to prevent the Respondents

from acting in furtherance of the order sought to be quashed. The facts of

this case are briefly as follows. The 5th Respondent has purchased a

motor bicycle from the Ratnapura branch of the Petitioner company on

14/12/2009. After two days, i.e. on 1611212009, the bicycle could not be

started and after reporting, an agent from the company came and

inspected the vehicle and the CDI unit was changed and thereafter the

bicycle was working properly for a few days. Again on 18/12/2009 the

vehicle could not be started and it had been repaired by the Petitioner's

agent at Ratnapura. Again on 20112 the vehicle became defective and an

agent came and certain wires were corrected and was able to start the

vehicle.

The 5th Respondent was not satisfied with the vehicle because it

broke down three times within six days. Thereafter the he complained to

the 1st Respondent: the Consumer Affair's Authority. After a protracted

inquiry, the 1st Respondent made an order on 14/5/2015 marked P47,

ordering the Petitioner to pay the back the cost of the bicycle to the 5th

Respondent.

The Petitioner's contention is that the CDI unit which was changed

by the Petitioner isn't covered by the warranty. Further they submitted

that the 5th Respondent has tampered with the wiring system and the

reason for not starting the vehicle on another occasion is due to loose

connection of the wires. Further they say that vehicle was in custody of

the 5th Respondent throughout the period and the Petitioner was not

f

r

rII (f ,tIIiIiIi II

1 j

~ 1 i ) i I I i

3

allowed to inspect the vehicle until it was inspected before the 1 st

Respondent on 05/0112011.

The Petitioner challenged the validity of the order of the 1 st

Respondent on several grounds. One of the grounds argued by the

Petitioner is that at the inspection carried out on the 05/0112011, in the

presence of the 1 st Respondent and 5th Respondent, the motor cycle was

working in good condition and therefore the inquiry should have been

concluded at that stage. It was found that the 5th Respondent has not used

the motor cycle for a long time and therefore the carburetor was clogged

and the battery was dead. After replacing the carburetor and the battery

they were able to start the motor cycle. Since there was no insurance to

the motor cycle, they could not do a test run on a highway but they had

done a test run on a foot path and found that the motor cycle is in good

working condition. In the report marked P19 the officers who were

representing the 1 st Respondent has been certified that they have not

observed any defect in the motor cycle.

The 5th Respondent has not agreed to accept the motor cycle

because he was suspicious of the condition of the vehicle. Thereafter the

1 st Respondent had referred this motor cycle to the technical division of

the Colombo University for an inspection and to report. After receiving

the report, the 1st Respondent had made the impugned order marked P47.

The Petitioner's other objection is that the 1st Respondent failed to

follow the rules of natural justice. The Petitioner submits that the report

sent by the Colombo University was not given even after requesting for a

copy and was not awarded the opportunity of cross-examining the author

of the report. Further the Petitioner submits that he was denied the

opportunity of presenting evidence to count the said report. Therefore,

the Petitioner argues that it is a violation of the rules of natural justice.

! I 1 I I

r i

\

4

The Petitioners further submit that in the report, the author has come to

the conclusion that there is a manufacturing defect in the wiring system.

Therefore the Petitioner's contention is that he should have given an

opportunity to question the author as to how he came to that conclusion.

The 1 st Respondent, in his order marked P46, has taken into

consideration the report submitted by the technical division of the

Colombo University.

The Consumer Affairs Authority has the power to inquire to a

complaint made by a consumer under Section 13 of the Consumer

Protection Act. An inquiry of this nature has to be conducted in fairness

to all parties, following the rules of natural justice. The Consumer Affairs

Authority is not expected to make any determination to satisfy only the

customers. It has to make an independent decision according to the facts

presented to it.

On 05/0112011 III the presence of the officers of the 1st

Respondent, the Petitioner had established that the motor cycle was

working in good condition. There was a difficulty to start the motor cycle

due to not using it for a long time. After attending to necessary

maintenance, they were able to start and run the vehicle. The inquiry

proceeded from that point onwards just because the 5th Respondent

didn't agree to accept the motor cycle. Once it is established that the item

sold is working in good condition there is no reason for the authority to

proceed further with the inquiry.

The 1st Respondent accepted the report issued by the Colombo

University without offering the Petitioner an opportunity to attack the

credibility of the report or the expertise of the author of the report.

The Petitioner has requested for a copy of the report submitted by

the Colombo University from the 1st Respondent but the document

I I

1 i , !

\ , 1 , I I I !

~ I j I

5

marked P45, the proceedings of the inquiry dated 19.08.2014, bear

witness to the fact that the 1 st Respondent arbitrary refused to issue a

copy. Under section 13 (1), (3) and (4) of the Consumer Affairs Authority

Act the 1 st Respondent can make an order only after an inquiry.

The 1 st Respondent, being an administrative body with quasI

judicial power, formulated by a statute to inquire in to the disputes in

relating to consumer affairs, is duty bound to hold the inquiry fairly and

reasonably. It has been held in the case of Shell Gas Lanka Ltd. vs.

Consumer Affairs Authority and another [2008] 1 Sri L R 128 at 134 that;

The duty of the court is to see that power shall not be exercised in

unlawful and arbitrary manner, when exercise of such powers

affects the basic rights of individuals. The courts should be alert to

see that such powers conferred by the statute are not exceeded or

abused.

Wade and Forsyth in Administrative Law 9th Edition at page 966

says that;

A statutory inquiry is a formalized version of the fair hearing

which is required by the common law according to the principles of

natural justice. It does not displace natural justice. It should be

regarded rather as a framework within which natural justice can

operate and supply missing details. The common law's

presumption that Parliament intends power to be exercised fairly is

all the stronger where Parliament itself has provided for a hearing.

Natural justice has in fact been applied in a long series of cases to

the whole procedure of a public inquiry, comprising the inspector's

function alike. The principle of these cases was that the law could

not be content with seeing merely that the form of the statutory

procedure had been followed. The same applies to the statutory

IiI

f.fIII ( II

rr JIf

I!l lI,

f:

6

rules of procedure which have been made for many inquires, as

explained later.

The learned Counsel for the Petitioner cited a series of case such as

Nesle Lanka Ltd v. Consumer Affairs Authority and another [2005] 2 Sri

L R 138, Gregory Fernando v. Stanly Perera [2004] 1 Sri L R 346,

Mahindapala and Others v. Minister of Land Development and others

[2009] 2 Sri L R 324 where it has been emphasized that the inquiry needs

to be held fairly and following the rules of natural justice.

In the present case the 1 st Respondent had relied on a report

tendered by the Colombo University. In fact in the order marked P47, the

1 st Respondent had stated that the Colombo University had found that

there is a manufacturing defect in the vehicle and the 1 st Respondent

relied on the findings of the University, but the Petitioner was denied the

opportunity to contradict or counter the said report. It is a violation of

natural justice.

Another factor that has to be considered is that according to the

warranty given by the Petitioner, the electric system was not covered. The

clause 3 of P48 is that "the repair or replacement of parts shall not

include the repair and/or replacement of ......... any electric items .... "

As per paragraph no. 2 of 1 R 1, the self starting system was not

functioning even at the time of purchasing but the Petitioner knowing it,

proceeded to purchase the motor bicycle.

As I pointed out earlier, the Petitioner had established that the

vehicle is in working condition in the presence of the officers of the 1 st

Respondent Authority but still the 1 st Respondent continued with the

inquiry, and relying on a report, where the Petitioner was not awarded the

opportunity to test the expertise of the author; decided against the

Petitioner. The Court cannot allow to stand such an order because it is

arbitrary, illegal and against the accepted norms of natural justice.

II

II f

7

Unser these circumstances, I issue writs as prayed for in paragraph

(d), (e) and (f) of the prayer of the petition.

Application allowed.

No costs.

President of the Court of Appeal

II! l jII II!