1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal from the High Court in

terms of section 331 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act

The Democratic Socialist Republic of SriLanka.

Complainant

CA/HCC/329/18 VS High Court of Colombo Case No: HC 6993/13 Wedage Don Kamal alias Winsan Kamal

Accused

And now between

Wedage Don Kamal alias Winsan Kamal

Accused Appellants

VS

The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Complainant -Respondent

2

BEFORE : N. Bandula Karunarathna, J.

: R. Gurusinghe, J.

COUNSEL : The accused appellant absconding

and unrepresented

Dilan Ratnayake SDSG

for the Attorney General

ARGUED ON : 08/06/2022

DECIDED ON : 26/07/2022

R. Gurusinghe, J.

The accused-appellant (the appellant) was convicted for having in possession

and trafficking 20.02 grams of heroin, an offence punishable in terms of

Section 54 A(b) and 54 A(c) of the Poisons Opium and Dangerous Drugs

Ordinance as amended by Act No. 13 of 1984. The appellant was sentenced to

life imprisonment.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the appellant

appealed to this Court.

A raid was conducted pursuant to the information provided by a personal

informant to PW2, that the appellant was bringing heroin to a particular place.

The Police team waited near the Nikape school in the Dehiwela, Galkissa area,

in order to apprehend the appellant. As they were waiting for the appellant, a

police officer in a uniform saw that the vehicle of the appellant was

approaching towards them, and he signalled the vehicle to stop, but the vehicle

3

did not stop. PW2 then fired a shot with his pistol onto the front tyre of the

vehicle, which caused the vehicle to stop. The police then searched the vehicle

and the people inside it. The appellant was arrested as he was detected with

heroin in his trouser pocket.

The Grounds of appeal set out in the written submissions of the appellant are

as follows:

1. The learned Trial Judge has not taken into consideration the

preliminary objections raised by the appellant for the indictment.

2. The learned Trial Judge has not taken into consideration the fact

that the prosecution has failed to establish the chain of custody of

the productions.

3. The learned Trial Judge has failed to consider the improbabilities

of the prosecution story.

4. The learned Trial Judge has failed to consider the contradiction

between the evidence of the prosecution witnesses.

5. The learned Trial Judge has neither accepted nor rejected the dock

statement of the appellant.

Even though the written submissions of the appellant were tendered to the

Court, the appellant escaped from the prison authorities in 2019. The Counsel

who appeared for him earlier had not been given any instructions by the

appellant. The appeal was heard in the absence of the appellant in terms of

section 325 (2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.

The first ground of appeal was not raised at the trial as a preliminary issue. It

was raised for the first time when the trial was concluded.

The first ground of appeal was based on two points.

4

1. As per the charge, the offence has been committed at Mount Lavinia. The

evidence is that the appellant was arrested with the drugs at Nikape,

Dehiwela. Nikape is an area that comes under the Mount Lavinia

Magistrate Court's jurisdiction. It is an area that comes under the

Dehiwela-Mount Lavinia Municipal Council.

2. As per the charge, the weight of the heroin is 20.8 grams. According to

the government analysts report, the weight of the heroin was 20.02

grams.

In terms of section 166 of the Code Of Criminal Procedure Act, any error

stating in either the offence, or the particulars required to be stated in the

charge, and omission to state the offence or those particulars, shall not be

regarded as material, unless the accused was misled by such error or omission.

The effect of an error in the charge was considered in Rex vs Amarasekera 29

NLR 33 and held as follows: "the accused must not be prejudiced either by total

lack of a formal charge or by an error or an omission in the charge." This is the

guiding principle.

The Supreme Court considered the issue of not reading out the indictment to

the accused in Hiniduma Dahanayakage Siripala alias Kiri Mahaththaya vs The

Hon. Attorney General, SC Appeal No.115/2014 SC (SPL) LA Application No.

36/2014 decided on 22/01/2020. In that case, His Lordship Justice Aluwihare

decided, among other things, as follows:-

"The threshold to be satisfied to obtain relief from the Court of Appeal in Appeals;

21. With the promulgation of the 1978 Constitution, if relief is to be obtained in

an appeal, a party must satisfy the threshold requirement laid down in the

proviso to Article 138(1), which is placed under the heading "The Court of

Appeal". The proviso to the said Article of the Constitution lays down that;

"Provided that no judgment, decree or order of any court shall be reversed or

5

varied on account of any error, defect or irregularity, which has not prejudiced

the substantial rights of the parties or occasioned a failure of justice". (Emphasis

is mine.)

22. The proviso aforesaid is couched in mandatory terms and the burden is on

the party seeking relief to satisfy the Court that the impugned error, defect, or

irregularity has either prejudiced the substantial rights of the parties or has

occasioned a failure of justice. It must be observed that no such Constitutional

provision is to be found either in the 1948 Soulbury Constitution' or the 'First

Republican Constitution of 1972'.

23. The Constitutional provision embodied in Article 138(1) cannot be overlooked

and must be given effect to. None of the decisions (made after 1978) relied upon

11 by the Appellants with regard to the issue that this Court is now called upon

to decide, appear to have considered the constitutional provision in the proviso to

Article 138(1). It is a well-established canon of interpretation, that the

Constitution overrides a statute as the grundnorm. All statutes must be

construed in line with the highest law. Judges from time immemorial have in

their limited capacity, essayed to fill the gaps whenever it occurred to them, in

keeping with the contemporary times, in statutes which do not align with the

Constitution. However, such interpretations are not words etched in stone.

42. While the omission of a formal arraignment was unfortunate and regrettable,

having taken into account the facts and circumstances peculiar to the case before

us, it cannot be said, in my view, that it had prejudiced the substantial rights of

the Accused-Appellants, nor can it be said that it had occasioned a failure of

justice. In the circumstances, I have answered the questions of law in the

manner detailed in paragraph 8 of this judgement and hold that the procedural

irregularity referred to, does not have the effect of vitiating the trial."

As the law now stands, no judgment, decree or order of any court shall be

reversed or varied on account of any error, defect or irregularity, which has not

6

prejudiced the substantial rights of the parties or occasioned a failure of

justice.

The learned Trial Judge considered the effects of errors and came to the

conclusion that the appellant was not misled by the errors. When considering

the whole case, the errors were not affected by the defence and caused no

prejudice to the accused. Therefore, the first ground of appeal cannot be

sustained.

The next point raised by the appellant is that the person who kept the heroin

and handed it over to the government analyst was dead at the time of the trial.

Therefore, the chain of custody was not proved beyond reasonable doubt. PW3

Sub Inspector Samarakone was the person in charge of productions at the

Narcotic Bureau at that time. He was dead by the time this case came up for

the trial. PW4 Assistant Government analyst, when giving evidence, stated that

Sub Inspector Samarakone, attached to the Police Narcotic Bureau, had

handed over the sealed production to her on the 04th of August 2010. The seals

were intact as per her evidence.

PW5 was called to produce the statement made by Sub Inspector Samarakone

in the information book. This witness stated that the deceased Sub Inspector

served under him for 12 years, and he knew his handwriting. During the12

years period, he had the opportunity to be familiar with the handwriting of Sub

Inspector Samarakone. PW1 stated that the heroin detected from the appellant

was sealed, and it was handed over to PW3 Sub Inspector Samarakone. PW4

testified that the seals were intact, and the productions were handed over by

Sub Inspector Samarakone. PW5 gave evidence in terms of section 32(2) of the

Evidence Ordinance. Section 32(2) of the Evidence Ordinance is as follows:

(2) When the statement was made by such person in the ordinary course

of business, and in particular when it consists of any entry or

memorandum made by him in books kept in the ordinary course of

7

business or in the discharge of professional duty; or of an

acknowledgment written or signed by him of the receipt of money, goods,

securities, or property of any kind; or of a document used in commerce

written or signed by him, or of the date of a letter or other document

usually dated, written, or signed by him.

The death certificate of Sub Inspector Samarakone was produced in Court.

PW5 stated that he had attended the funeral of Sub Inspector Samarakone.

Sub Inspector Samarakone's duty was to accept the productions from police

officers and keep them. Handing over the productions to the Government

Analyst was a part of his duty. PW 1 handed over the sealed parcel to PW 3,

which he had handed over to the Government Analyst. He had done that in the

ordinary course of his duty.Therefore, this argument cannot be accepted.

Another point raised by the appellant is that the Learned Trial Judge has not

considered the probabilities and improbabilities of the prosecution story. When

perusing the judgment, it is clear that the learned Trial Judge has adequately

considered the probabilities and improbabilities and came to the conclusion

that the prosecution story is probable.

The appellant stated in his dock statement that the raid had taken place

between Borallesgamuwa and Bellanwila Road. It further stated that several

high-ranking police officers came to the scene. This manifests the significance

of the raid. The learned Trial Judge has assessed the probabilities and

improbabilities. Therefore, this ground of appeal has no merit.

The next point raised in the written submission of the appellant is that the

learned Trial Judge has not considered the contradictions. There were no

contradictions marked. However, in the written submissions, it is stated

whether PW1 was informed of the appellant's name before the raid or whether

he came to know his name after the raid. This is contradictory between PW1

and PW2. The other one is whether the high-ranking police officers came to

8

Nikape, where the raid took place or whether it took place in the house of the

appellant in Ratmalana. The Next one is, where was the money of the appellant

found?. None of these differences had a bearing on the credibility of the

witnesses or affected the defence of the accused-appellant. Those were not

significant. Therefore, this argument cannot be succeded.

The final point is that the learned High Court Judge has not accepted nor has

he rejected the dock statement. The learned Trial Judge has considered the

dock statement. The position of the appellant was that his vehicle was

overtaken by the police vehicle and stopped by the police. This was specifically

referred to in the judgment, and came to the conclusion that the position of the

appellant could not be accepted. Therefore,it is quite clear that the learned

High Court Judge has rejected the dock statement. Though the learned Trial

Judge has not rejected the dock statement in so many words, he has refused to

act on it.

For the foregoing reasons, the appeal is dismissed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

N. Bandula Karunarathna, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal