WRT/0394/19

Page 1 of 11

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Mandates

in the nature of Writs of Certiorari and

Mandamus under and in terms of Article 140

of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

C.A. CASE NO. WRT/0394/19

1. Hemantha Prematilaka Waragoda

Withanage,

No. 24, Leynbaan Street,

Fort,

Galle.

2. Madduma Vidana Gamachchige

Ramyachandra Gunasekera,

No. 33, Sri Dharmarama Road,

Fort,

Matara.

3. Sunil Gunasekera,

No. 279/2,

Halambagaswala,

Thissamaharamaya.

PETITIONERS

Vs.

1. Dr. R. H. Samaratunga,

Secretary to the Treasury,

Ministry of Finance,

The Secretariat, Colombo 01.

WRT/0394/19

Page 2 of 11

1A. K. M. Mahinda Siriwardane,

Secretary to the Treasury,

Ministry of Finance,

The Secretariat, Colombo 01.

2. M. K. P. Kumara,

Director,

Department of Trade and Investment Policy,

Room No. 337, 3rd Floor,

Ministry of Finance,

The Secretariat, Colombo 01.

2A. K. A. Vimalenthirarajah,

Director,

Department of Trade and Investment Policy,

Room No. 337, 3rd Floor,

Ministry of Finance,

The Secretariat, Colombo 01.

3. Sanath Perera,

Additional Director General,

Treasury Operations Department,

Ground Floor, P.O. Box 1550,

Ministry of Finance, Colombo 01.

3A. H. C. D. L. Silva,

Additional Director General,

Treasury Operations Department,

Ground Floor, P.O. Box 1550,

Ministry of Finance, Colombo 01.

4. R. C. De Zoysa,

Chief Secretary,

Southern Provincial Council,

WRT/0394/19

Page 3 of 11

Chief Secretariat office,

S. H. Dahanayake Mawatha, Galle.

4A. Sumith Alahakoon,

Chief Secretary,

Southern Provincial Council,

Chief Secretariat office,

S. H. Dahanayake Mawatha, Galle.

5. Prasadini Bomiriarachchi,

Assistant Chief Secretary (Establishments),

Southern Provincial Council,

Chief Secretary’s Office,

S. H. Dahanayake Mawatha, Galle.

5A. Prasadini Bomiriarachchi,

Assistant Chief Secretary (Establishments),

Southern Provincial Council,

Chief Secretary’s Office,

S. H. Dahanayake Mawatha, Galle.

6. Ranatunga Mudiyanselage Indrani Sriyani

Nambukara Vithana,

Secretary,

Provincial Co-operative Employees Commission

Southern Province,

Planning Secretariat Building (01st Floor),

S. H. Dahanayake Mawatha, Galle.

6A. Jayantha Liyanage,

Secretary,

Provincial Co-operative Employees Commission

Southern Province,

Planning Secretariat Building (01st Floor),

S. H. Dahanayake Mawatha, Galle.

WRT/0394/19

Page 4 of 11

7. Chandrika Wickramasinghe,

Acting Secretary,

Provincial Co-operative Employees Commission

(Southern Province),

Planning Secretariat Building (01st Floor),

S. H. Dahanayake Mawatha, Galle.

8. Hemal Gunasekera,

Governor - Southern Province,

Governor’s Secretariat,

Lower Dickson Road, Galle.

8A. Willy Gamage,

Governor - Southern Province,

Governor’s Secretariat,

Lower Dickson Road, Galle.

9. A. U. Welarathna,

Governor’s Secretary,

Southern Province,

Governor’s Secretariat,

Lower Dickson Road, Galle.

9A. Dipika Kumari Gunaratne,

Governor’s Secretary,

Southern Province,

Governor’s Secretariat,

Lower Dickson Road, Galle.

RESPONDENTS

BEFORE : K. M. G. H. KULATUNGA, J.

COUNSEL : Chamara Fernando and Meleesha Perera, instructed by Niluka

Dissanayake, for the Petitioner.

Ishan Rathnapala, SSC, for the Respondents.

WRT/0394/19

Page 5 of 11

ARGUED ON : 26.08.2025

DECIDED ON : 23.09.2025

JUDGEMENT

K. M. G. H. KULATUNGA, J.

1. The petitioners have preferred this application seeking a writ of certiorari

and mandamus to quash and direct the decision in P-20 pertaining to the

refusal to issue a concessionary permit for the importation of vehicles.

The petitioners were the Chairman and members of the Co-operative

Employees’ Commission of the Southern Province. They have been so

appointed with effect from 20.09.2014. All three of them have applied for

permits to import vehicles on concessionary terms under the Trade and

Investment Policy Circular No. 01/2016. The said applications have been

rejected and returned by letter P-20 on the basis that the petitioners do

not qualify and are not eligible for the said permit, as the Provincial

Corporative Commission does not qualify under Clause 1.13 of the

Circular No. 01/2018. Accordingly, the petitioners have preferred this

application to quash the decision communicated by P-20.

2. This application was taken up for argument on 26.08.2025. Then the

parties were given time to tender their post-argument written

submissions. However, as requested by the parties, the written

submissions previously tendered on 21.03.2023 and 20.03.2023 were

considered.

3. The petitioners’ position and argument is that the Provincial Co-operative

Employees’ Commission (hereinafter referred to as “the Commission”) is

specifically recognized under and in terms of item 17.3 of List I (Provincial

Council List) of the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution and is established

under the Provincial Statute enacted by Statute No. 05 of 2019 (P-6). It

is thus argued that the said Commission is established as per the

WRT/0394/19

Page 6 of 11

provisions of the Constitution and thereby qualifies under Section 1.13

of Circular No. 01 of 2018 (P-14) for eligibility. It is further submitted that

prior to this, members of the said Commission have been issued with

such concessionary permits to import vehicles. In support thereof, P-08,

a letter dated 16.09.2013 issued on behalf of the Director General,

Treasury Operations Department, is relied on. According to which, it is

opined that members of the Provincial Co-operative Employees’

Commission qualify to be eligible for such permits, under the then

Circular No. 01/2013 read with Clause 01.01 (ඇ).

4. As opposed to this, the position of the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd respondents is that

the said Commission is established by a Provincial Statute and does not

qualify, as it is not a Commission established by the provisions of the

Constitution as per Clause 1.13 of Circular No. 01/2018. Further, the

Additional Director General’s letter dated 16.03.2013, marked P-08, is

incorrect and ultra vires, and it relates to a previous Circular bearing No.

01/2013 (P-7), and accordingly the petitioner cannot have any legitimate

expectation. The applicable Circulars as at the relevant time are 01/2016

and 01/2018 (P-09 (a) and P-14, respectively). It is also submitted that

the petitioners are guilty of laches or delay.

5. I will now consider if the petitioners qualify and are eligible as claimed by

them. The operative clause of the relevant Circular, P-14, is 1.13. It reads

as follows:

“01. හිමිකම් ලබන අවස්ථා

1.13 ආණ්ඩුක්‍රම ව්‍යව්‍ස්ථාව්‍ මඟින් සලසා ඇති විධිවිධාන ප්‍රකාරව්‍ පිහිටුව්‍ා ඇති

කකාමිෂන් සභාව්‍ක ව්‍සර තුනක (3) සක්‍රීය කස්ව්‍ා කාලයක් සහිත කකාමිෂන් සභා

සභාපතිව්‍රුන් හා සාමාජිකයින්.”

“01. Entitled categories

1.13 Chairman and members who have completed three (3) years

of active service period at a Commission established as per the

Provisions of the Constitution.”

WRT/0394/19

Page 7 of 11

According to the above, such Commission should be established as per

the provisions of Constitution. As I see, the Provincial Co-operative

Employees’ Commission is established under the Provincial Statute No.

5 of 2019. All that the Constitution provides for by item 17 of List I is

that the Provincial Council is empowered to make statutes in respect of

the said subject matter, namely the Provincial Co-operative Employees’

Commission. The said Schedule to the Constitution does no more than

provide for and declare the authority of the relevant Provincial Council to

legislate in respect of such matters. This, by no stretch of the

imagination, can be deemed, interpreted, or considered as being

provision to establish such Commission by the Constitution. What is

contemplated by the said Clause 1.13 of the Circular is that the

provisions as to the establishment and creation of such Commission

should be provided for by and in the Constitution in that form. The

Constitution merely specifies the authority empowered to make or

promulgate enabling statutes to create and establish such a Commission.

The statutory provisions as to the establishment and creation of the said

Commission are provided by the said Provincial Statute. For all purposes,

the said Commission, namely the Provincial Co-operative Employees’

Commission, is established by the Co-operative Employees’ Commission

of the Southern Province, Statute No. 01/1998, and not by the

Constitution. Accordingly, the decision made and conveyed by P-20, to

my mind, is correct and lawful.

6. Then, the petitioners referred to a list of 13 institutions which are listed

as being Commissions entitled to receive such import permits. The said

list is referred to and is contained in the letter dated 17.08.2018 of the

Director (Legal) of the Ministry of Finance and Mass Media (vide R-2). The

petitioners submit that items ‘e’ and ‘k’, the Human Rights Commission

of Sri Lanka and the Provincial Public Service Commission listed therein,

cannot be considered as Commissions established under the provisions

of the Constitution. Thus, it is argued that if those Commissions are so

WRT/0394/19

Page 8 of 11

included, the Provincial Corporative Employees’ Commission should also

be included (vide paragraph 6 of the written submissions).

7. The sum total of this argument is that, as the said two have been wrongly

listed, the Provincial Employees’ Co-operative Commission also should

be considered and recognized to qualify under Clause 1.13 of Circular P-

20. I am unable to accept this argument. An improper or incorrect listing

of any other institution cannot give rise to a right to demand that an

institution that does not qualify be deemed to be considered to be so

qualified. This is akin to creating a right by two wrongs, so to say. The

decision made by P-20 is based on the simple interpretation of Clause

1.13 of P-14. A wrong and erroneous decision on a previous occasion

cannot create a legitimate expectation as claimed by the petitioners. No

doubt, legitimate expectation is a ground which is accepted and well

entrenched in our law. When such an expectation is created by a

representation, it correspondingly creates a right in such person to have

the same enforced. This right, in such person, would thus create a

corresponding duty upon such public official who is statutorily

empowered and authorised to give effect to the same. Legitimate

expectation may be procedural or substantive.

8. I will now endeavour to consider the legal position and the principle of

legitimate expectation as it is relevant to this application. Prof. Craig, in

‘Administrative Law’ (7th Ed., at p.677), defines procedural and

substantive legitimate expectation as follows:

“The phrase ‘procedural legitimate expectation’ denotes the existence of some process right the applicant claims to possess as the result of a promise or behaviour by the public body that generates the expectation….. The phrase ‘substantive legitimate expectation’ captures the situation in which the applicant seeks a particular benefit or commodity, such as a welfare benefit or a license, as the result of some promise, behaviour or representation made by the public body.”

WRT/0394/19

Page 9 of 11

The ideology of ‘substantive legitimate expectation’ originated in the

landmark case of R vs. Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries and Food,

ex parte Hamble (Offshore) Fisheries Ltd [1995] 2 All ER 714, where

Sedley, J., held as follows:

“Legitimacy in this sense is not an absolute. It is a function of expectations induced by government and of policy considerations which militate against their fulfilment. The balance must in the first instance be for the policy maker to strike; but if the outcome is challenged by way of judicial review, I do not consider that the Court's criterion is the bare rationality of the policy maker's conclusion. While policy is for the policy-maker alone, the fairness of his or her decision not to accommodate reasonable expectations which the policy will thwart remains the Court's concern (as of course the lawfulness of the policy). To postulate this is not to place the judge in the seat of the Minister...but it is equally the court’s duty to protect the interests of those individuals whose expectation of different treatment has a legitimacy which in fairness outtops the policy choice which threatens to frustrate it.” [emphasis added].

The abovementioned dictum has been cited with approval in Dayaratne

vs. Minister of Health and Indigenous Medicine (1999) 1 SLR 393, in

Nimalsiri vs. Fernando (SC/FR/256/2010, decided on 17th September

2015), and in M. R. C. C. Ariyarathne and others vs. Inspector

General of Police and others (SC/FR/444/2012, decided on 30th July

2019). In M. R. C. C. Ariyarathne and others vs. Inspector General of

Police and others (supra), Prasanna Jayawardena, PC, J., after an

extensive and all-encompassing analysis on the doctrine of legitimate

expectation, cited with approval the following dicta of Dehideniya, J.’s

decision in Zamrath vs. Sri Lanka Medical Council

(SC/FR/119/2019, decided on 23.07.2019), as the rationale underlying

the doctrine of legitimate expectation:

“The legitimate expectation of a person … further ensures legal certainty which is imperative as the people ought to plan their lives, secure in the knowledge of the consequences of their actions. The perception of legal certainty deserves protection, as a basic tenet of the rule of law which this court attempts to uphold as the apex court of the country. The public perception of legal certainty

WRT/0394/19

Page 10 of 11

becomes negative when the authorities by their own undertakings and assurances have generated legitimate expectations of people and subsequently by their own conduct, infringe the so generated expectations.”

9. In R. vs. North and East Devon Health Authority, ex p Coughlan

[2001] QB 213, Lord Woolf, M.R. (giving the judgment of the Court

consisting of himself, Mummery and Sedley L.JJ.), as follows:

“Where the court considers that a lawful promise or practice has induced a legitimate expectation of a benefit which is substantive, not simply procedural, authority now establishes that here too the court will in a proper case decide whether to frustrate the expectation is so unfair that to take a new and different course will amount to an abuse of power.” [emphasis added.]

The above dicta confirms that an erroneous decision cannot create a

legitimate expectation. Further, in Siriwardane vs. Seneviratne and

four others [2011] 2 SLR 1, Dr. Shirani Bandaranayake, J. (as her

Ladyship then was), held as follows:

“A careful consideration of the doctrine of legitimate expectation, clearly shows that, whether an expectation is legitimate or not is a question of fact. This has to be decided not only on the basis of the application made by the aggrieved party before court, but also taking into consideration whether there had been any arbitrary exercise of power by the administrative authority in question.” [emphasis added.]

10. Thus, if a past promise, practice, or policy is found to be premised on a

wrong or erroneous interpretation, which is not legitimate, then the

change of policy or procedure to bring it within the lawful and correct

interpretation cannot create a legitimate expectation. There should be a

previous lawful and legitimate promise, practice, or policy to induce or

create a legitimate expectation. The previous practice of issuing permits

or the holding out that the Commissioners of the said Commission are

entitled to permits are based on the erroneous interpretation of a

previous Circular, namely Circular No. 01/2013. That being so, the

current Circular (P-14) premises the qualification on such Commission

WRT/0394/19

Page 11 of 11

being established as per the provisions of the Constitution. As

considered hereinabove, the previous interpretation and the policy

based thereon were erroneous and not legitimate. Accordingly, such a

promise, practice, or policy, which is neither lawful nor legitimate,

cannot create a legitimate expectation in the petitioners as claimed.

Accordingly, I hold that the petitioners have no legitimate expectation as

claimed.

11. In the above circumstances, I find that the petitioners have failed to

establish any basis in law or otherwise that entitles them to the relief as

prayed for. The impugned interpretation and the determination are

correct and lawful.

12. Accordingly, I am left with no option but to refuse and dismiss this

application. However, I make no order as to costs. Accordingly, this

application is refused and dismissed.

Application is dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL