==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0331/2019

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made

under Section 331 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of

1979.

Court of Appeal Case No. Nanneththi Harsha Nalin

CA/HCC/0331/2019 Kumara

High Court of Balapitiya ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Case No. HC 2064/2017

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

Amal Ranaraja, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J

CA/HCC/0331/2019

2 | P a g e

COUNSEL : Tenny Fernando with Pasindu Silva for

the Appellant.

Harippriya Jayasundara, PC, ASG with

Anoopa De Silva, DSG Chamodi

Gunasekera and Tharushi Kulasinghe for

the Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 18/02/2026

DECIDED ON : 19/05/2026

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) was indicted by the Attorney General in the High Court of

Balapitiya as follows:

1. On or about 30.01.2016 the Appellant was indicted for being in

possession of 5559.7 grams of Heroin (Diacetylmorphine) which is an

offence punishable under Section 54(A) (d) of the Poisons, Opium and

Dangerous Drugs Ordinance as amended by Act No. 13 of 1984.

2. In the course of the same transaction, the Appellant was indicted for

trafficking 5559.7 grams of Heroin, which is an offence punishable

CA/HCC/0331/2019

3 | P a g e

under Section 54(A) (b) of the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs

Ordinance as amended by Act No. 13 of 1984.

3. In the course of the same transaction, the Appellant was indicted for

being in possession of 1.100 kilograms of Cannabis Sativa L (Ganja)

which is an offence punishable under Section 54(A) (d) of the Poisons,

Opium and Dangerous Drugs Ordinance as amended by Act No. 13 of

1984.

4. In the course of the same transaction, the Appellant was indicted for

trafficking 1.100 kilograms of Cannabis Sativa L (Ganja), which is an

offence punishable under Section 54(A) (b) of the Poisons, Opium and

Dangerous Drugs Ordinance as amended by Act No. 13 of 1984.

After the trial, the Appellant was found guilty on all counts and the learned

High Court Judge of Balapitiya had sentenced him to death on counts No.

01 and 02 and had imposed a sentence of 01-year rigorous imprisonment

each on counts No.03 and 04 on 18/10/2019. The prosecution had called

05 witnesses and had marked productions P1 to P17.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellant had

preferred this appeal to this Court.

The learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the Appellant

has given consent for this matter to be argued in his absence. During the

argument he was connected via the Zoom platform from prison.

On behalf of the Appellant the following Grounds of Appeal were raised.

1. The deliberate failure of the prosecution to call a material witness who

had received the 1st information regarding the raid.

2. The learned High Court Judge had misdirected himself by completely

ignoring to evaluate the dock statement of the Appellant.

CA/HCC/0331/2019

4 | P a g e

3. The learned High Court Judge had misdirected himself with regards to

the ruling, as well as Section 27(1) of the Evidence Ordinance which is

relevant in this case.

Background of the case.

According to PW1, IP Willorarachchi, he was attached to the Ambalangoda

Police Station when this raid was conducted. According to him the first

information about the Appellant was received on 30.01.2016 from PW13, PS

64746 Ranasinghe about his possession of Heroin. PW13, who is an

intelligence officer, had transmitted the information to PW1 immediately.

Acting upon this information, he had arranged 13 police officers as well as

himself and PW13 for the raid. Several police officers were clad in uniform

and others were attired in civil dress. When PW13 transmitted the

information to him, he had instructed PW13 to enter the same in his pocket

note book and to obtain a signature from his superior officer. The team had

left the police station at 15.45 hours in a police jeep and in a private van. PC

72711 Chandana had driven the private van. PW1 and PW13 had travelled

in the van with the others. The van had proceeded up to a place called Parrot

Junction as per the information. Thereafter, they had proceeded up to the

Usmudulawa Junction. On their way, the informant had also gotten into the

van. The police jeep was stopped at the Urawatta Junction.

The van had proceeded up to the railroad and stopped. At that time, PW13’s

informant had also gotten in to the van. They had remained in the van till

17.00 hours. At that time PW1 and his team had spotted a person clad in a

black coloured three quarter and a red coloured T-shirt. After having seen

the person, PW1 had directed the informant to leave the van. Thereafter, PW1

and PW3 had walked up to the person shown by the informant and after

revealing their identity, PW1 had checked the bag the person was carrying

at that time.

CA/HCC/0331/2019

5 | P a g e

Inside the bag, PW1 had observed a parcel wrapped in two polythene sheets.

When he checked the contents in the parcel, he found a certain brown

coloured substance which tested positive for Heroin (Diacetylmorphine). At

17.15 hours the Appellant was arrested and loaded into the van in which

PW1 and his team had travelled in. At that time a short statement of the

Appellant was recorded. Upon the statement of the Appellant, another parcel

was recovered at his mother-in-law’s house. When he was arrested, he was

handcuffed. The Appellant had taken the key from the louvers of the kitchen

door and had opened the door of the room. Inside the room, two parcels

suspected to be drugs were recovered from under a bed upon his statement.

Inside one parcel, PW1 had found 17 parcels of brown coloured substances,

which tested positive for Heroin (Diacetylmorphine). In the second parcel,

Cannabis Sativa L (Ganja) was found. Thereafter, the house was subjected

to a thorough search with the help of Police Kennel. As nothing more was

recovered in the house, the police party had left for Asiri Manufacturing

Company, Ambalangoda to weigh the production. The weighing process had

commenced at 19.00 hours. In the first parcel which was recovered, the

substances weighed about 1.24 Kilograms. The substances in the 17 parcels

weighed about 20.052 kilograms. The productions had been entered into PR

Register under No. 171-175/16.

On 01.02.2016, PW1 had taken the productions to the Government Analyst

Department for analysis. According to the Government Analyst Report, a

total of 5.73366 kilograms of Heroin had been detected. Additionally, the

Appellant had possessed 1.100 Kilograms of Cannabis Sativa L.

PW3 was called to corroborate the evidence given by PW1.

“Reasonable doubt” refers to the legal principle which establishes that

insufficient evidence would prevent the conviction of a defendant of a crime.

The prosecution bears the weight of proving to the judge the defendant’s

guilt in respect of the crime with which he has been charged, in order to

prove why the defendant should be convicted. Accordingly, in this context,

CA/HCC/0331/2019

6 | P a g e

the phrase “beyond a reasonable doubt" indicates that the evidence and

arguments brought forward by the prosecution to establish the defendant’s

guilt must be done so clearly, in a manner that it is accepted as fact by any

rational person.

In Woolmington v DPP (1935) the Court ruled that in criminal cases, the

burden of proof is always on the prosecution to prove the defendant's guilt

beyond a reasonable doubt. The defendant is presumed innocent until

proven guilty, and it is not for the defendant to prove his innocence.

In the first ground of appeal the Learned Counsel contended that the

evidence of prosecution witnesses failed the test of credibility and probability.

In the Attorney General v Sandanam Pitchai Mary Metilda S.C. Appeal

No. 79/2008 decided on 06.05.2010 the Supreme Court held that:

“When considering the testimonial creditworthiness of Matilda, it is

important to bear in mind established principles on witness credibility

which may guide the Court in assessing the facts in situation where

conflicting evidence is presented. The Court must be conscious of the

fact that not all witnesses are reliable. A witness may fabricate or

provide a distorted account of the evidence through a personal interest

or through genuine error (Vide, Emson, Evidence, 3rd Edition, 2006).

A key test of credibility is whether the witness is an interested or

disinterested witness. Rajaratnam J. in Tudor Perera v. AG (SC 23/75

D.C. Colombo Bribery 190/B – Minutes of S.C. Dated 1/11/1975)

observed that when considering the evidence of an interested witness

who may desire to conceal the truth, such evidence must be scrutinized

with some care. The independent witness will normally be preferred to

an interested witness in case of conflict. Matters of motive, prejudice,

partiality, accuracy, incentive, and reliability have all to be weighed

(Vide, Halsbury Laws of England 4th Edition para 29). Therefore, the

relative weight attached to the evidence of an interested witness who is

CA/HCC/0331/2019

7 | P a g e

a near relative of the accused or whose interests are closely identified

with one party may not prevail over the testimony of an independent

witness (Vide, Hasker v. Summers (1884) 10 V.L.R. (Eq.) 204 – Australia;

Leefunteum v. Beaudoin (1897)28 S.C.R. 89) - Canada).

The overall consistency of evidence is a further test of creditworthiness.

Consistency is not just limited to consistency inter se but also

consistency with what is agreed and clearly shown to have occurred

(Vide, Bhoj Raj v. Sita Ram, AIR 1936 PC 60). The Court may also

determine credibility based on the relative probability of the defence

version taking place in light of the evidence before Court.”

In the case of The Attorney-General v. Rawther 25 NLR 385, Ennis, J

stated that:

“The evidence must establish the guilt of the accused, not his innocence.

His innocence is presumed in law, from the start of the case, and his guilt

must be established beyond a reasonable doubt”.

Further, in the case of Mohamed Nimnaz V. Attorney General CA/95/94

it was held:

“A criminal case has to be proved beyond reasonable doubt. Although

we take serious view in regard to offences in relation to drugs, we are

of the view that the prosecutor should not be given a second chance to

fill the gaps of badly handled prosecutions….”

In this case, the information had been received by PW13 and was transmitted

to PW1 immediately. PW1 had not taken any endeavour to record the same

in his pocket note book. Instead, PW1 had directed PW13 to record this in

his note book and to get the signature of his supervising officer as PW13 is

CA/HCC/0331/2019

8 | P a g e

an intelligence officer that functions separately from the Ambalangoda Police

Station. But PW1 had acted on this information and conducted the raid.

As stated above, although PW13 is an important witness in this case, he was

not called to give evidence in this case. Although he is an intelligence officer,

he had participated in the raid team and had met the informant before the

arrest of the Appellant. Further, he had travelled with the Appellant after his

arrest in the same van. Hence, he is an essential witness in this case.

Witnesses are a critical part of criminal trials. Strong testimony from even

one good witness can sometimes make or break the prosecution’s case. To

arrive at a fair decision, all essential evidence must be produced by the

prosecution.

In Stephen Seneviratne v The King [1936] 3 All ER 36 at 46 where Lord

Roche said:

“Witnesses essential to the unfolding of the narrative on which the

prosecution is based, must, be called by the prosecution, whether in the

result the effect of their testimony is for or against the case for the

prosecution.”

Considering the above cited judgment, PW13, the person who received the

information about the trafficking of Heroin, of course, is an essential witness

and the prosecution should have called him to give evidence. Not calling the

said witness to give evidence has caused great prejudice to the Appellant.

In the judgment, the learned High Court Judge had commented on this issue

in a prejudicial manner at page 444 of the judgement. The relevant portion

is re-produced below:

CA/HCC/0331/2019

9 | P a g e

Page 444 of brief.

fyfrdhska ika;lfha ;nd.ekSfï kvqjl oS tla idlaIshla muKla jQj o fufyhùu

m%udKj;a fõ' wêlrK mQ¾j kso¾Ykhka ta iïnkaOfhka bosrsm;aj we;' fuu kvqfõ oS

jeg,Sug iyNd.S jQ fmd,sia ks,OdrSka ;sfofkl=u idlaIs oS we;s kuq;a" me'id' 01 g f;dr;=r

,ndÿka ks,Odrshd idlaIshg fkdle`oùu meñKs,af,a idlaIsj, úYajdikSh;ajh ySklrkq

,nk njg pQos; f.ktkq ,nk ia:djrh i<ld ne,Sfï oS úfYaIfhkau fuu idlaIslre

nqoaê wxYfha fiajh lrkq ,nk wmrdO ms<sn`o f;dr;=re tla/ialsrSfï rdcldrsfhys

kshqla; jk tkï wkkH;djh fy,sfkdjk whqrska ryis.;j lrkq ,nk rdcldrshl

kshqla; jk ks,Odrsfhl= nj meñKs,af,a idlaIslrejkaf.ka bosrsm;aj ;sîu fya;=fjka tlS

idlaIsh fkdle`oùu flfrys ieliys; Ndjhla wêlrKfha uki ;=< Woa.; fkdlrjhs'

ta wkqj pQos;f.a tlS ia:djrh m%;slafIam lrñ'

The analysis of the learned High Court Judge regarding the failure of the

prosecution to call an essential witness to give evidence has caused great

prejudice to the Appellant and I consider it to be a clear misdirection.

In appreciating the evidence of PW1, PW2 and PW3, the learned High Court

Judge in her judgment stated that PW1, PW2 and PW3 had given believable

evidence, as their evidence was not subjected to cross examination. The

relevant portion of the judgment is re-produced below:

Page 436 of the brief.

Wm fmd,sia mrSlaIl ÿñkao pkaø,d,a (me'id' 03) idlaIs foñka by; lS jeg,Sug iQodkïùu"

msgj hdu" jeg,Su isÿl< wdldrh" NdKav lsrduek ne,Su" Wmfiajhg NdroSu iy igyka

fhoSu ms<sn`o me'id' 01 yd me'id' 02 f.a idlaIsh ;yjqre lrñka idlaIs oS we;' tlS

idlaIslrejkaf.ka lsisÿ yria m%Yakhla fkdweiSu fya;=fjka úYajdikSh;ajh ;yjqre ù

we;'

But upon perusal of the case record, the evidence given by PW1, PW2 and

PW3 were subjected to lengthy cross examinations by the defence and

correctly suggested their stance to the above-mentioned witnesses. (Pages

160-178- cross examination of PW1, Pages 239-263 cross examination of

PW2 and Pages 374-388 of the appeal brief).

CA/HCC/0331/2019

10 | P a g e

This clearly demonstrates that the learned High Court Judge had only

considered the examination-in-chief of the evidence of PW1, PW2 and PW3

to come to her conclusion. Hence, I conclude that this is a clear misdirection

which certainly affects the prosecution’s case.

In Kumara De Silva and two others v Attorney General [2010] 2 SLR 169

the Court held that:

“(4) Question of an adverse presumption under Section 114 (f) arises only

where a witness whose evidence is necessary to unfold the narrative is

wilfully withheld by the prosecution and the failure to call such witness

constitutes a vital missing link in the prosecution case.”

Additionally, in the case of Walimunige John v. The State (1973) it was

stated that:

“The question of a presumption arises only where a witness whose

evidence is necessary to unfold the narrative is withheld by the '

prosecution and the failure to call such witness constitutes a vital missing

link in the prosecution case and where the reasonable inference to be

drawn from the omission to call the witness is that he would, if called, not

have supported the prosecution.”

Our Apex Court has given clear guidelines as to the consideration of a dock

statement of an accused in a criminal trial. An accused person has a right

to make a statement from the dock. Although the accused cannot be cross

examined, the statement has to be considered as evidence.

The Appellant complains that the learned High Court Judge had not given

reasons for rejecting his dock statement in her judgment. Although the dock

statement of an accused has less evidential value, our courts have never

hesitated to accept the same when it poses a doubt on the prosecution’s case.

CA/HCC/0331/2019

11 | P a g e

In this case I believe it is very important to consider the dock statement of

the Appellant.

In Don Samantha Jude Anthony Jayamaha v. The Attorney General

CA/303/2006 decided on 11/07/2012 the court held that:

“Whether the evidence of the defence or the dock statement is sufficient

to create a doubt cannot be decided in a vacuum or in isolation because

it needs to be considered in the totality of the evidence that is in the light

of the evidence for the prosecution as well as the defence.”

In Kathubdeen v. Republic of Sri Lanka [1998] 3 SLR 107 the court held

that:

“It is settled law that an unsworn statement must be treated as evidence.

It has also been laid down that if the unsworn statement creates a

reasonable doubt in the prosecution case or if it is believed, then the

accused should be given the benefit of that doubt.”

In the case of The King Vs. W. P. Buckley 43 NLR 474, it was stated by

Howard, C.J.:

“In arriving at a verdict of guilty, the majority of the jury must have viewed

the evidence in sections accepted and convicted the appellant on those

parts that were satisfactory and disregard those facts that pointed to the

improbability of the story put forward by the Crown. The jury should have

viewed the evidence as a whole. If they had done so, we are of opinion

that they must have had a reasonable doubt as to the guilt of the appellant.

The verdict is in our opinion, unreasonable, in as much as taken as a whole

the evidence does not support the conviction.”

Further, in the case of Queen v. Kularatne it was held that:

“"We are in respectful agreement, and are of the view that such a statement

must be looked upon as evidence subject to the infirmity that the accused had

deliberately refrained from giving sworn testimony, and the Jury must be so

CA/HCC/0331/2019

12 | P a g e

informed. But the Jury must also be directed that — (a) If they believe the

unsworn statement, it must be acted upon; (b) If it raised a reasonable doubt

in their minds about the case for the prosecution, the defence must succeed;

and (c) That it should not be used against another accused.”

Although the learned High Court Judge had considered the dock statement

of the Appellant in her judgment, she has arrived at her own conclusion in

dealing with it. This too deprives a fair trial to the Appellant which is

guaranteed under the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of

Sri Lanka. Had the learned High Court Judge considered the dock statement

in its correct perspective, she could not have arrived at the conclusion that

the Appellant is guilty as charged.

In this case 8 Suspects were arrested initially. This includes the Appellant

and the skipper of the trawler. But 2nd to 8th Suspects were discharged on

the advice of the Hon. Attorney General.

In the final ground of appeal, the learned Counsel contended that the learned

High Court Judge had misdirected himself in respect of the ruling to Section

27(1) of the Evidence Ordinance which is relevant in this case.

According to Section 27(1) of the Evidence Ordinance-

“Provided that, when any fact is deposed to as discovered in

consequence of information received from a person accused of any

offence, in the custody of a police officer, so much of such information,

whether it amounts to a confession or not, as relates distinctly to the

fact thereby discovered may be proved.”

The Supreme Court in the case of Somaratne Rajapakse Others v. Hon.

Attorney General (2010) 2 Sri L.R. 113 at 115 stated that:

“A vital limitation on the scope of Section 27 of the Evidence Ordinance

is that only the facts which are distinctly related to what has been

CA/HCC/0331/2019

13 | P a g e

discovered would be permitted in evidence. 'There should be a clear

nexus between the information given by the accused and the

subsequent discovery of a relevant fact. A discovery made in terms of

Section 27 of the Evidence Ordinance discloses that the information

given was true and that the Accused had knowledge of the existence

and the whereabouts of the actual discovery.”

In the case of The Attorney-General v Potta Naufer & Others (2006), it

was further established that:

“The principle underlying section 27 of the Evidence Ordinance is that

the danger of admitting false confession is taken care of as the truth of

the confession is guaranteed by the discovery of facts in consequence of

the information given.”

The learned Counsel for the Appellant strenuously argued on the fact that

the statement that led to the discovery of Heroin includes a confessional part

which is illegal that is “ fyfrdhska md¾i,h ìrs`of.a uj jk moau,;d hk whf.a

oekg ud mosxÑ ksjfia id,h bosrsmsg ueo ldurfha we;s weo hg ks,a mdg fmdfydr Wrhl

oud ;sfnkjd ug fmkajkak mq¨jka'

In this case the Appellant was charged for possession and trafficking of

Heroin and Cannabis Sativa L. Both items were recovered from the bag.

Hence, the prejudicial portion of his statement should have been edited

before being marked in the trial.

In this case the above-mentioned portion of the Appellant statement contains

the word “Heroin” which is in my view inadmissible and highly prejudicial as

it clearly displays the confessionary portion of his statement.

For the reasons stated above, I am of the view that there is merit in the

grounds of appeal urged by the learned Counsel in favour of the Appellant.

The evidence presented by the prosecution failed to establish that the

CA/HCC/0331/2019

14 | P a g e

Appellant is guilty of the charges that were levelled against him beyond

reasonable doubt.

Due to aforesaid reasons, I set aside the conviction and sentence imposed by

the learned High Court Judge of Balapitiya dated 18/10/2019 on the

Appellant. Therefore, he is acquitted from the respective charges.

Accordingly, the appeal is allowed.

The Registrar is directed to send this judgment to the High Court of

Balapitiya along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Amal Ranaraja, J.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL