==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/ 167/2020

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979

Court of Appeal case No. The Democratic Socialist Republic

CA/HCC/0167/2020 of Sri Lanka

High Court of Kalutara

Case No. HC 891/2014

Vs.

1. Thuppahige Don Nissanka alias Udaya

2. Madawalamaddumage Don Ruwan

Pushpakumara

3. Dimunguwacharige Samantha alias

Petiya

4. Karanapathi Appuhamilage

Chaminda Buddhika

5. Delkandura Arachchige Upul Dickson

Silva

ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

1. Madawalamaddumage Don Ruwan

Pushpakumara

2. Dimunguwacharige Samantha alias

Petiya

CA/HCC/ 167/2020

2 | P a g e

3. Karanapathi Appuhamilage

Chaminda Buddhika

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

COUNSEL : Neranjan Jayasinghe with Imansi Senarath

and Randunu Heellage for the Appellants.

Harippriya Jayasundara, PC, SASG for the

Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 27/06/2025

DECIDED ON : 04/08/2025

*******************

CA/HCC/ 167/2020

3 | P a g e

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellants (hereinafter referred to as the Appellants)

with the 1st Accused and the 5th Accused were indicted by the Attorney General

in the High Court of Kalutara on the following charges, namely;

I. Between 25th February 2007 and 17th March 2007, within the

jurisdiction of this court the 1st accused together with the 2nd ,3rd

4th and 5th accused as a gang raped Kurudukarage Sandiya

Nilanthi an offence punishable under section 364(2) of the Penal

Code as amended by the Act No. 22 of 1995.

II. At the same time, place and during the course of the same

transaction the 2nd accused together with the 1st, 3rd, 4th and 5th

accused as a gang raped Kurudukarage Sandiya Nilanthi an

offence punishable under section 364(2) of the Penal Code as

amended by the Act No. 22 of 1995.

III. At the same time, place and during the course of the same

transaction the 3rd accused together with the 1st, 2nd, 4th and 5th

accused as a gang raped Kurudukarage Sandiya Nilanthi an

offence punishable under section 364(2) of the Penal Code as

amended by the Act No. 22 of 1995.

IV. At the same time, place and during the course of the same

transaction the 4th accused together with the 1st, 2nd 3rd, and 5th

accused as a gang raped Kurudukarage Sandiya Nilanthi an

offence punishable under section 364(2) of the Penal Code as

amended by the Act No. 22 of 1995.

V. At the same time, place and during the course of the same

transaction the 5th accused together with the 1st, 2nd 3rd, and 4th

accused as a gang raped Kurudukarage Sandiya Nilanthi an

CA/HCC/ 167/2020

4 | P a g e

offence punishable under section 364(2) of the Penal Code as

amended by the Act No. 22 of 1995.

During the pendency of the trial the 1st Accused passed away and the trial

proceeded against the other Accused only.

After the trial the Appellants were convicted under their respective charges and

each of them was sentenced to 18 years of rigorous imprisonment with a fine of

Rs.10,000/-, in default of which 06 months simple imprisonment was imposed.

Additionally, each of them was ordered to pay a compensation of Rs.150,000/-

to the prosecutrix with a default sentence of 1-year simple imprisonment.

The 5th Accused was acquitted from the charge.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellants

preferred this appeal to this court.

The Learned Counsels for the Appellants informed this court that the Appellants

have given consent to argue this matter in their absence. During the argument

they were connected vis zoom from prison.

The Counsel for the Appellants preferred following grounds of appeal:

1. The prosecution has failed to prove the charge of rape.

2. The learned High Court Judge had failed to take into consideration that

the evidence of PW1 and PW2 fails the test of credibility.

3. The learned High Court Judge had rejected the evidence of the Appellants

on unreasonable grounds.

4. Alternatively, the sentence imposed is excessive.

In this case the prosecutrix is a married woman with three children. On the day

of the incident, at about 10.00 p.m. when PW1 entered the house after a wash

wearing a towel only, the 1st Appellant entered the house and held her. At that

CA/HCC/ 167/2020

5 | P a g e

time, the victim had fallen unconscious and thereafter she did not know what

had happened to her. According to PW1, her husband PW2 was at home seated

on a chair in the living room. When she regained consciousness, she was in the

room naked sans the towel on her body. She clearly stated that she only saw

the 1st Appellant holding her.

According to PW2, the husband of the victim, he had seen the 1st Accused and

the Appellants entering the house when PW1 stepped inside the house after a

wash wearing only a towel. PW2 had observed the 1st Appellant to be armed

with a sword. After dropping the sword, the 1st Appellant had dragged the victim

in to the room. When the 1st Appellant came out of the room, the 2nd and 3rd

Appellants and the 1st Accused went inside the room one after the other. PW2

had not seen what happened inside the room. When PW2 entered the room after

the intruders had left the house, he had found the victim lying on the floor

naked. When PW1 regained conscious, she had told him that she could feel

wetness in her lower part of the body.

According to medical evidence, the JMO could not find any injuries in the vagina

of the victim as she is a married woman and had given birth to three children.

Further, the complaint was lodged three weeks after the alleged incident.

As the 1st and 2nd grounds of appeal advanced by the Appellants are

interconnected, both grounds will be considered together in this judgment.

In a criminal trial, as continuously stated by the Appellate Court the burden of

proving a case entirely rests on the hands of the prosecution and this

responsibility never shifts to the defence unless the defence takes up a plea to

a general or special exception under the Penal Code.

In H. M. Mahinda Herath v. The Attorney General CA/21/2003 in Appellate

Court Judgments (Unreported) 2005 at page 35-39 the court held that:

“Where it was held that in a criminal case burden is always on the

prosecution to prove the charge levelled against the accused beyond

reasonable doubt. The trial judge must always bear in mind that the

CA/HCC/ 167/2020

6 | P a g e

accused is presumed to be innocent until the charge against the accused is

proved beyond reasonable grounds”.

During the trial it transpired that on 28.03.2007 the prosecutrix had informed

the learned Magistrate that she never made a complaint willingly to the police

against the Appellants as no offence had been committed by the Appellants. The

relevant portion of the evidence is re-produced below:

Page 191 of the brief.

ප්‍ර : 2007 ud¾;= 29 වන දින කරුණු දැක්වීමක්ව විත්තිය සහ පැමිණිල්ල විසින් මමම නඩු වාර්තාව

අනුව 16 වන පිටුමේ කර ිමෙනවා ?

උ : එමහමයි. විත්තිය මවනුමවන් කරුණු දක්වවයි කියලත්ත සටහනක්ව ිමෙනවා. ඊළගට

පැමිණිල්මලන් කියා සිටින්මන් කියලත්ත සටහනක්ව ිමෙනවා.

ප්‍ර : ඊට පසුව ගරු මමහේසේරාත්තුමා අත්තසන් ර්ො ිමෙනවා 17 වන පිටුමේ උඩ. එහි මමමහම

ිමෙනවාද, පැමිණිලිකාරියමගන් විමසීමක්ව කරනු ලදුව එෙඳු පැමිණිල්ලක්ව ර්මා විසින්

මනාකළ ෙවත්ත, එෙඳු පැමිණිල්ලක්ව ර්මා විසින් මනාකළ ෙවත්ත, මමම විත්තිකරුවන්මගන්

ර්මාට එෙඳු සිදුීමක්ව සිදු මනාවූ ෙවත්ත, ර්මාමේ සේවාමී පුරුෂයා විසින් එකී පැමිණිල්ල කර

ඇි ෙවත්ත දන්වා සිටී කියලා ?

උ : එමහමයි. එමහම සටහන් මවලා ිමෙනවා.

She had further testified that she never wanted to make a complaint to the

police but due to a money transaction dispute her husband, PW2 had made-up

the complaint against the Appellants. She also stated that PW2 is not mentally

sound and he used to tell whatever come to his mouth. The relevant portion is

re-produced below:

Page 97 of the brief.

ප්‍ර : ර්මුන්ට කිසිම අවශ්‍යර්ාවයක්ව ිබුමන් නැහැ, මපාලිසීයට f.dia පැමිණිලි කරන්න,

මහත්තර්යායි ගිමේ ?

උ : මමේ මහත්තර්යා මානසික මලමඩක්ව.

CA/HCC/ 167/2020

7 | P a g e

ප්‍ර : ර්මුන් කියන විදිහට මපාලිසියට ගිමේ නැහැ, කිේවා. ර්මුන් කියන විදියට මමවැනි සිද්ධියක්ව

ගැන කියන්න අවශ්‍යර්ාවයක්ව ිබුමන් නැහැ, මුදල් ප්‍රශ්‍ේනයක්ව මර් මහත්තර්යා පැමිණිලි

කමල් ?

උ : මහත්තර්යා ර්මයි පැමිණිලි කමල්.

ප්‍ර : නැිව ර්මුන්මේ සේමේච්ඡාමවන් පැමැණිලි කමල් නැහැ ?

උ : ගිමේ නැහැ.

The learned Counsel also stressed that the prosecution had failed to prove

penetration as evidence given by PW1, PW2 and the medical evidence did not

support that the victim had penile penetration. But the learned High Court

Judge had presumed penile penetration under Section 114 of the Evidence

Ordinance. The relevant portion of the judgment is re-produced below:

Page 519 of the brief.

පසුපස එකා ෙැගින් කාන්ර්ාව රඳවා මගන සිට කාමරයට යෑම සහ එේ වහාම ඉන්පසුව ldka;dj නිරුවත්තව

යටි ෙමේ මර්ර් සහිර්ව බිම වැිරී සිටීම සාක්වි ආඥා පනමත්ත 114 වගන්ිය යටමත්ත වන ප්‍රිපාදන

ප්‍රකාරව ලිිංගික ප්රමේශ්‍ය සිදු වූ ෙව නිගමනය කළ හැක.

As the evidence given by PW1, the victim clearly contradicts the evidence given

by PW2, the learned High Court Judge should not have presumed penetration

under Section 114 of the Evidence Ordinance.

In this case PW2 is the complainant and had given evidence how the incident

had taken place. The prosecution had called PW1 to corroborate his evidence.

But PW1 had provided contradictory evidence which certainly affect the core of

the case.

Justice Dheeraratne in Sunil and others v. Attorney General [1986] 1 S.L.R

230 held that:

“Corroboration is only required or afforded if the witness requiring

corroboration is otherwise credible. If the evidence of witness requiring

corroboration is not credible his testimony should be rejected and the accused

acquitted. Seeking corroboration of a witness’s evidence should not be used

CA/HCC/ 167/2020

8 | P a g e

as a process of inducing belief in such evidence where such evidence is not

credible.

It is very dangerous to act on the uncorroborated testimony of a woman victim

of a sex offence but if her evidence is convincing such evidence could be acted

on even the absence of corroboration.”

In Premasiri v. Attorney General [2006] 3 Sri.L.R held that:

“The rule is not that corroboration is essential before there can be a conviction

in a case of rape but the necessity of corroboration as a matter of prudence

except where the circumstances make it unsafe to dispense with it, must be

present to the mind of the judge”.

Although, initially, PW1 had stated that she made the complaint to police after

two weeks from the date of incident, but she had gone on to say that she lodged

her complaint after two days of the incident. In the Magistrate Court she had

stated that she lodged her complaint after three weeks of the incident. But PW2,

who made the first complaint to the police had taken up the position that they

made their complaint to the police upon the expiry of three months. This clearly

attacks the credibility of the evidence given by PW1 and PW2.

In this case, the evidence presented is circumstantial. But considering the

evidence presented, it is not sufficient to confirm an inescapable inference that

there was penile penetration.

Although the learned High Court Judge had stated that the prosecutrix’s

evidence has been well corroborated by the other evidence, when analysing the

evidence presented by the prosecution the conclusion reached by the trial judge

is not tenable.

Therefore, in this case the 1st and 2nd appeal grounds which are raised by the

Appellants have merits.

CA/HCC/ 167/2020

9 | P a g e

When this Court invited the Senior Additional Solicitor General to express her

views with regard to the evidence given by PW1 and PW2, in keeping with the

highest tradition of the Attorney General’s Department, she humbly submitted

that she leaves the matter to be decided by this Court.

When analysing the entirety of the evidence presented, I am of the view that the

prosecution has failed to prove the charges against the Appellants beyond a

reasonable doubt. Hence, I set aside the conviction and the sentence imposed

on the Appellants and acquit them from this case.

The appeal is allowed.

The Registrar is directed to send this judgment to the High Court of Kalutara

along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL