IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Sinnathurai Pushparajah,

President,

Kavunavathai Narasinha Vairavar

Temple,

Paripalana Saba (the Trustee),

Karukampanai.

Intervenient-Respondent-Petitioner

CA CASE NO: CA (PHC) 171/2017

HC JAFFNA CASE NO: 1951/2016/WRIT

Vs.

Sivakolunthu Sothimuthu,

President,

Ahilaillangai Saiva Maha Sabai

College Road,

Kokkuvil.

Petitioner-Respondent

And 19 Others

Respondent-Respondents

Before: K.K. Wickramasinghe, J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: K.V.S. Ganesharajan for the Intervenient

Respondent-Petitioner.

2

Luxmanan Jayakumar for the Petitioner-

Respondent.

Manohara Jayasinghe, S.S.C., for the

Respondent-Respondents.

Decided on: 18.07.2019

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The original Petitioner-Respondent filed this application on

01.04.2016 as a public interest litigation in the High Court of

Jaffna against the Pradeshiya Sabas and Medical Officers of Health

in the Northern Province preventing the said Respondents from

granting permission for animal sacrifice as a religious practice.

The Petitioner also sought the main relief as an interim relief. The

High Court readily granted that interim relief ex parte and directed

that order to be communicated not only to the Respondents of the

case but also to others who are not parties to the case, and

specifically stated that If any Hindu temple conducts animal

sacrifice against this interim order, all the members of the Board of

Trustees will be charged with contempt of Court and legal action will

be taken. A huge publicity was given to this case and to the

interim order by both electronic and print media.

The Petitioner before this Court is one such outsider on whom the

notice or the interim order was served, and later upon his

application, he was made a party as the Intervenient-Respondent.

The Intervenient-Respondent objected to the application of the

original Petitioner stating inter alia that the subject matter has

already been decided by the Judgment of the Court of Appeal in Sri

Bodhiraja Foundation v. Inspector General of Police reported in

[2013] BLR 219 and affirmed by the Supreme Court in

3

Kanagaratnam v. Sri Bodhiraja Foundation reported in [2015] BLR

3. The copies of the two Judgments have also been tendered to the

High Court.

Thereafter the High Court delivered the following final order dated

24.10.2017.

I order a writ of prohibition restraining the Respondents or

any other person authorized by them from issuing a Permit to

carry out slaughter of animals and fowls in temple premises

during temple festival in their jurisdiction.

In this view of the matter, the writ application is allowed and

the application of the Intervenient-Respondent is rejected. I

make no order as to cost.

The Secretary, Ministry of Local Government (Northern

Province-11th Respondent), The Secretary, Ministry of Health

(Northern Province-18th Respondent) and Regional Health

Service Director (17th Respondent) are directed to implement

the Court Order very strictly.

Hon. Chief Minister (Northern Province) and Hon.

Minister of Health (Northern Province) are required to direct the

Local Authorities and officers to implement the Court order

very strictly.

Hon. Governor is hereby informed to monitor for

implementation and enforcement of Court Order by local

authorities.

Follow up Action

The follow-up action should be carried out by police

department and local authorities concerned to bring the

violators before nearest Magistrate Court. Any member of

public is entitled to file contempt of court proceedings before

4

Provincial High Court of Northern Province in Jaffna against

the violators of the Court Order such as Priest, Trustee of the

temples and officers of local authorities as well.

Registrar is directed to transmit the order to learned

Magistrate Mallakam, S.D.I.G. North of Police, SSP, ASP

Kankesanthurai, OICs of MC jurisdiction of Mallakam, all

Respondents, Hon. Chief Minister, Hon. Minister of Health,

Hon. Governor and Government Agent Jaffna.

The procedure adopted by the learned High Court Judge from the

beginning to the end is irregular. The general rule is, Court shall

not, unless there are compelling reasons to do so, grant the main

relief by way of an interim relief, particularly, upon an application

made ex parte. Applications for interim reliefs, as a rule, shall be

supported inter partes not ex parte, unless it is extremely urgent

that there is no time to give notice to the opposite party.

In the instant case, there was absolutely no necessity for the Court

to have allowed the Petitioner to support for interim relief ex parte,

which is also the main relief. Then the Court cannot in a writ

application make orders to be bound by the entire Jaffna

peninsula. Unless it is an action in rem, an order or Judgment of

a Court is bound by the parties to the case and their privies. Here

the learned High Court Judge has directed to serve notices/interim

orders on people who are not parties to the action. One such

person is the Intervenient Petitioner.

Then the learned High Court Judge has stated that any member of

public is entitled to file contempt of Court proceedings before the

High Court of Jaffna against violators of the Court order such as

priests, trustees of the Hindu Kovil etc. There is a laid down

procedure to deal with a party for contempt of Court, and any

5

member of public cannot bring before Court any violator of the

Court order for contempt of court. I cannot understand how

priests, trustees in the Jaffna Peninsula who are not parties to the

case are bound by the said order.

The writ of prohibition is to prohibit issuance of licences to

slaughter animals for animal sacrifice. Priests, Trustees etc.

obviously do not issue licences.

The learned High Court Judge has given directions to and made

requests from various Government officials including public

representatives to implement the Court order very strictly. There

is no reason to personalize the matter.

The learned High Court Judge has clearly exceeded his limits.

This was conceded at the argument in unison by the learned

counsel for the Respondents including the Senior State counsel.

In my view, the writ of prohibition issued by the High Court

restraining the Respondents from issuing licences to slaughter

animals at temple festivals is contrary to the Judgment of the

Divisional Bench of the Court of Appeal in Sri Bodhiraja Foundation

v. Inspector General of Police [2013] BLR 219, which was affirmed

by the Supreme Court in Kanagaratnam v. Sri Bodhiraja

Foundation [2015] BLR 3.

Animal sacrifice as religious practice was the subject of decision in

the said two cases. The instant case was also filed on the very

same subject. Both are writ applications seeking the identical

reliefs. The conspicuous difference is that the instant case was

heard by a single Provincial High Court Judge, and the other two

cases by three Justices of the Court of Appeal and three Justices of

the Supreme Court including the Chief Justice.

6

The said Court of Appeal case was filed to stop animal sacrifice as

a religious ritual at Munneswaram Kovil, Chilaw. The following are

the two reliefs sought from the Court of Appeal in that case.

A writ of prohibition restraining the 5th and/or 6th

Respondents or any person authorized by them from issuing

an annual or temporary licence to the 8th and 9th Respondents

to carry out the slaughter of animals at the above Kovil.

A writ of mandamus directing the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th

Respondents to take all necessary actions as permitted and

empowered by law to prevent the cruelty and slaughter of

animals taking place at the said Kovil.

The Court of Appeal refused to issue writ of prohibition preventing

the Respondents from issuing licences to slaughter animals for

animal sacrifice as religious practice.

To save time, I will straightaway quote the relevant part of the

Judgment of the Court of Appeal appearing at page 224:

The Petitioners in their petition have sought a writ of

prohibition restraining the 5th and/or 6th Respondents or any

person authorized by them from issuing an annual or

temporary licence or any other approval under section 4 of the

Butchers Ordinance to the 7th, 8th and 9th Respondents or their

representatives to carry out the slaughter of animals at

KovilIn considering this application I have to consider the

following matters. If the 7th, 8th and 9th Respondents, after

fulfilling necessary requirements to maintain a slaughter

house, make an application to issue a licence under the

provisions of the Butchers Ordinance, can the proper authority

refuse without accepting the application? The answer is no.

7

The proper authority under the law is bound to consider it and

take a decision to grant the licence or reject the application. If

this Court issues a writ of prohibition, the proper authority will

not be able to exercise their duty under the Butchers

Ordinance. For these reasons I hold the view that it is not

correct for this Court to issue a writ of prohibition. For these

reasons, I refuse to issue a writ of prohibition as prayed for.

What was decided by the Court of Appeal was that animal sacrifice

as a religious practice cannot be performed in violation of the law

of the land. If any religious place including a Kovil is to slaughter

animals as animal sacrifice, a licence under the Butchers

Ordinance shall be obtained and also shall not violate the

provisions of the Cruelty to the Animals Act. The Court of Appeal

also emphasized the adherence to By Laws relating to the

Slaughter Houses published in the Government Gazette No. 52017

dated 23.08.1988.

What the High Court did in the instant writ application was what

the Divisional Bench of the Court of Appeal refused to do. The

High Court issued a writ of prohibition restraining the Respondents

or any other person authorized by them from issuing a Permit to

carry out slaughter of animals and fowls in temple premises during

temple festival in their jurisdiction.

There is absolutely no reason for the High Court to revisit the

subject of animal sacrifice when the matter has been directly dealt

with by a Divisional Bench of the Court of Appeal, which has later

been affirmed by the Supreme Court. All Sri Lankans including

the citizens in the Northern Province are bound by that Judgment.

There is no separate Law on the subject of animal sacrifice

applicable to the Northern Province.

8

Cases under the popular banner of Public Interest Litigation

shall not be filed and decided as publicity stunts. This is a

textbook case of that kind.

I unhesitatingly set aside the order of the learned High Court

Judge of Jaffna dated 24.10.2017. The writ application filed in the

High Court shall stand dismissed. The original Petitioner shall pay

a sum of Rs. 50,000/= as costs to the Intervenient Petitioner.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

K.K. Wickremasinghe, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal