==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of an

application under and in terms of Section

331 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act

No. 15 of 1979

The Democratic Socialist Republic of

Sri Lanka

Complainant

Court of Appeal Case No: Vs,

CA/HCC/0172/25

High Court of Jaffna

Case No. HC/2762/2019

Moothathamby Sri Mayakrishnan

Kudavaththai,

Thunnalai East,

Karavetti

Accused

And Now Between

Moothathamby Sri Mayakrishnan

Kudavaththai,

Thunnalai East,

Karavetti

Accused-Appellant

Vs,

The Democratic Socialist Republic of

Sri Lanka

Complainant-Respondent

2

Before: Amal Ranaraja, J.

Dr. Sumudu Premachandra, J.

Counsel: Nihara Randeniya with Mohomed Azeem for the Accused-

Appellant.

Azard Navavi, A.S.G, PC for the Respondent

Argued on: 02.09.2026

Judgment on: 22.09.2026

Judgment

Amal Ranaraja. J,

1. The accused-appellant (hereinafter referred to as the appellant) has been

indicted in the High Court of Jaffna in Case No. 2762/2019. The charge

in the indictment is as follows;

01. That on or about the 20th of July, 2015 at a place known as

Nelliady in Karaveddy, within the jurisdiction of this Court, you

the accused above named, by causing the death of Thuraisingham

Prakas, have committed murder, an offence punishable under

Section 296 of the Penal Code.

2. At the conclusion of the trial, the learned High Court Judge has convicted

the appellant of a lesser charge i.e. an offence punishable under Section

297 of the Penal Code and sentenced him as follows;

3

i. A term of 10 years rigorous imprisonment and a fine of

Rs.25,000.00 with a term of 6 months simple imprisonment in

default.

The appellant has also been directed to pay a sum of

Rs.20,000.00 as compensation with a term of 1 year simple

imprisonment in default

3. The appellant being aggrieved by the conviction, disputed judgement

together with the sentencing order has preferred the instant appeal to

this Court.

Case of the Prosecution

4. On the date of the alleged incident, PW01 and the deceased have been

conversing on a lane named Parayankulam at about 22.00 hours. The

appellant has then approached them. The deceased, a former associate

of the appellant, has asked the appellant if he had any alcohol with him,

or where he had obtained it. Seemingly provoked by this question, the

appellant has drawn a sharp edged weapon and stabbed the deceased in

the chest.

5. Following the attack, the appellant has fled the scene. Although PW01

had given chase to the appellant, he has subsequently returned to the

location of the incident. Thereafter, the deceased has been hospitalised.

He has later succumbed to the injury. A postmortem examination has

been conducted on the deceased and the postmortem report prepared

thereafter, has been produced as evidence marked P1.

Case of the Appellant

6. The appellant has opted to exercise his right to remain silent.

4

7. When the matter was taken up for argument the appellant contended

that PW01’s intoxication, together with the surrounding conditions,

especially the inadequate lighting, has rendered PW01 incapable of

identifying the person who attacked the deceased.

8. The importance of identifying a perpetrator of a crime cannot be

overstated. It is essential for delivering justice to victims, deterring future

criminal conduct, and maintaining public trust in the criminal justice

system. Effective identification of perpetrators strengthens the

foundation of society, promoting a sense of safety and collective

responsibility. As such the relevant agencies must prioritise and enhance

their efforts in accurately and efficiently identifying those who commit

crimes.

9. Eyewitness testimony has long been considered a cornerstone of the

criminal justice system, providing a direct link between the crime and its

purported perpetrator. The conditions under which an eyewitness views

a crime play a crucial role in shaping their testimony. Factors such as

lighting, distance, and duration of the incident can significantly affect

the quality of the witness’s memory. In cases where the crime is

committed quickly, or in less than ideal conditions, the likelihood that a

witness will successfully identify the perpetrator diminishes.

10. Research has also demonstrated that high stress situations can impair

the ability to accurately perceive and later recall events. For instance,

during a violent crime, a witness may focus on the weapon, rather than

the assailant’s features.

11. In the case of R v Turnbull (Raymond), [1977] Q.B. 244 (1976), Lord

Widgery C.J. has held as follows;

“First, whenever the case against an accused depends wholly or

substantially on the correctness of one or more identi:ications of the

5

accused which the defence alleges to be mistaken, the judge should

warn the jury of the special need for caution before convicting the

accused in reliance on the correctness of the identi:ication or

identi:ications. In addition he should instruct them as to the reason for

the need for such a warning and should make some reference to the

possibility that a mistaken witness can be a convincing one and that a

number of such witnesses can all be mistaken. Provided this is done in

clear terms the judge need not use any particular form of words.

Secondly, the judge should direct the jury to examine closely the

circumstances in which the identi:ication by each witness came to be

made. How long did the witness have the accused under observation?

At what distance? In what light? Was the observation impeded in any

way, as for example by passing traf:ic or a press of people? Had the

witness ever seen the accused before? How often? If only occasionally,

had he any special reason for remembering the accused? How long

elapsed between the original observation and the subsequent

identi:ication to the police? Was there any material discrepancy

between the description of the accused given to the police by the witness

when :irst seen by them and his actual appearance? If in any case,

whether it is being dealt with summarily or on indictment, the

prosecution have reason to believe that there is such a material

discrepancy they should supply the accused or his legal advisers with

particulars of the description the police were :irst given. In all cases if

the accused asks to be given particulars of such descriptions, the

prosecution should supply them. Finally, he should remind the jury of

any speci:ic weaknesses which had appeared in the identi:ication

evidence.

6

Recognition may be more reliable than identi2ication of a

stranger; but even when the witness is purporting to recognise

someone whom he knows, the jury should be reminded that mistakes in

recognition of close relatives and friends are sometimes made.

All these matters go to the quality of the identi:ication evidence. If the

quality is good and remains good at the close of the accused's case the

danger of a mistaken identi:ication is lessened, but the poorer the

quality, the greater the danger.

In our judgment when the quality is good, as for example when the

identi2ication is made after a long period of observation, or in

satisfactory conditions by a relative, a neighbour, a close friend, a

workmate and the like, the jury can safely be left to assess the

value of the identifying evidence even though there is no other

evidence to support it: provided always, however, that an adequate

warning has been given about the special need for caution.” (Emphasis

added)

12. However, it has to be noted that the aforementioned Turnbull Principles

would apply, only in certain circumstances. In the case of Sigera Vs. The

Attorney General [2011] 1 SLR 201, Ranjith Silva J, has held,

“To apply Turnbul principles the identification had to be made under

difficult circumstances. In this case, although the incident took place

during night, there was ample light shed by the bulb of the lamp post

that was burning. There was no congregation of a multitude of persons

in a crowd but only the Accused Appellant and the deceased. In order

to inflict the injuries on the deceased, the assailant had to come very

close to the deceased. The injuries could not have been caused from a

distance. According to the Government Analyst the shooting had taken

7

place from a short distance. In fact it had to be done at close quarters

and the distance couldn't have been more than an arm's-length. A bulb

was lit and the Appellant was a well known person who lived in the

neighbourhood, in the same vicinity for a long time. These

uncontoverted facts prove that there was ample light and ample time

for the deceased to identify the Appellant.

13. Further, in the case of Bhola Singh vs. State of Punjab 1994 SC 13, it was

held,

“If the light available was suf:icient for the accused to identify their

targets there is no reason to hold that the injured eyewitnesses and

other witnesses could not identify the assailants. It is nobody's case that

the appellants were strangers. Hence, there was no dif:iculty in

identifying them.”

14. In the matter at hand, the appellant identified as the perpetrator of the

crime, was known to, and familiar with PW01. This prior familiarity

suggests a basis for reliable recognition. The scene of the incident has

been illuminated by moonlight, indicating that there was sufficient

natural light for visibility. The crime itself has occurred in very close

proximity to where PW01 was standing, providing an unobstructed view

of events. Furthermore, PW01 has actively pursued the appellant,

allowing for an extended period of observation, and further confirming

the appellant’s identity through sustained visual contact.

15. The complaint has also been lodged promptly with the police, directly

implicating the appellant as the individual who committed the crime. The

immediate nature of this complaint helps ensure the freshness of the

witness’s memory and reduces the opportunity for external influence.

These combined circumstances significantly reduce the possibility of a

mistaken identity.

8

16. They also confirm PW01’s awareness of his surroundings and his ability

at that time to act appropriately.

17. In those circumstances, I am not inclined to interfere with the conviction,

disputed judgement, together with sentencing order and proceed to

affirm the same.

18. The substantive term of imprisonment shall commence from the date this

judgement is read out and explained to the appellant in the High Court

of Jaffna.

19. I dismiss the appeal but make no order regarding costs

Appeal dismissed.

20. The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this Judgement to the

High Court in Jaffna for information and compliance.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Dr. Sumudu Premachandra, J.

I agree

Judge of the Court of Appeal