Page 1 of 11

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal in terms of

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

The Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

Court of Appeal Case No.

CA/HCC/0121/2023 Complainant

High Court of Kandy

Case No. HC/534/2019 Vs.

Jayasinghe Mudiyanselage Lakshman

Jayasinghe.

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Jayasinghe Mudiyanselage Lakshman

Jayasinghe.

Accused-Appellant

Vs.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Page 2 of 11

Complainant-Respondent BEFORE : MENAKA WIJESUNDERA, J

K.M.G.H. KULATUNGA, J

COUNSEL : Indica Mallawaratchy for the Accused-Appellant.

Shanil Kularatna, ASG, PC with Oswald Perera, SC

for the Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 27.11.2024

DECIDED ON : 19.12.2024

K.M.G.H. KULATUNGA, J.

1. When this matter was taken up for argument on 27.11.2024, the learned

Additional Solicitor General, Mr. Shanil Kularatna, PC., conceded that

there is evidence to reduce the conviction to one of culpable homicide not

amounting to murder, on the basis of exception 4 to section 294 (sudden

fight). Ms. Indika Mallawarachchi, Attorney-at-Law, appearing for the

accused-appellant (hereinafter also referred to as the appellant) submitted

that if the conviction for murder is reduced, to culpable homicide not

amounting to murder, the appellant would mainly make submissions on

the sentence. Thus, it is common ground that there is evidence of a sudden

fight emanating from the prosecution evidence and the conviction can be

reduced. Both parties made submissions on this aspect as well as on the

sentence.

2. The accused-appellant was indicted for the murder of one Herath

Mudiyanselage Kumara Kiyuldeniya. After the trial before the jury, the jury

unanimously returned a verdict of guilty for murder, upon which the

Page 3 of 11

learned trial judge imposed the sentence of death. This appeal is preferred

by the accused-appellant against the said conviction and sentence dated

30.11.2022.

3. The Prosecution led the evidence PW-03, Pradeep Kumara an eyewitness

who happened to be near a boutique where this incident took place. He is

a chance witness. Between 06:30 and 7:00 p.m. of 06.01.2014, he had

happened to see the appellant and the deceased engaged in a fight. Despite

requesting them to leave, the fisticuffs continued and at one point, the

appellant had left at which point the deceased had tilted backwards and

fallen. This witness, with the help of another rushed to the hospital, where

he was pronounced dead.

4. According to the medical evidence, the deceased had sustained six external

injuries, of which three were cut injuries and three were stab injuries. The

death is clearly due to excessive haemorrhage, mainly due to the stab

injury to the chest (injury no. 3).

5. As for the Defence, the accused had made a statement from the dock, (vide

page 73), and admits being at the scene near the boutique, and also

concedes that there was an argument with the deceased over of the

accused going to work at another place. The sum total of the accuseds

statement is that it was the deceased who started to assault him, and the

deceased was drunk. The accused claims to have blocked these blows

using his umbrella and then pushed the deceased and left. He denies

stabbing or causing injuries to the deceased. The main submission was

that the jury had not been properly directed on the consideration of the

mitigatory exception of sudden fight.

6. In an appeal of this nature, this Court is competent to consider the

evidence and set aside the conviction and convict for a lesser or different

offence. It is the duty of the trial judge to put to the jury alternative

Page 4 of 11

positions which the accused may be convicted for. This is a duty cast upon

the judge even if the Defence has not expressly relied upon or taken up

any such defence. It was so opined in King vs. Bellana Withanage Eddin

(41 NLR 345), where the Court of Criminal Appeal held thus; In a charge

of murder, it is the duty of the judge to put to the jury, the alternative of

finding the accused guilty of culpable homicide not amounting to murder

when there is any basis for such a finding in the evidence of record, although

such defence was not raised nor relied upon by the accused.

7. Further, in King vs. Albert Appuhamy (41 NLR 505) also it was opined

that; Failure on the part of a prisoner or his Counsel to take up a certain

line of defence does not relieve a Judge of the responsibility of putting to the

jury such defence if it arises on the evidence.

8. Then, in S. Luvis vs. The Queen (56 NLR 442), the Court in similar vein

held that having regard to the evidence, the fact that the sudden fight was

not specifically raised as a defence did not relieve the trial judge of the duty

of placing before the jury that aspect of the case.

9. The trial judge, in her summing up, has put to the jury the exceptions of

sudden fight as well as grave and sudden provocation (vide pages 5 and 6

of the summing up, pages 548 and 549 of the brief). However, the judge

has merely appraised of the provisions as to the exceptions and then the

told that the burden of proving such an exception is on a balance of

probabilities. Upon so charging the jury, the learned trial judge has

stopped at that and made no further comment.

10. When a special exception is pleaded, such person pleading the same is

endowed with the burden of satisfying the judge or the jury as to the

existence of circumstances, bringing the accused within such exception, by

105 of the Evidence Ordinance, which reads as follows:

Page 5 of 11

Burden of proving

that case of

accused comes

within exceptions.

105. When a person is accused of any offence, the burden

of proving the existence of circumstances bringing the case

within any of the general exceptions in the Penal Code, or

within any special exception or proviso contained in any

other part of the same Code, or in any law defining the

offence, is upon him, and the Court shall presume the

absence of such circumstances.

11. In view of the proviso to Section 105, a presumption arises as to the

absence of such circumstances unless it is so proved. This is a negative

presumption. It is this proviso that places the burden on the Defence, to

satisfy court to prove of the existence of such circumstances.

12. However, if the evidence of the Prosecution brings in evidence of the

circumstances as to the existence of any mitigatory defence, then it is the

duty of the trier of fact to consider such evidence and determine if it proves

the exception and consider it in favour of the accused. This obligation of

the trier of fact had been considered and upheld in The King vs. Bellana

Vithanage Eddin 41 NLR 345 where Court of Criminal Appeal held thus:

''In a charge of murder, it is the duty of the Judge to put to the jury the

alternative of finding the accused guilty of culpable not amounting to

murder when there is any basis for such a finding in the evidence on

record, although such defence was not raised nor relied upon by the

accused.

13. The legal burden of proving any such exception is placed on the accused

and this burden is required to be discharged on a balance of probabilities.

(King vs. James Chandrasekera (1942) 44NLR 97 and Perera vs.

Republic of Sri Lanka [1978-79] 2 Sri LR 84].

Page 6 of 11

14. In my view the placing of this legal burden on the accused is neither

inconsistent nor in conflict with the presumption of innocence as it is not

a shifting of the burden of proof. Firstly, when an accused seeks

exculpation or the mitigation expressly pleading any general or special

exception, he ipso facto necessarily admits the commission of the offence.

This resulting admission displaces the presumption of innocence. No doubt

the burden of proving the charges beyond reasonable doubt in a criminal

trial, is at all times, with the prosecution. This is one of the necessary

concomitants of the presumption of innocence. However, by virtue of

section 105 of the Evidence Ordinance the legal burden of proving any

special or general exception is placed upon the accused. This in my view,

is not a shifting of the burden of proof. Secondly, even where an accused

does not expressly plead any such defence of exculpation or mitigation or

to that matter even be it a total denial, and if, sufficient evidence of such

defence or exception is otherwise brought in to the record so as to enable a

judge or jury to arrive at a finding on such issue, the it should be

considered.

15. In the summing up of the instant Appeal, the trial judge had failed to direct

the jury on this issue. As such, the appellant appears to have been denied

the benefit of the lesser offence of culpable homicide not amounting to

murder being considered in his favour. It is a misdirection that has the

propensity to cause prejudice to the accused. As such, I would consider if

the evidence entitles the accused to have the benefit of exception 4 to

Section 294 of the Penal Code. Said exception reads as follows:

Exception 4

Culpable homicide is not murder if it is committed without

premeditation in a sudden fight in the heat of passion upon a sudden

quarrel, and without the offender having taken undue advantage or

acted in a cruel or unusual manner.

Page 7 of 11

16. The evidence of the sudden fight emanates mainly from the eyewitness

PW-03 Thushara Pradeep Kumara and then from the dock statement to

some extent. At this juncture, it necessary to briefly set out the facts of this

case. The accused, Lakshman, is a labourer who had been on and off

engaged by the deceased Pradeep Kumara. Pradeep Kumara was a mason

by profession. On the fateful day, the accused appears to have gone out to

work elsewhere, and around 6:00 p.m., gone to a boutique where he

happened to meet the accused. The deceased had been annoyed and

unhappy about the accused going to work elsewhere. An exchange of words

and a crosstalk had led to a fight, which had then led to an exchange of

blows between the two. At one point, the accused had pushed the deceased

and left the scene. The witness, and others who were there had seen the

deceased falling and found him with bleeding injuries. The accused had

been apprehended by the Police late that night. A knife had been recovered

on Section 27 statement, and the Government Analyst has confirmed the

presence of human blood. These, broadly, are the facts emanating from the

evidence.

17. As for the Defences stance, the accused admits getting into some issue,

as narrated by the witness, however, denies the stabbing. According to him,

the deceased had embarked upon a spree of blows aimed at the accused,

which he had attempted to block and wade off with his umbrella. At one

point, the accused claims to have left the scene and gone home. Right

throughout the trial as well as in his dock statement, and in his allocutus,

he maintains this denial. In these circumstances, the accused has not

taken up or put forward any specific mitigatory defence.

18. However, evidence of an incident in the nature of exchange of blows does

emanate from the sole eyewitness of the Prosecution. This witness has not

observed as to how this dispute or incident commenced or as to what

sparked off the same. However, the fact that a fight had been clearly

Page 8 of 11

observed by him. Therefore, the Prosecution has not led any evidence to

explain as to what sparked off this incident. No doubt, in view of the

explanation to exception 4, it is immaterial as to which party offers the

provocation or commits the first assault. The only evidence on this issue

comes from the accused himself by way of his dock statement. According

to him, it is the deceased who started this fight. Be that as it may, the sum

total of this evidence is that the fact of a fight between the two is in evidence.

They have met by chance, and it appears to be a sudden incident. During

the course of this fracas, the deceased has sustained six injuries by a sharp

cutting weapon. The eyewitness claims to have not seen any stabbing or a

knife which he attributes to poor light, as it was somewhat dark at that

time of the day. Circumstantially, there is a very strong inference that the

said injuries were inflicted by the accused and accused alone, and no other.

19. The next issue for determination is whether, the accused has taken undue

advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual manner. Inflicting six injuries is

numerically significant and high. However, of these three are stab injuries

and three are cut injuries. It is injury No. 03 that appears to be critical,

and has caused the death. In the course of a sudden fight, when the

passions are high, one cannot expect a person, who is so overwhelmed and

involved in the incident to be rationally inflicting calculated number of

injuries. Thus, causing multiple injuries is quite natural, and is to be

expected. In the circumstances of this incident, the evidence does not show

any form of advantage being taken by the accused or of acting in a cruel

manner. It is just that he had acted so in the heat of passion.

20. However, as stated above the legal burden of proving any general or

special exception is placed on the accused by Section 105 of the Evidence

Ordinance. This burden is required to be discharged on a balance of

probabilities. (King v James Chandrasekera (1942) 44 NLR 97 and

Perera v Republic of Sri Lanka [1978-79] 2 Sri LR 84].

Page 9 of 11

21. Thus, for the reasons adumbrated above, we are of the view that there is

sufficient evidence to satisfy on a balance of probabilities of the existence

of a sudden fight within the meaning of exception 4 to Section 294. The

members of the jury appear to have failed to appreciate this aspect which

can be directly attributed to the aforesaid insufficient direction or non-

direction in this regard. In the circumstances, we consider the direction on

sudden fight, in the summing-up to be insufficient which amounts to a

non-direction that has deprived the accused-appellant of the benefit being

found guilty of the lesser offence of culpable homicide not amounting to

murder. Accordingly, the verdict as pronounced by the jury, the conviction

entered thereon, and the sentence are hereby set aside. However, in view

of the evidence and for the reasons adumbrated above, the accused-

appellant is found guilty and convicted for the lesser offence of culpable

homicide not amounting to murder punishable under Section 297 of the

Penal Code on the basis of sudden fight.

22. Now it is left for this Court to consider and impose an appropriate sentence

to the lesser offence to which the accused now stands convicted. The

starting point would be the sentence prescribed by Section 297. It is a

maximum term of twenty years. The maximum sentence prescribed throws

some light as to the seriousness of which the legislature has considered

this offence. However, as culpable homicide not amounting to murder has

a plethora of variations and different facets. The appropriate sentence will

vary and depend on such circumstances. As for the present case, on a

consideration of a totality of the evidence, the dock statement, as well as

the allocutus, it is apparent that the accused was pursued by the deceased

and the inflicting the fatal injuries was in the heat of passion. The accused

appears to have reacted when he was pushed to the wall, so to say. He

appears to be an uneducated man. The record also reveals that at that time

he was looking after his sick wife, and did not have any previous enmity

with the deceased.

Page 10 of 11

23. As at now, the accused is around 48 years of age. The above being the

personal circumstances, now it is to consider the other relevant aggravating

and mitigating circumstances. As for remorse, the accused had

consistently, throughout the trial, maintained his innocence. On that score,

he seemed to demonstrate no remorse in that sense. However, it was

submitted by both counsel that from the very inception from the service on

the indictment on wards, the accused had informed and indicated his

willingness to plead guilty and accept liability for a lesser offence. That

being so, now at this stage, when this Appeal was taken up, the learned

counsel for the appellant informed this court that the appellant would not

pursue the appeal against the conviction any further than to reduce his

culpability to Section 297. This confirms the original stance taken up by

the accused. This clearly is an indication of his willingness to admit his

culpability which by itself is an expression of remorse in another form. I

think it is a relevant factor to be considered in mitigation. This offence was

committed ten years ago, as far back as 2014. Now we are contemplating

the sentence ten years hence, which is a significant lapse of time from the

point of committing the offence. The fact that a criminal case was hanging

over the head of an accused for a long period by itself akin to a punishment

by itself. However, a court, in considering the sentence, should also be

mindful of the interest of the public and also the victim. In the cases of A.G

v. Mendis 1995 (1) S.L.R 138 and in Dhananjoy Chatterjee v. State of

W.B. (1994) 2 SCC 220, it was held that, the Courts must not only keep in

view the rights of the criminal, but also the rights of the victim of crime and

the society at large while considering the imposition of an appropriate

punishment. The accused has, in this instance, used a knife against the

deceased who was apparently unarmed. The accused has not sustained

any injuries. The accused himself says that the deceased was drunk at that

time. If that be so, the accused being sober ought to have exercised control

and restraint in that situation.

Page 11 of 11

24. However, considering the level of education and all other attendant

circumstances, and the fact that the accused does not have previous

convictions, I hereby impose the following sentence; the accused is

sentenced to five years rigorous imprisonment, in addition a fine of Rs.

25,000/- is imposed, and in default of payment of the said fine, a period of

six months imprisonment is ordered. Further, it is ordered that this

sentence take effect from the date of conviction, 30.11.2022.

25. The convictions and sentences are varied and substituted accordingly. The

appeal is thus partially allowed to that extent.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Menaka Wijesundera, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL