..

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

c.A. Revision Application No: CA (PHC) APN 25/2015

H.C. Monaragala Case No: HC 60/2014

M.C. Wellawaya Case No: BR 616/2012

In the matter of an Application for Revision under Article 138 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka Complainant

Vs.

1. Wickramage Ranjith Kumara alias

Podi

Accused

2. Widanagamage Ajith Kumara, No. 1888, Shakti Mawatha, Modarawana, Embilipitiya. Claimant (Vehicle owner)

AND NOW BETWEEN

Widanagamage Ajith Kumara, No. 1888, Shakti Mawatha, Modarawana, Embilipitiya. Claimant - Petitioner

Vs.

BEFORE

COUNSEL

INQUIRY ON

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS

DECIDED ON

K.K. WICKREMASINGHE, J.

Hon. Attorney General Attorney-General's Department, Colombo 12. Respondent

K K. Wickremasinghe, J.

Janak De Silva, J.

Shanaka Ranasinghe, PC with AAL N. Abeysooriya for the Claimant - Petitioner

Nayomi Wickremasekara, SSC for the

R\!~;pondent

09.08.2018

The Claimant-Petitioner - On 04.09.2018

The Respondent - On 15.07.2016

23.10.2018

The Applicant-Petitioner has filed this revision application seeking to set aside the

confiscation order made by the Learned High Court Judge of Monaragala in Case

No. 60/2014.

Facts of the Case:

The Accused-driver (hereinafter referr~d to as the 'accused') was charged for

trafficking and having possession of Car,nabis Satvia L., offences punishable under

Poisons, Opium and Dangerous drug Ordinance. The accused had pleaded guilty

when the charges were read out on 04.08.2014 and the Learned High Court Judge

P2.ge 2 of 8

had convicted and sentenced accordingly.: The vehicle bearing registration number

WP-HA 2421 (SG-HA 2421) was listed as the vehicle allegedly used for

committing the said offences.

Thereafter a vehicle inquiry was held with regard to the confiscation of the vehicle

and the claimant-petitioner (hereinafter rett!rred to as the "petitioner") and his wife

had given evidence in the inquiry. At the conclusion of the inquiry, the Learned

High Court Judge had confiscated the vehi,cIe by the order dated 02.12.2014.

Being aggrieved by the said order, the petitioner had preferred an appeal. However,

the Learned High Court judge had pointed out that there were no provisions to

appeal against a confiscation order of a lehicle in terms of section 79( 1) of the

Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs Ordinance. Therefore the petitioner had

withdrawn the appeal.

Thereafter, the petitioner had preferred a revision application to this Court seeking

to revise the confiscation order dated 02.12.2014. This Court had delivered the

order on 14.10.2016. The Supreme Court had set aside the said order and had

directed this Court to re-consider the appli :ation on merits.

The Learned President's Counsel for th(: petitioner contended that the Learned

High Court Judge had failed to consider principles set out in case law and therefore

the order made was bad in law.

The Learned President's Counsel has submitted the case of Faris V. The Officer

in charge, Police Station, Galenbindufmwewa and another (1992) 1 S.L.R.

167, in which it was held that,

" ... an order for confiscation cannot be made if the owner establishes one of

two matters. They are:

Page 3 of 8

t.

I. That he has taken all precautions to prevent the use of the vehiclefor the

commission of the offence;

11. That the vehicle has been used/or the commission of the offence without

his knowledge.

In terms of the proviso, if the ,J 1111er establishes anyone of these matters

on a balance of probability, Ian order for confiscation should not be

d " ma e ...

However, section 79 of the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs Ordinance does

not afford a third party owner an opportunity to claim the vehicle. Accordingly any

vehicle or equipment which had been lJsed for the commission of offence, by

reason of such conviction, is forfeited to the State.

In the case ofManawadu V. The Attorney General (1987) 2 SLR 30, it was held

that,

"By Section 7 of Act No. 13 of 1982 it was not intended to deprive an owner

of his vehicle used by the offendc~' in committing a forest offence' without

his (owner's) knowledge and without his participation. The word forfeited'

must be given the meaning 'liable 10 be forfeited' so as to avoid the injustice

that would flow on the construction that forfeiture of the vehicle is automatic

on the conviction of the accused . The amended sub-section 40 does not

exclude by necessary implication the rule of 'audi alteram partem' . The

owner of the lorry not a party te the case is entitled to be heard on the

question of forfeiture of the lorry, if he satisfies the court that the accused

committed the offence without his knowledge or participation, his lorry will

not be liable to forfeiture.

Page 4 of 8

The Magistrate must hear the owner of the lorry on the question of showing

cause why the lorry is not liable to be fOlieited. If the Magistrate is satisfied

with the cause shown, he must restore the lorry to the owner. The Magistrate

may consider the question of r(\'easing the lorry to the owner pending

inquily, on his entering into a br-.nd with sl{fficient security to ahide by the

order that may ultimately be binding on him"

In the case of Orient Financial Sen' res Corporation Ltd. V. Range Forest

Officer of Ampara and another [SC Appeal No. 120/2011], it was held that,

"According to the plain readiflg of this section it appears that upon

conviction the confiscation is automatic. The strict interpretation of this

Section will no doubt cause prEjudice to the third parties who are the

owners of such vehicles ...

The Supreme Court has consistently followed the case of Manawadu vs the

Attorney General. Therefore it is settled law that before an order for

forfeiture is made the owner should be given an opportunity to show cause. lf the owner on balance of probability satisfies the court that he had taken

precautions to prevent the COln,1 iss ion of the offence or the offence was

committed without his knowledge '1or he was privy to the commission of the

offence then the vehicle has to be Ie/eased to the owner. "

Accordingly the Learned High Court Judge of Monaragala had held a vehicle

inquiry following the principles of Natural justice. Therefore the appenant was

bound to show cause that he had no knowledge of the offence being committed and

he had taken every possible step to prevent an offence being committed.

PagE ~,of 8

w,.

The Learned President's Counsel for the petitioner has submitted that as per the

evidence led on behalf of the petitioner, he did not have any knowledge of the

commission of the offence. On the date (.if arrest, the petitioner and his family had

attended an almsgiving at the residence of a relative of his wife. After the

almsgiving, his family was ready to ret,urn home and they had packed personal , belongings in the car including clothes, keys of house and wallet of the petitioner.

Thereafter the accused had taken the vehicle without the knowledge of petitioner

while petitioner was having a wash at e well nearby. Accordingly the Learned

, President's Counsel for the petitioner submitted that above evidence clearly

established that the petitioner did not have any knowledge ofrhe accused using the i vehicle to commit the particular offence: The Learned President's Counsel further

contended that if the respondent was to cnallenge the position of the petitioner that

the personal belongings of the petitioner were inside the vehicle, it was the duty of

the respondent to place evidence to the contrary before Court.

However, it is imperative to note that the burden of proving shifts to the petitioner

upon the conviction. Therefore it is the duty of the petitioner to prove on a balance

of probability that he was not privy to the ~ffence.

In the case of Umma Habeeba V. Ole, Dehiattakandiya and other (1999) 3

Sri.L.R. 89, it was held that,

"What s. 3A means is that the veil.'cle shall necessarily be confiscated if the

owner fails to prove that the ofJel'lce was committed without the knowledge

but not otherwise. If, as contended the Magistrate was given a discretion to

consider whether to confiscate or not - the Magistrate could confiscate even

when the ofJence was committed It ithout the knowledge of the owner taking

Page,6 of 8

~.

into consideration other damnab! ~ circumstances apart ,Fom knowledge or

lack of it on the part of the owner, " "

We observe that the petitioner and his. wife had taken different positions in the I inquiry, The petitioner had testified that 'he never allowed the accused to drive the

" vehicle and the accused did not have driving license. However the wife of the

petitioner had testified that she gave the Key of the vehicle to the accused since the

accused used to drive the said vehicle with the consent of the petitioner. Further we

observe that no clothes were recoveredh.:cording to the notes made by the Police

on 01.07.2012 with regard to the arrest 0:-' the accused.

Therefore we are of the view that the pe':itioner had failed to discharge the burden

cast on him on a balance of probability. We are mindful that the Learned High

,. Court Judge had considered fatal contrad,ctions in the evidence led on behalf of the

petitioner due to deliberate false statemerts.

In the case of Bank of Ceylon V. Kaleel and others [2004] 1 Sri L R 284, it was

held that;

"In any event to exercise revisionory jurisdiction the order challenged must

have occasioned a failure of justice and be manifestly erroneous which go

beyond an error or defect or irregularity that an ordinary person would

instantly react to it - the order complained of is of such a nature which

would have shocked the conscz'enc ... ' of court. "

In the case of Rasheed Ali V. Mohamed' Ali (1981) 2 SLR 29 it was held that,

"The powers of revision conferred on the Court of Appeal are very wide and

the Court has discretion to exerci.le them whether an appeal lies or not or

whether an appeal had been taken or not. However this discretionary

Page" of 8

remedy can be invoked only wh !!'(' there are exceptional circumstances

warranting the intervention of the (ourt ... "

Therefore considering the facts of the ca~~ and the order of the Learned High Court

Judge, we are of the view that there is .no failure of justice, defect, illegality or

,I 'i irregularity to shock the conscience of Court in order to invoke the revisionary

jurisdiction of this Court. Accordingly we do not see any reason to revise the order

of the Learned High Court Judge of Nlonaragala dated 02.12.2014. The order of

the Learned High Court Judge is affinneq.

Therefore the revision application is hereby dismissed without costs.

JU,)GE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Janak De Silva, J.

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Cases referred to:

1. Faris V. The Officer in charge. Police Station, Galenbindunuwewa and another (1992) I S.L.R. 167 2. Manawadu V. The Attorney General (1987) 2 SLR 30 3. Orient Financial Services Corporation i...,td. V. Range Forest Officer of Ampara and another [SC Appeal No. 120/2011] 4. Umma Habeeba V. OIC, Dehiattakandiya and other (1999) 3 Sri.L.R. 89 5. Bank of Ceylon V. Kaleel and others [.~004] 1 Sri L R 284 6. Rasheed Ali V. Mohamed Ali (1981) :: SLR 29

!

Page IJ of 8