IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBUC OF SRI LANKA

C.A. No. Rll-0003-2016

D.C. Puttalam Case No. 2621/D

In the matter of an application for

Revision and/or Restitution (restitutio-

,iI-integrum) in terms of Article 138 of

the Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Diathu Arachchige Lily Silva,

No. 43, Soratha Mawatha

Gangodawila

Nugegoda

PETITIONER

Vs.

I. Registrar General.

Registrar General's Department,

Pelawatta,

Battaramulla.

2. Jayasinghe Arachchige Mary

Magilin,

Anuradhapura Road,

Sirambi Adiya,

Puttalam.

3. Rosaline Rodrigo,

Anuradhapura Road,

BEFORE

COUNSEL

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS

Sirambi Adiya,

Puttalam.

4. Maxi Rodrigo,

Anuradhapura Road,

Sirambi Adiya,

Puttalam.

5. Princy Rodrigo,

Anuradhapura Road,

Sirambi Adiya,

Puttalam.

6. Janet Rodrigo,

Anuradhapura Road,

Sirambi Adiya,

Puttalam.

RESPONDENTS

Shiran GooneratneJ. &

Dr. Ruwan Fernando].

Chamath Fernando for the Petitioner

Chathura Galhena for the 3"' to 6"

Respondents

07.08.2019 (by the Petitioner)

09.08.2019 (by the 3"' to 6" Respondents)

ARGUED ON 27.02.2020

DECIDED ON 23.06.2020

CA RII-0003-2016 OC-PUTTALAM-262 1-0

..

Dr. Ruwan Fernando,1.

Introduction

III This is an application by the Petitioner by way of Revision and/or

Restitutio in Integmm to set aside the decree absolute entered in Case No.

2621/D by the District Court of Puttalam on 19.04.2012 after ex parte trial,

dissolving the marriage of the Petitioner to the Phillip Joseph Anthony

Rodrigo who died on 06.05.2013.

Background facts

The Petitioner's Application

121 The facts relevant to this application as set out in the Petition briefly are

as follows:

(a) The Petitioner lawfully man-ied Philip Joseph Anthony Rodrigo on

14.01.1993 and established their matrimonial home at Sirambiadiya,

Puttalam;

(b) The said Philip Joseph Anthony Rodrigo created disputes with the

Petitioner causing severe mental pain and agony to the Petitioner and

he continuously quarreled with the Petitioner and refused and/or

failed to perform matrimonial duties towards the Petitioner;

(c) Disreg-arding all the efforts of the Petitioner to continue the marriage

life, the said Philip Joseph Anthony Rodrigo continued to disrupt the

harmonious and peaceful relations between the parties and on or

about January 2005, the said Philip Joseph Anthony Rodrigo

maliciously and in a degrading, inhuman and cruel manner forced

out and/or ejected the Petitioner from the said matrimonial house;

(d) Though the Petitioner strived hard to reconcile with the said Philip

Joseph Anthony Rodrigo and continue the marriage life, all her

CA RII-0003-2016 I}C:-PlJTT ALAM-2621-1}

efforts were maliciously and inhumanely refused by the said Philip

Joseph Anthony Rodrigo;

(e) As the Petitioner did not have any place to stay from about March

2005, the Petitioner commenced residing with a friend in

J ayawardenapura, N ugegoda;

(f) On or about 06.05.2013, the Petitioner became aware that the said

Philip Joseph Anthony Rodrigo had passed away and the Petitioner

immediately went back to her matrimonial home in Puttalam in

order to organise the funeral of her late husband and show her last

respects;

(g) During the said funeral, the Petitioner for the first time was made

aware by the relations of the said Philip Joseph Anthony Rodrigo that

he had divorced the Petitioner by instituting a divorce action in the

District Court of Puttalam;

(h) When the Petitioner made further inquiries with regard to the said

divorce action, the Petitioner was able to discover that:

(i) Her late husband had instituted a divorce action against her in

the District Court of Puttalam in case bearing No. 2621/D by

Plaint dated 07.09.2009 and the Petitioner's address had been

stated in the caption of the Plaint as "Pinwatte, Panadura";

(ii) Although the Panadura Fiscal had reported to Court that

summons was served on the Petitioner by pointed-out service

on 29.11.2010, summons was never served on her;

(iii) The learned DistrictJudge had proceeded to hear the case ex-

parte and entered decree nisi against the Petitioner on . . 09.09.2011;

CA RII-0003-2016 DC-PUTTALAM-2621-D

..

..

(iv) Although the Panadura Fiscal had reported to Court that the

decree nisi was served on her on 17.01.2012, it was never

served on her and as per the journal entry dated 19.04.2012,

the decree JJJsihad been made absolute on 19.04.2012;

(v) At all times material to the said District Court Case, the

Petitioner was residing in Sri Jayawardenapura, Nugegoda,

and not in Pinwatte, Panadura and the documents marked P7-

Pl1 confirm that the Petitioner was residing in Gangodawila,

Nugegoda from about March 2005;

(i) At all times material to the said District COUIt Case, the Petitioner

was not residing in Pinwatte, Panadura and the Certificate issued by

the Grama Niladari of Pinwatte, Panadura marked P6 confirms that

the Petitioner's name is not included in any Electoral list in the

Pinwatte area;

G) The decree msi and the decree absolute entered by the District

Court Case No. 2621/0 is ex facie arbitrary, capricious and clearly

against the fundamental principles of natural justice;

(k) The Petitioner filed a case bearing No. 2089/L in the District Court

of Puttalam in August 2013 under Section 839 of the Civil Procedure

Code seeking inter alia, a declaration that the said order absolute

entered in the District Court of Puttalam Case is void ab initia,

(I) The District Court, however on 23.05.2014 held in Case No.

2089/L that it has no jurisdiction to vacate the said decree and

directed the Petitioner to seek relief from the Court of Appeal and

allowed the Petitioner to amend the Plaint and proceed with the

remaining reliefs prayed for in the said case.

CA RII-0003-20\6 DC-l'liTTALAM-262 \-D

Objections of the 2nd Respondent

131 The 2"" Respondent filed the statement of objections and while praying

for the dismissal of the Petitioner's application on the ground that the

Petitioner has no status to maintain this application, raised the following

preliminary objections to the maintainability of this application:

(a) The Petitioner cannot prefer a revision application in this Court in

as much as the Petitioner has failed to explain why the same has not

been preferred to the relevant Provincial High Court exercising Civil

Appellate Jurisdiction;

(b) The Petitioner has filed this application in the Court of Appeal

seeking to set aside the decree absolute made by the District Court

of Puttalam, without first asking for the relief from the same Court

which made the order;

(c) As the Petitioner herself has admitted in the Petition that the other

party to the dissolved marriage, the said Philip Joseph Anthony

Rodrigo had passed away, there is nothing to be restored by this

Court;

(d) Although the District Court of Puttalam in case TO. 2089/L filed by

the Petitioner refused to set aside the decree absolute in Case No.

2621/D, the Petitioner had not canvassed the said order.

Objections of the 3"' to 6'" Respondents

141 The 3" to 6'" Respondents filed their objections and denied all and

several averments contained in the Petition except those specifically

admitted in their objections. They further raised the following preliminary

objections to the maintainability of this application:

CA RII-0003-2016 OC-PUTTALAM-2621-0

(a) The Petitioner has failed to disclose exceptional circumstances

warranting to exercise the Revision and/or Restitutio in Intel/rum

jurisdiction of this Court;

(b) The Petitioner is guilty of laches as she has filed this application after

a lapse of 2 years and 7 months from the death of her former

husband Philip Joseph Anthony Rodrigo;

(c) The Petitioner has prayed for the restitution of marriage between

herself and the deceased Philip Joseph Anthony Rodrigo after the

lapse of 3 years and 8 months from the date of the said decree nisi

being made absolute by the District Court of Puttalam;

(d) The reliefs prayed for by the Petitioner in this application are against

the deceased Philip Joseph Anthony Rodrigo and therefore, such

reliefs cannot be maintained after his death; and

(e) The Petitioner has suppressed material facts and violated the rule of

uberninae fidei

151 The 3'd to 6'" Respondents further stated in their statement of objections

filter alia, that:

(a) The marriage between the Petitioner and Philip Joseph Anthony

Rodrigo was dissolved by a Divorce action filed by the said deceased

Philip Joseph Anthony Rodrigo and the Petitioner was living in

separation from the said Philip Joseph Anthony Rodrigo from 2005;

(b) The Petitioner was aware that late Philip Joseph Anthony Rodrigo

had obtained a divorce decree and the marriage with the Petitioner

was dissolved while the said Philip Joseph Anthony Rodrigo was

living but suppressed the said fact to obtain undue advantage by

abusing the process of law; and

CA: RII-0003-2016 nC-I'tlTTALAM-262 1-n

(c) The averments contained in the petitioner's application with regard

to her address are facts that are personally known to the deceased

Philip Joseph Anthony Rodrigo and hence, those matters cannot be

testified by anyone else other than the said deceased Philip Joseph

Anthony Rodrigo.

For those reasons, the 3'" to 6'" Respondents prayed for the dismissal of the

Petitioner's application.

Decision

ExtraordinaIy Relief by way of Restillltio in Integrum

161 Before considering the preliminary objections and the substantive

issues, it is necessary to deal with the nature and role of restitutio in

integrum as a mode of relief of our Courts.

171 The Latin phrase "restitutio in integrum" translated literally, means

restoration to a former condition or state. (Lewis and Short's Latin

Dictionary & Oxford Latin Dictionary). Percival Cane, The Selective Voet,

4.1 (Translator's note) translates the phrase as 'restoration to entirety'.

According to Sohm's Institutes of Roman Law, s. 56, Ill, Burge, 2nd ed.

Vol. 4, Chap. 1, "in Roman Law, the restitutio in integrum was the removal

of a disadvantage in law which had legally occurred. It was a protection

against injustice (as distinguished from an action against injustice) which

was rendered necessary on account of the practical impossibility of taking

legally, in advance, all the circumstances that in reality may occur". (see-

also Abeysekera v. Haramanis Appu 14 NLR 353).

181 The remedy was received into Roman Dutch law in wider form, where

restitutio in integrum was primarily intended for relief from contracts on

the ground of minority, error, fraud and duress (Abeysekera v. Haramanis

Appu, supra). Relief by way of restitutio in integrum will also be granted

CA RII0003-2016 o C-PUTTALAM-262 1-0

-

..

from the effect of an order in judicial proceedings where the legality of

such order is questioned (Phipps v. Bracegyrdle 35 NLR 302).

191 Voet describes restitutio iiI iiItegrum as follows:

"It is an action for the making whole ag-dln of a matter or cause .... It is otherwise descnbed (JiIsofar as it is granted by the magis!Tacy) as a resetlJiIg and restoration of a transaction to its on/pnai state; or a making whole again of a cause which has been lost. It is an extraordiIJ;uy remedy by which the praetor in Vlitue of his office and jurisdiction, taking dIe lIne of naturaJ fairness, puts back Injured or cheated persol1S for just cause liItO their on'gJilai state, just as if no dama,!,'1ng transaction had taken place, or at least orders them to be iiIdemm/ied. " VoeL; Commentarius, 4.1.1.).

1101 Voet also says "The effect of restitutio in integrum is that all things are

put back into their original condition, and that indeed in a single judicial

proceeding." Voet, Commentarius, 4.1.21; quoted and followed in the

South African case of Davidson v. Bonafede 1981 (2) SA 501 Cat 509 F.).

Hosten et al. describe an order of restitutio in liItegrum thus:

"This is an extraordinary remedy in terms of which a court orders the former position to be restored; in other words, each party must return to the other whatever he has received in terms of the contract." (Hosten et ai., Introduction to South African Law, p 293).

1111 According to Van der Linden, the cases in which this relief may, be

obtained under two heads: (i) relief relating to the original matter itself

(substantial relief) relieving a party from any act or conduct and replacing

him in his fOlmer situation is granted on the ground of his having been

induced through fear, fraud, minority, error or other sufficient reasons to

do the act against which he prays relief; (ii) relief relating merely to some

omission or error in the process or pleadings fjudicial relief) (Dember v.

Abdul Hake149 NLR 62, pp. 64-65).

CA RII-0003-2016 DC-l'UTTALAM-2621-D

1121 In Sri Lanka, the remedy of restitutio in integrum has taken deep root

in the practice and procedure of our Courts (Abeysekera v. Haramanis

Appu). Cases in which application for relief by way of restitution in respect

of judgments of original courts have been made can be broadly classified

under two heads: (a) where a judgment has been obtained by fraud or

where there has been a discovery of fresh evidence; (h) where a judgment

has been entered of consent and there has been an absence of a real

consent such as in cases of fraud, fear, excess of authority and mistake

(Dember v. Abdul Hake!, supra, p. 66).

1131 Article 138 (1) of the Constitution has vested this Court with the sole

and exclusive jurisdiction to grant relief by way of resDlution in integrum.

Article 138 (1) reads thus:

(J) The Court of Appeal shall have and exerCIse subject to the provisions of the ConsDlution or of any law, an appellate jUflsdicDon

for the cOlTecDOn of all elTors in fact or in law which shall be committed by the High Court, in the exerCIse of its appeUate or original junsdicDon or by any Court of First Instance, tribunal or other instJluDon and sole and exclusive cognizance, by fmy of appeal, reVISIon and resDtuDo in integrum, of all causes, suits, acDons, prosecuDons, matters and things of which such High Court,

Court of First instance, trIbunal or other insDtuDon may have taken cog11lzance.

ProVIded that no judgment; decree or 'order of any court shall be reversed or varied on account of any error, defect or irregularity, which has not prejudiced the substantJaJ rights of the parties or occasIoned a faIlure ofjusdce.

1141 The Petitioner in the instant case is inviting this Court to exercise the

jurisdiction vested in this Court by way of revision and/or resDtuDo in

integrum and to set aside the decree absolute entered in Case No. 2621/D

by the District Court of Puttalam on the ground that her husband had

CA RII-0003-2016 DC-PUTTALAM-2621-D

..

,.

obtained the divorce by fraud, without serving the summons and decree

nisi on her. The Petitioner has complained that the ex parte decree of

divorce obtained by a misuse of the legal process and in violation of

fundamental principles of natural justice is a nullity that has caused a

miscan'iage of justice.

Preliminary Objections

A-Decree of divorce entered ill favour of the plaintiff, Philip Joseph

Anthony Rodrigo by the District Court cannot be set aside after his death

B-The Petitioner has failed to invoke the Jurisdiction of the District Court in the first instance

1151 I shall now consider in detail the following two connected preliminary

objections raised by the Respondents to the maintainability of this

application.

I. As the said Philip Joseph Anthony Rodrigo is now dead, the divorce

decree entered by the District Court cannot be set aside after his

death as the deceased husband is no longer in a position to defend

himself or rebut the allegations made against him;

(2) Failure of the Petitioner to invoke the inherent power of the District

Court in the first instance in terms of section 839 of the Civil

Procedure Code before seeking the extraordinary relief by way of

revision or restitudo in integrum,

A- Can the decree of divorce entered in favour of the plaintiff by the

District Court be set aside after his death?

1161 At the hearing, the learned Counsel for the 3'd to 6'" Respondents, Mr.

Galhena submitted that the relief sought by the Petitioner to set aside the

dissolution of marriage between the Petitioner and the deceased Phillip

Joseph Anthony Rodrigo cannot be granted after his death as it would

CA RIIO()()320t6 OC-PUTTALAM-262 1-0

,

affect the rights of a deceased party who cannot be brought before Court.

His submission in short was that the divorce proceedings in the District

Court represented a personal cause of action both for the husband as well

as for the wife and consequently, the right to sue had not sUIVived for

challenging the ex parte decree after the death of the decree-holder

husband. He argued that this Court ought not to interfere with the decree

of divorce since it is against the rules of natural justice, more specifically,

the rule of audi alterem part em as the husband is no longer in a position to

defend himself or rebut the allegations made against him.

1171 This takes me to the consideration of the contention canvassed by the

learned Counsel for the Respondents that an ex parte decree of divorce

entered by the District Court in favour of one of the parties to the

proceedings cannot be set aside alter his death on an application made by

the surviving spouse on the principle of "action personalis moritur cum .

persona~ i.e. a personal cause of action dies with the person.

1181 It is true that a divorce action before a District Court represented a

personal action based on matrimonial fault on the part of one of the parties

to the marriage and thus, if either of the spouses in such proceedings dies

before any decree of divorce is passed, the personal cause of action would

die with his death on the priAciple of "actio personalis monlur cum

persona," However, the situation is different where, once one of the parties

to the divorce proceedings, who obtained an ex parte decree of divorce

without the knowledge or notice to the other spouse, expires and direct

legal consequences affecting the status and proprietary rights of the other

sUIviving party flow from such adverse ex parte decree of divorce.

1191 If the surviving wife is prevented from making any application for

setting aside the ex parte decree of divorce obtained by the husband

CA RII-0003-2016 DC-PUTTALAM-262 1-D

without her knowledge and notice to her, the wife would lose her marital

status and proprietary right in the deceased husband's property. In such

circumstances, the aggrieved surviving wife would suffer serious legal

damage and injury without getting any opportunity to get such as ex paJte

decree set aside while her deceased husband and his legal heirs would

benefit from such ex paJte decree of divorce obtained by the fraud

practiced on his wife.

1201 Thus, any ex paJte decree will have a direct impact on the status of the

wife and her right to the estate of the deceased husband and no Court in

such circumstances, would helplessly watch and allow the surviving wife to

sufier from such legal consequences flowing from such ex paJte decree of

divorce obtained by fraud. The maxim "actio personalis moritur cum

persona" would not apply where one spouse to the divorce proceedings

having obtained an ex paJ1e decree of divorce against the other spouse dies

and the surviving spouse is able to show that the ex paJte divorce was

obtained without the knowledge or notice to that party.

1211 A similar submission was made in Kusumawathie v. Wiiesinghe (2001)

3 Sri LR 128 that the divorce action before the District COUIt is a personal

action and with the death of the husband, the action was brought to a close

and hence, the Petitioner is prevented fi'om making allegations against the

deceased husband who is no longer in a position to defend himself or

rebut the allegations made against him.

1221 The Court of Appeal, however, held that the Court of Appeal would

interfere with the ex paJte decree of divorce entered by the District Court

when one of the parties to the proceedings is dead where the fraud had

been practiced on a party to the action and a miscarriage of justice or

failure of justice has occurred by fraudulently obtaining a decree of divorce

CA RII-0003-2016 DC-PUTTALAM-2621-D

without the knowledge or notice to the Defendant Jayasinghe]. at pages

244 and 245 stated:

"Mr. Suraweera ~ main contention w.:lS the action by the deceased Plaintiff against the Defendant-Petitioner w.:lS a personal action and therefore since the deceased Plaintiff is unable to refute the allegation against him this Court ought not to interfere with the findings of the DistrictJudge. I am unable to subsCrIbe to this point of VIew. Hi77ere a party appears before Court and complains that she has been wronged by process oflaw, this Court would not helplessly

watch and allow the fraud practiced on that party to be perpetrated. Restitutio in Integrum proVIdes this Court dIe necessary apparatus to step in and rectilj any miscarriage or faJiure of justice. If this is not the case, then there is a serious vacuum in the law which can be made use of by designiIJg indiVIduals as the Petitioner alleges has happened to her. I am of the VIew that this is an appropniue case for this Court to step in.

1231 Where a surviving aggrieved spouse who suffers from pernicious legal

consequences of an ex parte decree of divorce complains that her deceased

husband had obtained a decree of divorce without her knowledge or

notice to her, she is entitled to make an application for setting aside the ex

parte decree through the assistance of the Court. In such an exercise, all

other legal heirs of the deceased spouse who are interested in supporting

the decree of divorce passed against the surviving spouse are entitled to be

joined as necessary parties as it has happened in the present case.

1241 For those reasons, I hold that there is no substance in the argument

that the Petitioner is prevented from making any application for setting

aside the ex parte decree of divorce with the death of the husband, Philip

Joseph Anthony Rodrigo. For those reasons, :the aforesaid preliminary

objection raised by the learned Counsel for the Respondents is rejected.

B-Failure to invoke the Jurisdiction of the District Court in the first

instance before seeking relief by way of restitutio in integrum

CA RII-0003-2016 DC-PUTTALAM-2621-D

,

1251 At the hearing of this application, Mr. Galhena submitted that the

Fiscal had certified in his affidavits that the summons and the decree nisi

had been duly served on the Petitioner and therefore the presumption

under section 114(e) of the Evidence Ordinance that summons and decree

nisi were duly served on the Petitioner applies. He submitted that in such

circumstance, the burden shifts on to the Petitioner to rebut the said

presumption and prove that no summons and decree nisi were served on

her.

1261 He further submitted that where the decree of divorce has been

entered ex parte in the District Court and is sought to be set aside on any

ground, the application must, in the first instance be made to the very court

that entered decree absolute. His contention was that the Petitioner could

not succeed in this application without invoking the inherent powers of the

District Court first, in terms of section 839 of the Civil Procedure Code to

set aside the ex parte decree by leading evidence to establish that the

decree of divorce was obtained without the knowledge or notice to her.

1271 He cited the decisions in Perera v. Ekallayake 3 NLR 21, Karo!J~'

Appuh;llny v. Slilgho Appu 5 NLR 75 and Ittepana v. Hemawathie (1981)

I Sri LR 476 and submitted that these decisions have clearly held that the

Petitioner must first seek her remedy in the District Court before coming

to this Court and therefore, this application must fail.

[281 In Perera v. Ekanayake (supra), it was held that a judgment obtained

by fraud or passed under a mistake may be set aside either by a regular

action or possibly, by application by way of summary procedure as

regulated by the Civil Procedure Code. In KalV/is Appuhamy v. Slilgho

Appu (supra), it was held that the District Court has power to open or

rescind any order made ex parte, on being satisfied that it was prejudicial to

a party through no fault of his. Again, in Ittepana v. Hemawathie (supra), it

CA RII-0003-2016 DC-PUTTALAM-2621-1>

was held that if a defendant is not served with summons or otherwise

notified of the proceedings against him, the judgment entered against him

in those circumstances is a nullity and the proceedings being void, the

person affected by them can apply to have them set aside ex debito justitiae

in the exercise of the inherent jurisdiction of the court which is saved by

section 839 of the Civil Procedure Code.

1291 Furthermore, in Andradie v. Jqjasekera Perera (1985) 2 Sri LR 204,

Siva Selliah, J. stated at page 209 that:

"the practice has grown and almost hardened into a ruJe that where a decree has been entered ex-parte in the District Court and is sought to be set asIde on any ground application must in the first insliU]ce be made to that very court and that it is only where the finding of the District Court on such application is not consistent with reason or the proper exercise of the judge:S discretion or where he has misdirected himself on the /acts or law will this Court grant extraordinary relief by way of Revision or Restitutio in integrum which are extraordinary remedies".

1301 The above-mentioned judicial authorities make it very clear that where

the defendant is not served with summons or otherwise noticed of the

proceedings against him, the judgment entered against him in those

circumstances is a nullity. In such circumstances, the general practice for a

party or a person against whom an ex parte decree has been made is, in the

first instance, to move the court which made the order to set it aside upon

proof that summons or notice of the proceedings against such party had

not been served, before this Court can be invited to grant extraordinary

remedy by way of restitutio in integrum.

1311 I do not, however, think that the cases cited by the learned Counsel

for the Respondents, including Andradie v.]ayasekera Perera (supra) apply

to the facts of the present case. In Ittepana v. Hemawathie (supra), the

CA RII-0003-2016 DC-PUTTALAM-2621-D

defendant wife complained that she had not been served with summons

and denied having filed proxy and filed papers in the District Court making

the living husband as the Respondent to have the divorce decree annulled

on the ground of non-service of summons.

1321 Similarly, in Andradie v.Jayasekera Perera (supra), the Petitioner who

was the wife of the Respondent sought by way of revision and/or restitutio

in integrum to revise and set aside the ex parte decree of divorce obtained

by her husband who was living at that time on the ground that such ex

parte decree was obtained by fraud. The application was dismissed as the

Petitioner in that case failed, in the first instance, to make an application to

that very court before invoking the powers of revision and/or restitutio in

integrum in the Court of Appeal.

1331 In the present case, however, the said Phillip loshep Anthony

Rodrigo, who obtained the ex parte decree of divorce against the Petitioner

was dead by the time the Petitioner filed the application in the District

Court. Accordingly, the facts of the cases cited by the learned Counsel for

the Respondents will not apply to the present case.

1341 Mr. Chamath Fernando, the learned Counsel for the Petitioner cited

the case of Kusumawathie v. Wijesinghe (supra) and Pau/is v. Joseph and

Others (2005) 3 Sri LR 162 in support of his contention that in a situation

where one of the parties to the divorce action is dead, all what is required

for the surviving spouse in an application by way of restitutio in integrum is

to satisfy the Court of Appeal on the available evidence that the ex parte

decree of divorce was obtained fraudulently by the deceased spouse by

abuse and misuse of legal process.

1351 The facts of the case in Kusumawathie v. Wtiesinghe (supra) are

identical to the facts of the present case. In that case, the wife filed an

CA RIl-0003-20\6 nC-PliTTALAM-262 1-n

application in the District Court to set aside the ex-parte divorce decree

after the death of her husband who was the Plaintiff in the District Court

case. The District Court, like in the present case, held that it has no

jurisdiction to vacate the said decree as the Plaintiff was dead and observed

that the Petitioner should have sought relief from the Court of Appeal.

The Court of Appeal held that where one of the parties to the divorce

action was dead subsequent to the entering of the ex parte decree for

divorce, relief by way of restitutio in integrum may be sought if it is satisfied

by the surviving spouse that the decree for divorce had been obtained by

fraud or without the knowledge or notice to the Defendant The Court of

Appeal, however, refused to send back the case for inquiry as the Plaintiff

was dead at that time.

1361 Further, the facts of the case in Paulis v. joseph and Others (supra)

almost bear a similarity to the facts of the present case and that of the

Kusumawathie v. Wiiesinghe (supra). In the said case, the I" Respondent

took up the position that as the relief by way of restitutio in integrum is an

extraordinary remedy, it should only be granted in exceptional

circumstances and the party who complaints of non-service summons must

first go before the District Court exercising original jurisdiction, as the issue

of summons is a matter between District Court and the Officer concerned.

The I" Respondent's position was that the District Court remedy has to be

exhausted first, before resorting to restitutio in integrum. While rejecting

the position taken up by the I" Respondent, Imam]. observed at page 167:

"Although the position of the 1st Respondent is that the Petitioner should have gone to the DistJ7Ct Court as it has oniPnai junsdiction and where a due InqUlry would be held. However, there IS no merit In thIS submIssion, as the Plaintiff (petitioner's husband) IS now dead and she obviously cannot go to the DIstrict Court. "

CA RII-0003-2016 OC-PUTTALAM-2621-0

,

,

1371 In the present case, the Petitioner first went before the District Court

seeking to set aside the decree of divorce in terms of section 839 of the

Civil Procedure Code. The District Court however, held that it has no

jurisdiction as the Plaintiff is dead and the proper forum is either the Court

of Appeal or the Civil Appellate High Court. Thus, there is no substance

in the argument that the Petitioner had failed to go before the District

Court first, seeking to set aside the ex parte decree of divorce entered by

the District Court.

1381 The present application has been filed by the aggrieved wife by way of

resIJtutio in integIVm under Article 138 of the Constitution after the

District Court refused to entertain her complaint on the ground that the

husband is now dead. In this application other legal heirs of the deceased

husband had been brought on record as respondents by the aggrieved

spouse and they are seeking to have this application set aside and the

decree absolute confiITned.

1391 In a situation where the Plaintiff in the District Court Divorce case,

after having obtained an ex parte decree of divorce dies, and the Petitioner

had afready exhausted her rights in the District Court by filing an

application seeking to set aside the ex parte decree of divorce, no purpose

will be served now in sending the complaint of the Petitioner to the same

District Court directing it hold an inquiry and re-trial if it arises.

1401 I hold that where the ex parte decree of divorce had been obtained by

fraud or collusion resulting from a failure or miscarriage of justice, a

surviving spouse who suffers from direct legal consequences flowing from

such adverse ex parte decree of divorce is entitled to maintain an

application by way of resIJtudo in integrum for setting aside such an ex

CA RII-0003-2016 DC-PUTTALAM-2621-D

parte decree in a fit and proper case, even though the husband might have

died after obtaining such decree.

1411 In my view, the contention of Mr. Galhena that after the death of the

Phillip Joshep Anthony Rodrigo, the ex parte decree of divorce cannot be

set aside by the Court of Appeal by way of restitutio Ii] Integrum, is not

sustainable and the said preliminary objection is overruled.

Has the Petitioner satisfied that the ex parte decree of divorce had been obtained fraudulently without the knowledge or notice to the Petitioner?

142) I turn, now, to the substance of the application and proceed to

consider whether the Petitioner has satisfied that the decree for divorce

had been obtained without the knowledge or notice to the Petitioner as set

out in the application of the Petitioner.

143) Importantly, the Petitioner has made specific allegations of fraud and

pleaded and fornmlated a case founded on fraud wherein her late husband

had obtained tile ex parte divorce decree against her without knowledge or

notice to her. Mr. Galhena brought to our notice that the affidavits of the

Fiscal and the Journal Entries Nos. 6 and 12 demonstrate that the

summons and the decree nisi had been served on the Petitioner (P5) and

when the Petitioner was absent and unrepresented on the summons

returnable date, the District Court entered an ex parte decree.

144) He further submitted that when the Petitioner failed to respond to the

decree nisi, it was made absolute by the District Court and under such

circumstances, the question whether the summons and decree nisi had not

been served on the Petitioner is a question of fact which cannot be decided

without testing the credibility of the Petitioner's evidence on oath and also

without considering the admissibility and authenticity of the Petitioner's

documents marked P6 to PIlat a formal inquiry.

CA RIf-0003-2016 DC-PUTT AL AM-262 1-D

,

1451 The Petitioner has produced two official documents issued by the

Grama Niladhari of Pinwatte, Panadura (P6) and Wijerama, Maharagama

(P7). By P6, the Grama Niladhari, Pinwatte, Panadura has confirmed that

the Petitioner's name had not been registered in the Electoral Registers of

Pinwatte, Panadura for the period 2010-2012. By P7, Grama Niladhari,

Wijerama has confirmed that the Petitioner has been residing in

Gangodawila, Nugegoda from 2005, which falls within the Wijerama

Grama Niladhari Division.

1461 The 3" to 6" Respondents have stated in their objections that the

matters pleaded by the Petitioner in her Petition that she was residing in

Gangodawila, Nugegoda and not in Pinwatte, are facts personally known to

the deceased person and hence, the Respondents are not in a position to

testify to the said facts contained in the Petitioner's documents.

1471 It is not con-ect to say that the Respondents have nothing to do with

the proceedings before this court or that they cannot contradict the facts

contained in the Petition of the Petitioner. They are the legal

representatives of the deceased husband and as legal heirs of the deceased

person; they are very much interested in supporting the ex parte decree of

divorce so that the surviving spouse would remain a divorcee and not as a

widow of the deceased.

1481 On the other hand, the Respondents as legal heirs of the deceased

person would be the beneficiaries of the property rights of the deceased

person, if the ex parte decree of divorce is sustained and this application is

dismissed. They have neither produced a single document to contradict

the documents marked P6 to PII including the two documents issued by

the Grama Niladhari of Pinwdtte and Wijerama, nor made any specific

allegation what~oever, that the said two documents were fraudulent

CA RII-0003-2016 DC-PliTTALAM-262 1-D

I documents. Under such circumstances, this Court is required to rely on the

pleadings and the available documents filed by the parties in this court and

satisfy itself, whether the decree of divorce had been obtained without the

knowledge of or notice to the Petitioner.

1491 The Petitioner has stated in her application that after her late husband

maliciously ejected her from the matrimonial house in Puttalam, she

commenced residing from March 2005 with a friend in ugegoda,

Jayawardenapura and not at Pinwatte, Pandura as contained in the caption

of the Plaint filed by her late husband in the District Court Divorce case

and the decree nisi. The Petitioner has taken up the same position in her

Plaint and the Amended Plaint filed in the District Court of Puttalam Case

No.2089/L.

1501 The caption of the Plaint filed by Phillip Joshep Anthony Rodrigo in

the District Court of Puttalam Case No. 2631/D dated 11.09.2009 (P5 (a)

refers to the Petitioner's address as "Pinwate, Panadura". The Panadura

Fiscal had reported that the summons had been served on the Defendant

on 29.11.2010 and the decree nisi on 17.01.2012 at her Pinwatte,

Panadura address (Vide- Fiscal Reports marked P5).

1511 The document marked P7 is a Certificate on Residence and Character

issued by the Grama Niladhari, No. 52C, Wijerama, Maharagama

confirming that the Petitioner had been residing in several rented houses

from 2005 in the Gangodawila Grama Niladhari Division as a tenant and at

present, she is residing at 53/1, Sri Soratha Mawatha, Gangodawila,

Nugegoda from 2005 also as a tenant.

1521 The document marked P8 is a letter issued by a Lecturer of the

University of Sri Jayawardenapura confirming that the Petitioner has been

residing in Gangodawila area since March 2005 and that in 2011, the

CA RII-0003-20 16 DC-PUTTALAM-2621 -D

I

Petitioner together with her neighbors and friends organised a "Katina

Chivera Pinkama" at the Gangodawila Sunethradevi International Buddhist

Center Temple. The document marked P9 is also a letter issued by

Gangodawila Social Service Organisation confirming that the Petitioner has

been a member of it~ Orlr,mization since 20 II.

153] The document marked P II is an affidavit of one H.D.L.I Perera

confilming that in 2012, the Petitioner who is residing at No. 43, Soratha

Mawatha, Gangodawila assisted him in organising the annual "Katina

Chivera Pinkarna" at the Gangodawila Sunethradevi International Buddhist

Center Temple.

154] The Grama Niladari of Pinwatte, Panadura Division No. 696 has

clearly confilmed that the name of the Petitioner had not been registered

in the Electoral List of Pinwatte Panadura Grama Niladhari Division for

the period 2010 and 2012.

155] As noted, the Respondents have failed to produce a single document

to contradict the Petitioner's documents marked P6 to P6, P7, P8, P9, and

PI I and demonstrate that they are fraudulent documents produced by the

Petitioner to suppress the correct address of the Petitioner contained in the

caption of the Plaint filed by the deceased husband in the Divorce case.

The obvious result of the absence of any document to contradict the

contents of the documents marked P6-P9 and PII is that it is not open to

the Respondents now to contest the con-ectness of the documents marked

P6-P9 and PII and contend that the Petitioner's address at all material

time of the divorce case was not Gangodawila, N ugegoda.

156] On an examination of the Petitioner's documents marked P6-P9 and

P II, it is clearly established that the address of the Petitioner during all

material time of the divorce case filed by the Plaintiff in the District Court

CA RII-0003-2016 DC-PUTTALAM-2621 -D

of Puttalam was Gangodawila, Nugegoda and not the address contained in

the caption of the Plaint or the decree nisi, namely, Pinwatte, Panadura.

1571 If the aggrieved spouse under such circumstances is told off the gates

of her application by way of restitutio in integrum, it would clearly cause a

miscarriage of justice to the surviving spouse who would suffer serious legal

consequences of an ex parte divorce decree in terms of her marital status

and rights of a widow in her deceased husband's property.

1581 I hold that the Petitioner has clearly satisfied on the material tendered

to this Court that ex parte decree of divorce had been obtained by her

deceased husband without the knowledge or notice to the Petitioner.

Hence, the Panadura Fiscal could not have served summons or decree nisi

on the Petitioner on the basis of the address contained in the caption in the , Plaint or the decree nisi. Accordingly, the report of the Panadura Fiscal

had been produced by misusing the process of court, causing a miscarriage

of justice and serious damage to the Petitioner' marital status and her right

to the property of the deceased husband.

Exceptional Circumstances

1591 The Respondents have further raised a preliminary objection that the

Petitioner has not pleaded exceptional circumstances in the Petition and

therefore, the Petitioner is prevented from seeking relief by way of

restitutio Ii] Integrum. The Petitioner has clearly pleaded exceptional

circumstances in paragraph 22 of the Petition and established that the ex

parte decree of divorce had been obtained without serving summons and

decree nisi on her at her Gangodawila, Nugegoda address and thus, such

decree of divorce is a nullity. Accordingly, the Petitioner is entitled the to

invoke the revisionary and/or restitutio In Integrum jurisdiction of this court

against the said ex parte decree of divorce (P5 (g).

CA RII-0003-2016 DC-PUTT A LA M-2621-D

;

Delay in preferring this application after a lapse of 2 years and 7 months from the death of the late husband of the Petitioner and after a lapse of 3 years and 8 months from the decree nisi being made absolute by the District Court

Failure to prefer a revision application to the High Court of the Civil Appeal against the order made by the District Court

[601 The next question to be examined is whether the Petitioner is

disqualified in obtaining this relief due to undue delay in filing this

application. The important question here is to determine whether the

Petitioner had given a valid explanation for the delay in filing the present

application. It must be remembered that every delay of a party in filing an

application for revision or restitutio in integrum alone is not enough to tum

down such application and shut the door against such party.

1611 The question whether the delay is fatal to an application in revision or

resatutio IiI integrum depends on the facts and circumstances of the case

(Cnanapandithan v. Balanayagam (1988) I Sri LR 391). In the High Court

of Madras Case of Mrs. A.Abitha Nachi v. Tmt.K.S. Saroja, decided on 20

October, 2016, supra), the High Court considered what constitutes an

explanation for "sufficient cause" for the delay and stated at paragraph 13

as follows:

"There cannot be a straitjacket formula for accepang or rejecang any explanaaon furnished for the delay caused in filIJlg an acaon or applicaaolJ. If dIe explanaaon does not smad of mala fides or it is not put forth as PaJt of a dIlatory strategy, the coult must show Ullnost cOl1SJderaaon to the suitor. But when there is reasonable ground to thlJlk that the delay was occasIoned by the paJty

delIberately to g'dln arne, then the coult shoufd lean agaJnst acceptance of the expJaJlaaOlJ. 1621 The Indian Supreme Court recently in Esha Bhaf1L1chaJ:jee v.

ManagIng Committee of Raghunath pur Nafar Academy & others, (2013) 12 see 649, decided on 13 September, 2013 held that there should be a

CA RII-0003-2016 DC-PliTT ALAM-2621-D

liberal, pragmatic, justice oriented, non-pedantic approach while dealing

with an application for condonation of delay. The principles that are

elucidated in Paragraphs 15(viii}-{xii) ofthejudgmentJiJteraiIa, are:

"i5. (viii) There is a dislJnction betweeli InordInate delay and a delay ofshort duralJon or few days, for the former docIJ7ne of prejudice is attracted whereas to the latter it may not be attracted. That apart, the first one warrants slJict approach whereas the second calis for a lIberal delInealJoJJ.

(ix) The conduct, behaVIour and attitude of a party relalJng to its IilaclJon or negligence are relevant factors to be taken mto conslderalJon. It is so as the fundamenW pnnciple is that the Courts are required to weigh the scale of balance ofjuslJ(:e m respect of both parties and the SaId pnnciple cannot be given a toW go by In the name of lIberal approach.

(x) If the explanalJon olkred is concocted or the grounds urged In the application are fanciful, the Courts should be vigilant not to , expose the other SIde wmecessarily to face such a litigalJOn.

(Xl) It is to be bome In mInd that no one gets away with fraud, misrepresentalJon or InterpolalJon by takIng recourse to the technicalities oflaw oflimitalJon.

(xli) The enlJre gamut of facts are to be carefully scrulJnized and the approach should be based on the paradigm of judiCJaJ discrelJon

which is founded on objtXIJ"ve reasoning and not on IndiVIdual perceplJoJJ. ....... "

1631 The Petitioner has pleaded that she first came to know of the divorce

action instituted by her late husband on or about 06.05.2013 during the

funeral of her late husband and filed as application in the District Court of

Puttalam in terms of section 839 of the Civil Procedure Code within a

period of 3 months (August 2013) from the date of the death of her late

husband PI2(a). The learned Dist:rict]udge, however, held on 23.05.2014

that the District Court has no jurisdiction to set aside a decree of divorce as

CA RII-0003-2016 DC-PUTTALAM-262 1-D

,

..

the Plaintiff was dead and the Petitioner shall seek relief either in the Court

of Appeal or make an application to the High Court of Civil Appeal.

1641 The Petitioner has not made any application to the High Court of

Civil Appeal against the order made by the District Court refusing to

entertain her application. Even if she had failed to make any application to

the High Court of Civil Appeal, it does not prevent her from coming

before this Court by way of restitutio in IiJtegrum as this Court has sole and

exclusive jurisdiction to entertain an application by way of restitutio IiI

IiJtegrum in terms of Article 138 of the Constitution.

1651 The Petitioner filed this application on 03.02.2016 inviting this Court

to exercise jurisdiction vested in this court by way of revision! restitutio In

IiJtegrum. Thus, the Petitioner has filed this application within a period of

2 years and 9 months from the date on which she was made aware of the

divorce action filed by her late husband. In Saheeda Umma and another v.

Ham/fa and others (1999) 1 Sri LR 150, it was held that an application for

restitutio IiI IiItegrum is an action within the meaning of section 11 of the

Ordinance No. 22 of 1871 and is prescribed within 3 years. Hence, this

application is not barred by the provisions of the Prescription Ordinance.

1661 Even if it is assumed that the Petitioner had filed this application after

a period of 1 year and 9 months from the date of the District Court order,

the Petitioner is entitled to maintain this application where a miscarriage of

justice has occurred in relation to her status and her rights to her late

husband's property. It is settled law that if the impugned order or part

thereof is manifestly erroneous and is likely to cause grave injustice, the

court should not reject the application on the ground of delay alone

(CaroiJiIe Nona and Others v. Fedrick Singho and Others (2005) 3 Sri LR

CA RII0003-2016 DC-PUTTALAM-2621-D

176). In Biso Menike v. CynJ de AiWls (1982) 1 Sri LR 368, Sharvananda,

]. (as then he was) at page 379 obselVed:

"When the CoUIt has examined the record and IS saas/jed the order complained of IS maniksdy erroneous or WIthout junsdicaon, the

Court would be loathe to allow the mIschieF of the order to conanue and rt;ject dIe applicaaon simply on the ground of delay, unless dIere are very extraordInary reasons to jusa/Y such rejecaoJ1. Where the authority concemed has been acang altogether WI'dlOut basic junsdicaol1, the Court may grant relief ill spite of the delay unless the conduct of the party shows that he has approbated dIe usurpaaon o/jimsdicaon. In any such event, dIe explanaaon of the delay should be cOllSldered sympatheacaUy.

1671 In the case of Lazarus E5mtes Ltd. v. Beasley /19561 1 Q.B. 702

Denning 0. held that no court will allow a person to keep an advantage

which he has obtained by fraud as fraud unravels everything and thus, the

(OUlt had a jurisdiction to relieve against fraud in all cases. He stated at

page 713:

"No judgment of a court, no order of a MinIster, can be allowed to swd If it has been obmined by fi-aud. Fldud unldvels everything. The court IS carefUl not to find Fldud unless it is dlsancdy pleaded and proved; but once it IS proved, it vitiates judgments, contracts and all tJdJ1sacaollS whatsoever.

1681 In the present case, the delay of 2 years and 9 months in ruing this

application has been sufficiently explained by the Petitioner and the

Petitioner has further established that a miscarriage of justice has occurred

to her as described. For the foregoing reasons, I reject the contention of

the Respondents with regard to laches and undue delay in filing this

application by way of resaluaon In Integrum in the Court of Appeal.

1691 In Sinnivasa Thero v Sudesi Thero 63 NLR 31, the COUlt recognised

the principle that a court whose act has caused injui-y to a suitor has an

CA RII-0003-2016 DC-PUTT ALAM-2621-D

inherent power to make restitution as may be necessary to meet the ends

of justice. Sansonij, stated at page 34:

:7ustice requires that it should be restored to the position be occupied before the invahd order made for it l~' a rule that the Court

WIJJ not permit a suitor to sulkr by reason oIits wrongIul act. The Court WIll, so far as posslble, put him liJ the position which he would have occupied lIthe wrong order had not been made. It is a power which is lnherent In the Court itselI and rests on the pnnciple that a Court o/Justice is under a duty to repmi' the lnjllIY done to a party by its act. "

1701 Restitutio liJ Integrum is not itself an action, nor a cause of action

(Huber, Heedendaegse Rechtsgeleertheyt, 4.37.1.). It is a remedy in terms

of which existing legal rights are nullified, rather than enforced, by means

of an exercise of extraordinary power of a court of law, providing relief to

an aggrieved litigant (V oet, 4.1 (Translator's note). One or more of the

following essential elements must be present before an order of restitutio in

integrum is available:

1. an order of restitutio liJ liJtegrum involves the nullification or making

void ab initio of a previously valid legal transaction, or of the lelfal

consequences of an event (De Groot, Inleydinge, 3.48.5; Van

Leeuwen, Roomsch-Hollandsch Recht, 4.42.pr; Huber);

2. The nullification of valid legal rights by means of an order of

restitutio liJ liJtegrum requires the exercise of an extraordinary

power, by either a sovereign body, or by a court of law (De Groot,

Inleydinge, 3.48.5; Van Leeuwen, Roomsch-Hollandsch Recht,

4.42.pr; Huber);

3. The exercise of this power to nullify valid legal rights must be

justified by the existence of good, or just, reason Gusta causa).

(004.1.3; Huber, Ifeedensdaegse Rechtsgeleerthayt, 4.37.6; Voet,

CA RII-0003-2016 l}C-PLJTT ALAM-262 1-l}

Commentanus, 4.1.1; Van der linden, Koopmans Handboek,

1.18.10; Nathan, Common Law of South Africa vol 2, Chapter 12,

para 845);

4. The nullification of valid legal transactions or the legal consequences

of events is ordered to rectify, or to prevent, damage to the interests

of the person seeking relief (D.4.6.27; Buckland, Text-book p 720,

relying on D04.1.1-4; Voet, Commentanus, 4.1.1);

5. Once the original legal transaction or the legal consequences of an

event are nullified, it follows that any property or benefits given and

received in consequence of the original legal relations must be

restored to the person from whom they were received, and that any

legal rights lost be restored to the aggrieved party (De Groot,

Inlaydinge, 3A8.5; Voet, Commentanus, 4.1.21; Hosten et al.,

Introduction to South African Law, p 293).

1711 As the Petitioner has satisfied that the ex parte decree of divorce has

been obtained without the knowledge or notice to her and that a

miscarriage of justice has occurred in relation to her status and her rights to

her late husband's property. Accordingly, I hold that the Petitioner is

entitled to relief by way of restitutio in integrum for setting aside the ex

parte decree of divorce entered by the District Court of Puttalam in Case

No. 2621/D.

Conclusion

1721 For those reasons, I grant relief to the Petitioner as prayed for in

paragraph (b) of the prayer to tlle Petition and set aside the divorce decree

absolute dated 19.04.2012 entered by tlle District Court of Puttalam in

Case No. 2621/D.

CA RII-0003-2016 DC-PUTT ALAM-262 1-D

"

If

.. ..

1731 I further declare that the Petitioner's marital status with the said

Plaintiff, Phillip Joseph Anthony Rodrigo remains unallected by the

proceedings held in Case No. 2621/D of the District COUIt of Pultalam.

1741 The Petitioner's application is allowed. I make no order for costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Shiran Gooneratne J.

I Agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

CA RII-0003-2016 DC-PUTTALAM-2621-D