1 | P a g e

bIN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with Article

138 of the Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Court of Appeal No:

CA/HCC/0278/2019 Mudannayake Appuhamilage Priyantha

High Court of Gampaha Mudannayake

Case No: HC/18/2015

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : Sampath Abayakoon, J.

P.Kumararatnam,J.

COUNSEL : Dr.Ranjith Fernando with Nalin

Dissanayake, PC, Vishva Rajapaksha, and

Champika Monarawila for the Appellant.

Rajindra Jayaratna, SC for the

Respondent.

2 | P a g e

ARGUED ON : 09/11/2022

DECIDED ON : 14/12/2022

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) was indicted by the Attorney General in the High Court of

Gampaha on two counts of Statuary Rape punishable under Section 364(2)

(e) of the Penal Code as amended against Mudannayake Appuhamilage

Hashini Nuwanthika between the period of 01/08/2013 and 30/09/2013.

After the trial the Appellant was convicted as charged only on the 1st count

and he was sentenced to 14 years RI and a fine of Rs.10000/-. In default of

which 06 months RI was imposed. In addition, the Learned High Court Judge

had specified a sum of Rs.500000/- to be paid as compensation to the victim

in default of which a sentence of 02 years RI was imposed.

The Appellant was acquitted from the second count by the Learned Trial

Judge.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and the sentence the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the Appellant

has given consent to argue this matter in his absence due to the Covid 19

3 | P a g e

pandemic. At the time of the hearing, he was connected via Zoom technology

from prison.

The Counsel for the Appellant placed following grounds of appeal for

adjudication:

a. The learned trial judge has failed to observe the Section

properly before giving the verdict.

b. Failure on the part of the Court to consider evidence which

negatives the occurrence of the offence.

c. Failure on the part of the Court to observe the evidence which

confirms the reason for animosity and the institution of the

complaint.

d. Failure to observe the good character of the Appellant.

The prosecutrix who encountered this unpleasant incident was a 12-year-

old school girl. The Appellant was her relative who lived next door. The

prosecutrix was usually alone at home after school as both her parents were

employed at that time. She had a brother who was not at home when the

offence was committed on her.

On the day of the incident, when she was alone at home after school, the

Appellant had entered her house and had requested the prosecutrix to open

the door. As the Appellant is her relation and lived next door, she had opened

the door without hesitation. Suddenly, the Appellant had dragged the victim

to her room, made her lie on the bed, removed her undergarment, touched

her breasts, spread her legs, slept over her body and forcibly inserted his

penis in to her vagina. She had felt pain at that time. After the act, the

Appellant had threatened the victim against divulging the incident to

anybody and had left the house. According to the prosecutrix the Appellant

had raped her on another occasion as well. Due to fear, she had not divulged

these incidents to anybody. Unable to bear this agony, the victim had told

4 | P a g e

the incident to her sister first, who in return had conveyed the same to her

mother.

PW2, the mother of the victim had noticed the depressed mood of the victim,

but had only been made aware of the incident by her elder daughter. When

the mother had questioned the victim, she had told her mother what had

happened to her. Initially, PW2 had brought up the incident to the notice of

the Appellants wife which had culminated in a fight. Thereafter, a police

complaint had been lodged by PW2 and the victim.

PW4, Dr.Sunil Angampulige had examined the victim and submitted the

Medico-Legal Report. In his report although no injury was found on the

victims hymen the observations in the medical report had not excluded the

possibility of sexual intercourse. He had come to this conclusion as the

examination has revealed that the prosecutrix had an extending type of

hymen and therefore, it was observed that a there was a possibility of sexual

intercourse having taken place even if there was no damage to or tear of the

hymen. The JMO had referred the prosecutrix to a psychiatric and according

to the report, the prosecutrix had a relatively lower level of intelligence.

After the conclusion of the prosecution case, the Learned High Court Judge

had called for the defence. The Appellant had given evidence and had called

three witnesses in support of his case.

Although the Appellant advanced four grounds of appeal, he did not proceed

to canvass the first ground of appeal at the hearing. Hence, this Appeal

commences with the consideration of the second ground of appeal.

In the second ground of appeal, the Appellant contends that the Court failed

to consider evidence which negatives the occurrence of the offence.

Since the victim was a small girl when she encountered this unpleasant

ordeal, she had not revealed the incident to anybody due to fear of the

Appellant. She had first divulged the incident to her elder sister after about

three months of the incident. By this time PW2 also had noted her new

5 | P a g e

pensive mood. Further the prosecutrix was a person with a lower level of

intelligence.

The Learned Counsel strenuously argued that the medical evidence given

with regard to the effect that there were no injuries to the hymen and also

the fact that the judicial medical officer had taken up the possibility of this

alleged rape taking place, by stating that he is not 100 percent certain as to

the rape being committed, creates a reasonable doubt with regard to the

whole prosecution story.

PW4, JMO in his evidence stated that although there were no injuries found

during the physical examination and that her hymen was intact, considering

the time lapse between the crime and the examination and the fact that the

prosecutrix had an extending type of hymen, there was the possibility of a

vaginal penetration.

Explanation (i) to Section 363 of the Penal Code as amended states that

penetration is sufficient to constitute sexual intercourse. This means that it

is not necessary to prove that the sexual intercourse lasted longer or that the

man ejaculated.

In this case the prosecutrix was consistent in her evidence about the

happenings of the incident. She had vividly explained how she was raped by

the Appellant on the very first day. She had given evidence before the High

Court for more than 4 years after the incident. The Learned High Court Judge

accurately analysed the evidence before he accepted the that of the victim as

true and cogent. Hence this ground of appeal has no merit.

In the third ground of appeal the Counsel for the Appellant contended that

failure on the part of the Court to observe the evidence which confirmed the

reason for animosity and the complaint made.

During the argument the Counsel for the Appellant took up the stance that

a long-standing boundary dispute between these two families had instigated

the prosecutrixs family to make a false complaint against the Appellant.

6 | P a g e

As submitted by the Learned State Counsel, the prosecutrix had admitted

that prior to this incident the two families were in good terms and both the

families had visited each other. But this had changed and the two families

were no longer on talking terms but both this and the boundary dispute had

arisen only after this alleged complaint of rape against the Appellant.

The Appellant in his evidence had first cited that the boundary dispute was

on going for 1.5-2.5 years, and he had changed it to a period of 7-8 years

thereafter. This position was not corroborated by any of the defence witness

brought by the Appellant. The Grama Sevaka confirmed a complaint was

never made to her regarding a boundary dispute by either party. She had not

even visited the disputed site. The police also confirmed that a complaint was

never made to them either. The prosecutrixs brother who was called by the

defence also corroborated her sisters position that the boundary dispute was

arose only after the crime was reported. Until such time the two families had

been on good terms.

In State of Punjab v. Gurmit Singh [1996] 2 SCC 384 it was held that:

The courts must, while evaluating evidence, remain alive to the fact that

in a case of rape, no self-respecting woman would come forward in a

court just to make a humiliating statement against her honour.

Hence, it is submitted that it is inconceivable for the prosecutrix or her

mother to have fabricated a complaint of this nature which would

compromise the well-being and the future of the prosecutrix and her dignity

and reputation. Hence, this ground of appeal too has no merit.

In the final ground of appeal, the Appellant contended that the Trial Judge

had failed to observe the good character of the Appellant.

The fact that the person charged is of good character is always relevant in

criminal proceedings. However, the fact that he has a bad character is

generally irrelevant.

7 | P a g e

Professor G.L.Peiris in his book Recent Trends in the Commonwealth

Law of Evidence at page 311 states as follows:

Where the evidence, viewed as whole, admits some degree of doubt,

this doubt may be reinforced by evidence of good character which, to

that extent, could facilitate an acquittal in marginal cases.

The Learned High Court Judge in his judgment had considered the defence

witnesses to come to his conclusion. The defence witness under whom the

Appellant was working as a driver gave evidence and had told the court that

the appellant is a trustworthy person and that he would have never

suspected of any incident of this nature implicating him while he was

working under him. This defence witnesss evidence had been considered by

the Learned High Court Judge and he has given reasons in his judgment and

as to why he had rejected his evidence. The relevant paragraph of the

judgment is re-produced below:

(Page 204 of the brief.)

tfukau pQos; ;jrg;a W;aidy f.k we;af;a fuu m%shx.kS wdh;kfha Tyq b;du;a

YajdkiSh rshfrl= f,i fiajh lrk nj;a tu yslref.a l=vd orejka mdi,g iy

mka;sj,g f.k hdf lghq;= o tu orejka w;r l=vd .eyeKq orejka o isk nj;a

Yajdijka;j tu orejka ;ukag Ndr oS we;s njg;a fmkaughs' ta wkqj tu fydag,fha

yslre o idlaIs foka pQos;f.a prs;h ms<sn`oj Tyqg meKs,s ,e fkd;snqKq njg m%ldY

lr we;' pQos; rshfrl= f,i lghq;= lsrSu;a /lshdj lrk ia:dkfha yslref.a orejka

;sfokd mdi,g iqrlaIs;j /f.k hk njg;a ta w;r l=vd .eyeKq orejka isk njg;a

i`oyka lsrSu ksidu pQos; fujeks wdldrfha jrolg fm<f hhs lsis fgl tu.ska

wkq;shla f.dv kef.kafka ke;' Tyq ;u /lshdj wdrlaId lr .ekSu i`oyd Tyq ksis

f,i khdkql+,j yeisrsh hq;= nj wuq;= lreKla fkdf' tfia fyhska tjekafkl= fuf,i

;u /lshd lafIa;%h ;=, lghq;= l< muKskau Tyq fujeks wdldrfha l%shdjla fkdlrkakg

we;ehs wkq;shlg t<ug th m%udKj;a jkafka ke;'

As this is not a marginal case as described above, and due to the aforesaid

reasons, I conclude that this ground of appeal also is also sans any merit.

8 | P a g e

The learned High Court Judge in the judgment had considered all the

evidence adduced by the prosecution and the defence and had given reasons

as to why he acted on the evidence adduced by the prosecution. He has

accurately analysed all the evidence presented by both parties with correct

perspective and arrived at the correct finding.

Hence, I am of the view that the prosecution had proved the 1st count against

the Appellant beyond reasonable doubt. Hence, I affirm the conviction and

sentence imposed on him with regard to the 1st count. I further order the

sentence imposed on the 1st count to be operative from the date of conviction

namely 11/09/2019.

The appeal is, therefore, dismissed.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send a copy of this judgment to the

High Court of Gampaha along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

SAMPATH B. ABAYAKOON, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL