Page 1 of 12

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

Ranjith Keerthi Tennakoon No.482/4 Rajagiriya Road, Rajagiriya

Petitioner

Vs.

1. Hon. Attorney General Attorney General's Department Hulftsdorp, Colombo 12 2. Inspector General of Police

Police Head Quarters Colombo 01

3. Ajith Nivard Cabral

No. 32/7, School lane, Nawala 4. P.B. Jayasundare

Secretary to the President Presidential Secretariat, Galle Face, Colombo 01

In the matter of an application for orders in the nature of Writs of Mandamus, Certiorari and Prohibition under and in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

CA /WRIT/417/2021

Page 2 of 12

5. Basil Rajapakshe

Ministry of Finance The Secretariat Colombo 01, Sri Lanka 6. T.M.J.Y.P. Fernando

Deputy Governor Central Bank of Sri Lanka Janadhipathi Mawatha, Colombo 01.

Respondents

Before : Sobhitha Rajakaruna J.

Dhammika Ganepola J.

Counsel : Maithri Gunaratne, PC with Shiral Lakthilaka, Ashan Nanayakkara, Charitha Gunaratne and I. Shahabdeen for Petitioners

Nerin Pulle ASG, PC with N. Vignaeshwaran DSG and A. Gajadeera SC for 1st, 2nd, 4th and 5thRespondents.

Romesh De Silva PC with Palitha Kumarasingha PC and Niran Ankatell for the 3rd and 6th Respondents.

Supported on: 07.10.2021

Written Submissions on: 12.10.2021

Decided on: 03.11.2021

Sobhitha Rajakaruna J.

A Presidential Commission of Inquiry has been appointed by virtue of a warrant issued by

His Excellency the President, published in Extra Ordinary Gazette Notification No.

2003/41 on 27.01.2017. The said Commission has made recommendations to His

Page 3 of 12

Excellency the President to appoint a team of experts to conduct a forensic audit affair of

the Central Bank of Sri Lanka (CBSL) on issuance of Treasury Bonds and to conduct an

inquiry pertaining to the irregularities occurred within the CBSL during the designated

period. Accordingly, a forensic audit has been carried out by a company called BDO India

LLP as per the instructions of the CBSL, and its Monetary Board. Subsequently, the said

company has issued a report to the CBSL.

The Petitioner alleges that according to the said forensic report, the CBSL has incurred

losses between 10.4 - 10.6 billion Rupees during the period where the 3rd Respondent was

the Head of the CBSL, particularly from the year 2005 to 2015. He further asserts that the 1st

and/or the 2nd Respondents have an alleged legal duty to act upon the findings of the

forensic report and however, they have deliberately not acted upon or taken steps to bring

the 3rd Respondent before the law, based on the purported material listed out in paragraph

16 of the Petition. The Petitioner pleads that there is sufficient evidence in the said forensic

report to establish that the 3rd Respondent, being the principal officer to the CBSL, has

violated policies and rules approved by the Monetary Board.

The outline of the reliefs sought by the Petitioner from this Court is to prevent the 5th

Respondent, Minister of Finance making recommendations to His Excellency the President

to appoint the 3rd Respondent as the new Governor of the CBSL under Section 12 of the

Monetary Law Act. The Petitioner further seeks for a mandate in the nature of a writ of

Certiorari to quash the recommendations made by the 5th Respondent to appoint the 3rd

Respondent as the new Governor of CBSL. Additionally, the Petitioner prays, inter alia, for

a mandate in the nature of a writ of Mandamus to compel the 1st and 2nd Respondents to

take legal action against the 3rd Respondent considering the alleged evidence in the aforesaid

forensic audit report.

When this matter was taken up for support for the purpose of issuance of notice, the

Respondents took up several preliminary objections. The learned Additional Solicitor

General appeared on behalf of 1st, 2nd, 4th and 5th Respondents took up, inter alia, the

following preliminary objections:

Page 4 of 12

a) the pleadings in these proceedings are prolix and abuse the privilege granted to

pleadings by making unsubstantiated allegations against persons who have not been

made parties to this application;

b) this court has no jurisdiction to hear this matter in as much as these proceedings are

a disguised attempt at challenging the decision of the President acting qua President,

which can only be carried out in the Supreme Court in terms of Article 35 of the

Constitution;

c) a writ of Mandamus will not lie where discretion is involved and no judicial review

can be sought against the 1st Respondent, Attorney General, in the exercise of his

prosecutorial discretion;

d) the writ of Certiorari prayed against the recommendation made by the 5th

Respondent is futile in as much as the President has already appointed the 3rd

Respondent, as the Governor of CBSL.

The learned President's Counsel for the 3rd and 6th Respondents also took up several

preliminary objections including the objection based on the immunity of President from suit

that is provided in Article 35 of the Constitution. The learned President's Counsel further

submitted that no writs of Mandamus, Certiorari or Prohibition would lie on the face of the

petition and that the reliefs sort by the Petitioner are misconceived/vague.

All the Respondents raised the objection on locus standi and argued that the Petitioner

could not maintain the instant application as the same has not been filed in the public

interest.

Having set out the main preliminary objections of the Respondents, I now proceed to the

important legal issues that arise in respect of those objections in order to decide whether the

Petitioner has established a prima facie case which warrants this Court to issue notice. This

Court needs to take in to account at this stage, the question whether the application for

notice relates to a matter that ought to be resolved after full argument.

In terms of Section 12 (1) of the Monetary Law Act, the Governor of the Central Bank shall

be appointed by the President on the recommendations of the Minister in-charge of the

subject of Finance. The argument of the Respondents is that the power of appointment of

the 3rd Respondent, Governor of the Central Bank, is vested in his Excellency the President

Page 5 of 12

of the Republic and such appointment is an act of the President. The contention of the 3rd

Respondent is that the President is a necessary party to this application if the Petitioner

wishes to challenge the appointment done by the President.

By virtue of Article 35 (1) of the Constitution, no proceedings shall be instituted against the

President while he holds office as President, in any Court or tribunal in respect of anything

done or omitted to be done by him either in his official or private capacity. However, the

proviso to the said Article gives the right to any person to make an application under Article

126 against the Attorney General in respect of anything done or omitted to be done by the

President, in his official capacity. Therefore, Respondents argue that the said Article 35 (1)

clearly barred Writ application being filed against the President in respect of anything done

by him.

The 3rd and 6th Respondents rely upon the judgements in Victor Ivon and others v. Hon.

Sarath Silva and others 2001 (1) SriLR 309 and Centre for Policy alternatives v. B. N.

Jayarathne and others SC FR application 23/2013, SE minutes 24.03.2014. In the said

case of Victor Ivon, the Petitioners were challenging the appointment of the then Chief

Justice Sarath N. Silva. In the said application, Petitioners have not made the President as a

party as the President enjoys blanket immunity and instead named Chief Justice Sarath

Silva as the 1st Respondent. The argument raised by the Petitioners in that case was that the

said 1st Respondent was the "beneficiary" of the act of the President and the President's act

of appointing the 1st Respondent as the Chief Justice was reviewable and could be

questioned in those proceedings through the person of the 1st Respondent. The 5-judge

bench of the Supreme Court in that case agreeing with Wadugodapitiya J held, inter alia,

that; ( as per Wadugodapitiya J)

'I am unable to agree with Mr. Abeysuriya here either. The 1st Respondent has not invoked

the Presidents act of appointment to rely on or justify anything. Unlike in the cases cited above,

no allegation is made against the 1st Respondent that he has performed any executive or

administrative act violative of anyones fundamental rights. The only act challenged, is the

Presidents own act in appointing the 1st Respondent as Chief Justice. Therefore, Mr.

Abeysuriyas argument fails, in as much as his interpretation is not in accord with the decision

he has cited.'

Page 6 of 12

'I am constrained to say that, in fact, what the Petitioners are asking this court to do, is in effect

to amend, by judicial action, Article 35 of the Constitution, by ruling that the immunity

enjoyed by the President is not immunity at all. This, of course, it is not within the power of

this Court to do. In the guise of judicial decisions and rulings, Judges cannot and will not seek

to usurp the functions of the Legislature, especially where the Constitution itself is concerned.'

In the case of Center for Policy Alternative, the Supreme Court held that the President enjoys

absolute immunity in respect of his act of appointing the 6th Respondent in that case as the

44th Chief Justice of Sri Lanka in terms of Article 107(1) of the Constitution.

This Court observes that the said judgements in the Victor Ivon case and the Center for Policy

Alternative case have been delivered before certifying the 17th Amendment1 to the

Constitution. By the said 17th Amendment, the above Article 107 was amended and

thereafter the President could make the appointments of the Chief Justice and the other

Judges of the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal subject to the provisions of Article

41C which stipulates that such appointment has to be approved by the Constitutional

Council upon a recommendation by the President. When appointing the Chief Justice

Sarath Silva, the then President had unfettered discretion under the Constitution to make

such appointments without being subject to any condition. However, the appointment of the

Governor of the CBSL, under Section 12 of the Monetary Law Act has to be done by the

President on the recommendations of the Minister in-charge of the subject of Finance. The

Petitioner in the instant case challenges the recommendations made by the 5th Respondent,

the Minister of Finance.

However, the written submissions filed on behalf of the Petitioner highlights the following

assertions to emphasize that the Petitioner is not concern on the appointment made by the

President;

In simple terms, the Petitioner has asked to take criminal actions against the 3rd Respondent; not to

quash his appointment. The Petitioner is not concern on the appointment made by the

PresidentPreventing the 3rd Respondent acting as the Governor of Central Bank and quashing the

decision made by the President of the Republic have a difference of meaning like chalk and cheese

1 The 17th amendment to the 1978 Constitution of the Republic has been certified on 03rd October 2001.

Page 7 of 12

The Respondents categorically submits that the President has already appointed the 3rd

Respondent as the Governor of the CBSL and accordingly, the application of the Petitioner

for a writ of Certiorari to quash the recommendations of the 5th Respondent is futile.

Taking in to consideration of those circumstances including the above assertions of the

Petitioner, this Court is not inclined to determine at this stage as to whether the Petitioner is

entitled to challenge the recommendations of the 5th Respondent in the backdrop of the

provisions of Article 35 of the Constitution. There are several authorities of Superior Courts

where the Courts were reluctant to issue a writ when granting relief would be futile if it

leaves the final decision intact. The learned Additional Solicitor General cited the

Judgement in Ratnasiri and others v. Ellawala and others (2004) SLR 180 where

Marsoof, PC. J (P/CA) held that;

"This court is mindful of the fact that the prerogative remedies it is empowered to grant in these

proceedings are not available as of right. Court has a discretion in regard to the grant of relief in the

exercise of its supervisory jurisdiction. It has been held time and time again by our Courts that "A

writ... will not issue where it would be vexatious or futile." See, P.S. Bus Co. Ltd. v Members and

Secretary of the Ceylon Transport Board2. In Siddeek v Jacolyn Seneviratne and Others,3at 90,

Soza, J. delivering the judgment of the Supreme Court observed that -

"The Court will have regard to the special circumstances of the case before issuing a writ of

certiorari. The writ of certiorari clearly will not issue where the end result will be futility,

frustration, injustice and illegality."

In the circumstances, we are of the view that even if the recommendations made to the

President by the 5th Respondent (in supporting the appointment made under section 12(1) of

the Monetary Law Act) are being quashed by this Court, such appointment will remain

unchanged. The removal of the 3rd Respondent can be done only in terms of section 16 of

the said Monetary Law Act. Thus, no writ of Certiorari can be issued as prayed for by the

Petitioner since the end result will be of futility. Moreover, it is observed that the paragraph

(e) of the prayer of the Petition deals with a writ of Certiorari to quash the recommendations

made by the 5th Respondent. However, the learned Counsel for the Petitioner in his written

submissions, particularly in the paragraph referred to above, has waived his rights of

261 NLR 491, 496 3(1984) Sri LR 83

Page 8 of 12

challenging the appointment of the 3rd Respondent. This again emphasizes the proposition

that it is a futile exercise for this Court to issue a writ of Certiorari to quash the

recommendations of the 5th Respondent. Sharvananda J. (as he was then) held in Biso

Menike Vs Cyril de Alwis 1982 (1) SriLR 368 at p. 377, that a party aggrieved by the order

of an inferior tribunal is disentitled himself to the discretionary relief of the Court by reason

of his own conduct, like submitting to jurisdiction, laches, undue delay or waiver.

The Respondents vehemently objects to the application of the Petitioner for mandates of

writs of Mandamus as prayed for in the prayer of the Petition. The Petitioner pleads inter

alia for writs of Mandamus;

a) to compel the 1st and 2nd Respondents to take legal actions against the 3rd Respondent

considering evidence available within the Forensic Audit Report;

b) to compel the 1st Respondent to file a separate indictment against the 3rd Respondent

under the same and/or adding further and additional charges leveled against the 3rd

Respondent as mentioned in paragraph No. 22 of the Petition;

c) to compel the 2nd Respondent to arrest, detain and record a statement from the 3rd

Respondent considering the evidence available within the Forensic Audit Report.

The crux of the said pleadings of the Petitioner seeking for writs of Mandamus is to compel

the 1st Respondent, Attorney General to take legal action against the 3rd Respondent. All the

Respondents assert that judicial review cannot be sort against the Attorney General in the

exercise of his prosecutorial discretion. In support of this argument, the learned Additional

Solicitor General drew the attention of this Court to the judgment of the Supreme Court

case in Kaluhath Ananda Sarath De Abrew v. Chanaka Iddamalgoda and others SC FR

No. 424/2015, SE minutes of 11.01.2015. His Lordship Justice Priyantha Jayawardane,

PC has stated in that judgment where the legislature has confided the power on the

Attorney General to forward indictment with a discretion how it is to be used, it is beyond

the power of Court to contest that discretion unless such discretion has been exercised mala

fide or an ulterior motive or in excess of his jurisdiction. Further, the learned Additional

Solicitor General has submitted three judgments of English Courts dealing with the

prosecutorial discretion of the Attorney General. Those judgments are Attorney General v.

Page 9 of 12

Gouriet4, R v. Director of the Serious Fraud Office5 and R v. Director Prosecutions Ex p.

Kebilene6.

The learned Presidents Counsel for the Petitioner disagreeing with the above position has

cited a Canadian judgement in the case of R v. Anderson Supreme Court of Canada (2014)

2 SCR 167 in which it has been held as follows:

.Prosecutorial discretion is reviewable for abuse of process. The abuse of process doctrine is available

where there is evidence that the Crowns conduct is egregious and seriously compromises trial fairness or

the integrity of the justice system. The burden of proof lies on the accused to establish, on a balance of

probabilities, a proper evidentiary foundation to proceed with an abuse of process claim, before

requiring the Crown to provide reasons justifying its decision..

The Petitioner has cited several other judgements also to emphasize the doctrine of public

trust and the limitations to discretion that conferred by law. However, the argumentation of

the Respondents is based on the prosecutorial discretion of the Attorney General.

It is important to note that the judicial review is concerned, not with the decision but with

the decision making process7. The judicial review has been expanded through judicial

creativity during past decades and the Judges have exercised the freedom of employing

various theories in reviewing the discretionary power of public authorities. Accordingly, the

current position, in my view, is that the Attorney General's power to file or not to file an

indictment is a discretionary power which is neither absolute nor unfettered. Therefore,

each case that challenges such discretion should no doubt be decided on its own merits.

The vital question at this stage is whether the Petitioner has established a prima facie case

for review. The contention of the learned Presidents Counsel for the 3rd and 6th Respondents

is that the entire basis for the Petitioners application for writs of Mandamus to indict,

arrest, and detain the 3rd Respondent, relies solely on the forensic audit report marked

A5(a). He contends referring to bullet points 3 to 6 in page 174 of the said report (A5a),

4 (1978) A. C. 435 at 487 5 (2008) UKHL 60 6 (2000) 2AC 326 7 See Chief Constable of the North Wales Police v Evans [1982] 3 All ER 141, 154-155 , HL (Lord Brightman; R v Panel on Take-overs and Mergers, ex p Datafin plc [1987] QB 815, 842 (Sir John Donaldson); Lonrho plc v Secretary of State for Trade and Industry [1989] 2 All ER 609, 617 (Lord Keith of Kinkel).

Page 10 of 12

that the audit report does not contain conclusions or findings relating to legal matters. He

further submits that the relevant Indian company has relied on information provided to

them and they have not verified the information provided and cannot guarantee its

reliability or completeness. Among those bullet points, referred to by the learned Presidents

Counsel, the bullet point 3 particularly stipulates that:

BPO India does not tender any legal advice or related services and therefore none of the services

rendered under the contract should be considered to be legal services. In respect of any and all legal

matters, the CBSL may consult its legal advisors as they deem fit and in their own discretion

On perusal of those provisions of the said audit report it is apparent that it doesnt emanate

prima facie evidence or any proof to compel the 1st and 2nd Respondents to arrest, detain and

indict the 3rd Respondent. Moreover, we observe that the Petition of the Petitioner does not

divulge any abuse of process or malafides, unreasonableness, excess of jurisdiction on the

part of the 1st or the 2nd Respondents in exercising their authority. Therefore, we are

compelled to abide by the principles adopted upon the discretion of the Attorney General in

the above Supreme Court case of Kaluhath Sarath de Abrew v. Chanaka Iddamalgoda

and others and conclude that the Petitioner has not submitted any prima facie material

which warrants this court to review the discretion of the 1st & 2nd Respondents and to make

directions against them. Further, we are of the view that the contents of the said audit report

have no binding effect, which generates a mandatory duty upon the 1st Respondent to

exercise his prosecutorial discretion.

The Indian company, BDO India LLP or any of its principal officers have not been made

parties to this instant application. The investigations have been carried out by the said

company in order to submit the final report, 'A5a', upon which the Petitioner constructs his

claim for writs of Mandamus. We are of the view that it is necessary to make the said

company a party for the purpose of fuller and proper adjudication of the matters sought to

be advanced by the Petitioner in this application.

Mark Fernando J. in Victor Ivon v. Sarath N. Silva, Attorney General and another (1998)

1 SriLr 340 at p.349 stated as follows;

Page 11 of 12

"A citizen is entitled to a proper investigation - one which is fair, competent, timely and

appropriate - of a criminal complaint, whether it be by him or against him. The criminal law

exists for the protection of his rights - of person, property and reputation - and lack of a due

investigation will deprive him of the protection of the law. But the alleged lack of a proper

investigation, which resulted in those reports not being available to the Attorney-General was a

lapse on the part of those whose duty it was to investigate, and not on the part of the Attorney-

General. Those responsible for the investigation have not been made parties, and the petitioner's

case has not been presented on the basis of a defective investigation."

The learned Additional Solicitor General referring to the cases of Kaluarachchi v. Ceylon

Petroleum Corporation and others SC Appeal No. 43/2013: SC minutes 19.06.2019 and

Credit Information Bureau of Sri Lanka v. M/s Jafferjee and Jafferjee (Pvt.) Ltd. (2005)

1 Sri LR 89 raises another important point in exercising jurisdiction on issuance of writs of

Mandamus. He submits that the foundation of writ of Mandamus is the existence of a legal

right and also that Mandamus will not lie as the Petitioner has failed to explicitly demand

an exercise of such a public duty.

Therefore, we are inclined to accept the proposition of the Respondents that this Court

should not intervene to usurp investigatory powers and prosecutorial powers of the 1st

and/or the 2nd Respondent depending on the circumstances of this case. Based on the above

line of reasoning, we are of the view that the preliminary objections examined above should

be upheld and there is no necessity to examine deeply into the other preliminary objections

on standing etc., raised by the Respondents.

In an application for judicial review, the stage of notice demands that a court seized of an

application for notice should consider whether the case is suitable for full investigation at a

hearing at which all parties have been given notice. (See A. M. Chaminda Bandara Adikari

v. Kapila Adikari, Chief Inspector of Police CA/Writ/Application 216/2020 decided on

25.08.2020 at p.14) The court will take into account the question whether the application

for notice relates to a matter that ought to be resolved after full argument.

The interpretation given upon the words prima facie case in Ginadasa v. Weerasignhe, 31

NLR 33 by Dolten, J. is apt here. Accordingly, "the court must be satisfied that there is a serious

case to be tried at the hearing and that on the facts before it there is a probability that plaintiff is entitled

Page 12 of 12

to relief." The test for prima facie case in applications for judicial review should be similar.

(See Sandresh Ravindra Karunanayake v. AG and others CA/ Writ/Application

No.63/2020 decided on 07.07.2020 at p.13).

In the circumstances, we take the view that the Petitioner, has not made out a prima facie or

an arguable case and this court is unable to grant any relief as prayed for in the prayer of the

Petition. Accordingly, we decide to refuse issuance of notice on the Respondents of this

application. Therefore, the application is dismissed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Dhammika Ganepola, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal