-IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

c.A. Case No.254/1999 (F)

D.C. Colombo Case No.6101IZL

Rasammah Selvarajah, (Deceased)

No.l6, Mayfield Road,

Kotahena,

Colombo 13.

Original-PLAINTIFF

Kandiah Selvarajah,

No.l6, Mayfield Road,

Kotahena,

Colombo 13.

Substituted-PLAINTIFF

-Vs-

Rengasamy Singamuthu Keerthisingam,

No.231/B, Anula Road,

Colombo 06.

And of

No.l6, Mayfield Road,

Kotahena,

Colombo 13.

DEFENDANT

AND

Rasammah Selvarajah, (Deceased)

1

No.l6, Mayfield Road,

Kotahena,

Colombo 13.

Original-PLAINTIFF

Kandiah Selvarajah, (Deceased)

No.l6, Mayfield Road,

Kotahena,

Colombo 13.

Su bstituted-PLAINTIFF -APPELLANT

1. Rajayogani Kailainathan,

No.l6, Mayfield Road,

Kotahena,

Colombo 13.

And presently of

No.84, Prospect Ring,

London N2 88S,

United Kingdom.

Olst Substituted-Substituted-PLAINTIFF-APPELLANT

2. Sivayogini Thiruchelvam,

No.l6, Mayfield Road,

Kotahena,

Colombo 13.

02nd Substituted-Substituted-PLAINTIFF-APPELLANT

-Vs-

2

Rengasamy (Deceased) Singamuthu

No.23 VB, Anula Road,

Colombo 06.

And of

No.l6, Mayfield Road,

Kotahena,

Colombo 13.

DEFENDANT -RESPONDENT

AND NOW

1. Rajayogani Kailainathan,

No.l6, Mayfield Road,

Kotahena,

Colombo 13.

And presently of

No.84, Prospect Ring,

London N2 8BS,

United Kingdom.

Keerthisingham,

Olst Substituted-Substituted-PLAINTIFF-APPELLANT

2. Sivayogini Thiruchelvam,

16, Mayfield Road,

Kotahena,

Colombo 13.

02nd Substituted-Substituted-PLAINTIFF-APPELLANT

3

BEFORE

COUNSEL

Decided on

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J.

-Vs-

1. Rajeswary Keerthisingam,

No. 154, Kotahena Street,

Colombo 13.

2. Karthika Keerthisingam,

No. 154, Kotahena Street,

Colombo 13.

Substituted-DEFENDANT -RESPONDENTS

A.H.M.D. Nawaz,J.

S. Tissera with S. Ruthiramoorthy for the Substituted Plaintiff-Appellant. c.v. Vivekananthan with PallSY N. Joseph for the Substituted Defendant-Respondents

05.07.2019

T

he Plaintiff-Appellant (hereinafter sometimes referred to as "the Plaintiff")

instituted this action praying for a declaration that she was a lawful occupier and

the owner of the premises, described in the schedule to the plaint, and for an order of

injunction and to eject the Defendant in this case from the said premises on the ground

that he was a trespasser and damages.

The Defendant filed his answer alleging a statutory tenancy. The following issues were

raised on behalf of the parties.

4

ISSUES BY THE PLAINTIFF

1) Is the original Plaintiff tenant of the Premises No.l6, Mayfield Road, Kotahena

more fully described in the schedule to the Plaint since 1968?

2) Upon the death of the original Plaintiff does the substiruted Plaintiff in the

aforesaid house?

3) Are the original Plaintiff the substiruted Plaintiff residing in the aforesaid house

since 1968 until today?

4) As set out in the schedule to the Plaint did the original Plaintiff obtain the title

after making the full payment in Case No.6009/ RE and 14534/L in the District

Court Colombo?

5) Did Defendant come as a tenant to the room shown as X in the sketch marked as

PI annexed to the Plaint from 02nd of April 1978? Yes

6) Did Defendant on his own vacate on 21.03.1983 under the original Plaintiff? No

7) Has the Defendant entered in to the occupation of this room without the

permission when the original Plaintiff was not there between the two date of 15th

August 1983 and 28th September 1983? No

8) Did the original Plaintiff first come to know on 28th September 1983 with regard to

this unlawful occupation? No

9) Accordingly did the substiruted Plaintiff request the Defendant vacate by way of

several legal ways? Not proved

10) Is the Defendant still in unlawful occupation of the premises in suit refusing to

vacate said house? Stay lawfully

11) As set out in the paragraph 9 of the 7'h schedule of the Plaint has the Defendant

causing damages to the original Plaintiff substiruted Plaintiff? No

12) If the above issues are answered in favour of the Plaintiff is the Plaintiff entitled for

the reliefs prayed as in the Plaint? No

5

ISSUES BY THE DEFENDANT -RESPONDENT

13) Is the Premises in suit governed by the Rent Act? Not proved

14) Did the deceased Plaintiff give on rent divided and defined portion of the premises

in suit shown as A, B,C the sketch marked as PI filed with the Plaint to the

Defendant? Yes

15) Was the Defendant tenant under the deceased Plaintiff in the said divided portion]

Yes

16) If the above issues 13 to 15 are answered in affirmative can the Substituted

Plaintiff have and maintain this action?

17) Does the Plaint comply with the Section 41 of the Civil Procedure Code? Not

proved

18) If the above Issue No.17 is answered in negative should the Plaint be dismissed?

19) Has the cause of action arisen to the Substituted Plaintiff to make an application

for an interim injunction against the Defendant as prayed for in the Plaint?

20) However, are there any probable grounds for the Substituted Plaintiff to make

application for interim relief as prayed for in the Plaint?

21) If above issues No.19, 20, or one of them answered in negative can the substituted

Plaintiff claim interim reliefs as prayed in the Plaint?

22) Has any cause of action arisen to the substituted Plaintiff against the Defendant as

constituted in the Plaint?

23) Has this action filed after lapse of the time period?

24) If the above Issue No.22 is answered in negative and Issue No.23 is answered in

affirmative can the Substituted Plaintiff have and maintain this action?

It was on these issues that the trial had proceeded in the District Court and Issue No.5

raised by the Plaintiff makes it clear that an adjudication was required as to whether the

6

Defendant came as tenant from the date Q2nd of April 1978. This issue has been answered

in the affirmative.

Another vital issue that the Plaintiff has raised is-Did Defendant on his own vacate on

21.03.1983 under the original Plaintiff? This issue has been answered by the learned

District Judge in the negative. Once the answers given by the learned District Judge are

assessed for their correctness, the decision would then be dispositive of the rights of the

parties. The question of trespass that the Plaintiff has raised in the subsequent issues

depends on the answer to the question whether the Defendant abandoned the premises

sine anim orevertenda In other words did he abandon the premises without any intention to

rerum?

If he had had the animus revertendi (the intention to rerurn), it simply means that he had

not abandoned his tenancy and in that event the tenancy had continued without a break.

Then the question of trespass will not arise. In fact issues were to the effect that the

Defendant during the period of 15th August and 28th of September 1983, had entered into

this premises without permission raising thus the question of unlawful trespass. If one

looks at the issues of the Defendant, it is crystal clear that the tenor of the issues is for

the purpose of establishing that the tenancy is lawful and the continued tenancy is

lawful as well. The learned District Judge has found for the tenant and before doing so he

has indulged at the outset into the question whether the Plaintiff has established her

title to the premises. I would not go into it as what is before this Court is the

relationship between a landlord and tenant.

Quite relevant to the case is the extinctive prescription that the defendant has pleaded in

Issue No.23. In other words the Defendant has pleaded that the cause of action of the

Plaintiff is prescribed under the provisions of the Prescription ordinance can this case be

had and maintained?

The learned Disttict Judge has decided that the Plaintiff has not established his title but

rather he has decided that this case is filed by the Plaintiff on the basis that she is a

lawful possessor. By that token the District Judge has taken the view that this is a

7

possessory action and if dispossession has taken place on 25th of July 1983, the plaint was

out of time since it was filed on7'h of June 1989. Whilst agreeing with this finding, let me

get back to the principal question in this case namely whether the defendant in this case

has forcibly and unlawfully come into possession to this premises.

There is no doubt that the Defendant in this case had come into possession to this

premises on 2nd of April 1978. It simply means that he had been in lawful possession from

that date onwards. As per the paragraph 05 of the plaint the Defendant or his

representatives had been continuing in possession of this premises up to 25th of July 1983.

In the paragraph 05 of the plaint, it is averred that from that day onward the said room

had been vacant. As per Issue No.06, the Defendant had left the said premises on 21st of

March 1983. As per the evidence adduced by the Plaintiff, the Defendant during the said

period of time, vacated and left that place for the reason that he entered into marriage.

The Plaintiff testified that after his marriage the Defendant went into occupation of his

wife's house that was at Wattala. But, the Defendant in his evidence stated that though

he married during the said period of time, he did not vacate or leave the said premises. As

per admission of the Plaintiff, the Defendant or his representatives had been continuing

in possession of that premises up to the period of last part of June 1983. This shows that

the occupation of the premises by the Defendant had been unbroken. If he had gone into

occupation of his wife's premises, it was for a short while and that cannot be taken as an

abandonment of tenancy.

It has been proved that the defendant never terminated his tenancy with the landlord nor

did the landlord give him notice to quit.

There was an attempt on the part of the Plaintiff to establish that the defendant entered

into the premises unlawfully between the period of time from 15th of August 1983 and

28th of September 1983 that is within a period that is less than 45 days. The Plaintiff

herself had closed down the said premises and left for Jaffna on 28th of August 1983, for

residence.

8

The fact that the tenant was absent from the premises for a short period does not mean

that the Defendant terminated the tenancy. He did come back and that shows that he

had the animus revertendi.

Testifying on his behalf, the Defendant narrated as to how he stayed in a detention camp

when there was communal violence in 1981. This does not mean that the Defendant gave

up possession of the premises and handed it over to the Plaintiff. Leaving tenanted

premises due to an exigency such as a communal right cannot give rise to termination of

tenancy. The learned District Judge of Colombo was quite right in deciding that the

tenancy continued and the Defendant never became a trespasser.

In the circumstances I affirm the judgment dated 26.03.1999 and dismiss the appeal.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

9