IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF LRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Revision

Officer In Charge,

Police Station,

Alawathugoda.

COMPLAINANT

CA Revision No. CA (PHC) APN 0112011

High Court (Kandy) (Rev) 28/2010

Magistrate's Court (Kandy): 2902611 0

Vs.

1. Karunarathnage J anaka Ruwan Kumara,

Halmilla Kulam Temple,

Palugama,

Anuradhapura.

ACCUSED

And Now Between

Nazeer Ahamad Mohomed Rizvi,

No. 34, Malgammana,

Alawathugoda.

PETITIONER

I f III t I

I ! ! I

\

I

1

Vs.

1. Officer - In - Charge,

Police Station,

Alawathugoda.

2. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

And Now Between

Nazeer Ahamad Mohomed Rizvi,

No. 34, Malgammana,

Alawathugoda.

Vs.

1. Officer - In - Charge,

Police Station,

Alawathugoda.

2. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENT - RESPONDENT

IiI

I.

I

2 \

rII

Before : W.M.M.Malinie Gunarathne, J

: P.R. Walgama, J

Counsel : K. Aziz for the Petitioner.

: Anoopa De Silva S.S.C. for the Respondent.

Argued on : 22.06.2015

Decided on: 23.10.2015

CASE - NO - CA (PHC) APN 01/ 2011 - JUDGMENT 23. 10.2015

P.R. Walgama, J

The Petitioner - Appellant was the registered owner of the vehicle

bearing No. NC LP - 9192, which vehicle was used for transportation

of timber without a valid permit. The Petitioner IS the Registered

owner of the alleged vehicle which was confiscated by the Learned

Magistrate after an inquiry, and when an appeal was lodged against

the said order in the High Court, the Learned High Court Judge up

held the order of the Learned Magistrate. Being aggrieved by the

said order of the High Court Judge, the Petitioner has come before

this court by way of an application in revision and sought to have

the said order of the Learned High Court Judge and the Learned

Magistrate to be set aside or vacated.

The bone of contention of the Petitioner IS that the Respondents

had failed to make the Absolute owner of the vehicle a party to

the confiscation inquiry. Therefore it is contended by the Petitioner

3

that an opportunity had not been afforded to the Absolute Owner

to show cause why the vehicle should not be confiscated. In

particular it IS said that the Learned Magistrate has failed to

observed the Section 433(a) of the Criminal Procedure Code.

Hence in the above setting the Petitioner has adverted this Court to

the case of MERCANTILE INVESTMENTS LTD .'VS. IviOH01vfED

MOULOOM AND OTHERS - 1998 (3) SLR- 32. Which has dealt with

the above Section 433(a)(1) of Act No. 12 of 1990.

"in VIew of Section 433 (a)(1) of Act No. 12 of 1990, the

Petitioner being the absolute owner is entitled to possession of the

vehicle, even though the claimant - Respondent had been given its

possessIon on the Lease Agreement. It was incumbent on the part

of the Magistrate to have given the Petitioner an opportunity to

show cause before he made the order to confiscate the vehicle."

(emphasis added)

It is intensely relevant to note that the introduction of the Section 40 B of

the Forest (Amendment ACT) No 65 082009, has stated thus.

"40(B) The provisions of subsection (1) and (2) of Section 433 (A) of the

Criminal Procedure Code Act No 15 of 1979, as amended by Act, No. 12 of

1990, shall not apply to or in relation to any person who pleads guilty

to, or found guilty to, or is found guilty of a forest offence"

The Respondent in limine has raised the objection to the instant

application of the Petitioner on the basis that the failure on the

part of the Petitioner to exercise the right of Appeal but had

invoked the Revisionary jurisdiction of this Court. To buttress the

4

, r} I

IlrI

(ri

1 1 I I I

above said proposition the Respondent has adverted court to the

following decisions of the Supreme Court.

In the case of ABEYWARDENA .VS. AJITH DE SILVA 1998(1)

SLR 134 it was held that an appeal should be lodged in the

Court of Appeal in respect of an order delivered by a Provincial

High Court Exercising its revisionary jurisdiction.

Further it IS alleged by the Respondent that the Petitioner has

failed to established exceptional circumstances which warrant this

court to exercise the revisionary jurisdiction. Therefore the Respondent

has high lighted the case of DHARMARATNE AND OTHERS .VS.

PALM PARADISE CABANAS LTD AND ANOTHERS 2003(3) SLR

25.

Wherein His Lordship held that when the Petitioner had the right

of appeal and to come by way of revision will tantamount to

another appeal in the garb of a "Revision Application".

This Court will also recogmze the case of VANIK

INCORPORATION LTD .VS. JAYASEKARA 97 (2) SLR 365-

which was held thus;

"revisionary powers should be exercised

justice has occurred due to a fundamental

where a mIscarrIage of

rule of procedure being

violated, and also that not III all instances where there has been a

miscarriage of justice but only when a strong case is made out

amounting to a positive miscarriage of justice".

5

I! I

I. I

l' t

IIiIII

! 1 I I

I I I

I

\ 1 I

I

.'

It IS intensely relevant to note that the absolute owner of the

instant case VIZ the Bank of Ceylon has not indicated any interest

to gain possession of the vehicle and had not attempt to intervene

as a interested party to this action.

Therefore it IS contended by the Respondent that there IS no

necessity to order the Magistrate to hold fresh mqUIry, and take m

to consideration rights of the Absolute owner.

It IS contended by the Petitioner that the Learned Magistrate should

have noticed the Absolute owner to appear in court. But it is seen

from the decided cases which he has drawn the attention of court

are cases where the Absolute owner viz the Finance Company it

self has claimed the vehicle allegedly involved in the commission of

the illegal act. But nevertheless the case in hand is different as the

Absolute owner, the Bank of Ceylon had never intervened III the

confiscation inquiry. Invariably the Absolute owner would have been

pnvy to the incident of the alleged vehicle been used for

transportation of timber without a valid permit. The Registered

owner has purchased the said vehicle after obtaining a loan from

the Bank of Ceylon. When the Registered owner defaulted the

payment of installments the Absolute shall take necessary steps to

recover the same. In the instant matter the Absolute owner has not

taken any step to recover the amount due to them or to repossess

the vehicle in issue.

The Petitioner has relied on the

COMPANY PLC .VS. AGAMPODI

decision of THE FINANCE

MAHAPEDIGE PRIY ANTHA

CHANDANA-decided on 02.07.2009, which has followed the

6

~~--l

I

~ f

f I

f

f

I

f ! I I! I

\iII

.'

judgment of MERCANTILE INVESTMENT LTD .. VS. MOHOMED

MAULOON AND OTHERS, has held thus;

"consideration was given to the rights of the absolute owner as

well as the registered owner. In that matter the Learned Magistrate

had not gIven an opportunity to the absolute owner to show causae

before he made the order to confiscate the vehicle. On a

consideration of the said question, the Court of Appeal had held

that it is not only the registered owner, but the absolute owner

should be gIven notice on the inquiry in relation to the confiscation

of the vehicle."

The above decision was made prior to the said amendment on

02.07.2009. The forest (Amendment) Act No. 65 of 2009 was effective

from 16.11.2009. Therefore in the above setting, this Court is of the

view, in the terms of the above section, to hear the absolute owner In

the confiscation inquiry will not anse.

Further more the counsel for the Respondent has adverted this Court

to the Following decision of the Supreme Court ORIENT FINANCIAL

SERVICES CORPORATION LTD - VS - RANGE FOREST OFFICER

SC APPEAL NO 120/2011-dated 30.09.2011, which held thus;

"The Registered Owner has the possession and full control of the

vehicle and IS also responsible for the use of the vehicle. He is

the person who is In a position to take necessary precaution to

prevent the commISSIOn of an offence. Therefore the Registered

owner to whom the Absolute owner has granted possession of the

vehicle and who has the control over the vehicle is required to

7

I

\ I,

r

t f !! I I

E I

t !

f

t Ii

t

f 1f I

,

.'

satisfy Court that he had taken all precautions to prevent the

commission of the offences that the offence was committed without

his knowledge."

The only exception to the above would be.

"Where the absolute owner repossess the vehicle or the vehicle

was returned by the Registered owner to the Absolute owner, in such

instances the Absolute owner becomes the possessor and in control

of the vehicle. In such a situation if an offence was committed,

the Absolute owner has to satisfy court that necessary precaution

were taken and the offence committed without its knowledge."

Therefore it is stated that "the person who is in posseSSIon of

the vehicle IS the best person to satisfy Court that steps were

taken to prevent the commission of the offence and the offence was

committed without his knowledge."

In the above stated factual and legal matrix, it is abundantly clear

that Section 433(A) of the code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of

1979 ceases to have any application in respect of confiscations.

Therefore in the light of the above this Court is of the VIew

that no positive . . mIscarnage of Justice has been caused to the

Petitioner by the afore said unpurged orders.

The Respondent has adverted Court to the document filed by the

petitioner

purported

along with the petition, which is marked as X. This

document was not tendered at the mqUIry m the

8

!

t I \ i i t

\ t I

t

!

1 I Ii t I ! i

~ i f

\ I 1

.'

Magistrate Court nor was in the High Court. The said Letter only

confirms the fact that the lease Agreement

_"- ~ 11 ,:;t111

It is pertinent to note that the petitioner was carrymg on a business

of manufacturing and selling furniture. It also transpired that the

said timber was transported from his work shop. Further it has

been established that the accused had transported illicit timber on

an earlier occasion too.

In the above setting it IS abundantly clear that the Learned

Magistrate had arrived at the above determination to

confiscate the alleged vehicle, which decision does not

warrants any variation.

Hence the appeal is dismissed subject to a cost of Rs.IO,OOO/-

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

W.M.M.Malinie Gunarathne, J

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

9

I i ; !, ! II

\ 1! f If ,