I I .

J ;

1

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

CA (Writ) Application

No. 227/2014

In the matter of an Application for mandates in the nature of writs of Certiorari and Prohibition in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Shantha Ranawana,

Proprietor,

Inter Freight Forwarding Service,

No. 44,

Mudalige Mawatha ,

Colombo 01.

Vs

[1] W J L U Wijeweera,

PETITIONER

Commissioner General of Labour

(Acting),

Department of Labour,

Narahenpita,

Colombo 05.

[lA] Herath Yapa,

j iIII

i

~i

r

~

2

Commissioner General of Labour,

Department of Labour,

Narahenpita,

Colombo 05.

[18] M DC Amarathunga iICommissioner General of Labour, I! ,,Department of Labour,

Narahenpita, IColombo 05. iI:

[2] G W N Viraji it

~lDeputy Commissioner of Labour,

,,,\ t Termination Unit, I,

Department of Labour, tI i Narahenpita,

~

~IColombo 05.

g

~fft[3] P E C Cooray

~.. fI..' I ;;:,Inquiry Officer,

~

~tColombo Colombo South

~ District -i!Department of Labour, I

~JNarahenpita, !I!Colombo 05. t !,! II!!I ! I ffi

3

[4] K H N D Gunarathne,

No. 209/1,

Old Kottawa Road,

Mirihana,

Nugegoda.

RESPONDENTS

Before: Vijith K. Malalgoda PC 1 (PICA)

P. Padman Surasena 1

Counsel: Kamran Aziz with Ershan Ariaratnam for the Petitioner

Chaya Sri Nammuni, SC for the Respondents

Argued on : 2016-06-06

Written submissions: on behalf of the Petitioner filed on 2016-07-26,

on behalf of the 1st, lA, 2nd and 3rd Respondents

filed on 2016-08-03.

Decided on: 2016-11-21

JUDGMENT

P Padman Surasena J

4

Upon 4th Respondent making an application to the Commissioner of Labour

on 2013-08-27 alleging that his service was unlawfully terminated by the

Petitioner, the 3rd Respondent (Deputy Commissioner of Labour) has held

an inquiry in terms of the provisions of the Termination of Employment of

Workmen (Special Provisions) Act (hereinafter referred to as the "Actn).

It is the position of the Petitioner that the service of the 4th Respondent

was terminated by him as his performance was unsatisfactory. The

Petitioner relies on the letter dated 2013-04-10 produced marked X 3.

It is the position of the Petitioner that the 4th Respondent was employed as

a Management Trainee with effect from 2012-08-14 with a probationary

period of six months. However the Petitioner has failed to produce any

letter of appointment to this effect .

.. It is also the Petitioner's position that the said period of probation was

extended by another six months from 2013-02-21 by the letter marked and

produced as X 2.

Main ground which the Petitioner relied upon to justify his action of

termination of service of the 4th Respondent is the position that

5

thePetitioner is entitled to terminate the service of the 4th Respondent

without any notice since the 4th Respondent was under a period of

probation.

It is important to note that the document marked X 2 upon which the

Petitioner fully relies, to establish that the 4th Respondent was under a

period of probation had never been submitted by the Petitionerbefore the

2nd Respondent at the inquiry. The Petitioner has failed to adduce any

reason for non production of this letter at the said inquiry. This fact must

be viewed with the fact that there is also no letter of appointment issued to

the 4th Respondent.

This is an application for mandates in the nature of writs of Certiorari and

Prohibition in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution. Thus the task of this

court is to ascertain whether the impugned decision of the 1st Respondent

contained in the document markedX 13 is ultra-vires, unreasonable,

irrational, arbitrary or whether there is an error on the face of the record

as claimed by the Petitionerl.

It has been stated by this Court in the case of Jayawardena and another Vs

Pegases Hotel of Ceylon Ltd and others (2004 (2) 5 L R page 39) as

1 paragraph 40 of the written submissions filed by the Petitioner

IIIIII

!

I I .

i I

t

* j I I I I I ! I I I

6

follows; " ..... In this context it is necessary to observe that the

Commissioner of Labour is not bound in the course of an inquiry under the

Termination of Employment (Special Provisions) Act to "make all such

inquiries" like an Arbitrator to whom a dispute is referred under section

4(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act whose role was examined by this Court

recently in Sukumaran V The Maharaja Organisation and two others.2The

Commissioner of Labour has to act on the evidence presented to him in the

course of the inquiry ..... "

Since the document marked X 2 was not produced in the course of the

inquiry for the reasons best known to the Petitioner, this Court cannot form

an opinion that the decision contained in the document marked X 13

belongs to one of the categories claimed by the Petitionerreferred to

above.

.. Indeed the evidence available before the inquiry officer is some evidence

to the contrary (letter dated 2013-08-05 markedX 2 and produced at the

inquiry which has stated that the 4th Respondent was a permanent

employee).

2 CA No. 1684/2003 decided on 2004-08-30

I

,

i

~

.. t

f

ff

i .

J

I , I

!

7

It is the position of the Petitioner that the 4th Respondent's employment

has been terminated on disciplinary grounds and hence, the provisions of

section 2 (4) of the Termination of Employment of Workmen (Special

Provisions) Act No. 05 of 1971 as amended, will not apply and therefore

the Commissioner of Labour does not have jurisdiction to hear and

determine the application made by the 4th Respondent.

Section 2 (4) of the Act is as follows:

"For the purposes of this Act, the scheduled employment of any workman

shall be deemed to be terminated by his employer if for any reason

whatsoever, otherwise than by reason of a punishment imposed by way of

disciplinary action, the services of such workman in such employment are

terminated by his employer, and such termination shall be deemed to

include-

(a) non-employment of the workman in such employment or his

empl,oyer, whether temporarily or permanently, .9r

(b) non-employment of the workman in such employment in

consequence of the closure by his employer of any trade,

industry or business."

iIIIIirf

IiI tf

f

IiIIi

ti ri

r .

J 1

J I \

I I ! I ,

8

The Petitioner cannot be said to have satisfied the inquiry officer that the

service of the 4th Respondent was terminated "by reason of a punishment

imposed by way of disciplinary action".

In these circumstances, we see no basis as to why the decision contained

in the document marked X 13should be quashed by a Writ of Certiorari.

Therefore we decide to dismiss this application.

We make no order for costs.

Application is dismissed without costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC 1

I agree,

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

IIIfI

rtf

~fif[;

t

~

,w

t