==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC 173/23

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

COMPLAINANT

Vs.

Court of Appeal Case No. Gunasinghage Gamini Jayasinghe

CA/HCC/0173/2023

High Court of Anuradhapura

Case No. SHC/261/19

ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

Gunasinghage Gamini Jayasinghe

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

CA/HCC 173/23

2 | P a g e

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

COUNSEL : Anuja Premaratne, PC with Imasha

Senadeera and Nishadi Thanthreege for

the Appellant.

Yuhan Abeywickrama, DSG, for the

Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 18/02/2026

DECIDED ON : 18/05/2026

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) was indicted by the Attorney General in the High Court of

Anuradhapura on the following charges:

CA/HCC 173/23

3 | P a g e

1. That between 1st August 2001 and 31st August 2011 the Accused

kidnapped Ranasinghe Arachchige Imesha Dewindi, who was under

the age of 16 years, from the lawful guardianship of Ranasinghe

Arachchige Gamini, thereby committing an offence punishable under

Section 354 of the Penal Code.

2. In the course of the same transaction, the Accused committed rape of

Ranasinghe Arachchige Imesha Dewindi, who was under the age of 16

years, thereby committing an offence punishable under section 364 (2)

of the Penal Code as amended by Act No. 22 of 1995.

3. In the course of the same transaction, the Accused committed criminal

intimidation on Ranasinghe Arachchige Imesha Dewindi, who was

under the age of 16 years, thereby committing an offence punishable

under section 486 of the Penal Code.

Upon the Appellant pleading not guilty to the charges, the trial commenced.

The prosecution had called 5 witnesses in support of their case. Productions

P1 to P3 were also marked. As the evidence led by the prosecution warranted

a case to be answered, the Learned High Court Judge had called for the

defence and explained the rights of an Accused in a criminal trial. On

28.11.2022, the Appellant made a dock statement and closed his case.

After the trial, the Appellant was convicted for count numbers 2 and 3 only.

For the 2nd count, the Appellant was sentenced to 10 years Rigorous

Imprisonment. Additionally, a fine of Rs.10,000/ was imposed with a default

sentence of 06 months rigorous imprisonment.

For the 3rd count, the Appellant was sentenced to 02 years Rigorous

Imprisonment. Additionally, a fine of Rs.5,000/ was imposed with a default

sentence of 06 months rigorous imprisonment.

The Learned High Court Judge had ordered the sentence imposed on count

number two and three to run concurrently with each other.

CA/HCC 173/23

4 | P a g e

The Appellant was acquitted from count number 1 by the Learned High Court

Judge.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the Appellant

has given consent to argue this matter in his absence. Also, at the time of

argument, the Appellant was connected via the Zoom platform from prison.

The Counsel for the Appellant advanced the following grounds of appeal:

1. Has the Learned High Court Judge failed to consider the improbability

of the version of the prosecutrix?

2. Has the Learned High Court Judge failed to consider the belatedness of

the complaint made against the Appellant?

3. Has the Learned High Court Judge failed to consider that acting on the

uncorroborated testimony of a prosecutrix in a sexual assault case is

unsafe?

4. Has the Learned High Court Judge failed to appreciate that the

ingredients of the offence of Rape have not been established?

Background of the case

In this case the prosecutrix was 12 years old when she faced this bitter

ordeal. She had lived with her father and her siblings at Medawachchiya and

addended the school. The Appellant was their neighbour and had a small

child. The victim’s sister used to go to the Appellant’s house to play with the

little child. One day, the victim had gone to the Accused’s house to bring her

sister back. When she went to the Appellant’s place, the Appellant had

invited her to come to his room to convey a message to her. At that time the

Appellant, brandishing a sword and showing a gun, frightened the victim

that he would kill off her and her family if she divulges this incident to

CA/HCC 173/23

5 | P a g e

anybody. Thereafter, the victim was taken to his room, and the Appellant

had tried to remove her clothes and his sarong. At that time, the victim had

escaped from his custody and had run away from the scene.

The second incident had happened a week after the first incident. Within

that week when she was returning from a boutique, the Appellant had called

and told her that her mother was in his house and wanted her. Believing

that, when she went to his house, the Appellant had dragged her into a room,

put her on a bed, undressed her, had laid on top of her body after lowering

her undergarment up to knee, and had kept his penis into her vagina and

committed rape on her. Before committing the act, he had threatened her

with death to and her family. These threats had persisted several times even

after committing the offence. Due to fear, she did not divulge this incident to

anybody.

Due to this bitter ordeal, the victim had fallen sick and contracted epileptic

fits. As such, she was examined by a psychiatric at the Anuradhapura

General Hospital. At that time, she had revealed this incident to the doctor.

She had revealed this incident for the first time after about one year of the

incident.

Although it was suggested by the defence that she had fabricated this

complaint since her father and the Appellant had a fight two weeks before

she went to the police, she had denied the same.

PW2 Gamini, her father and PW3, Hema Kumari the mother of the victim,

both denied that there were problems between the Appellant and PW2. Both

PW2 and PW3 denied that they instigated their daughter to lodge a false

complaint against the Appellant. The victim had not attained her age when

she faced this incident.

PW9, JMO Karunatilaka had examined the victim on 21.07.2012, one year

after the incident. According to JMO, there was evidence of vaginal

penetration.

CA/HCC 173/23

6 | P a g e

As the appeal grounds raised by the Appellant are interconnected, all will be

considered together hereinafter.

In this case, the victim had given evidence without any contradictions or

omissions. Her evidence is clear and no ambiguities were noted. The victim

was only 12 years old when she was raped.

It is not disputed that the complaint to the police was made about one year

after the incident. The reason for the delay was that she was frightened by

the Appellant’s threat to kill her and her family. Therefore, she was scared

to lodge a complaint with the police. Further, she had developed an epileptic

condition after this incident. Due to her tender age and her education

standard, she could not remember the date of the offence clearly. But she

gave evidence regarding the incident without hesitation. When she gave

evidence, she was 21 years and married.

In the case of CA/HCC/0431/2019 decided on 02.12.2022, it was held by

his Lordship Justice Priyantha Fernando that:

“Child victims in sexual crimes of this nature, are often reluctant to

inform their parents or guardians about the abuse immediately unless

they are compelled to do so. Most importantly, one cannot expect a child

of tender age to keep a record of the exact date on which he/she was

abused or raped, unless there is some special significance on the date

in which the abuse took place.”

In criminal cases, the prosecution bears the weight of proving the defendant’s

guilt to the jury and to sufficiently explain why a conviction is justified.

“Beyond a reasonable doubt” refers to the legal principle that the evidence

and arguments brought forward by the prosecution must be so strong and

convincing that any rational person could accept the guilt of the defendant

as fact. Such a standard would ensure no uncertainties exist when a

defendant is convicted.

CA/HCC 173/23

7 | P a g e

In the case of State of Andra Pradesh v. Garigula Satya Vani Murthy AIR

1997 SC 1588, it was held that:

“…the courts are expected to show great responsibility while trying an

accused on charges of rape. They must deal with such cases with utmost

sensitivity.”

The prosecutrix in her evidence admitted and clearly stated how she was

raped by the Appellant after he had instilled fear in her. Although the

Counsel for the Appellant contended that a dispute erupted between PW2

and the Appellant, which led the victim to implicate the Appellant in this

case, the victim had never mentioned that an animosity existed with the

Appellant over this incident or with her father.

In State of Punjab v. Gurmit Singh [1996] 2 SCC 384 it was held that:

“The courts must, while evaluating evidence, remain alive to the fact that

in a case of rape, no self-respecting woman would come forward in a

court just to make a humiliating statement against her honour….”

In the case of Bharwada Bhoginbhai Hirjibhai v. State of Gujarat (1983) 3

SCC 217 it was held:

“Rarely will a girl or a woman in India make such false allegations of

sexual assault, whether she belongs to the urban or rural society, or,

sophisticated, or, not-so sophisticated, or, unsophisticated society. Only

very rarely can one conceivably come across an exception or two and that

too possibly from amongst the urban elites.”

In Sarath Menikpura v. Attorney General, CA/HCC/61/22, Decided On

27.06.2024, Wickum A. Kalurachchi, J held that;

“Delay in making a complaint about an offence committed against a child

is different. In the case at hand, the victim girl kept silent without informing

anybody about the rape or sexual harassment committed by her father for

three and a half years. A child’s reason for silence has been explained in

CA/HCC 173/23

8 | P a g e

the Crown Court Compendium Part I (published in May 2016 - page 10-

22), as follows:

“Experience has shown that children may not speak out about something

that has happened to them for a number of reasons. A child may

• be confused about what has happened or about whether or not to speak

out; blame him/ herself for what has happened or be afraid that he/ she

will be blamed for it and punished;

• be afraid of the consequences of speaking about it, either for him/herself

and/ or for another member of the family;

• may feel that s/ he may not be believed;

•may have been told to say nothing and threatened with the consequences

of doing so;

• may be embarrassed because s/he did not appreciate at the time that

what was happening was wrong, or because s/he enjoyed some of the

aspects of the attention they were getting;

• simply blank what happened out and get on with their lives until the

point comes when they feel ready or the need to speak out {e.g. for the

sake of a younger child who s/ he feels may be at risk};

• may feel conflicted: loving the abuser but hating the abuse."

In addition, in, The Crown Court Bench Book (published in March 2010

- at page 367) it is stated as follows:

"Children do not have the same life experience as adults. They do not have

the same standards of logic and consistency, and their understanding may

be severely limited for a number of reasons, such as their age and

immaturity. Life viewed through the eyes and mind of a child may seem

very different from life viewed by an adult. Children may not fully

understand what it is that they are describing, and they may not have the

CA/HCC 173/23

9 | P a g e

words to describe it. They may, however, have come to realise that what

they are describing is, by adult standards, bad or, in their perception,

naughty.”

In the case of R. v. B. (G.), 1990 CanLII 7308 (SCC) ; [1990] 2 S.C.R. 30, it

was stated;

“... it seems to me that he was simply suggesting that the judiciary should

take a common-sense approach when dealing with the testimony of young

children and not impose the same exacting standard on them as it does on

adults. However, this is not to say that the courts should not carefully

assess 13 the credibility of child witnesses and I do not read his reasons

as suggesting that the standard of proof must be lowered when dealing

with children as the appellants submit. Rather, he was expressing concern

that a flaw, such as a contradiction, in a child's testimony should not be

given the same effect as a similar flaw in the testimony of an adult. I think

his concern is well founded and his comments entirely appropriate. While

children may not be able to recount precise details and communicate the

when and where of an event with exactitude, this does not mean that they

have misconceived what happened to them and who did it. In recent years

we have adopted a much more benign attitude to children's evidence,

lessening the strict standards of oath taking and corroboration, and I

believe that this is a desirable development. The credibility of every

witness who testifies before the courts must, of course, be carefully

assessed but the standard of the "reasonable adult" is not necessarily

appropriate in assessing the credibility of young children.”

In Don Kuruppu Arachchige Indika Gayan v The Republic of Sri Lanka,

CA/205/2007 Ranjith Silva, J. held that:

“A small child who had undergone such harrowing experience mental and

physical torture and trauma, is bound to make mistake with regard to the

CA/HCC 173/23

10 | P a g e

dates and also bound to confuse several acts of sexual intimacy from one

another.”

It is important to note that corroboration is not a sine qua non to secure a

conviction in a rape case. The refusal to act on the victim’s evidence of sexual

assault due to the lack of corroboration would be adding insult to injury. If

the victim’s evidence does not lack basic infirmity and does not lack credence

according to the probability factor, there would be no reason to insist on

corroboration. These principles have been clearly laid down in a number of

Supreme Court decisions and must be given importance when considering

the evidence of the prosecutrix. It has been clearly established that the

prosecutrix cannot be considered an accomplice. However, as a rule of

prudence, it has been emphasized that some corroboration of her testimony

would normally be looked at to satisfy the courts that the prosecutrix is

telling the truth and that the person accused of abduction or rape has not

been falsely implicated.

E.R.S.R Coomaraswamy in his “Law of Evidence” Volume 2 Book 2 at page

658 has stated referring to child witness;

“There is no requirement in English law, that the sworn evidence of a

child witness needs to be corroborated as a matter of law. But the jury

should be warned, not to look for corroboration, but of the risks involved

in acting on the sole evidence of young girls and boys, though they may

do so if convinced of the truth of such evidence…….This requirement is

based on the susceptibility of children to the influence of others and to

the surrender to their imaginations”.

At page 659 it states, “As regards the sworn testimony of children, there is

no requirement as in England to warn of the risk involved in acting on their

sole testimony, though it may desirable to issue such a warning, though the

failure to do so will generally not affect the conviction”.

CA/HCC 173/23

11 | P a g e

Barry Nurcombe, M.D., F.R.A.C.P. in his article “The Child as Witnesses:

Competency and Credibility” states:

“Before the trial, the child is expected to recount the details of the alleged

offense, again and again, to strangers. Repeated court appearance may

be required. In court, the child will eventually be confronted by the

accused who is exercising his or her constitutional rights. In contrast to

the accused, the child has no advocate. His or her testimony is open to

direct challenge on the grounds of incompetence, confabulation, or

fabrication. These considerations deter victims from reporting offenses,

lead to false restrictions, and erode the apparent credibility of honest

witnesses.” Considering the above cited judicial decisions and the

writings, as the credibility of the evidence of a child witness would

predominantly depend on the circumstances of each case, it is the duty

of the Learned Trial Judge to assess and decide on the evidence given by

the child witness.

It is settled law that the evidence of a witness need not be necessarily

corroborated, especially so in a case of a sexual offence.

Finally, the Learned President’s Counsel contended that the Learned High

Court Judge had failed to appreciate that the ingredients of the offence of

Rape have not been established by the prosecution.

Explanation given under Section 363 of Penal Code (Amended Act) No. 22 of 1995 sates:

“Penetration is sufficient to constitute the sexual intercourse necessary

to the offence of rape.’

The victim had vividly explained how she was raped by the Appellant under

the pretext that her mother was in his house. The JMO had noted a healed

hymeneal tear at the 6 O’clock position in her vagina which had confirmed

the sexual penetration. Hence, prosecution has sufficiently proved the

CA/HCC 173/23

12 | P a g e

penetration which is necessary to prove the charge of rape under Section 363

of the Penal Code.

In this case, plausible reasons were given by the victim on why she had

lodged the complaint almost one year after the incident. There were no

contradictions or omissions in her evidence. She had clearly and vividly given

her evidence on this experience that she had encountered in the hands of

the Appellant.

It is extremely important that every point in the accused’s favour is

considered and placed before the Judge, when an accused is facing a serious

criminal charge, even when such points would seem trivial. It is possible that

such matters when placed before the Judge may create a reasonable doubt,

where the benefit to the accused must be given.

In this case, the Learned High Court Judge had considered the evidence by

the prosecutrix and the defence and had considered that the evidence by the

prosecutrix is in fact convincing and reliable, therefore concluding that the

prosecution has proved the case beyond a reasonable doubt.

After careful consideration of the evidence presented during the trial, I am of

the view that the evidence presented by the prosecution has not been tainted

with any serious shortcomings or ambiguity. As such, I consider it safe to

act on such evidence of the prosecution against the Appellant.

As seen under the appeal grounds brought by the Appellant, strong and

incriminating evidence has been adduced against the Appellant by the

prosecution. Thus, the Learned High Court Judge has correctly analysed all

the evidence presented by both parties to conclude that the prosecution has

indeed proved the case beyond a reasonable doubt.

As the Learned High Court Judge had correctly convicted the Appellant for

the charges mentioned in the indictment, I affirm this conviction and the

sentence imposed.

CA/HCC 173/23

13 | P a g e

After considering the circumstances of this case, I order the sentence

imposed on the 2nd and 3rd counts to run concurrently. The fine will remain

the same, and additionally I order a compensation of Rs. 200,000/- payable

to the victim, with a default sentence of one-year simple imprisonment.

Subject to the above variations, the appeal is dismissed.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgment to the High

Court of Anuradhapura along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL