IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A. Appeal No.82712000 (F)

D.C. Matale Case No.4359/L

Chandralatha ] ayaweera,

No. 29, Thihariya,

Kalagedihena.

PLAINTIFF

Agnas Silva (Deceased)

DEFENDANT

1. Kodagodage Nimal Siva, 2. Kodagodage Nihal Silva

All from: No.4 3, Malwatte Road,

Matale.

Substituted DEFENDANTS

AND

Kodagodge Nihal Silva

No. 43, Malwatte Road,

Matale.

Substituted DEFENDANT ~ APPELLANT

~Vs~

Chandralatha ] ayaweera,

1

BEFORE

COUNSEL

Decided on

A.H.M.D. Nawaz,J.

No. 29, Thihariya,

Kalagedihena.

PlAINTIFF ~ RESPONDENT

Kodagodage Nimal Siva,

No. 43, Malwatte Road,

Matale.

Substituted DEFENDANT ~RESPONDENT

A.H.M.D. Nawaz,J.

Vidura Gunaratne for the Substituted~

Defendant~ Appellant

S.A.D.S. Suraweera for the Plaintiff~Respondent

31.05.2016

The Plaintiff~Respondent (hereinafter sometimes referred to as "the Plaintiff")

instituted this action against the 1st Defendant Agnes Silva for a declaration of title

that the Plaintiff is the owner of the property called "Ponnamada Hena" and

"Galpotha Hena" which is morefully described in the schedule to the plaint, for

ejectment of the Defendant and all those who claimed under her and damages and

costs. The plaintiff's predecessor in title to the said land was one Henry Albert

Jayasooriya, who got this land by a final decree entered in a Partition Action No.176/P

in the District Court of Matale. The said Jayasooriya by Deed of Gift No.427 dated

23.04.1983 and attested by KR. Thiagarajah Notary Public, gifted the said land and

premises to the Plaintiff.

The plaintiff's position was that the land in dispute originally belonged to the said

Albert Jayasooriya, who invited the original defendant Agnes Silva and her family to

2

\I gf

live in the house on the said land. After the death of J ayasooriya, the Plaintiff had

allowed the Defendant to live there with her leave and licence, which she terminated

by her letter dated 03.08.1990 and requested her to vacate the house and give vacant

possession on or before 30.09.1990.

After the institution of this case, the original defendant Agnes Silva had died and her

two sons, Nimal Silva and Nihal Silva were substituted in place of the deceased

defendant. These substituted defendants challenge the validity of the deed on the

ground that when the Deed of Gift was executed, the said Jayasooriya was in the

hospital and not mentally fit to execute the said deed, and that the Notary who

attested the deed was not entitled to attest the said deed as the place of attestation

was out of his place of practice according to his warrant to practice.

At the commencement of the trial on 22.06.1995, no admissions were recorded but 17

issues were raised, six issues were by the Plaintiff and Issues No.7 to 17 by the

Defendants. Thereafter the Plaintiff and her witness Deepthi Kumara J ayasundera

gave evidence and closed the plaintiff's case. On 19.08.1999 when the defendant's case

commenced one Malini Perera, an interpreter working in the High Court of Kandy

was called to give evidence. Her evidence was about the notarial licence that had been

issued to Notary, Thiagarajah, by the High Court of Kandy. His licence was produced

and marked as D2. When the production of this document D2 was objected to by the

plaintiff's counsel, defendant's counsel suggested some further issues, which were

allowed by the Court. The issues go as follows:-

1. Was the notary who attested Deed No.427 (P2) authorized to practice within

Matale District? \ i 2. Was P2 written and executed in Kandy District? \

3. Was the Notary permitted to perform his duty only as a Notary within the f

Matale District?

4. If the above issues were answered in the affirmative, was the Notary legally

entitled to execute and attest P2 in the Kandy District?

3

5. If the above issue is answered in the negative, is the Plaintiff not entitled to the

subject-matter of this action?

On the above issues, both parties made submissions and the Court made order

allowing the issues to stand as 18 to 20 and allowed the witness Malini Perera's

evidence to be led-(See Page 129 of the Brief).

In the course of the evidence of this witness, it was admitted by the parties that the

districts of Kandy, Matale and Nuwara-eliya fall within the jurisdiction of the Zonal

area of the High Court of Kandy-(See page 129 of the Brief). Even otherwise, it is the

judicial zonal area of the High Court and not the District Court area that is

considered in this respect.

Section 4A of the Notaries Ordinance states; "Every warrant issued to a notary under the

provisions of section 3 or 4, authorizing him to practice as a notary in any judicial division in which

he resides, shall be deemed to authorize him to practise as a notary in the judicial zone in which he

resides."

This provision makes it patently clear that even if a notary lives in one district, (for

instance Matale) but attests a deed in another district (for instance Kandy) and if

these two districts are situated within the same judicial zone, he is entitled to

practice as such. In the instant case, the Judicial zone of the High Court which issued

the warrant to notary Thiagaraja is Kandy, within which Matale and Kandy fall and

therefore he is legally entitled to attest the deed in Kandy though he resides in Matale.

As the judicial district of Matale falls within the judicial zone of the High Court of

Kandy, the doubt about the area of practice of the Notary who attested P2 has been

resolved and therefore the said Notary was competent to practise within the Kandy

District and the Deed P2 can be accepted as having been legally attested by the

Notary. As such the issues raised numbering 18 to 20 on the legality of the attestation

must be answered in favour of the Plaintiff. Though the learned Judge has failed to

answer these issues, yet this failure cannot be considered a material defect as the

issues engage a question of law.

4

i !i ! I , f

1 I !

1

, \

~ lt f I {I ,

!

i \I

There is a discrepancy though as to the place of execution. As the evidence shows,

the said deed was executed in the Kandy Hospital premises and in the second page of

the deed it is stated that, "In witness whereof the said donor do hereunto and to two

others of the same tenor and date as these presents set our respective hands at

Matale" (sic) but in the attestation of the Notary, at page 3, 2nd para, the notary

certifies and attests that, "the same was signed by the said executant and also by the

said witnesses and by me the said notary in my presence and in the presence of one

another all being present together at the same time at Kandy".

With regard to the attestation, what is important, in terms of Section 31(20) of the

Notaries Ordinance, is the attestation of the Notary. Paragraph (c) to Subsection (20)

of section 31 of the Notaries Ordinance requires that the Notary in such attestation

shall state "the day, month, and year on which and the place where the said deed

or instrument was executed or acknowledged, and the full names of the attesting

witness and their residences". Hence, what appears at page 2 of the deed indicating

Matale as the place of signature need not be considered as it is not a part of the

attestation.

Once this matter is resolved, the second question that needs an answer is whether the

said Jayasooriya, at the time of the execution of the Deed of Gift No.427, was in sound

mind and executed the deed without any compulsion or duress on the part of the

Plaintiff. The 2nd Defendant said in his evidence~in'chief that when Jayasooriya fell

sick, it was the Plaintiff who took him to hospital and admitted. The said Deed

No.427 was executed on 23.04.1983 when Jayasooriya had been in the hospital. At

that time he was not in stable mental condition and therefore this deed was not

executed by him. This was the allegation made by the 2nd Defendant.

Though Jayasooriya was receiving treatment in the hospital, there was no evidence

that he was not in a position to sign or understand what he did. The 2nd Defendant

said that Jayasooriya was not in a sound mind or mental condition but this has not

been medically established. Jayasooriyas was operated after 3 or 4 days of the

execution of the deed and admittedly, after his discharge from the hospital he had

5

been living with the Defendants at the same house for about 9 months and his death

took place there. During this period there is no evidence to show that J ayasooriya was

suffering from any mental disorder or any other ailment which made him mentally

unsound. In this respect the findings of the learned District Judge can be accepted as

correct.

The only party who contests the plaintiff's title is the 2nd Defendant who has, in his

evidence clearly stated that the said Jayasooriya was his uncle who was not married

and there was no one to look~after him and therefore he invited them to come and live

with him and on his invitation they went to live with him. If this evidence is correct,

it must be admitted that when the Defendants and their parents went to live with

J ayasooriya, there must have been a house in which J ayasooriya had been living. It is

common sense that Jayasooriya could not have invited them to live with him without

a house. Therefore the evidence of the 2nd Defendant that the house was built by them

cannot be accepted.

The 2nd Defendant has admitted that as they went to live on Jayasooriya's invitation,

there was a house in which Jayasooriya lived and they also lived there. This evidence

clearly indicates that the Defendants were living in the house on the land and their

possession was not adverse to but on the leave and licence of J ayasooriya. The

defendants' position is that they had lived in the house for over 25 years and thus they

had prescribed to the land and premises. But this long possession is not independent

but with the leave and licence of the said J ayasooriya.

Therefore, the 2nd defendant cannot claim independent prescriptive title to the land in

dispute, and thus in my view the 2nd defendant's claim that he has prescriptive title to

the said land holds no water.

The 2nd defendant's evidence was that after Jayasooriya's operation for prostate

trouble, the Plaintiff and her husband got him discharged and took him to their

house. He lived thereafter for 8 months until he died. All these items of evidence show

that there was a close relationship between the Plaintiff and J ayasooriya that must

have made him donate the land in dispute to the Plaintiff. The 2nd defendant's

6

evidence that Jayasooriya did not tell him that he wanted to donate this property to

the Plaintiff nor did the Plaintiff tell him that she was going to get this property as a

gift from Jayasooriya are immaterial because it is not necessary for the Court to

consider that the donor or donee must tell all about their dealings to the Defendants.

However, Jayasooriya died on 18.01.1984, and until then there had been no dispute

that arose between the Defendants and Jayasooriya over the deed of gift or the fact

that they had prescribed to the land independently. The dispute has arisen only after

the Plaintiff sent a notice dated 08.08.1990 terminating the leave and licence to the

Defendants-See the effect of the doctrine "hire goes before sale"-De Sampayo J, in

Silva v. Silva 16 N.L.R 315.

The Plaintiff has based her title on the title of Henry Albert J ayasooriya, whose title

flows from the final decree in the Partition Action No.176/P in the District Court of

Matale. There is no dispute about this fact. The Plaintiff has based her title to the said

land on the deed of gift and prescriptive title ofJayasooriya, who was her predecessor

in title. As against this, the Defendants have failed to prove independent prescriptive

title to the said land. The said Jayasooriya had died on 18.01.1984 and this action has

been filed on 22.03.1991. Thus, within 7 years of Jayasooriya's death, the Plaintiff has

filed this action.

In the circumstances I hold that the judgment of the learned District Judge has been

entered on the correct findings of fact and law and I see no reason to interfere with

the judgment. The plaintiff's title by the Deed of Gift No.427 has been satisfactorily

proved and that the prescriptive title of her predecessor devolves on her. I therefore

hold that the appeal of the substituted 2nd Defendant-Appellant must be dismissed

with costs and the judgment of the District Court of Matale be affirmed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

7

;; !

\

f