IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

1

In the matter of an application in the

nature of writ of certiorari and mandamus

under and in terms of Article 140 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

Court of Appeal case no. CA Writ 124/2015, 125/2015 and 126/2015

D.M. U .N.Dissanayake,

No.446, Walauwa Road, Homagama.

(Case No 124/2015)

P.M.M.Madushanka,

No.202/2, Maavihena, Katupotha.

(Case No.126/2015)

W.S.M.A.R.Bandara,

C, 88/1, Atala, Kegalla.

(Case No. 126/2015)

Petitioners

Vs.

1. D.C.J.Weerakoon,

Air Commodore,

Commanding Officer, S.A.L.F .Base,

Colombo

tII

[,,t

!I! E

iI' I ltti

~

I

IIJ

((I

rff

2

And others

Respondents

Before : L.T.B. Dehideniya J.

Counsel : S.M.Vijithsingh for the Petitioners

: Manohara J ayasinghe SC for the Respondents.

Argued on : 24.07.2017

Decided on : 11.09.2017

L.T.B. Dehideniya J.

The writ application nos. 124/2015, 125/2015 and 126/2015 were

on the same issue and were argued together. This judgment is for the said

three applications.

The Petitioners in these applications were airmen served in the Sri

Lanka Air Force. They were involved in an identity card fraud and were

charged under the Air Force Act. After summary trial, they were

convicted and punished.

The Commander of the Air Force ordered to terminate the services

of the Petitioners on the ground that their service no longer required.

The Petitioners challenged both the conviction and the termination

of the service by these petitions, but at the argument stage, the Counsel

for the Petitioners restricted their challenge only to the validity of the

termination.

The Petitioners have raised several questions on the legality of the

conviction in their petitions, but I need not to consider them since the

r

3

petitioners are not challenging the conviction. I will consider the validity

of the termination only.

The Petitioners main contention is that in terms of section 43 and

155(1) (b) of the Air Force Act, the Petitioners could not have been

discharged and a punishment of discharge could be done only by a Court

Martial under section 133 of the Act. The Act does not give power to any

other officer acting under section 43 of the Act, to impose a punishment

under section 133. The learned State Counsel submitted that he is in

agreement with the proposition that an accused cannot be imposed a

sentence more than what is stipulated in law, but he argues that the

punishment is within the law and the termination is valid in law. His

argument is that the Commander has the option to proceed under section

129 (1) or section 43. In the instant cases the commander has opted to

proceed under section 43. The Petitioners in the case nos. 125/2015 and

126/2015 being officers in the rank of Sergeant, they were given the

option of trying the case before a Court Martial but they have declined.

The Petitioner in the case no. 124/2015 is being a corporal; he is not

entitle to this option under section 40(3) of the Air Force Act as amended

by the Act No. 82 of 1988. After conviction and sentence it has been

forwarded to the Commander of the Air Force with details of the

conviction with an application for discharge for ratification and the

Commander has made an order to discharge the Petitioners from the Air

Force under the category of "service no longer required". The learned

State Counsel further submits that the Commander has the power to

discharge servicemen under table B of the Fifth Schedule of the Air Force

Regulations of 1954 and the case in hand the Commander has acted under

section (xiii) (a) of the said schedule.

II

f f I

4

The Air Force Amendment Act No. 82 of 1988 has amended the

section 43 by giving authority to the officer who is conducting the trial to

sentence the accused for three months. The section 43 reads;

43. Where a commanding officer deals summarily with a case in

which an airman (not being a warrant officer) under his command

is charged with the commission of any offence, he shall, after

hearing the evidence, acquit the accused if he finds the accused not

guilty, or convict the accused if he finds the accused guilty, and

after conviction of the accused may

(a)

(i) if the commanding officer is of the rank of Wing

Commander or of higher rank, order the accused to be

placed under detention, or imprisonment, for a period not

exceeding ninety days, and such order of imprisonment shall

not take effect until it is ratified by the Commander of the Air

Force;

In the present case the trial has been conducted by the Base

Commander Air Commodore DJC Weerakoon and the Petitioners do not

dispute that the inquiry officer is of the rank higher than the rank of Wing

Commander. Therefore the sentence imposed is not ultra vires. If the accused is convicted by a Court Martial under section 133 he

can be subjected to a sentence of discharge. The section reads thus;

133. (1) .....

(2) Subject to the provisions of section 134, the following shall be the scale of punishments, in descending order of severity, which may be inflicted on airmen convicted of offences by courts martial:

(a) death;

(b) rigorous imprisonment;

t

t

IIi f

(c) simple imprisonment;

(d) detentionfor a term not exceeding three years;

(e) discharge with ignominy from the Air Force;

(j) dismissal from the Air Force;

5

(g) in the case of a warrant officer or a non-commissioned officer, reduction to the ranks or to a lower grade, or forfeiture, in the prescribed manner, of seniority of rank;

(h) in the case of a warrant officer or a non-commissioned officer, severe reprimand or reprimand;

(i) such forfeiture of and deductions from pay, and such jines, as are authorized by this Act.

In the instance case the discharge of the Petitioner from the Air

Force was not under the section 133. Under the Air Force Regulations

1954, the Commander of the Air Force has the power to discharge any

airman if his service is no longer required for the Air Force. In the Fifth

Schedule Table B section (xiii) (a) reads thus;

Causeo! discharge

(xiii)(a) His services being no longer required

Competent officer to

Authorize discharge

Commander of the Air Force

Carryout discharge

o.c.

Confirm discharge

Officer i/c Records

Special instructions

Applies only to an airman who cannot be discharged under any other item. . ...

There is no any limit prescribed in the said rules in exercising this

power, but the Commander is expected to act within the parameters of the

Administrative Law in this regard. The Commander has to maintain

discipline in the Air Force and he must act reasonably.

t

r

6

In the present cases the Petitioners were convicted for an offence

relating to service identity card fraud. The identity card of a serviceman is

a very important document which gives authority for him to enter in to

sensitive areas. The Commander has very correctly decided that the

persons who are involved in manufacturing forged service identity cards

are not suitable to be kept as members of the Air Force and their services

no longer required. The Commander has the authority to come in to this

decision under sec (xiii)(a) of the table B of the Fifth Schedule of the Air

Force Regulations 1954. This decision cannot be held ultra vires or

unreasonable.

I will consider whether this amounts to double jeopardy. The

termination of the Petitioners service is not a punishment. The offence

that the petitioners committed was of such grave in nature, it could be a

threat to the public security of the country to keep those offenders in the

Air Force. The said regulations have given the power to the Commander

to discharge such persons from the service if they cannot be removed

under any other clause. It is not a punishment but only an administrative

step.

Mangala Pushpakumara v. Air Chief Marshal Roshan Gunarathne

C.A. 448/2009 (Writ) CA Minutes dated 28.03.2013 (incorrectly recorded

as 28.03.2012) is a case similar to the case in hand. In that case too the

serviceman was discharged from the service after conviction. The

discharge was challenged in Court and one ground of challenge was

double jeopardy. It has been held by Goonarathne J that;

Discharge of the Petitioner was not meted out as a punishment.

Therefore the argument of Petitioner that he was punished twice

has no merit. Ccnsidering (a) to (e) above it is evident that

Petitioner was punished as and when an offence was committed. It

\

J

7

is apparent that the above material is sufficient for the 1st

Respondent to arrive at a conclusion that the Petitioner is not a fit

and proper person to be discharged under the other category

dependant on document 12A produced by the Petitioner. The

position as regards the discharge referred to in 12A has been 8

explained as a mistake in 1st Respondent's affidavit and this court

does not wish to interfere with 1st Respondent's decision. I reject

the argument that the Petitioner has been punished twice. It is in

order for the 1st Respondent to discharge the Petitioner. A

discharge is no punishment. Court has no reason to conclude that

the decision in P 15 and P 19 is either ultra vires or unreasonable in

the context of material placed by document R4. There is enough

and more material to support document P 15 & P 19.

Under these circumstances I see no reason to interfere with the

decision of the Commander of the Air Force.

The application dismissed without costs.

President of the Court of Appeal I

i