==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 8

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA.

The Officer in Charge

Police Station,

Welikada. Court of Appeal Case No: Plaintiff. CA/PHC/Appeal No: 139/13 High Court Case No: HCRA/80/2011 Vs. Magistrate’s Court Colombo Case No: 14405 D. Ariyawathi Munasinghe, No.85/2, U.E.Perera Mawatha,

Obesekarapura,

Rajagiriya.

1st Party.

1. Parapedewage Sanjaka Aravinda Kumara

No.85/2, U.E.Perera Mawatha, Obesekarapura, Rajagiriya. 2. Dona Gnanawathi Munasinghe

No.85/1, U.E.Perera Mawatha, Obesekarapura, Rajagiriya.

2nd Party.

-Now- 1. Parapedewage Sanjaka Aravinda Kumara

No.85/2, U.E.Perera Mawatha, Obesekarapura, Rajagiriya. 3. Dona Gnanawathi Munasinghe

No.85/1, U.E.Perera Mawatha, Obesekarapura, Rajagiriya.

2nd Party-Petitioners.

Vs.

Page 2 of 8

D. Ariyawathi Munasinghe,

No.85/2, U.E.Perera Mawatha,

Obesekarapura,

Rajagiriya.

1st Party-Respondent.

The Officer in Charge

Police Station, Welikada.

Plaintiff- Respondent.

Hon. Attorney General Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12.

Respondent.

-And Now Between-

1. Parapedewage Sanjaka Aravinda Kumara

No.85/2, U.E.Perera Mawatha, Obesekarapura, Rajagiriya. 2. Dona Gnanawathi Munasinghe

No.85/1, U.E.Perera Mawatha, Obesekarapura, Rajagiriya.

2nd Party-Petitioner-Appellants.

Vs.

D. Ariyawathi Munasinghe,

No.85/2, U.E.Perera Mawatha,

Obesekarapura,

Rajagiriya.

1st Party-Respondent- Respondent.

The Officer in Charge

Police Station, Welikada.

Page 3 of 8

Plaintiff- Respondent- Respondent.

Hon. Attorney General Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12.

Respondent-Respondent.

Before : Prasantha De Silva, J.

Khema Swarnadhipathi, J.

Counsel: Ms. Samanthi Gamage A.A.L with Pradeepa Abeyrathne A.A.L for the 2nd

Party-Petitioner- Appellants.

Mr. Pubudu De Silva A.A.L with K.Samaratunga A.A.L for the 1st Party-

Respondent- Respondent.

The Appeal disposed on Written Submissions with The consent of the Parties : 03.08.2021 Decided on : 07.12.2021

Prasantha De Silva, J.

Judgment

The Officer in Charge of the Welikada Police station filed an information on 29.10.2010 in

terms of Section 66(1) of the Primary Courts’ Procedure Act No.44 of 1979, against the 1st

Party-Respondent- Respondent and the 2nd Party-Petitioner-Appellants in this Appeal, on the

basis of a breach of the Peace being threatened over the possession of a property in dispute.

After following the procedure stipulated in the Primary Courts’ Procedure Act, Parties have

filed their respective Affidavits, Counter Affidavits and the documents marked and produced

as 1ප1-1ප26 and 2ව1-2ව28 by both the 1st Party and the 2nd Party.

Page 4 of 8

Consequently, the learned Magistrate acting as the Primary Court Judge having considered all

the Affidavits and the documents placed before Court at the inquiry, held that the 1st Party-

Respondent- Respondent [hereinafter referred to as the Respondent] was in possession of the

disputed portion of land two months prior to the date of filing of the information and decided

in terms of Section 68(3) of the Primary Courts’ Procedure Act to restore the Respondent into

the possession of the disputed portion of land.

Being aggrieved by the said Order, the 2nd Party-Petitioner- Appellants had invoked the

Revisionary Jurisdiction of the Provincial High Court of the Western Province holden in

Colombo. It appears that the learned High Court Judge after hearing of both parties and having

considered the Pleadings, Proceedings and the Written Submissions filed by them, held that

the learned Magistrate had come to the correct findings of fact and Law and decided that the

1st Respondent was in possession of the disputed portion of land, two months prior to the date

of filing of the information, thus affirmed the Order of the learned Magistrate.

Being aggrieved by the said Order dated 04.10.2013 by the learned High Court Judge, the 2nd

Party-Petitioner-Appellants [hereinafter sometimes referred to as the 1st Appellant and the 2nd

Appellant] have preferred this Appeal to this Court.

In terms of Section 68(1) of the Primary Courts’ Procedure Act, it is the duty of Court to

ascertain who was in possession of the land in dispute, on the date of filing of the information

under Section 66 of the Act.

If there is a forcible dispossession of a Party, the Court has to determine, when that

dispossession took place and if it was within two months immediately prior to the date of

institution of the Action, thus, it is a duty of Court to make an Order to place him back in

possession of the disputed land under Section 68(3) of the Act.

However, it appears that at the inquiry before the Judge of the Primary Court, the Plaintiff

submitted the documents such as the Complaint made by the 1st Party-Respondent and their

Affidavit, Counter Affidavit and the documents marked as 1ප1-1ප26 and the Affidavit and

Counter Affidavit of the 2nd Party- Appellants with the documents marked as 2ව1-2ව28 and 2ව2

(1)-2ප2 (9).

Page 5 of 8

In addition to those documents, the Plaintiff filed a sketch which depicts the disputed portion

of land, and the observation notes of the Inquiring Officer. After the conclusion of the inquiry,

both the 1st Party-Respondent and 2nd Party- Appellants had filed Written Submissions.

Apparently, the learned Magistrate acting as the Primary Court Judge, having considered all

the materials placed before Court had come to the conclusion that,

1) The disputed portion of land was identified by Plan No. 5274 of Lot 15C prepared by

Surveyor Liyanasuriya.

2) The 1st Party-Respondent was in Possession of the disputed Land until the date on

which the dispute arose.

It was observed by the learned Primary Court Judge that on or about 23.11.2010 the 2nd Party-

Appellant had attempted to dig the ground and put up poles to build a Garage to repair three-

wheelers, and this is where the dispute between the Appellants and the Respondent had started.

Consequently, the 1st Party-Respondent was dispossessed by the 2nd Party- Appellants from the

disputed portion of land.

Both the Appellants and Respondent admitted that the disputed portion of land is depicted in

Plan bearing No 5274 made by Licensed Surveyor Mr. Siri Liyanasuriya as Lot 15C.

It is to be noted that the said Gnanawathi Munasinghe the 2nd Party-Petitioner- Appellant

(hereinafter referred to as the 2nd Appellant) in her Affidavit dated 21.02.2011 affirmed as

follows;

“ මාගේ මව ප්‍රශ්ණගත ග ාට් 15C යන පර්චස් එකක් වන බිම් ගකාටස කිසිවකුගේ නමට ඔප්පුවක්

මඟින් පැවරීමක් කගේ නැත. මව ජීවතුන් අතර සිටි කා ගේදී පවා භුක්ි විඳින ද්ගද් මා පමණි. දැනට

අවුරුදු 10ක කා යක් පමණ සංජන අරවින්ද කුමාර එහි ඉදිරිපස ගකාටගස් ත්‍රීගරෝද ගරගපයාර් කරන

ගරාජයක් පවත්වාගගන යයි”.

The Court draws the attention to the statement made by Sanjana Aravinda Kumara the 2nd

Party-Petitioner- Appellant on 25.11.2010 to the Police Station Welikada.

“පරගප්ප ගද්වගේ සංජන අරවින්ද කුමාර, වයස අවුරුදු

23......................................................................... .........ගම් ඉඩගම් මම ත්‍රීවීේ ගරගපයාර් ක ා”.

Page 6 of 8

According to the said statement made by the said Sanjana Aravinda Kumara, the 1st Appellant

has been running a Garage to repair three-wheelers for the last 10 years. Since the 1st Appellant

was 23 years old at the time of making a statement to the Police, this means he was running a

Garage to repair three-wheelers, since he was 10 years old.

It is pertinent to note that the 1st Complaint made by the 1st Party-Respondent- Respondent

(hereinafter referred to as the 1st Respondent), Don Ariyawathi Munasinghe has stated as

follows.

“මගේ අයියා වන ඩී. පියදාස මුණසිංහ යන අය විසින් 01.11.2010 වන දින ඔහුට අයත් පර්චස් 01 ක

ඉඩම් කැබැේ නීතීඥ ගුරුගේ මහතා ඉදිරිගේ ඔප්පු අංක 555 යටගත් මගේ නමට ලිව්වා. එහි ප්ප ෑනක්

ිගබනවා. ඒ ඉඩමට අේ ා මගේ ඉඩමක් ිගබනවා. අද දින මගේ නංගිගේ ුතා වන සජී යන අය

විසින් මම අයියාගගන් මි දී ගත් ඉඩගම් ගරාජ් එකක් හදනවා. මම ඔහුට අවසර දී ා ිබුගන් නෑ. ඔහු

බග න් ගමහි ගම් ගරාජ් එක

හදන්ගන්.............................................................................................................”.

The 2nd Appellant denied the said position of the 1st Respondent and submitted a letter marked

as 2ව10 dated 10.01.2000 which states that “……………………….මාගේ නැගණියගේ ුතා වන

පී.ඩී. සංජන අරවින්ද කුමාර හට ගකාළඹ රාජගිරිගේ උගේගස්කරුර ගනා.248 දරන ඉඩගම් මා සතු

ගද්ප වලින් පංගුවක් 10.01.2000 දින සිට ඔහුට කැමි වයාපාරයක් කරගගන යාමට ඉඩ ස සා දී

ඇි බවත්........................................................................................”.

It is worthy to note that the learned High Court Judge has considered the said letter 2ව10 and

stated in his Order that……….“බ ය පැවරීගම් ලිපියක් ග ස සඳහන් ගේඛණගේ විශයගත ගද්ප

සංජන අරවින්ද කුමාර නමැි ප වන ගපත්සම්කරුට 10.01.2000 වන දින බා ගදන බවට ප්‍රකාශ කර

ඇතත්, එහි සඳහන් කර ඇත්ගත් මා සතු ගද්ප වලින් පංගුවක් ඔහුට කැමි වයාපාරයක් කර ගගන

යාමට ඉඩ ස සා දී ඇි බව පමණක් ගව්”.

It is observable that the said letter 2ව10 does not specify a portion of land, as such, it is not clear

whether the uncle of the 1st Appellant, Piyadasa Munasinghe promised to give the disputed

portion of land to the 1st Appellant.

On the other hand, it is to be noted that at the time of writing the said letter 2ව10 in the year

2000, the 1st Appellant was 10 years old. Thus, it is questionable that the said Piyadasa

Munasinghe promised to give the disputed portion of land to his nephew. However, the 1st

Appellant had not established that he was given the possession of the disputed premises to carry

Page 7 of 8

out a business on the land in question. It is observable that the said Piyadasa Munasighe did

not transfer the property in dispute to the 1st Appellant for the last 10 years after such promise

to the 1st Appellant. Nevertheless it was transferred to his sister the said Respondent Ariyawathi

Munasinghe on 03.11.2010.

As such, it is apparent that the uncle of the 1st Appellant did not intend to transfer his rights of

the disputed portion of land to the 1st Appellant. Thus, there is no evidentiary value of the said

letter 2ව10 to the instant Case.

Therefore, it is imperative to note that the contents of the Affidavits of the Appellants are

disproved by the evidence placed before Court by the Respondents. In view of the material

placed before Court, it is evident that the dispute arose among the Parties when the 2nd

Appellant attempted to dig the ground and put-up poles to build a Garage to repair three-

wheelers on 23.11.2010. Thus, it is apparent that the possession of the land in dispute was with

the said Piyadasa Munasinghe and the 1st Respondent Ariyawathi Munasinghe until the dispute

arose on 21.11.2010.

The said position was clearly established by the observation notes dated 21.11.2010 of the

investigating officer. It appears that the said observation notes stated that the land in dispute is

a bare land, 1 Perch in extent and the 1st Appellant [සජී] was engaged in a construction, digging

the ground and setting up poles.

...................................“මා එහි යන විට සජී යන අය විසින් ව වේ හාරා ගපාේ ලී කණු ගයාදා

ඉදිකිරීමක් කිරීමට කටයුතු කරමින් සිටි අතර මා ඔහුට දැනුම් දුන්නා, දැනට ඉඩම සම්බන්ධව පැමිණිලි

ැබී ඇි බැවින් කිසිදු ඉදිකිරීමක් ගනාකරන ග සට උපගදස් බා දුන්නා. ගමම ඉඩම පර්චස් 1කින්

සමන්විත හිස් ඉඩම් කැබැේ කි. පැමිණිලිකාරිය විසින් ගමම ඉඩම ඇයට අයත් ඉඩමක් බව පවසන

අතර වගඋත්තර කරුවන් විසින් එම ඉඩම ඔවුනට අයත් එකක් බව පවසා සිටියි. ගමම ඉඩම පිටුපස

වගඋත්තර කරුගේ නිවස පිහිටා ඇත. ගමම ඉඩම් කැබැේ ට වම් පස පැමිණිලිකාරියගේ නිවස පිහිටා

ඇත”.

As such, it clearly proves that there was no existing Three-wheeler repairing garage run by the

1st Appellant in the disputed premises. If the 1st Appellant had been running a Three-wheeler

repairing garage for the last 10 years, it should be visible to the investigating officer. Since the

investigating officer observed that it’s a bare land, the learned Primary Court Judge had come

Page 8 of 8

to the correct findings of fact and had come to the conclusion that the 1st Respondent was

dispossessed by the 1st Appellant on the date the dispute arose among the parties.

In this instance, Court observes that the documents 2ව14-2ව28 submitted by the 1st Appellant

are the letters obtained from various people to establish that the 1st Appellant had been running

a Three-wheeler repairing garage at the disputed premises. Since it was established that the 1st

Appellant had not been carrying on a business, running a Three-wheeler repairing garage, it is

seen that there is no evidentiary value of those letters 2ව14-2ව28.

Thus, it seems that those letters were obtained by the 1st Appellant for the sake of getting an

advantage in the instant Case in his favour.

Apparently, upon the evidence placed before the Primary Court Judge, it is patently clear that

the facts of the instant case are properly evaluated in the correct perspective thus the Order of

the Primary Court Judge is well-founded.

As such, it is not necessary to interfere with the Judgment of the learned High Court Judge,

who affirmed the Order of the learned Primary Court Judge.

In view of the aforesaid factual and legal matrix, I uphold the impugned Orders of the learned

Primary Court Judge dated 27.04.2011 and the learned High Court Judge dated 04.10.2013.

Accordingly, the Appeal is dismissed with costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL Khema Swarnadhipathi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL