==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 7

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCTRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for revision

in terms of the Article 138 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka, reading with

Section 16(3) of the Judicature Act No.02

of 1978.

CA/CPA/126/2022

HC of Colombo Case No.: HC/3748/2007

Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department, Colombo

12

Complainant

Vs

01.)Rathnayaka Mudayanselage

Nishanka Jayasinghe

02.) Appuralalage Chaminda

Dilruksha Roopasinghe

Page 2 of 7

03.) Nalaka Liyanagama

04.) Rajaguru Mudayanselage Indika

Roshan Jayasinghe

05:) Usgoda Arachchilage

Chandrasoma Deshapriya

06.) Amudamana Arachchige Saman

07.) Jayakodi Arachchige Wasantha

Chandrakumara

08.) Moonadeniya Manage Saman

Shantha Prasad

09.) Madagoda Arachchige Indika

Kumara Gunaratna

10.) Kulasekara Mudayanselage

Chaminda Kulasekara

11.) Hewahettige Suminda

12.) Hetti Pathirannahalage Dinesh

Susantha Dharmapriya

13.) Gammampila Imiyage Don Hemal

Lanka Priyadharshana Gammampila

Page 3 of 7

14.) Karasinghe Arachchige Ruwan

Lasantha Deshapriya

15.) Liyanaralalage Namal Jagath

Bandara Seneviratne

16.) Ranmohottige Dinesh Dharmapriya

Amarasooriya

17.) Jayalath Pedige Suranga Nalin

Dilruksha

18.) Horathal Pedige Nalaka Mihira

Bandara Wijeratne

19.) Saluwadana Nilamelage Gamini

Seneviratne

20.) Amarasinghe Kankanamlage

Vijitha Kumara

21.) Nisshanka Arachchi

Appuhamilage Rasika Nilanga

22.)Liyanaarachchi Kankanamlage

Chandika Prasad Liyanaarachchi

Page 4 of 7

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Wimala Perera

No: 7/83, Kapuwatta Road,

Gangodawila, Nugegoda

Aggrieved Party-Petitioner

Vs.

01.)Rathnayaka Mudayanselage

Nisshanka Jayasinghe (01)

02.) Appuralalage Chaminda

Dilruksha Roopasinghe(02)

06.) Amudamana Arachchige Saman

(Currently serving the sentence at the

Prison)

16.)Ranmohottige Dinesh

Dharmapriya Amarasooriya

17.) Jayalath Pedige Suranga Nalin

Dilruksha

(Currently serving the sentence at the

Prison)

Page 5 of 7

22.) Liyanaarachchi Kankanamlage

Chandika Prasad Liyanaarachchi

Accused Respondents

The Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

Complainant Respondent

Before : B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

Amal Ranaraja, J

Counsel: Amila Palliyage with Sandeepani Wijesooriya, S. Udugampola, Lakshitha

Wakishta Arachchi and Subaj De Silva for the Aggrieved Party Petitioner

Anil Silva, PC with Anjana Abeyratne for the Accused-Respondent

Wasantha Perera, DSG for the Complainant- Respondent

Argued On : 04.09.2025

Judgment On: 29.10.2025

Page 6 of 7

JUDGMENT

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

The Aggrieved Party Petitioner filed this revision application on 14.10.2022,

prayed for the following relief in the said petition.

a) Issue notice on the Respondents.

b) Revise and/ or set aside the order of the learned High Court judges' order of

sentencing dated 2022.05.05

c) Order appropriate sentences on the Accused Respondents depending upon the

aggravating circumstances of this case.

d) Grant Costs

e) Order the Accused Respondents to pay a reasonable compensation to the

aggrieved party

f) Grant such other and further relief that Your Lordship's Court shall seem meet.

It is observed that the application seeking to invoke the Court’s revisionary jurisdiction

was made on 14.10.2022 . It is a well-established principle that a party seeking revision

must do so without undue delay. In the present matter, the delay remains unexplained.

Our Courts have consistently held that such inordinate and unjustified delay constitutes

a bar to the exercise of revisionary powers under Section 364 of the Criminal Procedure

Code.

This concept was considered by Justice Kulathilaka, J. in Rajapakse v. The State, 2001

(2) SLR 161 held that;

“The learned counsel for the accused-appellant also submitted that if this Court were to

hold that the petition of appeal is out of time it would not preclude him from inviting this

Court to exercise the revisionary powers in terms of Section 364 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act. We agree that the powers of revision of the Court of Appeal are wide

enough to embrace a case where an appeal lay was not taken. However, an application in

revision should not be entertained save in exceptional circumstances.

Further held that;

Page 7 of 7

In addition, if this Court were to act in revision, the party must come before the Court

without unreasonable delay. In the instant case, there is a delay of 13 months. In this

regard, vide Justice Ismail's judgment in Camillus Ignatious vs. OIC of Uhana Police

Stations (Application in revision), where His Lordship was of the view that a mere delay

of 4 months in filing a revision application was fatal to the prosecution of the revision

application before the Court of Appeal.”

In Camillus Ignatious vs. OIC of Uhana Police Stations CA 907/89 M.C. Ampara

2587 (Application in revision) where His Lordship was of the view that a mere

delay of 4 months in filing revision application was fatal to the prosecution of the

revision application before the Court of Appeal. Accused's contumacious conduct

and unreasonable delay would necessarily preclude him from inviting this Court

to act in revision in terms of Section 364 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.”

His Lordship further added- “These matters must be considered in limine before

the Court decides to hear the accused-petitioner on the merits of his application.

Before he could pass the gateway to relief his aforesaid contumacious conduct and

his unreasonable and undue delay in filing the application must be considered and

determination made upon those matters before he is heard on the merits of the

application.

In the instance case petitioner has failed to explain the reason for the delay.

Therefore, with the above judicial pronouncement, we dismissed the application

without issuing notice to the Respondents.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Amal Ranaraja, J.

I AGREE.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL