IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C. A. Case No. : 24 112010

H. C. Balapitiya Case No. : 208/1997

1

In the matter of an Appeal Against an order of the High Court under Sec. 331 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 and in terms of Article 138 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

Comph-ainant Vs (1 )Baviyage DamithJ ayalal (2)Bavi Premasir (3)Senanayake Danny Saman Accused

And Now between

(1 )Baviyage Damithl ayalal

[1 5t Accused Appellant] (2) Senana) <.l;""'c U<.ll1H) :)a.W<.ll.

[2nd Accused Appellant] Accused-Appellants

Vs

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON:

The Hon. Attorney General Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondent

K. K. Wickramasinghe, J &

M.M.A. Gaffoor, J

AAL Dr. Ranjith Fernando for the 1 st Accused- Appellant.

AAL Indika Mallawaratchy for the 2nd and 3rd Accused Appellants

Rohantha Abeysooriya Senior DSG for the Attorney General.

15th November 2016

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS: 07/02/2017,13/07/2017

DECH)ED ON : 3rd October 2017

K. K. WICKRAMASINGHE, J.

The Accused AppellantS (herein after referred to as the AppellantS) were indicted in the High Court of Balapitiya for commiting murder of one Hakkini Vijitha Veera De Silva which is an offence punishable under section 296 of the Penal Code. When the indictment was read over to three Accused they had pleaded 'not guilty' to the indictment and accordingly the trial was commenced before the learned High Court Judge.

The Accused Appellants were convicted for the above mentioned charge and sentenced to death. Being aggrieved by the said conviction and sentence, the Appellants made the instant appeal to this court for the vacation of the same .

.. .,'

2

.'

At the trial the prosecution led the evidence of mainly the following witnesses:-

1. Hakkini Suseema De Silva (PW3)- Eye Witness 2. Thewahandi Gilbert De Silva - (Husband ofPW3) 3. Ramegei Osman De Silva- (PW9)-Police Offic,er 4. Jagoda Arachchige Sirisoma- (PWIO)- ASP

The prosecution case:-

According to witness Hakkini Suseema De Silva (PW3) there was a quarrel between the accused and another named Dunstan near the house of the witness. Eventually, these people have crossed the boundaries and entered the land where the house was situated. At that point the witness, her husband, the sister of the witness and the deceased requested them not to quarrel in their premises. At the same time a pet dog had come barking towards the accused and one of the accused had hit the dog with a club which resulted the death of the dog. There after the intruders left the place. The husband of Suseema Gilbert De Silva has taken the carcass to the Police Station to make a complain regarding this. At the mean time all the accused have returned to the said premises and they have entered the house from the rear side of the house and dragged the deceased out of the house to the well and stabbed him' LO death.(The inj uries corroborate with the med:..:al evidence)

The eyewitness demonstrably explained how the accused acted together in furtherance with common intention to commit murder of the deceased. According to the evidence of Suseema, when the 4th accused was stabbing the deceased, the 2nd accused was holding the deceased. She further said that the 2nd accused was carrying a club and others were carrying knives. Evidence of the eyewitness reveals that there was no provocation e by the deceased to the accused party.

The injuries of the deceased were compatible with medical evidence.

The Learned Counsel for the Accused Appellants submitted the following

~V1lLfdUl~Livl1;:, 1lldfh..CU lJj L~lC licicm .. c:11 l:l':: .:vidence of the ejc,'y:~l!"'::>::> :..:~~) ~:~..: prosecution:-

Names of the accused were not mentioned in the complaint regarding killing of witness's pet dog. Therefor there was no reason for the accused to return to their premises and commit murder. It was suggested by the defence that the reason to

,,~'

3

II

l

commit murder of the deceased was making a complaint regarding the death of the dog. When considering evidence, it is abundantly clear that the death of the dog was not the reason, but the earlier altercation.

The trial judge has very correctly considered the pos~ession that, as suggested by the defence if the virtual complainant has not mentioned about the accused there would not have been a sudden provocation. Thereby It was a clear case of murder.

The trial judge has held that the witnesses have given evidence after 15 years and therefor one cannot expect them to have a photographic memory with regard to an incident.

Further, by perusing judgement it is evident that the Learned Trial Judge has adequately considered the contradictions and the omissions submitted by the Leamed Counsel for the Appellants and given reasons accordingly. Also the evidence of the eyewitness is consistent with the evidence of other witnesses including PWI 0 who recovered the club and the dead body near the well.

According to PW9 the 2nd Accused Appellant was absconding and later arrested after four months of the incident.

Considering aoove there is no reason to imerlere with the fin~ings of L~l';; LC:afllcJ High Court Judge. Hence the conviction and the sentence affirmed.

The Appeal is hereby dismissed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

M.M.A.Gaffoor, J.

I Agree

Judge of the Court of Appeal .:-

4

I II(,It f