IN THE COUI~T OF APPEAL OF TIlE DEMOCRATIC: ,

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF ~.RI LANKA

C.A. Case No. 412/1995 (i~)

D.C. Kuliyapitiya Case No. 7742/P

1. J .M.S. Bandara'~Tathie J ayasinghe

2. ].M.W. BandarftWathie Jayasinghe

both of Gallehamullawatta, Welipennagahamulla.

PLAINTIFFS

~Vs-' .-

1. B.L Ariyadasa .

of GallehamullaVvatta, WelipennagahamllUa.

and 19 others

DEFENDANTS

AND NOW BE" WEEN

K.A. Chandrad:;.sa

Of Gallehamullo: watta, Welipennagahamlllla.

20th DEFENDA' ~T ~ APPELLANT

~VS~

1. J .M.S. Bandarav rathie J ayasinghe

'I lao EM. Anoma T Ci. narakumari Amithirigala

Ib. EM. Damayancll Pushpakumari Amithirigala

all of Gallehamu!lawatta, Welipennagahamulla.

1a and lb Substituted PLAINTIFF ~ RESPONDENTS

1

2. J.M.W. BandarawathieJayasinghe

2a. E.M. Anorna T aInarakurnari Arnithirigala

2b. E.M. Damayant.hi Pushpakurnari Arnithirigala

all of Gallehamullawatta, Welipennagahamulla.

2a and 2b Substituted PLAINTIFF, RESPONDENTS

I. B.L Ariadasa

Ia. Pushpa Udaya Kanthi

both of Gallehamullawatta, Welipennagahamulla.

2. J .M. Leelawathi,~

of Welipennagahamulla Post Pannara.

3. J.M. Jyasundara

of Welipennagahamulla Post Gallehamullawatte.

4. T.M. Telisinghe

ofWadumunnegedara Post Nawasegaha~atte.

5. J.M. Nandana

' . ' 6. J.M.Jagath

7. J .A. Piyarathne

8. J .A. Karunarath .. le

9. K.A.L GunawaJ'dhane

all of Welipennagahamulla Post Gallehamullawatte.

IO.J.M. Ernonona (Deceased)

lOa. S.M. SeelawatlL.e

of Gallehamullawatta, Vv

T elipennagahamulla.

11. M.A. Ranrnenika

12. S.M. Dhanawathie Manike

both of Welipermagahamulla Post

Gallehamullawa ere.

2

BEFORE

COUNSEL

Decided on

AH.M.D. Nawaz, I.

13. M.N. De Silva

I of Mahawewa Post Ihala Mahawewa.

14. S.M. Suripala

15. S.M. Wijesighe

16. S.M.A. Dayananda

17. S.M.A. Gamini Wasantha

18. S.M.A. Chandan a Subasinghe

19. S.M.A. Dhanawathie Manike

20.K.A. Chandrada.sa

all of Welipenn~gahamulla Post Gallehamullawa tte.

DEFENDANT~RESPONDENTS

A.H.M.D. Nawa.z,j.

Rohan Sahabandu, PC with Hasitha Amarasinghe for the 20th Deff:ndant~Appellant

M.C. Jayaratne 'vith M.D.]. Bandara for lA, IB, 2A and 2B Substitut ed Plaintif~ Respondents

Rubasinghe Gunasena with LM.C.D. Bandara for the 7th and 13th Defendant~ Respondents

07.01.2019

"The 20th Defendant~Appeliant in the instant appeal before me (hereinafter s?metimes

referred to as "the .20th Defendant or Appellant") was someone who sought to ,

jntervene under Section {)9 of the Partition Law, No.9-I of 1977 and be added as a party

before judgment was enu:red in the case and he was so ?dded as the 20th Defendant subject

to the obligation to make a prepayment of costs. This~Jfepayment ordered by the District

3

Court was not complied -\Nith by the 20th Defendant and on this account he was precluded

from filing his statement of claim though I find that a statement of claim appears on record.

This was the sanction that had been imposed by the learned District Judge of Kuliyapitiya

. " for not complying with the order of prepayment and thus the 20th Defendant-Appellant

was not permitted to participate at the trial which had since proceeded to the stage of

, ' judgment on 30.08.199~. The 20th Defendant-Appellant has preferred this appeal

strenuously impugning it on several grounds and he has put forward an argument that

i ., ; " . long before the institutio,n of this partition suit, he l~ad purchased 1/16th portiqn of the

subject-matter which is ~ ,upported by a deed in his pos~ession bearing No. 595 apd dated

17.02.1975. The 20th Defendant argued that his interes't and share in the subject matter

were extinguished by the Judgment of the District Court dated 30.08.1995, which has not , investigated his title as a result of his exclusion from participating at the trial. Mr Rohan

Shahabandu, P.C. argued' that the non-compliance with the order of prepayment should . ,

~ot have led to his exclus~on from participation at the tnal as there were irregularities such

~s the non-compliance wIth Section 12 of the Partition,Law, No. 21 of 1977 as a~ended.

As is well known in Partition Law, there exists a duty in terms of Section 12 of the

Partition Law No. 21 of 1977 as amended on the part of the Attorney-at-Law of the Plaintiff

to cause a search of the eptries in the land register rdating to the land and disclose the

names of all those persons found therein and there should be a declaration under his hand

that he has made such a s2arch. Such a declaration is conspicuous for its absence from the

record. Thus the argument was made that the absente of such a declaration ~hould be

treated as a fundamental vic.~-an expression quite felicitously used by Soza,J. in Somawathje

;1

v. Madawela (1983) 2 SrLLR 15 at 31.

So I would begin from this beginning. There was i1.o Section 12 declaration and the

inference is inevitable theit if such a search which was e.fljoined upon the Attorney-at-Law

pf the Plaintiff had been made, the presence or otherwise of the 20th Defendant's Deed

bearing No. 595 executed long before the institution of this partition case would have been

disclosed and if he was found to be a co-owner of the land, it was imperative by virtue of

Section 12 of the Partition Law that he should have been added as a Defendant and issued

4

with summons. All thesE':requirements are spelt out by Section 12 of the Partition Law

which for reasons of clarity must be set out: ~

1. After a partition iction is registered as a lis pendens under the Registration of

Documents Ordinance and after the return of the duplicate referred to in section 11,

the plaintiff in the action shall file or cause to be filed in ceurt a declaration under

the hand of an attorney~at~law certifying that all such entries in the register

maintained under ; that Ordinance as relate to the land constituting the subject ~

matter of the action have been personally inspected by that attorney~ at - law after

the registration of t:~e action as a lis pendens, and containing a statement of the name

of every person found upon the inspection of thc:se entries to be a person whom the

plaintiff is required by section 5 to include in the plaint as a party to the action and

also, if an address of that person is registered in the aforesaid register, that address.

2. The plaintiff in a partition action shall, together:,with the declaration referred to in

subsection (1) of this section, file or cause to be f,iled in court~

a. if the aforesaid declaration discloses any pe.rson who is not mentioned in the

plaint as a party to the action but who should be made such a party under section

5, an amended plaint including therein that p'~rson as a party to the action, which

amended plaint shall be deemed for all purposes to be the plaint in the' action;

b. as many surnmtmses as there are defendartts, each such summons being a

summons substantially in the form set out in the Second Schedule to this Law

. and containing the name and address of the ~lefendant on whom that summons

is to be served;

c. if the language of any defendant is not the language of the court, a translation of

the summons iIl that language;

d. as many copies of the plaint as there are defendants, with a translation thereof in

the language of each defendant whose langu:-lge is not the language of the court;

or, with the leave of the court, where complia ~;1Ce with this requiremen,t involves

an expense which appears to the court exceSSIve and unnecessary in the

5

circumstances, a concise statement of the relevant paragraphs of the plaint

relating to each defendant with translatior s thereof in the language of any

defendant whose language is not the languag~ of the court;

e. one copy of the plaint certified by the registered attorney as a true copy, such

copy being the copy to be attached to the corn1nission issued to the surveyor who

is to make the preliminary survey of the land to which the action relates; f as many copies: of a notice substantially ifi the form set out in the Second

Schedule to thi~ : Law as there are lands to whi~h the action relates together with

translations thereof in the language of any defendant whose language is not the

language of the c.ourt;

g. such number of c.:opies of the aforesaid nott~e and of each translation thereof

referred to in par;;tgraph (f) of this subsectior~ as would enable the trallsmission

of one copy of ~;uch notice and one copy of ~~ch such translation to the Grama

Seva Niladhari of the division or of each of the divisions in which the land or each . . .

of the lands to v~hich the action relates is situate;

h. a precept to the Fiscal substantially in the form set out in the Second Schedule

to this Law."

The fact that Section 12 is. mandatory, as I said before, was alluded to by Soza, J. (with

Sharvananda, J. WanaEundera, J. Wimalaratne, J and Ratwatte, J. agreeing) in

Somawathie v. Madawela (supra) as follows:-

"The purpose of this declaration is to satisfy the conscience of the Court that all persons who are

seen upon an inspection of the entries in the Land Registry to be persons entitled to a right, share or

interest in the land sought to be partitioned are before it.: In fact it is only after the declaration is

filed that the Court issues summons. It is the declaration that gives the green light for the case to

proceed."

"This glaring blemish L aints the entire proceedings. I t amounts to what has been called 'fundamental

vice'. It transcends thebounds of procedural error."

6

This principle was again articulated by Wimalachandra, J. in Maduluwawe Sobitha

Thero v. Joslin (2005) 3 SrLLR 25 at 31:-

"It is imperative to m~ke a declaration under Section 12 (1) of the Partition Law after the partition

action is registered as a lis pendens. Section 12(1) stipulates that after the registration of the lis

pendens, the plaintiffmust file or cause to be partitioned in the register maintained under the

Registration of Documents Ordinance, stating the names of all persons found, upon the; inspection

I of those entries, to be added as necessary parties to the action under section 5 of the Partition Law,

No. 21 of1977."

"The failure to make a correct declaration under section' ]2(1) of the Partition Law, amounts to a

procedural irregularity which results in a miscarriage a/justice, in that the petitioner who has a

title deed duly registe~ed to the entire property, which is the subject matter of the said partition

action, was kept out 'without being made a party. This a~ounts to what is called a fundamental

vice."

The evidence or existenc~ of a Section 12 declaration w~uld have thro'WIllight on the fact

whether or not the 20th Defendant should have been added and issued with surnnons and

the question arises what if the deed of the 20th Defendant had been found in the register?

If so found and if not included in a mandatory declaration as enjoined by Section 12 of the

Partition Law, the failur~ to include the name of the 20th Defendant might have even

approximated to a fraud and as Lord Denning exclaimed in Lazarus Estates Ltd., v.

Beasley (l956) 1 Q.B. 702:-

"No court in this land will allow a person to keep an advantage which he has obtained by fraud. No

judgment of a court, no order of a Minister, can be allowed to stand if it has been obtained by fraud.

Fraud unravels everything. The court is careful not to find fraud unless it is distinctly pleaded and

proved; but once it is proved, it vitiates judgments, contracts and all transactions whatsoever ... "

Lord Diplock had already articulated his often cited e/;pression-'jraud unravels all" in that

seminal decision in letter of credit law namely United City Merchants v. Royal Bank 01

Canada (1983) A.C 168 at: 184. Lord Diplock's plain Ellglish -'1raud unravels all" is a pithy

7

summation of that well k"i.iown Latin dictum ex turpi cadsa non oritur actio. I would not go so

far as to find fraud against the Plaintiffs but the absence of a Section 12 declaration is good

enough a reason to drav; an adverse inference against the two Plaintiffs in terms of

illustration Cf) to Section 114 of the Evidence Ordinance namely;

"Evidence which could be and is not produced if produced, be unfavourable to the person who

withholds it."

So the inference that the i nterests of the 20th Defendalit were found on the entries in the

land registry pertaining to the corpus but yet the declaration to the effect was not filed

with a view to hiding it away from Court is no doubt rebuttable having rego.rd to the

language of Section 114 which couches the presumption thus-"the Court may presume the

existence of any fact wh~ch it thinks hkely to have happened, regard being had to the

common course of natural events, human conduct, and public and private business in their

relation to the facts of th~ particular case." If the 20th befendant had registered his deed

bearing No 595, a search of the entries pertaining to ,~he land would have disclosed his

~ : name as a co-owner of this land but the absence of the mandatory declaration leads to the

irresistible inference that. he was kept out of the case deliberately. As I said before, the

I presumption under Section 114 of the Evidence OrdiDance is only rebuttable but in the

absence of rebutting evi(~ence this Court draws the inference that the 20th Defendant who

appears to have a legiti~ate interest in the corpus haE: been deliberately ousted [rom any

kind of participation at t~ie trial.

What is the effect of ncn-compliance with Section .12 of the Partition Law No. 21 of

1977 as amended?

The two judgments I have cited above Somaw-athie v. Madawela (supra) and

Maduluwawe Sobitha Thero v. Joslin (supra) both ~;peak in terms of the peremptor)

nature of Section 12 of the Partition Law No.21 of '1977 and whilst Soza, J. states ir

Somawathie v. Madawela that Section 12 declaration gives green light for the case tc

proceed and a failure to 20mply with it is a blemish that taints the entire proceedings

Wimalachandra, J. in A1aduluwawe Sobitha Thera v. Joslin declares that such :

8

procedural irregularity leads to a miscarriage of justice. The import of all these

pronouncements is that Whatever step that is taken subsequent to the non~compliance

with Section 12 becomes,mvalid and the entire proceedings thereafter become null and

void.

I am fortified in this reasoning by the language of $ection 48(1) and its 2nd paragraph

thereto which have the object of making partition decrees inviolate and immune from

t internal and collateral attack. The legislature sough~ to secure finality for the decrees

entered under the partitiq:p law by specifically providing that the interlocutory decree and

final decree shall be final,and conclusive "notwithstar:di.ng any omission or defect of procedure"

and by expressly protecting these decrees from attack on the ground of fraud and

collusion.

So even an omission or defect of procedure will not result in partition decrees being attacked

and having taken note of the fact that the Courts had intervened on several occasions to

impugn partition decrees on the ground of what "vas called a fundamental'vice, the

legislature sought to insulate partition decrees from these fundamental vices. They were

I categorized as omissions or defects of procedure and formulated as such in the 2nd paragraph of

Section 48 (l) of Partitior..law No. 21 of 1977. The expression "omission or defect of procedure"

was defined to include an omission or failure ~

(a) to serve summons on any party; or

(b) to substitute the heirs or legal representatives of a party who dies pending the

action or to appoint a person to represent the estate of the deceased party for the

purposes of the action; or

( c) to appoint a guardian ad litem of a party who is a minor or a person of unsound

mind.

The upshot of these legislative amendments was that despite these enumerated omissions

or defects of procedure in the 2nd paragraph to Section 48 (1) of Partition Law, finality of

partition decrees was kept jnviolate. I hasten to point out that the failure to file a Section

9

12 declaration is not specified as an enumerated item in the expression "omission or defect of

procedure". If those omissions or defects of procedure as are enumerated in (a), (b) and (c)

of the 2nd paragraph to Section 48 (1) will not invalidate partition decrees, the failure to

file a Section 12 declarr1.tion is not one of those grounds falling within the above

enumeration and therefore the failure to file such a declaration is bound to have the effect . .

of eroding the finality.

In my view the omission to specify, within the classification of omission or defect oJprocedure,

"failure to file a Section 12 declaration and take all the steps that have to be taken under

Section 12" is deliberate on the part of the legislature a.nd therefore it follows that when

there is non~compliance '~'ith Section 12 of Partition lav\J, such non~compliance would not

come within such omissions or defects of procedure". that are excusable. It is only the

omissions or defects of procedure categorized under the 2nd lJaragraph to Section 48 (l) that are

excusable.

Failure to comply with Section 12 is more than an omission or defect of procedure. It is

more fundamental than a mere omission or defect of pro~~ edure. That is probably the reason

why Justice Soza stated'in Somawathie v Madawela. {supra) that the failure t o follow

'3ection 12 of the Partition Law transcends the bound~f of procedural error.

A failure to follow Sectio!i 12 leads to the custer of :;t true claimant with a 1egitimate

interest from participating at the partition suit and E.uch a deprivation of a due process

cannot be a mere omissiOl:l or a defect of procedure.

It is indeed a fundamental vice to precipitate the non~participation of a legitimate claimant

at the trial and such a fundamental vice cannot save the partition decrees from attack. In

Iny view the legislature-deliberately omitted to keep out of the list given in the 2nd

paragraph to section 48 (1) "the failure to comply with Section 12" and such a deliberate

exclusion fortifies my rea:~oning that Section 12 non~compliance renders the decrees under

J?artition Law susceptible to attack and irnpugnatic n. The failure to make a correct

declaration under Sectio11 12 would amount to a fundamental vice which is more than a , mere omission or defect <?f procedure and such an irre~larity results in proceedings that

10

are null and void. In other' words the failure to follow Section 12 is jurisdictional and not

merely procedural.

A non~conormity with Section 12 gives rise to a j~risdictional defect which can be

impugned both directly and collaterally. If I may sum' up the effect of the 2nd paragraph

paragraph of Section 48 (1) in another way; a failure to effect due service of summons on

any party may not vitiat~ partition decrees but a failure to file a Section 12 declaration

correctly and accurately is more fundamental than a me.te omission or defect of p~ocedure.

Adopting the above reasoning, I proceed to hold that all the steps that the District Court

took subsequent to the s~age of Section 12 are a nullity and even the order made by the

learned District Judge ,ordering the intervention of the 20th Defendant sl}bject to

prepayment of costs also becomes inoperative and null and void. In other words the

District Judge of Kuliyapitiya should have ensured that Section 12 was complied with. No

other steps could have been taken without the requirements of Section 12 being complied

with. District Judges trying partition suits should ensure that the juri?dictional

requirements of Section' 12 are strictly followed in order to prevent the supervening

~onsequences of nullity.

The learned Counsel for the lA, IB, 2A and 2B Substituted~Plainti~Respondents in his

written submissions has drawn the attention of this Court to Journal Entry No 13 at page

26 of the Appeal brief wherein it has been journalized on 02.02.1987 that

K.A.Chandradasa ~the Appellant before this Court had been handed over notices along

with other new claimants ?ut the Appellant was not present in Court in response to this

notice. In fact the other new claimants who were present in Court in response to the

notices issued by Court were added as lOth, 11th and 12th Defendants and given an

opportunity to file their statements of claim~see J ourna 1 Entry 13. Thus the argument was

that the Appellant beforE.: this Court being the 4th clairnant before the Surveyor was duly

noticed by Court in terms of Section 20 (1) of the Partition Law as amended but on the

notice returnable date ~i . e .02.02.1987 he was absent ,md thus had not responded to the

notice. It was only after a lapse of 7 years and 9 months that the Appellant made an

application to intervene ~ ,n 23.11.1994 in terms of Section 69 of the Partition Law.

11

'.

As is well known under section 69 of the Partition Lav; which is now in force any person

who claims an interest in the land may apply to courr at any time before Judgment is

delivered in a partition action, that he be added as a party to the action. Therefore it could

be seen that an interveni.ent cannot come to court after the judgment is delivered in a

partition action. In additjon to this restriction of time fo1' interventions, Section 20 (5) of

the Partition Law debars,a person from making an application for intervention if he has

not responded to a notice: sent by court. The preclusive provision goes as follows:

The provisions of Section 69 shall not apply to a person to whom notice has been sent under this section.

So the contention is that 'here is an appellant who was iloticed to appear because he was a

new claimant before the Surveyor. But he did not respond to this notice. So though he

made an application to intervene before judgment V/ QS delivered, he could not avail

, himself of the right to intervene given to him under Section 69 because Section 20 (5)

debars him from making, the application for intervent~on. I am afraid I cannot assent to

this proposition.

I have held that all steps taken subsequent to the non-conformity with Section 12 were

Dullities and the partition case, like Humpty Dumpty, had fallen irretrievably and if I may

paraphrase Mother Goos~, all the king's horses and all the king's men could not put Hump;y together

i again. The proceedings b(.came void at the stage of nonocompliance with Section 12 and it

remained void. What is void cannot be rendered valid thereafter. In fact Lord Denning in

the Privy Council in McFoy v United Africa CompHny (1961) 3 AER 1169 stated at p

1172

If an act in law is void, then it is in law a nullity .... .Thercis no need for an order of the court to set

. it aside. It is automatically null and void without much ado, though it is sometimes collvenient to

have the court decln,f-e it to be so. And every proceeding which is founded on it is also bad and

incurably bad. You cannot put something on nothing and, expect it to stay there. It will collapse.

See the effect of the maxiUl "you cannot put something on nothing" in Piyadasa Perera i T Cooray

CA 1104/00 (F) -D.C.Mt.Lavinia 2286/L (Argued &: Decided on 17.03.2017).

12

Thus Section 20 notice th:;lt was issued was without juri3diction and Section 69 along with , . "; its restriction in Section 20; (5) would all apply only w~en valid proceedings had commenced

and continued,

Only when proceedings ate recognized by law, there can be a valid decree, So the statutory

, , bar in Section 20 (5) ~"one cannot intervene under section 69, because one has not

responded to notice" hap. not application in proceedings that were conducted without jurisdiction, Having regard to all these considerations, I take the view that a grave

injustice has occurred by:reason of the failure on the p~rt of the learned District Judge to

evaluate evidence accor~g to law and to bear in mindthe consequences of nullity arising

owing to non~complianc~ with Section 12 of the Pan.:ition law, In the end there is no

;' . comprehensive investigat.ion of title at all as is required under Section 25 of the Partition

Law as amended,

In the circumstances I s~t aside the impugned judgment and interlocutory decree and

direct the learned Distrkt Judge of Kuliyapitiya to take proceedings ue novo. The learned

District Judge shall tak~ " steps to compel the Plaintiffs to comply with section 12 of

Partition Law before the ,matter is taken up for trial.

' " < JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

13