I

1 I

i I

~ I I 1 I I

* I I

t

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A./L.A No.418/2004

In the matter of an Application for Leave to

Appeal under Section 754 of the Civil

Procedure Code from the Order of the

Learned District Judge of Balapitiya dated

22nd October 2004, in case No. 683/P.

*******

1

Kaluhara Janenona

Of Ahungalla.

Plaintiff (deceased)

T. Jinawathi De Silva

Of Hotel Road, Ahungalla.

Subsituted Plaintiff

Vs

1. K. Usulawathi

Of Ahungalla.

2. K. Wyman of Ahungalla

(deceased)

2A K. Usulawathie

Of Ahungalla.

3. Aitken Spence & Co. Ltd.

Lloyds Building

Sir Baron Jayathilake Mawatha

Colombo. 01.

2

4. M.Piyasena

Of Ahungalla.

5. Kaluhara Lisinnona

Of Thotawatta Road

Ahungalla.

6. Hettihandi Renuka Indraji De Silva

Of Ahungalla.

7. Ahungalla Hotels Ltd.

305, Vauxhall Street

Colombo 02.

8. Kaluhara Erin Singho

Of Thotawatta Road

Ahungalla.

9. Pettagan Chandrawathi de Silva

Of "Sirsevana" , Ahungalla.

10. Pettagan Chandrawathi Silva

11. Peoples Bank

No. 75, Sir Chittampalam A.

Gardinar Mawatha

Colombo 02.

12. Development Finance

Corporation of Ceylon

No. 73/5, Galle Road,

Colombo 03.

13. National Development Bank

No. 40. Nawam Mawatha

Colombo 02.

Defendants

AND

3. Aitken Spence &Co. Ltd.

Lloyds Building

3

Sir Bron Jayathilake Mawatha

Colombo 01.

7. Ahungalla Hotels Ltd.

305, Vauxhall Street,

Colombo 02.

Defendant Petitioners

Vs

T. Jinawathi De Sila

Of Hotel Road, Ahungalla.

Substituted Plaintiff respondent

1. K. Usulawathi

Of Ahungalla.

2A K. Usulawathie

Of Ahungalla.

4. M. Piyasena

Of Ahungalla.

5. Kaluhara Lisinnona

Of thotawatte Road

Ahungalla.

6. Hettihandi Renuka Indraji De Silva

Of Ahungalla.

8. Kaluhara Erin Singho

Of Thotawatta Road

Colombo.

9. Pettagan Kumudu De Silva

Of "Sirsevena", Ahungalla.

10. Pettagan Chandrawathi De Silva

11. Peoples Bank

INo.7S, Sir Chittampalam A. ,

Gardinar Mawatha, Colombo 02.

12. Development Finance

Corporation of Ceylon

NO. 73/5, Galle Road,

Colombo 03.

13 National Development Bank I!No. 40, Nawam Mawatha iColombo 02.

! IDefendant Respondents

,

i IBEFORE : Deepali Wijesundera J. III : M.M.A. Gaffoor J.

: Sujith Perera for Defendant

Petitioners.

R.e. Gunaratne for Plaintiff

Respondents.

COUNSEL

: 03rd August, 2015 !I IARGUED ON

DECIDED ON : 18th December, 2015

ii

I.II I

.. ! 1

~4 t t

~

~

~

Deepali Wijesundera J.

The plaintiff (now deceased) instituted an action to partition a land

called Pitawatte alias Thinawatte alias Unawatana more fully described

in the schedule to the plaint in 1982. The third and seventh defendant

respondents have filed their statements of claim in December 1992

which is nearly eleven years after the plaint was filed. After the trial had

commenced the defendant petitioners have moved for an alternative

plan which was allowed by court in 2002 and they have taken two years

to get the land surveyed and the plan made. The third and seventh

defendant petitioners have made an application to amend these

statements of claim thereafter. This application was refused by the

learned District Judge on 22/10/2004. The District Judge has stated in

his order that the petitioners have taken nearly eleven years to file their

first statement of claim and that they have deliberately delayed the case

by their conduct. He has also stated that the defendant petitioners did

not have a proper understanding of what they were doing.

The learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that under Sec.

93 of the Civil Procedure Code amendment of pleadings should be

allowed if the party seeking to amend show court that grave and

irremediable injustice would be cased if the amendment is not allowed

5

and that the party so applying is not guilty of laches. To explain what

grave and irremediable injustice is, the learned counsel has gone into

detail to explain what a partition action is citing authorities which is

totally out of line. The issue in the instant application is something

entirely different.

The petitioners stated that to address the real issue between the

parties the amendment of the statement of claim has to be allowed. He

has cited several judgments on amendment of pleadings which are

totally irrelevant to the instant application.

On the issue of grave and irremediable injustice caused to the

petitioners the learned counsel stated that the land in dispute is used as

the entrance to the hotel the only five star resort in the southern

province if they are not allowed to amend the statements might lose

their service entrance. While admitting the partition case was filed over

twenty years ago the petitioners stated they only filed their statements a

few years ago.

The petitioners stated that the Supreme Court has repeatedly

rejected the notion that mere delay amounts to laches, and cited the

6

judgments in Abeywardena and others vs Euginahamy and others

1984 2 SLR 231, Punchimahatmaya menike and others vs

Ratnayake and others 18 C.I.W. 18, Seneviratne vs Candappa 20

NLR 150, Peiris vs Weerasekera 1936 38 NLR 150, Lulu Balakumar

vs Balakumar Bar Journal 1997 Vol VII part I. In all these cases it has

been decided that an amendment should be allowed if it can be made

without injustice to the other party. The petitioners citing more

judgments went on to argue that it has been held that the Partition Act

does not prevent a person from intervening and being added as a party

even after delivery of judgment. This is again totally out of the issue in

the instant case.

The learned counsel for the plaintiff respondent stated that the

petitioners filed their first statement of claim nearly eleven years after

filing of the partition case and claimed that they were unaware of the

land described in the schedule to the plaint and thereafter the seventh

defendant had filed an amended statement of claim and the trial has

commenced in July 2001. At the trial the learned District Judge has

rejected issue No. 12 raised by the petitioners and they have not

appealed against the said order. The respondent's counsel went on to

explain how the petitioners have moved for dates on trial dates giving

various excuses to delay the trial. The respondents stated that after

7

moving for time to consider the superimposition of preliminary plan

marked as X6.

The respondents stated that in the amended answer the

petitioners are attempting to resile not only from the position they took in

their second amended statement of claim but also from the position they

specifically put to the plaintiff in cross examination and is seeking to

once again an exclusion of lots 3 and 4 of plan 2738.

The respondents citing the judgments in Uberis vs Jayawardena

62 NLR 217, Emil Erlanger vs The New Sombrero Phosphate

Company 3 1887-1888 appeal cases 1218 stated that a party is entitle

to amend his pleadings only if he satisfied court that grave and

irremediable injustice will be cased to him and that he is not guilty of

laches. The respondents stated that in the instant case not only the

length of the delay in making the applications but also the nature of the

acts done by the petitioners establish laches on the part of the

petitioners and the injustice the plaintiff would suffer if the amendment is

allowed.

8

There is no provision in the Partition Act for amendment of

pleadings therefore one has to revert back to the provisions in the Civil

Procedure Code for amendment of pleadings. Sec. 93 of the Civil

Procedure Code deals with amendment of pleadings.

Sec. 93 (2) of the Civil Procedure Code reads thus;

liOn or after the day first fixed for the trial of the action and

before the final judgment. No application for the amendment of

pleadings shall be allowed unless the court is satisfied, for

reasons to be recorded by court that grave and irremediable

injustice will be caused if such amendment is not permitted, and

on no other ground and that the party so applying has not been

gUilty of laches".

It is clearly stated in the above section that a party seeking to

amend the pleadings should satisfy court that grave and irremediable

injustice would be caused to the said party if the amendment is not

allowed and that the said party is not guilty of laches.

In the instant case the petitioners have taken over ten years to file

their first statement of claim and the amendment was sought after the

9

trial was commenced and after twenty two years have passed since the

filing of the case. Therefore he can not say his rights will be affected if

the amendment was not allowed since he has been sleeping over his

nights. The petitioners are undoubtedly guilty of laches. The learned

district Judge has very correctly ordered that the amendment can not be

allowed under Sec. 93 of the Civil Procedure Code.

For the afore stated reasons I affirm the order of the learned

District Judge of 8alapitiya dated 22/10/2004 and dismiss the

application of the petitioners, with costs fixed at Rs. 100,0001=.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL.

M.M.A. Gaffoor J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

10

1III

titif! tfIII

III

iiIIiii