IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA CA 158/2005

Puwakgolle Basnayake Mudiyanselage Dhanapala Egodakanda Walapone.

1st Accused -Appellant Vs. Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

Plaintiff - Respondent

; 1 1 ! i 1 \ j I j I I I I I I ! I

t !

I

C.A.No.158L2005

Before

Counsel

Argued and Decided on

1

H.C.Kandy No.732L92

Vijith K. Malalgoda P.C. J. (PICA) &

S. Devika de L. Tennekoon, J.

Chula Bandara for the Accused-Appellant.

Rohantha Abeysooriya D.S.G. for the A,G.

09.12.2015

Viiith K.Malalgoda, P.C. J. (PLCA)

In this case the Learned Counsel for the accused- appellant at

the out set informs that he will not be challenging the conviction but

will only be making submissions with regard to the sentence already

imposed. In the present case the accused-appellant who was an

employee of the Ragala Multi Purpose Co-operative Society was

indicted along with one Tilakaratne who was his assistant under

Section 386 and 467 of the Penal Code. At the conclusion of the

High Court trial the learned High Court Judge Kandy has convicted

the accused-appellant on counts 01, 03, 04 and 05 and acquitted the

2nd accused-appellant from all the charges against him. After

conviction the learned High Court Judge has imposed the following

sentence on the accused-appellant.

II!I[

tI

ii1Ii

\

2

On count 01 Court has imposed a jail term of 18 months

Rigorous Imprisonment.

On count 02 Court has imposed a fine of Rs.2500/=

On count 03 Court has imposed a fine of Rs. 5000/=

On count 05 Court has imposed a fine of Rs. 10000/=

In default on each of the above fines imposed, six months R.I.

was imposed by Court.

The position taken up by the Learned Counsel before this

Court was that the said offense had committed in the years 1984,32

years ago and the accused-appellant is presently 77 years old.

Counsel further submits that considering the time taken to conclude

the case and the other factors such as old age and health condition,

he has instruction from his client to conclude this case without going

for arguments. The learned Deputy Solicitor General at this stage

submits that he too agrees with the submissions of the counsel that

the offence had committed 32 years back and it is unfair to punish

a person at this stage for offence committed 32 years ago. In the

case of K.R.Karunawathi Vs. The State 78 New law Report 413 the

delay of 10 years to conclude a case had been considered as long

delay. However in the present context this Court is not inclined to

declare a period of 10 years as long delay but, when considering the

t,

fti rtf!

\

t

J

t

3

facts and circumstances of the present case we are of the view that it

not fair to impose a custodial sentence after 32 years. Therefore we

decide to suspend the above sentence of 1 Y2 years for a period of 5

years with effect from today. We are not going to change the other

sentences imposed by the learned High Court Judge. Subject to the

above variation the appeal stand dismissed.

Registrar is directed to forward this case record back to the

High Court of Kandy for the implementation of the said sentence.

The appeal is dismissed.

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

S.Devika de L. Tennekoon,J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE CORUT OF APPEAL

WC/-1

\

J