Page 1 of 5

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCTRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal under and in terms

of Section 331 (1) of Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 (as amended)

read with Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

CA/HCC/52/2024 The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

HC Puttalam Case No.HC/30/2022

Complainant

V.

Madduralalage Nimal Ananda alias Sudha Mama

Accused

And Now between

Madduralalage Nimal Ananda alias Sudha Mama

Accused-appellant

Vs.

The Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department

Colombo 12.

Complainant -Respondent

Page 2 of 5

Before : B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

Amal Ranaraja, J

Counsel: Amila Palliyage with Sandeepani Wijesooriya, Savini Udugampola, Lakitha

Wakishtaarachchi, Sampath Perera and Subaj De Silva for the Accused-

Appellant

Hiranjan Peiris ASG for the Respondent

Argued On: 25.08.2025

Judgment On: 08.10.2025

JUDGMENT

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

The Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Accused’) was indicted before the

High Court of Puttalam on the count of rape committed on Kachcakaduwage Champika

Fernando punishable under Section 364 (2)(e) of the Penal Code as amended by Act No.22

of 1995.

At the trial, the prosecution led the evidence through 8 witnesses, and marked

productions from P1 to P3 and thereafter closed its case. After the conclusion of the

prosecution case, the Accused, in his defence, made a dock statement.

Although the accused was charged with the offence of rape, the accused was

finally convicted of the offence of grave sexual abuse which is an offence

punishable under Section 365(b)(2)(b) in the Penal Code and was sentenced to a

term of 12 years rigourous imprisonment, to a pay a fine of Rs. 20,000/- carrying

a default sentence of 6 months simple imprisonment and to pay Rs.200,000/- as

compensation to the victim carrying a default sentence of 1 year simple

imprisonment.

Page 3 of 5

Being aggrieved by the afore-mentioned conviction and the sentence, the Accused has

preferred this appeal to this Court. The following are the grounds of appeal as pleaded by

the Accused.

1. Did the Learned Trial Judge err in law by convicting the Appellant for Grave

Sexual Abuse punishable under section 365(2)(B)(2) of the Penal Code when the

charge of rape on the Indictment remained unaltered?

2. Did the Learned Trial Judge err in law by failing to consider the provisions

under Sections 167, 168, 169, 176 and 177 of the Criminal Procedure Code?

3. Did the Learned Trial Judge err in law by convicting the Appellant for Grave

Sexual Abuse in the absence of a specific act of Grave Sexual Abuse on the

Indictment either altered by the Prosecution or by the Learned Trial Judge at the

time of delivering the impugned judgement?

4. In the absence of such evidence adduced by the Prosecution did the Learned

Trial Judge err law and facts when arriving at a conclusion that the Prosecution

had proved the ingredients of the charge beyond reasonable doubt?

5. Did the Learned Trial Judge err in law by not complying with the procedures

stipulated under Criminal Procedure Code which amounts to a denial of a fair Trial

to the Appellant?

In the present case, the accused-appellant was charged with an offence, namely

the charge of rape. He was acquitted of the charge of rape. This shows that the

evidence led at the trial was not sufficient to convict him of the offence of rape.

“එම සාක්ෂියට අනුව වින්දිත තැනැත්තියට යයෝනිගත පුරුෂ ලිංග ප්‍රයේශයක්ෂ සිදු වී යනාමැි බව

වියශේෂඥ අධිකරණ වවද්‍යවරයා විසින්ද නිශේිතවම හරසේ ප්‍රශේනවලදී ප්‍රකාශ කර ඇත. ඒ පිලබඳව

පැමිණිල්ල විසින්ද කිසිදු පැහැිල කිරීමක්ෂ නැවත ප්‍රශේනවලදී සිදු කර නැත. ඉිරිපත්ත කර ඇි

අධිය ෝද්‍නායේ සිංඝටක සහ වින්දිත තැනැත්තියයේ සාක්ෂිය පිළිබඳව කිසිඳු අවයබෝධයකින්ද යතාරව

යමම වියශේෂඥ අධිකරණ වවද්‍යවරයායේ සාක්ෂිය පැමිණිල්ල විසින්ද යමයහයවා ඇි බව යමහිදී

නිරීක්ෂෂණය කරමි.

Page 4 of 5

ඉහත සඳහන්ද සාක්ෂි මත පැමිණිල්ල විසින්ද ද්‍ණ්ඩ නීි සිංග්‍රහයේ 364 වගන්දියයහි ද්‍ක්ෂවා ඇි "සේී

දුෂණ" නම් වරද්‍ට අද්‍ාළ සිංඝටක ඔප්පපු කර යනාමැි බවට තීරණය කරමි .”(vide page 131 and

132 of the brief)

The accused-appellant came to the trial Court to defend a charge of rape. His line

of defence is apparently to attack the charge of rape. He was not given any

opportunity to defend a charge under Section 365(B)(2)(a) of the Penal Code.

In a charge of rape, the prosecution must prove the penetration. In a charge of

grave sexual abuse, prosecution is not required to prove penetration. Penetration

can be minimal, and placing the penis between the labia majora or labia minora

would be sufficient. Thus, to constitute the offence of rape, even a penile erection

is not necessary. On the other hand, the moment the penis, genitals or any part of

the human body or instrument touches the vagina without consent of the victim

the offence of grave sexual abuse is completed. Thus, the ingredients in a charge

of rape are different from the ingredients that must be proved in a charge of grave

sexual abuse. We also find that the accused was gravely prejudiced by the fact that

the trial judge failed to inform him of the charge of grave sexual abuse, giving him

the opportunity to defend him self on the charge. Instead, the Judge has, at the

conclusion of the judgment, arrived at a decision to convict him for grave sexual

abuse instead of rape.

We are mindful that the indictment was filed by the Honourable Attorney General

based on the statement provided by the prosecutrix. Accordingly, if during the trial

her testimony fails to disclose the occurrence of penetration, it raises a substantive

question as to whether the accused's actions legally constitute rape.

“යමම නඩුයේදී වින්දිත තැනැත්තිය පැහැිලව ප්‍රකාශ කර ඇි පරිි චුිතයේ පුරුෂ ලිංගය ඇයයේ සේී

ලිංගය මත පාවිච්චි කිරීමක්ෂ සිදු වී ඇත. තවද්‍ එකී ක්‍රියාව චුිත විසින්ද සිදුකර ඇත්තයත්ත ලිංගික තෘප්පියක්ෂ

ලබා ගැනීම පිණිස බව ඔහු එය සිදු කර ඇි සියලු අවසේථානුගත කරුණු සැලකිල්ලට ගැනීයම්දී

පැහැිලව යපනී යයි. ඒ අනුව ද්‍ණ්ඩ නීි සිංග්‍රහයේ 365 (ආ) (2) (අ) වගන්දිය යටයත්ත වන බරපතල

ලිංගික අපයයෝජනය නම් වරද්‍ යමම චුිත විසින්ද සිදු කර ඇි බවට පැමිණිල්ල විසින්ද ඔප්පපු කර

ඇතැයි තීරණය කරමි.”

Page 5 of 5

Upon reviewing the judgment, the learned High Court Judge observed that the

act described by the prosecutrix falls under Section 365(B)(2)(a) of the Penal Code.

However, the prosecutrix failed to articulate the specific acts that constitute rape.

In particular, she did not establish the occurrence of penetration, which is a

fundamental element that must be proven in order to sustain a charge of rape.

It is well established that in rape cases, the court expects the prosecution's

evidence to be sufficiently convincing. When the testimony of the prosecutrix is

credible and trustworthy, corroboration is not deemed necessary by the court.

In Premasiri v. Attorney General [2006] 3 S.L.R held that:

“The rule is not that corroboration is essential before there can be a conviction in

a case of rape but the necessity of corroboration as a matter of prudence except

where the circumstances make it unsafe to dispense with it, must be present to

the mind of the judge”.

I am mindful that our courts place great emphasis on the consistency of witness

testimony. In the present case, the evidence provided by the prosecutrix lacks

credibility. We have already determined that the accused was not afforded a fair

opportunity to defend against the charge of grave sexual abuse. Given that the

prosecutrix's testimony was inconsistent and therefore unreliable, we find it

unsafe to sustain the conviction.

Accordingly, we set aside both the conviction and the sentence.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Amal Ranaraja, J

I AGREE.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL