IN THE COURT OF APPEAL

OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

C.A. (WRIT) Application No : 110/19

In the matter of an application for Orders in the nature of Writs of Certiorari and Prohibition under Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Ponnaperumage Fred Dekstor Fernando,

No: 28015, Samagi Mawatha,

Daluwakotuwa,

, Kochchikade.

Petitioner'

Vs,

1. K.J.S. Madhawa, Returning Officer, Gampaha North Elections Office, Gampaha.

2. United Natonal Freedom Front, No: 118, Barnes Place, Colombo 07.

3. Upali Amrasiri,

President, United National Freedom Front, 195/20, Weera Mawatha, Depanama, Pannipitiya.

4. Maithri Gunaratne, General Secretary, United National Freedom Front, No: 118, Barnes Place, Colombo 07.

Respondents

Before

Counsel

Decided on

CA (WRIT) 110/19

Hon. Justice Janak De Silva.

Hon. Justice N. Bandula Karunarathna.

M. Premachandra for the Petitioner.

Maithree Amarasinghe for the 15t Respondent.

Suren Fernando with K. Wickramanayake for the 2od&

3 rdRespndents.

Faizer Musthapha, PC with Charitha Gunarathna, AAL for

the 4th Respondent.

05. 02. 2020.

Hon. Justice Janak De Silva.

Learned counsel for the Petitioner submits that she has considered the case

of the Petitioner. She submits that there are no grounds to pursue this application

inter - alia due to the order made by this Court on the last date rej ecting the

application made by the Petitioner to tender further documents.

She moves that she be allowed to withdraw the application by reserving the

right of the Petitioner to file a fresh application and without costs.

Learned Counsel for the 2od& 3rd Respondents objects to any right being

reserved to the Petitioner to file a fresh application in view of the history of the

litigation between the parties. He moves for nominal costs on behalf of his clients.

Learned State Counsel for the 1 sl Respondent infonns that she is not asking

for costs, nor is she objecting to the application made to be withdraw the

application. Learned counsel for the 4th Respondent moves for cost as well as

objects to any rights being reserved for the Petitioner to file a fresh application.

Court has perused the journal entries in this application which shows that

the Petitioner has on several dates moved that this matter be fixed for support but,

did not support it at least on five days. We wish to place on record that the present

counsel for the Petitioner only marked her appearance for the 1 st time on

20/12/2019. Having considered the factual maters in this application including the

futile exercise made by the Petitioner in the District Court and the Civil Appellate;

High Court to challenge his expulsion by the political party, we see no reason to

reserve any right to the Petitioner to file a fresh application.

We allow the Petitioner to withdraw the application and grant costs only in

favor of the 2nd Respondent.

Application for withdrawal IS allowed with costs m favor of the 2nd

Respondent.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Hon. Justice N. Bandula Karunarathna.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

LSD/-