==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 16

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of Section 331 (1) of the Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 Mohomad Thasim Mohomad Fairoos No. 161/B 40, Ambalanduwa, Govipola Road, Panadura. 1st Accused-Appellant Court of Appeal Case No. CA HCC 105-106/2022 High Court of Kalutara Case No. HC 14/2008 Mohomad Anwer Mohomad Sahiran No. 38/B5, Polwatte Road, Mahaheenatiyangala, Kalutara.

2nd Accused-Appellant

Vs. The Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12.

Complainant-Respondent

Page 2 of 16

Before: B. Sasi Mahendran, J. Amal Ranaraja, J.

Counsel: Mohan Senevirathna with Nuwan Rathnayake and Sanwi Dissanayake for the Accused-Appellants.

Dishna Warnakula, D.S.G for the Respondent. Argued on: 09.12.2025 Judgment on: 21.01.2026

JUDGMENT AMAL RANARAJA, J.

1. The first and the second accused appellants (hereinafter referred to as

the “first accused appellant”, the “second accused appellant” or the

“appellants”) together with four others have been indicted in the High

Court of Kalutara in High Court case number HC/14/2008.

The charges in the indictment are as follows:

Charge 01

That on or about September 04, 2004, at Polwatta, in the district of

Kalutara, within the jurisdiction of this Court, the appellants were

members of an unlawful assembly the common object of which was to

cause hurt to Ginthotage Asara Dilruk Fernando; and thereby committed

an offence punishable under section 140 of the Penal Code.

Page 3 of 16

Charge 02

During the same course of transaction as above, the accused appellants

along with the other accused, committed murder by causing the death of

one Ginthotage Asara Dilruk Fernando whilst being members of an

unlawful assembly; and thereby committed an offence punishable in

terms of section 146 read with section 296 of the Penal Code.

Charge 03

During the same course of transaction as above, the accused appellants

committed the murder of one Ginthotage Asara Dilruk Fernando: and

thereby committed an offence punishable in terms of section 32 read

with section 296 of the Penal Code.

2. At the conclusion of the trial, the learned High Court Judge has

convicted the appellants of the third charge and proceeded to impose the

death sentence on them.

3. The third to the sixth accused named in the indictment have been

acquitted of all charges. The appellants too have been acquitted of the

first and second charges.

4. Aggrieved by the conviction, disputed judgment, together with the

sentencing order, the appellants have preferred the instant appeal to this

Court.

Case of the prosecution

5. On the day of the incident, at approximately 18.00 hours, PW01 has

arrived at the deceased’s home and have watched a movie together.

Around 18.30 hours, they both have left the residence, and started

walking towards a junction in the area.

Page 4 of 16

6. At about 19.20 hours, while they were walking, PW01 and the deceased

have been reportedly confronted by two individuals, identified as the

appellants, near the second accused appellant’s home. During the

confrontation the first accused appellant has reportedly held on to PW01.

The second accused appellant has allegedly dragged the deceased

towards the second accused appellant’s home.

7. PW01 has managed to break free from the first accused appellant and

escape. As he fled, PW01 has observed four other individuals (i.e. third to

the sixth accused named in the indictment) giving chase.

8. PW01 has stated that the area was not lit and identified the appellants

by their voices. Sometime after escaping, PW01 has returned to the

location where the confrontation occurred. There, PW01 has discovered

the deceased had fallen near the home of the second accused appellant.

9. PW01 has remained at the scene until the police arrived and provided a

statement to the investigators there.

10. Dr. H.H. De Silva, a medico-legal, medical officer has performed the post-

mortem examination of the deceased. He has concluded that the death

was caused by hemorrhagic shock. The post-mortem report detailing

these findings has been submitted as evidence marked exhibit පැ04.

Case of the appellants

11. The appellants have maintained that they were not involved in the

incident that caused the fatal injuries to the deceased.

Page 5 of 16

Grounds of appeal

12. When the matter was taken up for argument, the learned Counsel for the

appellants have urged the following grounds of appeal:

i. Had the learned High Court Judge evaluated the evidence of PW01,

using standard tests, which are used for evaluating evidence? Had

such failure on the part of the learned High Court Judge caused

prejudice to the accused appellants?

ii. Had the learned High Court Judge correctly appreciated the legal

position regarding the recovery of a fact, in consequent to a

statement recorded from an accused person while in police custody

in accordance with the provision of section 27(1) of the Evidence

Ordinance? Had the failure on the part of the learned High Court

Judge to appreciate the said legal position in its proper

perspective, caused a prejudice to the second accused appellant?

iii. Had the learned High Court Judge applied the principals of law

relating to burden of proof correctly, when assessing the

prosecution case and the defense case? Had the failure on the part

of the learned High Court Judge to appreciate the said legal

principles in its proper perspective, caused a prejudice to the both

accused appellants?

iv. Had rights of the both accused appellants adversely affected

consequent to protracting the trial of the case for fourteen long

years, for which no contribution was made by the both accused

appellants?

Page 6 of 16

v. Had the successive High Court Judges, before whom the case had

come up, adopted proceedings in accordance with the provisions of

section 48 (1) of the Judicature Act? Had the failure on the part of

the successive High Court Judges before whom the proceedings of

the case had taken place to exercise the discretion?

13. The learned counsel for the appellants has contended that the learned

High Court Judge has merely provided a summary of the testimony of

PW01, purportedly the sole eye witness to the incident.

14. It has been argued that the learned High Court Judge has failed to

properly evaluate this testimony using the established tests for evidence

assessment and consequently has not determined whether it was safe to

rely upon and accept PW01’s account.

15. PW01’s testimony presents notable discrepancies. Initially, PW01 has

stated that the location where he and the deceased were confronted was

dark, devoid of light, implying that visual identification of the appellants

was not possible. Therefore, voice identification was the sole available

method. However, on a subsequent occasion, PW01 has testified to

having seen the appellants. In this later account, PW01 has described

the first appellant holding on to him and the second appellant dragging

the deceased toward the second appellant’s home.

ප්‍ර: එළිය එිබුණාද ?

උ: එළිය ක්එනෑ.එ

ප්‍ර: එෙප්නේනඑනැ් ?

උ: එඔව්

ප්‍ර: එළුවරයි එ ?

උ: එළුවරයි .

ප්‍ර: එඳුරය්නනඑුලුවර්න ?

Page 7 of 16

උ: එනෑඑෙෙ දෙේඑහැඩරුරඑඳුරයග්නනඑුලුවර්න.

ප්‍ර: එමුන්නඑඔවු්නඑඳුරයග්නේනඑෙළ ෙහ ෙඑ ?

උ: එනෙඑකි ලදඑඳෙේඑඉස්සයහටඑආරද.

ප්‍ර: එළවු එකිව්ෙව්?

උ: එ1, 2එවිත්ිබළරුර්න.

ප්‍ර: එමුන්නඑළටහ එ ්නනරඑ ?

උ: එඔව්.

ප්‍ර: එලි ් එනෑඑකිව්රද?

උ: එඔව්.

ප්‍ර: එෙගර්වරලඑිබුණාඑ ?

උ: එඔව්.

ප්‍ර: එපදෙ එෙ පැත්ෙත්එෙගර්වඑිබෙනනරද?

උ: එෙගර්වඑඳඩුි එෙගර්වඑෙ ළි එිබෙ ්නේන.

ප්‍ර: එෙයාළරුෙගඑෙේඑඳමයි එමෙදෙගඑෙේඑඳමයි එෙගර්වඑ3ක්එිබෙනනරදඑඳෙනක්එෙගර්වඑ5එෙහේඑ1එ

ෙරනිඑවිත්ිබළරුෙගඑෙග යඑිබෙනනරද?

උ: එඔව්.

ප්‍ර: එඔ එෙගර්වඑඳමෙයඑෙල කුඑඉඩක්එිබෙනනරදඑ ? ළඟඑළඟඑෙගර්වඑිබෙනනරදඑ ?

උ: ළඟඑළඟඑෙගර්වඑිබෙනනරද.

ප්‍ර: එඔ එෙගර්වඑරලඑලි ් එිබබ්නඑකිව්රද?

උ: එඔව්.

ප්‍ර: එමුන්නලදඑෙ ්නනදඑඳ්වලගත්මදඑකිව්රදඑවිත්ිබළරුර්නඑෙ ෙ නද?

උ: එඔව්.

ප්‍ර: එමුන්නලඑෙෙ ළ එළෙළේ?

උ: එෙදරත්එඇ ෙගනඑගි දඑඳ්වලගත්මඑගේනඑෙෙඑළ දෙග්නඑඳ්වලදගත්මද.

ප්‍ර: එළදට ?

උ: එෙදරඑඳ්වලගත්මද, 1එවිත්ිබළරු.

ප්‍ර: එමෙදඑෙ එිද්ිය එස න්නයෙ ්නඑෙයාඑපීකක්ණාෙදි සදක්ෂිඑදු්නනද?

උ: එඔව්.

16. Although PW01 has provided testimony, stating that the incident site

was sufficiently illuminated by the ambient light from the adjacent

Page 8 of 16

residences, there is no record of PW06 and PW07, the investigators, who

responded to the first complaint having testified to this effect. This

crucial piece of evidence or rather the lack thereof, from the investigating

officers seem to have escaped the attention of the learned High Court

Judge. Further, PW01’s testimony regarding the actions of the appellants

at the scene of the initial confrontation contains a significant

contradiction. Initially, PW01 has asserted that the second accused

appellant dragged the deceased toward his house. However, when

providing further testimony, at the trial, PW01 has revised his statement,

claiming instead that it was the fifth accused as named in the indictment

who was responsible for the dragging of the deceased from the scene.

ප්‍ර: එ ැ්නඑමුන්නඑකිව්රදඑෙයාළරුඑඇ ෙගනඑගිෙදඑසිරයද්නඑකි ද?

උ: එඔව්.

ප්‍ර: එි්වරුක්එඇ ෙගනඑගිෙදඑ 5) විත්ිබළරු?

උ: එඔව්.

17. Also, the testimony provided by PW01 asserting that the first accused

appellant physically restrained him at the scene of the initial

confrontation is demonstrably contradicted by his earlier deposition

given during the non-summary inquiry conducted at the Magistrates

Court in Kalutara. In those proceedings, PW01 has explicitly stated that

the fifth accused as named in the indictment was the individual who held

him. This material contradiction has been formally marked and identified

as exhibit 1වි1.

18. Accordingly, the testimony of PW01 concerning the appellants

identification has been irreconcilable yet no explanation has been offered

for the resulting discrepancies. Consequently, the disputed judgment

does not demonstrate an engagement with these critical inconsistencies.

Page 9 of 16

19. The proper identification of an accused individual is a cornerstone of any

just legal process. Without it, the entire foundation of the case is

compromised. In the present instance, this crucial step has

demonstrably not been undertaken correctly.

20. Furthermore, the involvement of the accused in the alleged offence must

be established beyond a reasonable doubt. This legal standard designed

to protect the innocent, requires irrefutable evidence.

21. Regrettably, in this particular case, the high bar has not been met,

leaving significant doubt regarding the appellant’s culpability. The

existence of such discrepancies also casts doubt on whether PW01 was

indeed present at the scene of the incident and was able to witness the

purported incident related in his testimony. This has a direct bearing on

the reliability and the credibility of his testimony.

22. Section 27(1) of the Evidence Ordinance in Sri Lanka is an exception to

the general rule that confessions of a person accused of crime made to a

police officer while in custody is inadmissible. This section does not

make the entire confession admissible, but only the information that

directly led to the discovery of a material fact, e.g. the location of the

hidden weapon, can be proved.

23. The primary legal interpretation confirmed by various judgments of the

Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court of this country is that a section

27(1) recovery establishes the accused’s knowledge of the items’

existence and location, not necessarily accused’s exclusive or

conscientious possession of the item at the time of the offence. Courts

have also held a conviction cannot rest solely on a section 27(1) recovery.

The prosecution must adduce other evidence to establish the accused’s

guilt such as a direct link to the crime.

Page 10 of 16

24. In the case of Justin Fernando Vs. Inspector of Police, Slave Island [1945]

46 NLR 158, Wijeyewardene, J, stated as follows:

“There remains, however, for consideration the second

objection raised by the accused’s Counsel. It has been settled by

a number of decisions that only so much of the information as led

immediately to the discovery of a fact is admissible (vide Queen-

Empress v. Nana). The cycle in this case was discovered in

consequence of the information given by the accused that he sold

it to a carter through Costa. The further information given by the

accused that “he had stolen the cycle at the City Dispensary”

was not necessarily or directly connected with the discovery and

should not therefore have been mentioned to court by the

constable”.

25. In the case of The Queen v D. L. Albert [1960] 66 NLR 543, L. B. De Silva,

J, stated as follows:

“The vital question for consideration in this case is whether

the evidence of the Inspector of Police that the Accused told him

that these articles which were subsequently identified as part of

the stolen property, were in his custody, is admissible as

evidence under section 27. There is no question that this

statement is a confession. A confession to a Police Officer may be

admitted in evidence if it falls within the provisions of Section 27

of the Evidence Ordinance.

Under this section, when a fact is discovered in consequence

of information received from a person accused of any offence, in

the custody of a Police Officer, “so much of such information,

Page 11 of 16

whether it amounts to a confession or not, as relates distinctly to

the fact thereby discovered, may be proved”.

The Courts have laid special emphasis on the word

“distinctly” in this section. Otherwise, the door will be thrown

wide open to admit a number of confessions which did not

directly relate to the discovery of such fact”.

26. The prosecution has established during the trial that a specific part of

the second accused appellant’s confession directly led to the discovery of

a material fact, i.e. the knife marked පැ02, and subsequently presented

such parts of the second accused appellant’s confessions, as exhibit

පැ03.

“ේනනදඑපිිර එඳෙේඑෙේඑපිටුපසඑඇිබඑලැ් එළළඑළඟඑඇිබඑඑෙප ්වඑෙලලිඑෙග ඩඑ ටඑ

සඟරදඑමැුණරද.එේනනදඑපිිර එෙටඑෙප ලිිද ටඑෙප්නරදඑෙ ්නනඑුලුවර්න.”

27. However, the learned High Court Judge in a misdirection of law has

concluded that exhibit පැ03 enables the court to infer that the injuries

detailed in the post-mortem report (exhibit 4) were inflicted by the second

accused appellant. Such misdirection has caused prejudice to the second

accused appellant.

“ෙයාළරුෙේඑශීකයෙදඑනිීකක්ණා එළයනඑල එපැ.4එ යාඑපක්ණදත්එෙයාඑ

පීකක්ණාඑරද මදෙව්එවිස්මයඑළයනඑල එතුරදලඑපැ.සද.එ5එෙගි්නඑමහවුරුඑවීෙඑ එළකීඑ

තුරදලඑිබයුණුඑනරැිබඑිගඑළැුල එආයුය කි්නඑිදදුඑවි එහැකිඑනරටඑපලළයනඑල එෙම එ

පැ.එසද.එ5එටඑපැ.එ2එ යාඑේනන එඉිරිපත්එකියරෙ එී එමහවුරුඑකියරෙඑෙගි්නඑ එපැ.එ2එ

යාඑේනන එ2එරනඑචූිමෙේඑපැ.3එ යාඑප්‍රළදශ එෙමඑඳනදරයා එළයඑගැීමෙඑ

ෙහේතුෙර්නඑෙයාළරුටඑඇිබඑව෕එතුරදල ්නඑිදදුඑළයනඑල්ේඑඳ්නළරයකුඑරත්එෙන රඑ

Page 12 of 16

2එරනඑචූිමඑනරටඑඉහමඑපරිිඑඉිරිපත්එව෕එසදක්ෂිඑෙගි්නඑමරදුයටත්එමහවුරුඑවීඑඇිබඑනරඑ

පැහැිලිඑෙව්.”

28. General principles of judgment writing would consist of the following:

i. Structure; i.e. clear introduction, followed by statement of facts,

legal issues, analysis and conclusion.

ii. Facts; i.e. the brief account of relevant facts and the evidence

presented in the particular case.

iii. Law; i.e. a clear articulation of the legal principles relevant to the

particular case.

iv. Application; i.e. proper application of the law to the facts of the

case.

v. Simplicity; i.e. use simple words, short sentences for proper

clarity.

29. In Sri Lanka a criminal judgment as per the provisions in section 283 of

the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 must contain specific

mandatory elements. They can be listed as follows;

i. Points for determination; i.e. the specific legal or factual questions

the Court needs to decide.

ii. Decision; i.e. the Courts finding on those points (e.g. guilty or not

guilty).

iii. Reasons; i.e. the logical basis for the decision, applying the law to

the facts.

Page 13 of 16

iv. Conviction or acquittal details; i.e. if convicted; the specific offence,

the section of law and the sentence imposed. If acquitted; the

offence the accused is acquitted of must be stated.

v. Pronouncement; i.e. the judgment must be dated, signed by the

judge and must be pronounced in open Court.

vi. Explanation; i.e. the judgment must be explained to the accused.

30. Section 283 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 reads

as follows:

“The following provisions shall apply to the judgments of courts other than

the Supreme Court or Court of Appeal: -

(1) The judgment shall be written by the Judge who heard the case and

shall be dated and signed by him in open court at the time of

pronouncing it, and in case where appeal lies shall contain the point or

points for determination, the decision thereon, and the reasons for the

decision.

(2) It shall specify the offence if any of which and the section of the law

under which the accused is convicted and the punishment to which he

is sentenced.

(3) If it be a Judgment of acquittal it shall state the offence of which the

accused is acquitted.

Page 14 of 16

(4) When a judgment has been so signed it cannot be altered or reviewed

by the court which gives such judgment:

Provided that a clerical error may be rectified at any time and that any

other error may be rectified at any time before the court rises for the

day.

(5) The judgment shall be explained to the accused affected thereby and a

copy thereof shall be given to him without delay if he applies for it.

(6) The original shall be filed with the record of proceedings. (Sections 279

and 283 shall apply to every judgment of a Primary Court-See section

33 (2) of the Primary Courts' Procedure Act.”

31. In the case of Chandrasena and Others vs. Munaweera [1998] 3 SLR 94,

Jayasuriya, J, stated as follows:

“In Ibrahim Vs. Inspector of Police 59 NLR 235, the Supreme

Court emphasized that the mere outline of the prosecution and

the defence without reasons being given for the decision but

embellished by such phrases as “I accept the evidence of the

prosecution and I disbelieve the defence” is by itself an

insufficient discharge of duty cast upon the Judge by section 306

(1) of the Criminal Procedure Code. Vide also the decision in

Thusaiya Vs. Pathihamy 15 CLW 119 by Nihill, J.- According to

the presently applicable section 283(1) of the Code 283(1) of the

Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979, the judgement

shall contain the point or points for determination, the decision

thereon and the reasons for the decision. In the Supreme Court

stressed that the object of the statutory provision is to enable the

Page 15 of 16

Supreme Court to have before it the specific opinion of the Judge

in the lower Court on the question of fact, so that it may enable

the Court to ascertain whether the finding is correct or not. The

weight of authority is to the effect that the failure to observe the

imperative provisions of the section is a fatal irregularity and that

even in a simple case that the provisions of this statute must be

complied with.”

32. The learned High Court Judge has erred by failing to identify the

essential elements for actus reus and mens rea and more specifically the

particular limb of the offence for which the appellants have been

convicted of in the disputed judgment. Furthermore, the learned High

Court Judge has also neglected to adequately compare the testimony of

the prosecution witnesses against applicable law, thereby failing to

present a logical basis for the disputed judgment.

33. The particular offence has been committed in the year 2004. 21 years

have passed since then. Therefore, this Court finds that it does not seem

just to call upon the appellants to defend themselves again after such an

unconscionable lapse of time, making it not a fit case to order a re-trial.

I am also aware of the unreliable nature of the evidence of PW01 on

which the prosecution’s case rests.

In Queen vs. G.K. Jayasinghe 69 NLR 314 at page 328, Sansoni, J. has

stated,

“…we have considered whether we should order a new trial in

this case. We do not take that course, because there has been a

lapse of three years since the commission of the offences, and

Page 16 of 16

because of our own view of the unreliable nature of the

accomplice’s evidence on which alone the prosecution case rests.

We accordingly direct that the judgment of acquittal be

entered.”

34. In light of the matters discussed, I am of the view that the first three

grounds of appeal as presented by the learned Counsel for the appellants

have merit and ought to succeed. Consequently, it is unnecessary for

this Court to consider the remaining grounds of appeal.

35. In these circumstances, I am inclined to interfere with the conviction,

disputed judgment together with the sentencing order.

36. Accordingly, I set aside the conviction and the disputed judgment

together with the sentencing order and acquit the appellants of the

charge convicted of.

Appeal allowed.

I make no order regarding costs.

37. I direct the Registrar of this Court to send this judgment to the High

Court of Kalutara for compliance.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

B. SASI MAHENDRAN, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal