==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/63/25

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal Case No. Hambegamuwe Chandrananda Thero

CA/HCC/ 0063/2025

High Court of Anuradhapura

Case No. SHC/222/2021

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

CA/HCC/63/25

2 | P a g e

COUNSEL : Nuwan Premadasa for the Appellant.

Wasantha Perera, DSG for the

Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 13/02/2026

DECIDED ON : 12/05/2026

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Appellant was indicted by the Attorney General under

Section 365B (2) (b) of the Penal Code for committing one count of grave

sexual abuse on Ihalagama Sumanajothi Himi alias Tharukshan

Niwanthaka Nilakshan Bandara between 06.05.2016 and 21.05.2016.

The trial commenced on 14.09.2022. The prosecution had led evidence of

PW1, PW2, PW3, PW7, PW9, PW10, PW11 and PW14 and had marked

productions P1 to P4. The defence agreed under Section 420 of the Penal

Code that PW5, PW6, PW12, PW13, PW15 and PW16 had performed official

duties in conducting investigation. After the closure of the prosecution case,

as the prosecution evidence warranted the calling of the defence, the Learned

High Court Judge had called for the defence. The Appellant made a lengthy

dock statement and closed his case.

CA/HCC/63/25

3 | P a g e

The Learned High Court Judge after considering the evidence presented by

both parties before him and his predecessor, convicted the Appellant as

charged and sentenced the Appellant to 07 years of rigorous imprisonment

and imposed a fine of Rs.5,000/- subject to a default sentence of 03 months

simple imprisonment.

In addition, a compensation of Rs.100,000/- was ordered with a default

sentence of 06 months simple imprisonment.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the Appellant

has given consent to argue this matter in his absence. During the argument

he was connected via the Zoom platform from prison.

The Facts of this case albeit briefly are as follows.

In this case, after leading some peripheral matters including the age of the

victim, video recorded evidence of the victim was played in the open court

under Section 163A of the Evidence Ordinance as his evidence-in-chief.

Hence, I consider reproducing Section 163A of the Evidence Ordinance to be

very important.

163A (1). In any proceedings for an offence relating to child abuse a video

recording of a preliminary interview which-

(a) is conducted between an adult and a child who is not the accused in

such proceeding (hereinafter referred to in this section as “a child

witness”); and

(b) relates to any matter in issue in those proceedings. May

notwithstanding the provisions of other law with the leave of the Court, be

given in evidence in so far as it is not excluded by Court under subsection

(2).

CA/HCC/63/25

4 | P a g e

(2) Where a video recording is tendered in evidence in any proceedings

referred to in subsection (1), the Court shall give leave under that

subsection unless-

(a) it appears to Court, that the child witness will not be available for

cross-examination in such proceedings; or

(b) any rules of Court requiring the disclosure of the circumstances in

which the video recording was made have not been complied with to the

satisfaction of the Court.

(3) Where a video recording is given in evidence under this section-

(a) the child witness shall be called by the party who tendered the video

recording in evidence;

(b) such child witness shall not be examined in chief on any matter which

in the opinion of the Court, has been dealt with in his recorded testimony.

(4) Where a video recording is given in evidence under this section, any

statement made by the child witness which is disclosed by the video

recording shall be treated as if given by that child witness in direct oral

testimony and accordingly, any such statement shall be admissible

evidence of any fact of which direct oral testimony from him would be

admissible.

(5) Where the child witness, in the course of his direct oral testimony

before Court, contradicts, either expressly or by necessary implication,

any statement previously made by him and disclosed by the video

recording, it shall be lawful for the presiding Judge, if he considers it safe

and just in all the circumstances of the case to act upon such previous

statements as disclosed by the video recording, if such previous

statement is corroborated in material particulars by evidence from an

independent source.

CA/HCC/63/25

5 | P a g e

PW1 - the victim of this case, was about 09 years old when he faced this

grave violation. At the time of giving evidence, he was 15 years old and was

still schooling.

At the age of 09, due to a family situation, the victim was ordained as a

Buddhist Priest at a Temple situated in Kekirawa. The Appellant was the

chief priest of the temple. The incident had happened on the day after the

ordination.

The alleged incident had happened while he was sleeping on a bed. According

to the victim, another priest of his age was made to sleep facing the wall of

the room. The Appellant slept in the middle and the victim had slept at the

edge of the bed. While sleeping, the Appellant had first touched the victim’s

penis. When he turned to the other side, the Appellant had kept his penis

over his anus. As he had felt wetness, he got up from the bed and went to

the other room. The transcript of the video recording was marked as P2 by

the prosecution.

The victim had first divulged this incident to his mother who had in turn

lodged the complaint with the police.

The JMO who had examined the victim had not excluded the possibility of

sexual abuse. In his history to the doctor, the victim had stated the same as

in his interview.

After the closure of the prosecution’s case, the defence was called, and the

Appellant denied the charges while he gave evidence from the witness box.

The following Grounds of Appeal were raised on behalf of the Appellant:

I. The Learned Trial Judge has failed to evaluate the inter se

contradictions between the evidence of PW1, PW2 and PW3.

II. The Learned Trial judge has failed to evaluate the contradictions of

the evidence of PW1 and PW7, the JMO.

CA/HCC/63/25

6 | P a g e

III. The Learned Trial judge has failed to consider the probability and

improbability of the testimony of PW1.

IV. The Learned Trial judge has failed to consider in favour of the

Appellant the prosecution’s failure to call Wimalajothi Thero to give

evidence.

V. The time frame mentioned in the indictment is not correct in view

of the evidence of PW1.

In a case of this nature, the testimonial trustworthiness and credibility of

PW1; particularly the probability of the occurrence of events as recounted by

the victim should be assessed with utmost care and caution by the Trial

Judge. The Learned Trial Judge must satisfy and accept the evidence of a

child witness after assessing his competence and credibility as a witness.

In Ranjeet Kumar Ram v. State of Bihar [2015] SCC Online SC 500 the

court held that:

“Evidence of the child witness and its credibility would depend upon the

circumstances of each case. Only precaution which the court has to bear

in mind while assessing the evidence of a child witness is that the

witness must be a reliable one”.

In Ratansinh Dalsukhbhai Nayak v. State of Gujarat [2004] 1 SCC 64 the

court held that:

“The decision on the question whether the child witness has sufficient

intelligence primarily rests with the trial Judge who notices his manners,

his apparent possession or lack of intelligence, and said Judge may resort

to any examination which will tend to disclose his capacity and intelligence

as well as his understanding of the obligation of an oath. The decision of

the trial court may, however, be disturbed by the higher Court if from what

is preserved in the records, it is clear his conclusion was erroneous. This

precaution is necessary because child witnesses are amenable to tutoring

and often live in a world of make beliefs. Though it is an established

CA/HCC/63/25

7 | P a g e

principle that child witnesses are dangerous witnesses as they are pliable

and liable to be influenced easily, shaked and moulded, but it is also an

accepted norm that if after careful scrutiny of their evidence the Court

comes to the conclusion that there is an impress of truth in it, there is no

obstacle in the way of accepting the evidence of a child witness”.

In the case of R v Barker [2010] EWCA Crim 4 – Lord Chief Justice

(England and Wales Court of Appeal) it was held;

“……We emphasise that in our collective experience the age of a witness

is not determinative on his or her ability to give truthful and accurate

evidence. Like adults some children will provide truthful and accurate

testimony, and some will not. However, children are not miniature adults,

but children, and to be treated and judged for what they are, not what they

will, in years ahead, grow to be. Therefore, although due allowance must

be made in the trial process for the fact that they are children with, for

example, a shorter attention span than most adults, none of the

characteristics of childhood, and none of the special measures which apply

to the evidence of children carry with them the implicit stigma that children

should be deemed in advance to be somehow less reliable than adults. The

purpose of the trial process is to identify the evidence which is reliable and

that which is not, whether it comes from an adult or a child. If competent,

as defined by the statutory criteria, in the context of 12 credibility in the

forensic process, the child witness starts off on the basis of equality with

every other witness. In trial by jury, his or her credibility is to be assessed

by the jury, taking into account every specific personal characteristic which

may bear on the issue of credibility, along with the rest of the available

evidence.”

In State of UP. v Krishna Master AIR 2010 SC 3071 it was held;

“This Court is of the firm opinion that it would be doing injustice to a child

witness possessing sharp memory to say that it is inconceivable for him to

CA/HCC/63/25

8 | P a g e

recapitulate facts in his memory witnessed by him long ago. A child of

tender age is always receptive to abnormal events which take place in its

life and would never forget those events for the rest of his life. The child

would be able to recapitulate correctly and exactly when asked about the

same in future.”

Taking into consideration the 1st ground of Appeal, I agree with the Learned

Deputy Solicitor General on the fact that the victim had experienced such an

unpleasant event at an extremely young age. Due to the victim being 09 years

old at the time, it cannot be reasonably expected for him to give evidence

which is 100% accurate. However, in the evidence in chief which consists of

a video recorded interview of him, it is evident that he had very accurately

recalled the events that had occurred on that day. As such, I agree with the

finding of the Learned High Court Judge and consider that the evidence by

witnesses had been correctly evaluated by him.

In Don Kuruppu Arachchige Indika Gayan v The Republic of Sri Lanka,

CA/205/2007 Ranjith Silva, J. held that:

“A small child who had undergone such harrowing experience mental and

physical torture and trauma, is bound to make mistake with regard to the

dates and also bound to confuse several acts of sexual intimacy from one

another”.

In The Attorney General v. Sandanam Pitchai Mary Theresa [2011] 2 SLR

292 the court held that:

“Whilst internal contradictions or discrepancies would ordinarily affect

the trustworthiness of the witness statement, it is well established that

the Court must exercise its judgment on the nature of the inconsistency

or contradiction and whether they are true material to the facts in issue.”

CA/HCC/63/25

9 | P a g e

In the case of R. v. B. (G.), 1990 CanLII 7308 (SCC) ; [1990] 2 S.C.R. 30, it

was stated;

“... it seems to me that he was simply suggesting that the judiciary

should take a common-sense approach when dealing with the testimony

of young children and not impose the same exacting standard on them

as it does on adults. However, this is not to say that the courts should

not carefully assess 13 the credibility of child witnesses and I do not

read his reasons as suggesting that the standard of proof must be

lowered when dealing with children as the appellants submit. Rather,

he was expressing concern that a flaw, such as a contradiction, in a

child's testimony should not be given the same effect as a similar flaw

in the testimony of an adult. I think his concern is well founded and his

comments entirely appropriate. While children may not be able to

recount precise details and communicate the when and where of an

event with exactitude, this does not mean that they have misconceived

what happened to them and who did it. In recent years we have adopted

a much more benign attitude to children's evidence, lessening the strict

standards of oath taking and corroboration, and I believe that this is a

desirable development. The credibility of every witness who testifies

before the courts must, of course, be carefully assessed but the

standard of the "reasonable adult" is not necessarily appropriate in

assessing the credibility of young children.”

Although the Learned Counsel for the Appellant contended that the evidence

given by PW1 contradicted with the evidence of PW2 and PW3, the defence

had not marked any contradictions or highlighted any omissions by any of

the witnesses. PW1 reiterated that the incident pertaining to this case had

happened after the ordination and after returning to the temple. This

position was never contradicted. The Learned High Court Judge had very

correctly considered this issue in his judgement at page 228 of the brief. As

CA/HCC/63/25

10 | P a g e

the evidence given by PW1, PW2 and PW3 are cogent and sans any

contradictions or omission, this ground has no merit.

In the second ground of appeal, the Learned Counsel for the Appellant

contended that the evidence given by PW1 and PW7, the JMO is

contradictory, which had escaped the attention of the Learned High Court

Judge.

As stated earlier, the victim was only 09 years old when he encountered this

incident. In the history to the doctor, he had told how the Appellant had

committed anal intercourse which had left no bleeding or pain felt while

passing stool. PW1, in his evidence quite consistently said what he

experienced on that day. He had not contradicted his evidence with PW7. It

is important to note that PW7, JMO has not excluded the history given by

the victim. Hence, this ground also has no merit.

In the third ground, the Appellant argues that the Learned Trial judge has

failed to consider the probability and improbability of the testimony of PW1.

The Learned High Court Judge in his judgment, at pages 221-224 of the

brief, had very correctly and adequately analysed the evidence given by PW1

and had arrived at his decision. He had given plausible reasons as to why he

accepts the evidence given by PW1 as cogent and believable. Under these

circumstances, it is incorrect to argue that the Learned High Court Judge

had not considered the evidence given by PW1 in its correct perspective.

Hence, this ground also has no merit.

In the fourth ground of appeal, the Learned Counsel contends that the

Learned Trial judge has failed to consider in favour of the Appellant the fact

that the prosecution had failed to call Wimalajothi Thero to give evidence.

Calling witnesses is entirely on the prerogative of the prosecution. This

concept was endorsed by the Court in the case of Bandaranaike v

Premadasa 1978-79 (1) SLR 369 that:

CA/HCC/63/25

11 | P a g e

“In Sri Lankan courts where sections 136(2) and 157 do not apply, the

practice is that the right to determine the order of calling witnesses is

given to Counsel subject to the overriding discretion given to the Court by

Section 135 to direct the order in the interests of justice. This practice

giving the Counsel the right to decide what witnesses he will call and in

what order, is linked at one end with the adversary system and at the

other end with the audi alteram partem rule of natural justice: with the

adversary system because the judge is cast in the role of an impartial

umpire ruling on the case as presented by the counsel and not

descending into the area of combat; with the audi alteram partem rule of

natural justice because the judge has to give the counsel an opportunity

of being heard and presenting his case to the best possible advantage of

which the corollary is that the Counsel is entitled to call his witnesses in

the order he chooses. The Court will interfere with the practice in the

exercise of its discretion only in an exceptional case to avert a miscarriage

of justice”.

In this case the prosecution has called all necessary witnesses to prove their

case. The Learned High Court Judge in his judgement had dealt with this

point raised in this appeal at pages 224-227 of the brief and had given

reasons as to why he accepts the evidence of PW1 as cogent. Therefore, this

ground also has no merit.

In the final ground the Appellant questions the time frame mentioned in the

indictment, and that it is not correct in view of the evidence of PW1.

In the indictment, the date of offence has clearly been mentioned. The victim

giving evidence had clearly said that the incident had taken place after the

ordination and when he had returned to the temple. The victim was just 09

years old when he encountered this bitter ordeal.

CA/HCC/63/25

12 | P a g e

As per the Section 165 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of 1979,

the Appellant had been given reasonable notice regarding the time of the

incident. For clarity the Section 165 of CPC is re-produced below:

Particulars as to time, place, and person.

(1) The charge shall contain such particulars as to the time and place

of the alleged offence and as to the person (if any) against whom and

as to the thing (if any) in respect of which it was committed as are

reasonably sufficient to give the accused notice of the matter with

which he is charged and to show that the offence is not prescribed.

(2) When the accused is charged with criminal breach of trust or

dishonest misappropriation of movable property, it shall be sufficient

to specify the gross sum or, as the case may be, the gross quantity in

respect of which the offence is alleged to have been committed, and

the dates between which the offence is alleged to have been committed

without specifying particular items or exact dates, and the charge so

framed shall be deemed to be a charge of one offence within the

meaning of section 174:

Provided that the time included between the first and last of such dates

shall not exceed one year.

(3) When the nature of the case is such that the particulars mentioned

in section 164 and the preceding subsections of this section do not

give the accused sufficient notice of the matter with which he is

charged, the charge shall also contain such particulars of the manner

in which the alleged offence was committed as will be sufficient for that

purpose.

In Bhoginbhai Hirjibhai v. State of Gujarat (supra) the court held further:

“In regard to exact time of an incident, or the time duration of an

occurrence, usually, people make their estimates by guess work on the

CA/HCC/63/25

13 | P a g e

spur of the moment at the time of interrogation. And one cannot expect

people to make very precise or reliable estimates in such matters.”

“It is unrealistic to expect a witness to be a human tape recorder.”

In R. v. Dossi 13 Cr. App. R. 158 the court held that:

“A date specified in an indictment is not a material matter unless it is

an essential part of the alleged offence; the defendant may be convicted

although the jury finds that the offence was committed on a date other

than that specified in the indictment. Amendment of the indictment is

unnecessary, although it will be good practice to do so (provided that

there is no prejudice below) where it is clear on the evidence that if the

offence was committed at all, it was committed on the day other than

that specified.”

In the case of D. R. M. Pandithakoralage (Excise Inspector) v.

V. K. Selvanayagam 56 NLR 143 it was noted:

“There can be no doubt that the accused was in no way misled by the

mistake as regards the date in the plaint. In the case of William Edward

James it was held that a mistaken date in an indictment, unless the date

is of the essence of the offence or the accused is prejudiced, need not be

formally amended. In the course of his judgment dismissing the appeal the

Lord Chief Justice referred to the judgment of Atkin J. in the case of Dossi

where it was held that from time immemorial a date specified in an

indictment has never been considered a material matter unless time was

of the essence of the offence.”

Due to the Appellant being given sufficient notice regarding the date of

offence under which he was indicted, and since plausible evidence was led

regarding the period, I consider that no prejudice or failure of justice has

been caused by this, as an entirely different issue was raised by the Appellant

in the trial. Therefore, I consider that the Learned High Court Judge has

correctly addressed this issue to arrive at his decision.

CA/HCC/63/25

14 | P a g e

In this case, the credibility of the evidence given by the victim did not suffer

at any stage of the trial. No contradictions were marked and no omissions

were highlighted.

The Learned High Court Judge had correctly considered the evidence by

PW1, with sufficient caution and care, and held that such evidence is

convincing and cogent, which makes it sufficient on its own to prove the case

against the Appellant.

The principles of the presumption of innocence and reasonable doubt are

two very fundamental principles in criminal law, which refers to the

prosecution’s duty to prove the guilt of the Accused beyond a reasonable

doubt.

Reasonable doubt refers to the most fundamental legal principle which

entails the principle that insufficient evidence would essentially prevent the

conviction of a defendant of a crime. The burden of proving the defendant’s

guilt in respect of the crime with which he has been charged falls on the

prosecution, without which the defendant cannot be convicted. As such, the

phrase “beyond a reasonable doubt” would mean that the prosecution’s

evidence and arguments to establish the guilt of the defendant must be done

clearly, in a way it is accepted as fact by any rational person.

In Nandana Kumarage Sujeewa Officer-in-Charge, Police Station

Rambukkana SC/Appeal/61/2023 it was reaffirmed that:

“The fundamental principle in criminal law is that the burden of proving

the charge beyond a reasonable doubt lies solely with the prosecution and

never shifts to the accused…. Therefore, the shifting of the burden referred

to previously does not diminish the prosecution’s responsibility to prove

the case beyond a reasonable doubt. The burden shifts only after the

prosecution has established its case, not before that stage is reached.”

CA/HCC/63/25

15 | P a g e

In Wijesekera (Excise Inspector) v Arnolis, (1940) [17 CLW 138], Justice

Wijeyewardene held that:

“… it is not every kind of doubt the benefit of which an accused person

is entitled. An accused person could claim only the benefit of a

reasonable doubt. It is always possible to conjure up a doubt of a very

flimsy nature. But an accused person cannot be acquitted on the ground

of such doubt…The guilt or innocence of an accused person must be

determined on evidence and not on some suggestion made in the course

of an argument…”.

Justice Kodagoda in Sivathasan v. Attorney General [2021] 2 Sri LR 290

at 304-305 emphasized that:

“a reasonable doubt is a real, substantial doubt arising from objective

consideration of the facts, not an imaginary or flimsy one: A reasonable

doubt is a real or actual and a substantial doubt, as opposed to an

imaginary or flimsy doubt that may arise in the mind of the decider of

facts (judge or the jury, as the case may be), following an objective

consideration of all the attendant facts and circumstances. It is a doubt

founded on logical and substantial reasoning (well-founded) which a

normal prudent person with not less than average intelligence and

learnedness in men, matters and worldly affairs, would naturally and

inevitably develop in his mind following a comprehensive, objective,

independent, impartial and neutral consideration of the totality of the

evidence and associated attendant circumstances. It is a doubt that

makes the case for the prosecution significantly less probable to have

occurred than in the manner purported to have occurred. A reasonable

doubt is not the type of doubt that arises due to incorrect, abnormal or

unreasonable comprehension of testimonies and other material which

amount to evidence presented at the trial, or due to irrational fear,

inappropriate sympathy, or unjustifiable mercy. It is not a doubt that

develops in the mind of an imbecile, indecisive or timid person, or in a

CA/HCC/63/25

16 | P a g e

weak or vacillating mind. A shadow of a doubt, an imaginary doubt, a

vague doubt or a speculative or trivial doubt should not be confused with

a reasonable doubt. A reasonable doubt is not a doubt that a partisan

individual with vested interests would entertain in his mind, or a doubt

that such a person would advocate that purportedly exists.”

Considering the evidence led in this case and guided by the judgements

mentioned above, I conclude that the Learned High Court had correctly

convicted the Appellant as charged. I, therefore, dismiss the appeal.

Considering all the circumstances of this case, I order the sentence will be

operative from the date of conviction, i.e., 17.12.2024.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgement to the High

Court of Anuradhapura along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL