1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C. A. Case No. CA 729/97 (F)

District Court of Kalutara Case No. 6325/P

Kalarnulla Waduge Harriat of

W dudoda, Kalarnulla, Kalutara

Plaintiff

Vs.

1. Panadura Acharige

Karunadasa Perera of No.

165, Kajugahawatta,

Gotatuwa, Angoda

2. Panadure Acharige

Chandradasa Perera

3. Panadure Acharige

Wirnalawathei Perera

4. Pandura Acharige

Leelawathie Perera

5. Kalarnulla Waduge Nanthawathie

6. Kalarnulla Waduge Alice Nona

7. Kalarnulla Waduge Leelawathei

8. Kalarnulla Waduge Mariya

Nona, Arnpara

9. Manawaduwa Acharage Asilin Nona, Ragarna

10. Kalarnulla Waduge Thilekeratne, Arnpara

11. Kalarnulla Waduge Pesurnawathie

12. Kalarnulla Waduge Swama

Latha

13. N. A. Jane Nona of

Mwathagarna

2

14. Rarnrnuni Nirnalawathei,

Kalutara 15. Kalarnulla Waduge Hernalatha Piyaseeli 16. Kalarnulla Waduge Karnalawathie

17. Kalarnulla Waduge Arnarasena

18. Kalarnulla Waduge Mallika Pathrninie

19. Kalarnulla Waduge Daya Nandanie

20. Kalarnulla Waduge Asoka

21. Kalarnulla Waduge Chandrasorna

22. Kalarnulla Waduge Kanthi

23. Kalarnulla Waduge

Jayanthi Padrnasiri

24. Kalarnulla Waduge Anorna N andanie

25. Kalarnulla Waduge

26. Kalarnulla Waduge

Seelawathie

27. Kalarnulla Waduge Arnitha Ranjanie

28. Kandaaddara Badalge A yrine of Dodangoda

Defendants

3

BETWEEN

Kalarnulla Waduge Harriat

of Wadudoda, Kalarnulla,

Klutara

Vs.

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

Plaintiff-Appellant

Panadura Acharige

Karunadasa Perera of

No. 165,

Kajugahawatta,

Gotatuwa, Angoda

Panadure Acharige

Chandradasa Perera

Panadure Acharige

Wirnalawathei Perera

Pandura Acharige

Leelawathie Perera

Kalarnulla Waduge

Nanthawathie

Kalarnulla Waduge

Alice Nona

Kalarnulla Waduge

Leelawathei

Kalarnulla Waduge

Mariya Nona, Arnpara

Manawaduwa

Acharage Asilin Nona,

Ragarna

10. Kalarnulla Waduge

Thilekeratne, Arnpara

11. Kalarnulla Waduge

Pesurnawathie

12. Kalarnulla Waduge

Swarna Latha

4

13. N. A. Jane Nona of

Mwathagama 14. Rammuni Nimalawathei,

Kalutara 15. Kalamulla Waduge Hemalatha Piyaseeli 16. Kalamulla Waduge Kamalawathie

17. Kalamulla Waduge Amarasena

18. Kalamulla Waduge Mallika Pathminie 19. Kalamulla Waduge Daya

Nandanie 20. Kalamulla Waduge Asoka

21. Kalamulla Waduge Chandrasoma

22. Kalamulla Waduge Kanthi

23. Kalamulla Waduge Jayanthi Padmasiri

24. Kalamulla Waduge Anoma Nandanie

25. Kalamulla Waduge

26. Kalamulla Waduge Seelawathie

27. Kalamulla Waduge Amitha Ranjanie

28. Kandaaddara Badalge Ayrine of Dodangoda

Defendants-Respondents

BEFORE

COUNSEL

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS TENDERED ON

DECIDED ON

M. M. A. GAFFOOR, T.

M. M. A. GAFFOOR, J.

Udaya Bandara for the Plaintiff-Appellant Chandra Wijesooriya for the 5th and 14th Defendant-Respondents

02.04.2013 & 16.05.2018 - Further W.5. (5th

and 14th Defendant- Respondents)

24.04.2018 (Substituted 4th Defendant-Appellant)

14.09.2018

****

5

Plaintiff-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the' Appellant') instituted

this partition action bearing No. 6325/P in the District Court of Kalutara to

partition the land morefully described in the Schedule to the Plaint

depicted in Plan 'X'. There was no dispute to the corpus depicted in the

said Plan; the dispute was on the pedigree between the Appellant and the

14th Defendant.

According to the Appellant's Plaint the Kalamulla Waduge Saralathhamy

was entitled to 1/75 shares of the land, Maarikku Acharige Soida Hamy

1/75 shares, Panadure Acharige Benedict Perera to 1/90 shares, Illenaide

Badalege Appu Naide 13/20 shares and Kiri Hamy to 1/60 shares were

the original owners of the said land sought to be partitioned.

6

Contrary to the above position, the 5th and 14th Defendant-Respondents

who filed a joint Statement of Claim along with 13th, 15th to 28th Defendant-

Respondents took up the position that the original co-owners of the land

were Kalamulla Waduge Ancho Nona alias Jeewathhamy - 1/2 shares,

Kalamulla Waduge Saralathhamy alias Hamu Naide - 1/4 shares and

Kalamulla Waduge Kiri Hamy-1/4 shares.

The Appellant gave evidence and produced the documents marked 'X',

'Xl' and PI to P3 and she was cross-examined; there was no other witness

gave evidence on behalf of the Appellant.

The parties went to trial on issues 1 to 9. Having taken up the trial the

learned District Judge dismissed the claim on 15.08.1997.

Being aggrieved by said judgment and Decree the Appellant brings this

appeal to set aside the judgment dated 15.08.1997.

In this appeal, the following submissions of the Appellant are noteworthy:

1. The learned Trial Judge has failed to evaluate the fact that the pedigree put forward by the Appellant was mostly supported by deeds than the pedigree given by the contesting Defendant-Respondents.

2. Even, the Appellant has given number of deeds to prove her pedigree and ownership than the other contesting Defendants; the learned Trail Judge has failed to apply the basic rule of Balance of Probability.

3. Learned District Judge has been unable to pay sufficient attention on a matter that the oral evidence takes a secondary place when compared with the documentary evidence.

7

4. The shares on which ownership has been proved can be allocated to relevant parties by the Trail Judge; and the remaining shares can be left unallotted, the trail judge was not mindful on this.

While, the 5th and 14th Defendant-Respondents (sometimes referred to as

the "Respondents") submitted that the learned District Judge in the

aforesaid judgment was highly concerned about the failure on the part of

the Appellant to prove his title in this partition action; it was the finding of

the learned Judge that the Appellant had failed to adduce evidence to

substantiate her position as to the original co-owners of the property in

terms of what she had averred in the Plaint.

After evaluation of these all submissions and the said judgment, I am of

the opinion that, the learned District Judge being unsatisfied as the proof

of title by the Appellant and has dismissed this partition action; and the

learned Judge has come to a conclusion in the said judgment that the 14th

Defendant too has failed to prove her title according to the pedigree she

relied upon.

In every partition action, the Trail Judge has to follow the provisions of

section 25 of the Partition Law. Section 25(1) as follows:

, ... the court shall examine the title of each party and shall hear and receive

evidence in support thereof and shall try and determine all questions of law

and. fact arising in that action in regard to the right, share, or interest of

each party to, of, or in the land to which the action relates, and shall

consider and decide which of the orders mentioned in section 26 should be

made.'

Therefore, there is a duty cast upon the Judge to examine the title of each

party and determine their rights, title and interest in the subject matter.

8

To deal this matter further, I would like to recall some judicial decisions.

As has been stated by this Court and the Supreme Court in several

precedents before, the duty of the Court in a partition action is primarily to

investigate the title of the parties to the case to its satisfaction.

In Peris vs Perera (1896) 1 N.L.R 362 Bonser, C. J. held as follows:

"It is obvious that the court ought not to make a decree, except it is perfectly

satisfied that the persons in whose favour it makes the decree are entitled to

the property. The court should not, as it seems to me, regard these actions as

merely to be decided on issues raised by and between the parties.

The first thing the Court has to do is to satisfy itself that the plaintiff has made

out his title, for, unless he makes out his title, his action cannot be maintained;

and he must prove his title strictly, as has been frequently pointed out by this

Court." (Page at 367)

This same dicta are found In many decisions such as Fernando vs.

Mohammedu Saibo (1899) 3 N.L.R 32, Mather vs. Thamotheram Pillai

(1903) 6 N.L.R 246 and Neelakutty vs Alvar (1918) 20 N.L.R 372.

In Thayalanayagam vs. Kathiresapillai (1910) 5 Balasingam L.R. 10,

Hutchinson, C. J. said:

"In a partition action such as this is, I think that the judge has power, and that

in some cases it may be his duty, even after the parties have closed their case, to

call for further evidence. (But if he does, he must do it in a regular manner) ... "

In the case of Karunaratne vs. Sirimalie (1951) 53 N.L.R 444, the Supreme

Court held that,

9

"Where, in a partition action, all possible claimants to the property are

manifestly before the court, no higher standard of proof should be called for in

determining the question of title than in any other civil suit"

And further it is pertinent to recall the finding of Fernando, J. in Golagoda

VS. Mohideen (1937) 40 N.L.R 92, he said that a trial judge 'perfectly satisfy'

himself whether the claimants who are parties to the proceedings or

property in question actual parties or not.

In Chettiar VS. Kumarihamy (1944) 45 N.L.R 332, Wijewardena, J. held that

"In a partition action the duty is cast upon the Judge to satisfy himself that the

property to be partitioned does not belong to persons, who are not parties to the

action. With regard to the decision on this question the court would consider

the evidence without regard to the issue."

Further, in the case of Appuhamy VS. Perera 56 C.L.W 32 and Cooray VS.

Wijesuriya 62 N.L.R 158. In Appuhamy VS. Perera, Basnayake, C. J. held

that, a trial judge need to observe the provisions of Evidence Ordinance

even in a partition case and His Lordship further held that 'it is important

that even in partition action evidence that is not relevant according to the

provisions of the Evidence Ordinance should not be admitted.'

Basnayake, C. J. in Cooray VS. Wijesuriya emphasised that,

Section 25 of the Partition Act imposes on the Court the obligation to examine

carefully the title of each party to the action. Apart from proof by the

production of birth, death and marriage certificates, the relevant provisions of

the Evidence Ordinance in regard to proof of a pedigree are to found in sections

32 (5),32 (6) and 50 (2).

I

/'

10

In this case, the Appellant relay on the position that the documentary

evidence is the best evidence; oral evidence takes a secondary place when

compared with the documentary evidence.

However, in my opinion, the oral evidence may use to strength the

documentary evidence in a partition action. Plaintiff can produce a witness

and his testimony to ensure the validity of the documentary evidence. In

this case Appellant has admitted her own mistakes regarding P2, these

facts also carefully considered by the trail judge.

In the all circumstances, I am of the considerable view that the Trail Judge

was difficult to fathom the lawful title of both parties. Therefore he had

dismissed the action. I am too feeling the same difficulty.

Accordingly, I see no reason to interfere with the judgment of the learned

District Judge, and dismissed the appeal without costs.

Appeal dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL