==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0055/2024

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979.

Court of Appeal Case No. Wijesundara Bandara Mudiyanselage

CA/HCC/0055/2024 Medagedera Sarath Bandara

High Court of Ampara

Case No. HC-AMP/1970/2018

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

COUNSEL : Janith Perera for the Appellant.

Azard Navavi, PC, ASG for the Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 23/07/2026

DECIDED ON : 24/09/2026

CA/HCC/0055/2024

2 | P a g e

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) was indicted by the Attorney General in the High Court of Ampara

for committing one count of incestuous rape on his sister’s daughter namely

Dissanayake Mudiyanselage Hashini Kawshalya Tennakoon on 28.05.2017,

an offence punishable under Section 364(3) of the Penal Code as amended.

After the trial, the Appellant was convicted as charged and was sentenced to

15 years rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs.50,000/-, in default of

which 01-year simple imprisonment had been imposed.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and the sentence, the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the Appellant

has provided his consent for this matter to be argued in his absence. During

the argument he was connected via the Zoom platform from prison.

The Counsel for the Appellant advanced the following grounds of appeal:

1. The judgment of the High Court Judge is factually and legally incorrect.

2. The Learned Trial Judge failed to consider the discrepancies in the

evidence of prosecution witnesses.

3. The Learned Trial Judge erred by holding that the evidence of PW1 and

PW2 are trustworthy to be acted upon.

4. The Learned Trial Judge has failed to analyse, scrutinize and to give

reasons in rejecting the defence evidence.

CA/HCC/0055/2024

3 | P a g e

As these the grounds of appeal are interrelated, these grounds will be

considered jointly in this appeal.

In this case the Appellant was indicted on 01 count for having committed an

offence of incestuous rape on 28.05.2017 punishable under Section 364(3)

of the Penal Code as amended that is, committing incestuous rape on the

victim who was under 14 years of age when she stood in a relationship

towards him as enumerated in Section 364(A) (1) of the Penal Code as

amended.

Section 364(3) of the Penal Code states:

“Whoever commits rape on a woman under sixteen years of age and the

woman stands towards the man in any of the degrees of relationships

enumerated in Section 364A shall on conviction be punished with

rigorous imprisonment, for a term not less than fifteen years and not

exceeding twenty years and with fine.

Section 364A (1) of Penal Code states:

“Whoever has sexual intercourse with another, who stands towards

him in any of the following enumerated degrees of relationship, that is

to say —

a) either party is directly descended from the other or is the adoptive

parent, adoptive grandparent, adopted child or adopted grandchild of

the other; or

b) the female, is the sister of the male, either by the full or the half-blood

or by adoption, or is the daughter of his brother or of his sister, by the

full or the half blood or by adoption, or is a descendant from either of

them, or is the daughter of his wife by another father, or is his son’s

or grandson’s or father’s or grandfather's widow; or

CA/HCC/0055/2024

4 | P a g e

c) the male, is the brother of the female either by the full or the half blood

or by adoption, or is the son of her brother or sister by the full or the

half blood or by adoption or is a descendant from either of them, or is

the son of her husband by another mother, or is her deceased

daughter's or granddaughter’s or mother's or grandmother’s husband,

commits the offence of 'incest'.”

In this case the Appellant was not charged under 364A of the Penal Code as

amended. He was charged under Section 364(3) of the Penal Code as

amended. The sole reason for mentioning 364A of the Penal Code as

amended in the body of the charge framed under 364(3) is to establish the

prohibited sexual intercourse the Appellant had with his sister’s daughter.

According to PW1, the Appellant is her maternal uncle who was working in

the Sri Lankan Army during the relevant period. He has separated from his

wife and started to build a house close to the victim’s house. Hence, he used

to stay at the victim’s house in the night. The victim’s father was employed

in Colombo and used to visit them once a month. On the day of the incident

the Appellant had consumed liquor with another person and had gone to

sleep around 10.00pm. The victim, her mother and siblings had slept inside

the house while the Appellant slept in the hall. The victim had gone to sleep

after watching a teledrama. At about 10.30pm, the victim had heard the

Appellant calling her mother to get a glass of water. As her mother, PW2 was

fast asleep, she had come out and gone to the kitchen to fetch a glass of

water. At that time, the Appellant had grabbed her from behind, closed her

mouth, removed her undergarment and committed rape on her and also

ejaculated. Although the victim had resisted, she could not escape from the

Appellant. While the Appellant was on her body, a table was knocked down

by the victim. Hearing the noise, when her mother came out, she had seen

the Appellant on the top of the victim’s body. As PW2 raised cries, the

Appellant had taken his clothes and left the house in his three-wheeler that

night. Thereafter, the incident was reported to her father in the morning who

CA/HCC/0055/2024

5 | P a g e

had informed the incident to the Child Protection Authority on 04.06.2017

and they had taken PW1 to Colombo. After lodging a complaint, the victim

was subjected to a medical examination at the Colombo Judicial Medical

Officer.

PW2, the mother of the victim too narrated the same as the victim.

PW06, the JMO who examined the victim and issued the Medico Legal Report

has stated that when he examined the victim, she was 14 years old. She had

given a short history as stated in her statement to police. The medical test

revealed that 4 and 8 O’clock positioned tears were found on her vagina.

According to the JMO, the hymenal tears were fresh and the victim had still

complained of pain in her vagina.

The Appellant gave evidence from the witness box and denied the charge. He

had taken up the position that a false complaint was lodged due to a land

problem that had existed between their two families.

Further, he had called four witnesses on his behalf and led bad character

evidence of the victim.

In this case, the defence could not mark any contradictions or highlighted

any omissions in the evidence given by PW1 and PW2. Further, PW2 had

seen the Appellant was on victim’s body when she came out from the room

where she was sleeping.

In this case, the evidence of PW1 has been corroborated with the evidence of

PW2, who is the mother of the victim and the sister of the Appellant. Further,

the medical evidence also corroborates the version of the victim. PW1 and

PW2 had never mentioned about any dispute with the Appellant. The

Appellant was staying in the victim’s house on that day.

CA/HCC/0055/2024

6 | P a g e

It is very important to note that the Appellant had never been questioned of

the existence of a land dispute with the victim’s family. He only stated this

in his evidence given under oaths.

The Court of Appeal in Bandara v. The State C.A. 27/99 held that:

“…when there is ample opportunity to contradict the evidence of a

witness but is not impugned or assailed in cross-examination that is a

special fact and feature in the case, it is a matter falling within the

definition of the word “proof” in section 3 of the Evidence Ordinance and

a trial judge or court must necessarily take the fact in to consideration

in adjudicating the issue before it.”

In Ukkuwa v. The Attorney General [2002] 3 SLR 279, is a case where

Justice S. Tilakawardene held that matters of fact that could have been

challenged and clarified at the Trial Court are precluded from being

challenged at the Appellate Court in the following manner at page 282;

“… court is mindful of the fact that having had the opportunity to cross-

examine the witness before the original court and having failed or

neglected to avail himself of the opportunity of such examination on

these matters which could have been clarified, had such objections or

cross-examination being raised in the original court, the counsel is

precluded from challenging so the veracity of such matters of fact before

this court.”

In Gunasiri and Two Others v. Republic of Sri Lanka C.A. 116/13, the

Court of Appeal held that:

“…it is a rule of essential justice that whenever the opponent has

declined to avail himself of the opportunity to put his case in cross-

CA/HCC/0055/2024

7 | P a g e

examination it must follow that the evidence tendered on that issue

ought to be accepted.”

Considering the above-mentioned judgments, the non-questioning of any

material facts by the Appellant had not caused any challenge to the

prosecution witnesses.

Further, it is highly unlikely that parents would use their own daughter’s

chastity to bring forward a false claim of rape against a close relation, which

could potentially harm her dignity.

In Deo Nayaran Yadav and Bhulla Yadav V The State of Bihar (Criminal

Appeal (DB) No.871of 2017) the court held that:

“No parent of any girl in our society can damage reputation of his/her

daughter regarding her chastity. It has been seen in our society that

even in case of commission of sexual assault, victims and their parents

are hesitant/reluctant to go public to file a criminal case, because after

such incident, life of the girl is almost spoiled.”

In State of Punjab v. Gurmit Singh [1996] 2 SCC 384 it was held that:

“The courts must, while evaluating evidence, remain alive to the fact that

in a case of rape, no self-respecting woman would come forward in a

court just to make a humiliating statement against her honour….”

In the case of Bharwada Bhoginbhai Hirjibhai v. State of Gujarat (1983) 3

SCC 217 it was held:

“Rarely will a girl or a woman in India make such false allegations of

sexual assault, whether she belongs to the urban or rural society, or,

sophisticated, or, not-so sophisticated, or, unsophisticated society. Only

very rarely can one conceivably come across an exception or two and that

too possibly from amongst the urban elites.”

CA/HCC/0055/2024

8 | P a g e

As observed above, the defence has failed to successfully challenge the

evidence brought forward by the prosecution. The evidence given by the

victim as well as PW02 is quite similar, and the medical evidence assessed

by PW06 JMO further corroborates the incident in question. As such, it is

quite evident that their evidence can be considered to be cogent and accurate

regarding the incident. No vital contradictions or omissions have been

marked.

In the case of State of Andra Pradesh v. Gangula Satya Vani Murthy AIR

1997 SC 1588, it was held that:

“…the courts are expected to show great responsibility while trying an

accused on charges of rape. They must deal with such cases with utmost

sensitivity.”

As such, considering the sensitivity of the situation and the tender age of the

victim, it is the view of this court that the evidence given is consistent and

credible.

Further, the Learned High Court Judge had very correctly considered the

defence evidence before he convicted the Appellant as charged.

Hence, I conclude that the grounds of appeal raised by the Appellant do not

have any merit.

When analysing the entirety of the evidence presented, I am of the view that

the prosecution had proved the case against the Appellant beyond

reasonable doubt. Hence, I affirm the conviction and sentence imposed on

him by the Learned High Court Judge of Ampara. Therefore, the Appeal is

dismissed.

CA/HCC/0055/2024

9 | P a g e

Considering all the circumstances, I order the sentence imposed on the

Appellant to be operative from the date of conviction namely, 15/09/2023,

given the fact that the Appellant has been in incarceration since the

conviction.

The Registrar is directed to send this judgment to the High Court of Ampara

along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL