IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

CA Case No. 149/2012

HC Panadura No. 1806/2004

In the matter of an application for appeal in

terms of Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

The Honourable Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

-Vs-

Geoffrey Anthony Thilan Amarasekara

Accused

-ANO-

Geoffrey Anthony Thilan Amarasekara

Accused - Appellant

-Vs-

The Honourable Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondent

1

tII fI!

Fr!I\

lt

I,f !

1

fl

,II

~

BEFORE

COUNSEL

Argued on

Decided on

A.H.M.D.Nawaz J,

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J, and

K.K. Wickramasinghe, J.

Saliya Pieris for the Accused-Appellant.

Shavindra Fernando, PC, ASG for the Attorney-

General

15.09.2015

17.09.2015

The Accused-Appellant was indicted in the High Court of Panadura for having

committed the offence of murder in respect of one Thiruchelvam alias Terry on or

about 15th March 1998 punishable under Section 296 of the Penal Code. The trial

commenced before the Learned High Court Judge of Panadura on 13th May 2009 and

the prosecution led the evidence of the mother of the Accused-Appellant, the

investigating police officer and the judicial medical officer. On behalf of the Accused-

Appellant, no evidence was led except a laconic dock statement made by the

Accused-Appe Iia nt.

At the conclusion of the trial learned High Court judge of Panadura found the

Accused-Appellant guilty of the offence of culpable homicide not amounting to

murder contrary to Section 297 of the Penal Code. Having found the Accused-

Appellant guilty of the lesser offence based on knowledge, the Learned High Court

judge sentenced the Accused-Appellant to a term of 8 years' rigorous imprisonment

2

I!ffri!i

I

) I

I

(

f and imposed a fine of Rs. 15,000/- In default of which a term of 8 months' rigorous f:

imprisonment (RI) was imposed.

Even though the learned High Court judge found the accused guilty in a judgment

dated 22nd June 2012, the aforesaid sentence of 8 years' RI has been imposed by the

Learned High Court judge on 10.08.2012. Though the sentence was imposed on a

later date than the date of conviction, a careful reading of Sections 279 and 283 (2)

of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 make it clear that the sentence

forms part of the judgment and I construe that the sentence has been imposed as

from 22nd June 2012 - the date of the conviction - vide the useful observations of

M.W.H. de Silva J in Henricus v Wijesooriya1 Interpreting sections 304 and 306 of

the old Criminal Procedure Code which correspond to Sections 279 and 283 of the

Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979, M.W.H. de Silva J had the following

to state in Henricus (supra)-

"Sections 304 and 306 quite clearly show that the judgment must be

contemporaneous with the sentence and that the sentence forms, in fact, a

part of the judgment."

In fact Section 283 (2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act is indicative of the fact

that the sentence is part of the judgment.

lilt (the judgment) shall specify the offence if any of which and the section of the law

under which the accused is convicted and the punishment to which he is sentenced."

When this instant appeal came up for argument before this court on 15th September

2015, the learned Counsel for the Accused-Appellant submitted that he would not

canvass the conviction but would only confine the appeal to the question of

147 NLR 378 at 380-381

3

III

fI

mother of the Accused-Appellant attesting to this fact of attempted suicide in the

prison cell and the subsequent examination of the Accused-Appellant by a medical

doctor on a number of occasions since the attempted suicide. The affidavit dated 21st

April 2015 also deposes to the fact that the Accused-Appellant does not receive his

medication and that relevant tests have not been carried out.

For purposes of satisfying myself with the presence or otherwise of a state of disease

of mind on the part of the accused appellant, I have examined the record of

proceedings which took place in the High Court of Panadura and the record is chock-

full of items of evidence tending to show unsoundness of mind.

Our task of looking at that evidence is only for the purpose of ascertaining whether

the plea in mitigation of the sentence is justified having regard to the material before

us as the issue of sentence invariably engages the question of excessive punishment

or a sentence which the State alleges to be lenient. Whether a sentence is excessive

or lenient in light of the facts and circumstances of a particular case is a question of

law which this Court is bound to consider in appeal and as I observed in Bandage

Sumindra Jayanthi v Hon.Attorney-General CA 251-267/2012 (HC Vavuniya decided

on 3.07.2015), the parties must be able to demonstrate to the appellate court the

existence of both aggravating and mitigatory circumstances in the case for the

reviewing court to assess the propriety of the sentence meted out. Such

circumstances may be manifest in the evidence led, submissions made and the

judgment pronounced containing the sentence. Submissions by both the prosecutor

and defence counsel have to be considered by the sentencing judge and no judge can

deny the right of parties to make submissions on sentence though no doubt

sentencing belongs to the domain of the judicial mind. But parties do enjoy the right

5

I

~ ! ! r t I III

of representing their respective positions on sentence to the judge and this right

cannot be intruded upon by a sentencer as submissions on sentencing at times clarify

and shed much light on the evidence led inclusive of both the aggravating and

mitigatory circumstances. Even this Court is not denuded of jurisdiction to consider

post conviction circumstances which are traceable to manifest items of evidence led

in the High Court.

Viewed with these indicia, I observe upon a perusal of the evidence led in this case

that even the prosecution has elicited evidence on unsoundness of mind from the

mother of the Accused-Appellant who was summoned to testify for the prosecution

(vide page 69 of the brief). Therefore submissions made by the learned counsel for

the Accused-Appellant that the convict has continued to display tendencies

bordering on insanity whilst in prison have to be borne in mind by this Court.

Mr. Saliya Pieris submitted that the Accused-Appellant has consistently displayed

pathological behaviour which has resulted in his attempts to take his life twice in the

past. The latest episode of the abortive attempt has taken place during incarceration

post conviction. The Accused-Appellant who is an amputee had been shown to

doctors for his disease of mind which, as spoken to by his mother, manifested itself

in aberrant behaviour such as attempts to jump in front of an oncoming train,

constant bathing and listening to music at full blast. A perusal of the proceedings at

pages 69, 70, 75 and 77 demonstrates the above. The Accused-Appellant, when

called upon to make his defence, has stated in his terse dock statement that as he

had been suffering from a mental illness since 1998, he could not remember what

had happened at that time (sic). He had further stated that he was still suffering from

a mental illness and the Court could do anything it wanted-vide page 159 of the

6

f I

I

f

f III

I

,

proceedings. Though the defence had moved for a date to call a medical doctor to

testify as to the illness of the Accused-Appellant, no such witness was called in the

end.

The learned High Court Judge has herself acknowledged the fact of the mental illness

that was adduced before Court but found the Accused-Appellant guilty of culpable

homicide not amounting murder based on knowledge.

Medical Condition at the commencement of the trial-Chapter XXXI of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act

It is relevant to advert to Section 375 (1) of the Chapter XXXI of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No 15 of 1979 which states as follows:-

"If any person committed for trial before the High Court appears to the court at

his trial to be of unsound mind and consequently incapable of making his

defence, the jury or (where the trial is without a jury) the Judge of the High

Court shall in the first instance try the fact of such unsoundness and incapacity,

and if satisfied of the fact shall find accordingly and thereupon the trial shall be

postponed. II

This provision that deals with the competence and fitness of an accused person of

unsound mind has been activated as the record shows that the Accused-Appellant

was declared to be fit to face his trial subsequent to an examination and it was after

such a finding that the trial got underway.

In fact Chapter XXXI of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act makes elaborate

provisions for the initial investigation as to whether a particular accused is

competent and fit to undergo his trial. The procedure post the acquittal of the

7

f t III I

t

\II [ ,

I1

!l

accused upon a successful defence of insanity is also provided for in section 380 of

the Code which declares that:-

"Whenever any person is acquitted upon the ground that at the time at which

he is alleged to have committed an offence he was by reason of unsoundness

of mind and incapable of knowing the nature of the act alleged as constituting

the offence or that it was wrong or contrary to law, the verdict shall state

specifically whether he committed the act or not."

Section 381 of the Code provides for a person acquitted on ground of unsoundness

of mind to be kept in safe custody.

Section 381 (1) lays down:-

"Whenever the verdict states that the accused committed the act alleged, the

court before which the trial has been held shall, if such act would but for the

incapacity found have constituted an offence, order such person to be kept in

safe custody in such place and manner the court thinks fit and shall report the

case for the orders of the Minister. "

Section 381 (2) states as follows:-

liThe Minister may by writing under the hand of the Secretary to the Ministry

order such person to be confined in a mental hospital, prison, or other suitable

place of custody until further orders."

I think it appropriate to cite these provisions in order to show the anomaly that exists

in regard to Accused-Appellants whose insanity is manifest on the record but

evidence sufficient to establish its proof on a balance of probabilities has not been

successful thus resulting in their incarceration. What does an appellate court do

8

f I!

)

I I I

\

f , , , f ; i I ! IIf f

; Ii II

when circumstances during the appeal clearly manifest that the convicted prisoner

still labours under hallucinations and delusions such as the accused appellant in the

instant case before us? The Code of Criminal Procedure Act does not appear to

contain comparable provisions as it does in relation to pre-trial unsoundness of mind

and this Court is of the view that a revision of the Code or any enactment which

caters to post-conviction illnesses of mentally unsound convicts is a desideratum

and certainly these Accused-Appellants whose lot could have been better but for the

standard of proof to which their insanity could not be established at the trial,

deserve to be provided for with ameliorative treatment and detention in a safe

place or a mental hospital.

The Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act 1996

In order to fortify itself with the order that this Court would ultimately make in the

case, this court would now look at the other legal regimes that operate in this

country in regard to the welfare of persons of unsound mind. The Protection of the

Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act No. 28 of 1996 which came into effect on 24th

October 1996 principally provides for the establishment of a National Council for

Persons with Disabilities charged with the promotion, advancement and protection

of the rights of persons with disabilities in Sri Lanka. It has to be recalled that Sri

Lanka enacted the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act No. 28 of

1996 long before the United Nations adopted the Convention on the Rights of

Persons with disabilities on 13th December 2006. Until the UN Convention on the

Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) is incorporated into domestic law, the

Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act No. 28 of 1996 establishes

the legal definition of disability in Sri Lanka.

9

\

t i i, !

\ , I

I i f

It I l !II

)I

\

, I I I I

1 1

Section 37 of the Act reads thus:-

" .... Person with disability means any person who, as a result of any deficiency

any physical or mental capabilities, whether congenital or not, is unable by

himself to ensure for himself, wholly or partly, the necessities of life. II

On a reading of this Act, this Court finds that although mental illness is incorporated

within the legal definition of "disabled person" under Section 37 of the Protection of

the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act No. 28 of 1996, the Act is severely lacking

in the provision of a codified statement of rights to support this Court in the

generation of a legal regime to deal with a convict such as the Accused-Appellant we

find before us.

Mental Diseases Ordinance of 1873

In order to secure the best for the Accused-Appellant by way of a discount in

sentence, Mr. Saliya Pieris drew our attention to the Mental Diseases Ordinance of

1873.

This Court has examined the antiquated Mental Disability Law and I find that this

main legislation governing the mental health is based on British lunacy laws of yore.

This Ordinance has yet not been repealed. The statute emphasizes

institutionalisation through treatment and detention of those affected by mental

illness.

Section 5 (1) provides for compulsory detention "until the Minister's pleasure shall

be known" with the possibility that the person with mental illness be removed to a

mental hospital by the District court when there is no relative or friend to care for

them. The adjudication on the question whether the person is of unsound mind is

10

I! IL I,

Jf f l ! t f I Ill Iii

,

entrusted to the District Court. Under Section 6, a relative may petition for the

admittance of a person of unsound mind and providing that a certificate is issued by

two medical practitioners then the person named in the petition will be admitted to

the hospital.

Section 9 (1) of the Ordinance comes closer in that if any person under imprisonment

in any jail shall become of unsound mind and a report is made to the Minister in

charge of the subject of Justice by the fiscal of the District Court within whose

jurisdiction the said jail is situated, with a certificate of the medical officer thereof,

that such person is of unsound mind, it shall be lawful for the Minister in charge of

the subject of Justice to direct by warrant under his hand that such person shall be

removed to the mental hospital named in such warrant, to be detained, until the

expiration of the sentence under which such person may have been imprisoned.

Section 10 of the Ordinance deals with further proceeding at expiration of sentence

if the person shall not have recovered.

In terms of this section, if the Superintendent of any mental hospital to which any

person shall have been removed under the provisions of the preceding clause, and

who shall not have recovered, shall, at least 14 days before the expiration of the

sentence under which such person shall have been imprisoned, report the same to

the District Court of the district in which such mental hospital shall be situated, and if

the said District Court shall, upon inquiry, be satisfied that such person is still of

unsound mind, and that it is necessary to continue to keep him under control, the

said District Court may order such person to be detained in the mental hospital until

discharged there from by order of the Minister.

11

~ !

I I II! !

~ I t i t

~

\I

Lankan Law is still moored to British lunacy laws of olden times, Britain itself has

moved on with times enacting in the process a slew of legislation to deal with these

types of cases.

English Statutes

Section 37 (lA) (c) of the Mental Health Act 1983 and Section 305 (4) of Criminal

Justice Act 2003 are two provisions that enable Hospital Orders and Guardianship

Orders to be made when without the mental disorder the Court would be required

to impose a life sentence or custody for life. There are provisions in the Powers of

Criminal Courts (Sentencing) Act 2000 that enable a Magistrate's Court to conduct an

inquiry into the physical or mental condition of the Accused-Appellant before the

method of dealing with him is determined. The Act also provides for power to obtain

medical reports.

The fact that Court must have a medical report is reiterated in section 157 (1) of the

Criminal Justice Act which declares:-

Subject to subsection (2), in any case where the offender is or appears to be

mentally disordered, the court must obtain and consider a medical report

before passing a custodial sentence other than one fixed by law.

(2) subsection (1) does not apply if, in the circumstances of the case, the court is

of the opinion that it is unnecessary to obtain a medical report.

In this Section "mentally disordered", in relation to any person, means suffering from

a mental disorder within the meaning of the Mental Health Act 1983-Section 157 (5)

of Criminal Justice Act 2003.

13

t ! I

\!I Ir !

~

~

1

I I t I

I I

procedures to be adopted by Courts including the appellate courts in respect of

mentally disordered accused.

Before this Court proceeds to make an order in this case, we bear in mind the

submissions of the Learned Additional Solicitor General Mr. Shavindra Fernando P.C

who expressed the apprehension that the offender may be a continuing danger to

the public upon his release. He contended that the Court must ensure safeguards

before the offender is released and re-enters society when his determinate term has

ended. If one were to summarize the submissions of the Learned Additional Solicitor

General the tenor of his argument was that there must be a balancing of competing

public interest vis-a-vis the interests of the Accused-Appellant.

After alii am reminded of what Lord Hailsham of St. Marylebone said n R v Howe2-

1/ Murder, as every practitioner of the law knows, though often described as one

of the utmost heinousness, is not in fact necessarily so, but consists in a whole

bundle of offences of vastly differing degrees of culpability, ranging from

brutal, cynical and repeated offences like the so-called Moors murders to the

almost venial, if objectively immoral, "mercy killing" of a beloved partner."

With the kind of sustained derangement that the Accused-Appellant in this case has

displayed we are the of view that it is a travesty to treat his case or even to actually

treat it as if it were in the same degree of criminality as that of a professional

assassin, or an armed robber who deliberately shoots a police officer or a security

guard or a person who tortures, abuses and kills people for sadistic or sexual

satisfaction.

2 {1997) AC 417 at 433

15

I , IIn my view, the contention that any murder, whatever the circumstances, should be J

regarded as uniquely heinous is also untenable legally.

However the key argument of the Additional Solicitor General is entitled to much

weight even though he did not stand in the way of compassion being shown to the

Accused-Appellant by way of a discounted term of sentence. He argued that it is

necessary to protect the public from an otherwise potentially dangerous person.

Certainly it carries within it the contention that the likelihood of the risk that an

offender of this nature may pose, if released, to kill again. It is axiomatic that the

public should, so far as reasonably practicable, be protected against the risk of

violence and if constant supervision of this Accused-Appellant is undertaken during

the period of incarceration I should regard it as a necessary initial safeguard towards

the reduction of the potential risk.

Towards the end, this Court is of the view that the Accused-Appellant should be

periodically examined by a medical doctor attached to the Mental hospital located in

Angoda and if his detention at the said hospital is necessitated he should continue to

receive such treatment under the supervision of the medical officers attached to

both the prison and the Angoda Mental Hospital. In the process the Court makes the

following orders.

In order to make these orders, this Court derives much strength from Section 7 of

the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

As regards matters of Criminal procedure for which special provisions may not

have been made by this Code or by any other law for the time being in force

such procedure as the justice of the case may require and as is not inconsistent

with this Code may be followed.

16

\

r j I,

~. ! ! I

~

f I

\ I

! i

I

1 I

We make these orders in order to ensure that when the Accused-Appellant re-enters

society, his release would not pose a potential threat to society.

The above orders have to be carried out by the Commissioner General of Prisons

immediately upon receipt thereof.

Reduction of Sentence

Having considered the submissions of both the Counsel for the Accused-Appellant

and the learned Additional Solicitor General, the Court sets aside the sentence of 8

years' RI and substitute in lieu thereof a term of 5 years' RI which is to run from the

date of conviction namely 22nd June 2012. As I observed earlier, this Court backdates

the sentence from the date of conviction on the basis of the holding in Henricus v

Wijesooriya (supra) and section 283 (2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.

Subject to the above variation of the sentence and the orders that this Court has

imposed as to the medical treatment to be afforded to the Accused-Appellant, the

appeal of the Accused-Appellant is dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K.K. Wickramasinghe, J.

I agree JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

18

I I , ! I

f I I ! i ,

" f I