1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal under Section 754(1) of the Civil Procedure Code. Amidu Lebbe fareed, Paragahawela Ukkuwela. PLAINTIFF VS. 1. O. L. M. Idroos 2. O. L. M. Idroos Lebbes Wife

Rahuma Beebi, Paragahawela, Ukuwela.

DEFENDANTS

AND NOW

Amidu Lebbe Fareed Paragahawela, Ukkuwela.

PLAINTIFF-APPELLANT

VS.

1. O. L. M. Idroos (Deceased) 2. O. L. M. Idroos Lebbes Wife

Rahuma Beebi (Deceased), Both Paragahawela, Ukuwela

DEFENDANT-RESPONDENTS

C. A. Appeal No. 292/1999 (F) D. C., Matale Case No. 4065/L

2

1a. Rumal Athu Beebi 1b. Mohammadhu Raseeq 1c. Mohammedu Rafeeq 1d. Zahira Beebi 1e. Idroos Lebbe Nawferdeen 2a. Ahaza Beebi 2b. Idroos Lebbe Ajmeer 2c. Siththi Rizana 2d. Idroos Lebbe Zasina

All of Paragahawela, Ukuwela SUBSTITUTED DEFENDANT-RESPONDENTS

Before : M. M. A. Gaffoor, J.

Counsel : Shymal A. Collure AAL for the for the Plaintiff-

Appellant

Hasitha Udugamakorala AAL for the Defendant-

Respondents

Written Submission tendered on : 11.12.2017 (by the Plaintiff-Appellant) 01.11.2018 (by the Defendant-Respondents)

Decided on : 05.04.2019

*****

M. M. A. GAFFOOR, J.

The Plaintiff-Appellant (Appellant) instituted the above styled action in

the District Court of Matale, seeking inter alia, for a declaration of title

for the land described in the schedule to the plaint and ejectment of

the Defendant-Respondents (Respondents) and their agents

therefrom.

3

The Respondents filed their answer preferring a claim in reconvention

and denying the claim of the Appellant. Accordingly, the Respondents

sought for a declaration that the 2nd Defendant-Respondent is the

owner of the land described in the schedule to the plaint.

The trial commenced on 2 admissions and 19 issues. Out of the issues,

1-14 are recorded by the Appellant and 15-19 were recorded by the

Respondents. After conclusion of the trial, the learned District

delivered the judgment on 29.01.1999 in favour of the Respondents

and dismissed the case of the Appellant.

Being aggrieved by the said judgment, the Appellant preferred this

appeal, to set aside the judgment and grant relief sought to the

amended plaint.

When elucidate the purported basis of his case, the Appellant stated

that, his Brother-in-law namely, S. M. Arsheen was the owner of the

lot A2 of Plan 1685A and that he sold the said land to the 2nd

Defendant by way of Deed No. 3243 (P3) and placed his possession in

lot B2. Thereafter the said Arsheen had sold the said B2 to the

Appellant by Deed bearing Nos. 3363 and 3363 dated 19.09.1987 and

12.09.1989 respectively. Therefore, it was the position of the

Appellant that while, the Respondents placed in possession only in lot

A2, they had entered the said lot B2 illegally.

Therefore, it was the position of the Appellant that what the said

Arsheen sold to the 2nd Defendant-Respondent is not B2 but it is lot A2

and the Notary has made a mistake and the said Arsheen did not

know of the said mistake.

4

In contrast, in the amended answer (at page 54 of the appeal brief)

the Respondents position was that the said Arsheen having sold to

the 2nd Defendant-Respondent, lot B, the land in dispute by deed P3.

In the trial, on behalf of the Appellant, a prime witness, the said

Arsheen, who is the Brother-in-law of the Appellant and the

predecessor in title to the property, gave evidence. In his evidence (at

page 71) he stated that he did not sign the Deed P3, by which he sold

the property in question to the 2nd Defendant-Respondent. But, the

said Arsheen, in his evidence, while admitting the said deed P3 (at

page 159) by which he sold the said property to the 2nd Defendant-

Respondent, stated that what was sold to him was lot A2 but

inadvertently it has been referred to as lot B2 in the said Deed.

However, a careful perusal of the said deed P3 shows very clearly that

what was sold and what intended to be sold was lot B2 which was

been correctly described according to the Partition Plan marked as P1.

The boundaries, the extent, and all other details given in the schedule

to the said deed, correctly apply to lot B2 and not lot A2. The plan

marked P1 also witness that lot B2 is on the East of the main road

while lot A2 is on the West of the main road, therefore, I think that

there could not have been any confusion or discrepancy as to which

lot was sold to the 2nd Defendant-Respondent.

It is seen from the Trial proceedings that, the Appellant (at page 103)

insists that he alone possessed the said land after he purchased it

from his brother-in-law. When confronted with a document, in the

same page he speaks of one land, one house in which he lives with his

brother-in-law and therefore both of them possessed the said land.

5

Further, at (page 99) the said proceedings he denied having filed the

case No. 4025/L but when confronted with the plaint marked V4, he

admitted having filed it. Therefore, it is quite clear that both the

Plaintiff and his brother-in-law Arshaeen are not credible witnesses

and had given contradictory evidence at the trial. In regard to this, this

Court observes that in the case of DE SILVA & OTHERS VS.

SENAVIRATNA AND ANOTHER [(1981) 2 SLR page at 07]- when an

appellate court is invited to review the findings of the trial judge on

the question of facts, the principles that should be guided is as

follows:-

a. where the finding on questions of fact are based upon

the credibility of witnesses on the footing that the trial

judges perception on such evidence, then such findings

are entitled to great weight and the utmost

consideration and will be reversed only if appears to the

appellate court that the trail judge has failed to make full

use of his advantage of seeing and listening to the

witnesses and the appellate court is convinced by the

plainest considerations that would be justified in doing

so.

b. that however where the of fact are based upon the trail

judges evaluation of facts, the appellate court is then in

in as good a position as the trail judge to evaluate such

facts and no sanctity attaches to such findings of fact of

a trial judge.

6

c. where it appears to an appellate court that on either of

the grounds the findings of fact by a trial judge should be

reversed then the appellate court ought not to shrink

from that task

Furthermore, a careful perusal of the pleadings, issues, and the entire

evidence as the final findings of the learned District Judge clearly

reveals that the only matter raised by the Appellant in the instant case

is as to whether what was sold to the 2nd Defendant-Respondent.

Therefore, I am of the view that the learned District Judge correctly

assessed the credibility of the evidence especially, Appellant and the

said Arsheen.

In this regard, it is to be noted that the observation of the Hon. G.

P. S. De Silva, C. J. in ALWIS VS. PIYASENA FERNANDO [(1993) 1

SLR 119] when he emphasized that:

"..it is well established that findings of primary facts by a

trial Judge who hears and sees witnesses are not to be

lightly disturbed on appeal.

In ARIYADASA VS. ATTORNEY GENERAL [(2012) 1 SLR 84] the

Court observed as follows:

Court of Appeal will not lightly disturb a finding of a

Judge with regard to the acceptance or rejection of a

testimony of a witness, unless it is manifestly wrong,

when the trial Judge has taken such a decision after

7

observing the demeanor and the deportment of a

witness...

In the circumstances, I hold that the Appellants case is without any

merit and therefore is liable to dismissed.

Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed with cost.

Appeal dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL