==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 12

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal from the order and the sentence of the High Court of Balapitiya made in terms of Section 331 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka Complainant CA HCC 194/2024

High Court of Balapitiya Vs. Case No. HCB 1784/15 1. Muthuvahandi Ranjith De Silva

alias Muthuvahandi Rajith De Silva

2. Muthuvahandi Nishanka Silva alias

Ariyarathne alias Nishanka Ariyarathne

alias Nishanka Ariyarathne alias

Muthuvahandi Nisanka Ariyarathne De

Silva

3. Migel Arachchige Rathnapala Silva alias

Ajasaththa

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Muthuvahandi Nishanka Silva alias

Ariyarathne alias Nishanka Ariyarathne

alias Nishanka Ariyarathne alias

Muthuvahandi Nisanka Ariyarathne De

Silva

Second Accused-Appellant Vs,

Page 2 of 12

Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12. Respondent

Before: B. Sasi Mahendran. J, Amal Ranaraja. J, Counsel: Anuja Premaratna, PC with Imasha Senadeera and Emal

Gunasekara for the 2nd Accused-Appellant.

Shanaka Wijesinghe, ASG for the Respondent.

Argued on: 26.02.2026

Judgment on: 30.03.2026

Judgment Amal Ranaraja. J,

1. The second accused-appellant (hereinafter referred to as appellant) has

been indicted in the High Court of Balapitiya along with two others in

High Court Case No. HC-CRI-1784-15. The charge in the indictment is

as follows;

01. That on or around the 30th of March, 1996, in Ambalangoda,

within the jurisdiction of this Court, you, together with the

now deceased, Muthuvahandi Ranjith, and Migel Arachchige

Rathnapala Silva, caused the death of Dadallage Upasena,

thereby committing an offence of murder punishable under

Section 296 of the Penal Code read with Section 32 of the

Penal Code.

Page 3 of 12

2. At the conclusion of the trial, the learned High Court Judge has

convicted the appellant of the charge and sentenced him to death. The

appellant, aggrieved by this conviction, disputed judgement, and

sentencing order has preferred the instant appeal to this Court.

Case of the Prosecution

3. On the day of the incident PW04, the nephew of the deceased had been

near the alleged shooting location and heard cries from that direction.

When he had arrived at the location, PW04 has seen the deceased fallen

with injuries. He, along with PW01 (the deceased’s wife), had then

transported the deceased to the Ambalangoda Hospital in a van for

treatment.

4. Enroute to the hospital, the deceased has allegedly made two

declarations to PW01 and PW04, regarding the cause of his death or the

circumstances that resulted in it. The deceased has also reportedly

made a similar declaration to the admitting doctor, PW10, Dr. Piyaratne

at the Ambalangoda Hospital.

5. The prosecution has relied on those declarations, as provided for in

Section 32(1) of the Evidence Ordinance No.16 of 1895 to establish its

case.

Case of the Appellant

6. Due to the appellant’s absence from Court, no evidence has been led on

his behalf during the trial. Nevertheless, a written submission has been

tendered of him at the conclusion of the trial.

Page 4 of 12

7. When the matter was taken up for argument, the learned President’s

Counsel urged the following ground of appeal;

i. Did the learned High Court Judge err in concluding that the

prosecution had proved its case beyond reasonable doubt?

8. A dying declaration under English Law, is generally a statement made

by a person on the verge of death regarding the cause of his/her

impending demise or the circumstances of the transaction that led to

it. These statements are admissible as exceptions to the hearsay rule,

based on the principle that someone facing imminent death is unlikely

to lie.

9. The concept stems from the maxim nemo moriturus praesumitur mentiri

- no one at the point of death should be presumed to be lying. The

modern foundation in English law was established in R v Woodcock

(1789) 1 Leach 500 to page 502 as follows;

“A general principle on which this species of evidence is admitted is that

they are declarations made in extremity when the arty is at the point of

death and when every hope of this world is gone; when every motive to

falsehood is silenced and mind is induced by most powerful

considerations to speak the truth; a situation so solemn and so awful is

considered by the law as creating an obligation equal to that which is

imposed by a positive oath administered in a court of justice”

10. In Sri Lanka, this is covered under Section 32(1) of the Evidence

Ordinance No.14 of 1895 as follows;

32. Statements, written or verbal, of relevant facts made by a

person who is dead, or who cannot be found, or who has become

incapable of giving evidence, or whose attendance cannot be

Page 5 of 12

procured without an amount of delay or expense which, under the

circumstances of the case, appears to the Court unreasonable, are

themselves relevant facts in the following cases:-

(1) When the statement is made by a person as to the cause

of his death, or as to any of the circumstances of the

transaction which resulted in his death, in cases in which

the cause of that person's death comes into question.

Such statements are relevant whether the person who

made them was or was not, at the time when they were

made, under expectation of death, and whatever may be

the nature of the proceedings in which the cause of his

death comes into question.

A statement made by a deceased person, who is dead is inadmissible in

evidence under this subsection when it does not refer to the cause of his

death nor relate to any of the circumstances of the transactions which

resulted in his death.

11. Further, the provision in Section 32(1) of the Evidence Ordinance No.14

of 1895 differs from English Law on this matter in the following respects;

i. Under English Law for a dying declaration to be admissible the

declarant is required to be in imminent danger of death and

have completely abandoned all hope of recovery. However, this

stringent requirement is immaterial under Sri Lankan Law.

Section 32(1) expressly states that a declaration is relevant

“whether the person who made it was or was not at the time it

was made under expectation of death”.

ii. The scope of admissibility for a dying declaration differs

significantly between English and Sri Lankan legal systems.

Under English Law such declarations are strictly admissible,

Page 6 of 12

only in cases involving homicide. In contrast Sri Lankan

Evidence Law adopts a broader approach allowing for the

admissibility of dying declarations in a wider range of cases as

exemplified in R v Samarakoon Banda 44 NLR 169 as follows,

“We have arrived at this conclusion on what appears to us to be

the clear wording of the section. No authority exactly in point

was brought to our notice. Crown Counsel, however, cited the

case of Lalji Dusadh v. Emperor in which it was held that a

statement made by a person who had been robbed, and

subsequently killed, regarding the robbery and the assault

committed in the course thereof, was admissible in evidence at

the trial of the assailant for robbery. In the words of Mullick A.C.J,

“the words of section 32 are very wide, and it is not necessary

that the charge be one of homicide”. The same view was

expressed in Nga Ba Min v. Emperor. As we have indicated, these

cases are not exactly in point, but they are useful as indicating

that the Patna and Rangoon High Courts are not prepared to

restrict the scope of section 32(1) to the narrow rule of English

Law that a dying declaration as to the cause of death is only

admissible when the causing of death is the subject of the

charge.”

iii. In English Law the admissibility of a dying declaration in a

homicide case is strictly limited; it is only accepted if the

declarant is also the victim. Declarations concerning the death

of another individual is not admissible. In contrast Sri Lankan

law permits a wider application, as it is not mandatory for the

declarant to be the individual regarding whose death the legal

proceedings have been initiated.

Page 7 of 12

“The accused was charged with the murder of A, in the course

of which he also inflicted fatal injuries on B. The accused pleaded

the right of private defence.

The Crown put in a dying declaration by B, giving the

circumstances in which he met with his death and which also

brought A to the scene.

Held, that the dying declaration was admissible under section

32(1) of the Evidence Ordinance.”

Vide R vs Samarakoon Banda 44 NLR 169

Also, E.R.S.R Kumaraswamy in his book “A TEXTBOOK OF

THE LAW OF EVIDENCE IN CELON” at pages 124 and 125 has

stated as follows in interpreting the Subsection 32(1) of the

Evidence Ordinance;

In the interpretation of this subsection the following rules may

be laid down,

a) The statement (declaration) may be made before the cause

of the death has arisen or before the deceased has any reason

to anticipate that he would be killed.

b) The cause of death contemplated in the subsection is an

external or physical cause accounting for the death it does

not therefore, include a case of death by a person’s own hand.

c) There should be a root connection between the alleged cause

of death referred to in the statement (declaration) and the

immediate cause of death as shown by other evidence.

Page 8 of 12

d) Dying declarations made in answer to leading questions are

nevertheless admissible though their weight as evidence may

be affected.

12. A dying declaration is considered substantive evidence not just

corroborative. If the court is satisfied that the statement is true,

voluntary, and not the result of tutoring or prompting, a conviction can

be based solely on a dying declaration without any corroboration.

13. Courts must carefully scrutinize such declaration to ensure that the

deceased was in a fit mental state and was not influenced. If the

declaration is suspicious, the benefit of the doubt must be given to the

accused.

14. In many homicide cases, the victim is the only eyewitness, in such

circumstances, excluding their last words could lead to a miscarriage of

justice. As stated earlier, it is believed that a person facing imminent

death is unlikely to falsely implicate an innocent person. Further, it can

be oral, written or even through gestures.

15. In the case of Alisandri v The King 38 NLR 257, Lord Roche stated,

“It is to be observed that in the section the word used is “verbal” and not

“oral” which is used elsewhere in the Ordinance, as for example in

section 3 and section 119 in reference to evidence given in Court. It is

unnecessary to decide whether the question put “Was it Alisandiri?”

and the nod of assent would have constituted an oral statement made

by the deceased, but their Lordships are clearly of opinion that it

constituted a verbal statement made by her. The case under

consideration closely resembles the case of a person who is dumb and is

able to converse by means of a finger alphabet. Upon proper evidence

Page 9 of 12

proving the words used in a conversation so held their Lordships think

that a statement so made would be a verbal statement within the

meaning of the section. So here their Lordships think that there was

proper and sufficient evidence of a verbal statement by the deceased to

the effect that it was the accused who cut her neck.”

16. While there are positives to admitting a dying declaration as substantive

evidence, as described above, there are also significant drawbacks to

doing so.

17. The inability to cross examine the witness makes it inherently weak in

ensuring the truth, creating a risk of convicting an innocent person. The

relatives or interested parties may manipulate a dying person into

making a statement that falsely implicates someone. If the deceased,

was in a state of deep-shock or mentally unfit at the time of the

declaration its value is significantly reduced or nullified. If multiple,

inconsistent dying declarations are made, the evidentiary value is

severely weakened. If the declarant dies before completing the

statement, it may be held inadmissible.

18. In Ranasinghe vs. AG, [2007] 1 SLR 218 at page 221, Sisira De Abrew,

J, has discussed the above as follows;

“As there are inherent weaknesses in a dying declaration which I have

stated above, the trial Judge, or the jury as the case may be, must be

satisfied beyond reasonable doubt on the following matters. (a)

Whether the deceased, in fact, made such a statement. (b) Whether the

statement made by the deceased was true and accurate. (c) Whether

the statement made by the deceased person could be accepted beyond

reasonable doubt. (d) Whether the evidence of the witness who testifies

about the dying declaration could be accepted beyond reasonable

doubt. (e) Whether witness is telling the truth. (f) Whether the

Page 10 of 12

deceased was able to speak at the time the alleged declaration was

made.”

19. The deceased has apparently made, three dying declarations on the

same day. One has been made to his wife (PW01), another to his nephew

(PW04), and the third to Dr. Piyaratnne (PW10), who admitted the

deceased to the Ambalangoda hospital before his transfer to the

Karapitiya Hospital for further treatment. PW01 has testified that the

deceased in his declaration named, the appellant, Rajitha, and

Ajasaththa, as his assailants. PW04 has stated that the deceased

declared the appellant and Rajitha, being involved in the shooting.

However, PW10, Dr. Piyaratne, in his testimony has stated that the

deceased made a declaration to him identifying Rajitha and one other as

the shooter.

20. To contradict this the prosecution presented the evidence of PW05,

Senior Superintendent of Police. PW05, the investigating officer at the

time has recorded a prior statement from PW10 wherein PW10 has

mentioned that the deceased in his declaration has named the appellant

and Rajitha as the persons involved in the shooting.

21. The declarations purportedly made by the deceased to PW01 and PW04

were allegedly uttered in the van while he was being transported to the

Ambalangoda hospital. During cross examination PW01’s attention has

been drawn to a specific portion of her prior statement to the

investigating officer. In that statement PW01 had asserted that the

deceased remained silent throughout the journey to the Ambalangoda

hospital. PW01 has however, subsequently denied this prior assertion

and the relevant part of her statement has been formally marked as a

contradiction වි 01(4).

22. This marked contradiction significantly, undermines the credibility of

the evidence presented by both PW01 and PW04. Specifically, if the

Page 11 of 12

deceased indeed remained silent during transport a fundamental

question arises: Could he possibly have uttered the declarations

purportedly made to PW01 and PW04.

23. PW03 in his deposition has stated that on the day of the incident while

he was on duty as the rail gate operator near the scene of the shooting,

he observed an individual chasing the injured party. This individual has

then shot the person being pursued. Following the shooting, the injured

individual has been subsequently taken away in a van by other

individuals.

24. Thus, according to PW03’s eye-witness account only one person had

been directly involved in the actual shooting. While a second individual

had been present his involvement has been limited to operating the

motorcycle used by the shooter to escape the scene. This testimony

creates a material discrepancy; with the purported dying declarations of

the deceased regarding the number of persons involved in the shooting.

This Court deems this discrepancy concerning the number of assailants

to be a material issue.

25. It also raises the question whether those purported dying declarations

were actually true. Additionally, the deceased has been accompanied by

his wife and nephew enroute to the Ambalangoda hospital. Such

circumstances of proximity creates a scenario where the deceased could

have been prompted or coached regarding the identity of the assailants

during the journey and the subsequent dying declaration being

purportedly made to Dr. Piyaratne (PW10).

26. In those circumstances I am inclined to interfere with the conviction,

disputed judgement and the sentencing order and proceed to set aside

the same.

27. I acquit the appellant of the charge.

Page 12 of 12

I make no order regarding costs.

Appeal allowed.

28. The Registrar of this Court is directed to send a copy of this judgement

to the High Court in Balapitiya for compliance.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

Judge of the Court of Appeal