==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0225/25

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal Case No.

CA/HCC/0225/2025 Noordeen Mohomed Hanifa Janabdeen

High Court of Matale alias Ukkuraja

Case No. HC/101/2020

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

COUNSEL : Mohan Weerakoon, PC with Sandamali

Peiris for the Appellant.

Wasantha Perera, DSG for the Respondent.

CA/HCC/0225/25

2 | P a g e

ARGUED ON : 29/05/2026

DECIDED ON : 13/07/2026

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Appellant was indicted by the Attorney General for

committing an offence under Section 354 and 365B (b) (2) (b) of the Penal

Code that is, Kidnapping from lawful guardianship and Grave Sexual Abuse

respectively, on Mohamed Najeer Sakeer on 02.03.2017.

The trial commenced on 17/11/2021. After leading all the necessary

witnesses, the prosecution had closed the case. The Learned High Court

Judge had called for the defence and the Appellant gave evidence from the

witness box, called two witnesses on his behalf and closed the case for the

defence.

The Learned High Court Judge after considering the evidence presented by

both parties, convicted the Appellant as charged and sentenced him on

02.06.2025 as follows:

CA/HCC/0225/25

3 | P a g e

For the 1st count under section 354 of the Penal Code the Appellant was

sentenced to 2 years rigorous imprisonment with a fine of Rs.5000/-. In

default, 6 months simple imprisonment was ordered.

For the 2nd count under Section 365B (b)(2)(b), the Appellant was sentenced

to 10 years rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs.10,000/- was imposed

subject to a default sentence of 06 months simple imprisonment. A

compensation of 500,000/- was ordered subject to a default sentence of 1-

year simple imprisonment.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid convictions and sentences, the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

The Learned President’s Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that

the Appellant has given consent to argue this matter in his absence. During

the argument he has been connected via the Zoom platform from prison.

On behalf of the Appellant the following Grounds of Appeal are raised:

1. The evidence led at the trial was not properly analysed by the Learned

High Court Judge.

2. The identity of the Appellant was not proved by the prosecution.

3. There are inter se contradictions between the evidence given by PW1

and PW2.

The Facts of this case albeit briefly are as follows.

The victim was 10 years old and was schooling at the time of the incident.

The Appellant is the father of one of his friends. The victim gave evidence

when he was 15 years. According to him he was living with his parents and

three other siblings at the time of the incident.

CA/HCC/0225/25

4 | P a g e

On the day of the incident, the victim after attending Maths tuition, left for

religious observation to the village mosque. Two of his friends had also joined

him. One of the friends was the Appellants son. After religious observation,

his friends including the Appellant’s son had gone home. While the victim

was heading towards his home, the Appellant had come on a motor bike and

requested the victim to come to catch rabbits. After much persuasion, the

victim had gotten on to the bike and the Appellant had proceeded to a maize

crop which is situated just behind a Church at Luckywatta. There, the

Appellant had asked from the victim whether he knew how to indulge in sex.

When he replied in the negative, the Appellant had made the victim sleep on

the surface with his face upward after making the victim remove his pair of

shorts. Thereafter, the Appellant had climbed onto the victim’s body, and

had kept his penis among the victim’s thighs and had performed intercrural

sex on the victim. Although the Appellant had pleaded with the victim to stay

back for some time after the sexual act, the victim had left the place and

gone home quickly. When his father and mother both asked about the reason

for the delay, the victim had divulged the incident to his mother and they

had lodged the complaint with the police immediately. As the Appellant’s son

had heckled him by asking the victim whether he had enjoyed with his father,

and since the others at school had bullied the victim, the victim had gotten

upset and embarrassed and had stopped schooling for some time.

According to PW2, Noon Shakila, the mother of the victim, on the day of the

incident when the victim came home late after attending religious

observations, when she inquired from the victim about the reason for the

delay, the victim had divulged the incident he had encountered with the

Appellant.

PW5, Dr. Waidyaratna who examined the victim had stated that the

possibility of intercrural sex cannot be excluded. As per the Medico-Legal

Report, PW5 has noted that the findings are not inconsistent with the given

history.

CA/HCC/0225/25

5 | P a g e

In the first ground of appeal, the learned President’s Counsel had contended

that the evidence led at the trial was not properly analysed by the Learned

High Court Judge.

Upon perusal of the judgment, the learned High Court Judge had very

correctly analysed all the evidence adduced by both parties in this case. The

Learned High Court Judge had mentioned the relevant reasons to

substantiate his decision. He had given plausible reasons as to why he

believed and acted on the evidence presented by the prosecution. Therefore,

this ground has no merit at all.

In the second ground of appeal, the learned President’s Counsel strenuously

argued that the identity of the Appellant was not established in this case by

the prosecution.

In a criminal trial, whether or not the accused is in fact the person who

committed the crime can be established by way of identification. The

prosecution is responsible for proving the identity of the accused beyond a

reasonable doubt, therefore, it is quite evident that accurate identification

would be crucial in securing a conviction as well as to prevent wrongful

convictions. As such, reliable and accurate identification would ensure the

wrong person is not wrongfully convicted when the actual perpetrator of the

crime is free. Witnesses would identify the perpetrator by recognising the

perpetrator’s face, voice or actions from the time of the incident. Thus, the

rules and flaws relating to witness identification is essential in protecting the

rights of the accused and to maintain trust in the criminal justice system.

The Turnbull ruling (from the UK Court of Appeal) 1977 QB 224 ensures the

fairness of a trial by protecting the defendant from inherently weak evidence.

The case centred on the recognition that an honest witness can still be

completely wrong about who they saw. Therefore, the court established that

a conviction based wholly or substantially on disputed visual identification

requires special judicial scrutiny and procedural safeguards.

CA/HCC/0225/25

6 | P a g e

The contention of the learned President’s Counsel is that the victim had

identified the Appellant as “Ukkuraja” solely on the instruction and

information provided by his parents, and admitted that prior to the alleged

incident he had no knowledge of or acquaintance with any person by that

name. It is clearly revealed through the testimony of PW1 himself that he did

not know the Accused personally, and that the said name was merely one

communicated to him by his mother and father.

The victim in his evidence at page 56 of the brief very clearly stated that he

knew the Appellant as the Appellant’s son was his friend. Before the incident,

the Appellant’s son also went to the mosque with the victim but had left

early. The Appellant and the victim were residents of the same village. The

victim in his cross examination stated that although he did not know the

name of the Appellant, he did know him as the father of his friend. He

admitted that he came to know the name of the Appellant from his parents.

The relevant portion is re-produced below:

Page 69 of the brief.

ප්‍ර : එතක ොට ක ොලිසියට ගිහිල්ලො තමො කේ කිව්කව් අේමො කිව්වො උක්කුරොජො මොමො තමො කේ කල්

කියලො කියන්න කියලො?

උ : නැහැ නැහැ එකහම කනකව්. මට නම දන්කන් නෑ. කමයො මම දන්නවො.

ප්‍ර : කමයොව දන්නවො ඔය සිද්ධිය වන විට කමම තැනැත්තොකේ නම දන්කන් නැහැ?

උ : නැහැ

PW2, in her evidence at page 97-98 conformed that the victim did not know

the name of the Appellant at the time of the incident.

Pages 97-98 of the brief.

ප්‍ර : අහන කද්ධට උත්තරකදන්න පුතො රදරය වුකන් විත්ි රුකෙන් කිව්කව් විත්ි රුකේ නම කියලද

කිව්කව් නැිවද කිව්කව් ක ොකහොමද තමොට කිව්කව්?

CA/HCC/0225/25

7 | P a g e

උ : පුතො කමයොකෙ පුතොකෙ නම කියලො එයොකේ තොත්තො. පුතො තමයි එයො අදුරන්කන් තොත්තොකෙ නම

එයො අදුරන්කන් නැහැ.

ප්‍ර : තොත්තොකෙ නම දැනකෙන හිටිකේ නැහැ?

උ : නැහැ

Further, the Learned High Court Judge had very correctly dealt with the

identification issue in his judgment. The relevant portion is re-produced

below:

Pages 212-213 of the brief.

සියලු තත්වයන්ට අවධොනය කයොමු කිරීකේදී චූදිත නිසි රිදි හඳුනොෙැනීමට තරේ ොලව වොනුවක්ක හො

ආකලෝ තත්වයක්ක ිබී ඇි බවටද,ඉශත් යන අයකේ පියො චූදිත බවට ඒ වන විටත් හඳුනොකෙන ිබී

ඇි බවටද, ක නී යන තත්වය තුළ කමම නඩුකව් ැ.සො.1 විසින් චූදිත නිසි රිදි හඳුනොෙැනීම ට ලක්ක

ර ඇි බවට තහවුරු කව්. ඒ කහේතුකවන්ම චූදිත නිසි රිදි හඳුනොකෙන කනොමැි බවට විත්ිය විසින්

ඉදිරි ත් ත කය ප්‍රික්කකෂේ රමි.

This ground of appeal, therefore, has no merit as the identification of the

Appellant is very well established by the prosecution.

In the final ground of appeal, the Learned President’s Counsel contended

that there are inter se contradictions between the evidence given by PW1 and

PW2.

Inter se contradictions refer to conflicts or inconsistencies between the

testimonies of different prosecution or defense witnesses, which can weaken

or even destroy a case. The corresponding legal effect of such contradictions

would completely depend how material they are to the core of the case.

Therefore, if the testimonies of key witnesses would fundamentally

contradict each other on the corpus delicti (the core facts of the crime) which

would include, for instance, the sequence of events, identification of the

accused, recovery of evidence; the court must treat such fundamentally

contradicting versions as unreliable.

CA/HCC/0225/25

8 | P a g e

The rationale for this is that such major contradictions would create a

reasonable doubt in the prosecution’s case. It has been established in a

number of legal precedents that the benefit of the doubt must be considered

in favour of the accused, which would then often result in an acquittal.

The Attorney General v. Sandanam Pitchai Mary Theresa [2011] 2 SLR

292 the court held that:

“Whilst internal contradictions or discrepancies would ordinarily affect

the trustworthiness of the witness statement, it is well established that

the Court must exercise its judgment on the nature of the inconsistency

or contradiction and whether they are material to the facts in issue”.

In the case of Gangadhar Behera v. State of Orissa: (2002) 8 SCC 381 it

was noted:

“Normal discrepancies in evidence are those which are due to normal

errors of observation, normal errors of memory due to lapse of time, due

to mental disposition such as shock and horror at the time of occurrence

and those are always there however honest and truthful a witness may

be. Material discrepancies are those which are not normal, and not

expected of a normal person. Courts have to label the category to which

a discrepancy may be categorized. While normal discrepancies do not

corrode the credibility of a party's case, material discrepancies do so.”

CA/HCC/0225/25

9 | P a g e

As held in the case of Mahathun and Others vs. The Attorney General

2015 [1] SLR 74;

“(4) Where evidence is generally reliable, much importance should not be

attached to the minor discrepancies and technical errors.

In the case of Joy Devaraj vs The State of Kerala (2024) INSC 473 it was

held:

“The appellant was required to demonstrate that the incongruities in the

statements of the several eye witnesses shook the roots of their

credibility. The threshold for disbelieving a witness is not mere

discrepancy or inconsistency but material discrepancy and

inconsistency, which renders the account narrated by the witnesses so

highly improbable that the same may safely be discarded altogether

from consideration.”

In this case, although the learned President’s Counsel highlighted the

contradiction and the omission in the evidence given by PW1, the Learned

High Court Judge in his judgment at pages 206-208 very correctly had dealt

with the contradiction and the omission highlighted and had given plausible

reasons as to why he disregards the said contradiction and omission and

accepts the evidence given by PW1 and PW2 as cogent.

Considering the evidence led in this case and guided by the judgements

mentioned above, I conclude that this is not an appropriate case in which to

interfere with the judgement delivered by the Learned High Court Judge on

02/06/2025 against the Appellant. I therefore, dismiss the appeal.

As the Appellant in remand since the date of Judgement, I order his sentence

be operative from the date of conviction, i.e., from 02.06.2025.

CA/HCC/0225/25

10 | P a g e

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgement to the High

Court of Matale along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J,

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL