Page 1 of 8

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA.

Court of Appeal Case No:

CA (PHC) APN 22 / 2018

High Court of Badulla Case No:

Rev. 41/2017

Magistrate Court of Bandarawela Case

No: 76369

In the matter of an application for the

revision of order dated 16.05.2017 by

the Provincial High Court of Uva

Province holden in Badulla.

Officer in Charge,

Police Station,

Ella.

Complainant

Vs.

01. Mohomed Mohomed Aniz,

No. 45/B/1, Ella Road,

Hill Oya, Bandarawela.

02. Mohomed Cabeer Sedu Mohamed,

No. 77/03, Vishaka Mawatha,

Bandarawela.

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Page 2 of 8

01. Irangani De Silva,

Chairman

International Animal Welfare Trust,

No. 93/20, Elvitigala Mawatha,

Colombo 08.

02. K.M Dilan Indika,

Secretary,

International Animal Welfare Trust,

No. 93/20, Elvitigala Mawatha,

Colombo 08.

03. Piumika Sathsarani Wanasinghe,

Mahaulpatha,

Bandarawela.

Petitioner Petitioner

Vs.

01. Officer in Charge

Police Station,

Ella.

Complainant Respondent

Respondent

Page 3 of 8

02. Mohamed Mohamed Aniz

No. 45 /B / 1, Ella Road,

Hill Oya, Bandarawela.

03. Mohamed Cabeer Sedu Mohamed,

No. 77 /03, Vishaka Mawatha,

Bandarawela.

04. Mohamed Saroof Sakoor Mohamed,

No. 40A, Boralanda,

Banadarawela.

05. Tennakoone Mudiyanselage Piyadasa,

Weragama, Yahalakanduragama,

Etampitiya.

Accused Respondents

Respondents

06. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondent Respondent

Page 4 of 8

Before : Menaka Wijesundera J.

Neil Iddawala J.

Counsel : Leslie J. Siriweera with A. H. Senevirathna for the Petitioners.

Chathurangi Mahawaduge SC for the State.

Argued on : 08.02.2022

Decided on : 08.03.2022

MENAKA WIJESUNDERA J.

The instant application for revision has been filed to set aside the order of the learned

High Court Judge dated 16.5.2017 and the judgment of the Magistrate dated

11.1.2017.

The petitioner petitioners are the office bearers of International Animal Welfare

Trust. (Hereinafter referred to as the petitioners).

The 1st and the 2nd respondents (hereinafter referred to as the respondents) have

been arrested for allegedly transporting 7 buffaloes without a license on 1.12.2015,

and produced before the Magistrate of Bandarawela.

Both had pleaded guilty and had been convicted and sentenced by the Magistrate.

The purported registered owner to the vehicle namely the 4th respondent had

claimed the vehicle and the Magistrate has had an inquiry and has released the

vehicle to the 4th respondents and in the same inquiry the 5th respondent also has

been handed over the animals based on two documents marked as E2 and E3 which

Page 5 of 8

are the a certificate issued by the Gramasevaka from the area of the 5th respondents

and E3 is a voucher by the previous owner of the buffaloes.

In the meantime the petitioners had been handed over the buffaloes at the inception

of the inquiry to look after the animals until the conclusion of the inquiry on a bond

by the Magistrate.

The petitioners had not intervened at the inquiry. But they had filed a revision

application to the High Court Claiming that the learned High Court Judge had

followed the wrong procedure in releasing the buffaloes because he had based his

order on the two documents produced by the 5 the respondents marked as E2 and

E3 which is in contravention of the Animals Act no 29 of 1953 sections 3D 6, 7 and

8 (2).

The petitioner further cited the gazette dated 26.11.2009 issued by the Minister in

charge in which it is stated that a license is needed to transport cattle.

The learned High Court Judge dismissed the application of the petitioners on the

basis that there is delay and the delay is not explained and that the petitioners have

no locus standy.

Being aggrieved by the said orders the instant application has been filed.

It is well settled law that a party filling a revision application has to do so without

delay and if there is it has to be explained. But the Counsel for petitioners urged

that it is a technical matter with which the Court should not bother.

Delay has been considered to be fatal in many of our decided cases and it has been

held by this bench that if there is a delay it has to be explained to the satisfaction

of Court in CA/PHC/APN 78/2021.

Page 6 of 8

But in the instant matter the delay has not been explained in the High Court but

before this Bench the petitioner stated that the, petitioners were a welfare

Organization and that there were practical difficulties in obtaining the relevant

Court proceedings, but nevertheless the animals were in their custody and they

were gravely prejudiced by the order of the Magistrate.

Revisionary power of the Court Of Appeal is enshrined in the Constitution under

article 138 and 145 under which the Court of Appeal acting in revision can correct

any error in fact or in law committed by the High Court or the lower Court, if the

situation demands, in the interest of justice.

In the instant matter the welfare of the animals are in question and this Court also

notes that the petitioner is canvassing a legal issue which this Court thinks is fit

enough to consider in spite of the delay of nearly 5 months in filling the instant

matter.

Under the provisions of the act cited by the petitioner section 8 (1) and (2) it is very

clearly stated how a cattle voucher should be prepared and why an owner should

be inposession of one.

Further to that the gazette notification submitted by the petitioner also specifies

the form, according to which the voucher should be prepared.

But the E3 produced by the 5th respondent in the Magistrates Court does not fall in

to that category; as such this Court is of the opinion that the 5th respondent has not

established his ownership as per the provisions of the relevant act and the

Magistrate has been misled by the 5th respondent.

The next issue is whether the petitioners had locus standy to appear in this matter

in the High Court. The learned State Counsel appearing for the Attorney General

Page 7 of 8

strenuously stated that the petitioners do not have locus standy to appear in this

matter and as such cited the judgment of Dehideniya J CA(PHC)APN 144/2016, in

which the term locus standi and aggrieved party has been discussed.

It has said that the intervenient petitioners must show that they have sufficient

interest in the matters to which the revision applications relates to and has

gone on to cite the dictum of Lord Denning in R.V.Paddington Valuation Office

(1996) 1 QB380 at401 which has discussed locus standi and had cited A.R.Perera

and Others VS Central Freight Bureau of Sri Lanka and another (2006)1 SLR 83 in

which it has been held as the Court would not listen,. To mere busy body that is

interfering in things which did not concern him. But it will listen to anyone whose

interests are affected by what has been done.

Therefore as the petitioners were given the custody of the animals and as the

animals were handed over to the 5th respondent in contravention of the provisions

of the act and as the petitioners are a welfare organization for animals, this Court

is of the opinion that as per the judgment cited above the petitioners have a

grievance to be addressed and as such as decided in the judgment cited above the

petitioners are an aggrieved party.

As such it is the opinion of this Court that the Magistrate has founded his order on

improper procedure which makes it an illegal order, hence the learned High Court

Judge in refusing the application of the petitioners has caused a grave miscarriage

of injustice which prompts this Court to act in revision and set aside the order of the

Magistrate and the judgment of the High Court.

As such the instant application for revision is allowed and the paragraphs in the

prayer to the petition, a, b, and c are hereby granted.

Page 8 of 8

Judge of the Court of Appeal.

I agree.

Neil Iddawala J.

Judge of the Court of Appeal.