1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

In the matter of an Application for mandates in the nature of Writs of Certiorari Mandamus under and in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. CA (Writ) Application No: 399/2019

A.W.P.C. De Waas. Gunawardhana, Ex PC 49956 No. 289/C, Kaluwarippuwa Cross Road, East Katana. Petitioner Vs.

1. National Police Commission.

2. P.H. Manathunga,

Chairman, National Police Commission. 3. Professor S.T. Hettige 4. Savithri D. Wijesekare 5. Anton Jeyananthan 6. Y.L.M. Zawahir 7. Tilak Collure 8. Dr. Frank de Silva

(2nd 8th Respondents are the Members of the National Police Commission)

2

9. D.M. Samansiri,

Secretary, National Police Commission, 1st 9th Respondents at Bandaranayake Memorial International Conference Hall, Bauddhaloka Mawatha, Colombo 07. 10. Hon. Justice N.E. Dissanayake,

Chairman, Administrative Appeals Tribunal. 11. A. Gnanathasan P.C,

Member. 12. G.P. Abeykeerthi,

11th and 12th Respondents - Members, Administrative Appeals Tribunal, 10th 12th Respondents at No. 35, Silva Lane, Dharmapala Place, Rajagiriya.

13. C.D. Wickremaratna,

Acting Inspector General of Police, Police Head Quarters, Colombo 01. 14. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12. Respondents

3

Before: Arjuna Obeyesekere, J Counsel: Prince Perera for the Petitioner Supported on: 20th November 2019 Written Submissions: Tendered on behalf of the Petitioner on 29th November 2019 Decided on: 13th March 2020

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J

The Petitioner has filed this application seeking inter alia the following relief:

a) A Writ of Certiorari to quash the disciplinary order made against the

Petitioner by the Inspector General of Police, dismissing the Petitioner

from service;

b) A Writ of Certiorari to quash the decision of the National Police

Commission;

c) A Writ of Certiorari to quash the decision of the Administrative Appeals

Tribunal dated 21st March 2019.

The facts of this application very briefly are as follows.

The Petitioner had joined the Police Department on 20th November 1995 as a

Reserve Police Constable, and had been absorbed into the Regular Service of

the Police Department on 6th February 2006. The Petitioner states that he had

4

an unblemished record of service for a period of 15 years, until the incident

that is the subject matter of this application arose in May 2012.

The Petitioner states that on 24th May 2012, he, together with his wife, had

visited the house of his sister-in law (i.e. sister of his wife) at around 3pm to

borrow a sum of Rs. 10,000 from his wifes brother-in-law, Jesudasan Gerard.

The Petitioner states further that Gerard was carrying on a small shop at his

residence and was engaged in the distillation of illicit liquor to supplement his

income. The Petitioner claims that once he arrived at the house of his sister-in-

law, Gerard had left the said house to go to the bank to get the money leaving

the Petitioner and his wife in the house. In the meantime, a group of Police

Officers attached to the Negombo Police Station, led by Inspector of Police

Wijerama had visited Gerards house, and having found that the distillation of

illicit liquor is being carried out at the said premises, arrested the Petitioner

and produced him before the Magistrates Court. The Petitioner had been

granted bail the next day. Although formal criminal proceedings had been

instituted against the Petitioner, he had been discharged by the Magistrates

Court of Negombo as the prosecution witnesses had not been present on the

trial date.

The Petitioner denies that he was involved in the distillation of illicit liquor, and

states that the said illegal operation was carried on by Gerard. He states

further that his presence at Gerards house that day was only to collect the

money.

5

Pursuant to his arrest, the Petitioner had been placed under interdiction. The

Police Department had thereafter issued the Petitioner with a charge sheet

dated 27th July 2012 under the hand of the Senior Deputy Inspector General of

Police, containing the following charge:

wmlSra;sodhl yeisrSu

tkus, wksis f,i fyda jskh mj;ajd .ekSug ydkslr jk wkaouska fyda fmd,sia

fiajfha fydo kug le<,la jshyels wkaouska fyda yeisrsu.

uS.uqj fldgsGdYfha iSoqj fmd,sia ia:dkhg wkqhqla;j rdPldrs l, fmd,sia

fldia;dm,a 49956 wkaorjdia mgne|sf.a pkaok jdia .=KjraOk jk Tn, ia:sr

mosxpsj isgsk kef.kysr l,qjdrsmamqj, lgdk msysgs ksji, 2012.05.24 jk osk ijia

ld,fha us.uqj fmd,sia ia:dkfha fmd.m. jsfPardu we;= ks<Odrska msrsila jsiska

jeg,SfuSoS tys Tn jsiska ks;s jsfrdaOs u;ameka ksIamdokh lruska iy ta i|yd

fhdod .kakd f.davd iy Bg wod, WmlrK <. ;nd f.k isgsfuka, Tn fmd,sia

fomdra;fuSka;= ksfhda. ta 07 ns mrsYsIaGfha jskh ix.%yfha 01 jk j.ka;sh

hgf;a oelafjk jrola isoq lr we;s njg Tng fuhska fpdaokd lrus.

A disciplinary inquiry had thereafter been held against the Petitioner, where

the evidence of Inspector of Police, Wijerama as well as several others was led

on behalf of the prosecution. The Petitioner had given evidence, and led the

evidence of his wife and Gerard. This Court has examined the evidence of

Gerard and observes that Gerard has in fact accepted responsibility for the

illicit liquor that had been seized by the Police.

The Inquiry Officer, having evaluated the evidence placed before him, had

rejected the defense of the Petitioner, and held as follows:

6

fus wkqj pqos; ks<Odrshdf.a l%shd l,dmfhka iuia: fmd,sia fomdra;fuSka;=ju

wmlSra;shg m;a lsrsu isoq lr we;' fmd,sia ks<Odrska isgskafka kS;s jsfrdaOs u;a

meka fmrSu" jslskSu" m%jdykh" iusnkaO f;dr;=re fidhd n,d mqoa.,hska

w;awvx.=jg .ekSugh' kuq;a fuu pQos; ks<Odrshd lr we;af;a kS;s jsfrdaOs

u;ameka ksIamdokhhs' fujeks wmlSra;sodhl ks<Odrska ;joqrg;a fmd,sia

fomdra;fuska;=fjs ;nd .eksu lsisfia;a iqoqiq fkdjk nejska Tyqg ovqjus

meuskjSfuSos wdh;k ix.%yfha II j.ka;sfha 24:3:1 wkqj fiajfhka mylsrSu yer

fjk;a jsl,amhla fkdue;s nj jskh n,Odrs ;=udf.a f.!rjkSh wjOdkh fhduq

lrjus'

The Inspector General of Police had thereafter issued the following disciplinary

order on the Petitioner:

jsOsu;a jskh mrslaIKfhos bosrsm;a jq idlaIslrejkaf.a idlaIs" f,aLk.; idlaIs"

uq,sl jsuraIk f.dkqj" jsOsu;a jskh mrslaIK f.dkqj" yd mrslaIK ks<Odrshdf.a

wjika jdra;dj ud jsiska wOHkh lrk ,os. mrslaIK ks<Odrshdf.a wjika jdra;dj

wkqj" fpdaokd m;%fha i|yka jq tlu fpdaokdj idlaIs iys;j ikd: jS we;s w;r

udo ta yd tl. fjuska tu fpdaokdj ioyd Tn jeroslre njg ;srKh lrus.

fmd,sia ks<Odrsfhl= f,i Tn lr we;s jskh lvlsrSu uq fmd,sia

fomdra;fuska;=ju wmlSra;shg ,lalrkakls. tfukau Tn jeks wfhl= ;joqrg;a

fiajfha ;nd.ekSu iuia: rdPH fiajhgu ydksodhl jk w;r th wfkl=;a

ks<Odrskag jeros mQrajdoraYhlao imhkq ,nhs.

ovqju(- 2012.05.24 osk isg l%shd;aul jk mrsos fiajfhka my lsrSu.

tka. fla. b,ka.fldaka

fmd,siam;s

7

The Petitioners appeal to the National Police Commission had been rejected

by letter dated 3rd July 2017. The Petitioner had thereafter appealed to the

Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT). Having heard the Petitioner as well as

having considered the observations of the National Police Commission, the

written submissions of the Petitioner and the Inquiry proceedings, the AAT had

concluded that the Petitioner had been rightly found guilty of the charge

preferred against him, and upheld the dismissal from service.

Aggrieved by the said decision of the AAT, the Petitioner invoked the

jurisdiction of this Court conferred under Article 140 of the Constitution,

seeking the aforementioned relief. The Petitioner has made available to this

Court, a complete copy of the proceedings before the Inquiry Officer, thus

affording this Court an opportunity of considering the complaint of the

Petitioner.

Prior to considering the complaint of the learned Counsel for the Petitioner,

this Court wishes to advert to the averment in the petition to this Court that

the Petitioner possesses an unblemished record of service.1 This Court has

examined the written submissions filed on behalf of the Petitioner at the AAT,

and observes that on page 6 thereof, there is a reference to the Petitioner

having pleaded guilty to a charge of cheating a sum of Rs. 57,795. It has been

mentioned further that the Petitioner had been placed under interdiction and

had been reinstated only on 9th April 2012 which is 1 months prior to the

incident that is the subject matter of this application. Thus by his own

1 Vide paragraph 3(1) of the petition, and paragraph 4(i) of the affidavit.

8

admission, the Petitioner does not have an unblemished record of service, and

his statement, made under oath to this Court, is untrue.

The Supreme Court in Liyanage & another v Ratnasiri, Divisional Secretary,

Gampaha & Others2 citing the case of Jayasinghe v The National Institute of

Fisheries and Nautical Engineering (NIFNE) and Others3 has held as follows:

The conduct of the petitioner in withholding these material facts from

Court shows a lack of uberrimae fides on the part of the petitioner. When

a litigant makes an application to this Court seeking relief, he enters into a

contractual obligation with the Court. This contractual relationship

requires the petitioner to disclose all material facts correctly and frankly.

This is a duty cast on any litigant seeking relief from Court.

In Fernando, Conservator General of Forests and two others vs. Timberlake

International Pvt. Ltd. and another4, the Supreme Court, having held that the

conduct of an applicant seeking Writs of Certiorari and Mandamus is of great

relevance because such Writs, being prerogative remedies, are not issued as of

right, and are dependent on the discretion of court, stated as follows:

It is trite law that any person invoking the discretionary jurisdiction of the

Court of Appeal for obtaining prerogative relief, has a duty to show

uberrimae fides or ultimate good faith, and disclose all material facts to

2 2013 (1) Sri LR 6 at page 15. 3 2002 (1) Sri LR 277. 4 S.C. Appeal No. 06/2008; SC Minutes of 2nd March 2010.

9

this Court to enable it to arrive at a correct adjudication on the issues

arising upon this application.

This Court is therefore of the view that on this ground alone, this application is

liable to be dismissed.

The Petitioner has also referred to an incident where he had been charged

with a similar offence of distilling illicit liquor, a few months after the incident

that is the subject matter of this application occurred. The Petitioner had

however been acquitted by the learned Magistrate of this charge.5 This

incident however is not relevant to a consideration of the issue before this

Court.

The following passage of Lord Diplock, in Council of Civil Service Unions vs

Minister for the Civil Service6 sets out clearly the grounds on which a decision

of an administrative body could be subjected to judicial review:

Judicial review has I think developed to a stage today when without

reiterating any analysis of the steps by which the development has come

about, one can conveniently classify under three heads the grounds upon

which administrative action is subject to control by judicial review. The

first ground I would call 'illegality', the second 'irrationality' and the third

'procedural impropriety'.

5 The Order of the learned Magistrate is at page 91. 6 1985 AC 374

10

In considering the complaint of the Petitioner, this Court must be mindful that

in this application, this Court is exercising its Writ jurisdiction as opposed to its

Appellate jurisdiction. This distinction has been referred to in Administrative

Law by Wade and Forsyth7 in the following manner:

"The system of judicial review is radically different from the system of

appeals. When hearing an appeal the court is concerned with the merits of

a decision: is it correct? When subjecting some administrative act or order

to judicial review, the court is concerned with its legality: is it within the

limits of the powers granted? On an appeal the question is right or

wrong?' On review the question is lawful or unlawful?

As Lord Brightman stated in the House of Lords in Chief Constable of North

Wales Police v Evans8, applications for judicial review are often misconceived:

Judicial review is concerned, not with the decision, but with the decision

making process. Unless that restriction on the power of the court is

observed, the court will in my view, under the guise of preventing the

abuse of power, be itself guilty of usurping power..... Judicial review, as

the words imply, is not an appeal from a decision, but a review of the

manner in which the decision was made..

The learned Counsel for the Petitioner has no complaint with regard to the

procedure that has been followed. His grievance, which has been clearly set

out in the written submissions, is that the evidence that was available was

7 H.W.R. Wade and C.F. Forsyth, Administrative Law (11th Edition), Oxford University at page 26. 8 [1982] 1 WLR 1155 at 1174.

11

insufficient to conclude that the Petitioner had been involved in the distillation

of illicit liquor. He thus submitted that there was an error on the face of the

record, and that the benefit of any doubt must be given to the Petitioner. As

the Petitioners complaint is that there is no material to conclude that the

Petitioner was involved in the alleged incident, this Court has examined the

evidence in order to ascertain the veracity of the said complaint.

This Court has already narrated the events that transpired on 24th May 2012

when IP Wijerama visited the house of Gerard. The evidence had revealed the

following facts:

(a) The Petitioner was aware that Gerard was engaged in the distillation of

illicit liquor;

(b) Inspite of that, the Petitioner, being a Police officer, did not think too

seriously of being present at such a place;

(c) The Petitioner was present in the said house at the time the Police visited

Gerards house.

The following narration of IP Wijerama as to what transpired once he went

inside the house sheds light on the involvement of the Petitioner:

ud kej; jrla f.agsgqj wrsk f,ig f.agsgq fyd,a,d lE.eyqjd. tjsg irula we|

.;a;= mqoa.,fhla meusK f.agsgqj jsjD; l,d. tu wh uSg biafi,a,d iSoqj

fmd,sisfha jev lrkjd hehs lshq wh nj yoqkd .;a;d. ud ksji msgqmiska we;=,a

jqkd. ksjfia uq,q;eka f.h ;djld,slj ilia lrk ,o jsYd, ,smla u; we,quSkshus

uqgsgs folla lismamq fmrkak ilia lr ;snqkd. fuys oykhg .Eia u.ska ,ndos

12

;snqKd. ud bosrsmsgos iellre fr.=hqf,agrfha iqjsph jid .skak ksjd oeuqjd. fuS

wjia:dfjs ud Tyqf.ka jsuiqjd ljqo fuSl lrkafka lshd.

The central feature of the defence of the Petitioner is that it is Gerard who

carried out the illegal operation and that Gerard had already left the house by

the time the Police arrived at the scene. One would therefore have expected

this position to have been suggested to IP Wijerama, during cross examination.

What had however been suggested, as borne out by the following question, is

that Gerard had fled the scene after the Police arrived:

m%Yakh(- fuu ksji kshu mosxpslre rdihshd fPaiqodika fkdfy;a fPrdvs keue;s

wh nj;a Tyq fuu jro isoq lruska isg fmd,sia ks<odrska tkjd oel Tyq mek

hdfuka miq tu ks,orshd tu reiaj isgs msrsig fmfkkag Tyq w;a wXx.=jg f.k

PSma r:hg oud .;a;do js;a;sh lshkafka ms<s;=r l=ulao.

The failure on the part of the defence representative to suggest the central

feature of the defence of the Petitioner to this Court, gives rise to a doubt

about the credibility of the version of the Petitioner that he was alone at the

time the Police visited the scene.

The Petitioner himself admits that the charge leveled against him is a serious

charge. A similar conclusion has been reached by the Inspector General of

Police, the National Police Commission and the AAT. When this Court considers

the decision of the Inquiry Officer in the light of the material that has been

placed before the Inquiry Officer, this Court cannot say that the said decision

to reject the defence of the Petitioner and to find him guilty of the charge is

irrational and unreasonable or that there has been an error on the face of the

13

record. This Court agrees with the AAT that the Petitioner had been rightly

found guilty of the charge, and would in fact take the view that the decision of

the AAT is a decision which a sensible authority acting with due appreciation of

its responsibilities would have decided to adopt.9

The Petitioner, being a Police Officer with 15 years of service, and having just

been reinstated in service, ought to have known that his presence at premises

where illicit liquor is being distilled, can give rise to a charge of being involved

in that operation, and that such conduct can bring the entire Police

Department to disrepute. This Court therefore agrees with the conclusion of

the Inquiry Officer, the Inspector General of Police and the AAT that retaining

in service a person such as the Petitioner would bring the entire Public Service

to disrepute.

In the above circumstances, this Court does not see any legal basis to issue

formal notice of this application on the Respondents. This application is

accordingly dismissed, without costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

9Secretary of State for Education and Science v Metropolitan Borough Council of Tameside [1977] AC 1014.