1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

CN03-06/200S

HIC Colombo case No. 8999/1997

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of Section 331 (1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No 15 of 1979.

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

COMPLAINANT

1. Monika Fenando

2. Ajith Priyankara Perera

3. Neville Roshana Peiris

4. Sugath Krishantha Appu

ACCUSED

And,

1. Monika Fenando

2. Ajith Priyankara Perera

3. Neville Roshana Peiris

4. Sugath Krishantha Appu

ACCUSED-APPELLANTS

Vs,

Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENT

Before:

Counsel:

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J (PICA) &

H.C.J. Madawala J

Dr. Ranjith Fenando for the Accused-Appellants

Sarath Jayamanna P.e. ASG for the Attorney General

Argued on: 24.03.2015,25.05.2015,07.07.2015,03.08.2015, 05.08.2015, 21.09.2015

Written submissions on: 26.04.2016,01.12.2016

Decided on: 17.02.2016

Order

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J

2

The three accused-appellants namely Ajith Priyankara Perera, Neville Roshana Peiris and Sugath

Krishantha Appu were indicted before the High Court of Chilaw along with Naththandiyage Mary

Juliet Monica Fernando for conspiracy to commit the abduction and murder of Kalugamage Charlot

Theres Fernando and the said three accused-appellants were further charged in the indictment for the

abduction and murder of Kalugamage Charlot Theres Fernando and Susahewage Tecline alias

Seelawathy, offences punishable under sections 113 (b), 355 and 296 read with section 102 and

section 355 and 296 read with section 32 respectively.

At the conclusion of the said trial which proceeded in the High Court of Chilaw before the High Court

Judge without a jury, all four accused were found guilty of the said indictment and sentenced

accordingl y.

When the appeal preferred by the said accused were taken up before the Court of Appeal, this court

after considering the appeal, had made order setting aside the conviction and sentence imposed on the

3

accused, directing a retrial and the case was to be heard in the High Court of Colombo in the same

indictment.

However as revealed before us, out of the 4 accused who were present in the pt trial, only the 1- 3

accused were present before High Court of Colombo for the re-trial. The trial against the 4th accused

proceeded in his absence after satisfying and following the provisions of section 241 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act. Even though the 4th accused was absent and unrepresented on few calling

dates he was later represented by counsel from the commencement of the 2nd trial.

The re-trial proceeded before the High Court Judge of Colombo with a jury and the steps taken in this

regard will be looked into and discussed by me at a later stage of this Judgment since that has been one

of the grounds of appeal before this court.

At the conclusion of the High Court Trial before the High Court Judge with a Jury, the jury by a

majority decision of 6.1 found all 4 accused guilty on all the charges in the indictment against them.

The Learned High Court Judge, after the said verdict of the Jury had sentenced the 4 accused as

follows;

1st accused

2nd to 4th accused

1 st count - 20 years Rigorous Imprisonment with a fine of Rs. 10,000 in default

2 years Rigorous Imprisonment

2nd count -Death Penalty

count 1 and count 4 - 20 years Rigorous Imprisonment with a fine of Rs. 10,000

in default 2 years Rigorous Imprisonment

Count 3- 20 years Rigorous Imprisonment with a fine of Rs. 10,000 in default 1

year Rigorous Imprisonment

Counts 2, 5 and 6- Death Penalty

4

Being dissatisfied with the said conviction and sentence, 4 accused preferred an appeal before the

Court of Appeal. However, when this appeal was pending for argument, the 1st accused-appellant had

moved to withdraw her appeal unconditionally and this court on 29.02.2008 permitted the application

for withdrawal of the appeal by the pt accused-appellant and accordingly dismissed her appeal.

Therefore, the present appeal taken up before us is limited for the appeals preferred by 2nd to 4th

accused-appellants.

The Learned Counsel for the accused-appellants had restricted his appeal to four grounds of appeal

before this court. The said grounds can be summarized as follows,

1. Procedure adopted with regard to the change of jury option was irregular and illegal, because

the accused did not communicate through their mouth but through their counsel.

2. The prosecution failed to produce the conditional pardon papers to prove that such pardon was

given-conviction based on the evidence of co-accused treated/considered as independent

prosecution witness .... with no corroboration addressed.

3. Noncompliance of section 227 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act when the jury had been

dispensed for a continuous period for four days without swearing.

4. The approach of the Learned Trial Judge in his charge to the jury was erroneous as there was

no application of law to the facts of the case.

Change of Jury option,

As observed in this Judgment, the first trial before the High Court of Chilaw was a trial before the

High Court Judge without a jury. As directed by this court the second trial (re-trial) was taken up

before the High Court of Colombo and the said trial had proceeded before the High Court Judge with a

Jury.

5

The Learned Counsel for the 2nd to 4th accused-appellants took up the position that the said change of

the jury option was against the provisions of section 195 (ee) since the said change of the original

choice was effected only on the application of counsel but has not come from the mouth of the

accused.

As observed by this court, the situation in this case is different to any other case where the parties

alleged that section 195 (ee) is not followed for the reason that a Jury option has not been given.

In this regard the court is mindful of the decision in The Attorney General V. Segulebbe Latheef and

Another (2008) 1 Sri LR 255 where J.A.N. de Silva J (as he was then) observed,

This amendment necessitated an introduction of a further amendment i.e. section 195 (ee)

imposing a duty on the trial judge to inquire from the accused at the time of serving the

indictment whether or not the accused elects to be tried by a jury. This is in recognition

of the basic right of an accused to be tried by his peers. It is left to the discretion of the

accused to decide as to who should try him.

"As pointed out earlier for nearly two hundred long years the jury system has been in existence

in Sri Lanka with whether the faults it had. I do not make an endeavour to discuss the merits

and the demerits of the jury system. As long as it is in the statute book that the accused can

elect to be tried by a jury, the trial judge has an obligation not only to inquire from him

whether he is to be tried by a jury, judge must also inform that the accused has a legal right to

that effect. Non-observance of this procedure is an illegality and not a mere irregularity."

(emphasis added)

In the present case, there was no allegation of not granting jury option when the indictment was served

on the accused but the complainant is that, the change of the jury option has not come from the mouth

of the accused.

6

As observed by this court the decision of the above case was mainly based on the right of an accused

person to know his legal rights with regard to his trial, since the amendment brought under section 195

(ee) made provisions to take up all trial in the High Court before the Judge without a jury subject to an

exception for certain trials to be taken up by the High Court Judge before a Jury if the accused so

desires. It is this right which was to be explained to the accused by court which was highlighted in the

said case.

Even though the importance of the said requirement was highlighted in the said case, there was no

reference made in the said judgment that the said option has to come from the mouth of the accused.

The position in the present case is quite different to the above situation. The accused had given their

option to a trial by a Judge without a jury when the indictments were served on them and the trial

proceeded.

When the re-trial was to be taken up, the accused have charged their option for a trial by a Judge

before a jury and from the proceeding placed before this court it is clear that the accused were well

aware of their rights to have the trial before the jury or not before the jury since they have once

experienced a trial without a jury.

In this regard, I would like to record the sequence of events took place before the High Court of

Colombo as revealed during the argument before this court.

When the case was called before the High Court of Colombo in the later part of 1997 only the pt _3rd

accused were present and it was reported that the 4th accused had gone abroad.

After leading evidence the trial was fixed in absentia against the 4th accused and there was no legal

representation for the 4th accused during that period. When the case was called before the High court

on 24.05.1999, pt to 3rd accused were represented by counsel and 4th accused was still absent and

7

unrepresented. When the court, inquired the 3 accused present in the court they had informed that they

wished to try the case before the High Court Judge without a jury.

However, when this case was called again on 13.05.2004 the counsel who appeared for the pt and 3rd

accused had informed the court that the counsel for the 2nd accused had informed him that the 2nd

accused wanted the case to be taken up by the High Court Judge before Jury and his clients, i.e. pt and

3rd accused also agreeable for the case to be taken up before a Jury.

Thereafter when this matter was called before the High Court on 25.06.2004 the Learned High Court

Judge had made the following order.

.. ... tJ ~~ 9Bo(5))C)0) ~~Bc5 ~9C) ~CS)0)QO 0)~~) @o rJ)6~ @l; ~@@

q~C) ~9 C)60))C) qorJ) 1 CS)~rJ)6~QO Q)~ rJ)6 tJ q~C) q~rJ)6~QO ~C)

qlO)' ~ q~C) ~dBlrJ)6lC)~ q~l;~) O~ 8D

oog~ ~9C) 9B oCS)C)o) ~~Bc5 0)0) gq QlC)O Oc;CS)~ rJ)6~ Qll~~ 9BoCS)C)0)

~~Bc5 rJ)lC;t) 0C;cs) 8Qc)6 0)l~O q~rJ)6~ 68c3g)60 h3Q rJ)6~ .........

When the matter was ready to be taken before a jury against all 4 accused on 17.01.2005 an

application was made by an Attorney at Law for the 4th accused for a postponement since the 4th

accused wanted to represent by counsel at the trial.

The matter was called again on the 20.01.2005 and the counsel who appeared for the 4th accused had

moved further time to get ready for trial and when inquired by court had replied,

S qC)c3c:C)~ 4 C)h3 ~dBlrJ)6l C)~C)~ O~ 8o~ ~~~ CS)O)) 4 C)h3

~dBlrJ)6lG3 ~9 ~CS)0)Q 9BoCS)C)0) ~~B80 ~CS)0)QO 0)l~O 4 C)h3 ~dBlrJ)6l

C)~C)~ @l~ qlBl Ql@Q q~C) rJ)lZdO) o@rJ)6 8D."

When this matter was once again called to fix a date for trial the counsel informed as follows,

8

C)l~~60d> ~@O (9l@~ GO@l;O OO~ ,B)(5)~ C32~So(5) (5)~) l;~C)) 85~@~ ~ ~~C)

gOO(5)C)d ~~o80 C)(5)(3) 6)Oo 4 @C),B) c)d>B>0)6l O)lld>~ gO))~O)(9 Q)C)d> t; Q)C)

qQ0)6~G.10 l;l~~ ~O OO~@lC)~@C)~ @O~ S5~ ~~~ (5)~) l;l~~ ~~ Q)C)d>G.1.

From the above proceedings, it is clear that the court had given all the opportunities to the pt to 4th

accused to decide as to how their trial should be proceeded and they were well aware of the right given

to them in selecting the trial whether it should be taken up before the High Court Judge without a jury

or before the High Court Judge with a Jury. Therefore, we see no merit in the said argument raised by

the Learned Counsel for the 2nd to 4th accused-appellants.

Failure to produce Conditional Pardon

Even though the counsel who represented the 2nd to 4th accused-appellants did not make any reference

to the evidence in this case, the Learned Additional Solicitor General, placed before us the entire case

for the prosecution.

As revealed before this court the 1st deceased had an illicit affair with the husband of the 1st accused.

The 2nd deceased was the pt deceased's servant. The 2nd accused-appellant is the Mill Manager of the

1 st accused-appellant and 3rd and 4th accused-appellants were people who helped the 2nd accused-

appellant to commit the said offence. Witness no.3 who was the driver of the pt accused's husband

was used in the commission of this offence. According to the 3rd witness he was physically present

during the entire episode, witnessed the entire incident but could not leave the place. When he was

produced before Marawila Police by the husband of the 1st accused, he made a statement to police and

subsequently made a statement giving full details before the Magistrate. Later he was granted a pardon

by the Honourable Attorney General and made him a witness for the prosecution.

As submitted by the Learned Additional Solicitor General the submissions made by the Learned

Counsel for the accused-appellant is an unheard objection by this court earlier.

9

Granting a conditional pardon to a person and making him a witness is provided subject to certain

restrictions by our courts. It is an accepted legal principle that it is unsafe to act on the uncorroborated

testimony of a witness who was given a conditional pardon.

In the case of Ram Prasad V. State of Maharashtra 1999 Cr. IJ 2889 (SC) it was decided that, the

evidence of an accomplice has to pass the test of reliability and must leave adequate corroboration

before the same can be acted upon.

The next important aspect of having a witness who was given a conditional pardon in a jury trial is the

duty on the prosecution and the court to inform the jury of this fact and cautioned the jury with regard

to the admissibility of the said evidence.

In this regard, we observe that while the 3rd witness Sunil Shantha was giving evidence, he had told

court, that he made a statement to CID on 7th of January 1992, and was remanded. On 16th he made a

voluntary statement before the Magistrate and later signed certain documents before the Magistrate

expressing his willingness to become a prosecution witness. Even the defence counsel cross examined

the witness on the basis that he was granted a conditional pardon by the Attorney General.

Registrar of the High Court whilst giving evidence before the jury once again revealed the High Court

the background behind granting a conditional pardon to the 3rd witness Sunil Shantha.

The Learned High Court Judge had explained the Jury the principles, fundamentals and procedure with

regard to granting conditional pardon to Sunil Shantha and cautioned the jury as to how such evidence

should be evaluated. Whilst referring to the requirement of corroboration, the court has specially

warned the jury that such corroborative evidence should emanate from independent sources.

In the absence of any specific legal requirement for the pardon papers to be marked before the trial,

this court is of the view that the Learned Trial Judge has sufficiently cautioned the Jury with regard to

10

the admissibly of the evidence of the 3rd witness Sunil Shantha on whom the Attorney General has

granted a pardon.

In this objection, the Learned Counsel for the 2nd to 4th accused-appellants have further submitted that

there was no independent corroboration to the evidence of the 3rd witness.

However, the extent to which the evidence of 3rd witness Sunil Shantha was corroborated by

independent witnesses were placed before the Jury by the trial judge and as observed by us, this

corroboration commences at the time the two deceased were taken out from the house of Rani Beatrice

(sister in law of the pt deceased) with the dying deposition made to her by the 2nd deceased that one of

the persons who came up to the gate was Sunil Shantha.

In his evidence, Sunil Shantha has taken up the position that he had no alternative but to follow the

order given to him by the 2nd accused-appellant and had explained the events took place on the fateful

day. In his evidence, he had stated going to a petrol station and buying some petrol to a can prior to

their visit to the house of witness Beatrice. This too was corroborated by witness Dharmakeerithi a

pump attendant who identified, Sunil Shantha and all three accused-appellants coming to collect

petrol.

After the killing and setting fire to the dead bodies, when the three-accused left the scene of crime in

the Jeep driven by the 3rd witness, the witness could not control the vehicle due to fear, and it had gone

out of the road and collided with a tree.

Witness Premathilake who lived close to the place where the Jeep met with an accident, helped in

pulling the Jeep and the putting it back to the road. Though witness could not identify the persons, he

was categorical that apart from the driver, there were three others in the Jeep.

Prosecution witness M.AJ. Mendis the Additional Government Analyst confirmed that the parts of the

broken tail light found at the scene of the accident tallied with the Jeep. In addition, the Additional

11

Government Analyst corroborated that the two hair strands found inside the Jeep belonging to the two

deceased Theresa and Taclin and Scientifically it was conclusively established that the Jeep belonging

to the husband of the 15t accused to the Indictment which were driven by witness Sunil Shantha was

instrumental in committing the two murder on 03.01.1992.

When considering the above evidence, which was carefully placed before the Jury by the Leaned Trial

Judge, we see no reason to hold that the evidence given by prosecution witness No.3 Sunil Shantha

was not corroborated by the independent witnesses' testimony.

Under these circumstances, we reject the second ground of appeal raised by the 2nd to 4th accused-

appellants.

Non compliance of section 227 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act

Section 227 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 reads thus;

227 (1) It shall be necessary in any case to keep the jury together during any adjournment

previous to the close ofthe Judge's summing up, but it shall be lawful for the Judge if it

should appear to him to be advisable in the interests of justice in any trial to require the

jury to be kept together during any adjournment.

(2) Where the jury is allowed to separate during the course of any trial the jurors may be

first sworn or affirmed not to hold communication with any person other than a fellow

juror upon the subject of the trial during such separation. (emphasis added)

(3) If any such juror shall hold any such communication with any person other than a

fellow juror or if any person other than a communication with any such juror, such

juror or person as the case may be shall be deemed to be guilty of a contempt of court

and shall be punishable accordingly.

12

As referred above, there is no requirement under law to keep the jurors together during an adjournment

prior to the judges summing up, unless the learned High Court Judge decides so in the interest of

justice,

When the jurors are allowed to separate, it is the general practice to sworn or affirm the jurors not to

hold communication with other than the fellow jurors but the term used in the section is 'jurors may'

and not 'jurors shall' as against the term 'shall' used in subsection (1).

However when going through the proceedings of the present jury trial, it is observed by this court that

except for the adjournment on 3rd February, on all the other days the jurors had been properly affirmed

prior to the adjournment and this practice had continued nearly for 3 weeks since the trial proceeded

for nearly 3 weeks. Therefore, it is our considered view that the jurors were well aware of their

responsibilities and the mere failure on one single day has not caused any prejudice to the accused-

appellants. It is further observed that in the absence any information and/or complaint against a juror

of their conduct during the trial, it is safe to conclude that no prejudice had caused to anyone of the

accused-appellants for the failure as complained by the Learned Counsel for the 2nd to 4th accused-

appellants. ,

I Approach by the Learned Trial Judge I

The role played by the Trial Judge at the conclusion of a jury trial is provided under section 229-231 I

of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act as follows, i

Section 229 When the case for the defence and the prosecuting counsel's reply (if any) are

concluded the Judge shall charge the jury summing up the evidence and laying down

the law by which the jury are to be guided.

Section 230 It is the duty of the Judge-

13

a) To decide all questions of law arising in the course of the trial and especially all

questions as to the relevancy of facts which it is proposed to prove and the

admissibility of evidence or the propriety of questions asked by or on behalf of

the parties, and in his discretion to prevent the production of inadmissible

evidence whether it is or is not objected to by the parties;

b) To decide upon the meaning and construction of all documents given in

evidence at the trial;

c) To decide upon all matters of fact which it may be necessary to prove in order

to enable evidence of particular matters to be given;

d) To decide whether any question which arises for himself or for the jury.

Section 231 The Judge may if he thinks proper in the course of his summing up express to the jury

his opinion upon any question of fact or upon any question of mixed law and fact

relevant to the proceeding.

When making his summing up before the jury, the trial judge is free to make his summing up

according to his wish but what is required is to follow the above guidelines. Therefore, one cannot

argue that the approach of the judge is erroneous, if he has properly guided by the requirements

referred to above.

One of the main argument raised by the Learned Counsel for the 2nd to 4th accused-appellants was that

the Learned Trial Judge when making the charge before the jury does not indicate any application of

the facts to the law. However, when going through the charge by the Learned Trial Judge we observe

that the Learned Trial Judge had properly explained the each and every legal provision applicable to

the present case and thereafter evaluated the prosecution as well as the defence version at length

before the jury. As observed from the relevant provision of law in the Code of Criminal Procedure Act

No 15 of 1979, i.e. section 229, the law requires the trial judge to, "charge the jury summing up the

14

evidence and laying down the law by which the jury are to be guided" and there is no requirement of

application of law to the facts of the case as submitted by the Learned Counsel for the accused-

appellants. We further observe that the above allegation made by the Learned Counsel is not specific

but mainly in general nature and in the said circumstances we see no merit in this argument.

In addition to the main grounds of appeal raised before us by the Learned Counsel for the 2nd to 4th

accused-appellants, when filing the written submissions before this court, had drew our attention to

several portions of the summing up by the trial judge and submitted that the errors, misdirection and

non-directions found in the summing up had caused prejudice to the 2nd to 4th accused-appellants.

However, when considering the said portions placed before us, we cannot consider them as errors,

misdirection or non-directions, since the Learned Counsel had relied only on a specific sentence of the

summing but not considered the summing up as a whole when placing those arguments. In one

instance the Learned Counsel whilst referring to page 1759 of the summing up, submitted that the

Learned Trial Judge had erred in law when he said to the jury that, "they can convict even on

uncorroborated evidence of an accomplice" but, as observed by us the said position taken by the

Learned Counsel is untrue and the trial judge had discussed the value of the evidence of an accomplice

in detail from pages 1759-1764.

Whilst referring to page 1781 of the summing up the Learned Counsel has submitted that Learned

Trial Judge's directions on dock statement dilutes the value of it but we see no merit in the said

argument. In this regard we observe that the Learned Trial Judge after discussing the nature and value

of a dock statement at length, had finally said, "6 q~C) C)ciBltJ)6lC)~G3 ~ OlOOC)@C) q~

l \ !

I

15

In the said circumstances, we see no merit in the argument raised by the Learned Counsel when he

submitted that the portions referred to in the written submissions have caused prejudice to the 2nd to 4th

accused -appellants.

For the forgoing reasons this court is not inclined to interfere with the conviction and the sentence

imposed on the 2nd, 3rd and 4th accused-appellants by the High Court of Colombo. The appeal

submitted by the 2nd, 3rd and 4th accused appellants is hereby dismissed.

Appeal dismissed. Conviction and sentence is affirmed.

President of the Court of Appeal

H.C.J. Madawala J

I agree,

Judge of the Court of Appeal

{