==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka Complainant

Court of Appeal Case No: Vs,

CA/HCC 280/2023

High Court of Balapitiya 1. Opatha Withanage Sarath Kumara

Case No. CRI 1561/2013 2. Hikkaduwe Vithanage Ruwan Kumara

3. Kariyawasam Bovithanthri Nishantha

4. Subayahakuru Champika

5. Gallage Sujeewa Pushpakumara

Accused

And Now Between

Gallage Sujeewa Pushpakumara

Accused-Appellant

Vs,

Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12.

Complainant-Respondent

2

Before: Amal Ranaraja, J.

Dr. Sumudu Premachandra, J.

Counsel: Asela Serasinghe for the 5th Accused-Appellant Janaka Bandara, D.S.G. for the State.

Argued on: 15.07.2026 Judgment on: 07.09.2026

Judgment

Amal Ranaraja. J,

1. The accused-appellant (hereinafter referred to as ‘appellant’) has been

indicted in the High Court of Balapitiya in Case No. HC/1561/13, with

four others. The charges in the indictment are as follows;

01. On or about the 18th of February, 2010, within the

jurisdiction of this Court, in Marakgoda, you, along with the

now deceased second accused, were members of an unlawful

assembly with the common intention of causing injury to one

Warapitiyage Piyasena; thereby you have committed an

offence punishable under Section 140 of the Penal Code of Sri

Lanka.

02. At the time, place and course of action of the above first

charge, a member of several members of the aforementioned

unlawful assembly, caused the death of Warapitiyage

Piyasena, and had knowledge of the possibility of this offence

3

occurring in achieving the aforementioned common intention;

thereby at the commission of such offence, you, along with the

now deceased second accused, by being members of such

unlawful assembly, have committed an offence punishable

under Section 296 read with Section 146 of the Penal Code.

03. At the time, place and course of action of the above first

charge, you, along with the now deceased second accused,

caused the death of Warapitiyage Piyasena, thereby you have

committed an offence punishable under Section 296 read with

Section 32 of the Penal Code of Sri Lanka.

2. At the conclusion of the trial, the learned High Court Judge has

convicted the appellant of the first and the third charges, and sentenced

him as follows;

i. First Charge – Sentenced to 6 months rigorous imprisonment

and also imposed a fine of Rs. 5000.00, with a term of 5

months simple imprisonment in default.

ii. Third Charge - Sentenced to death.

3. The appellant, aggrieved by the conviction, disputed judgement,

together with the sentencing order, has preferred the instant appeal to

this Court.

4. The appellant contends that the evidence presented by the prosecution

only indicates that the appellant struck the head of the deceased on the

road, while the deceased was already on the ground. That this evidence

does not demonstrate an assault involving the weapon allegedly in

appellant’s possession. Consequently, the prosecution has failed to

adduce sufficient material to establish the appellant’s murderous

intent. Hence, the learned High Court Judge has misdirected himself in

4

convicting the appellant of murder, an offence punishable under

Section 296 of the Penal Code of Sri Lanka (the third charge).

5. Upon reviewing the disputed judgement, it is apparent that the learned

High Court Judge has convicted the appellant of murder, under the

third limb of Section 294 of the Penal Code of Sri Lanka;

294. Except in the cases hereinafter excepted, culpable homicide

is murder –

Firstly –

Secondly –

Thirdly – If it is done with the intention of causing bodily

injury to any person, and the bodily injury intended to be

inflicted is sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause

death;”

6. On a plain reading of the third limb’s provisions, for charges under such

limb, the prosecution must establish that the accused possessed a

specific mental element, i.e. the intention to inflict bodily injury. This

injury must inherently be of a kind that, in the ordinary course of

nature, is sufficient to cause death.

7. In Vithana Vs. The Republic 2007 1 SLR 169, Sisira Abrew J, in

interpreting the third limb to Section 294 of the Penal Code of Sri Lanka

has held as follows;

“The ingredients that must be proved by the prosecution in order to

prove a charge of murder under the 3rd limb of Section 294 are that:

(i) The accused inflicted a bodily injury on the victim.

(ii) The victim died as a result of the above bodily injury.

5

(iii) The accused had the intention to cause the bodily injury.

(iv) The above injury was sufficient to cause the death of the victimin

in the ordinary course of nature”

8. Dr. U.C.P. Perera, a medico-legal specialist, who has conducted the

postmortem examination of the deceased, mentioned in the relevant

charge, has provided the following opinion;

හිසට එල්ල වූ ම ොට බලයක් ම ේතුමෙන් ම ොලමේ ආෙරණ තුළ දැඩි මලස රුධිරය

ගැලීම න් ො ම ොලය තුෙොලවීම න් රණය සිදු වී ඇත. (vide Postmortem

report marked පැ 01 in page 299 of the Brief),

Meaning the death was caused by a traumatic brain injury and

subdural haemorrhage, resulting from blunt force applied to the head.

Dr. Perera has testified that the blunt force applied to the head of the

deceased, could have resulted from the head being grabbed and then

struck against the road. He has stated that he could not exclude this

specific possibility.

9. Furthermore, Dr. Perera has indicated that the brain injury and

subdural haemorrhage were in the ordinary course of nature, sufficient

to cause the death of the deceased.

10. In King vs. Thajudeen 6 NLR 16, Bonser CJ has stated,

“But it was urged that they did not intend to break the man’s rib and

therefore they could not be convicted of grievous hurt. No doubt they

had not in their mind at the time they struck him their baton and with

their fists any definite idea that they were going to break his ribs or any

particular rib; but when people cause injuries to a man, their intent

6

must be judged by the result of their action. They must be deemed in

law to have intended what they did”.

Therefore, the Court can deem that the appellant intended to cause the

injury to the head of the deceased together with the underlying injuries,

set out in detail in “පැ.1” which has been classified to inherently be a

kind that, in the ordinary course of nature, is sufficient to cause death.

11. Considering the matters discussed above, the appellant’s contention

lacks merit. Accordingly, I am not inclined to interfere with the

conviction, disputed judgement, together with the sentencing order and

proceed to affirm the same.

12. I dismiss the appeal but make no order regarding costs.

Appeal dismissed.

13. The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this Judgement to the

High Court in Balapitiya for compliance.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Dr. Sumudu Premachandra, J.

I agree

Judge of the Court of Appeal