Page 1 of 8

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal under and in terms of section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 and in terms of Article 138 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka Complainant

Court of Appeal Case No.:

CA HCC 184/20

Vs.

High Court of Galle Case No. HC 3003/07

Udageiyalage Sarath Kumar

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN Udageiyalage Sarath Kumar

Accused-Appellant Vs. Hon. Attorney General, Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12.

Complainant-Respondent

Page 2 of 8

Before: B. Sasi Mahendran, J. Amal Ranaraja, J.

Counsel: Selvaraja Dushyanthan with Dhanushka Thilini instructed by

Rohitha Deshapriya for the Accused-Appellant.

Maheshika Silva, D.S.G. for the Respondent. Argued on: 04.08.2025 Decided on: 28.08.2025

JUDGMENT

AMAL RANARAJA, J.

1. The Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Appellant) has

been indicted in the High Court of Galle in case no. HCC 3003/07. 2. The charge in the indictment is as follows;

That on or about, April 08, 2006, the appellant has committed the offence of rape on a minor, who was under the age of 16 years, an offence punishable under section 364(2)(e) of the Penal Code as amended by Penal Code (Amendment) Act No.22 of 1995.

3. At the conclusion of the trial, the appellant has been convicted of the

offence in the charge and sentenced as follows;

A term of 20 years rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs.25,000 with a term of 01 year simple imprisonment in default.

Page 3 of 8

Further, has ordered the appellant to pay a sum of Rs.500,000 as compensation to PW01 with a term of 02 year simple imprisonment in default. Also that the terms of imprisonment shall run consecutively. 4. Being aggrieved by the conviction, the disputed judgment, and the

sentencing order, the appellant has preferred the instant appeal to this Court. 5. When the matter was taken up for argument, the learned counsel for

the appellant informed Court that he intended to limit the ground of appeal to the following;

i. The sentence imposed by the learned High Court Judge is

disproportionate and excessive, therefore the sentence is contrary to sentencing policy.

6. The learned counsel for the appellant has contended that the sentence

imposed on the appellant was extreme, and the sentence of 20 years rigorous imprisonment imposed in respect of the charge is the maximum sentence imposed by statute. Additionally, the learned counsel for the accused has contended that the following circumstances be taken into consideration and a variation of the sentence be made in favour of the appellant. 7. The learned counsel for the appellant has set out the following

occurrences in mitigation;

i. The appellant was 21 years old at the time of the

occurrence and 33 years old at the time of the conviction. ii. That according to the medico-legal report there were no

external injuries on the victim; i.e. PW01. iii. The appellant had no previous convictions or pending

cases. iv. That the appellant was a first offender.

v. That the appellant was married and a father of two

children. vi. That the sentence was imposed 14 years after the incident.

Page 4 of 8

8. The learned deputy solicitor general has asserted that PW01 had been

held in temporary custody by the appellant at the time of the alleged incident referred to in the charge occurred. That such a situation involves a significant breach of trust placed on the appellant, which is a serious matter. Furthermore, the Courts attention had been brought to the fact that the appellant had attempted to communicate with PW01 while she was in the custody of the probation officers following the incident in question. Such action by the appellant is argued to demonstrate a persistent intention to reoffend. 9. At the time of the incident referenced in the charge, PW01 has been an

8 year old girl. The appellant, an adult male, and a relative of PW01.

10. To begin with, it is reasonable to consider the sentences prescribed by

law for the offence stated in the charge set out in the indictment. 11. Section 364(2) of the Penal Code is as follows;

Whoever-

(a) being a public officer or person in a position of authority,

takes advantage of his official position, and commits rape on a woman in his official custody or wrongfully restraints and commits rape on a woman; (b) being on the management, or on the staff of a remand

home or other place of custody, established by or under law, or of a womens or childrens institution, takes advantage of his position and commits rape on any woman in mate of such remand home, place of custody or institution;

(c) being on the management or staff of a hospital, takes

advantage of his position and commits rape on a woman in that hospital;

(d) commits rape on a woman knowing her to be pregnant;

(e) commits rape on a woman under eighteen years of age;

(f) commits rape on a woman who is mentally or physically

disabled;

(g) commits gang rape;

Page 5 of 8

shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term not less

than ten years and not exceeding twenty years and with fine

and shall in addition be ordered to pay compensation of an

amount determined by court to the person in respect of whom the

offence was committed for the injuries caused to such person;

Provided however, that where the offence is committed in respect

of a person under sixteen years of age, the court may, where the

offender is a person under eighteen years of age and the

intercourse has been with the consent of the person, impose a

sentence of imprisonment for a term less than ten years.

12. The best interest of the younger generation, is in peril with the rampant

sex offenders which does not augur well for the future generations. The

rich Sri Lankan culture is at risk. Also broken or disturbed young lives

with their educational prospects impeded, their lives steered off course

and potential psychological considerations ought to be of paramount

importance.

13. Further, in determining the appropriate punishment, the Court is

required to consider the same from the point of view of the convict as

well as the public.

14. In Attorney General vs. H. N. de Silva 57 NLR 121, Basnayake,

ACJ, explaining the matters that should be taken into consideration in

determining a sentence has stated as follows;

In assessing the punishment that should be passed on an

offender, a Judge should consider the matter of sentence both from

the point of view of the public and the offender, Judges are too often

prone to look at the question only from the angle of the offender. A

Judge should, in determining the proper sentence, first consider the

gravity of the offence as it appears from the nature of the act itself

Page 6 of 8

and should have regard to the punishment provided in the Penal

Code or other statute under which the offender is charged. He

should also regard the effect of the punishment as a deterrent and

consider to what extent it will be effective. If the offender held a

position of trust or belonged to a service which enjoys the public

confidence that must be taken into account in assessing the

punishment. The incident of crimes of the nature of which the

offender has been found to be guilty and the difficulty of detection

are also matters which should receive due consideration. The

reformation of the criminal, though no doubt an important

consideration is subordinate to the others I have mentioned. Where

the public interest or the welfare of the State (which are

synonymous) outweighs the previous good character, antecedents

and age of the offender, public interest must prevail.

15. Convictions for rape carry significant implications not just for the

victim but for the society as a whole ensuring that individuals convicted

of serious offences are dealt with appropriately is crucial for justice and

further deterrence of future offences. The legal consequences imposed

on individuals convicted of rape are designed to reflect the seriousness

of the crime.

16. S. N. Silva, J, as he was then, in assessing the aggravating

circumstances as regards to the offence of rape has stated as follows in

Attorney General vs. Ranasinghe [1993] 2 SLR 81,

It is also appropriate to cite an observation made by the

Lord Chief Justice in the Court of Appeal of England, with regard

to the sentence to be imposed for an offence of rape. In the case

of Roberts (4) at page 244. It was observed as follows;

Page 7 of 8

Rape is always a serious crime. Other than in wholly

exceptional circumstances, it calls for an immediate

custodial sentence. This was certainly so in the present

case. A custodial sentence is necessary for a variety of

reasons. First of all to mark the gravity of the offence.

Secondly to emphasise public disapproval. Thirdly to serve

as a warning to others. Fourthly to punish the offender,

and last but by no means least, to protect women. The

length of the sentence will depend on all the

circumstances. That is a trite observation, but these, in

cases of rape vary widely from case to case.

In the case of, Keith Billiam [5] the Lord Chief Justice

repeated the foregoing observations and stated that in a

contested case of rape a figure of five years imprisonment

should be taken as the starting point of the sentence,

subject to any aggravating or mitigating features.He

observed further as follows:-

The crime should in any event be treated as

aggravated by any of the following factors : (1) violence is

used over and above the force necessary to commit the

rape; (2) a weapon is used to frighten or wound the victim;

(3) the rape is repeated; (4) the rape has been carefully

planned ; (5) the defendant has previous convictions for

rape or other serious offences of a violent or sexual kind;

(6) the victim is subjected to further sexual indignities or

perversions; (7) the victim is either very old or very young ;

(8) the effect upon the victim, whether physical or mental,

is of special seriousness. Where any one or more of these

aggravating features are present, the sentence should be

substantially higher than the figure suggested as the

starting point.

Page 8 of 8

17. It is seen that the appellant has been 21 years old at the time he

committed the offence referred to in the charge on PW01, an 8 year old girl at that time. However, this Court also takes into consideration the fact that the rape has not been repeated on the victim and also the fact that the appellant does not have previous convictions or pending cases. 18. Accordingly, I have taken the above matter into consideration and is of

the view that ends of justice would be satisfied if a lesser sentence be imposed. 19. Therefore, I set aside the sentence of 20 years rigorous imprisonment

imposed in respect of the offence stated in the charge and, sentence the appellant to 15 years rigorous imprisonment in respect of such offence. The fine imposed in respect of the offence and the sum ordered to be paid as compensation together with the terms of simple imprisonment imposed in default of the payment of the same, shall remain unchanged. The substantive term of rigorous imprisonment shall commence from the date of conviction i.e. September 25,2020. 20. Subject to the above variation, the appeal stands dismissed.

Appeal dismissed. I make no order regarding costs. 21. The Registrar of this Court is directed to communicate this judgment to

the High Court of Galle for compliance.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

B. SASI MAHENDRAN, J.

I agree

Judge of the Court of Appeal