1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of 1979.

Court of Appeal Case No. CA/HCC/ 0254/2017 Kaluarachchige Don Sampath

High Court of Gampaha Samantha Kumara

Case No. HC/111/2008

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

vs.

The Hon. Attorney General Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

P.Kumararatnam,J.

COUNCEL : U.R. De Silva, P.C. with Savithri Fernando

for the Appellant.

Chethiya Goonesekera, ASG for the

Respondent.

2 | P a g e

ARGUED ON : 29/03/2022

DECIDED ON : 24/05/2022

***********************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) was indicted in the High Court of Gampaha under Section 300 of

the Penal Code for committing attempted murder of Rupasinghe Liyanage on

or about 05th May 2005.

The trial commenced before the High Court Judge of Gampaha. As the

Appellant absconded when this case came up for hearing, Learned High

Court has held an inquiry under Section 241(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 and fixed the case for trial in absentia of the

Appellant.

When the trial was to commence on 10/03/2011, a counsel submitting a

letter written by the Appellant sought the courts permission to defend the

Appellant in his absence. The court acting under Section 241(2) of the Code

of Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 granted permission to the defence

counsel to appear on behalf of the Appellant in his absence.

In Thilakaratne v. Attorney General [1989] 2 SLR 191 the court held that:

Section 241(2) contemplates a case where an absent accused or

someone else on his behalf retains a counsel to appear for him in

absentia. It can also apply in a case where, at the commencement of a

High Court trial, the accused is represented by counsel (assigned or

3 | P a g e

retained), and during the course of the trial the accused absconds. In

such a case it is possible for a counsel to continue to appear for him in

absentia right till the end of the trial.

After the conclusion of the prosecution case, the learned High Court Judge

had called for the defence. As the Appellant was tried in absentia the case

was closed without adducing any evidence on behalf of the Appellant. After

considering the evidence presented, the learned High Court Judge had

convicted the Appellant under Section 300 of the Penal Code and sentenced

him to two years rigorous imprisonment with a fine of Rs.1000/- with a

default sentence of two months simple imprisonment.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

The Counsel for the Appellant, U. R. De Silva, P.C. had filed a motion on

28/03/2022 indicating that he receives no instructions from the Appellant

and there is no way of contacting him as he was absconding throughout the

trial as well as during the period of this appeal. As such, the counsel wishes

to withdraw from this appeal. This position was endorsed by his junior

counsel who appeared before this court on that day.

Hence, the court decided to adjudicate this matter based on the written

submissions filed by the parties. The ASG, who appeared for the Respondent

have no objection.

As no separate grounds of the Appeal filed by the Appellant, this court has

decided to adjudicate this appeal on following grounds extracted from the

written submission filed on behalf of the Appellant.

1. Evidence given by the victim PW1 is not credible as it contains

many contradictions inter se and per se.

2. The Learned High Court Judge had shifted the burden of proof on

to the Appellant.

4 | P a g e

3. The Learned High Court Judge had failed to evaluate the defense

case which creates a reasonable doubt over the prosecutions case.

Background of the Case

In this case the victim PW1 and the Appellant are neighbours. On the day of

the incident around 5 p.m. when the victim was making his way to the well

for bathing as usual, he had been intercepted by the Appellant and an

argument had ensued between the Appellant and the victim. Then the

Appellant had started to assault the victim which had turned to a fight

between the two. Initially, the victim was unaware that the Appellant was in

possession of a knife but saw it only when he was being stabbed by the

Appellant. At that time when the victim had grabbed the knife from the

Appellant, the Appellant had gone home. The victim has been bleeding when

he returned home and had sought first aid from a neighbour but the

neighbour had refused to treat him. Hence, he was taken to a hospital nearby

for treatment. He had been in Ragama Teaching Hospital for about 18 days

and under gone a surgery performed on his abdomen. He had given a

statement to police while receiving treatment in the hospital and handed over

the knife which he grabbed from the Appellant to the police. The knife was

marked as P1 at the trial.

In the first ground of appeal the contention of the Appellant is that the

evidence given by the victim is not credible as it contains so many

contradictions inter se and per se.

The victim, during cross examination stated that although this matter was

referred to the Mediation Board it was not settled. He further said that no

verbal exchange happened between them but both had a fight and the victim

had retaliated with the bucket he was carrying at that time. Victim was not

sure as to when he had taken the knife to the hospital and handed it over to

the police. As he was not stable when he was admitted to the hospital, his

position was that he cant remember everything accurately. Denying that he

5 | P a g e

carried a knife at the time of the fight, he further denied giving false evidence

in the court.

Although 13 contradictions were marked on the evidence given by the victim

most of them are related to how he handed over the knife to the police and

the nature of the knife. Some contradictions are based on the memory of the

victim. As none of them attack the root of the case, the Learned High Court

Judge had very correctly admitted the victims evidence as true in order to

come to his conclusion.

In Attorney General v. Sandanam Pitchi Mary Theresa (2011) 2 SLR 292

held that:

Discrepancies that do not go to the root of the matter and assail the

basic version of the witness cannot be given too much importance.

In this case as the evidence given by the victim is not tainted with doubt or

ambiguity and do not go to the root of the case, I conclude that the Learned

High Court Judge is correct to accept the victims evidence to arrive at his

findings. Therefore, the first ground has failed without any merit.

In the second ground of the appeal the contention of the Appellant is that the

Learned High Court Judge had shifted the burden of proof onto the Appellant.

On careful perusal of the Judgment, it is apparent that nowhere in the

judgment does the Learned High Court Judge shift the burden of proof onto

the Appellant. The Learned High Court Judge very correctly, considering all

the evidence in accordance with the Evidence Ordinance, declared that the

prosecution has proved the case against the Appellant beyond reasonable

doubt. Hence, this ground also has no merit.

In the final ground the Appellant contends that the Learned High Court

Judge had failed to evaluate the defence case which creates a reasonable

doubt over the prosecutions case.

6 | P a g e

The Learned High Court Judge had very correctly analyzed the evidence

adduced by both parties to arrive at his finding. As the Appellant was

absconding during the pendency of the trial and when the defence was called

by the court, the Appellant had failed to adduce evidence on his behalf.

Despite that the Learned High Court Judge without prejudicing himself, had

properly analyzed the evidence presented and had come to a correct finding.

Hence, this ground too has no merit.

In this case the prosecution had adduced strong and incriminating evidence

against the Appellant. The Learned High Court Judge had properly analyzed

and considered all the evidence presented by both parties and come to his

conclusion that the Appellant is guilty of the charge levelled against him.

As the Learned High Court Judge had rightly convicted the Appellant for the

charge of attempted murder and had given a very lenient custodial sentence,

I affirm the conviction and dismiss the Appeal of the Appellant.

The Registrar is directed to send a copy of this judgment to the High Court

of Gampaha along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

SAMPATH B. ABAYAKOON, J.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL