1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A. Case No: CAfPHC/160/2013 PRC Kalutara Case No: Rev 09/2011 MC Mathugama Case No: 63910/10

In tenns of an appeal under Article 154(P)

of the Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka and High

Court of the Provinces (Special provisions)

Act No. 19 of 1990

1. Ponnamperuma Arachchige Nuwan

Thilakarathna ,

2. Dona Sadana Kumari Wijesooriya,

Both of

Lumbini Niwasa,

Kosketiya,

Pelawatta.

2nd Party-Petitioner-Appellants

-Vs-

Rettiarachchige Don Nihal J ayawardana, J

Kosketiya,

Pelawatta.

1 st Party-Respondent-Respondent

Before

Counsel

The Officer in Charge,

Police Station,

Meegahathenna.

2

Complainant-Respondent-Respondent

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

&

Mahinda Samayawardhena J.

Nihara Randeniya for the 2nd Party-Petitioner-

Appellants.

Ranjan Nayakaratne with Kumara Gunathilake for the 1 st

Party -Respondent-Respondent.

Written Submissions: By the 1st Party-Respondent-Respondent on 20109/2018

By the 2nd Party-Petitioner- Appellants on 25/0112019

Argued on : 31/05/2019

Judgment on: 03/07/2019

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

This is a Revision application against the judgment of the learned High

Court Judge ofKalutara dated 08/08/2013.

3

The Complainant-Respondent-Respondent filed an infonnation under

Section 66(l)(a), of the Primary Courts Procedure Act (Act), owing to a likelihood

of a breach of peace between the 2nd Party-Petitioner-Appellant (Appellant) and

the 1 st Party-Respondent-Respondent (Respondent) due to a forcible encroachment

to the land described in the sketch at page 33 of the brief. The learned Magistrate

after inquiry, by order dated 09/02/2011, granted possession of the land to the

Respondent in terms of Section 68( 1) of the Act.

The Appellant filed a revision application in the High Court where the

learned High Court Judge affinned the order made by the learned Magistrate.

This application has been filed mainly on the basis that the learned

Magistrate has. not properly and carefully considered the evidence led by the

Appellant in order to identify the land in issue. The objection raised on the failure

to show exceptional circumstances by the Appellant, in order to maintain this

application, was not pursued by the Respondent.

In tenns of Section 66( 1) of the Act, the Magistrate should evaluate the

evidence, if there is a dispute regarding the identity of the land. (David Appuhamy

vs. Yassassi Thero (1989) 1 SLR 253)

The land in dispute is known as Kosketiyawatta Uthuru Kattiya, however,

ill common usage the land is known as Kadewatta. The police report dated

08/09/2010, has identified the disputed land as Kadewatta.

,

4

The Appellant has drawn attention of Court to documents marked 2P6, 2P7

and 2P9 as documents, which the Appellant contended were documents not

considered by the learned Magistrate. The Appellant states that he filled a part of

the adjacent land in dispute with earth, since the land where his house is situated is

high land than the adjacent land.

It is noted that at pages 169-172 of the brief, the learned Magistrate has

compared and distinguished the sketch of the land in dispute marked 2P6 with the

sketch prepared by PC 81911 Wijesuriya, which is a sketch made in the process of

the investigation to the compliant. The sketch marked 2P6, clearly indicates that

the land in dispute which the Respondent claims ownership is 60 perches in extent

and is adjacent to the 1 acre land, which belongs to the Appellant. It is observed

that there is no road which gives direct access to the Appellants land from the

main road. The access road to the Appellants house is limited to his house and not

the land in dispute.

According to the police observations, the 20 perch land in dispute adjacent

to the land of the Appellant is an uncleared land which does not consist of a

roadway from the Appellants land.

It is noted that the learned Magistrate has correctly considered the sketch

prepared by the police and the Appellant marked 2P6 and 2P7, and after

considering the evidence of the respective parties, has identified the land in

5

dispute. Therefore, the argument of the Appellant that the land in dispute is not

identified correctly, cannot be sustained.

In the circumstances, I do not see any reason to interfere with the findings

of the learned Magistrate or the learned High Court Judge.

Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed without costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL