IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A. Case No: CA 204/2017

H.C. Colombo Case No: HC 7582/2014

In the matter of an Appeal under section 15(b) of the Judicature Act No. 02 of 1978 read with Section 331 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka Complainant

Vs.

Mahapatunage Sujeewa Samanmali Perera alias Hamina No. 27/G/7, Sedawatta Road, Wellampitiya. Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

The Attorney General Attorney-General's Department, Colombo 12. Complainant-Appellant

Vs.

Mahapatunage Sujeewa Samanmali Perera alias Hamina No. 27/G/7,

Page 1 of 8

BEFORE

COUNSEL

WRlTIEN SUBMISSIONS

DECIDED ON

K.K. WICKREMASINGHE, J.

S.edawatta Road, Wellampitiya. Accused-Respondent

K. K. Wickremasinghe, J. K. Priyantha Fernando, J.

Riyaz Bary, SSC for the Complainant-Appellant

.... AAL Dr. Ranjit Fernando for the Accused-Respondent

The Complainant-Appellant - On 03.09.2018 The Accused-Respondent - On 22.10.2018

08.08.2019

This appeal was filed by the Hon. Attorney General seeking to set aside sentences

imposed by the Learned High Court Judge of Colombo dated 23.01.2017 in case

No. HC 7582/2014, and seeking to substitute the same with lawful and appropriate

sentences.

Facts of the Case:

The accused-respondent (hereinafter referred to as the 'respondent') was indicted

in the High Court of Colombo on two counts for committing the offences of

trafficking and possession of 1.72 grams of Heroin, punishable in terms of section

54(A) (b) and 54A (d) of the Poisons Opium and Dangerous Drugs Ordinance as

Page 2 of 8

amended by Act No. l3 of 1984 (hereinafter,referred to as the 'Dangerous Drugs

Ordinance').

The indictment was handed over and read over to the respondent on 20.01.2015

and the respondent pleaded not guilty to the same. Thereafter, the case was fixed

for trial. However, on 23.01.2017, the respondent informed her willingness to

conclude the case by pleading guilty and accordingly, the indictment was read over

to the respondent again. The respondent pleaded guilty to the both counts in the

indictment and was convicted accordingly.

, Thereafter counsel for the both parties made submissions regarding the sentence.

The Leaned High Court Judge imposed sentences on the respondent as follows;

1. Count No.1 -A term of 12 months Rigorous Imprisonment that was

suspended for 7 years. A fine of Rs.l 00, 000/= with a default sentence of 6

months Simple Imprisonment.

2. Count No.2 -A term of 12 months Rigorous Imprisonment that was

suspended for 7 years. A fine of Rs.l 00, 000/= with a default sentence of 6

months Simple Imprisonment.

The Leaned High Court Judge ordered the sentences to run concurrently.

Being aggrieved by and dissatisfied with the said sentences imposed by the

Learned High Court Judge, the appellant preferred this appeal.

Following grounds of appeal were averred on behalf the appellant;

1. The sentences imposed are manifestly erroneous and contrary to section 54A

(b) and (d) of the Dangerous Drugs Ordinance.

2. The sentences are manifestly inadequate having regard to the nature of the

offences for which the respondent had been convicted.

3. The attendant circumstances pertaining to the offence committed, warrant

imposition of a higher sentence.

Page 30f8

It is observed that as per the submissions of ~he State Counsel in the High Court,

the respondent was arrested on 19.06.2013 by a team of police officers of

Kotahena Police station. The said team of police officers had gone to Sedawatte on

information received from a private informant and upon searching, a cellophane

bag which contained 50g and 100mg was recovered from the respondent's purse.

Thereafter she was taken into custody.

According to the Government Analyst's report, the quantity of pure heroin was

1.72grams.

The Learned Counsel for the respondent brought the atte"i:ition of this Court to the

fact that there is a difference between the quantities of heroin recovered from the

possession of the respondent and heroin sent to the Government Analyst's

Department. Accordingly, it was submitted that the police officers reveled that they

have recovered 50.1grams from the possession of the respondent whereas the

Government Analyst's report dated 24.09.2013, mentioned the gross weight ofthe

brown colour powder was 54.8grams [page 13 & 14 of the brief]. It was argued on

behalf of the respondent that, if the High Court case proceeded for the trial, there

was a huge possibility of the respondent being acquitted, since the quantity of

externally added heroin was more than the quantity of heroin which was mentioned

in the indictment. I do not think that an accused who pleaded guilty to an offence at

the stage of trial is entitled to submit the possibility of hislher acquittal, as a

mitigatory factor at the stage of appeal. If an accused was very confident of hislher

acquittal, he or she should have stood for trial instead of pleading guilty. Therefore

I really do not see any merits in this argument.

It was submitted on behalf of the respondent that the fact that the respondent had

pleaded guilty at the first instance of the trial would have been a main

consideration to impose a suspected sentence. I observe that as per section 54A (b)

and (d) of the Dangerous Drugs Ordinance, a person who is convicted of such

Page 4 of 8

offence, shall be imposed a tenn of imprison;nent not less than 07 years and not

exceeding 20 years with a fine not less than Rs.l 00,000/= and not more than Rs.

500,000/=. it is observed that when the Learned High Court judge was imposing

the sentence, he had considered the quantity of heroine, the fact that the respondent

had one previous conviction of similar nature and the fact that the respondent

pleaded guilty to the offence at first instance thereby saving the valuable time of

Court. Accordingly, the Learned High Court Judge had decided to impose a

sentence below the minimum mandatory sentence and proceeded to suspend the

"-same. I am well aware that the Court has discretion to impose an appropriate

sentence, even if it is below a minimum mandatory sentence, considering the facts

of each case. [Vide S.C reference No. 0312008-H.C. Anuradhapura 33412004 and

Ambagala Mudiyanselage Samantha Sam path V. Attorney General (S.c. Appeal

No. 17/2013)]. I further observe that the instant case is very different from the

above two decisions.

Further, section 303 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 as

amended by Act No. 47 of 1999 reads as follows;

"303(2): A court shall not make an order suspending a sentence of

imprisonment if-

(a) a mandatory minimum sentence of imprisonment has been

prescribed by law for the offence in respect of which the sentence is . . imposed; or

(b) the offender is serving, or is yet to serve, a term of imprisonment

that has not been suspended; or ... " (Emphasis added)

Therefore, it is observed that the Court shall not suspend a sentence when a

minimum mandatory sentence is prescribed by the respective provision of law.

Since sections 54A (b) and 54A (d) of the Dangerous Drugs Ordinance carry a

Page 5 of 8

minimum mandatory sentence, I am of the vie, that the Learned High Court Judge

should have imposed a custodial sentence.

The Learned SSC for the appellant contended that the sentences are manifestly

inadequate having regard to the nature of the offences and the attendant

circumstances pertaining to the offence committed, warrant imposition of a higher

sentence.

It was held m the case of Attorney General V. Jinak Sri Uluwaduge and

another [1995] 1 Sri L.R 157 that; "

"In determining the proper sentence the Judge should consider the gravity

of the offence as it appears from the nature of the act itself and should have

regard to the punishment provided in the Penal Code or other statute under

which the offender is charged. He should also regard the effect of the

punishment as a deterrent and consider to what extent it will be effective.

Incidence of crimes of the nature of which the offender has been found guilty

and the difficulty of detection are also matters which should receive due

consideration ... "

In the case of The Attorney General V. Mendis [1995] 1 Sri L.R. 138, it was

held that,

"In our view once an accused is found guilty and convicted on his own plea,

or after trial, the Trial Judge has a difficult function to perform. That is to

decide what sentence is to be imposed on the accused who has been

convicted. In doing so he has to consider the point of view of the accused on

the one hand and the interest of society on the other. In doing so the Judge

must necessarily consider the nature of the offence committed, the manner in

which it has been committed the machinations and the manipulations

Page 6 of 8

resorted to by the accused to commit [he offence, the effect of committing

such a crime insofar as the institution or organisation in respect of which it

has been committed, the persons who are affected by such crime, the

ingenuity with which it has been committed and the involvement of others in

committing the crime ... "

In the case of Attorney General V. Mayagodage Sanath Dharmadiri Perera

[CA (PHC) APN 147/2012], it was held that,

"On the other hand this is not a fit case to order-suspended sentence. The

nature and the gravity of the offence have to be considered before ordering a

suspended sentence ... "

In the case of Sevaka Perumal etc. V. State of Tamil Nadu [AIR 1991 S.c.

1463J,

" ... Protection of society and stamping out criminal proclivity must be the

object of law which must be achieved by imposing appropriate sentence.

Therefore, law as a corner-stone of the edifice of order should meet the

challenges confronting the society ... Therefore, undue sympathy to impose

inadequate sentence would do more harm to the justice system to undermine

the public confidence in the efficacy of law and society could not long

endure under serious threats.

In light of above, it is understood that even though a Judge has discretion with

regard to the sentencing of an offender, such discretion has to be exercised

judicially. A trial Judge must be mindful to impose a sentence which is

proportionate to the crime committed.

Considering the facts of the case, I am of the view that the sentences imposed by

the Learned High Court Judge are manifestly inadequate. Therefore, I set aside the

Page 7 of 8

sentences imposed by the Learned High Court.Judge, dated 23.01.2017. I impose a

term of 07 years rigorous imprisonment for each count, on the respondent. I further

order the said terms of imprisonment to run concurrently. Since the respondent has

already paid the total fine of Rs. 200,000/= on 02.03.2017 (page 44 of the brief), I

do not impose another fine on her.

Accordingly, this appeal is hereby allowed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K. Priyantha Fernando, J.

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Page 8 of 8