IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Jayasekera Liyanaarachchilage

Dhanasiri,

Bamunugama,

Horapawita.

3rd Defendant-Petitioner

CASE NO: CA/363/2006/LA

DC MATARA CASE NO: 11437/P

Vs.

Jayasekera Liyanaarachchilage

David,

Bamunugama,

Horapawita,

Plaintiff-Respondent

and 8 other

Defendant-Respondents

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Ranjan Suwandaratne, P.C., with Anil Rajakaruna for

the 3rd Defendant-Petitioner.

Rohan Sahabandu, P.C., with Surekha Withanage for

the Plaintiff-Respondent.

Written Submissions:

by the 3rd Defendant-Petitioner on 19.06.2018

by the Plaintiff-Respondent on 21.06.2018

Decided on: 20.07.2018

2

Samayawardhena, J.

The 3rd defendant-petitioner filed this application seeking leave to

appeal against the order of the learned District Judge of Matara

dated 25.08.2006 whereby the Commissioners Scheme of Partition

depicted in Plan No.433B was accepted with slight modifications as

the Final Partition Plan.

When this matter came up for the first time before me learned

Presidents Counsel appearing for both sides agreed the leave

inquiry and the main argument being taken up together and

disposed of by way of written submissions.

According to the Interlocutory Decree the 3rd defendant gets the

largest share, and on top of it, he will also get the shares of the 4th,

6th, 7th and 9th defendants.

The only grievance of the 3rd defendant against Plan No.433B is

that he has not been given any road frontage whereas the entire

road frontage has been given to the plaintiff.

The 3rd defendant has got alternative Plan No.1225 prepared

wherein Lot 2 which is 10 perches in extent has been given to the

3rd, 4th, 6th, 7th and 9th defendants in common to address this

grievance. Lot 2 has a small road frontage and through that Lot

the 3rd, 4th, 6th, 7th and 9th defendants can have access to their

larger Lots, which are Lots 3 and 7 of that Plan. According to this

Plan, as per the evidence of the Surveyor, the 3rd, 4th, 6th, 7th and

9th defendants get 46 foot road frontage and the plaintiff gets 172

(or 218-this evidence is not clear) foot road frontage.

The short question to be decided is whether some road frontage

can be given to the 3rd defendant who gets the largest share. This

3

has been denied according to the impugned order on two grounds:

(a) according to the Report of the Preliminary Plan No.433, Lot 1

which covers the entire road frontage had been claimed by the

plaintiff before the Surveyor and (b) as Lot 1 is a Deniya and Paddy

Field ( ) and therefore unbuildable no special

advantage would accrue to the plaintiff in giving that entire Lot to

him. It is clear from the order that the District Judge's particular

emphasis is on (b) above.

There is no dispute that according to section 31 of the Partition

Law, No. 21 of 1977, as amended, the Final Scheme of Partition

shall be prepared in conformity with the Interlocutory Decree.

According to the Interlocutory Decree, Lot 1 of the Preliminary Plan

(which is 1 Rood and 13.2 Perches in extent) is only a Deniya

without any cultivation. ( -) Therefore the finding

of the District Judge that Lot 1 being a Paddy Field and Deniya is

an unbuildable (marshy) land and therefore no significance can be

attached to that Lot notwithstanding it covers the whole road

frontage is in my view not correct. On the other hand, if it is a

useless Lot, it does not affect the plaintiff if the Court gives a small

road frontage through that Lot to the 3rd defendant who gets the

largest share of the whole land.

This also goes to show that notwithstanding the plaintiff has

claimed Lot 1 before the Commissioner at the Preliminary Survey,

he has not made any improvements in that Lot except having a

well, which is also not masonry ( ).

The District Judge in the impugned order has referred to section

33 of the Partition Act in favour of the plaintiff, as I understand, in

connection with (a) above. That section reads as follows:

4

"The surveyor shall so partition the land that each party entitled to

compensation in respect of improvements effected thereto or of

buildings erected thereon will, if that party is entitled to a share of

the soil, be allotted, so far as is practicable, that portion of the land

which has been so improved or built upon, as the case may be."

Given the facts of this case I do not think that the said section is

helpful to the plaintiff as the said Lot has not either been

improved or built upon by the plaintiff. It is noteworthy that this

section speaks of "portion of the land which has been so improved

or built upon" and not "portion of the land which has been so

improved or built upon or claimed before the surveyor".

I am quite aware that the policy of the law has been to allot to a co-

owner the portion which contains his improvements and which he

has been in possession whenever it is possible to do so.

(Thevchanamoorthy v. Appakuddy1, Sinchi Appu v.

Wijegunasekera2, Albert v. Ratnayake3)

However this is not an invariable, rigid, absolute rule.

In Premathiratne v. Elo Fernando4 it was held that "Although, in a

partition decree, a co-owner should, whenever possible, be given the

lot which carries his improvements, this principle should not be

adhered to if, in the process of giving effect to it, substantial injustice

is likely to be caused to the other co-owners. Where, however,

improvements made by one co-owner fall within the portion allotted

to another co-owner the latter should pay compensation to the

former in respect of the improvements."

1 (1950) 51 NLR 317 at 321 2 (1902) 6 NLR1 at 11-12 3 [1988] 2 Sri LR 246 at 248 4 (1954) 55 NLR 369

5

As I said earlier, in Lot 1, there are no improvements and therefore

the question of payment of compensation does not arise.

In Liyanage v. Thegiris5 it was held that "In an action for the

partition of a land owned in common the rule that a co-owner should

be allotted the portion which contains his improvements is not an

invariable rule; it will not be followed if it involves substantial

injustice to the other co-owners."

The conclusion was the same in Sediris Perera v. Mary Nona6:

"Although, according to section 33 of the Partition Act, a co-owner

should ordinarily be given by the commissioner an allotment which

includes the improvements he has made, this rule need not be

adhered to if, in doing so, a fair and equitable division is rendered

impossible. Accordingly, an alternative scheme may be adopted at

the stage of the final decree so that a building put up in spite of

protest may fall into a lot given to a co-owner other than the person

who put up the building."

It is not fair to deprive the 3rd defendant who gets the largest

share from the corpus of any road frontage whatsoever and give

the entire length of road frontage to the plaintiff on the basis that

the plaintiff claimed the Lot which covers the entire road frontage

before the Commissioner at the Preliminary Survey especially when

there are no improvements made on that Lot by the plaintiff. I

have already stated that the finding of the District Judge that the

said Lot is a Deniya and Paddy Field and therefore unbuildable is

factually incorrect and against the Interlocutory Decree.

5 (1954) 56 NLR 546 6 (1971) 75 NLR 133

6

I must state that the 3rd defendant does not ask for a road

frontage proportionate to his share. He is asking a small road

frontage in comparison with what the plaintiff will ultimately get.

Notwithstanding the Commissioner's Scheme of Partition shall not

be lightly rejected (Appuhamy v. Weeratunga7), I am of the view

that, in the facts and circumstances of this case, the alternative

Plan No. 1225 depicts a fairer division. However, as the District

Judge in the impugned order has stated the entire length of the

road which runs across the land shall be 12 feet wide.

Where a scheme of partition submitted by a Surveyor is found to

be better than that submitted by the Court Commissioner, the

proper course to adopt would be to remit the scheme to the

Commissioner to modify the scheme on the lines prepared by the

Surveyor with further directions if any given by Court. The Court

cannot enter the Final Decree on the approved alternative Plan.

(Hendrik v. Gimarahamine8, Gunasekera v. Soothanona9)

Counsel for the 3rd defendant in his written submissions has

stated that the Court Commissioner is now dead and therefore in

terms of section 18 of the Partition Law Court shall necessarily

send the commission to the Surveyor General to prepare the Final

Partition Plan. Section 18 has no application to the instant matter

as it is applicable to the Preliminary Plan. If the Surveyor who

prepared the alternative Plan No. 1225 is alive, let the District

Judge send the commission to him, or if he is unavailable, any

other Surveyor in the Penal of Surveyors of the District Court to

prepare the Final Scheme of Partition in lines with the alternative

7 (1945) 46 NLR 461 8 (1946) 47 NLR 30 9 [1988] 2 Sri LR 8

7

Plan No. 1225 subject to widening 10 foot road running across the

land to 12 feet.

The impugned order of the District Judge is set aside and the

appeal is allowed with costs both here and the Court below.

Judge of the Court of Appeal