==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/291/2024

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal against the

Judgment and Sentences of the High

Court of Badulla in terms of Section 331

of the Code of Criminal Procedure Code

Act read with Section 14 of the Judicature

Act No. 02 of 1978, Section 11 of the

High Court (Special Provisions) Act No.

19 of 1990.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

Complainant

-Vs-

Paneer Selvam Sanjeewan alias Seeni

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Paneer Selvam Sanjeewan alias Seeni

Accused-Appellant

-Vs-

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

Complainant-Respondent

Court of Appeal Case No: CA/HCC/291/24

High Court of Badulla Case No: HC/21/2021

CA/HCC/291/2024

2 | P a g e

Before : Hon. P Kumaratnam, J.

Hon. Pradeep Hettiarachchi, J.

Counsel : Neranjan Jayasinghe with Randunu Heellage for the Accused-

Appellant.

Azad Nawawi, A.S.G. for the Respondent.

Argued on : 30-03-2026

Decided on : 12-05-2026

Pradeep Hettiarachchi, J

Judgement

Introduction

1. The Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the “Appellant”) was indicted before

the High Court of Badulla for the following charge;

On or around 04-07-2018, within the jurisdiction of High Court of Haputale, the

Appellant, by using the Appellant’s genitals on any orifice or part of the body

of a boy below 16 years namely, Weerasingham Sadeesh Kumar committed an

offence of grave sexual abuse, which is an offence punishable under Section

365B (2)(b) of the Penal Code as amended by the Act No. 22 of 1996, 29 of

1998 and 16 of 2006.

2. Upon the Appellant pleading not guilty to the charge, the matter was taken up for trial

before the High Court. At the conclusion of the trial, the Learned High Court Judge

found the Appellant guilty of the charge and convicted him. Accordingly, the Appellant

was sentenced to ten years’ rigorous imprisonment. In addition, the Appellant was

ordered to pay a fine of Rs. 5,000/-, in default of which he is to undergo six months’

imprisonment. The Appellant was further directed to pay a sum of Rs. 150,000/- as

CA/HCC/291/2024

3 | P a g e

compensation to the victim, in default of which he is to undergo one year’s simple

imprisonment.

3. Being aggrieved by the judgment and the Sentence, the Appellant has preferred the

instant appeal to this Court.

Brief Facts of the Case

4. At the time of the incident, PW1’s father was employed at a work site in Colombo,

while his mother was abroad for foreign employment. Consequently, PW1 had been

placed under the care of his uncle and was residing at his uncle’s house. However, on

the day of the incident, PW1 had returned to his own residence to collect a book and to

light an oil lamp, which he habitually did on a daily basis.

5. As PW1 was about to leave the house after completing these tasks, he noticed the

Appellant standing near the front door. The Appellant requested permission to use

PW1’s phone to send a text message. PW1 responded that he could do so after he had

closed the door. The Appellant then stated that there was no need to remain outside and

suggested that they could go inside and send the message.

6. Thereafter, the Appellant grabbed PW1 by the hand and forcibly pulled him into the

house. PW1 was then pushed onto the bed. The PW1 had been wearing a pair of denim

trousers and a t-shirt at the time the alleged incident had taken place. The Appellant had

then removed the denim trousers which the PW1 had been wearing and slept on the top

of the victim’s body, as a result of which PW1 could not breathe. He had screamed,

saying “aunty,” and then the Appellant had strangled his neck. The Appellant had

removed his trousers too. Thereafter, the Appellant had intercrural sex with the victim

for about 2-3 minutes. Since PW1 was unable to breathe, he has struggled, and the table

nearby had fallen onto the floor as a result of this struggle.

7. Thereafter, a neighbor known as “Mani” arrived at PW1’s residence upon hearing

PW1’s cries for help. At that point, the Appellant fled the scene by jumping over the

gate. PW1 informed Mani of the incident, following which Mani left the premises,

stating that he needed to proceed to the estate to collect his tools.

CA/HCC/291/2024

4 | P a g e

8. However, PW1 did not disclose the incident to anyone at the time, as he was

apprehensive that it would cause difficulties and adversely affect his studies.

Subsequently, his uncle became aware of the incident through another source and took

PW1 to the police station. Thereafter, the victim was produced before the Medical

Officer of Panketiya Hospital for examination.

Grounds of Appeal

9. The grounds of appeal urged by the Appellant are as follows;

a. The prosecution has failed to prove the sexual offence mentioned in the

Indictment.

b. The Learned High Court Judge had failed to consider the omissions which go

to the root of the case.

c. The prosecution’s version is improbable.

d. The decision not to call PW3 warrants the application of adverse inference

under section 114 (f) of the Evidence Ordinance.

e. The Learned High Court Judge had erred in coming to the conclusion on the

premise that the Accused had failed to prove his stance through credible

witnesses and evidence.

Consideration of the Grounds of Appeal

10. It was contended by Learned Counsel for the Appellant that the prosecution had failed

to establish the offence of grave sexual abuse as set out in the indictment. The Learned

Counsel submitted that there exists a material inconsistency between the particulars of

the charge and the evidence adduced at trial. While the indictment alleges that the

Appellant committed grave sexual abuse by engaging in intercrural sexual activity with

PW1, the testimony of PW1 suggests that the Appellant merely pressed his penis

against PW1’s genital area. It was therefore argued that the prosecution had failed to

prove the specific act alleged in the indictment. The relevant portion of PW1’s evidence

is reproduced below:

CA/HCC/291/2024

5 | P a g e

ප්‍ර: දැන් සතීෂ් කුමාර්ගේ ඇඟ උඩ හාන්ි වුනා කිව්වා. දැන විත්තිකරු සතීෂ් කුමාර්ගේ ඇඟ උඩ

හාන්ි උනාම විත්තිකරුගේ චු කරන තැන ගකාගහද ිබ්ගබ්?

උ: මං චූ කරන තැනට තමයි ියා ගත්තගත්ත

ප්‍ර: සතීෂ් කුමාර් ගේ චූ කරන තැන ියාගත්තගත්ත?

උ: ඔව්

ප්‍ර: ඊට පස්ගස් විත්තිකරු ගමානවහරි කරාද?

උ: උස් පහත්ත කරා

ප්‍ර: ගකාච්චර ගවලාවක් උස් පහත්ත කරාද?

උ: විනාඩි 2-3 ක් විතර.... (vide page 58 of the Appeal Brief)

11. PW1 faced this unfortunate incident in 2018 when he was thirteen years old, and he

testified before the High Court four years later. In my opinion, PW1’s evidence must

be evaluated in that context; he cannot be expected to recollect every detail of the period

with mathematical precision. Furthermore, it can be inferred that when a male organ is

placed against the genitals of another male and moved in a repetitive, upward and

downward motion, such conduct amounts to inter-crural sexual activity. Hence, the

specific nature of the act committed does not, in my view, create a significant departure

from the charge contained in the indictment.

12. Sakar - Law of Evidence – 20th Edition – Volume 02 – page 2808, where it has been

said that “When a minor child witness is giving evidence… the court has to examine

evidence of such child with utmost caution…. In the case of such evidence, the court

has to search for reliable corroborative evidence either orally or documentary as a

matter of prudence after being satisfied that evidence of such child witness is itself free

from infirmity and is sterling sound, in rape cases it is utmost necessary.”

13. At this stage, it is appropriate to refer to the Indian case of Bhoginbhai Hirjibhai vs.

State of Gujarat (AIR 1983-SC 753 at pp 756-758), often cited in our Courts, where it

was held:

CA/HCC/291/2024

6 | P a g e

“1) By and large a witness cannot be expected to possess a photographic

memory and to recall the details of an incident. It is not as if a video tape is

replayed on the mental screen.

2) Ordinarily, so happens that a witness is overtaken by events. The witness

could not have anticipated the occurrence which so often has an element of

surprise. The mental faculties therefore cannot be expected to be attuned to

absorb the details.

3) The powers of observation differ from person to person. What one may

notice, and the other may not. An object or movement might emboss its image

on one person’s mind, whereas it might go unnoticed on the part another.

4) By and large people cannot accurately recall a conversation and reproduce

the very words used by them or heard by them. They can only recall the main

purpose of the conversation. It is unrealistic to expect a witness to be a human

tape recorder.

5) In regard to exact time of an incident, or the time duration of an occurrence,

usually people make their estimates by guesswork on the spur of the moment

at the time of interrogation. And one cannot expect people to make very precise

or reliable estimates of such matters. Again, it depends on the time-sense of

individuals which varies from person to person.

6) Ordinarily a witness cannot be expected to recall accurately the sequence

of events which take place in rapid succession or in a short time span. A witness

is liable to get confused or mixed up when interrogated later on.”

14. PW6, the Judicial Medical Officer (JMO) who examined PW1, also testified at the trial.

He stated that while he could exclude the possibility of anal penetration, he could not

rule out acts that leave no physical trace, such as the touching of external genitalia or

inter-crural intercourse. In these circumstances, I am of the view that the inconsistency

highlighted by Learned Counsel is immaterial.

15. Another ground of appeal urged by the Appellant is that the Learned Trial Judge failed

to consider material omissions. At the trial before the High Court, defence counsel drew

CA/HCC/291/2024

7 | P a g e

the attention of the Court to several omissions in the statement made by PW1 to the

police.

16. At the trial, it was brought to the attention of the Learned Trial Judge that PW1 had not

mentioned in his statement to the police that he was pushed onto the bed (vide page 64

of the appeal brief). However, at the time this alleged omission was raised, Learned

State Counsel pointed out that it did not in fact constitute an omission, as PW1 had

stated in his statement that he was “dragged by the hand and then put onto the bed.”

17. Furthermore, it was pointed out that PW1 had not stated in his statement to the police

that the Appellant had lain on his body (vide page 65 of the appeal brief). It was also

brought to the attention of the Learned High Court Judge that PW1 had not mentioned

in his statement that, as a result of the Appellant lying on his body, he was unable to

breathe (vide page 65 of the appeal brief).

18. It was further submitted that PW1 failed to mention in his statement that the Appellant

had strangled him (Vide pg. 66 of the Appeal Brief). It is pertinent to note that in an

offense of this nature, a victim cannot be expected to narrate every detail with

photographic memory at trial; such an event is a traumatic experience that a person of

his age would not naturally wish to constantly recollect or memorize. On the contrary,

there is often a tendency to suppress or erase such memories as one grows older.

Consequently, in my opinion, trivial or insignificant omissions and discrepancies in the

victim’s evidence should not be given undue prominence. In this regard, the following

authorities are instructive:

19. "Irrelevant details which do not in any way corrode the credibility of a witness

cannot be labelled as omissions or contradictions.” As held by the Supreme Court

of India in the Bhajan Singh @ Harbhajan Singh & Ors vs. State of Haryana on

2011 (7) SCC 421.

20. In Sunil vs. Attorney General [1999] 3 Sri LR 191, it was held that;

“[…] Nevertheless, the Court must not be unmindful of the fact that they are

human witnesses and it is a hall mark of human testimony that such evidence is

replete with mistakes, inaccuracies and misstatements. Though one has to be

CA/HCC/291/2024

8 | P a g e

careful in the assessment of evidence given by the bribery officers, the Court

has to be equally mindful of the fact that the evidence tendered by human

testimony will suffer from certain deficiencies and defects […]” (At pg. 193)

21. Having regard to the aforesaid principles laid down in a line of authorities, I am unable

to agree with Learned Counsel for the Appellant that the omissions highlighted by him

in the course of submissions undermine the credibility of the testimony of PW1 or

create any reasonable doubt as to his trustworthiness. It was further contended by

Learned Counsel that the decision not to call PW3 warrants the application of the

presumption under Section 114(f) of the Evidence Ordinance.

22. As held in the case of Walimunige John vs. The State 76 NLR 488, where two Accused

were convicted of murder, one argument raised in the appeal was the failure of the

prosecution to call two witnesses, whose names were on the back of the indictment and

who were alleged to have been present at the scene. The Appellants argued that the trial

judge should have directed the jury to draw an adverse inference from the prosecution’s

failure to call these witnesses, as per Section 114(f) of the Evidence Ordinance. The

Court, however, reaffirmed that the prosecution is not obligated to call all witnesses

listed on the indictment. It emphasized the prosecutor's discretion in determining which

witnesses to present, and the Court saw no necessity to call the other two witnesses

because their evidence would have been merely cumulative, supporting the testimony

of the deceased's widow. The Court further held that the trial judge is not required to

instruct the jury to draw adverse inferences unless the omission of a witness creates a

significant gap in the prosecution’s case.

23. Accordingly, the application of Section 114(f) of the Evidence Ordinance would arise

when considering whether an adverse inference ought to be drawn from the absence of

a witness who might be expected to give evidence on an important issue of fact.

CA/HCC/291/2024

9 | P a g e

24. Furthermore, section 134 of the Evidence Ordinance states that no particular number of

witnesses is required for the proof of any fact. In Attorney General vs. Mohomed

Saheeb Mohamed Ismath CA No 87/97 (Decided on 13-07-1999), Jayasuriya J.

interpreted it to mean that evidence should be evaluated and weighed, not counted.

25. In the present case, PW3 did not witness the commission of the offence. He merely

arrived at the scene after hearing PW1’s screams. By the time PW3 reached the crime

scene, the Appellant had already fled. Accordingly, the evidence of PW3 does not assist

in establishing any material fact relevant to the commission of the offence.

26. In these circumstances, it cannot be contended that the failure to call PW3 created a

material lacuna in the prosecution's case. Therefore, the adverse inference under

Section 114(f) of the Evidence Ordinance is not applicable against the prosecution for

its failure to call PW3 as a witness.

27. It was also contended by the Learned Counsel for the Appellant that the Learned High

Court Judge had erred in coming to the conclusion on the premise that the Appellant

had failed to prove his stance through credible witnesses and evidence.

28. When evaluating the dock statement of the Appellant, the Learned Trial Judge has

stated as follows;

“ඉහත නීි තත්තවය ප්‍රකාරව චූදිත විින් විත්ති කූඩුගව් ිට කරන ලද ප්‍රකාශය සළකා

බැලීගේදී සදීශ් කුමාර් ඇඹුල් ගේර කමින් ිටියදී ඇත්තත කඩන බිමට වැටීම

ගහ්තුගකාටගගන ඔහුට පහර දුන් බවත්ත, පසුව පැමිණ ඔහුගේ නිවගස් අයවලුන් තමාට

බැන වැදුණු බවට සඳහන් කර ඇත. ගකගස්ගවතත්ත පැස 01 ඇඹුල් ගේර කමින් ිටියදී

ඔහුට පහර දුන් බවටද එගලස පහර දීම ගහ්තු ගකාටගගන ගමවැනි අසතය

පැමිණිල්ලක් පැස 01 විින් කර ඇි බවට වන ස්ථාවරය පැහැදිලි සාක්ි මගින් ඔේු

කිරීමට විත්තියට හැකියාවක් ලැබී ගනාමැත.“(At pg 19 of the Judgement dated 06-

09-2024)

29. In this regard, it is pertinent to emphasize that, in a criminal case, the burden of proving

the charges beyond a reasonable doubt rests entirely on the prosecution, and no

corresponding burden is cast upon the Accused. Therefore, the Learned Trial Judge’s

observation that the Appellant failed to establish his defence through credible witnesses

and evidence is not consistent with established legal principles.

CA/HCC/291/2024

10 | P a g e

30. Nevertheless, I am of the view that the Appellant’s dock statement, when considered in

conjunction with the prosecution version, does not give rise to a reasonable doubt. In

his dock statement, the Appellant stated that he had assaulted the victim on the basis

that the victim had fallen from a tree. He further stated that he thereafter proceeded to

the estate and, upon his return, the victim’s family members arrived and scolded him.

The Appellant’s position is that he has been falsely implicated due to the said incident.

31. However, it is noteworthy that this version was never put to the victim during cross-

examination. During cross-examination, it was merely suggested that there had been a

dispute between the Appellant and the victim.

32. The other important circumstance to be noted is that, had the victim fallen from a tree

as asserted in the dock statement, the Judicial Medical Officer would reasonably have

observed at least some abrasions or injuries consistent with such a fall. However, no

such evidence was elicited from the testimony of the JMO.

33. Accordingly, the Learned Trial Judge’s misdirection regarding the Appellant’s burden

of proving the contents of the dock statement does not, in my view, vitiate the

conviction, as the dock statement, even when considered in its entirety, does not create

a reasonable doubt in the prosecution's case.

34. Upon consideration of the foregoing analysis of law and facts, I find no merit in the

arguments advanced on behalf of the defence. Accordingly, there is no basis to interfere

with the judgment of the Learned High Court Judge, and the conviction is affirmed.

35. However, the sentence of imprisonment imposed on the Appellant warrants revision in

light of the circumstances of the case. There was no evidence that the victim sustained

any injuries consequent to the alleged offence, nor was there cogent evidence that the

Appellant had used violence upon the victim. It is also relevant that the Appellant was

20 years of age at the time of the offence and had no previous convictions or pending

cases against him.

CA/HCC/291/2024

11 | P a g e

36. Upon consideration of the foregoing, I am of the view that a sentence of seven years’

rigorous imprisonment would be sufficient to meet the ends of justice. Further, the

compensation payable to the victim is reduced to Rs. 75,000/-, with a default sentence

of six months’ simple imprisonment. The fine imposed by the Learned High Court

Judge is maintained. Subject to the aforesaid variation in sentence, the appeal is

dismissed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Hon. P. Kumararatnam, J

I agree,

Judge of the Court of Appeal