IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Wellakke Lokuge Sandhya

Kumari,

Obada Kanda,

Rakwana.

2nd Respondent-Petitioner-

Appellant

CA CASE NO: CA (PHC) 117/2015

PHC RATNAPURA CASE NO: 33/2010/RA

MC RAKWANA CASE NO: 40324

Vs.

Wellakke Lokuge Pushpa Manel,

Obada Kanda,

Rakwana.

1st Respondent-Respondent-

Respondent

And Several Other

Respondents

Before: K.K. Wickramasinghe, J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Anuruddha Dharmaratne for the Appellant.

Shantha Jayawardena for the Respondent.

Decided on: 27.08.2019

2

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The 2nd respondent-petitioner-appellant (appellant) has filed this

appeal against the Judgment of the High Court which affirmed

the order of the Magistrates Court delivered under section 66 of

the Primary Courts Procedure Act.

The Magistrates Court held with the 1st respondent-respondent-

respondent (respondent) who is a sister of the appellant.

The dispute relates to a room of a house which was padlocked

by the appellant after the death of their father on the basis that

the father gifted the property to the appellant by way a Deed.

This has happened within two months before filing the

application in Court by the police.

The learned High Court Judge in the impugned Judgment has

correctly analyzed the facts of the case when she affirmed the

order of the Magistrates Court. There is no necessity to repeat

them here.

The pivotal argument of the learned counsel for the appellant

before this Court is that the order of the Magistrates Court

cannot be allowed to stand in view of the agreement reached

between the parties to accept an order after a site inspection by

the learned Magistrate. It is the contention of the learned

counsel that notwithstanding site inspection was done, the

learned Magistrate has delivered the order without any reference

to the site inspection.

3

When I peruse the Magistrates Court case record it is seen that

the order was due on 10.03.2010. On that day, it appears to me

that the order was ready. Why I say so is that the order

delivered on 21.04.2010 is dated 10.03.2010. On 10.03.2010,

the parties have informed the Court that they are agreeable to

have an order after an inspection by the learned Magistrate.

Inspection has been done on 17.03.2010 and according to the

inspection notes filed of record, it seems that the learned

Magistrate could not come to a just conclusion, and therefore

the learned Magistrate has re-fixed the matter for the order for

21.04.2010. In the meantime, the appellant has sent a long

letter to the learned Magistrate (vide pages 477-481 of the Brief)

explaining the situation after the inspection. By reading that

letter, it is clear that there is no settlement and any order

allowing both parties to live together in the house would have

ended up with serious breach of the peace. Thereafter the

learned Magistrate has delivered the order dated 10.03.2010 on

21.04.2010. I see nothing seriously flawed in that procedure.

The learned Magistrate has taken extra troubles to amicably

settle the matter when the order was ready, and, failing which,

the order has been delivered on merits. It is not the submission

of the learned counsel for the appellant that if the order were to

be delivered purely on inspection, it would have been in favour

of the appellant. Inspection notes filed of record do not suggest

so. That objection regarding procedure is a technical objection,

which has no place in section 66 applications where the sole

intention is to make provisional orders to prevent breach of the

breach until the substantive dispute is determined by a civil

Court.

4

The 2nd respondent shall vindicate his rights by filing a civil case

in the District Court, if so advised.

Appeal is dismissed but without costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

K.K. Wickramasinghe, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal