1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application under Section 331 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. Complainant

Court of Appeal CA HCC 0202/2020 Vs. Provincial High Court of Colombo HC 7659/2014

Sandra Marakkala Sadamali Wickramasinghe Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Sandra Marakkala Sadamali Wickramasinghe Accused-Appellant Vs.

Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12

Respondent

2

Before: B. Sasi Mahendran, J. Amal Ranaraja, J.

Counsel: Lakshman Dias with Diani Gunaratna and Yashodara Illangasinghe for the Accused-Appellant. Suharshi Herath, D.S.G., for the Respondent.

Argued on: 03.09.2025 Decided on: 29.09.2025

JUDGMENT

AMAL RANARAJA, J.

1. The accused-appellant (hereinafter referred to as the “Appellant”) has been

indicted in the High Court of Colombo in High Court case no. HC 7659/2014.

The charge in the indictment is as follows;

That on or about April 2008 in the district of Colombo within the

jurisdiction of this Court the accused being a servant employed as a

bursar, at Alethea International School, did commit criminal breach of

trust in respect of a sum of Rs. 3,055,764.15 entrusted to her in her

capacity as such servant; and thereby committed an offence punishable

under Section 391 of the Penal Code.

3

Case of the Prosecution

2. The appellant has entered Alethea International School as a student.

Thereafter, upon leaving school she has been employed by the school. While

being employed she has functioned in different positions related to the

administration of the school. As the appellant appeared to have had an inborn

talent for accounting and being trustworthy, PW01 has assigned the appellant

with the position of the “bursar”. The appellant has held such a position for

four to five years. In April 2008, PW01 has noticed the appellant making

personal investments and purchases which appeared to be beyond the

appellant’s means. PW01 feeling suspicious has directed PW02, PW05 and

others attached to the accounts department of the school to check the

registers maintained by the appellant.

3. The investigation has divulged that the appellant had misappropriated funds

of the school by not handing over the days’ collection in full on some days to

PW02, to be banked.

4. When the management of the school had confronted the appellant in February

2009 with the findings of the investigation, she has undertaken to pay back

the amount due in installments.

5. Thereafter, the appellant has been interdicted and PW01 has proceeded to

make a complaint to the Criminal Investigation Department. The Criminal

Investigation Department has subsequently investigated the first complaint

and at the conclusion of the investigation forwarded the extracts to the

Attorney General.

Case of the Accused

6. The appellant has maintained that she did hand over the days’ collection to

PW02. Hence, she did not have any cash in hand which she could utilize for

her own use. When confronted about the occasions she had not handed over

4

to PW02 the due amount in full, the appellant has claimed that they were

either calculation errors or mistakes and that they did not make an impact as

PW02 has acknowledged receipt of the days’ collection handed over to her by

the appellant in the income book.

7. Upon the appellant pleading not guilty to the charge, the matter has been

taken up for trial and at the conclusion of the trial, the Learned High Court

Judge has found the appellant guilty of the charge, convicted and sentenced

her to three years’ rigorous imprisonment and also imposed a fine of Rs.

100,000 with a default term of 3 months’ rigorous imprisonment.

8. The appellant being aggrieved by the judgment and the sentencing order has

preferred the instant appeal to this Court. The appellant has prayed that the

judgment and the sentencing order dated February 27,2020 be set aside and

that the appellant be acquitted of the charge.

Grounds of Appeal

9. The appellant has urged the following grounds of appeal:

i. Has the Learned High Court Judge decided the case based on

evidence of partial or biased witnesses?

ii. Has the failure of the prosecution to call the most important and

independent witnesses whose evidence is vital for the case to

explain the real monetary transaction has caused prejudice to the

appellant?

iii. Has the Learned High Court Judge not considered the necessary

ingredients that needs to be constituted for the proof of the

offence?

5

iv. Is the decision of the Learned High Court Judge that the

prosecution has proved its case beyond a reasonable doubt

erroneous?

v. Has the Learned High Court Judge failed to analyze and assess

the evidence placed before him, but solely depended on the entries

of the books marked “X”, “Y” and “Z” when in fact all witnesses

gave evidence with regard to the existence of parallel ledgers

maintained by the accounts division?

vi. Has the appellant been denied a fair trial?

10. The appellant has maintained three cash registers when she functioned as

the bursar. The registers maintained by the appellant are as follows;

i. The cash register for school fees of students studying for the local

exams in the English medium, marked “පැ-X”. ii. The cash register for students studying in the Sinhala medium,

marked “පැ-Y”. iii. The cash register for facility fees of all students, marked “පැ-Z”.

11. The appellant has been tasked with collecting fees from the

parents/guardians of the students, to issue receipts and enter the particulars

of payments made to her in the relevant cash register. At the end of each day

the appellant has had to hand over the days’ collection in money and cheques

to PW02 to be banked. When the days’ collection was handed over to PW02

she had counter-signed the relevant registers and accepted the money and

cheques that have been handed over to her by the appellant. The appellant

has also been tasked with the balancing of the registers maintained by her.

Initially, the appellant has balanced the registers weekly, however, after some

time, she has taken a longer time to do so. At the time the registers maintained

by the appellant were checked, it has been revealed that the appellant has

balanced those registers once a month only.

6

12. PW05, the internal auditor, has conducted an audit on the cash registers

maintained from 2003 to 2008. He has observed inconsistencies in the entries

made in the cash registers and the monies relevant to those inconsistent

entries misappropriated by the appellant beginning April 2008, the period in

which the appellant functioned as the bursar. PW05 has also checked the

cash registers marked පැ-X, පැ-Y and පැ-Z and highlighted the

inconsistencies in those registers itself. Such inconsistencies in the cash

registers marked පැ-X, පැ-Y and පැ-Z have been due to the following reasons:

i. Omitting the entry of sums received and of the receipt numbers issued in respect of such payment. ii. Understating the fees received and the balances iii. Not stating the total collection handed over to PW02 etc.

The inconsistencies and the monies relevant to those inconsistent entries

misappropriated by the appellant have been highlighted in the registers

marked පැ-X, පැ-Y and පැ-Z by PW05 as follows;

7

8

13. The appellant has contended that the inconsistencies highlighted in the cash

registers marked පැ-X, පැ-Y and පැ-Z are either calculation errors or mistakes

and that they did not have an impact; as the money and the cheques collected

by her were handed over to PW02 and PW02 had acknowledged receipt by

making a note in a register termed the “income book”. She has also contended

that PW05, the internal auditor has referred to the contents of the register

termed the “income book” and if such register was produced at the trial, the

contents of the same would have revealed the fact that the appellant had

handed over the money/cheques collected by her to PW02 at the end of each

day. The appellant has also contended that monies deposited directly in the

bank account of the school would have also been inserted in the register

termed the “income book” hence, further revealed that the appellant had not

set apart any money for her use. Therefore, the prosecution by not producing

the register termed the” income book” has failed to prove its case beyond a

reasonable doubt.

14. PW02 in cross-examination has confirmed that a register termed the “income

book” did not exist in the accounts department of the school. PW02 has also

stated that she endorsed the respective cash register maintained by the

appellant when she accepted the day's collection handed over to her by the

appellant.

15. PW04, the assistant accountant has corroborated the same and stated that

there was no register termed the “income book”. PW11, the officer who

investigated the first complaint of PW01 has also stated that the investigations

conducted by the criminal investigation department did not reveal the

existence of a register termed the “income book” and the registers marked පැ-

X, පැ-Y and පැ-Z were the only cash registers revealed at the investigation.

PW05, the internal auditor of the school being a foremost witness of the

prosecution has not been questioned about the existence of a register termed

the “income book” in cross examination.

9

In Sarwasingh vs. State of Punjab (2002) AIR Supreme Court 3652 at 3655 the

Indian Supreme Court has held;

“It is a rule of essential justice whenever the opponent has declined

to avail himself of the opportunity to put his case in cross

examination it must follow that the evidence tendered on that issue

ought to be accepted”.

In State of Himachal Pradesh vs. Thakur Dass (1983) 2 Criminal Law Journal

1694 at 1701, V. D. Misra, C.J. (as he was then) held,

“Whenever a statement of fact made by a witness is not challenged

in cross examination it must be concluded that the fact in question is

not disputed”.

16. Due to the aforesaid reasons, it is my view that the Learned High Court

Judge has not misdirected himself when he concluded that a register termed

the “income book” did not exist in the accounts department of the relevant

school.

17. PW01, the managing director of the school, PW02 the accountant, PW04 the

assistant accountant, PW05 the internal auditor and PW11, W.I.P of the

criminal investigation department have testified on behalf of the prosecution;

PW11 is an external and independent witness. PW05 an auditor with many

years of experience. In fact, PW05 has been auditing the accounts of the

school since 2003. In those circumstances, it is apparent that PW05 had no

reason to be biased against the appellant. The evidence of PW01, PW02 and

PW04 is corroborated by the evidence of PW05 and PW11. The credibility and

the consistency of the prosecution witnesses’ have not been disputed. The

appellant being assigned to a position though she did not have the necessary

qualifications, depicts the fact that the entire accounts department of the

10

school has functioned as a family and that PW02 has placed trust on the

appellant to a point that the management nor the accounts department of the

school had a reason to wrongly implicate the appellant. In those

circumstances, the evidence of the prosecution witnesses are reliable and

creditworthy.

18. The appellant has also contended that the prosecution should have

necessarily called the external auditor and the parents of the students named

at the back of the indictment to establish the case of the prosecution beyond

a reasonable doubt.

19. PW02 and PW04 being attached to the accounts department of the school

have testified regarding the functions of the accounts department and the

procedure followed when engaging in the day to day affairs of the department.

They have also testified with regard to the responsibility of each individual

associated with the accounts department, including those of the appellant.

The appellant has had an opportunity to cross examine PW02 and PW04, but

has failed to mark a contradiction or draw the attention of Court to an

omission in their evidence. PW05, the internal auditor also testified with

regard to the inconsistencies in the registers maintained by the appellant. As

such the prosecution has established through cogent evidence that the

appellant has upon making inconsistent entries misappropriated the monies

relevant to those fraudulent/omitted entries which is a sum of money

equivalent to the sum stated in the charge in the indictment.

In Walimunige John vs. State 76 NLR 488, G.P.A. de Silva, S.P.J has stated,

“...no particular number of witnesses shall be required for the proof

of any fact. The adequacy of one witness to prove a fact in terms of

the section 134 of the Evidence Ordinance will hold good in a case

where only one witness is available to the party desiring to

establish a fact, and where only one witness is called even though

others are also available.”

11

20. The prosecution has called its foremost witnesses whose testimony was vital

and sufficient to manifest its case beyond a reasonable doubt.

21. The Learned Counsel for the respondent has also contended that the

ingredients necessary to prove criminal breach of trust have not been

substantiated by the prosecution at the trial.

The ingredients necessary to be established by evidence to prove criminal

breach of trust is as follows:

(a) Entrustment with property or dominion over property, and either

(b) i). dishonest misappropriation or conversion to his own use, or

ii). dishonest use or disposal, or

iii). wilfully suffering any other to do b (i) or b (ii).

22. Those being the ingredients necessary to prove the offence of criminal breach

of trust, the entrustment of property is undisputed as the prosecution

witnesses as well as the appellant herself has admitted that she was entrusted

with the task of collecting the fees of the students. The monies so collected

had been vested in the appellant until or unless the appellant handed over

the same to PW2. The prosecution has also established by evidence that the

appellant has misappropriated part of the money entrusted to her by placing

16 different inconsistent entries in the cash registers marked පැ-X, පැ-Y and

පැ-Z maintained by her. The appellant making purchases and investments

beyond her means, sending her siblings overseas for studies, matters which

she has not disputed, manifest the fact that the money misappropriated by

the appellant have been converted to her own use with the intention of

causing wrongful loss to the school.

12

23. Further, when I peruse the disputed judgment I am convinced that the

Learned High Court Judge has analyzed/assessed the evidence placed before

him properly and proceeded to convict the appellant.

24. Further, the learned High Court Judge has diligently ensured that the

appellant’s right to retain and communicate effectively with her counsel has

not been impeded. Throughout the proceedings, the learned High Court Judge

has conducted the hearings in a manner that is both accessible and

understandable for the appellant, demonstrating a commitment to

transparency and fairness in the judicial process. The learned High Court

Judge has also made an effort to expedite the proceedings, thereby minimizing

unnecessary delays.

25. Careful review of the Court proceedings reveals that the appellant’s Counsel

has not at any point raised any objections regarding a lack of time for

preparation. This silence on the part of the Counsel suggests the level of

satisfaction with the resources provided and the time allocated for proper

preparation. It also implies that both the Counsel and the appellant have been

granted an opportunity to present their case effectively.

26. In The Attorney General vs. Segulebbe Latheef and Another, 2008 (1) S.L.R.

225, J. A. N. De Silva, J, as he was then, discussing the concept of the right

of an accused to a fair trial has stated as follows;

“ “The right of an accused person to a fair trial is recognized in all the

criminal justice systems in the civilized world. Its denial is generally

proof enough that justice is denied.”

(2) Like the concept of fairness, a fair trial is also not capable of a clear

definition.

13

The right to a fair trial amongst other things includes the following:-

1. The equality of all persons before the court.

2. A fair and public hearing by a competent independent

and impartial court/tribunal established by law.

3. Presumption of innocence until guilt is proven according

to law.

4. The right of an accused person to be informed or promptly

and in detail in a language he understands of the nature

and cause of the charge against him.

5. The right of an accused to have time and facilities for

preparation for the trial.

6. The right to have a counsel and to communicate with him.

7. The right of an accused to be tried without much delay.

8. The right of an accused to be tried in his presence and to

defend himself or through counsel.

9. The accused has a right to be informed of his rights.

10. If the accused is in indigent circumstances to provide

legal assistance without any charge from the accused.

11. The right of an accused to examine or have examined the

witnesses against him and to obtain the evidence and

examination of witnesses on his behalf under the same

conditions as witnesses against him.

14

12. If the accused cannot understand or speak the language

in which proceedings are conducted to have the

assistance of an interpreter.

13. The right of an accused not to be compelled to testify

against himself or to confess guilty.”

27. Due to the reasons stated above, I am not inclined to interfere with the

disputed judgment together with the sentencing order and proceed to dismiss

the appeal.

Appeal dismissed.

28. The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgment to the High

Court of Colombo for compliance.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

B. SASI MAHENDRAN, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal