==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0071/02024

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal Case No. Adhiwarna Bandula Pushpakumara

CA/HCC/ 0071/2024 alias Suddha Mama

High Court of Nuwara Eliya

Case No. HC/57/2020

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

COUNSEL : Hafeel Farisz with Shannon Thilakaratne

for the Appellant.

Maheshika De Silva, DSG for the

Respondent.

CA/HCC/0071/02024

2 | P a g e

ARGUED ON : 06/03/2026

DECIDED ON : 12/06/2026

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Appellant was indicted in the High Court of Nuwara Eliya

for committing one count of Grave Sexual Abuse on the prosecutrix,

punishable under Section 365(B) 2 (b) of the Penal Code as amended by Acts

No.29 of 1998 and No.16 of 2006. The date of offence was between

01.11.2015 to 31.12.2015. It was alleged that the Appellant had indulged in

intercrural sex on the prosecutrix, who is the daughter of the Appellant’s

sister. The prosecutrix was 11 years of age at the time of the incident.

The trial commenced on 05/10/2021. After leading all necessary witnesses,

the prosecution had closed the case on 06/09/2023. The Learned High Court

Judge had called for the defence on the same day and the Counsel for the

Appellant had moved for a day to call witnesses on his behalf. The Appellant

had made a dock statement and called one witness in support of his case.

The Learned High Court Judge after considering the evidence presented by

both parties, convicted the Appellant under Section 365 (B) (2)(b) of the Penal

Code as amended, and sentenced him to 07 years rigorous imprisonment

and imposed a fine of Rs.5,000/- subject to a default sentence of 03 months

simple imprisonment. In addition, a compensation of Rs.1,000,000/- was

ordered with a default sentence of 02-years simple imprisonment.

CA/HCC/0071/02024

3 | P a g e

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

During the argument, the Appellant was present in Court as he was granted

bail pending appeal.

On behalf of the Appellant the following Grounds of Appeal were raised.

1. The Learned High Court Judge failed to consider that the version of

the prosecution is improbable.

2. The Learned High Court Judge failed to evaluate in law the credibility

of the witnesses of the prosecution.

3. The Learned High Court Judge had failed in law to judicially analyse

the contradictions per se in the version of the prosecution.

4. The Learned High Court Judge had failed to consider that ex facie the

evidence of PW1 and PW2 (the victim and her father) were

contradictory to each other.

5. The Learned High Court Judge had failed to give due weight to the

omissions and contradictions marked by the defence.

6. The Learned High Court Judge failed to consider that the prosecution

had failed to establish the date in which the alleged offence took place.

7. The Learned High Court Judge failed to give any analysis to the version

of the defence.

8. The Learned High Court Judge failed to evaluate judicially if the

identity of the Appellant was established beyond reasonable doubt.

Background of the case albeit as follows:

PW1 was only 11 years old when she encountered the unpleasant incident

as she described in her evidence. According to PW1, her mother had gone

abroad and she was staying at her grandmother’s house. The Appellant is

her maternal uncle. Her mother had started to live separately with another

person at Mahiyanganaya. Due to this a family problem had existed between

her parents. Her father is a disabled soldier.

CA/HCC/0071/02024

4 | P a g e

On the day in question, while she was sleeping with the Appellant’s daughter,

who is also of the same age, she had suddenly felt weight and movement on

her body and her panty had been lowered up to her knee. Her frock was

raised upwards and she had felt pain in her vagina. She could not identify

the person who was on her body at that time, but when she flashed the torch,

she had, at that time, seen the Appellant close to the door with his sarong

being lowered. Although, she had tried to wake the Appellant’s daughter up,

she had not responded. Hence, she had rushed to her grandmother’s room

and informed the incident to her. Her grandmother had told her to sleep. On

the following day, her grandmother had checked her vagina. According to the

victim, a blood-like stain was found on her panty.

After school, the Appellant’s wife had inquired about the incident from her

and advised her not to tell anybody, as her aunt’s daughter was also of the

same age and that this incident would affect her daughter’s school career.

Thereafter she had gone to her house and informed about the incident to her

father, PW2 and lodged a complaint at the police. In the meantime, she had

called her mother who was abroad and divulged the incident to her. Her

mother did not want PW1 to lodge a complaint with the police and had

threatened PW1.

PW2, the victim’s father, also gave evidence and confirmed the evidence given

by the victim.

PW7, the JMO had noted down under the history given by the victim, that

about one month back, one day when she was sleeping, she had felt someone

removing her underpants, their weight on her body and pricking with

something at her genital area. The victim did not mention the identity of the

perpetrator. The JMO opined that there is no evidence of vaginal or anal

penetration. Intercrural penetration cannot be excluded.

As the appeal grounds are interconnected, all grounds will be considered

together hereinafter.

CA/HCC/0071/02024

5 | P a g e

Credibility assesses the likeliness and probability that a statement is true

and can be trusted, believed and accepted as true or competent. It consists

of both objective and verifiable evidence along with subjective, perceived

trustworthiness. The element of credibility is established by way of

consistency, expertise, integrity in communication and actions, and is of

utmost importance in trials of justice, such as this.

The victim in her evidence admitted of the existence of a family dispute

between her father and her mother and her family. The defence suggested

that this is a story made up in order to put her mother and her family into

an embarrassing position.

After informing her grandmother and the wife of the Appellant, the victim

had informed the incident to her father. Thereafter, she had informed about

this to the JMO who had examined the victim. In the history to the doctor,

she had not revealed the identity of the Appellant. She had merely mentioned

to the doctor that “someone” had done this. Further, the description and the

injury she noted on her vagina was not detected by the JMO. After

examination, the JMO had opined that the victim was free of any genital

injury.

Further, when she felt that someone was on her body, she had neither

shouted nor woken up the daughter of the Appellant. Although she had said

that a previous incident of sexual harassment had happened to her, no

charge had been framed against the Appellant.

The victim further admitted that after she went to stay with her father, her

mother had stopped sending money to them.

The Learned High Court Judge had posed the following question to the

victim:

CA/HCC/0071/02024

6 | P a g e

Page 93 of the brief.

wêlrKfhka (

m% ( Thd ta fj,dfõ w;a;ïug fmkakqfõ keoao uf.a f,a tkjd lsh,d @

W ( w;a;ïud nekakd'

m% ( TÉpr isoaêhla fjkfldg Thdf.a tyd me;af;a ;uqkaf.u jhfiau flfkla

ksodf.k isáhfka fkao @

W ( Tõ'

m% ( b;ska Thd thdgj;a l;d lf,a keoao @

W ( l;d l,d' fldÉpr l;d l,;a kskafoka nkskjfka'

m% ( Thd lE .eyqfjj;a keoao @ nh ys;=fka keoao fufyu fohla fjkfldg'

lE .eyqfõ keoao f.or fjk f.dvla wh bo,d ;sfhkjdfka @

W ( w;a;ïud lshdf.k ;uhs ÿjf.k uka .sfha' Th isoaêh yskaod biaflda,

;=klg .shd' fï wjqreoafoa idudkH fm< ,shkak nersjqkd'

Further, in her history to the doctor she had said that the Appellant had

bitten her chest. But she had failed to state this sexual act both to the police

and in her evidence.

The prosecutrix, in her evidence stated that the Appellant had sexually

harassed her previously. Even though she had stated the same to the JMO,

the prosecution had failed to frame this charge against the Appellant.

The Appellant, in his dock statement had denied the charge levelled against

him. Due to a family dispute, the victim’s mother had started to send money

to them. As such, this allegation was levelled against him, his wife and his

mother. But the Learned Magistrate of Walapane had discharged his wife

and his mother.

CA/HCC/0071/02024

7 | P a g e

Although PW2, the father of the victim said that he had informed about the

incident to the Grama Niladari, he had failed to mention about this in his

statement to the police. This was highlighted as an omission by the defence.

The Grama Sevaka who was called by the defence denied that PW2 had

complained about a sexual harassment that had happened at the Appellant’s

house. Further, he had denied that he had prevented PW2 from going to the

police to lodge a complaint.

Additionally, the defence led evidence with regard to a complaint lodged

against another person by the victim for sexual harassment. The said case

is pending in the Magistrate Court of Walapane.

In criminal trials such as this, “probability tests” on victims of sexual assault

are not standard, singular tests, rather, such tests would be layered tests

which include forensic, psychological and testimonial assessments in order

to establish the likelihood of whether such a sexual act occurred. As such,

these multiple assessments help to uphold the legal standard of proof of

“beyond a reasonable doubt”.

Such a burden of proof of “beyond a reasonable doubt” establishes that the

prosecution bears the weight of proving the guilt of the defendant beyond a

reasonable doubt, until which the defendant is presumed innocent. Clear

and cogent evidence must be adduced to satisfy this standard of proof, and

such evidence must not contradict each other.

In the case of Gurcharan Singh vs State of Haryana AIR 1972 SC 2661 it

was held that:

"as a rule of prudence Court normally looks for some corroboration on

her testimony so as to satisfy its conscience that she is telling the truth

and that the person accused of rape has not been falsely implicated".

CA/HCC/0071/02024

8 | P a g e

In the case of Premasiri vs The Queen 77 NLR 86 it was held that:

"in a charge of rape, it is proper for a jury to convict on the

uncorroborated evidence of the complainant only when such evidence is

of such nature is sufficient to convince the jury that she is speaking the

truth."

Considering the evidence given by the victim and the surrounding

circumstances, relying solely on the evidence of the victim is not prudent in

this case. Her evidence is ambiguous and creates a doubt on the

prosecution’s case.

Justice Dheeraratne in Sunil and others v. Attorney General [1986] 1

Sri.L. R 230 held that:

“Corroboration is only required or afforded if the witness requiring

corroboration is otherwise credible. If the evidence of witness requiring

corroboration is not credible his testimony should be rejected and the

accused acquitted. Seeking corroboration of a witness’s evidence should

not be used as a process of inducing belief in such evidence where such

evidence is not credible.

It is very dangerous to act on the uncorroborated testimony of a woman

victim of a sex offence but if her evidence is convincing such evidence could

be acted on even the absence of corroboration.”

In Premasiri v. Attorney General [2006] 3 Sri.L.R held that:

“The rule is not that corroboration is essential before there can be a

conviction in a case of rape but the necessity of corroboration as a

matter of prudence except where the circumstances make it unsafe

to dispense with it, must be present to the mind of the judge”.

CA/HCC/0071/02024

9 | P a g e

In the case of Sana v Republic of Sri Lanka [2009] 1 SLR 48 it was further

noted that:

“The corroborative facts and evidence must proceed from someone other

than the witness to be corroborated. This means that his previous

statements, even when admissible cannot be used to corroborate him, such

as proof of a complaint in a sexual case or a previous act of identification

is not corroborative of the evidence of the witness, even though by showing

consistency, it can to some extent strengthen his credibility. Where an

accused is charged with rape corroboration of the story of the prosecutrix

must come from some independent quarter and not from the prosecutrix

herself. A complaint made by the prosecutrix to the police in which she

implicated the accused cannot be regarded as corroboration of her

evidence.”

In Wijepala v AG [2001] 1 SLR 46 the Court held that:

“ …Evidence of a single witness, if cogent and impressive, can be acted

upon by a Court, but, whenever there are circumstances of suspicion in

the testimony of such a witness…. then corroboration may be

necessary”.

Considering the evidence given by the prosecutrix, the prosecution should

have placed corroborative evidence, as the evidence given by the prosecutrix

failed to satisfy the court on the tests of consistency, spontaneity and

probability.

In this case, the victim had not mentioned the name of the perpetrator to the

JMO when her history was recorded. She had mentioned about the Appellant

of committing sexual harassment to her on a previous occasion, however the

prosecution had not preferred a charge under Section 345 of the Penal Code.

As such, I hold that this is not a proper case to believe the evidence given by

CA/HCC/0071/02024

10 | P a g e

the prosecutrix to secure a conviction against the Appellant. Further, I note

that the prosecution should have corroborated the evidence of the

prosecutrix. Hence, I conclude that all appeal grounds placed before this

court have merit.

As discussed above, the evidence adduced by the prosecution does not

support the conviction entered by the Learned High Court Judge of Nuwara

Eliya dated 14/12/2023. Hence, I set aside the conviction and acquit the

Appellant from the charge.

Therefore, the appeal is allowed.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgment to the High

Court of Nuwara Eliya along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL