Page 1 of 25

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for Revision in terms of Article 138 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, read with Section 364 of the Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

The Director General,

Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption, No.36, Malalasekara Mawatha, Colombo 07. Complainant CPA 0014/2024 Vs. High Court of Colombo B/0028/2019

1. Thotamuna Kankanamage Wasantha Kumara,

No. 102/1, Arabeaddara Waththa, Maha Uragaha, Uragasmanhandiya. 2. Upali Gamini Jayawardhana,

No. 145 G, Kanaththa Road, Molligoda, Wadduwa.

Accused

Page 2 of 25

AND NOW BETWEEN The Director General,

Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption, No.36, Malalasekara Mawatha, Colombo 07.

Complainant-Petitioner

Vs.

1. Thotamuna Kankanamage Wasantha Kumara, No. 102/1, Arabeaddara Waththa, Maha Uragaha, Uragasmanhandiya.

2. Upali Gamini Jayawardhana, No. 145 G, Kanaththa Road, Molligoda, Wadduwa.

Accused-Respondents

Before: B. Sasi Mahendran, J. Amal Ranaraja, J.

Counsel: Kajaluxsy Sivasubramanyam for the Petitioner.

Page 3 of 25

Argued on: 09.05.2025 Judgment on: 29.05.2025

JUDGMENT

AMAL RANARAJA, J,

1. This is an application filed by the complainant-petitioner, namely the

Director General of the Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery

or Corruption (hereinafter referred to as the Petitioner), seeking to

invoke the discretionary remedy of revision granted to this Court by

Article 138 of the Constitution.

2. The Petitioner is seeking to set aside and vacate the order dated

15.11.2023 pronounced by the Learned High Court Judge of Colombo,

where the indictment was dismissed based on a preliminary objection

pertaining to the maintainability of the indictment before the Court.

Page 4 of 25

3. When the matter was presented for notice on February 12,2024 and it

was determined that the facts and the law presented before the Court

contained sufficient grounds to issue notice to the accused-

respondents, this Court issued notice to be returnable on April

01,2024.

4. The said notice had been issued by the Court under registered cover on

February 20,2024 and it has not been returned. When this matter was

mentioned on April 01, 2024, the accused-respondents were absent and

unrepresented. However, in an abundance of caution, this Court

directed the Registrar to issue another notice to the accused-

respondents at the address provided in the petition. The second notice

has been issued by the Court on May 02, 2024 under registered cover,

and the said notice has not been returned to Court. When the matter

was mentioned again on June 03, 2024, which was the return date for

the second notice, the accused-respondents were again absent and

unrepresented.

Page 5 of 25

5. Having satisfied ourselves that the accused-respondents have been

given sufficient notice of the revision application before the Court, and

that they were not interested in the matter, the matter was fixed for

argument.

6. At the hearing of this application, the Learned Counsel for the petitioner

was allowed to file written submissions substantiating the application

before the Court.

7. This is a matter in which the petitioner, as the Director General of the

Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption, has

filed the indictment under consideration against the Accused-

Respondents in the High Court of Colombo in case No. B/0028/2019, in

terms of Section 11 of the Commission to Investigate Allegations of

Bribery or Corruption Act No. 19 of 1994 (hereinafter referred to as the

CIABOC Act).

8. The charges in the indictment states that the accused-respondents

solicited and accepted money as a gratification from the person named

in the charges to perform their official duties, and thereby, committing

Page 6 of 25

offences punishable under Sections 19 (b) and 19 (c) of the Bribery Act

No. 11 of 1954 as amended.

9. The indictment has been served on the accused-respondents on

February 07, 2020, and thereafter was read out and explained to the

Accused-Respondents on November 05, 2023. The accused-

respondents have pleaded not guilty to the charges in the indictment

and the Learned High Court Judge has directed the petitioner to

commence the trial.

10. The Learned Counsel for the petitioner has concluded his opening

address, and at the conclusion of this address, it has been recorded that

an application was made by the Counsel for the accused-respondents to

raise a preliminary objection. The Learned High Court Judge has allowed

the said application and directed that the preliminary objection may be

filed by way of written submissions.

11. According to the objection that has been raised, the petitioner has filed

his submissions countering the preliminary objection raised.

Page 7 of 25

12. The Learned High Court Judge of Colombo has issued his order on

November 15, 2023, which is now being challenged before this Court.

13. The Learned High Court Judge has addressed the objection raised on

the grounds that under the provisions of this CIABOC Act, the

Commission is required to investigate allegations of Bribery or

Corruption communicated to it collectively. Therefore, since the

investigations in this case has commenced by a single Commissioner,

the indictment is rendered void ab initio.

14. In agreement with this preliminary objection, the learned High Court

Judge has discharged the accused-respondents from the case, concluding

that the investigation into the alleged offences has not been initiated

collectively by the Commission, indicating a clear lack of jurisdiction in

this matter.

15. In the process of his determination, the Learned High Court Judge has

considered several sections of the CIABOC Act, as well as case law

Page 8 of 25

including that of Anoma S. Polwattta vs. The Commission to

Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption, SC Writ Application

No. 1/2011 decided on 26.07.2018.

16. The Learned High Court Judge has further determined that some other

case law cited on behalf of the petitioner, such as Indiketiya Hewage

Kusumadasa Mahanama and Another vs. The Commission to

Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption SC/TAB/1A and

1B/2020 decided on 11.01.2023 and Nandasena Gotabaya

Rajapakse vs. The Director General, Commission to Investigate

Allegations of Bribery or Corruption and Others, CA (Revision) APN

No. 29/2008 decided on 12.09.2019, was not relevant to the preliminary

objections pending before such Court.

17. Since the essence of the order issued by the Learned High Court Judge

relies on the premise that the Commission has to collectively investigate

allegations of bribery or corruption communicated to it, under the CIABOC

Act, it is the view of this Court that a detailed examination of the Learned

High Court Judges is determination in necessary to assess its correctness

in this regard.

Page 9 of 25

18. I will now consider the argument presented by the petitioner which posits

that an objection similar to the one underlying the disputed order cannot

be raised in the High Court. This argument is based on the provisions

outlined in sections 12(1) and 12 (2) of the CIABOC Act.

19. Another division of this Court in CA Application No 85/2022 decided on

04.04.2023 has determined that objections concerning to the Director

Generals its right to file an indictment must be raised exclusively under

section 24 of the CIABOC Act. Consequently, neither the Court of Appeal

nor the High Court serves as an appropriate forum for challenging an

indictment on these grounds.

20. The Court of Appeal has been guided by the Supreme Court judgment in

Indikatiya Hewage Kusumadasa Mahanama and Another vs. The

Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption

(supra) where, after having considered a similar objection, their lordships

of the Supreme Court have observed thus,

When considering the submission referred to above, it is clear

that the said grounds of appeal raised on behalf of the 2nd

accused-appellant were based on a misrepresentation given

to the decision of this Court in the case of Anoma S. Polwatte

vs. The Director General of the Commission to

Page 10 of 25

Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption and

Others (supra). As already observed by us, when deciding the

above case, this Court had never intended to impose an

additional requirement of submitting a written directive given

by the commission when forwarding an indictment by the

Director General CIABOC to High Court other than following

the provision already identified under section 12 (1) and (2) of

the CIABOC Act. If the Director General is directed under

section 11 of the CIABOC Act by the CIABOC to forward an

indictment, he is only bound to follow the provisions of section

12 (1) and (2) of the CIABOC Act. In the absence of any

complaint that the Director General CIABOC had failed to

comply with sections 12 (1) and (2) of the CIABOC Act when

forwarding the indictment before the High Court at Bar, it is

correct in refusing the jurisdictional objection raised on behalf

of the 2nd accused before the High Court at Bar. The trial Judge

before whom the indictment is filed is therefore bound to

accept the indictment and take up the trial unless there is

material to establish that Director General CIABOC had failed

to comply with the provisions of section 12 (1) and (2) of the

CIABOC Act. Any party who intends to challenge an

indictment forwarded by the Director General CIABOC on the

basis that the CIABOC had failed to comply with section 11 of

the CIABOC Act, the said challenge would only be raised in an

appropriate action filed before an appropriate forum.

Page 11 of 25

21. The appropriate course of action in response to the observation mentioned

above is to file an application under section 24 of the CIABOC Act. Such

application should take the form of a writ in the Supreme Court, seeking

to quash the directive issued by the Commission to institute proceedings

in the High Court.

22. Be that as it may, it appears that the Learned High Court Judge has been

guided by the judgment in Anoma S. Polwatte (supra) where it was

determined that a direction to institute proceedings under the Bribery Act

or The Declaration of Assets and Liabilities Law No. 1 of 1975 is a function

of the Commission, and such function shall be exercised collectively by the

Commission.

23. Upon consideration of the relevant legal framework, the Learned High

Court Judge has concluded that investigating allegations communicated

to the Commission is also a function of the Commission as defined under

Section 3 of the CIABOC Act. Consequently, the Learned High Court Judge

has determined that the indictment should be dismissed, citing that the

Commission has not collectively conducted the investigation into the

allegations pertinent to the offences specified in the indictment.

Page 12 of 25

24. The case of Anoma S. Polwatte (supra) has established that the authority

to direct the institution of proceedings under the Bribery Act or The

Declaration of Assets and Liabilities Law resides with the Commission, and

a collective directive from the Commission is a necessary prerequisite for

initiating such proceedings. However, it seems that the Learned High

Court Judge has extended this interpretation by asserting that an

investigation (in terms of the CIABOC Act) in to allegations communicated

to it must also be conducted collectively by the Commission.

Consequently, any investigation that is not carried out collectively may a

have vitiating effect on the indictment that arises from such an

investigation.

25. For matters of clarity, I will reproduce section 3 of the CIABOC Act, which

refers to functions of the Commission and relied on by the Learned High

Court Judge in his determination,

The Commission shall subject to the other provisions of this

Act, investigate allegations, contained in the

communications made to it under section 4 and where any

such investigation discloses the commission of any offence

by any person under the Bribery Act or The Declaration of

Page 13 of 25

Assets and Liabilities Law No. 1 of 1975, direct the

institution of proceedings against such person for such

offence in the appropriate Court.

26. The case of Anoma S. Polwatte (supra) involved a writ application

submitted to the Supreme Court challenging the institution of proceedings

against Anoma S. Polwatte in the Magistrate's Court under the provisions

of section 78(1) of the Bribery Act. The application sought writs of

Certiorari, Prohibition and Mandamus as per section 24(1) of the CIABOC

Act.

27. The Supreme Court has held that the CIABOC Act grants certain functions

and powers to the Commission. While these powers can be exercised

collectively or individually the functions must be exercised collectively.

28. Their Lordships of the Supreme Court having considered section 2(8),

section 3 and section 5 of the CIABOC Act, have observed as follows,

"When looking at the provisions of the above 3 provisions of

the Act, it is clear that by the above provisions, a clear

distinction had been between the powers of the Commission

Page 14 of 25

and functions of the Commission. As identified in section 3

referred to above, when an offence is disclosed after an

investigation, Commission shall direct the institution of

proceedings and the said conduct of the Commission had

been identified within the functions of the Commission. The

powers of the Commission have been identified under

section 5 of the Act and under section 2(8), such powers of

the Commission may be exercised by its members either

sitting together or separately.

Thus, it is clear that the members of the Commission can

exercise ancillary powers on his own though the full

complement of the Commission is not available at one give

time, but for the exercise of functions such as the direction

to be given to the Director General, it is crystal clear that the

Act has not provided for one member alone to give such

direction."

29. The above observations of their Lordships of the Supreme Court clearly

show that the focus had been on the function of instituting proceedings

before a Court of law, and that it should be exercised collectively.

30. Since the judgment in Anoma S. Polwatte (supra) has not provided clear

directions as regards to the investigation of an allegation communicated

to it, becomes necessary for this Court to consider whether the Learned

Page 15 of 25

High Court Judge was correct in extending the principle laid down by the

Supreme Court in the judgment of Anoma S. Polwatte (supra) to dismiss

the indictment.

31. If one takes the face value of section 3 of the CIABOC Act, it can be argued

that investigation of allegations communicated to it and institution of

proceedings are functions designated to the Commission and should be

exercised collectively.

32. However, when one goes through the other sections of the CIABOC Act is

clear that the intention of the legislature on formulating the provisions in

the Act had not been that.

33. Section 3 of the CIABOC Act begins with the phrase The commission

shall, subject to the other provisions of this Act. The wording

indicates that section 3 must be understood in the context of the CIABOC

Act as a whole. It emphasizes the necessity of interpreting its stipulations

in relation to the various other provisions outlined in the CIABOC Act,

particularly concerning the investigation of allegations communicated to it

and the institution of legal proceedings.

Page 16 of 25

34. As the function of the institution of proceedings had been interpreted and

determined by the Supreme Court, my focus in this judgment is on the

investigation of allegations by the Commission.

35. It is my view that the powers of the Commission cannot be confined to

those set out in section 5 of the CIABOC Act. When one examines the

CIABOC Act it becomes evident that the powers granted to the Commission

extend beyond those outlined in section 5 of the Act.

36. Section 4(3) of the Act reads as follows,

The Commission shall have the power to investigate any

matters disclosed by a communication received by it under

subsection (1) whether or not such matters relate to a period

to the appointed date and not withstanding anything to the

contrary in any other law.

(the emphasis is mine)

37. Section 16 (3) of the Act reads as follows,

The Commission may delegate to the Director General or

any other officer appointed to assist the Commission any of

Page 17 of 25

its powers [other than the powers referred to in paragraphs

(i), (j), (k) and (1) of subsection (1) of section 5, section 11,

and this section] and the person to whom such powers are

delegated may exercise those powers subject to the

direction of the Commission.

(the emphasis is mine)

38. It is my view that the sections considered above indicate that the powers

of the Commission and are not limited solely to the areas outlined in

section 5 of the CIABOC Act. Investigating allegations communicated to

the Commission is also a power vested in it, although this is described as

a function of the Commission.

39. It is abundantly clear that the legislature in its wisdom has provided for

the Commission to exercise its powers collectively or individually.

40. Section 2(8) of the CIABOC Act reads as follows;

The members of the Commission may exercise the powers

conferred on the Commission either sitting together or

separately and where a member of the Commission

exercises any such power sitting separately, his acts shall

be deemed to be the act of the Commission.

Page 18 of 25

41. The principle that statutes should be interpreted in a manner that it

minimizes, absurdity or futility is a well-established legal practice. This

maxim serves as a guide to ensure that legislative intent is honoured and

the law operates effectively within society.

42. In the case of Nandasena vs. Senanayake and Another (1981) 1 SLR

238 at page 245, Sharvananda, J (as he was then) has held,

"Statutes should be construed, as far as possible, to avoid

absurdity or futility. A statute should be construed in a

manner to give it validity rather than invalidity- ut res magis

valeat cuam pereat. As Lord Dunedin stated in Whitney Vs.

Inland Revenue Commissioner (1925) AC 27, 52, A statute

is designed to be workable, and the interpretation thereof

should be to secure that object, unless crucial omission or

clear direction makes that end unattainable." A similar view

was expressed by Lord Simon L.C. in Noles Vs. Don Caster

Amalgamated Collieres Ltd (1940) AC 1014, 1023 in the

words: "If the choice is between two interpretations, the

narrower of which would fail to achieve the manifest

purpose of the legislation, we should avoid a construction

which would reduce the legislature to futility and should

rather accept the bolder construction based on the view that

parliament would legislate only for the purpose of bringing

about an effective result." Lord Reid enunciated the same

Page 19 of 25

view in Luke Vs. Inland Revenue Commissioner (1963) 1

ALL ER 655, 664 "How then are we to resolve this difficulty?

To apply the word literally is to defeat the obvious intention

of the legislature and to produce a wholly unreasonable

result. To achieve the obvious intention and produce a

reasonable result, we should do some violence to the words.

This is not a new problem... The general principle is well

settled. It is only where the words are absolutely incapable

of construction which will accord with the apparent

intention of the provision and avoid a wholly unreasonable

result that the words of the enactment must prevail."

It is thus legitimate and proper to read and rely upon such

a principle as this: "Where the language of a statute in its

ordinary meaning and grammatical construction leads to

manifest contradiction of the apparent purpose of the

enactment, or to cause inconvenience or absurdity,

hardship or injustice, presumably not intended, a

construction may be put upon it which modifies the meaning

of the words and even the structure of the sentence."

(Maxwell 'Interpretation of Statues, 10th Ed. at p.

229). A purposive approach to the construction of relevant

section of the law avoids the futility apprehended by

Counsel and enables the statutory objective to be achieved."

43. If this Court is to accept the argument that the powers granted to the

Commission are limited solely to those specified in section 5 of the CIABOC

Page 20 of 25

Act, then the investigation of allegations communicated to it, an essential

function of the Commission would compromise the very purpose of

enacting the CIABOC Act. The Bribery Act designed to address bribery and

corruption would therefore fail to fulfill its intended objectives.

44. Allegations of bribery or corruption can arise at any moment, necessitating

prompt and effective investigation. If the legislature intended for the

Commission to conduct investigations collectively, it becomes evident that

such a requirement would lead to an absurd situation. The need for

immediate action in response to allegations cannot be overstated delays in

investigations would not only hinder justice but also undermine public

trust in the integrity of the institution.

45. Article 156A enacted by the 19th Amendment to the Constitution

introduces enabling provisions for the establishment of a Commission to

Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption. It clearly indicates that

the legislature intended to empower this Commission to carry out

investigations in to such allegations.

Page 21 of 25

46. Article 156A(1)(b) reads as follows.

The powers of the Commission including the power to direct

the holding of a preliminary inquiry or the making of an

investigation into an allegation of bribery or corruption

whether of its own motion or on a complaint made to it and

the power to institute prosecutions for offences under the

law in force relating to bribery or corruption.

47. The corresponding Article 156A(1)(b) of the 21st Amendment to the

Constitution, reads as follows.

The powers of the Commission including the power to direct

the holding of a preliminary inquiry or the making of an

investigation into an allegation of bribery or corruption

whether of its own motion or on a complaint made to it, and

the power to institute prosecutions for offences under the

law in force relating to bribery or corruption.

48. I also believe that the rationale behind the legislatures decision to enact

sections 4(3), 16(3) and section 2(8) lies in the intention to explicitly

delineate the powers of the Commission to investigate allegations

communicated to it. These sections also serve as primary sources of

Page 22 of 25

authority for the Commission distinct from the powers granted under

section 5 of the CIABOC Act.

49. Due to the matters discussed above the rest of the grounds argued by the

Learned Counsel for the petitioner need not be considered, as the

determination of the Learned High Court Judge to discharge the accused-

respondents from the proceedings before the High Court cannot be allowed

to stand.

50. As the application before this Court is an application invoking the

revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal, which is a discretionary

remedy, it becomes necessary for this Court to consider the conditions

upon which the discretionary remedy of revision can be granted.

51. In the case of Hotel Galaxy (Pvt) Ltd vs. Mercantile Hotels Management

Ltd (1987) 1 SLR 5, it was held,

"It is settled law that the exercise of revisionary powers of

the appellate Court is confined to cases in which exceptional

circumstances exist warranting its intervention."

Page 23 of 25

52. In the case of Wijesinghe vs. Thamaratnam, (Srikantha Law Reports

Vol-IV page 47), it was held,

"Revision is a discretionary remedy and will not be

available unless the application discloses circumstances

which shocks the conscience of the Court."

53. In the case of Vanik Incorporation Ltd. vs. Jayasekare (1997) 2 SLR

365, it was held,

"Revisionary powers should be exercised where a

miscarriage of justice has occurred due to a fundamental

rule of procedure being violated, but only when a strong

case is made out amounting to a positive miscarriage of

justice."

54. In the case of Dharmaratne vs. Palm Paradise Cabanas (2003) 3 SLR

24, Gamini Amarathunga, J, has observed thus;

"Existence of exceptional circumstances in the process by

which the Court select the cases in respect of which the

extraordinary method of rectification should be adopted. If

such a selection process is not there, revisionary jurisdiction

of this Court will become a getaway of every litigant to make

a second appeal in the grab of a revision application or to

make an appeal in situations where the legislature has not

given a right of appeal.

Page 24 of 25

The practice of Court in insisting the existence of exceptional

circumstance for the exercise of revisionary powers has

taken deep root in our law and has got hardened into a rule

which should not be lightly disturbed.

55. I find that the petitioner has established sufficient exceptional grounds

before this Court. I am of the view that this is a fit and proper case where

this Court should intervene by exercising the discretionary remedy of

revision vested in this Court to interfere with the disputed order of the

Learned High Court Judge for the reasons as considered.

56. Accordingly, the order dated November 15, 2023 of the Learned High Court

Judge of Colombo, is set aside as it cannot be allowed to stand.

Application is allowed.

57. The alleged preliminary objection raised by the accused-respondents is

hereby dismissed.

Page 25 of 25

58. The Learned High Court Judge is directed to revert the case back to the

case role of the Court and issue notice on the accused-respondents, read

over the indictment to them, and proceed therefrom to hear evidence if

necessary, and conclude the case.

59. The Registrar of the Court is directed to communicate this judgement to

the High Court of Colombo for necessary compliance.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

B. SASI MAHENDRAN, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal