==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 13

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with Article 138 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka Complainant

Court of Appeal Case No. CA/HCC/258/2024 Vs. High Court of Hambantota Case No. HC 63/2015

Hatharin Kandambige Sagara Sampath Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Hatharin Kandambige Sagara Sampath

Accused-Appellant Vs. The Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12.

Complainant-Respondent

Page 2 of 13

Before: B. Sasi Mahendran, J. Amal Ranaraja, J.

Counsel: Chrishan de Alwis, AAL for the Accused-Appellant. Maheshika Silva, D.S.G. for the Respondent.

Argued on: 20.01.2026 Judgment on: 09.02.2026

JUDGMENT

AMAL RANARAJA, J.

1. The Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the “appellant”) has

been indicted in the High Court of Hambantota in High Court case

number HC 63/2015

2. The charge in the indictment is as follows;

That on or about, April 21, 2014, at Thissapura, within the

jurisdiction of this Court, the appellant did commit the offence

of rape on a woman, an offence punishable under section 364(1)

of the Penal Code (as amended by Act, No.22 of 1995).

Page 3 of 13

3. At the conclusion of the trial the learned High Court Judge has

convicted the appellant of the charge and sentenced him as follows;

4. Aggrieved by the conviction, the disputed judgment together with the

sentencing order, the appellant has preferred the instant appeal to this

Court.

Case of the prosecution

5. At the time of the incident, PW01 has been a married woman living with

her husband who worked as a laborer.

6. On the particular day, her husband has been scheduled for a night shift

rendering him absent from his house. PW01 thus has been alone in the

house. Her solitude has been abruptly interrupted that night when she

distinctly heard the ring of a mobile phone coming from just outside her

house immediately adjacent to a wall. PW01 has remained inside.

Has imposed a fine of Rs. 10,000.00 with a term of ten months rigorous

imprisonment in default.

Additionally, also imposed a term of nine years rigorous imprisonment.

The appellant has also been directed to pay a sum of Rs. 100,000 as

compensation to PW01 with a term of two years rigorous imprisonment in

default.

Page 4 of 13

A while later, an individual who subsequently identified himself as the

appellant, has stated his intention was to meet PW01’s husband. PW01

still within the perceived safety within her home has promptly informed

the appellant that her husband was not present and suggested he

instead approach a neighbour to discuss the matter he has intended to

raise with her husband.

The encounter has left PW01 deeply unsettled. The barking of dogs in

the vicinity has unsettled her further. Feeling vulnerable and

uncomfortable, being alone in the house for the remainder of the night,

PW01 has decided that it would be prudent to seek refuge.

Accordingly, she has intended to spend the night at the home of her

neighbour for greater safety. In anticipation of reaching her neighbour’s

house, PW01 has proceeded to step out of her own and begun walking

the temporary gate erected in her garden. At this juncture, the appellant

has suddenly accosted and forcefully seized her.

To prevent her from raising alarm or screaming for help, the appellant

has forcefully manipulated the chez cloth PW01 was wearing, effectively

muffling her. The appellant has then dragged PW01 into a secluded and

isolated area in the immediate vicinity. At that isolated location, the

appellant has allegedly proceeded to engage in sexual intercourse with

PW01 entirely without her consent or acquiescence.

Page 5 of 13

7. Consequently, when the appellant moved away to retrieve his slippers,

PW01 has seized the opportunity and escaped to PW06’s house. PW01

has related the incident to PW06. Accompanied by PW06, PW01 has

then gone to her husband’s workplace, thereafter travelled together and

filed a police complaint.

8. An investigation has commenced during which, PW01 has been

examined by PW07, Dr. R. A. S. Senevirathna, consultant judicial

medical Officer, District Hospital of Hambantota, the medico-legal report

based on PW01’s examination has been subsequently presented as

evidence and marked පැ-1.

Case of the appellant

9. The appellant has contended that the act of sexual intercourse with

PW01 on the occasion in question was with her consent, just as he had

on previous occasions.

Grounds of appeal

10. When the matter was taken up for argument, the learned Counsel for

the appellant urged the following grounds of appeal:

i. Failure to address material contradictions in the

prosecution’s case.

Page 6 of 13

ii. Failure to address material omissions in the prosecution’s

case.

iii. Improper admission of hearsay evidence prejudicing the

defence.

iv. Failure to address the improbability of the complainant’s

account.

v. Erroneous rejection of the accused’s dock statement.

vi. Erroneous reliance on injuries as corroboration.

vii. Failure to produce medico-legal report of the accused.

Evaluation

11. Prior to being examined by PW07, the consultant judicial medical officer

PW01 (the patient) has provided a brief account of the incident to the

doctor. In her description she has stated as follows;

“She was sexually abused by Sagara around 9.30 pm in the

night on 22.04.2014. He threatened her to do sexual

intercourse with him. He closed her mouth forcefully and

squeezed her neck. Though he said that two more persons in

an around, she did not see any others. He did vaginal

intercourse in a jungle area”.

[vide the medico-legal report by Dr. A.S.Senevirathne,

page 417 of the appeal brief]

Page 7 of 13

12. Dr. Senevirathne testifying as PW07 has stated that he conducted the

medico-legal examination of PW01. During his assessment, he has

observed distinct external injuries consisting of aberrations and a

contusion. In his professional opinion regarding the mechanism of

injury, PW07 has concluded that those bodily injuries were more

suggestive of restraint and resistance during the sexual act.

In light of the issues previously discussed, it is clear that PW01 has

maintained a consistent narrative throughout. This consistence is

further supported by expert evidence which lends credence to PW01’s

claim. The alignment between PW01’s narrative and the findings

presented by the expert witness underscores the reliability of her

account.

13. Consistency in testimony is crucial in establishing credibility. PW01’s

unwavering commitment to her narrative re-enforces the strength of her

position. Furthermore, the corroborative expert evidence provides an

objective framework that not only validates her experience but also

enhances the overall integrity of her claims.

14. PW01 has provided testimony three years after the incident in question,

given this considerable time gap it is important to recognize that

memory lapse can occur, potentially affecting the recollection of her

account. Additionally, PW01 comes from a rural background which may

have made her feel overwhelmed by the court room atmosphere. This

Page 8 of 13

unfamiliar environment could further impact her ability to recall events

with clarity and confidence.

15. In her testimony, PW01 could have attempted to articulate her

experience in a more detailed manner than she did when she initially

reported the incident to the police, however this effort to elaborate may

have led to inconsistencies in her narrative. Under such circumstances,

it is not uncommon for witnesses to inadvertently contradict themselves

or omit certain details, especially in the face of intense questioning by

the opposing party, who may highlight these discrepancies to cast a

doubt on her credibility.

16. Further, micro-analyzing each discrepancy without giving

consideration to the mental state of PW01, her thought process and the

totality of her evidence is also not reasonable. It is essential, for the

Court to consider these factors when evaluating PW01’s testimony.

The contradictions highlighted in V01 to V03, as well as the omissions

noted by the High Court, do not undermine the essence of PW01’s

narrative. Consequently, these discrepancies can be considered

immaterial to the core of the testimony of PW01.

17. While it is essential to scrutinize the details of any witnesses account,

the fundamental aspects of PW01’s story remain intact despite the

noted discrepancies. The essence of the testimony, conveys a coherent

Page 9 of 13

and a plausible series of events which provides a necessary

understanding of the case at hand. The presence of minor

contradictions or omissions may raise questions about the precision of

PW01’s memory but do not detract from the overall credibility of the

narrative.

18. It is important to distinguish between minor details that may be

imperfectly recalled and the overarching truth that the witness seeks to

convey.

19. Accordingly, the contention that the discrepancies in the witness’s

testimony arose because PW01 had attempted to cover up the

circumstances surrounding the appellant’s visit to her home that night

must fail.

20. Hearsay evidence is an out of court statement offered in court to prove

the truth of the matter asserted, generally deemed inadmissible

because the original speaker is not under oath and available for cross

examination, making it unreliable.

However, it can become admissible under specific exceptions like dying

declarations or when offered for purposes other than proving the truth

of the statement.

21. Parts of the narrative provided by PW01 which includes references to

her parents, some villagers and who were not called as witnesses by the

Page 10 of 13

prosecution has however not been deemed substantive evidence by the

learned high court judge in his disputed judgment. Therefore, it cannot

be argued that he has improperly considered hearsay evidence in

reaching his conclusion as reflected in the disputed judgment.

22. The ‘test of probability’ is a foundational method used by courts to

evaluate the credibility of witness’s narration by assessing whether his

story aligns with common sense, human experience and objective

independent evidence. It helps judges determine which version of events

is more likely than not or inherently probable.

23. The learned counsel for the appellant has contended that the dragging

of PW01 by the appellant could not have occurred as described by her.

However, in pages 107 to 109, and page 118, PW01 has clearly

explained how the appellant manipulated the chez cloth she was

wearing to muffle her and subsequently drag her to the nearby isolated

area. Such explanation is plausible and aligns with common sense.

24. Further, PW01 had been found to be a truthful witness despite being

unable to recall the specific details of the chez cloth from the incident.

Her inability to recall specific details of the chez cloth does not negate

her narrative that a chez cloth was used to muffle her.

25. Another point contended on behalf of the appellant is the alleged logical

inconsistency of the appellant taking phone calls in the isolated area.

This action should be considered in light of the fact that the appellant

Page 11 of 13

had told PW01 that two other individuals were going to join him and

would also engage in sexual intercourse with her.

26. Additionally, the appellant has stated to PW01 that he was armed with

a pistol. This disclosure would have undoubtedly instilled fear in PW01

and profoundly subdued her. This fear has been demonstrably

evidenced in her subsequent action. Upon escaping PW06’s house,

PW01 has immediately warned its occupants that the appellant might

shoot them.

27. During the cross examination of PW01, the appellant’s defence posited

among other suggestions that PW01 had engaged in consensual

intercourse with the appellant, that her husband returned

unexpectedly that night and any subsequent assault on PW01 was

perpetrated by her husband.

28. These suggestions have been however unequivocally denied by PW01.

Instead, PW01 has maintained a consistent narrative that she

accompanied by PW06, first proceeded to her husband’s workplace.

After confiding in him about the incident, they then travelled together

to lodge a formal police complaint.

29. A crucial point of fact is when PW01 testified in court, her husband had

unfortunately passed away due to an elephant attack, rendering him

unavailable as a corroborating witness. The prosecution’s case has been

significantly bolstered by several pieces of evidence. It has been

established that PW01 had exhibited clear signs of distress upon her

Page 12 of 13

arrival at the Police Station to make a complaint. Furthermore, the

consultant judicial medical officer (PW07) who examined PW01 has

provided an expert opinion stating that the bodily injuries observed on

her were highly suggestive of restraint and resistance having occurred

during the sexual act.

30. The learned High Court Judge has meticulously considered these

corroborative pieces of evidence from the prosecution alongside other

material evidence and the appellant’s dock statement undertaking a

comprehensive and holistic assessment.

31. Consequently, the learned High Court Judge has determined that the

appellant’s narrative, as presented in the dock statement, lacked

credibility when weighed against the compelling prosecution evidence

and has therefore decided not to rely upon it.

32. Detailed and cogent reasons have been specifically provided for this

determination. Given these compelling circumstances and the robust

assessment undertaken by the learned High Court Judge, there is no

merit in the contention that the appellant’s dock statement was

erroneously rejected due to any misapplication of legal principles or

factual misrepresentations.

33. It has also been submitted by the learned Deputy Solicitor General that

any infirmity in the investigation by not producing the appellant for a

medical examination does not raise a doubt in the credibility of PW01.

Page 13 of 13

34. In those circumstances, I am not inclined to interfere with the

conviction, disputed judgment together with the sentencing order.

I proceed to affirm the same and dismiss the appeal.

I make no order regarding costs.

Appeal is dismissed.

35. The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgment to the High

Court in Hambantota for compliance.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

I agree,

Judge of the Court of Appeal