==== BLOCKS ==== 

Judgment CA Tax No. 83/2024

IN THE COURT OSOCIALIST REPUBL

C . A. Tax No.83/2024TAC. Appeal No.TAC/IT/160/

OF APPEAL OF THE DEM

LIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of a Casethe opinion of the CourUnder and in terms of Sof the Tax Appeals ComNo. 23 of 2011 as amenNo. 20 of 2013 of the Socialist Republic of Sri L

THE COMMISSIONER OF INLAND REVENUE

Department of Inland RevSir Chittampalam A.Mawatha, Colombo-

-Vs-

JETWING TRAVELS (PVJetwing House, No. 46/26, Nawam MawaColombo 02.

APP

RESP

/2018

Page 1|16

MOCRATIC

e Stated for rt of Appeal

Section 11A mmission Act

nded by Act

Democratic Lanka.

GENERAL

venue, . Gardiner

VT) LTD,

atha,

PELLANT

PONDENT

Judgment CA Tax No. 83/2024 Page 2|16

Before : JUSTICE M.CHAMATH.B.S. MORAIS

JUSTICE ANNALINGAM PREMASHANKER

Counsel: Deputy Solicitor General, Manohara Jayasinghe,

with Ms. D. Jayanthakumar instructed by Sithi

Rizni Firdous, State Attorney for The Appellant.

Lakshmanan Jeyakumar, Attorney at Law with

Ms. Bhagya Herath, Attorney at Law, Ms.

Sanjeevi Jayasinghe, Attorney at Law, Ms.

Abirami Balasubramaniam, Attorney at Law

instructed by Madushi Cooray, Attorney at Law

for The Respondent.

Written Submissions of The Appellant :- 26.09.2025,06.11.2025

Written Submissions of The Respondent :- 21.05.2025,06.11.2025

Argument :- 05.08.2025

Decided on :- 22.01.2026

ANNALINGAM PREMASHANKER, J.

A.

A1. This is an appeal by the Commissioner General of Inland

Revenue (Hereinafter sometimes referred to as The

Appellant/CGIR) from the determination of the Tax Appeals

JUDGEMENT

INTRODUCTION

Judgment CA Tax No. 83/2024 Page 3|16

Commission dated 25.03.2024 made in TAC appeal no.

TAC/IT/160/2018. The Respondent is Jetwing Travels (Pvt)

Ltd (Hereinafter sometimes referred to as The

Respondent/Tax Payer).

A2. The Appellant being dissatisfied with the determination of

Tax Appeals Commission (Hereinafter sometimes referred to

as TAC) requested for an appeal by a case stated for the opinion

of the Court of Appeal by their communication dated

25.04.2024.

A3. In this Appeal the issue before the court is whether the

Respondent is eligible to claim the profit and income of Rs.

24,857,269/- as exempt from tax under Section 13(ddd) of the

Inland Revenue Act No. 10 of 2006 (Herein after sometimes

referred to as IRA).

B.

On 5th August 2025, both parties agreed to conclude the argument

by written submissions. It is found that the Appellant has furnished

written submissions on 26.09.2025 and 06.11.2025. The

Respondent has furnished the written submissions on 21.05.2025

and 06.11.2025.

ARGUEMENT

Judgment CA Tax No. 83/2024 Page 4|16

C.

C1. There were four questions of law presented for the opinion of

the Court of Appeal, in the case stated dated 14. 05. 2024. They

are:

“Has the Tax Appeals Commission erred in law in interpreting

the section 13 (ddd) of the Inland Revenue Act, No. 10 of 2006

(as amended)?”

“Has the Tax Appeals Commission erred in law in determining

applicability of the section 13(ddd) of the Inland Revenue Act,

No. 10 of 2006 (as amended) without due consideration for the

nature of income sources of the Appellant Company?”

“Has the Tax Appeals Commission erred in law in determining

the Appellant Company is entitle to claim tax exemption

under section 13 (ddd) of the Inland Revenue Act, No. 10 of

2006 (as amended)?”

“In view of the fact and circumstances of the case, did the Tax

Appeals Commission err in law when it came to the conclusion

that it did?”

The First, Second and Third Questions of law are similar and on the

same point and the fourth is a consequential question. Hence, the

first three questions will be dealt together.

ANALYSIS

Judgment CA Tax No. 83/2024 Page 5|16

C2.

The tax payer submits its return for the year of 2013/2014 dated

15.09.2014, claiming an income tax exemption on profit and

income under section 13 (ddd) of IRA No. 10 of 2006. This claim

was rejected by the Assessor and the return is not accepted and

issued an assessment.

C3.

Having aggrieved by the said Assessment, the tax payer made an

appeal to the CGIR. The Tax Payer made the same agitation before

the CGIR. CGIR by his determination dated 02.07.2018 determined

the appeal by confirming the assessment.

C4.

The tax payer having not satisfied with the determination of the

CGIR, made an appeal to the TAC. In the appeal before the TAC the

tax payer raised the same issues. TAC by its determination dated

25.03.2024, determined that the tax payer is entitled to the tax

exemption and allowed the appeal.

C5.

There is an agreement between the Jetwing Travels (Pvt) Ltd and the

Foreign Tour Operator (Hereinafter sometimes referred to as

FTO), who is domiciled in a foreign country.

AGREEMENT

TAX RETURN

FIRST APPEAL

SECOND APPEAL

Judgment CA Tax No. 83/2024 Page 6|16

C6.

“Section 13 – There shall be exempt from Income Tax –

13 (ddd) - the profits and income earned in foreign

currency by any resident company, any resident

individual or any partnership in Sri Lanka, from any

service rendered in or outside Sri Lanka to any person or

partnership outside Sri Lanka, other than any

commission, discount or similar receipt for any such

service rendered in Sri Lanka, if such profits and income

(less such amount, if any, expended outside Sri Lanka as

is considered by the Commissioner-General to be

reasonable expenses) are remitted to Sri Lanka through a

bank”

C7.

The requirements for eligibility for tax exemption under Section 13

(ddd):

(a) Income should be in foreign currency.

(b) Tax Payer should be a resident company.

(c) Service should be rendered in or outside Sri Lanka.

(d) Service receiver should be a person or partnership outside

Sri Lanka.

(e) Other than any commission, discount or similar receipts for

any such services rendered in Sri Lanka;

(f) Should be remitted to Sri Lanka through a bank.

SECTION 13 (ddd) OF IRA

REQUIREMENTS

Judgment CA Tax No. 83/2024 Page 7|16

C8.

The Foreign Tour Operator enters into an agreement with the

foreign tourist for providing vacation packages in Sri Lanka, for

which consideration is paid by the tourist to the Foreign Tour

Operator. The FTO obtains the services of the Respondent (local

company) to provide the services undertaken by them to the tourist.

The Respondent receives the payment directly in foreign

currency through a bank from the Foreign Tour Operator.

For example, as per the request of the FTO, the Respondent would

arrange the package with hotels, transport services and other

excursions, etc, which will be sold by the FTO to the tourist arriving

in Sri Lanka. In return, the Respondent receives a payment from

the Foreign Tour Operator according to the terms of the

agreement between FTO and the Respondent. The payment is

received in foreign currency and is received via the banking

channels. This is the Respondent’s income.

C9.

The Foreign Tourist, the customer of FTO pays the consideration to

the Foreign Tour Operator and not to the Respondent. This

payment by the Foreign Tourist to the Foreign Tour Operator is

made in the home country of the tourist. This shows that the

Foreign Tour Operator is the supplier of the service and the tourist

SCOPE OF AGREEMENT

THE INCOME OF THE RESPONDENT COMPANY

Judgment CA Tax No. 83/2024 Page 8|16

is the recipient of the service. The Respondent receives payment

according to the agreement between the Respondent and the

Foreign Tour Operator not from the foreign tourist. The Respondent

provides its services to the Foreign Tour Operator. The income is

remitted to the respondent only by the FTO and not by the tourist.

Thereby, the services enjoyed by the tourist are immaterial within

the ambit of the Section 13 (ddd) of the IRA.

The Foreign Tourist does not make any payments or provide any

commission to the Respondent. They directly deal with the

Foreign Tour Operator only. Therefore, there is no privity of

contract between the Foreign Tourist and the Respondent.

Therefore, it is clear that the payment is received from the Foreign

Tour Operator and not from the tourist and the payment is made in

foreign currency through bank.

The contract between the Respondent and the FTO is quite apart

and distinct from the contract between the FTO and The tourist.

The Respondent has no contractual obligations whatsoever

towards the tourist. Therefore it is incorrect to allege the

Respondent was providing the services to the tourist.

Judgment CA Tax No. 83/2024 Page 9|16

C10.

The appellant’s only contention was that the Respondent provide

service to a tourist who is not a person outside Sri Lanka

[requirement (d)]. It is argued that the Jetwing Travels (Pvt) Limited

provides travel service to the tourists who are in Sri Lanka as the

recipient of the service. This cannot be accepted as tourist is not

making any payment to the Jetwing Travels (Pvt) Limited only

acted as a local agent of the foreign Tour Operator. The

Respondent stressed that they had a privity of contract with the

FTO and their services were rendered to the Foreign Tour Operator

and not to the tourist.

C11.

Though the Appellant by his written submissions contends that

there is no proof of money being remitted by the FTO via an

accepted banking channel, such submission was never been

raised before the TAC or previously before the CGIR or the

Assessor. Similarly, though the Appellant submits in his written

submission that there is an absence of proof by the Respondent,

that the relevant FTO did not have any branches in Sri Lanka,

this submission too has never been presented previously. Hence, we

are not inclined to consider the same. Therefore, the only ground

the Appellant has come before this court appears to be on the

requirement that the services rendered to the tourist who were

APPELLANT’S POSITION

FIRST TIME IN APPEAL

Judgment CA Tax No. 83/2024 Page 10|16

present in Sri Lanka at that time and not to any person or

parties outside Sri Lanka, which is set out in paragraph C7(d)

above.

C12.

In Court of Appeal Tax 01/2021 -- The Commissioner General

of Inland Revenue Vs Aikten Spence Travels Limited, Court of

Appeal held:

”…the income is remitted to the respondent only by the FTO

and not by the foreign tourist, thereby the service provided to

the foreign tourists is irrelevant and within the ambit of

Section 13(ddd) of the IR Act, Furthermore, in arriving at this

determination, this Court would like to emphasize the purpose

of tax exemptions in an economy. Tax exemptions on foreign

remittance are generally granted to incentivize resident

entities to increase foreign activities, thereby, increasing the

flow of foreign currency to the local economy. This can

enhance the livelihood and the economy of a country. Further,

this particular exemption encourages resident entities to use

legal and legitimate means of remittance i.e. banks, without

resorting to illegal and cheaper methods to remit foreign

income. On one hand this supports the local banking system

and on the other hand it helps with assessing and calculating

the economic realities.”

CASE REFERENCE No. 1

Judgment CA Tax No. 83/2024 Page 11|16

In the above conclusion the court has dealt with section 13 (dddd),

which is similar to section 13 (ddd), which is a subject matter of

this appeal.

C13.

Commissioner General of Inland Revenue Vs Lignocell and

Another. S.C Appeal 145/2023 in which Supreme Court held;

“…The cardinal rule in interpreting a Statute is that the Rules

of Interpretation should be followed, foremost, to preserve the

intention of the Legislature. If the words are plain and

unambiguous, and only indicate one meaning, then the literal

meaning should be given. if not, a harmonious meaning

should be given, for the Section to be construed, so that there

maybe be no repugnancy or inconsistency. The duty of the

court is to implement the provisions, without departing from

the policy underlined in the law.

… if I may summarize, in interpreting a statute if the

language is plain and unambiguous, a strict and a literal

meaning should be given. It should be contextual in nature

without departing from the intention of the Legislature and

the Statute should be considered as a wholesome instrument.

…I do not think it is necessary to examine or distinguish the

aforesaid judgments at the juncture, other than to- re-iterate,

the established rule in interpreting fiscal statute, i.e., not to

CASE REFERENCE No. 2

Judgment CA Tax No. 83/2024 Page 12|16

extend the provisions of the Statutes by implication, beyond

the clear language of the Statute.

…courts have clearly followed the rule that in taxation, you

have to look simply at what is clearly said. You read nothing

in; you imply nothing in; but you look fairly at what is said

and at what is said clearly. That is the tax.

Hence, in fiscal Statutes, the first source is the words of the

Statute. Where the meaning is manifest on the plain words of

the Statute, there is no need for any interpretation process.

Where there is an ambiguity or doubt regarding an exemption,

only such ambiguity or doubt should be resolved having

regarding to the context and the language of the words of the

Statute. In the appeal before this Court for determination, the

words of the Statute are clear and precise. There is no

ambiguity or about whatsoever.”

C14.

In the case in hand, the income received by the Respondent is in

foreign currency through a bank – Requirement (a) and (f).

The Respondent is a Resident Company – Requirement (b).

Render services in or outside Sri Lanka – Requirement (c).

FULFILLMENT OF REQUIREMENTS

Judgment CA Tax No. 83/2024 Page 13|16

Services rendered to a person or partnership who is operating

from outside Sri Lanka – Requirement (d).

The Income earned by the Respondent does not include any

commission, discount or similar receipt – Requirement (e).

Income should be remitted to Sri Lanka through a Bank –

Requirement (f).

C15.

The Appellant’s position is that the Respondent had paid value

added tax. Therefore, the claim of tax exemption is not bona fide.

But this court considers the VAT payment is on a different basis,

and the Tax payer genuinely made the payment. But in respect of

Income Tax the tax payer’s claim is reasonable and genuine.

C16.

For the reasons stated above, the first, second and third

questions of law are answered in negative.

VALUE ADDED TAX

ANSWERS

Judgment CA Tax No. 83/2024 Page 14|16

D.

The Fourth Question of Law is “In view of the fact and

circumstances of the case, did the Tax Appeals Commission

err in law when it came to the conclusion that it did?”

As this court answers the questions No. 1, 2, 3 in negative and as

the 4th question of law is a consequential question, also answered in

negative.

E.

In the determination of the TAC dated 25.03.2024, it is only

mentioned that it is clear that the Appellant is entitled to the

Tax exemption claim. Accordingly, we allowed the appeal of the

Appellant. In the determination of the Commissioner General of

Inland Revenue dated 02.07.2018, it has been concluded that to

confirm the assessment issued by the Assistant Commissioner,

without accepting the Returns for the year 2013|2014 dated 15. 09.

2014.

In the Appeal to the TAC dated 05.10. 2018, the Jetwing Travels

(Pvt) Limited moved the TAC to grant;

TAC’S DETERMINATION

4th QUESTION

Judgment CA Tax No. 83/2024 Page 15|16

a. Set aside the determination of the Commissioner

General

b. Annul the assessment bearing the assessment No.

ITA 16030600326VI dated 13. 05. 2016

c. Hold the Return of income made by the appellant

is in conformity of law

As the TAC allows the appeal, it should be interpreted that TAC has

given all the reliefs.

F.

For the reasons adumbrated above, the questions of law are

answered as follows;

Q.N.1. No.

Q.N.2. No.

Q.N.3. No.

Q.N.4. No.

ANSWERS TO THE QUESTIONS OF LAW

Judgment CA Tax No. 83/2024 Page 16|16

G.

As analyzed above and as the four questions raised in the case

stated are answered in negative, the determination of the TAC

dated 25. 03. 2024 is affirmed and the appeal is dismissed.

The Appeal is dismissed. But considering the circumstances of

the case no cost is ordered.

The Registrar is directed to forward a copy of the judgment to the

Tax appeal commission.

On this 22nd day of January 2026

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

M. C. B. S. MORAIS

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

CONCLUSION