1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made

under Section 331 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of

1979

Court of Appeal No:

CA/HCC/480-482/2017

High Court of Colombo

Case No: HC/2184/2004

1. Nanayakkara Wasam Hiniduwa

Liyanage Piyadasa

2. Jayasinghe Archchige Chaminda

Kumara

3. Warnakulasuriyage Mahesh

Suranga Perera

Accused-Appellants

vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

Complainant-Respondent

2 | P a g e

BEFORE : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

P. Kumararatnam, J.

COUNSEL : Neranjan Jayasinghe for the 1st and 3rd

Appellants.

Amila Palliyage with Duminda De Alwis,

R.Doralagoda and Savani Udugampola for

the 2nd Appellant.

Azard Navavi DSG for the Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 28/01/2022

DECIDED ON : 16/03/2022

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellants (hereinafter referred as the

Appellants) were indicted by the Attorney General in the High Court of

Colombo under Sections 54(A) (d) and 54(A) (b) of the Poisons, Opium and

Dangerous Drugs Ordinance as amended by Act No. 13 of 1984 for the

Possession and Trafficking respectively of 10.2 grams of Heroin

(Diacetylmorphine) on 06th February 2003.

After trial, the Appellants were found guilty on both counts and the Learned

High Court Judge of Colombo has imposed a sentence of life imprisonment

on the 27th of October 2017.

3 | P a g e

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellants

preferred this appeal to this court.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the

Appellants have given consent to argue this matter in their absence due to

the Covid 19 pandemic. During the argument they have been connected via

Zoom platform from prison.

Six grounds of appeal have been raised on behalf of the 1st and 3rd

Appellants. For the 2nd Appellant five grounds are raised. As 1st to 5th

grounds of appeal raised by all Appellants are identical, the said grounds will

be considered collectively in this judgment. As the fourth and sixth grounds

of appeal raised by the 1st and 3rd Appellants are pertaining to the

productions of this case the said two grounds also will be considered

together. Hence, for all the Appellants the following appeal grounds will be

considered in this appeal.

1. The entire case relies on uncorroborated evidence of witnesses and the

trial judge has failed to consider the vital contradictions of the

prosecution witnesses.

2. The learned trial judge has not correctly applied the test of probability

and improbability in order to determine the creditworthiness of the

witnesses.

3. The learned trial judge has failed to consider the legal principle of joint

possession.

4. The learned trial judge has failed to consider the fact that the

prosecution has failed to establish the production chain of the case.

5. The learned trial judge has not properly considered the dock

statement.

4 | P a g e

Background of the case

On 05.02.2003 around 9.45 p.m. Excise Officer (EO)800 Dissanayake

attached to The Excise Narcotic Bureau had received information from his

personal informer about the plans for trafficking narcotics in the early hours

on the following day. He has intimated this information to his superior

officers to organize a raid on the following day.

PW01 Excise Inspector Sunil Gunatunga attached to the Excise Narcotic

Bureau acting on this information organized the raid in this case. He had

selected nine Excise Officers including PW02 EO 800 Dissanayake. On the

following day at 6.30 a.m. the team left for Peliyagoda as per the information.

Before leaving the bureau PW01 had examined and ensured that no officers

had carried any suspicious items with them.

The team had reached the given location at 6.30 a.m. and except two officers,

the rest had walked up to the suspects house as per the information

provided by the informant. As the house was surrounded by a parapet wall

of different heights, the officers had entered the house by scaling over a wall.

When the officers entered the house, they had witnessed three people sitting

around a glass pad facing each other and packeting something. When

checked it was found that the persons seated around the table were engaged

in packeting what appeared to be Heroin. The officers had observed that the

1st Appellant was packing the smaller packets in to a larger bag and the 2nd

and 3rd Appellants were also engaged in packaging and wrapping the

substance that was on the glass pad. Two blades which had been used to

package Heroin were also recovered from the glass pad.

As the recovered substance reacted for Heroin, the officers had arrested all

three Appellants and recovered all the items mentioned above from the place

of incident. Upon further investigation a bundle of cash amounting to

Rs.196150/= was recovered under a mattress from a room close to the place

where they were seated. After taking the three Appellants into custody along

5 | P a g e

with all the items recovered, the group left the house around 8.00 a.m. In

the meantime, others had gone to the house for further investigation and

came to the place where the vehicles were parked around 9.00 a.m. When

they reached the office, the time was around 9.45 a.m.

At the raid, the officers had recovered 1380 small packets. The substance in

those packets were put in to one paper and weighed at the bureau. The

suspected Heroin sample weighed 51.450 grams. Considerable time was

spent to unwrap 1380 metal foils one by one. After sealing the production

was kept under the custody of the Officer-in-Charge of the Excise Narcotic

Bureau until it was taken to the Magistrate Court in Maligakanda.

PW1 Excise Inspector Sunil Gunatunga had vividly explained how the raid

was planned and executed and identified the productions accurately. His

evidence was very well corroborated by PW2 EO 800 Dissanayake. The

productions were taken to Government Analyst by PW2 EO 800 Dissanayake

on 13/02/2003.

The Retd. Government Analyst PW7 Mr. Sivaraja had given evidence,

confirming that the Government Analyst Department had received the parcel

pertaining to this case from PW2 on 13/02/2003.This witness further stated

that upon analysis 10.2 grams of pure Heroin was found in the parcel.

After the close of the prosecution case, the defence was called and all

Appellants had made dock statements and closed their cases.

In every criminal case the burden is on the prosecution to prove the case

beyond reasonable doubt against the accused person. In a case of this

nature, the prosecution not only need to prove the case beyond reasonable

doubt but also ensure, with cogent evidence that the inward journey of the

production has not been disturbed at all-material points.

6 | P a g e

In the case of Mohamed Nimnaz v. Attorney General CA/95/94 held:

A criminal case has to be proved beyond reasonable doubt. Although

we take serious view in regard to offences in relation to drugs, we are

of the view that the prosecutor should not be given a second chance

to fill the gaps of badly handled prosecutions where the identity of the

good analysis for examination has to be proved beyond reasonable

doubt. A prosecutor should take pains to ensure that the chain of

events pertaining to the productions that had been taken charge from

the Appellant from the time it was taken into custody to the time it

reaches the Government Analyst and comes back to the court should

be established.

In Witharana Doli Nona v. The Republic of Sri Lanka CA/19/99 it was

held that:

It is a recognised principle that in drug related cases the prosecution

must prove the chain relating to the inward journey. The purpose of this

principle is to establish that the productions have [not] been tampered

with. Prosecution must prove that the productions taken from the

accused appellant was examined by the Government Analyst. To prove

this, the prosecution must prove all the links of the chain from the time

it was taken from the possession of the accused appellant to the

government Analysts Department.

In Perera v. Attorney General [1998] 1 Sri.L.R 378 it was held:

It is a recognized principle that in a case of this nature, the prosecution

must prove that the productions had been forwarded to the Analyst

from proper custody, without allowing room for any suspicion that there

had been no opportunity for tampering or interfering with the

7 | P a g e

production till they reach the Analyst. Therefore, it is correct to state

that the most important journey is the inward journey because the final

analyst report will depend on that. The outward journey does not

attract the same importance.

In Mahasarukkalige Chandani v. Attorney General CA/213/2009 decided

on 30/06/2016 His Lordship Justice Malalgoda held that:

As observed above, that Government Analyst Report which is the

principal evidence in a drug offence entirely depends on the inward

journey of the production chain and therefore, there is a duty cast on the

prosecution to establish the inward journey of the production with

reliable evidence. In this regard it is important to note that, calling a

witness who was at a police reserve to establish he was functioning as

reserve officer during a particular time is not sufficient to establish a

production chain but, he has to give evidence confirming that the

productions referred to the said case was properly received by him and

properly handed over by him in good condition.

In Albert Deny Kunja v. The Attorney General CA/92/2007 decided on

06/07/2018 the court held that:

However, upon perusal of the proceedings of the trial it is evident that

the prosecution witness Jayamanne had handed over the production to

one K.P.Chandrani at the Government Analyst Department and the

Assistant Government Analyst had acquired production from said K.P.

Chandrani.We find that one K.P.Chandrani had handled production

at a subsequent stage of the inward journey and she had not been

called to give evidence. Therefore, the prosecution had failed to establish

the chain of custody of production beyond reasonable doubt.

8 | P a g e

In this case I am of the opinion that it is very appropriate to consider the

second and the fourth grounds of appeal first as the Appellant contends that

the learned trial judge has failed to consider that the prosecution has failed

to establish the production chain of the case and the learned trial judge has

not correctly applied the test of probability and improbability in order to

determine the creditworthiness of the witnesses respectively.

As cited above, judicial precedents very forcefully endorse one unique point

that the inward journey of the production in drug related offences should not

be disturbed until it reaches for analysis. If any disturbance occurs during

the inward journey, an adverse outcome with regards to the prosecution case

is inevitable.

Further I consider it is very appropriate to mention what Justice Mackenna

in Discretion, The Irish Jurist, Vol.IX (new series), 1 at page10 has

stated;

When I have done my best to separate the true from the false by these

more or less objective tests, I say which story seems to me the more

probable, the plaintiffs or the defendants, and If I cannot say which, I

decide the case, as the law requires me to do in the defendants favour.

In this case the Learned High Court Judge in his judgment at the 3rd

paragraph of page 444 had made an adverse comment regarding the inward

journey of the production in this case. According to the comment the Judge

states:

It is evident that the production in this case was in the custody of the

Officer-in-Charge from 7.00 p.m. on 06/02/2003 to 3.35 p.m. on

07/02/2003.But the Officer-in-Charge was neither mentioned in the

indictment as a witness or called by the prosecution as a witness.

Hence there is break in the outward journey up to it reaching the

Government Analyst Department.

9 | P a g e

According to PW01 Gunatunga after the sealing process was over the

production marked as P1-P8 were handed over to the Officer-in-Charge of

the Excise Narcotic Bureau on 06/02/2003 at about 7.00 p.m. According to

pages 137-138 of the proceedings, he had taken the said productions from

the Officer-in-Charge on the following day at about 3.35 p.m. with seals

intact. He had confirmed this position after going through his pocket note

book.

At the same time, he confirms that the Appellants were produced along with

the productions on 07/02/2003 to Maligakanda Magistrate Court at 7.25

p.m. It is impossible to produce suspects at 7.25 p.m. to court on

07/02/2003.As this position was not clarified during the trial it leaves an

ambiguity of the evidence of PW1 and fails the test of probability.

Further, PW1 confirms that he handed over the production to the Officer-in-

Charge of the Excise Narcotic Bureau. But the said Officer-in-Charge was

not called to give evidence. Further his name was not mentioned in the

indictment. Not calling the Officer-in-Charge to give evidence regarding the

production and its status when he received and handed it back to PW1, is a

fatal error which affects the root of the case. The above-mentioned ambiguity

in PW1s evidence could have been solved had the Officer-in-Charge been

called to give evidence by the prosecution. This break in the chain of custody,

I consider it creates a serious doubt on the prosecution case.

Now I am going to consider the remaining appeal grounds advanced by the

Appellants.

In the first ground of appeal the Appellants contend that the entire case relies

on uncorroborated evidence of witnesses and that the trial judge has failed

to consider the vital contradictions of the prosecution witnesses. The

prosecution had called PW1 first and he had given evidence regarding the

raid conducted in this case. To corroborate his evidence PW2 was called by

10 | P a g e

the prosecution. Hence, it is not correct to say that the entire case relies on

uncorroborated evidence.

But contradictory evidence has been led regarding the height and the entry

to the house by PW1 and PW2. According to PW1 the height of the

surrounding wall is between 3-4 feet and they entered the premises by

jumping over the wall. He denied the suggestion that the back wall is 10 feet

in height.

But, PW2 in his evidence has said that the height of the back wall of the

house is about 10 feet and it is difficult to jump over the wall without a

ladder. As witnesses in this case had given evidence as per their notes,

contradiction with regard to the height of the wall cannot occur in this case.

I conclude that this contradiction would go to the root of the case and not

awarding the benefit of the doubt to the Appellants in such a case is

unjustifiable.

In Mahasarukkalige Chandani v. Attorney General (Supra)the court

further held that:

Since the court is not inclined to act on the evidence placed by the

prosecution in establishing the inward journey as safe, it is not

necessary for this court to consider the other grounds of the appeal

raised by the Learned counsel during the argument before us.

As the grounds of appeal considered above have merits which certainly

disturb the judgment of the Learned High Court Judge, it is not necessary to

address the remaining grounds in this appeal.

In this case the prosecution has failed to establish the custody of the

production chain beyond reasonable doubt. As this is a substantial fact, this

ground alone is sufficient to vitiate the conviction in this case. Further the

11 | P a g e

failure of the witnesses to pass the test of probability and the vital

contradiction highlighted are the other two factors which support a judgment

in favour of the defence.

Due to aforesaid reasons, we set aside the conviction and sentence imposed

by the Learned High Court Judge of Colombo dated 27/10/2017 on the

Appellants. Therefore, they are acquitted from both charges.

Accordingly, the appeal is allowed.

The Registrar is directed to send a copy of this judgment to High Court of

Colombo along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

SAMPATH B. ABAYAKOON, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL