==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0127/23

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal No:

CA/HCC/0127/2023 Sembukutty Arachchilage Nishshanka

High Court of Anuradhapura

Case No: HC/02/2016

Accused-Appellant

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

Complainant-Respondent

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

COUNSEL : Shavindra Fernando, PC, with Nipun

Samaratunga, Sandani Wijendra and

Amanda Imbulana for the Appellant.

Sudharshana De Silva, PC, ASG with Malik

Azeez, SC for the Respondent.

CA/HCC/0127/23

2 | P a g e

ARGUED ON : 27/01/2026 DECIDED ON : 26/03/2026

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) being aggrieved by the conviction and the sentence imposed on

him on 23/03/2023 by the Learned High Court Judge of Colombo, preferred

this appeal to this Court well within the appealable time.

The Appellant was indicted by the Attorney General in the High Court of

Anuradhapura with one charge of possession of an automatic T-56 gun

punishable under Section 22(3) of the Firearms Act as amended by Act No.

22 of 1996 and the 2nd charge for the possession of 26 live bullets punishable

under Section 27(1) of the Explosive Act.

After trial, the Appellant was found guilty on both counts and the Learned

High Court Judge of Anuradhapura has imposed a sentence of life

imprisonment for the 1st count and fine of Rs.10,000/- with a default

sentence of 03 months simple imprisonment imposed on the 2nd count.

CA/HCC/0127/23

3 | P a g e

The Learned President’s Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that

the Appellant has given consent to argue this matter in his absence. During

the argument he was connected via the Zoom platform from prison.

The Learned President’s Counsel, on behalf of the Appellant had raised

the following appeal grounds:

1. The evidence led by the prosecution does not support the prosecution

version.

2. The learned High Court Judge has shifted the burden of proof to the

defence.

At the trial, PW1 IP/Kumarasinghe, and PW2 SI/Ubayananda, were called

by the prosecution to give evidence on behalf of the prosecution. The

Government Analyst Report was admitted and marked under Section 420 of

the Code of Criminal Procedure Act. Further, the prosecution had marked

productions P1-P5. The Appellant had made a dock statement and closed his

case.

Background of the case

According to PW1, he was the Officer-In-Charge of the Nochchiyagama Police

Station at the time of the raid. PW1 had received some information from a

private informant that a person who is a permanent resident of his police

division had smuggled a weapon from Colombo. This witness had not entered

this information in the relevant books but said that he communicated the

same to the Assistant Superintendent of the police division and had left for

the raid. After mobilising his team around the place called Galdiwewa,

Pahamunegoma and Ralapanawa, he had directly gone to a house said to be

belonging to the Appellant and had then arrested him and recovered an

assembled T-56-gun with a magazine under a mattress in the room.

CA/HCC/0127/23

4 | P a g e

PW2, was called to give evidence to corroborate the evidence given by PW1.

The gun and the magazine which were recovered during the raid contained

26 live bullets and was handed over to the reserve Police Constable 48492

Jayakody marked under Production Register No.99/11.

The productions alleged to have been recovered from the Appellant had been

forwarded to the Government Analyst. According to the Government

Analyst’s Report, the gun had been categorised as an automatic weapon and

the bullets were categorised as explosives.

In respect of the 1st ground of appeal advanced by the Appellant, the learned

President’s Counsel contended that the so-called raid conducted by the

police is a fabricated and premeditated one.

Under this ground the learned Presidents Counsel contended that the notes

taken down by PW1, which was highly relied on by the prosecution, does not

contain relevant material.

In cases such as this, the police would essentially act as the main source of

information, and such information would later become the evidence that is

used in a criminal prosecution. Accordingly, the police would bear the

primary responsibility to acquire such evidence as accurately as possible

without any contradictions, being the investigative arm of the state.

Thereby, it is of utmost importance that the best evidence rule is followed in

criminal trials, where an accused would be considered innocent until proven

guilty where the guilt of such an accused would have to be proven beyond

reasonable doubt and not just on a mere balance of probabilities.

The concept of “reasonable doubt” refers to the legal principle which

establishes that insufficient evidence prevents the conviction of a defendant

of a crime. The prosecution would bear the weight of proving the defendant’s

guilt in respect of a crime with which he has been charged to the judge, in

order to prove why the defendant should be convicted. The phrase “beyond

CA/HCC/0127/23

5 | P a g e

a reasonable doubt” would therefore mean that the evidence and arguments

brought forward by the prosecution to establish the defendant’s guilt is done

so clearly, in a manner that it is accepted as fact by any rational person.

As such, the prosecution would have an obligation to collect and present the

best possible evidence to prove the accused’s guilt; where the investigating

officers are duty bound to collect the best possible evidence, and the public

prosecutor is bound to present the best possible evidence to prove an alleged

fact or circumstance leading to the commission of the offence. Failing to lead

the best evidence could make the prosecution’s case vulnerable, as an

adverse inference could be drawn against such evidence on the basis that

such a failure led to a suppression of the best evidence.

Bradford Smith, Law Commission, WWW.smithlitigation.com 2014 states

that:

“Good police note taking is important for two reasons. First, it invariably

bolsters the credibility of the police officer giving evidence. Second, it

promotes the proper administration of criminal justice by facilitating the

proof of facts”.

In the case of Manu Sharma [Manu Sharma v. State (NCT of Delhi), (2010)

6 SCC 1 it was held:

“What is the significance of requiring an investigating officer/officer in

charge of a police station to maintain a diary? The purpose and the object

seems to be quite clear that there should be fairness in investigation,

transparency and a record should be maintained to ensure a proper

investigation.”

CA/HCC/0127/23

6 | P a g e

In Miller v. Minister of Pensions (1947) 2 All E.R. 372 Denning J, in the

Kings Bench held that:

“The evidence must reach the same degree of cogency as is required in

a criminal case before an accused person is found guilty. That degree is

well settled. It need not reach certainty, but it must carry high degree of

probability”

In the case of The King Vs. W. P. Buckley 43 NLR 474, it was stated by

Howard, C.J.:

“In arriving at a verdict of guilty, the majority of the jury must have viewed

the evidence in sections accepted and convicted the appellant on those

parts that were satisfactory and disregard those facts that pointed to the

improbability of the story put forward by the Crown. The jury should have

viewed the evidence as a whole. If they had done so, we are of opinion

that they must have had a reasonable doubt as to the guilt of the appellant.

The verdict is in our opinion, unreasonable, in as much as taken as a whole

the evidence does not support the conviction.”

In the case of Sivathasan v. Attorney General [2021] 2 SLR 290 it was held:

“A reasonable doubt is a real or actual and a substantial doubt, as

opposed to an imaginary or flimsy doubt that may arise in the mind of the

decider of facts (judge or the jury, as the case may be), following an

objective consideration of all the attendant facts and circumstances.

A reasonable doubt is not the type of doubt that arises due to incorrect,

abnormal or unreasonable comprehension of testimonies and other

material which amount to evidence presented at the trial, or due to

irrational fear, inappropriate sympathy, or unjustifiable mercy.”

CA/HCC/0127/23

7 | P a g e

PW1 had admitted that he had not entered the information received from his

private informant in the relevant books. PW1 in his evidence told court that

as an Officer-in-Charge he need not put that information in the relevant

books. Further, the PW1 had admitted that he had not mentioned in his

notes that he had knocked the door before the Appellant opened the door.

Section 1 of The Police Departmental Order No. A. 16, which lays down the

rules to be followed by the police in relation to note taking, is reproduced

below.

“For the purpose of investigating crime or accidents a notebook is the most

important record kept by a Police Officer. Notebooks should be regularly

examined, initialled and dated, by Officer-in-Charge of Stations, Districts,

Divisions and Provinces. The following rules regarding notebooks are to be

strictly observed.

(I) All entries in a notebook will be in ink or indelible pencil.

(II) Notes relating to inquiries will be headed with the date, time and

place at which they are written. On completion each note will be

initialled and dated by the Officer making the entry.

(III) No blank space will be left.

(IV) Nothing will be rubbed out, altered, or interpolated. Every error will

be crossed through by a single line so that it is still legible and will

be enclosed in brackets.

(V) Entries will be made in the Notebook on every matter arising in the

course of one’s official duties. Entries will also be made when an

Officer has by reason of sickness or other personal reasons to deviate

from orders given to him when he was sent out on duty.

(VI) No leaves will be removed from the Notebook.

(VII) Notebooks will be examined, initialled, and dated by the Reserve

Constable or Sergeant every time an Officer reports for or from duty.

At every Instruction Class Notebooks will be examined, initialled and

dated by the Officer holding such class.

CA/HCC/0127/23

8 | P a g e

(VIII) Officers when initialling and dating Notebooks will do so with a

different coloured ink or pencil when possible and in small characters

to save space.

(IX) Notebooks will always be carried when on duty, except on parade

unless specifically ordered to do so.

(X) All Police Officers will when leaving the Service return any unfinished

Notebook and re-fill to the Officer-in-Charge of the Station. Cost of

any re-fill not returned will be recovered and credited to revenue.”

As per the rules laid out in this Departmental Order, police officers are

obliged to immediately note down any information or intelligence regarding

criminal movements or attempted grave offences in their Personal Note Book.

If such information was received from a higher authority, the person’s details

must be noted and recorded in order to use such details as a basis for

subsequent arrests. All information regarding suspected offences must be

noted in writing. Such notes would be of utmost importance and would be

crucial in justifying police actions such as arrests and would also be required

for legal and transparent procedures.

PW1, in his evidence vehemently stated that he had not recorded the

information received in his Police Note Book. The relevant pages are re-

produced below:

Page 64 of the brief.

m% ( wmrdOhla iïnkaOfhka f;dr;=rla wdjd kï ta f;dr;=r wmrdO f;dr;=re fmdf;a

igyka fjkak ´fka fkao' uu wykafka Tn;=udf.ka fndfydu ir, m%Yakhla' Tng

fm!oa.,sl T;a;=lrefjl= úiska fikanql=Üá wdrÉÑ,df.a ksYaYxl hk whf.a f.or

.sKs wúhla ;sfnk njg f;dr;=rla ,nd ÿkakd fkao' th Tn igyka lr ;sfnkjdo"

keoao lsh,d lshkak @

W ( keye' tjekakla igyka lf<a keye'

CA/HCC/0127/23

9 | P a g e

m% ( oeka Tn;=ud ;uhs lshkafka tfyu f;dr;=rla igyka lrkafka ke;=j ug f;dr;=rla

wdjd' wdj .uka uu .shd w;awvx.=jg .kak' tal fkao fuu .re wêlrKhg

lshkafka' hï f;dr;=rla Tng wdjd' ta f;dr;=r wkqj Tn .shd w;awvx.=jg .kak@

W ( ug hï f;dr;=rla wdjd' ta f;dr;=r iïnkaOfhka ud ixpdrh lrñka tu f;dr;=f¾

i`oyka foaj,a ksjeros o hkak mrSlaId lr ne¨jd' Bg miafia w;awvx.=jg .kak

.shd'

Further, he had admitted that in his notes, he had not recorded that he

knocked on the door before the Appellant could open the door. The two

portions referred to above are very important as the Appellant had taken up

the position that he was not arrested as stated by the prosecution. According

to the Appellant, he was arrested at his sister’s house while sleeping. In this

instance, it is noted that, had PW1 taken down proper notes, he could have

correctly answered the questions fired at him during the cross examination.

Further, PW1 had not taken any endeavour to establish that the Appellant

and his family were the only occupants of the house from which the

Appellant was arrested.

PW1 had stated that he arrested the Appellant, as two warrants were pending

at that time.

Considering the evidence given by PW1, the probability of the raid as stated

by the prosecution raises a serious doubt which certainly affects the outcome

of the case.

In the same ground, the Learned President’s Counsel contended that the

Learned High Court Judge had allowed the prosecution to lead bad character

evidence under Section 54 of the Evidence Ordinance, thereby acting on that

evidence, the Learned High Court Judge had erroneously misdirected

himself.

CA/HCC/0127/23

10 | P a g e

Section 54 of the Evidence Ordinance states:

In criminal proceedings the fact that the accused person has a bad

character is irrelevant, unless evidence has been given that he has a good

character, in which case it becomes relevant.

Explanation 1.- This section does not apply to cases in which the bad

character of any person is itself a fact in issue.

Explanation 2.- A previous conviction is relevant as evidence of bad

character in such case.

As a result, the fact that the person charged is of good character is always

relevant in criminal proceedings. However, if the person has a bad character,

that fact is generally irrelevant. Hence, the prosecution should be mindful

not to lead character evidence of the accused, unless evidence has been given

that he has a good character. The trial judge also has a responsibility to

ensure that bad character evidence of the accused does not creep into the

court proceedings.

In R. G. Moses v. The Queen 75 NLR 121 the Court held:

“ that the conviction of the Appellant must be quashed on the ground

that the evidence of the previous conviction, which was inadmissible

according to Section 54 of the Evidence Ordinance, had been taken into

account in the trial judge’s judgment and was in a high degree

prejudicial to the Appellant. In such a case the substantial question is

whether or not the accused has been deprived a fair trial”.

In L.C. Fernando v. The Republic of Sri Lanka 79(II) NLR 313 the court

held (Wijesundera, J. dissenting) that:

“(a) that the evidence of ‘T’ was both irrelevant and inadmissible and in

view of the express prohibition against the admission of such evidence

CA/HCC/0127/23

11 | P a g e

in section 54 of the Evidence Ordinance and its highly prejudicial nature,

such evidence should have been excluded by the trial judge; the

improper reception of such evidence had resulted in the accused’s

chance of having a fair trial being prejudiced and in a failure of justice”.

In Makin v. Attorney General for New South Wales [1894] A.C 57 Lord

Herschell held that:

“It is not competent for the prosecution to adduce evidence tending to

show that the accused had been guilty of criminal acts other than those

covered by the indictment, for the purpose of leading to the conclusion

that he is likely, from his criminal conduct or character to have

committed the offence, for which he is being tried”.

As stated above, PW1 had stated that two warrants were pending against the

Appellant when he was arrested for this case.

Further, in the re-examination, the prosecution had led character evidence

as opposed to good character of the Appellant. The relevant portion is re-

produced below:

Page 76 of the brief.

m% ( uy;auhd óg fmr fuu pQos;j y`ÿkkjdo @

W ( fuu pQos; wmrdO j,g keUqre;djhla ;sfnk flfkla nj;a" úúO m%foaY j, kvq

;sfnk nj;a" ta iïnkaOfhka oekqula uf.;a ;snqKd'

The learned High Court had not taken any steps to disregard the evidence

which clearly discloses the character of the Appellant. The learned High

Court Judge without the said evidence had simply relied on the same when

he considered this case.

CA/HCC/0127/23

12 | P a g e

This evidence, with no doubt, clearly indicates that the prosecution had

placed bad character evidence, whereas, the Appellant had not presented

good character evidence. By leading this evidence, either accidently or

purposefully, the prosecution had paved the way for the character evidence

to creep into the proceedings. Ironically, the Learned High Court Judge had

considered this evidence in his judgment. Thus, the Appellant had been

denied a fair trial.

The Learned High Court Judge, before he could analyse the entire evidence

presented by both parties, by relying on the evidence given by PW1 and PW2,

concluded that the arrest and recovery of the firearm and ammunition from

the Appellant could be accepted beyond a reasonable doubt. This approach

of the Learned High Court Judge clearly demonstrates that he had been

greatly influenced by the bad character evidence which had creeped into the

court proceedings. The prosecution should not have led evidence which

contained bad character evidence of the Appellant. This leads to a denial of

a fair trial.

In the case of Shiv Kumar v. Hukam Chand and Anr [1999] 7 SCC 104 the

court observed that:

“The expected attitude of the Public Prosecutor while conducting

prosecution must be couched in fairness not only to the Court and to the

investigating agencies but to the accused as well. If an accused is

entitled to any legitimate benefit during trial the Public Prosecutor should

not scuttle/conceal it. On the contrary, it is the duty of the Public

Prosecutor to winch it to the force and make it available to the accused.

Even if the defence counsel overlooked it, Public Prosecutor has the

added responsibility to bring it to the notice of the Court if it comes to his

knowledge”

CA/HCC/0127/23

13 | P a g e

In the case of Medichetty Ramakistiah & ors. v. The State of Andhra

Pradesh (AIR 1959 A.P. 659) it was held that:

“A prosecution, to use a familiar phrase, ought not to be a persecution. The

principle that the Public Prosecutor should be scrupulously fair to the

licensed and present his case with detachment and without evincing any

anxiety to secure a conviction, is based upon high policy and as such courts

should be astute to suffer no inroad upon its integrity. Otherwise, there

will be no guarantee that the trial will be as fair to the accused as a

criminal trial ought to be. The State and the Public Prosecutor acting for it

are only supposed to be putting all the facts of the case before the Court to

obtain its decision thereon and not to obtain a conviction by any means

fair or foul.”

Hence, I conclude this ground of appeal has merit.

In the second ground of appeal, the learned President’s Counsel contended

that the learned High Court had reverted the presumption of innocence

towards the defence.

The Appellant in his dock statement admitted that he was arrested by officers

at his sister’s place. He vehemently denies being in possession of any

dangerous weapon in his custody. His position was that this case had been

fabricated against him.

When considering the defence evidence, the learned High Court Judge had

reverted the presumption of innocence stating that the Appellant has to

prove what he has taken in his defence. This is a clear misdirection as

reverting the presumption of innocence is unknown and not recognised in a

criminal prosecution.

In a criminal trial, as continuously stated by the Appellate Court the burden

of proving a case entirely rests on the hands of the prosecution and this

CA/HCC/0127/23

14 | P a g e

responsibility never shifts to the defence unless the defence takes up a plea

under a general or special exception of the Penal Code.

In H. M. Mahinda Herath v. The Attorney General CA/21/2003 in

Appellate Court Judgments (Unreported) 2005 at page 35-39 the court held

that:

“Where it was held that in a criminal case burden is always on the

prosecution to prove the charge levelled against the accused beyond

reasonable doubt. The trial judge must always bear in mind that the

accused is presumed to be innocent until the charge against the accused

is proved beyond reasonable grounds”.

The learned Counsel for the Appellant had cited two paragraphs of the

judgment and argued that the learned High Court Judge had reversed the

presumption of innocence and thereby denied a fair trial to the Appellant.

The learned High Court Judge in his judgment at Pages 152-153 stated as

follows:

3 and 4 of the brief.

by; meñKs,af,a idlaIs flfrys wjOdkh fhduq lsrSfï oS" pQos; isá ksji ms<sn`oj yria

m%Yak j,oS;a wid we;s kuq;a tu idlaIs j,ska meyeos,sj wkdjrKh ù we;af;a" tu ksjfia

pQos; mosxÑj isák njhs' flfia jQjo" ke.Ksh fyda fjk;a mqoa.,fhl= isg ke;' th

ifydaorshf.a ksji jkafka kï" ta ms<sn`oj le`oúh yelsj ;snqKq fyd`ou idlaIslre

ifydaorsh fõ' tfia fkdjkafka kï" fjk;a iqÿiq idlaIslrefjl= le`oùug yelshj ;sìK'

fuysoS pQos;g wmrdO kvqfõ uQ,sldx. Tmamq lsrSfï lsisÿ Ndrhla fkdmej;sh o" ;udf.a

ú;a;sjdpl mokï lr.kakd lreKq j, meje;au iïnkaOfhka tu lreKq ikd: lsrSfï

j.lSu Tyqg mj;S' tneúka" meñKs,af,a idlaIs u`.ska Tyqf.a ksjfia isg w;awvx.=jg .;a

njg m%ldY lrkafka kï tf,i fkdjk njg fmkajd oSu i`oyd idlaIslrejka le`oùug

yelshdj ;sìK'

;jo" pQos; fjkqfjka i`oyka lr we;af;a pQos; w;awvx.=jg m;ajQfha ifydaorshf.a ksjfia

isg njhs' tfia kï tu ksji ifydaorshf.a nj pQos; tu ksjfia mosxÑ fkdue;s nj

idlaIslrejka u`.ska fmkajd osh yelsj ;snqK;a ta iïnkaOfhka lsis`ÿ mshjrla f.k ke;'

CA/HCC/0127/23

15 | P a g e

The two paragraphs of the judgment cited above clearly demonstrates that

the learned High Court judge had reversed the burden of proof, which is

unknown to the criminal prosecution. As contended by the Counsel for the

Appellant this deviation had denied a fair trial to the Appellant.

The concept of fair trial is a fundamental principle in every judicial system.

In another sense, the notion of a fair trial secures justice. A trial in criminal

jurisprudence is a judicial examination or determination of the issues at the

hand of the Court to arrive at a conclusion whether the accused is guilty of

the offence or not. An accused has the right to a fair trial, where the

accused’s innocence or guilt in respect of the alleged crime will be

ascertained. This right remains an internationally recognised and respected

human right, as fair trials are essential in discovering the truth and would

therefore be of utmost importance to each party involved in a case.

The single most important criterion in evaluating the fairness of a trial is the

observance of the principle of equality of arms between the defence and the

prosecution. Equality of arms, which must be observed throughout the trial,

means that both parties are treated in a manner which ensures their

procedurally equal position during the course of a trial.

In this case as stated earlier, the Learned Trial Judge had come to a

conclusion that the evidence given by PW1 and PW2 could be accepted as

true regarding the raid conducted in respect of the Appellant. This clearly

shows that the Learned High Court Judge has been highly influenced by the

inadmissible or prejudicial evidence led by the prosecution. Further, the

Learned High Court Judge has not mentioned in his judgment that he

disregards the inadmissible or prejudicial evidence in deciding this case.

Hence, this ground also has merit.

The pleaded grounds of appeal above have merits which certainly disturb the

judgment of the learned High Court Judge.

CA/HCC/0127/23

16 | P a g e

Due to the aforesaid reasons, I set aside the conviction and the sentence

dated 23/03/2023 imposed on the Appellant by the learned High Court

Judge of Anuradhapura. Therefore, I acquit him from both charges.

Accordingly, the appeal is allowed.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgment to the High

Court of Anuradhapura along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL