1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

CA (PHC) Rev.Appn No.2l/2015

HC Kalutara 656/2013

In the matter of an application to revise the Order of the High Court of Kalutara relating to the sentence imposed in case HC 656/2013 under the Articles of the Constitution read together with the prOVISIons of the Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

Liyanagamage Lahiru Kithsiri Kumara, (Presently incaserated 1 serving sentence - Prisoner No.3 7864 at Monaragala Prison)

Accused - Petitioner

VS.

The Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

Respondent

)

I , ! 1

I ! t I

~ f !

BEFORE

COUNSEL:

Argued on

Written Submissions filed on

Decided on

Malinie Gunaratne, J

2

W.M.M. Malini Gunaratne, J.and

P.R. Walgama, J.

Dr. Rajnith Fernando for the Petitioner

Himali J ayanetti for the Respondent

30.09.2015

14.12.2015 and 22.01.2016

17.03.2016

This is an application in revision filed on 01.03.2015 by the

Accused - Petitioner (hereinafter referred to as the "Petitioner") to revise the

sentencing order of the learned High Court Judge of Kalutara dated

17.12.2013.

Briefly, the facts relevant to this application are as follows:

The Respondent had indicted the Accused - Petitioner (hereinafter

referred to as the Petitioner) together with another Accused in the High

Court of Kalutara on two counts for possession and trafficking of two kilos

and seven hundred and sixty two grams ( 2 kilos and 762 grams) ofCanabis

Sativa, offences punishable under Section 54 A (b) and 54 A (d) of the

3

Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs Ordinance as amended by Act No. 13

of 1984.

It is stated in his Petition on the 22nd October 2012 (year is not

correct) the Petitioner pleaded guilty to the 1 st and 2nd counts in the

indictment, whereupon the learned High Court Judge had proceeded to

convict the Petitioner on the plea so recorded. (It is to be noted that no

document had been filed to support the contention). It is further stated after

being found guilty, sentencing had been put off. However, when the matter

was called in the open Court on 23.l0.2013, for the purpose of passing

sentence the Petitioner was absent and after inquiry under Section 241 of the

Criminal Procedure Act, the Court proceeded to sentence the Petitioner in

absentia, noting that the Petitioner was absconding after pleading guilty to

the charges. It is further stated, on 17.12.2013 the High Court Judge

sentenced the Petitioner to two years (02 years) rigorous imprisonment on

each count to run consecutively. Further it is stated, subsequently, the

Petitioner arrested on warrant and produced before the learned High Court

Judge on 15.l0.2014 and the sentence passed against him on 17.12.2013,

was ordered to be implemented.

It is further stated in the Petition, since the 1 st Accused had also

pleaded guilty to the charges, on 13.02.2014 the learned High Court Judge

proceeded to pass sentence on the 1 st Accused, a fine of Rupees Twenty five

thousand (Rs.25 ,0001-) in default six months (06 months) simple

imprisonment on each count making a total fine of Rupees Fifty thousand

(Rs.50,OOOI-) on both counts.

4

Being aggrieved by the sentence imposed on the Petitioner, this

Revision Application is preferred seeking to revise and mitigate the sentence

depending on the following grounds and exceptional circumstances

mentioned in Paragraph (11) of the Petition.

(a) The Petitioner was the 2nd Accused on indictment who tendered a

plea of guilt to the charges on the very first occasion when the

matter was called in Court, which plea of guilt indicates possible

regret and remorse on his part, apart from not wasting judicial

time.

(b) The Accused - Petitioner was a first offender with no previous

convictions and / any pending cases of any nature against him.

(c) The custodial/consecutive sentence totaling four years (04 years)

rigorous imprisonment appears to have been imposed as

punishment for not been present in Court at the time of sentencing.

This appears to have been the basis or the reason for imposing a

custodial sentence even when there is an option of imposing only a

fine under the law.

(d) The same High Court had imposed only a fine to the I st Accused in

the case who had been charged with the Accused -Petitioner for

jointly possessing / trafficking the prohibited substance on the

same day, same time, in the same transaction, notwithstanding the

fact or record that he had been produced before the High Court for

sentencing whilst being in remand in connection with another case

in Magistrate's Court, Bibile.

The Petitioner further avers the disparity in sentencing is grievously

erroneous in law.

5

When the application was taken up for argument on 30.09.2015, the

learned State Counsel raised the following preliminary objections with

regard to the maintainability of this application.

(i) The Petitioner has made this application on 18.03.2015, fifteen

months after the order dated 17.12.2013.

(ii) The Petitioner has not made any attempt to explain the delay.

(iii) The Petitioner has failed to exercise the statutory right of appeal

against the Order dated 17.12.2013 and has failed to disclose

the exceptional circumstances warranting the exercise of the

revisionary jurisdiction of this Court.

(iv) The Petitioner has violated Rule (3) of the Court of Appeal

Rules.

Now, I will consider the preliminary objections raised by the

Respondent. As set out before, the first objection namely, is the delay of

filing the application. The learned State Counsel contended that the

Petitioner has filed this revision application after fifteen months from the

order of the High Court and therefore he is not entitled to any relief due to

laches.

In the case of Attorney General vs. Kunchihamby 46 N.L.R. 401, it

was held the delay of three months, was disentitled the Petitioner for relief.

In Camilus Ignatious vs. O.I.C. of Uhana Police Station (Rev) CA 907/89

M.C. Ampara 2587, held that, a mere delay of four months in filing a

revision application was fatal to the prosecution of the Revision Application

before the Court of Appeal.

,,

6

Delay would normally be a ground upon which a revision application

could be referred. Therefore, in every case where there is a delay the

applicant should explain the reason for the delay. (Ghanapandithan vs.

Balanayagam (1998) 1 S.L.R. 391). It is relevant to note that, the Petitioner

has failed to account for the delay.

The Petitioner has preferred this application to this Court after fifteen

months (15) months from the order of the learned High Court Judge.

The inordinate delay has not been explained by the Petitioner to the

satisfaction of this Court. In Dissanayake vs. Fernando 71 N.L.R. 356, it

was held, it is essential that the reason for the delay in seeking relief should

be set out in the Petition. The Petitioner has failed to account for the delay.

Hence, the long period of inaction and failure to seek relief on the part of the

Petitioner was fatal to an application in revision.

I will consider the next objection namely, failure to exerCIse the

statutory right of appeal. The learned State Counsel stressed that the

Petitioner is not entitled to invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of this Court,

specially as the Petitioner had an alternative remedy namely the right of

appeal which he has failed to exercise.

In Ameen vs. Rasheed (1936) 6 N.C.L.W, the Court refused to

exercise its discretion and entertain a revision application where the right of

appeal was available to the aggrieved party. In the case of Letchumi vs.

Perera and Another (2000) 3 S.L.R. 151, the Court dismissed an application

for revision on the basis that there was an alternative remedy specified by

statute.

7

In the case of Halwan and Others vs. Kaleelna Rahuman (2000) 3

S.L.R. 50, S.N. Silva J. (as he was then) has observed:

"A party dissatisfied with a judgment or order, where a right of appeal

is given either directly or with leave obtained, has to invoke and pursue the

appellate jurisdiction. When such a party seeks judicial review by way of an

application for a writ, he has to establish an excuse for his failure to invoke

and pursue the appellate jurisdiction. Such excuse should be pleaded in the

petition seeking judicial review and be supported by affidavits and necessary

documents. The same principle is applicable to instances where the law

provides for a right of appeal from a decision or order of an institution or an

officer, to a statutory tribunal. The reason is that such appellate procedure as

established by law being the ordinary procedure should be availed of before

recourse is had to the extraordinary jurisdiction by way of judicial review as

provided in Article 140 of the Constitution".

It is to be noted, in Paragraph 9 of the Petition it is stated that no

appeal was lodged by the Petitioner against the sentence imposed, as he had

been erroneously advised that no right of appeal was available in view of the

tendering of a plea of guilt to the charges. According to the facts of the case,

it is not the reason that the Petitioner could not lodge an appeal.

At the time (on 17.12.2013) of imposing the sentence, the Petitioner

was absconding. Subsequently he had been arrested on warrant and

produced before the High Court on 15.10.2014. Hence, the time was barred

to exercise the statutory right of appeal and that is the reason that the

Petitioner could not lodge an appeal. However, the reason stated in the

I

~ t ! I,

8

Petition cannot be considered as an excuse, not to exercise the right of

appeal.

It is relevant to note, although a right of appeal is available, the

Petitioner is entitled to file a revision application, when exceptional

circumstances are present. It is the contention of the Counsel for the

Petitioner that, in Paragraph (11) of the Petition filed in this Court the

Petitioner has pleaded exceptional circumstances.

I have examined the contents in Paragraph (11) of the Petition filed in

this case and I do not agree that the matters referred to therein amount to

exceptional circumstances as required by law. If there are no exceptional

circumstances, this Court will not exercise its revisionary powers specially

when the right of appeal is available.

Thus, the existence of the exceptional circumstances is a process by

which the method of rectification should be adopted. In Perera vs. Silva

(Supra) Hutchinson C.J. has stated that if such selection process is not

available, then revisionary jurisdiction of the Court will become a gateway

for every litigant to make a second appeal in the garb of a revision

application to make an appeal in situations where the legislature has not

given the right of appeal.

Revisionary powers will only be exercised when it appears that there

will be injustice caused to the Petitioner unless the revisionary power is

exercised by Court. Certain pre-requisites have to be fulfilled by a Petitioner

to the satisfaction of this Court in order to successfully catalyse the exercise

of such discretionary power. This is best illustrated in T. Varapragasam and

Another vs. Emmanuel- C A (Rev.) 931184 - CAM 24.07.91, where it was

1

9

held that the following tests have to be applied before the discretion of the

Court of Appeal is exercised in favour of a party seeking the revisionary

remedy.

(a) The aggrieved party should have no other remedy.

(b) If there was another remedy available to the aggrieved party then

revision would be available if special circumstances could be

shown to warrant.

(c) The aggrieved party must come to Court with clean hands and

should not have contributed to the current situation.

(d) The aggrieved party should have complied with the law at that

time.

The view of this Court is that the Petitioner has not fulfilled any of the

pre-requisites aforesaid.

As the conduct of the Petitioner is intensely relevant to the granting of

relief, such conduct should not be repellant to the attraction of exercise of

revisionary power (W.K.M.B. Perera vs. The Peoples Bank - S.C. 141194-

S.C.M. 12/05/95. In this case the conduct of the Petitioner in jumping bail

and absconding up to the date that he was arrested clearly design to

circumvent and subvert the law and the institution of the justice.

Contumacious conduct on the part of the Petitioner is a relevant

consideration when the exercise of a discretion in his favour is involved.

I am of the view, in the light of the above findings it is abundantly

clear that the Petitioner has not pleaded any exceptional circumstances as

required by law.

)

I t

l i I ! "

10

The next preliminary objection to be considered is whether the

Petitioner has violated the Rule 3 (1) (a) and (b) of the Court of Appeal

(Appellate Procedure) Rules of 1990. All copies of documents, material to

the application has to be filed along with the Petition and Affidavit. The

Petitioner had failed to file vital documents (proceedings, journal entries

etc.) material to the application. Hence, I am of the view, it is a clear

violation of Rule 3 (1) (a) and (b) of the Court of Appeal (Appellate

Procedure) Rules of 1990. It has been held over and over again by this

Court as well as the Supreme Court, non-compliance with the Court of

Appeal (Appellate Procedure) Rules is fatal to the application.

For the reasons stated above this revision application should be

dismissed in limine.

However, it is relevant to note, this revision application has been filed

only on the basis of disparity of the sentence that had been imposed on the

Petitioner. No where in the Petition it is stated that the sentence is not

lawful and legal in law. However, if the Court seems the sentence is illegal

and unlawful, intervention of this Court is necessary and justifiable to revise

it and impose a legal and lawful sentence.

The learned High Court Judge has imposed on the Petitioner a

sentence of two years (02 years) rigorous imprisonment on each count to run

consecutively. But the sentence found in Section 54 (a) (b) and 54 (a) (d) of

the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs Ordinance as amended by Act

No.13 of 1994 is a fine not exceeding Rupees Twenty five thousand

(Rs.25,0001-) or imprisonment for a period not exceeding One year.

\ I

I f

11

Therefore, I set aside the sentence imposed by the learned High Court

Judge and substitute one year rigorous imprisonment on each count to run

consecutively, totaling two years.

Taking into consideration the entirely of the submissions adduced by

both parties, this Court upholds the preliminary objections raised by the

Respondent and conclude that this is not a fit and proper case to invoke the

discretionary revisionary powers of this Court. Accordingly, I dismiss the

Petition.

Since the Court has dismissed the Petition for the above stated

reasons, this Court is of the view that it is not necessary to go into the merits

of the case.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

I agree

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Petition is dismissed.

\

f t ! ! t