\

I

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for leave to Appeal in terms of Section 15 of the Judicature Act read with Section 340 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 and Section 13(2) of the Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption Act No.19 of 1994.

C.A.L.A Appeal No: CA(LA) 65/2007 High Court of Colombo Case No: B1399/2002

Director-General,

Commission to Investigate Allegations

Of Bribery or Corruption,

No.36, Malalasekera MW,

Colombo 07.

Accuser

Vs.

1. Yapa Hettipathirannehelage Kithsiri Manjula Kumara Yapa, Benawatte, Pannala. 2. Wijesinghe Mudiyanselage udaya Sri Rohana Parakrama,

No. 241, Negombo Road, Pahalagala Yaya, Pannala.

Page 1 of7

I,

f I

,I

i I

\ I IIIi1

t III

I ! t

f l I

t,

!f

1 1 I I ! ! l j I I

\ 1

BEFORE .

3. Boradeniya Ralalage Jayanthi Kumari, Koongolla Watta, Karanthipopola, Kuliyapitiya.

Accused

And Now Between;

Director -General,

Commission to Investigate Allegations

Of Bribery or Corruption,

No.36, Malalasekera MW,

Colombo 07.

Complainant-Appellant

Vs.

1. Yapa Hettipathirannehelage Kithsiri Manjula Kumara Yapa Benawatte, Pannala.

2. Wijesinghe Mudiyanselage udaya Sri Rohana Parakrama No. 241, Negombo Road, Pahalagala Yaya, Pannala.

Accussed - Respondents

L.U Jayasuriya J.

Page 2 of7

!rI

1I! ,

~ .. , I,f (.

I

tI!

J I i

I

f I l ,

I

COUNSEL

ARGUEDON :

DECIDED ON :

L.U .Iayasuriya .I.

Deepali Wijesundera J.

Saliya Pieris with A. Rathnasiri for the Accused-Respondents.

Dilan Ratnayake D.S.G with Subhashini Siriwardene for the Complainant-Appellant.

14th December, 2016

10th January, 2017

The Applicant Appellant (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the

Appellant) filed the leave to appeal application to appeal against the

acquittal of the 1st and the 2nd Respondent by the High Court of

Colombo.

The 1st Respondent was indicted in the High Court of Colombo;

1) For soliciting a gratification of Rupees 25,000/- from one

Lalitha Inoka Irangani to perform an official act, an offense

punishable under S.19(b) and S.19(c) respectively.

2) For accepting a gratification of Rupees 25000/- from the said

Irangani, an offense punishable under S.19 (b) and S.19 (c) of

the Bribery Act.

Page 3 of7

~ I I I I [

f II

I 1

1

\ t ,

t f ! , i I 1

I l

f

I. 1

The 2nd Respondent was indicted in the High Court of Colombo for

abetting the 1st Respondent in order to commit the above mentioned

offences punishable under Ss. 19(b) and 19( c) of the Bribery Act.

The 3rd Respondent was indicted for abetting the 1st respondent in order

to commit offences of accepting the gratification of Rupees 25,000/-

punishable under Ss. 19(b) and 19( c) of the Bribery Act.

It is important to note that the Appellant is canvasing the Acquittal of the

1 st and 2nd Respondents but is not pursuing the acquittal of the 3rd

Respondent. Therefore, the finding of the learned High Court Judge with

regard to the 3rd Respondent stands unchallenged.

The Counsel of the Appellant stated that there were no marked

contradictions in the evidence of the prosecution witnesses but the

learned High Court Judge has misled herself in believing that there is a

contradiction in I.P. Liyanage's evidence and the decoy's evidence. He

went on to say that both witnesses have said the same story. He further

went on to say that, there is no contradiction but only a difference in

explaining the incident, which would not become a contradiction.

Sun dan am Pichchai Mary Theresa 2011. 2SLR 292 was cited In

support of this argument.

The learned D.S.G argued that there is no requirement in law to

corroborate a Police Officer's Evidence when he is a key witness and

cited the judgment in Devundorage Nihal Vs. A.G. 2001.1SLR 409.

Page 4of7

)II

II ! !I

! r

I

Referring to page 14 of this judgment, the counsel of the Appellant

submitted that the learned High Court Judge has stated that the

acceptance of the money has not been proven.

This court however, finds that this position is incorrect. The High Court

Judge has merely stated that: "~C(C G'~J~J mzs) @D 88m2S) G'25)J~l2lS)". It is

evident that a wrong inference has been drawn by the Appellant.

The Learned Counsel for the 1st and the 2nd Respondents referred to the

facts of the case and submitted that the complainant's husband was

arrested by the 1st Respondent. It was further submitted that when the

complainant met the 1st Respondent at the Police Station, she has given

the telephone number which was the general number of the Police

Station. The said telephone number was given by the 1st Respondent to

the Complainant in order to inquire about the bracelet alleged to have

been recovered from the complainant's husband. The version of the

prosecution is that the telephone number was given to the Complainant

to facilitate the gratification.

In the event the telephone number was indeed given to facilitate the

gratification, this court finds it questionable as to why the 1st Respondent

gave the official telephone number of the Police Station.

Page 5 of7

1 I

) I I

The evidence of the decoy and the 4th witness who ran behind the 2nd

Respondent differs at some point.The 4th witness says that the 1st

Respondent crumbled and threw away the money (a sum of Rupees

25,000/-consisting of 1000 Rupee notes) while running. The decoy

however, who ran behind the 1st Respondent has not seen the throwing

away of the money.

The learned High Court Judge has observed the above discrepancy and

has said that there remains a doubt on the part of the case of the

prosecution.

E.R.S.R Coomaraswami in his Law of Evidence VOL II Book I at page

395, dealing with how the Police Evidence in Bribery Cases should be

considered has stated as follows.

"In great many cases, the Police Agents are as a rule, unreliable

witnesses. It is always in their interest to secure a conviction in the

hope of getting a reward. Such Evidence ought therefore to be

received with great caution and should be closely scrutinized

particularly when their evidence is only the corroborating evidence

of the accomplice."

Therefore, this court is of the view that the learned High Court Judge has

carefully evaluated the evidence placed before her and has come to the

correct conclusion.

Page6of7

IIil I

1 I

I f 3

1 1 I 1 1

j I ! i

..

For the afore-mentioned reasons, this court decides to dismiss the

application of the Appellant.

Application Dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Deepali Wijesundera J. :

I Agree.

II i I IIII

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL I

Page 7 of7

!

~

1I!

1