Page 1 of 14

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of

section 331 (1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No- 15 of 1979, read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Court of Appeal No: Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

CA/HCC/0110/22 COMPLAINANT

Vs.

High Court of Rathnapura 1. Rassagala Polwaththe Kulasena

Case No: HCR/257/13 Gunasekara

2. Rassagala Polwaththe Gunasekara

ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

Rassagala Polwaththe Kulasena Gunasekara

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12

RESPONDENT

Page 2 of 14

Before : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

: P. Kumararatnam, J.

Counsel : U. R. De Silva, P.C. with Savithri Fernando with H.

Ruberu for the Accused Appellant

: Dishna Warnakula, DSG for the Respondent

Argued on : 27-03-2023

Written Submissions : 20-01-2023 (By the Accused-Appellant)

: - (By the Respondent)

Decided on : 26-05-2023

Sampath B Abayakoon, J.

This is an appeal by the accused appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

appellant) being aggrieved of his conviction and the sentence by the learned High

Court Judge of Rathnapura.

The appellant was indicted along with another before the High Court of

Rathnapura for causing the death of one Silindukande Kirimenikelage Siripala

on 03-11-2011, and thereby committing an offence punishable in terms of

section 296 read with section 32 of the Penal Code.

After trial, by the judgement dated 07-04-2022, the learned High Court Judge of

Rathnapura found the appellant who was the first accused mentioned in the

indictment guilty as charged, while the second accused was acquitted.

Accordingly, the appellant was sentenced to death.

At the hearing of this appeal, the learned Presidents Counsel for the appellant

formulated the following ground of appeal for consideration of the Court.

Page 3 of 14

1. Whether the learned High Court Judge has failed to consider the

evidence led at the trial in terms of section 297 of the Penal Code on

the basis of a sudden fight on provocation.

The facts led to the death of the deceased Siripala can be summarized in the

following manner. On the day of the incident, around 7.30 in the night, PW-01

has heard a quarrel and heard the voices of PW-03 Udayakumara and the

appellant. He has heard the quarrel from the direction of the village temple.

Later, he has heard his brother Rohana shouting stating our Siripala is finished,

which has led to the witnesses opening his house door. He has seen the deceased

fallen in front of the house and had taken steps to take him to the hospital.

On his way to the hospital, the deceased has made a dying declaration to PW-01

stating . The deceased had succumbed to the

injuries at the hospital. In the trial Court, the witness has identified the appellant

as the person mentioned by the deceased as Latha Appu.

The main witness who has described the incident had been PW-03

Udayakumara. At the time of this incident, he had been with the deceased

Siripala. Before the altercation with the appellant occurred, the deceased Siripala

had been selling illicit liquor inside an abandoned house, which belonged to the

grandmother of the appellant. A relative of the appellant who had a mental

condition had come and consumed liquor sold by the deceased, which has led to

an altercation. At that time, the appellant has warned the deceased to leave

before he would return in 20 minutes time. He has also scolded the deceased in

filth. The appellant had objected to the selling of illicit liquor inside the

abandoned house stating that the land belonged to him, and the deceased

should not sell liquor in the manner it was carried out in his land.

The appellant has returned in about 10 minutes time. However, the deceased

has refused to leave stating that he also has a right to the land. When the

appellant returned, he was carrying a broken spring leaf and had assaulted the

deceased towards his cheek. In order to prevent an incident occurring, PW-03

Page 4 of 14

has forced the deceased to leave. While walking towards his mothers elder

sisters house, the deceased has stopped near the place that leads to the

appellants house. The appellant had come and stopped about 250 300 meters

away and had again started to scold the deceased in filth. Being angered by this,

the deceased has taken two rocks, and had confronted the appellant. However,

the appellant without coming near the deceased had continued to scold him in

filth.

However, some moments later, the appellant had come and stabbed the

deceased. According to the witness, the first attempt by the appellant to stab the

deceased had failed. At the same time, the deceased has taken a rock in his hand

and almost simultaneously the appellant had stabbed the deceased for a second

time and the deceased had attacked the appellant with the rock on the

appellants face. The deceased had sustained a stab injury to his chest.

It was the evidence of PW-03 that after the attack, the appellant fainted because

of the injury suffered by him to his face and as the appellant appeared to be

injured severely, the witness has taken him to the hospital. He has later seen

the deceased also being admitted to the hospital and had come to know later

that he passed away.

The Judicial Medical Officer who conducted the postmortem on the deceased has

observed two stab wounds out of which the stab wound that he observed on the

chest had been the more serious one. He has described the first stab wound as

a wound that can cause the death in the ordinary course of nature.

When called for a defence, the appellant has made a dock statement and has

claimed that the deceased was in the habit of selling illicit liquor from his

grandmothers house. Although he has informed the deceased several times not

to do that, he has continued to do so. On the day of the incident, he found that

the deceased has given the illicit liquor to his fathers younger brother who had

a mental disease. The appellant has claimed that there was an argument over

this and he and the deceased exchanged fist cuffs. It had been his position that

Page 5 of 14

when he was returning home, he heard PW-03 saying . Thinking

that he is being attacked he hid, but the deceased came and attacked him with

a rock and both of them engaged in a scuffle. As a result, he was fainted and

regained his consciousness only at the hospital. Because of the attack, he lost

four frontal teeth and later he was arrested while taking treatment in the hospital

by the police.

The Consideration of the Ground of Appeal

It is clear from the evidence adduced before the trial Court that the appellant

has not taken up the position that he was provoked by the deceased or it was he

who attacked the deceased due to being provoked. In his dock statement too, the

appellant has pleaded ignorance as to how the deceased suffered the stab

wounds.

However, at the hearing of this appeal, the position taken up by the learned

Presidents Counsel on behalf of the appellant was that there was evidence

available before the trial Court that the appellant acted due to being provoked

by the actions of the deceased and the incident where the deceased suffered fatal

injuries were due to the provocation extended upon the appellant. Under the

circumstances, it was his view that the conviction should have been in terms of

either exception 01 or 04 of section 297 of the Penal Code.

It was the submissions of the learned DSG that the incident cannot be termed

as an incident occurred due to a sudden fight or a provocation for that matter.

It was her position that when the first incident occurred, the evidence clearly

establishes the fact that the deceased had done nothing to aggravate the

situation. The learned DSG pointed out that there was a clear time gap between

the first incident and the incident where the appellant had stabbed the deceased.

It was her position that although the appellant has also received injuries, the

actions of the appellant would not fall under the definition of a provocation or a

sudden fight.

Page 6 of 14

Under the circumstances, it was her view that the appeal should be dismissed

as it is devoid of merit.

It is clear from the evidence adduced before the trial Court that the appellant

has not taken up a defence that the incident was a result of a sudden fight or

due to him being provoked. Although he has admitted that there was a quarrel

between him and the deceased, due to the deceased selling illicit liquor from an

abandoned house belonging to his grandmother, he has not admitted that it was

he who caused the stab wound to the deceased.

However, it had been his position that it was he who suffered injuries and as a

result fainted, and only regained his consciousness at the hospital.

Since the learned Presidents Counsels position was that the actions of the

appellant fall within the general exceptions in terms of section 294 of the Penal

code, I find it desirable to consider the relevant law in that regard.

In the instant appeal, the appellant mainly relies on exception 1 of section 294

of the Penal Code, which reads thus:

Exception 1- Culpable homicide is not murder if the offender whilst

deprived of the power of self-control by grave and sudden

provocation, causes the death of the person who gave the

provocation, or causes the death of any other person by mistake or

accident.

The above exception is subject to the following provisos: -

Firstly- That the provocation is not sought or voluntarily provoked

by the offender as an excuse for killing or doing harm to any person.

Secondly- That the provocation is not given by anything done in

obedience to the law, or by a public servant, in the lawful exercise of

the powers of such public servant.

Page 7 of 14

Thirdly- That the provocation is not given by anything done in the

lawful exercise of the right of private defence.

Explanation- Whether the provocation was grave and sudden enough

to prevent the offence from amounting to murder is a question of

fact.

Section 105 of the Evidence Ordinance, which provides for burden of proving a

case of an accused comes within the exceptions, reads as follows:

Section 105- When a person is accused of an offence, the burden of

proving the existence of circumstances bringing the case within any

of the general exceptions in the Penal Code, or within any special

exceptions or proviso contained in any other part of the same Code

or in any law defining the offence, is upon him, and the court shall

presume the absence of such circumstances.

Illustrations

(b) A, accused of murder alleges that, by grave and sudden

provocation, he was deprived of the power of self-control.

The burden of proof is on A.

Although there is a specific provision in the Evidence Ordinance as to by whom

a general exception or any special exception should be established, our Superior

Courts have consistently held that even if no such exception has been pleaded

by an accused person during a trial, it is the duty of a trial Judge to consider

whether such circumstances do exist.

In the case of King Vs. Bellana Withanage Eddin 41 NLR 345, a Court of

Criminal Appeal held thus;

In a charge of murder, it is the duty of the judge to put to the jury, the

alternative of finding the accused guilty of culpable homicide not amounting

to murder when there is any basis for such a finding in the evidence of

Page 8 of 14

record, although such defence was not raiser nor relied upon by the

accused.

In King Vs. Albert Appuhamy 41 NLR 505, it was held,

Failure on the part of a prisoner or his counsel to take up a certain line of

defence does not relieve the judge of the responsibility of putting the jury

such defence if it arises on the evidence.

In the case of King Vs. Withanalage Lanty 42 NLR 317, the Court of Criminal

Appeal, observed the following;

There was evidence in this case upon which it was open to the jury to say

that it came within exception 4 to section 294 of the Penal Code and that the

appellant was guilty of culpable homicide not amounting to murder.

However, no such plea was put forward on his behalf. In the course of his

charge to the jury, the presiding judge preferred to this evidence as part of

the defence story but not as evidence upon which a lesser verdict possibly

be based.

It was the duty of the presiding judge to have so directed the jury and that

in the circumstances, the appellant was entitled to have the benefit of the

lesser verdict.

The above line of authorities clearly establishes that for a trial Judge to consider

whether there was provocation, which reduce the offence of murder to that of a

lesser culpability, there must be evidence available in the trial.

The evidence made available to the trial Court clearly suggests that this was not

a single incident where the appellant has stabbed the deceased, but an incident

which has taken place over a period of time. Therefore, it is the view of this Court

that this incident would not fall under exception 4 of section 294 of the Penal

Code.

Page 9 of 14

It is the view of this Court that the appellant can succeed in his argument if there

was evidence to establish that the incident falls within exception 1 of section 294

of the Penal Code as exhibited before.

It clearly appears from the judgement of the learned High Court Judge, the

Counsel who represented the appellant at the trial had, rather than pleading the

general exceptions of section 294, has pleaded the special exception as described

in section 89 of the Penal Code, where it has been stated that nothing is an

offence which is done in the exercise of the right of private defence.

As the wording of the section clearly suggests, if it can be established that an

action of an accused person was done in the exercise of the right of private

defence, there cannot be a conviction against such a person, but only an

acquittal.

In the judgement, the learned High Court Judge has considered the special

exception pleaded in relation to the general exceptions mentioned in section 294

of the Penal Code, and has extensively considered whether the actions of the

appellant can be considered in terms of the said exceptions.

It is my considered view that there is a clear distinction between section 89 of

the penal code and exceptions mentioned in section 294, which are exceptions

to the offence of murder. If a trial Court finds that the actions of an accused

person fall within any of the exceptions mentioned in section 294 of the Penal

Code, such an accused person cannot be acquitted on the basis of right of private

defence, but can only be convicted on the basis of culpable homicide not

amounting to murder in terms of section 297 of the Penal Code.

It clearly appears from the judgement that the learned High Court Judge has

considered the evidence to find that whether there was a basis to conclude that

the injury caused to the deceased was an act by the appellant in exercising his

right of private defence based on the last confrontation between the two, where

the evidence shows that both the stabbing and the deceased hitting the appellant

with a rock occurred simultaneous to each other. On the basis that there was no

Page 10 of 14

material placed before the Court to conclude that the appellant exercised his

right of private defence, the stand taken up by his Counsel at the trial has been

rejected by the learned High Court Judge.

The appellant has been convicted for the offence of murder in terms of the third

limb of section 294 where it is stated that, if it is done with the intention of

causing bodily injury to any person, and the bodily injury intended to be inflicted

is sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death.

It is therefore clear that the learned High Court Judges attention had not been

drawn to whether this incident falls within exception 1 of section 294. The term

sudden provocation used in exception 1 of section 294 of the Penal code has

been subjected to several interpretations by our Superior Courts.

The earlier judgements of our Superior Courts had followed a strict interpretation

in applying exception 1 of section 294 of the Penal Code to mean that provocation

should consist of a single act which occurred immediately before the killing so

that there was no time for the anger to cool and the act must have been such

that it would have made a reasonable man to react in the manner as the accused

did.

However, in the case of Sinnathambi Vs. The Queen 75 NLR 79, H. N. G.

Fernando, C.J. gave a more pragmatic interpretation to the term sudden

provocation. It was held,

An offender may be said to have been deprived of his power of self-control

by grave and sudden provocation within the meaning of exception 1 to

section 294 of the Penal Code even though there was an interval of time

between the giving of the provocation and the time of the killing, if the

evidence shows that, all the time during the interval, the accused suffered

under a loss of self-control.

Page 11 of 14

In the judgement of Premalal Vs. The Attorney General (2000) 2 SLR 403, it

was held,

Per Kulatilaka, J.,

Our judgements interpreted the phrase sudden provocation to mean that

provocation should consist of a single act which occurred immediately before

the killing so that there was no time for the anger to cool and the act must

have been such that it would have made a reasonable man to react to the

manner as the accused did.

Of late we observe a development in other jurisdictions where courts have

taken a more pragmatic view of the mitigatory plea of provocationin a

series of cases court look into the consideration of the prior course of

relationship between the accused and his victim.

The law in relation to the term sudden provocation has been developed on the

same lines in the Indian Courts as well. In the Indian case of Poovammal Vs.

State Represented by Inspector of Police V. K. Puram Police Station,

Tirunelveli District (2012(2) MLJ (Crl) 482), the Court referring to the case of

K. M. Nanavati Vs. State of Maharashtra (1962) 1 MLJ (Crl) 531 (SC) referred

to the offence of manslaughter in English Law, an offence committed during

provocation and observed thus,

Under the English Criminal Law, the provocation must be grave and also

sudden. But by way of judicial thinking, the Indian Criminal Law has gone

ahead. In our system there is a concept of sustained provocation. It is

concerned with the duration of the provocation. There may be

incidents/occurrences, which are such that they may not make the offender

suddenly to make his outburst by his overt act. However, it may be lingering

in his mind for quite some time, torment continuously and at one point of

time erupt, make him to lose his self-control, make his mind go astray, the

mind may not be under his control/command and results in the offender

committing the offence. The sustained provocation/frustration nurtured in

Page 12 of 14

the mind of the accused reach the end of breaking point, under that accused

causes the murder of the deceased.

It is therefore clear that our Courts have viewed the term sudden provocation to

include cumulative provocation in considering whether an act committed by an

accused person would fall within the ambit of exception 1 of section 294 of the

Penal code.

It is therefore necessary to consider the facts that had been revealed before the

trial Court, in the above perspective, since there had been a time gap between

the first incident and the incident where the appellant has caused the fatal injury

to the deceased. It is clear from the evidence that the deceased had been in the

habit of selling illicit liquor based in an abandoned house, which belonged to the

grandmother of the appellant. The words that had been uttered by the appellant

when he first confronted the deceased provides sufficient proof that the appellant

had been opposing the deceased continuously.

When the appellant met the deceased, he was selling illicit liquor at the

abandoned house and one of the consumers had been a mentally retarded

person who is a close relative of the appellant. The appellant has scolded the

deceased in filth because his continuous engagement in selling illicit liquor in

the house and the land claimed by the appellant. After the initial outburst, the

appellant had left the place stating that he will be returning in about 20 minutes

and if the deceased still remains there, he would be killed. However, he had

returned in about 10 minutes time and even at that time, the deceased had

refused to leave stating that they also have a right to these houses.

It appears that the deceaseds continuous presence has aggravated the anger

that had been boiling within the appellant because of his previous actions, which

has resulted in him assaulting the deceased. After the assault, the appellant has

continued to scold the deceased in filth, and PW-03 has separated the two. While

going away from the place of the first incident, the deceased has stopped near

the turn towards the appellants house. Thereafter, the appellant also has come

Page 13 of 14

near that place, he has stopped some distance away, but had continued to scold

the deceased. This has angered the deceased and he has picked up two rocks

and had confronted the appellant. In the ensuing scuffle, the appellant has

stabbed the deceased and the deceased also has attacked the appellant with a

rock he has picked up from the ground.

According to PW-03s evidence, the appellant also has received grievous injuries

to his face and had fainted. The deceased had been taken to the hospital

subsequently where he was pronounced dead.

It is the view of this Court that the above facts taken cumulatively establishes

that the attack on the deceased by the appellant was not a premeditated

intentional act done with the intention of causing the death of the deceased. It

sufficiently proves that due to the illegal activities of the deceased, which he

carried out in a house claimed by the appellant, the initial provocation was by

the deceased, although it may not be a sudden provocation. It is the refusal by

the deceased to stop carrying out the illegal selling of illicit liquor that has

sparked a series of events within a short span of time relevant to this incident.

It is the view of this Court that due to the cumulative provocation and the events

of the given day, and due to the heat of passion, the appellant has committed

this act where the deceased received a stab wound, which had been proved fatal.

The Judicial Medical Officer who has conducted the postmortem has categorized

this injury as an injury that could cause the death in the ordinary course of

nature, but not as an injury that would be essentially fatal. The evidence

establishes that the delay in taking the injured deceased to the hospital may also

have been a reason for the death of the deceased person due to haemorrhage.

Under the circumstances, it is my view that convicting the appellant in terms of

section 296 of the Penal Code is not warranted. I am of the view that if considered

in the correct perspective, there was ample evidence before the trial Court to

convict the appellant in terms of section 297 of the Penal Code under exception

1 of section 294. Accordingly, I set aside the conviction of the appellant and

Page 14 of 14

convict him for culpable homicide not amounting to murder in terms of section

297 of the Penal Code.

As considered above, I am of the view that the act committed by the appellant

had been an act done with the knowledge that it is likely to cause death but

without any intention to cause death, or to cause such bodily injury as is likely

to cause death.

Therefore, acting in terms of the second limb of section 297 of the Penal Code, I

sentence the appellant for a rigorous imprisonment period of 10 years. In

addition, I order him to pay a fine of Rs. 25000/=, and in default, he shall serve

an additional rigorous imprisonment period of 2 years.

The appeal is allowed up to the above extent.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P. Kumararatnam, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal