1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for

mandates in the nature of Writs of

Certiorari and Mandamus in terms of

Article 140 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka

C A (Writ) Application No. 526/ 2015

1. Lakshmi Mignone E. Perera,

No. 406,

Horana Road,

Alubomulla,

Panadura.

2. Sandya Rohini Malkanthi Perera,

No. 222/5,

2

Ranmuthu Place,

Ihalakaragahamuna,

Kadawatha.

PETITIONERS

Vs.

1. Sri Lanka Handicrafts Board,

No. 215,

Bauddhaloka Mawatha,

Colombo 07.

2. Dr. S M M Ismail,

Chairman,

Sri Lanka Handicrafts Board,

No. 215,

Bauddhaloka Mawatha,

Colombo 07.

.....

..:

3

3. R A L Udayakumara,

Member

4. P G ] ayasinghe,

Member

5. D M Ranjith Bandara,

Member

6. P H Ananda.

Member

7. Keerthi Suranjith Bandara,

Member

8. B A Lalith Wijesekera.

Member

3rd to 8th Respondents are of

4

Board of Directors,

Sri Lanka Handicrafts Board,

No. 215,

Bauddhaloka Mawatha,

Colombo 07.

9. T M K B Tennekoon,

Secretary,

Ministry of Industry and Commerce,

P. O. Box 570,

73/ 1,

Galle Road,

Colombo 03.

10. Mahinda Seneviratne,

Secretary,

Ministry of Social Empowerment and

Welfare,

pt Floor,

., .

,,".

5

Sethsiripaya,

Battaramulla.

11. S S N de Silva,

Former Additional Secretary

(Development)

Ministry of Rural Economic Affairs,

C/o Secretary,

Ministry of Social Empowerment and

Welfare,

1 st Floor,

Sethsiripaya,

Battaramulla.

12. A M K K Attanayake,

Former Senior Assistant Secretary to the

Ministry of Rural Economic Affairs,

and Welfare,

1st Floor.

6

13. M C Gamage,

Former Director (SME)

Ministry of Rural Economic Affairs,

C/o Secretary,

Ministry of Social Empowerment and

Welfare,

pt Floor,

Sethsiripaya,

Battaramulla.

14. H M A Medawatte,

No. 67 /7 C,

Namal Uyana,

Niyadagala Road,

Pannipitiya.

RESPONDENTS

..

.....

<" , -

7

Before: P. Padman Surasena J (PIC A)

A.L Shiran Gooneratne J

Counsel:

Shyamal A Collure with A P Jayaweera for the Petitioners.

Chaya Sri Nammuni SC for the 1st - 10th Respondent.

Chathura Galhena with Ms. M Gunawardena for the 14th Respondent.

Argued on : 2018 - 05 - 04

Decided on 2018 - 07 - 24

JUDGMENT

P Padman Surasena J (P I C A)

The Petitioners in this application prays inter alia for following relief.

I. a mandate in the nature of a writ of certiorari to quash the decision

and / or directive and / or order of the 9th Respondent to interdict the

Petitioners contained in the letter produced marked P 21,

8

II. a mandate in the nature of a writ of certiorari to quash the decision

of the Board of Directors of the 1st Respondent Board with regard to

the interdiction of the Petitioners contained and / or referred to in the

letters produced marked P 19 and P 20,

III. a writ of Mandamus to compel the 1st to 8th Respondents or anyone

or more of them to cancel the decision contained and / or referred to

in the letters produced marked P 19 and P 20 in relation to the

interdiction of the petitioners and / or restore the Petitioners in their

respective posts at the 1st Respondent Board with payment of arrears

of salary and other emoluments, if any, by causing them to report for

duty,

IV. a writ of Mandamus to compel the 1st - 8th Respondents or anyone

or more of them to remove or cause to be removed the letters

produced marked P 19 and P 20 from the personal files of the

Petitioners.

1st Respondent (Sri Lanka Handicrafts Board) is a statutory Board

established by an Act of Parliament (Act No. 35 of 1982). The 1st Petitioner

-' .~

.' -

9

had functioned as the Chief Operations Officer and the 2nd Petitioner had

functioned as the Director Finance of the said Board.

Upon a complaint made by a group of its employees regarding a serious

financial and administrative irregularities alleged to have taken place in the

institution, the Board of Directors of the 1st Respondent Board had

appointed a committee comprising of 10th to 14th Respondents to conduct a

preliminary investigation into the said complaint.

The said committee after conducting investigations has submitted a report

(Produced marked R 14) recommending that a formal investigation be

carried out against the 1st and 2nd Petitioners as they have found material

against the Petitioners to directly link them with the serious financial

misconducts.

The Chairman of the said committee (10th Respondent) had forwarded the

said report to the 9th Respondent who is the Secretary of the Ministry

relevant to the 1st Respondent Board.

The 9th Respondent upon the receipt of the said report had taken steps to

send the letter produced marked P 21 to the 1st Respondent Board

10

instructing the Board to institute disciplinary proceedings against the

Petitioners as per recommendations by the committee.

The complaint made to this Court by the Petitioners in the instant

application is that the decision to suspend the services of the Petitioners

had been taken by the 9th Respondent (Secretary of the relevant Ministry)

without any power to do so.

However, this Court observes that upon the receipt of the letter dated

2015-11-12, the 1st Respondent Board, at the board meeting held on 2015-

11-19, had taken a decision to suspend the services of the Petitioners and

institute disciplinary proceedings against them. Thus, this Court is unable

to accept the submission of the Petitioners that it is the 9th Respondent

who had decided to suspend the Petitioners from their service.

The second argument advanced on behalf of the Petitioners is that the

decision to suspend their services was taken as per the Establishment Code

which does not apply to them.

However, this Court observes that the Board of Directors at a meeting held

on 2016-02-10, had decided to apply the Establishment Code to its

employees. It is the Petitioners contention that his service was suspended

;,

...

.' ...

11

on 2015-11-19 which is a date before the date on which the decision to

apply the Establishment Code to the employees was taken by the Board.

This Court observes that under section 15 of National Craft Council and

Allied Institutions Act No. 35 of 1982, the council is empowered to appoint

and dismiss its employees. The said section also has empowered the

council to exercise disciplinary control over its employees.

In the case of Sirisena Cooray Vs. Tissa Dias Bandaranayaka and two

othersl the Supreme Court stated as follows.

" ... The grounds of judicial review were originally broadly classified as

three-fold. The first ground is illegality; the decision-maker must

understand correctly the law that regulates his decision making power and

must give effect to it The second is ''irrationality'' namely Wednesbury

unreasonableness (Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd. V Wednesbury

Corporation. The third is ''procedural impropriety'~ (Halsbury 4h ed., Vol 11

para 60). To these grounds a fourth may be added ''proportionality'' See

Lord Diplock in CCSU V Minister for the Civil Service at 951. ... "

1 1999 (1) 5 L R 1.

12

Perusal of the material adduced before Court clearly shows that the

Appellant has failed to satisfy Court that any of the above grounds for a

writ of certiorari has been made out.

In any case, the Petitioner can face the disciplinary proceedings and

exonerate himself from the charges, if he is innocent. Thus, the Petitioner

is not without a remedy. It is the view of this Court that, what the

Petitioner attempts through this application is to use the writ jurisdiction of

this Court to halt the machinery of disciplinary proceedings moving against

them. Perusal of the relief prayed for in the petition by the Petitioners

show that they are attempting through this application to create

circumstances to enable them to be restored in their respective posts at

the 1st Respondent Board with payment of arrears of salary and other

emoluments, and also to have the letters produced marked P 19 and P 20

removed or cause to be removed from their personal files without going

through any disciplinary proceedings.

The jurisdiction to issue writs in the nature of certiorari and Mandamus

which is vested in this Court by virtue of Article 140 of the Constitution is a

jurisdiction which this Court could decide in its discretion to exercise only in

"-

-.:;.

.i

, .~

13

a fit case. This Court is not inclined to assist the Petitioners to tread on the

said unlawful path .

In these circumstances, this Court is of the view that it should not decide

to invoke its discretionary jurisdiction in favour of the Petitioners.

In these circumstances, and for the foregoing reasons, this Court decides

to refuse and dismiss this application.

The Petitioners application has no merit. It has been filed to get this Court

to use its powers to stall the due process of law. Thus, each of the

Petitioners is directed to pay Rs. 50,000/= each to the state as a state

cost.

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

A.L Shira" Goo"eratne J

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL