==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0087/2021

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal under and in

terms of Section 331 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979

and in terms of Article 138 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Complainant

Vs

D. Ariyarathne alias Frank Wilfred

Ariyarathne

Accused

AND NOW

D. Ariyarathne alias Frank Wilfred

Ariyarathne

Accused - Appellant

Vs

The Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondent

Court of Appeal Case No:

CA/HCC/0087/2021

High Court of Rathnapura Case No:

HC/117/2016

CA/HCC/0087/2021

2 | P a g e

Before : P. Kumararatnam, J.

Pradeep Hettiarachchi, J.

Counsel : Palitha Fernando, P.C. with I.W. Gunawardena for the Accused -

Appellant.

Shanaka Wijesinghe, A.S.G., P.C. for the state.

Argued on : 05.02.2025

Decided on : 02.04.2026

Pradeep Hettiarachchi, J

Judgment

1. The Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as “the Appellant”) was indicted before

the High Court of Ratnapura for committing the murder of Wadivel Tholassi Amma, an

offence punishable under Section 296 of the Penal Code. At the conclusion of the trial,

the Learned High Court Judge found the Appellant guilty and convicted him

accordingly. The Appellant was thereafter sentenced to death.

2. Being aggrieved by the said conviction and sentence, the Appellant has preferred this

appeal, contending that the circumstances of the case do not warrant a conviction for

murder but, at most, constitute the offence of culpable homicide not amounting to

murder.

3. There is no dispute that the Accused-Appellant caused the death of the deceased.

Learned Counsel for the Appellant contended that the Learned Trial Judge failed to

consider the applicability of Exception 4 to Section 294 of the Penal Code, which, on

the evidence, indicated that the Appellant had acted with knowledge rather than

intention, and therefore ought to have convicted the Appellant under Section 297 of the

Penal Code.

CA/HCC/0087/2021

3 | P a g e

4. Section 294 of the Penal Code sets out the circumstances in which a homicide, though

otherwise amounting to murder, may be mitigated to culpable homicide not amounting

to murder. The section enumerates several exceptions which, while not absolving the

offender of criminal liability, may operate to reduce the nature of the offence.

5. It is noteworthy that, in the present case, no evidence has been adduced by either the

prosecution or the defence to bring the alleged act of the Appellant within any of the

exceptions enumerated in Section 294 of the Penal Code. Nevertheless, the Appellant

submitted that the circumstances of the present case, when considered in their entirety,

do not indicate that he entertained any murderous intention at the time of the incident.

In such circumstances, it was contended that the court may convict the Appellant of the

offence of culpable homicide not amounting to murder on the basis that he possessed

only the knowledge that his act was likely to cause death.

6. It was further submitted that, as evidenced by the medical testimony, the Appellant had

used only moderate force on the deceased. This, it was contended, indicates that the

Appellant did not entertain the murderous intention contemplated under Section 294 of

the Penal Code and that, at most, it indicates that the Appellant had the knowledge that

his act was likely to cause death when he assaulted the deceased, which would bring

the act within the ambit of culpable homicide not amounting to murder rather than

murder.

7. There are no eyewitnesses to the incident. The principal item of evidence relied upon

by the prosecution against the Appellant is the dying declaration made by the deceased,

in which she stated that she had been struck by the Appellant with a wooden stick.

8. In this regard, the medical evidence of the Judicial Medical Officer (JMO), who

conducted the post-mortem examination on the deceased, assumes considerable

importance. According to the JMO, there were eleven injuries observed on the body of

the deceased. Out of these injuries, injury Nos. 3, 9, and 11 were categorized as grievous

injuries, whereas the remaining injuries were not of a grievous nature. The JMO further

testified that injury No. 3 was sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death.

CA/HCC/0087/2021

4 | P a g e

9. It is also evident that the deceased had remained in the hospital for five days prior to

her demise. Significantly, none of the injuries were categorized as necessarily fatal. At

the time of the alleged incident, the deceased was 89 years of age and was suffering

from certain complications relating to her kidneys and other internal organs due to her

advanced age. It is noteworthy that the cause of death, as stated in the post-mortem

report, was multiple blunt force injuries.

10. Furthermore, the JMO testified that the deceased was suffering from hypertension,

which, in his opinion, may also have contributed to her death. The testimony of the

JMO also indicates that the force used by the Appellant in inflicting the blows on the

deceased was moderate.

11. It can be observed from the circumstances of the case that the attack appears to have

been committed in a moment of anger and impulse rather than pursuant to any

premeditated intention to cause death. It is also significant to note that the deceased

succumbed to her injuries five days after the incident due to the cumulative effects of

those injuries. Her advanced age also appears to have contributed to the cause of death.

12. This circumstance further demonstrates the presence of knowledge rather than

intention. In criminal law, there is a clear distinction between “Intention” and

“Knowledge”. Intention denotes a deliberate desire to bring about a particular

consequence, such as death. Knowledge, on the other hand, implies an awareness that

a particular act is likely to cause death, even though such a consequence may not have

been desired.

13. In Jai Prakash vs. State (Delhi Administration) [(1991) 2 SCC 32], this distinction

was extensively discussed as follows:

It is the 'Knowledge' or 'Intention' with which the act is done that makes difference,

in arriving at a conclusion whether the offence is culpable homicide or murder.

Therefore, it is necessary to know the meaning of these expressions as used in these

provisions... ..

The 'Intention' and 'Knowledge' of the accused are subjective and invisible states of

mind and their existence has to be gathered from the circumstances, such as the,

weapon used, the ferocity of attack, multiplicity of injuries and all other

CA/HCC/0087/2021

5 | P a g e

surrounding circumstances. The framers of the code designedly used the words

'intention' and 'knowledge' and it is accepted that the knowledge of the

consequences which may result in doing an act is not the same thing as the intention

that such consequences should ensue. Firstly, when an act is done by a person, it is

presumed that he must have been aware that certain specified harmful

consequences would or could follow. But that knowledge is bare awareness and not

the same thing as intention that such consequences should ensue. As compared to

'Knowledge', 'Intention' requires something more than the mere foresight of the

consequences, namely the purposeful doing of a thing to achieve a particular end."

14. In the present case, the evidence suggests that the Appellant had knowledge that his act

was likely to cause death, but there is insufficient material to establish a deliberate

intention to kill. Moreover, the death of the deceased was not instantaneous but

occurred several days later, apparently due to complications arising from the injuries,

which further indicates that the injuries, although serious, were not necessarily inflicted

with the intention of causing death.

15. In these circumstances, the offence, in my view, cannot properly be brought within the

ambit of Section 294 of the Penal Code but would more appropriately fall within the

scope of Section 297 of the Penal Code.

16. In the case of The King vs. Aldon (1943) 44 NLR 575, it was held;

“Where, in a charge of murder, the Court of criminal appeal is satisfied that there

was some doubt as to whether the jury were of opinion that the accused had a

murderous intention or merely the knowledge that what he did was likely to cause

death,- Held, that the accused should be given the benefit of the doubt and sentenced

under the latter part of section 297 of the Penal Code.”

17. In Kumarasinghe vs. The State 77 NLR 217, (At pg. 218-219) it was held further, that,

“ In the instant case, in the absence of any evidence which could bring into operation

any of the five Exceptions specified in s. 294 of the Penal Code, the only alternatives

open to the Jury were, either to convict the prisoner of the offence of culpable

homicide not amounting to murder on the ground that he had only the knowledge

that his act was likely to cause death or else to convict him of murder if they were

CA/HCC/0087/2021

6 | P a g e

convinced that he had acted with a murderous intention. The distinction. between

such “knowledge” and “murderous intention” was not brought to the notice of the

Jury in the passage from the charge cited above.”

18. In Farook vs. Attorney General (2006) 3 Sri L. R.174, it was held:

“The determinant factor is the intentional injury which must be sufficient to cause

death in the ordinary course of nature, that is to say, if the probability of death is

not so high, the offence does not fall within murder but within culpable homicide

not amounting to murder or something less.”

19. The difference between the offence of murder and culpable homicide not amounting to

murder is well explained in Rajwant Singh vs. State of Kerala AIR 1966 SC 1874.

Hidayatullah J considering the offences of culpable homicide not amounting to murder

and murder; said

“Two offences involve the killing of a person. They are the offence for culpable

homicide and the more heinous offence of murder. What distinguishes these two

offences is the presence of a special mens rea which consists of four mental attitudes

in the presence of any of which the lesser offence becomes greater. These four

mental attitudes are stated in S. 300, I. P..C as distinguishing murder from culpable

homicide. (S. 294 of our Penal Code) Unless the offence can be said to involve at

least one such mental attitude it cannot be murder. The first clauses says that

culpable homicide is murder if the act by which death is caused is done with the

intention of causing death. An intention to kill a person brings the matters so clearly

within the general principle of mens rea as to cause no difficulty. Once the intention

to kill is proved, the offence is murder unless one of the exceptions applies, in which

case the offence is reduced to culpable homicide not amounting to murder. The

Appellants here did not contemplate killing the Lt. Commander. The second clause

deals with acts done with the intention of causing such bodily injury as the offender

knows to be likely to cause the death of the person to whom harm is caused. The

mental attitude here is twofold. There is first the intention to cause bodily harm and

next there is the subjective knowledge that death will be the likely consequence of

the intended injury. English Common Law made no clear distinction between

intention and recklessness but in our law the foresight of the death must be present.

The mental attitude is thus made of two elements (a) causing an intentional injury

CA/HCC/0087/2021

7 | P a g e

and (b) which injury the offender has the foresight to know would cause death. Here

the injury or harm was intended . . . They intended that the Lt. Commander should

be rendered unconscious for some time but they did not intend to do more harm than

this. Can it be said that they had the subjective knowledge of the fatal consequence

of the bodily harm they were causing. We think that on the facts of the case the

answer cannot be in the affirmative. The third clause discards the test of subjective

knowledge. It deals with acts done with the intention of causing bodily injury to a

person and the bodily injury intended to be inflicted is sufficient in the ordinary

course of nature to cause death. In this clause the result of the intentionally caused

injury must be viewed objectively. If the injury that the offender intends causing and

does cause is sufficient to cause death in the ordinary w ay of nature the offence is

murder whether the offender intended causing death or not and whether the

offender had a subjective knowledge of the consequences or not. As was laid down

in Virsa Singhe vs. State of Punjab for the application of this clause it must be first

established that an injury is caused, next it must be established objectively what the

nature of that injury in the ordinary course of nature is. If the injury is found to be

sufficient to cause death one test is satisfied. Then it must be proved that there was

an intention to inflict that very injury and not some other injury and that it was not

accidental or unintentional. If this is also held against the offender the offence of

murder is established” (emphasis added).

20. In Anda vs. State of Rajastan AIR 1966 SC 148 at 151, Hidayatullah J, the determinant

factor is the intentional injury which must be sufficient to cause death in the ordinary

course of nature, that is to say, if the probability of death is not so high, the offense does

not fall within murder but, within culpable homicide not amounting to murder or

something less.”

21. Hence, it is pertinent to consider the Appellant’s arguments in light of the

aforementioned authorities. Evidently, this was not a premeditated or calculated killing.

The sequence of events reveals that the Appellant offered a glass of arrack to the

deceased and, when the deceased refused it, the assault took place in a fit of anger. Thus,

the incident appears to have arisen out of impulse and anger rather than from a pre-

planned intention to kill.

CA/HCC/0087/2021

8 | P a g e

22. Moreover, the deceased did not die on the spot or immediately after the assault. As

evidenced by the testimony of the Judicial Medical Officer (JMO), the deceased

received medical treatment and survived for five days following the incident. Death

ultimately ensued due to the cumulative effects of the injuries sustained, coupled with

her advanced age and hypertension, and not as an immediate or inevitable consequence

of the assault itself. In other words, the injuries did not result in instantaneous death,

which further suggests that the act of the Appellant was committed with knowledge that

it was likely to cause death rather than with the intention to cause death.

23. The Learned Trial Judge, in his judgment, has concluded that the Appellant entertained

a murderous intention based on the testimony of the JMO, who stated that the injuries

were intentional. In my view, this amounts to a clear misdirection by the Learned Trial

Judge. The mere fact that the JMO opined that the injuries were intentional does not,

by itself, establish a murderous intention.

24. In determining whether the Appellant entertained a murderous intention or merely

possessed knowledge, several factors must be taken into account, including the part of

the body on which the injuries were inflicted and their extent, the weapon allegedly

used, the number of blows delivered, whether the death was instantaneous, the duration

of the assault, the circumstances under which the assault took place, and the prior and

subsequent conduct of the Appellant.

25. Only then would the court be able to distinguish between knowledge and murderous

intention. As emphasized in Kumarasingha vs. Attorney General (supra), if the

evidence does not manifest the presence of any of the five exceptions specified in

Section 294, yet demonstrates that the Appellant acted only with knowledge, the

Appellant must be convicted of culpable homicide not amounting to murder.

26. In the instant appeal, ostensibly, there is no evidence that would bring into operation

any of the exceptions stipulated in Section 294. Nevertheless, the evidence adduced

does not establish that the Appellant entertained a murderous intention.

27. In such a situation, it would be unsafe to convict the Appellant of murder, as the

evidence presented is not sufficiently strong to lead to the inescapable conclusion that

the Appellant acted with a murderous intention.

CA/HCC/0087/2021

9 | P a g e

In Nandkumar Nandu Manilal Mudaliar vs. State of Gujarat 2025 INSC 1302 the

Indian Supreme Court held that the Appellant’s act did not constitute murder under

Section 302 IPC but amounted to culpable homicide not amounting to murder under

Section 304 Part I. The Court observed that although the stab wounds inflicted were

serious and sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death, the incident

occurred suddenly during a quarrel, in a state of anger and without premeditation or

intention to kill. The Court noted that the deceased died thirteen days later due to

septicemia and that the circumstances demonstrated knowledge but not intention,

thereby requiring conversion of the conviction from Section 302 to Section 304 Part I.

28. The Honourable Court observed that the attack was done in anger and impulse, not with

pre-planned intent to kill. Hence, it was culpable homicide, not murder. The Hon’ble

Court explained the key difference between “Intention” and “Knowledge” under

criminal law: Intention means the person wanted to cause death, whereas Knowledge

means the person was aware that his act could likely cause death, even if he did not

desire it.

29. Referring to the case Kesar Singh vs. State of Haryana 2008 (15) SCC 753 the Hon’ble

Court held:

“If a person acts with intention to cause death or such injury likely to cause

death, it falls under Section 304 Part I and, if there is no intention, but only

knowledge that the act might cause death, it falls under Section 304 Part II.”

30. In the present case, although the injuries are sufficient to cause death in the ordinary

course of nature, the evidence does not lead to the conclusion that the Appellant acted

with a murderous intention. However, the Learned Trial Judge has failed to distinguish

between murderous intention and knowledge and has erroneously arrived at a finding

of murder solely on the basis of the evidence of the JMO, who stated that the injuries

were intentional.

31. In view of the foregoing analysis of the evidence and the applicable legal principles, I

am of the opinion that the evidence adduced by the prosecution has failed to establish

beyond a reasonable doubt that the Appellant had acted with the murderous intention

CA/HCC/0087/2021

10 | P a g e

of causing the death of the deceased as contemplated under Section 294 of the Penal

Code. In these circumstances, the conviction for murder cannot be sustained.

32. However, the evidence clearly establishes that the Appellant had the knowledge that his

act was likely to cause death. Accordingly, the conviction of the Appellant under

Section 296 of the Penal Code is set aside and substituted with a conviction for culpable

homicide not amounting to murder under Section 297 of the Penal Code.

33. Hence, I set aside the death sentence imposed on the Appellant and substitute it with a

custodial sentence of ten (10) years’ rigorous imprisonment. Furthermore, I order the

Appellant to pay a sum of Rs. 500,000.00 as compensation to the family of the

deceased. In default of payment, the Appellant shall undergo a further term of two (2)

years’ imprisonment. It is further ordered that the term of imprisonment shall run from

the date of conviction.

34. Accordingly, the appeal is partly allowed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P. Kumararatnam, J

I agree,

Judge of the Court of Appeal