IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Officer-in Charge

Police Station

Norton Bridge

Complainant

Vs.

1. Atapattu Mudiyanselage Ranjith Priyantha Kumara Atapattu

4th Mile Post Norton Bridge

2. Dissanayake Mudiyanselage

Ruwan Inon Dissanayake

101/31, Meegama Watte

Wattegama

3. Giddawa Gedera Gunasena

117/02, Meegama Watte

Wattegama.

4. Yatinuwara Gedera Ajith

Premakeerthi of Jayampathi Stores

Dombagamuwa

Makulpatha

Accused

1

\I

-2-

CA (PHC) Appeal: 03/2013

HC/Nuwara Eliya / HC/NE/48/2012 (Rev)

Magistrate Court of Hatton/57576/6/12

Atapattu Mudiyanselage Sadi Banda

Of Galkotuwa Mawatha

Polgahaweia

And

Atapattu Mudiyanselage Sadi Banda

Of Galkotuwa Mawatha

Polgahaweia

Applicant Petitioner

Vs

Officer-in-Charge

Police Station

Norton Bridge

Complainant _1st Respondent

I

-3-

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo 12

2nd Respondent

And

Atapattu Mudliyanselage Sadi Banda

Of Galkotuwa Mawatha

Polgahawela

Applicant-Petitioner-Appellant

Vs.

Officer-in Charge

Police Station

Norton Bridge

Complainant-1st Respondent

Respondent

The Hon Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo 12.

2nd Respondent-Respondent

.'

-4-

BEFORE A.W.A. SALAM, J.

MAUNIE GUNARATNE, J.

COUNSEL: Athula Perera with

Chathurani de Silva,

FOR THE APPELLANT

Anoopa de Silva, SSC

FOR THE RESPONDENT

Argued on 01.10.2013

Decided on 25.07.2014

Malinie Gunaratne, J.

In this matter Four accused in the Magistrate Court of Hatton,

appeared and pleaded guilty to a charge of illicit transport of timber. The

offence under the Forest Ordinance was, without a permit the

transportation of Eight (08) logs of Tuna timber worth Rupees Eight hundred

and seventy six and cents forty two (Rs.876/42).

/ I ' ! i

.'

-5-

The facts of this appeal were not disputed and it was common

ground that the Norton Bridge Police had instituted proceedings in the

Magistrate Court of Hatton against the four accused for transporting eight

logs of Tuna timber valued at Rs.876/42, on 2012/02/04, without a lawful

permit.

All four accused pleaded guilty, nevertheless the learned Magistrate

convicted only the 1st and the 2nd accused and fined Rs.15,OOO/- each.

In addition to the fine imposed, the learned Magistrate has

proceeded to confiscate the vehicle after an inquiry. Being aggrieved by the

said Order the Petitioner moved the High Court of Nuwara Eliya in revision

but the learned High Court Judge, by his Order dated 14.02.2013, dismissed

the Petition of the Petitioner on the basis that there were no exceptional

circumstances adduced before him. Being aggrieved by the said Order of

the learned High Court Judge the Petitioner has filed the present Petition.

The Petitioner's Counsel contended in this Court that the learned

Magistrate in his Order has accepted the fact that the Appellant did not

have any knowledge about the transporting of timber without a permit.

Further contended in such circumstances confiscation of the lorry is highly

unreasonable and thereby had erred in law.

1

~ j , 4

1 I t I j I

.'

-6-

In the oral and written submissions of the learned Counsel for the

Respondent, it has been stressed that there has in fact been a clear

appreciation of the evidence lead in the Magistrate's Court together with a

clear appreciation of the relevant law. Further submitted that the finding of

the learned Magistrate and the High Court Judge is in fact sound in law.

Further submitted, that in no where in the said inquiry proceedings

find that the Appellant had acted within the requisites of Sec.40. Sec 40(1)

of the Forest Ordinance provides that:

"Provided that in any case the owner of such tools, vehicles,

implements and machines used in the commission of such offence, is a third

party, no order of confiscation shall be made if such owner proves to the

satisfaction of the Court that he had taken all precautions to prevent the use

of such tools, vehicles, implements, cattle and machines as the case may be,

for the commission of the offence".

Hence, it is the position of the Respondent, that the Appellant had

failed to satisfy Court to the effect that he had acted in accordance to the

requisites of Sec. 40 of the Forest Ordinance.

The learned Magistrate has considered the provision laid down in

Sec.40 of the Forest Ordinance as amended and had come to the conclusion

that the Court has a discretion to confiscate the vehicle after an inquiry, on

..

-7-

the basis that the registered owner had not been able to prove that he had

taken all precautions to prevent the use of the vehicle for the commission of

the offence. The learned High Court Judge also has taken the same view

and affirmed the order of the learned Magistrate and dismissed the Revision

Application.

I have to admit that no where in the said inquiry proceedings there is

evidence, that the Appellant had taken all precautions to prevent the

commission of the offence. However, at the inquiry the Appellant has given

evidence and stated, he purchased the lorry on 26/02/2000 and gave it to

his son to transport the tea leaves. Further stated, that he had no

knowledge about transporting timber. The learned Magistrate in his Order

has accepted the fact that the Appellant did not have any knowledge about

the transporting of timber without permit.

Nevertheless the learned Magistrate has confiscated the lorry. I am

of the view, before making the Order of confiscation learned Magistrate

should have taken into consideration, value of the timber transported, no

allegations prior to this incident that the lorry had been used for any illegal

purpose, that the appellant and or the accused are habitual offenders in this

nature and no previous convictions, and the acceptance of the fact that the

-8-

Appellant did not have any knowledge about the transporting of timber

without a permit. On these facts the Court is of the view that the

confiscation of the lorry is not justifiable.

The learned High Court Judge has affirmed the learned Magistrate's

Order and dismissed the Revision Application on the basis that there were

no exceptional circumstances adduced before him.

The revisionary power of Court is a discretionary power. This is an

extraordinary jurisdiction which is exercised by the Court and the grant of

relief is entirely dependent on the discretion of the Court. The grant of such

relief is of course a matter entirely in the discretion of the Court, and always

be dependent on the circumstances of each case. Existence of exceptional

circumstances is the process by which the Court should select the cases in

respect of which the extraordinary power of revision should be adopted.

The exceptional circumstances would vary from case to case and their

degree of exceptionality must be correctly assessed and gauged by Court

taking into consideration all antecedent circumstances using the yardstick

whether a failure of justice would occur unless revisionary powers are

invoked.

In all the above circumstances, I take the view that the learned High

Court Judge has not exercised his revisionary jurisdiction justifiably over the

determination made by the learned Magistrate.

r, I

!

-9-

Taking all these into consideration I set aside the Order of the

learned High Court Judge, dated 14.02.2013 and the Order of the learned

Magistrate dated 12.13.2012.

Appeal is allowed. ~'CZ$~~

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

I agree ~ ..

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

( Ii