"

,

, ~, " IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

CA (Writ) Application

No. 69/2013

In the matter of an application for mandates in the nature of Writs of Certiorari and Mandamus under and in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lank.

A.M. Podihamine,

Ellagama, Diyatalawa.

PETITIONER

1. T.P.A. Hemakumara,

Divisional Secretary,

Haputale.

2. The Commissioner of Land Uwa Province,

Provincial Land Commissioner's Office,

Kachcheri, Badulla.

3. The Commissioner General of Land,

Land Commissioner General's Department,

No.l200/06, Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

RESPONDENTS

And Now between

Ruwan Pathiranage Don Chandrasena,

Wawewatta, Ellagama,

1

BEFORE

COUNSEL

Decided on

Diyatalawa.

INTERVENIENT ~ PETITIONER

A.M. Podiamine,

Ellagama, Diyatalawa.

PETITIONER~RESPONDENT

1. T.P.A. Hemakumara

Divisional Secretary,

Haputale.

2. The Commissioner of Land Uwa Province,

Provincial Land Commissioner's Office,

Kachcheri, Badulla.

3. The Commissioner General of Land,

Land Commissioner General's Department,

No.l200/06, Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

RESPONDENT ~RESPONDENTS

A.H.M.D. Nawaz,J,

Sanath Weerasinghe for the Intervenient/

Petitioner.

W. Dayaratne, PC with D. Dayaratne for the Petitioner/ Respondent.

Yuresha Fernando, SSC for the Respondents.

28.02.2017

2

AoHoMoDo Nawaz, J.

This is an application for intervention made by the Intervenient' Petitioner praying

to be made a Respondent and permitted to file a statement of objections to the main

application before this Court. The main application has been filed by the Petitioner,

Respondent (one A.M. Podihamine) alleging mala fides against the 1st Respondent

(Divisional Secretary, Haputale) and by her amended petition dated 25.03.2013, the

said Podihamine has prayed for;

(i) a writ of certiorari to quash a notice served on her to quit a land depicted as

Lot 782 in final village plan No. 387 and the consequent order by the learned

Magistrate of Bandarawela dated 22.03.2013 to eject her from that land

upon the said quit notice,

(li) a writ of mandamus to compel the lsr, 2nd and 3rd Respondents (Divisional

Secretary, Haputale, The Commissioner of Lands, Uva Province and the

Commissioner General of Lands respectively) to issue a permit for the

Petitioner in respect of the said Lot 782.

The amended petition filed by Podihamine (who has since become the Petitioner,

Respondent to the application for intervention) contains a long narrative of how she

came to possess this land in question ' a land situated in the village of Ella

Aluthwela in the Divisional Secretariat of Haputale in the District of Badulla, which

has been depicted as Lot 782 in the final village Plan No. 387. Podihamine's version is

that she purchased this land from an original permit holder called Juwanis

Appuhamy in 1977 and since then she has been living on the land having constructed

her dwelling and engaged in cultivation and plantation on the land. According to

her amended petition for writs of certiorari and mandamus, she chronicles a long

narrative beginning with the son of the original permit holder one R.P. Gunasekara

making an attempt to evict her from the land when Gunasekera's mother (the

widow of Juwanis Appuhamy) became a permit holder. Thereafter began a history

of litigation between the widow of Juwanis Appuhamy and the Petitioner who is

the vendee of the land in question from Juwanis Appuhamy. The long and short of

3

the main application for judicial review by the Petitioner is that she was served with

a quit notice issued by the tt Respondent that has resulted in the consequent order

of the Magistrate to eject her from the land. Whilst Podihamine~the Petitioner to

the main application~prays that these two orders be quashed by certiorari, she has

also applied for a writ of mandamus to compel the issuance of a permit in her favor

in respect of Lot 782~the land in question.

The principal argument inherent in the tenor of the application for the aforesaid

writs appears to be premised on legitimate expectation of a permit that the

Petitioner Podihamine alleges has been promised to her. On a prima facie case being

made out that the petitioner's ejectment was sought and obtained by the 1st

Respondent whilst the petitioner had entertained a legitimate expectation of a

substantive benefit in the form of a permit, this Court issued a stay order on

05.04.2013 in terms of paragraph "d" of the prayer to the petition, staying all further

proceedings in M.e. Bandarawela Case No. 49528 until the final determination of

the application. This Court observes an appearance of a Counsel for the proposed

Intervenient Petitioner for the first time on the following notice returnable date

namely 06.05.2013. On the date fixed for support of the intervenient petition on

05.08.2013, State Counsel for the Respondents informed Court that the Divisional

Secretary would hold an inquiry in relation to the land in dispute giving an

opportunity to anyone who was having a claim or interest in the subject~matter to

be heard at the inquiry. The learned State Counsel also informed this Court that the

application for writs against the Respondents would not be an impediment to an

appropriate order being made at the conclusion of the proposed inquiry by the

Divisional Secretary. Upon that notification, the Intervenient Petitioner reserved his

right to support his application for intervention on a later date~vide Journal Entry

dated 5/08/2013.

When this matter came up later on 28.01.2014, the learned State Counsel notified

this Court that there was no possibility of a settlement in the matter and moved for

time to file objections on behalf of the Respondents. Since the intervenient petition

4

had not yet been supported by that time, there was an application on the part of the

Petitioner to file a statement of objections to the intervenor's petition and upon the

lodgment of the statement of objections, the Intervenient Petitioner has also filed a

counter objection to the statement of objections of the Petitioner.

Subsequently, the Intervenient Petitioner and Petitioner have both filed written

submissions for and against the grant of intervention. It has to be pinpointed at this

stage that the Respondents to the main application for certiorari and mandamus are

yet to file their statement of objections on the merits of the petitioner's case for

writs of certiorari and mandamus.

When the matter was taken up for inquiry into the application for intervention on

15.05.2015, the Court directed a fresh inquiry to be held into the rival claims put

forward by both the Petitioner Podihamine and the Intervenient Petitioner

Chandrasena with regard to the subject matter in dispute lot No.782.

The Court also ordered an opportunity to be afforded to both parties to lead

evidence on their respective claims and a determination to be made finally with a

view to a recommendation, whether any person would be entitled to a permit which

they claimed.

The decision maker was entitled to exercise his discretion in favour of the Petitioner

or the Intervenient Petitioner in arriving at his conclusions -vide J.E dated

15.05.2015.

When this matter came up again in 28.09.2015, the parties informed court that the

Respondents had not come to a conclusion at the inquiry and they moved that the

inquiry as regards intervention be proceeded with.

The basis for intervention as averred in the intervenient petition dated 18.06.2013 is

that the Intervenient Petitioner is a son of Ruwan Pathiranage Don Juwanis

Appuhamy and R.A. Isabel Perera who were permit holders of portions of lands

which included Lot No. 782 as depicted in final village Plan No. 387.

5

The Intervenient Petitioner being the son of the original permit holders also narrates

the litigation that had long continued between the Petitioner and his mother and he

concedes that the Petitioner's possession of the land in question was affirmed by the

Provincial High Court of Uva Province exercising civil appellate jurisdiction.

Subsequent to the demise of his mother R.A. Isabel Perera who was not the permit

holder at the time of her demise, the Intervenient Petitioner had made a request of

the Respondents that he be issued with a permit in respect of Lot No. 782 and in his

intervenient petition dated 18.06.2013 before this Court, he has also listed a long line

of relevant correspondence marked IP7 ~ IP19. According to the Intervenient

Petitioner, this series of correspondence suggests evidence of the fact that all

necessary steps have been taken to issue him with a permit in respect of the said Lot

No. 782 and he is emphatic that in making the application to this Court, the

Petitioner has suppressed this fact which he alleges is within the knowledge of the

Petitioner.

In the circumstances the Intervenient Petitioner contends that he is vitally

concerned in the matter and therefore he is a necessary party who has not been

cited as a Respondent. According to the Intervenient Petitioner, he needs to

intervene in order to safeguard his rights and interests.

The Petitioner Podihamine has filed a statement of objections to the intervenient

petition and written submissions against the application of the Intervenient

Petitioner (Chandrasena) for intervention. Thus the Petitioner Podihamine joins

issue with Chandrasena on Chandrasena's attempt to become a respondent.

Explaining the list of documents filed by the Intervenient Petitioner namely IP7~

IP19, the Petitioner contends that these documents demonstrate a series of

unconscionable attempts by the Intervenient Petitioner to collaterally attack the

judgment of the Civil Appellate High Court which rejected his mother'S rei vindicatio

action for want of title. In her statement of objections filed by Podihamine, she has

also raised a preliminary objection that the Intervenient Petitioner cannot have and

6

, maintain this application for intervention and it should be dismissed in limine for the

following reasons;

a) The Intervenient Petitioner's application for intervention is barred in law as

the Court of Appeal (Appellate Procedure) Rules of 1990 which set out the

procedure to be followed by the Court in dealing with applications for

prerogative writs do not make provisions for third~party interventions in

such proceedings.

b) The aforesaid legal position has been laid down in unequivocal terms by W.L

Ranjith Silva J. in Weerakoon and Another v. Bandaragama Pradeshiya

Sabawa.1

c) The aforesaid legal position has been uniformly followed by this Court in

refusing applications for intervention in writ applications as evidenced by the

subsequent judgments of the Court in CA. (Writ) 96/2013, CA. minutes

25.02.2014 and C.A. (Writ) 453/2007, CA. minutes of 25.02.2014.

As opposed to the above line of argument put forward by the Petitioner, the

Intervenient Petitioner has su bmitted the following decisions that permitted

interventions.

a) Mahanayaka Thero, Malwatta Vihara v. Registrar~General Association et al,2

b) The Government Dental Therapist Association et al v. George Fernando, Director of Health

Services et al,3

c) Jetwing Hotel Management Services (Pvt) Ltd., v. Securities and Exchange Commission and

Others,4

d) Jayawardena v. Minister of Health and Others.5

1 2012 B.L.R 310. 239 N.L.R 186.

3 CA (Writ) Application 293/09 decided on 2ih July 1994.

4 CA (Writ) Application 293/09 decided on 31st May 2010.

5 CA (Writ) Application 978/2008 decided on 21st May 2009.

7

But for the purposes of this application, the crucial question that needs to be posed

is whether, on the facts and circumstances of this particular case, where the

Petitioner has sought both a writ of certiorari and a writ of mandamus, the

participation and assistance of the intervenor Chandrasena is necessary and

essential in order to adjudicate upon the issues immanent in the two reliefs that the

Petitioner Podihamine has sought.

I am disinclined to think that the presence of the intervenor is necessary for this

purpose. The scope of inquiry in prerogative writs is whether the Respondents have

acted ultra vires or they owe a duty imposed by law. On the facts and circumstances

of this case, I am of the view that the availability of the writs sought could

efficaciously be adjudicated upon without the participation of the Intervenient'

Petitioner. In the circumstances, the application for intervention is rejected.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

8