...

I !

IN THE COUR'T OF APPEAL OF TIlE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A. Case No. 450/2000 (F)

D.C. Colombo Case No. 138S6/MR

Indu Nilmini Urmila Ethapane nee Bodinagoda

No. 17, Don Carolis Mawatha,

Colombo 05.

PLAINTIFF

--Vs--

Nihal Indrajith Ethapane

No. 08, Botheju lwenue,

Colombo 05.

DEFENDANT'

AND NOW

Indu Nilmini Urmila Ethapane nee Bodinagoda

No. 17, Don Car6lis Mawatha,

Colombo 05.

PLAINTIFF--APPELLANT

--Vs--

Nihal IndrajithEthapane

No. 08, Botheju Avenue,

Colombo 05.

DEFENDANT --RESPONDENT

1

BEFORE

COUNSEL

Decided on

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J.

A.H.M.D. Nawaz,j.

Parakrama Agalawatte for the Defendant~ A12pellant.

Athula Bandara Heratl;1 with Madubashini Rajapaksha and Shashika De Silva for the Plaintiff~ Respondent.

12.12.2018

(l) y a plaint dated 9th September 1993 the Plaintiff~Respondent (the Plaintiff~ uJ Respondent, (hereinafter sometimes referred to as "the Plaintiff") sought a

declaration that the purchaser of his land namely Percy Mendis the Defendant~ Appellant

(hereinafter sometimes referred to as "the Defendant") he ordered to pay an outstanding

sum of Rs Four Hundred Thousand (Rs.400,000/ ~ ) and the plaint further averred that at

the time of execution of the deed of sale bearing No 992 on 4th February 1992, the

Defendant (the vendee OI~lthe deed) had paid the Plaintiff (the vendor) only a sum of

Rs. Hundred Thousand (Rs. 100,000/~) out of the purchase price of Rs. five Hundred

Thousand (Rs.SOO,OOO/ ~).

The Defendant filed his amended answer dated 21 July 1994 denying some of the

averments in the plaint and traversed that he had paid the Plaintiff Rs.400,000/~ and the

only amount that was ouqtanding was a sum of Rs. 10Cl,0001-.

Two admissions were mad~ at the trial. The first is an admission of paragraph 2 of the

plaint which recites that the Plaintiff secured rights to the property by a deed bearing

No 20 and which had been executed in Plaintiff's favour on grh October 1990. As it turned

out, this deed was marked at the trial as PI which was a deed of gift executed by a sister

of the Plaintiff. It is the right of the Plaintiff on this deed which was sold by the aforesaid

deed No 992 (P2) to the Defendant.

1 -'

2

The 2nd admission related to the sale of the land described in the schedule to the plaint

for a consideration of Rs 500,000. In other words the fact that the parties agreed to

transact over the land for a consideration of Rs 500,000 was admitted.

Some of the material issues that were framed by the p<J.rties were as follows;

a) Did the Defendant and the Plaintiff agree to enter into the sale of the land

belonging to the Piaintiff on the condition th~t the Defendant would make a

payment of Rs. lOC),OOO/~ initially and thereafter he would make the balance

payment of Rs.400,000r within a period of three months?

b) Was the possession of the land in question handed over to the Defendant upon the

acceptance of a sum of Rs. 100,000/ ~ and on this condition pursuant the deed of

sale bearing No. 992 and executed by Notary Public S.1. Weersuriya?

c) Has the Defendantlfailed to make the balance payment of Rs.400,000/ ~. within

three months from the date of 4th February 1992 (the date of execution of the deed?

d) Was a letter of demand dispatched by the Plaintiff to the Defendant on 13/05/1993

demanding the payment?

e) Has the Defendant failed to make the payment of Rs. 400,000/ ~ even after the letter

of demand?

All these issues have been ;~nswered in the affirmative for the Plaintiff. The material issue

which is significantly rele'tant to the defense of the Defendant appears as issue No lI( {f).

Has the Defendant, as averred in paragraph 5 of the answer mctde a payment of Rs. 400,000;' to the

Plaintiff?

This issue has been ans'~vered by the learned Additional District Judge of Colombo

against the Defendant.

J As the aforesaid issues indicate, the parties were essentially at variance on one material v . " fact - How much out of the total consideration of Rs. 500,000/~, was exchanged at the

time of execution of the deed of sale? Was it only Rs.IOO,OOO/~ as the Plaintiff alleged or

was it Rs. 400,000/~ as the defendant traversed?

3

Ii.

The learned Additional District Judge of Colombo by his judgment dated 19th June 2000

has found for the Plaintiff upholding his case that the Defendant had paid him only Rs

100,000 and the balance sum of Rs 400,000 was yet outstanding from the Defendant.

Thus the learned Additional District Judge of Colombo allowed the claim of the Plaintiff

that Defendant should pay him Rs 400,000 together with interest. It is against this

judgment dated 19.06.2000 that the Defendant has appealed.

The original Plaintiff (thf)vendor on the deed of sale) herself did not give evidence in the

case but her brother Sha1,1tha Shri Mallikaarachchi who was the witness to the deed of

transfer was called to testify on behalf of the Plaintiff. The witness testified to the

Defendant meeting him and suggesting the sale on the conditions that were framed on

the issues as aforesaid namely he would pay Rs. 100,000/- on the day of the execution but

would settle the balance sum of Rs. 400,000 within three months. This was the evidence

of this witness who also testified that it was in conformity with this agreement that the

Defendant paid the Plaintiff Rs 100,000 promising to tender the balance sum of Rs

400,000 within three months from the date of executi?n. Mallikaarachchi who was also

a witness to the deed of ,sale categorically confirmed that a sum of Rs 400,000 was

I '

~>. ", outstanding from the Defendant Appellant and this evidence was not impugned as un

, j.< r creditworthy by the Defence. The fact that the plaintiff did not give evidence does not

detract from the effect of the testimony of Mallikaarachchi as he gave truthful evidence

and there was no serious challenge to his testimonial creditworthiness. In any event no

particular number of witnesses shall in any case be required for the proof of any fact-

Section 134 of the Evidence Ordinance. Evidence has to be made but not counted-see

MuUuwa v State of Ma,dhya Pradesh AiR 1976 S.C 989. Therefore failure to give , evidence on the part of tI-~e Plaintiff does not detract from the probative value one finds

in the evidence of the witnesses.

Notary'S evidence

Shrya Indrani Weerasuriya testified that the execution of the deed No 992 on 04.2.1992

was a genuine transaction and that the consideration mentioned in the deed and the

payment attributed were (all legally transacted. No doubt, the Defendant-Appellant

4

contended that the payment of consideration referred to in the attestation clause of the

notary was untrue in so far as his payment was a sum of Rs.400,000 and his obligation

was only to pay a sum of Rs 100,000.

It has to be noted that at the inception of the trial, the deed bearing No 992 was admitted

and therefore the Defendant~ Appellant cannot be heard to controvert the contents of the

deed. Section 58 of the Evidence Ordinance to makes it clear that the plaintiff's assertion

that only a sum of Rs 100, 000 was paid has been admitted formally and there was no

further burden on the part10f the plaintiff to establish this fact.

Mr. Athula Bandara Herhth relied on section 92 of the Evidence Ordinance which

prohibits the adduction of parol evidence for the plJrpose of contradicting, varying,

adding to, or subtracting from its terms.

Section 92 now contains the law as to the admissibility of parol evidence, when the terms

of any contract, grant, or other disposition of property have been reduced to the form of

a document. In such a cas( it enacts, subject to certain rrovisos, that no evidence of any

oral agreement or statement shall be admitted for the rurpose of contradicting, varying,

adding to, or subtracting from the terms of the docum:-llt.

Proviso (1), however, allows any fact to be proved "which would invalidate any

document, or which would entitle any person tC' any decree or order relating

thereto."(see illustrations (d) and (e).

Proviso (1). Any fact m3)~ be proved which would invalidate any document, or which

would entitle any perSO:;i to any decree or order relating thereto, such as fraud,

intimidation, illegality, wq.nt of due execution, want of capacity in any contracting party,

the fact that it is wrongly dated, want or failure of consideration, or mistake in fact or

law.

This proviso gives the following instances:~

(a) Fraud - S.92 Illustrati~;a (d)

(b) Intimidation. r (c) Illegality.

5

"\

..

(d) Want of due execution. (Prevention of Frauds (}-dinance).

(e)

(f)

tg)

Want of capacity in any contracting party, e,g. minority.

I That fact that it was wrongly dated.

Want or failure of c:Jnsideration.

.\ It is settled law that n~)twithstanding an admission III a deed of sale that the

consideration is stated to have been received, it is open to the vendor to prove that no

consideration has been actually paid, Sha Lal Chand vs. Indrajit, ILR 22 All. 370. Thus,

a consideration different from that recited in the deed can be proved. Ramratan vs.

Ramtapesuwar(1969) Jab J. 164.

However the Defendant Appellant would be hard put{ to rely on this exception as the

contents of the deed hav(~been admitted when issues were sought to be raised-see also

William Fernando v Roslyn Cooray 59 N.LR J69 and Sangarakitta Thero v

Buddharakitta Thero53 N.LR 457.

, Since the deed has not been challenged by the Defendant Appellant, it would not lie in

the mouth of the Defendant to contend that the deed does not represent the true

consideration. Such a contention will offend against the rule that no one can approbate

and reprobate. The deed tl)o was read and explained before execution and the learned

District Judge was quite correct in his assessment anll evaluation of evidence that the

contents of the deed were within the knowledge of the Defendant Appellant.

Upon a consideration of all items of evidence that have been led in this (:ase, I take the

~riew that the learned District Judge of Colombo came to the correct conclusion and I see

no reason to depart from we findings of the original court.

In the circumstances I affirm the judgement dated 19.06.2000 and dismiss the appeal

i with costs

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

. II 6