IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A. Revision N 0.1542/2006 D.c. Mount Lavinia Case No.l489/P

In the matter of an application for Revision and Restiturio in Integrum in terms of Article 138 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Walakada Appuhamilage Dona Chandra Vissanthi,

No.90, Samaja Mawatha,

Maharagama.

PLAINTIFF

~Vs~

1. Walakada Appuhamilage Dona Kusumalatha,

2. Walakada Appuhamilage Swarnalatha,

Both of No.90, Samaja Mawatha,

Maharagama.

3. Hearaluge Magilin Perera (Deceased),

4. Gamage Uparis Perera (Deceased),

Both of No. 321, Highlevel Road,

Makumbura, Pannipitiya.

5. Alhaj Tuwan Aarif Miskin (Deceased),

No. 456/3, Gangodawila,

Nugegoda.

6. P.V. Nevil Dhanarathne (Deceased),

6A. Walakada Appuhamilage Dona Pushparani Dhanaratne,

1

No. 76, S. De S. Jayasinghe Mawatha,

Kalu bowila, Dehiwela.

7. Gamage Wimalasiri Perera,

No. 321, Highlevel Road,

Makumbura, Pannipitiya.

8. Gamage Chithra Kusumalatha Perera,

9. Gamage Sarath Chandrasiri Perera,

10. Gamage Nihal Tilakasiri Perera,

All of No. 321, Highlevel Road,

Makumbura, Pannipitiya.

II. Hajiyani Linda Miskin,

No. 456/3, Gangodawila,

Nugegoda.

DEFENDANT

AND NOW

P. Douglus Jayaweera,

No. 115/80, Andiris Mawatha,

Rattanapitiya, Boralesgamuwa.

PETITIONER

~Vs~

\Valakada Appuhamilage Dona Chandra Vissanthi,

No.90, Samaja Mawatha,

Maharagama.

PLAINTIFF~ RESPONDENT

2

BEFORE

1. Walakada Appuhamilage Dona Kusumalatha,

2. Walakada Appuhamilage Swarnalatha,

Both of No.90, Samaja Mawatha,

Maharagama.

3. Hearaluge Magilin Perera (Deceased),

4. Gamage Uparis Perera (Deceased),

Both of No.321, Highlevel Road,

Makumbura, Pannipitiya.

5. Alhaj Tuwan AarifMiskin (Deceased),

No. 456/3, Gangodawila, Nugegoda

6. P.V. Nevil Dhanarathne (Deceased),

6A. Walakada Appuhamilage Dona Pushparani Dhanaratne,

No. 76, S. De S.Jayasinghe Mawatha,

Kalubowila, Dehiwela.

7. Gamage Wimalasiri Perera,

No. 321, Highlevel Road,

Makumbura, Pannipitiya.

8. Gamage Chithra Kusumalatha Perera,

9. Gamage Sarath Chandrasiri Perera,

10. Gamage Nihal Tilakasiri Perera,

All of No. 321, Highlevel Road,

Makumbura, Pannipitiya.

II. Hajiyani Linda Miskin,

No. 456/3, Gangodawila,

Nugegoda.

DEFENDANT ~ RESPONDENTS

A.H.M.D. Nawaz,j.

3

COUNSEL

Decided on

A.H.~1.D. Nawaz, J.

Gamini Hettiarachchi for the Petitioner

Gamini Marapana, PC with Naveen Marapana for the t\ 8th, 9th and 10th Defendant-Respondents

18.06.2019

The Petitioner has invoked the revisionary jurisdiction and Restitutio in Integrum to

have the interlocutory and final decrees entered in this case set aside. In

consequence of the said decrees, the Petitioner was evicted from the subject-matter of

the partition action on 16.09.2006 and not having been a party to the partition action, the

Petitioner seeks an annulment of the interlocutory decree and final decree on several

grounds among which is the complaint that the learned District Judge of Mount Lavinia in

her judgment dated 30.04.2004 has not investigated the title of parties in a complete and

effect~al manner.

Havir:g supported this application for the extraordinary relief of Revision and Restitutio in

Integmm, the Petitioner obtained an interim order restraining the Plaintiff-Respondent

and the Defendant-Respondents from alienating, selling, leasing, mortgaging or creating

any encumbrances.

All these acts of the Petitioner were called into question by Mr. Gamini Marapana, PC

the learned Counsel for the t\ 8th, 9th and 10th Defendant-Respondents. The learned

President's Counsel contended at the outset that this Court should desist from

exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction of Revision and Restitutio in Integmm owing to

some overriding considerations that are rife in this case. The learned President's Counsel

set out in extenso several non-disclosures that the Petitioner had deliberately sought to

perpetuate and thus he had not come with clean hands to this Court in order to obtain

the notice and interim relief.

The argument of the learned President's Counsel harked back to the words of Pathirana,

J. in Alphonso Appuhamy v. Hettjarachchj (1973) 77 N.LR 131 at page 135:-

4

"I must at this stage observe that had the Petitioner made a full disclosure of all material facts in

the Petition and Affidavit and apprised the Court therwf, this Court may not have issued notice in

the first instance".

In the context of an injunction Pathirana, J. quoted at page 138 of the judgment the

words of \;Vigram V. C. in the case of CasteDi v. Cook (1849) 7 Hare 89 at 94.

"A plaintiff applying ex parte comes (as it has been expressed) under a contract with the Court

that he will state the whole case fully and fairly to the Court. If he fails to do that, and the Court

finds, when the other party applies to dissolve the injunction, that any material fact had been

suppressed or not properly brought forward, the plaintiff is told that the Court will not decide on

the merits, and that, as he has brol?en faith with the Court, the injunction must go."

In other words, so stringent is the requirement for a full and truthful disclosure of all

material facts thc.t the COlrt will not: go into the merits of the application, but will

dismiss it without further examination, once the Court finds that the Petitioner has been

guilty of willful sclppression or misrepresentation of a material fact.

Though Pathirana, J. so e10quently echoed the requirement of full disclosure in the

context of an application for mandamus, this necessity for a candid disclosure also holds

good ~n the two appellate rcmedies~ Revision and Restitutio in Integrum.

The principle is that, "whc1 a party is seeking discretionary rdief ... he enters into a contractual

obligation with the Court when he files an application in the Registry and in terms of that contractual

obligation, he is required to disclose uberrimafides and disclose all material facts fully and frankly to this

Court. .. When the Pctitioner .... hcs been remiss in his duty .... and obligation to Court ... the Court is entitled

to raise the matter III limine and to dismiss the application without investigating into the merits of the

application"~see F.N.D. Jayasuriya, J. in Blanca Diamonds (Pvt) Ltd v. Wilfred Van Els

(1997) 1 Sri L.R 360, 362~ 3. A part of this dictum of Jayasuriya, J. was cited and followed

by Marsoof,J. in Dahanayake v. Sti Lanka Insurance Corporation Ltd, (2005) 1 Sri L.R

67, 79; see also Fernando v. Ranaweera, Secretary of Ministry of Cultural and

Religious Affairs (2002) 1 Sri L.R 327, 334~5, where the Supreme Court referred to the

prindple in dismissing an application made under Article 126(2) of the Constitution for

the alleged violation of the petitioner's Fundamental Right under Article 12(1).

So what are those non<l.isclosures that would disentitle this Petitioner to the

extraordinary remedies of this Court-namely Revision and Restitutio in Integrum? Germane

to this question is the relevant background to this litigation.

The ft Partition Action

InitiaiJy an interlocutory decree and final decree had been entered in respect of a part of

the corpus--the part being called T algahawattc in the District Court of Mount Lavinia in

Case No.1489/P. The Plaintiff--Respondent and the l't and 2ml Defendant-Respondents

filed this partition action in respect of a portion called T algahawatte and were indeed

successful in obtaining the partition decrees, which the learned President's Counsel was

quick to pinpoint and class::Jy as fraudulent and illusory, obtained behind the back of one

Andy Perera-the real owner of the corpus. Andy Perera's children petitioned the Court of

Appeal in Revision and Restitutio in Integrum complaining that they had no notice of the

institution of the action or of the proceedings. A.c. Gooneratne Q.c. for the Respondents

conceded before S.N. Silva, J. and D.P.S Goonesekara, J. on 15.03.1993 that the Petitioners

should have been made parties and issued with notice.

Accordingly, the interlocLtory decree dated 25.07.1986 and the final decree dated

27.100[986 were both set aside and the Court of Appeal directed the District Court of

Mount Lavinia to permit the petitioners (Andy Perera's Children) to intervene in the

action and nIe a statement of claim. In other words, a trial de novo was ordered.

Mr. Gamini Marapana, PC pointed out that if the Petitioner had any claim in Talgahawatte

which was collusively partitioned in the abortive trial, he must have intervened in the

action but the Pe':itioner chose not to do so.

There was indeed an ongoing litigation around this time in the same Court where one

Mrs. J-Iaajiani Linda Miskin was suing the Petitioner for ejectment from T algahawatte on

the basis that the Petitioner had become an overholding lessee. I will presently turn to

6

this litigation as the facts pertaining to the case and the answer filed by the Petitioner in

that cases are quite germane to this application for Revision and Restitutio in Integrum.

I will once again focus on ""hat happened to the first partition suit. I adverted to the fact

that Andy Perera's childrei1 were ordered by this Court to be added to this partition

action in the tried de novo. After the case was sent back to the District Court of Mount

Lavinia for a trial de novo, Gamage Wimalasiri Perera (the son of the owner of the corpus

Andy Perera) filed his statement of claim and took up the position that the Plaintiff who

had filed this abortive partition action and the 1st , 2nd, 5th and 6th Defendants had no right

or claim in the land. He pO'llted out that Kongahawatte~the contiguous land must also be

brought into the partition action and that the larger land comprising the two contiguous

lands called Kongahawatte and T algahawatte formed the corpus for the trial de novo.

The s.lid Gamage Wimalasiri Perera (the son of the owner Andy Perera) became the th

Defendant in the trial de 1101'0. His siblings became the 8th , 9th and 10th Defendants. At the

trial d~~ novo, the su bstituted Plaintiff gave evidence and the matter \vas settled among the

parties. Interlocutory and final decrees were entered and a writ \vas issued after the

Petitioner was served 'Aith notice and the Petitioner was ejected on 16.09.2006.

In Ocrober 2006, the Petitioner filed this application for Revision and Restitutio in Integrum

seeking an annucment of both the interlocutory and final decrees. In this application

before this Court, the Petitioner states that he had been in occupation of "Kongahawatte"

in Gangodawila for more than thirty years and had thus acquired prescriptive title to the

property.

But despite this assertion taken up rather belatedly for the Lrst time in the petition

before this Court, he states that he was not made a party even at the trial de novo. As I said

before, his complaint is tha;:: he was never noticed of either the abortive trial wherein the

Court of Appeal set aside Ue decrees or the trial de novo which [Ook place subsequently.

He complains then he was v/rongly ejected from Kongahawatte and no investigation of title

has taken place. As I said, I find a reference to prescriptive title for the first time only in

7"

the instant case though he had an opportunity to stake this claim in the case filed against

him by Haajiani linda Miskin whose name appears as the 11th Respondent in this

application.

I mus': state that this claim of a prescriptive title appears to be an afterthought. Let me go

back to the litigation where Haajiani linda Miskin sued him in the District Court of

Mount Lavinia Case No.l410/01/Land for ejectment on the basis that she had leased the

land namely a portion of the land T algahawattc where the garage run by the Petitioner had

stood According to her plaint dated 06.02.2001 in the District Court of Mount Lavinia

Case No.1410/01/Land, she averred that she had let the Petitioner a portion of Talgagawatte

on lease which terminated on 01.07.1999. ln other words, Mrs. Miskin who claimed

owne:ship on a deed over t'1is portion of T algahawatte, sought to eject the Petitioner from

the land for unlawful possession and non~payment of rent. In other words the status of

Priyankarage Douglas Jayaweera (the Petitioner) was admittedly a lessee under Mrs.

Miskin.

In the answer filed by this Petitioner on 23.04.2001, no assertion of prescriptive title \vas

made by him. Ewn though the character of the litigation was one between a lessor and

an overholding lessee, it do;:s not preclude the Petitioner from having pleaded a superior

title such as prescription. On the contrary, the Petitioner admitted the title of Andy

Perera (the father of the nih Defendant~Respondent in this application) and stated

further that the said Andy Perera had given his brother, one Jayaweera, leave and license

to operate a garage somevvhere in 1956 and the Petitioner began to help his brother as a

factotum or a harodyman in the running of the garage.

After the brother had left the place for a job in 1966, the Petitioner averred in his answer

that he had been on a lease ;.n the premises and he sought the relief of a monthly tenant in

his cross claim.

So here was a person who was seeking the status of a tenant. He also alleged that he was

a bonafide occupier who was entitled to compensation for improvements.

8

These assertions made to the District Court in 2001 are certainly inconsistent with a plea

of prescription and quite consistent with a subordinate character or dependent title.

The admissions made by the Petitioner in the answer filed by him in 2001 would operate

as estoppel and these admissions would bind the Petitioner-see Section 17(1) of the

Evidence Ordinance.

This admission that he wa~; on a portion of Talgahawatte as a lessee of Mrs. Miskin is an

acknowledgment that he was staying in the land on a dependent title and his possession

was not ut dominus at all. When he claims as a lessee or a tenant, by necessary implication

this is an admission that he is not an owner.

The a6sence of any plea of prescription from the answer dated 06.02.2001 and filed in the

District Court of Mount Lavinia Case No.l410/01/land quite conclusively establishes this

fact and even under Section 18(3)(a) of the Evidence Ordinance this statement made in

the answer will bind him as a statement made against his proprietary interest.

In the course of the argument of this application in this Court a poser was put to the

Counsel for the Petitioner as to what right the Petitioner had in the land and the

constant response was that it is the prescriptive title of the Petitioner that gives him

proprietary interest in the property.

From the above, it is quite dear that the admission of a subordinate or a dependent title

debunks the so-called prop.C"ietary interest of the Petitioner. There are other factors in the

answer filed by the Petitioner that militate against the assertion of title in the land. In the

aforesaid answer, the Petir,oner also claimed compensation as a bona fide occupier. An

assertion of a claim for compensation qua a bona fide occupier would go contrary to an

assertion of prescriptive title or title per se. Moreover, the Petitioner claimed statutory

tenan~:y under Mrs. Miskir: and since Miskin got no rights under the decrees that were

entered in the trial de novo, the Petitioner could not have an enforceable interest in the

land. All these factors show that the Petitioner has no title in the land. One could observe

the Petitioner claiming tenancy rights under persons who did not get soil rights under

9

the decrees. Therefore, it would be preposterous for the Petitioner to seek to attack the

decrees in this case by way of this Revisionary application.

Mr. Camini Marapana, PC submitted that he would treat the admissions made in the

answer more as non-disclosures for the purposes of this application. As the learned

President's Counsel submitted, there is barely a murmur in this petition about this

previous District Court case filed against him. As the answer filed by him in that case

revealed the true nature of his interest in the land, a non-disclosure of that case would

amount to a willful suppression of a material fact. As to what are "material facts", see

Atukorale, J. in Hotel Galaxy (Pvt) Ltd v. AlercantHe Hotels Management Ltd (1987)

I Sri LR 5,35-36.

If the title of Andy Perera is admitted in paragraph 3 of the answer and the Petitioner's

broth::r had been a license:: of Andy Perera, he would have had no right to claim as a

statutory tenant and he does not explain as to how he paid rent to one Saibudeen, if

Andy Perera was the owner of these premises. None of these matters that were brought

to the notice of the District Court in 2001, were ever brought to the notice of this Court

in 2006 when this Petitioner made this application to this Court. [n the Petition dated

13.10.2006 for Revision and Restitutio in Integrum, the Petitioner states that he had been in

occupation of Kongahawatta but in the case filed against him by Mrs. Miskin, he was sued

for ejectment from T algahawatte. A question was posed in the course of the argument as to

how this Petitiorcer shifted from T algahawattCl to Kongahawatta which is a contiguous land

of T algahawatte. There was no satisfactory response to this looming question given in the

petition nor submissions.

In these circumstances, there is strong merit in the argument of the learned President's

Coumd that there has been gross non-disclosure before this Court. It has to he

remembered that in the trill de novo, hoth Kongahawatte and T algahawatte constituted the

corpus for partition and I am of the firm view that the Petitioner does not enjoy sufficient

locus standi to invl)ke the jurisdiction of this Court for Revision and Restitutio in Integrum.

The non-disclosure becomes more pronounced in light of the fact that nobody knows as

10

to who the landlord of this Petitioner would be, if he was claiming tenancy rights. In any

event, the irregularities that he complains of in the petition such as the absence of his

name from a Section 12 declaration cannot be agitated since Section 12 declaration would

not be expected to contain the name of a tenant.

From the foregoing, it is 8S plain as a pikestaff that this Petitioner who has no title

whatsoever to this land docs not demonstrate any exceptional circumstances that would

entitle him to invoke the ___ evisionary jurisdiction of this Court. By having obtained a

notice and an interim order on suppression of material facts the Petitioner has sought to

frustrate the enjoyment of [he fruits of the interlocutory and final decrees and it would

be an abuse of process of this Court to permit this state of affairs to be perpetuated with

impunity.

In the circumstances this Court deems it condign to dismiss this application in limine.

Accordingly, I uphold the preliminary objection raised by the learned President's

Coun:;e} and dismiss this application.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

11