IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal in

terms of Section 331(1) of the

Code of Criminal Procedure Act,

No.15 of 1979 read with Article

138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of

Sri Lanka.

Hon. Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

C.A. Case No. HCC/344/19 Complainant

High Court of Colombo Vs.

Case No. 327/2018

Kussiyage Susantha

Priyajanaka Costa,

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Kussiyage Susantha

Priyajanaka Costa,

Accused Appellant

Vs.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Complainant-Respondent

2

BEFORE : K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J (P/CA)

WICKUM A. KALUARACHCHI, J

COUNSEL : Neranjan Jayasinghe with Harshana Ananda for

the Accused-Appellant

Dilan Ratnayake SDSG for the Respondent

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS

TENDERED ON : 10.06.2022 (On behalf of the Accused-Appellant)

27.06.2022 (On behalf of the Respondent)

ARGUED ON : 21.10.2022

DECIDED ON : 23.11.2022

WICKUM A. KALUARACHCHI, J.

The accused-appellant was indicted in the High Court of Colombo on

two counts of possession of 9.06 grams of heroin and trafficking of

9.06 grams of heroin. After the trial, the appellant was convicted of

both counts and sentenced to death. This is a case where the learned

High Court Judge who wrote the judgment heard the entire evidence

in the case.

The learned Counsel for the appellant and the learned Senior Deputy

Solicitor General for the respondent made oral submissions at the

hearing of this appeal. Prior to the hearing, written submissions have

been filed on behalf of both parties.

In this case, after conducting a raid based on information received, the

accused-appellant was arrested. PW-1, IP Samarathunga led the raid

3

but his evidence was not led in the trial, as he had vacated his post

and left the island. Accordingly, the evidence of PW-3 and PW-2 was

led regarding the raid.

According to the prosecution, the raiding team went to

Obeysekarapura for this raid on information received. The appellant

was waiting in front of the house of one Renuka. They searched him

and found a parcel of heroin in the right-side trouser pocket. The

appellant was then arrested.

After the prosecution case, the appellant made an unsworn statement

from the dock. In addition, two witnesses were called on behalf of the

appellant. In brief, the defence version is as follows: There was

animosity between IP Samarathunga and the said woman, Renuka,

for making complaints against IP Samarathunga to the police

headquarters and the Human Rights Commission. Hence, they went

to Obeysekarapura to arrest Renuka. First, they arrested two

defence witnesses for possession of heroin, and then they arrested the

appellant, the son of Renuka since she could not be found. The

appellant and two defence witnesses stated that none of them were in

possession of heroin at the time of the arrest.

The learned counsel for the appellant advanced his arguments on the

following two grounds:

1. The learned High Court Judge has failed to take into

consideration vital contradictions between PW-3 and PW-2 and

thereby arrived at a wrong conclusion that the evidence of

PW-3 and PW-2 is cogent.

2. The evidence of the defence had been rejected on unreasonable

grounds.

4

The first ground of appeal

The learned counsel for the appellant contended that, according to

PW-3, the information received by PW-1 before leaving the police

station was that a person was waiting with heroin in front of the house

of Renuka in Obeysekarapura, Rajagiriya. However, according to

PW-2, the information was that the son of Renuka in

Bandaranayakapura was waiting with heroin in front of her house.

Also, the learned counsel pointed out that, according to PW-3, they got

to know that the appellant was the son of Renuka only after the

appellant was taken into custody. However, according to PW-2, before

they left the police station, they knew that they were going to take into

custody the son of Renuka. Apart from that, the learned counsel for

the appellant contended that, according to PW-2, they got to know

before leaving the police station that the appellant was wearing a white

T-shirt and black trousers. However, according to PW-3, the

description regarding the appellants clothes had been received by a

telephone call when they reached Borella after receiving the

information.

I agree with the learned counsel for the appellant that the

aforementioned discrepancies between PW-3's evidence and PW-2's

evidence in respect of the information appear to exist. When these

discrepancies existed, the learned High Court Judge stated in his

judgment that there were no discrepancies or contradictions between

PW-3's and PW-2's evidence, which is an incorrect observation

according to my view.

This court should now decide whether the aforementioned

discrepancies and the learned High Court Judge's observation affect

the final decision in this case. The learned Senior Deputy Solicitor

General contended that these are minor discrepancies and that the

5

subsequent incidents demonstrate that the information received is

correct.

When considering the aforesaid discrepancies, it is apparent that all of

these discrepancies are related to the information received. The

argument of the learned counsel for the appellant was that these

discrepancies regarding the information occurred because they did not

receive information about the appellant and the raiding team went to

arrest Renuka. If these police officers went to arrest Renuka but

instead arrested the appellant, Renuka's son, because she was not

there, and wanted to pretend that they arrested the appellant based on

information received, the police officers attached to the same police

station could make entries to that effect and give evidence without any

discrepancy. Therefore, it is difficult to agree with the contention that

these discrepancies occurred as there was no such information.

In the case of Sunil vs. The Attorney General (1999) 3 Sri LR 191, it

was observed that the Court must not be unmindful of the fact that

they are human witnesses and it is a hallmark of human testimony

that such evidence is replete with mistakes, inaccuracies, and

misstatements. Also, it is stated in this judgment that the court has to

be equally mindful of the fact that the evidence tendered by human

testimony will suffer from certain deficiencies and defects. It is in this

light that Justice Cannon in Attorney General v. Visuavalingam (47

NLR 286) emphasized that no prudent and wise Judge would disregard

testimony for the mere proof a contradiction but that a wise Judge

should critically assess and evaluate the contradiction. He emphasized

the Judge must give his mind to the issues what contradictions are

material in discrediting the testimony of a witness.

In considering the facts and circumstances of the instant action with

the substance of the aforesaid judicial authority, I agree with the

contention of the learned SDSG that the aforesaid discrepancies

6

relating to the information received are not vital discrepancies that go

to the root of the case.

The second ground of appeal

The vital issue to be considered in this appeal is the two different

versions in respect of the raid, presented by the prosecution and

defence, and not the discrepancies regarding the information received.

In dealing with that issue, it has to be considered whether defence

evidence has been rejected on unreasonable grounds, as contended by

the learned counsel for the appellant.

The learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General for the respondent

contended that the learned High Court Judge had carefully considered

the dock statement and the evidence of defence witnesses and

correctly rejected the same as the defence version was improbable.

It is needless to state that when a criminal case is determined, the

evidence of the defence should be considered in the same manner as

the evidence of the prosecution. The Supreme Court of India, held in

the case of Dudh Nath Pandey vs The State Of U.P, decided on 11th

February 1981, reported in 1981 AIR 911, 1981 SCR (2) 771 that

defence witnesses are entitled to equal treatment with those of the

prosecution. And, Courts ought to overcome their traditional,

instinctive disbelief in defence witnesses. Quite often, they tell lies but

so do the prosecution witnesses.

The basis of the defence case was that since Renuka had complained

to the Police Headquarters and the Human Rights Commission against

IP Samarathunga, the raiding team wanted Renuka to be taken into

custody. Since the said attempt failed, the appellant was arrested,

according to the defence version. To examine whether there is any

acceptability in the said basic premise of the defence, Renuka has

7

not given evidence and stated that she made such complaints, and as

a result, IP Samarathunga had animosity with her. So-called

animosity is merely a suggestion made on behalf of the appellant.

Therefore, the basic premise of the defense has not been presented in

a plausible manner. This matter was considered not because the

appellant had a burden of proving anything. It is sufficient for the

appellant to create reasonable doubt on the prosecution case.

However, there must be an acceptable basis in the defence version in

order to create reasonable doubt on the prosecution case.

Furthermore, the two defence witnesses stated in their testimony that

they were arrested for no reason, and the defence version was that the

appellant was also arrested with them for no reason when they were

at Bandaranayakapura. However, it transpired in the cross-

examination that both defence witnesses had pleaded guilty for

possession of heroin when they were at Meethotamulla. Although

they have given explanations like they pleaded guilty on the advice of

their lawyer, it is a fact that they themselves had pleaded guilty to the

heroin cases against them and were convicted. Now they cannot come

to this court and say that they were arrested with the appellant when

nothing was possessed by them. They also cannot say that they were

arrested when they were at Bandaranayakapura because they

pleaded guilty to possessing heroin when they were at

Meethotamulla. Furthermore, when DW-3 was cross-examined in

this case, a contradictory portion of his statement made to the police

in the said heroin case, "When I arrived, some police officers suddenly

came near the "Meethotamulla" bus station, surrounded me, and

searched me," had been marked as X-5. Hence, the defence story that

three of them were arrested at Bandaranayakapura for no reason

appears to be improbable. Considering the said circumstances, I am

of the view that the learned High Court Judge has correctly rejected

the defence witnesses evidence.

8

As stated above, the prosecution version was not that all three were

arrested at Bandaranayakapura but the two defence witnesses were

arrested at Meethotamulla. While the prosecution presented this

evidence, the learned High Court Judge carefully observed in his

judgment how the defence witnesses attempted to demonstrate

initially that they knew nothing about "Meethotamulla."

In perusing the judgment of the learned High Court Judge, it is

apparent that the learned Judge has carefully considered the

prosecution evidence as well as the defence evidence. Only after

careful analysis of the evidence, the learned High Court Judge

correctly rejected the defence evidence. Therefore, I regret that I am

unable to accept the second ground of appeal that the evidence of the

defence has been rejected on unreasonable grounds.

Finally, it should be mentioned that in Oliver Dayananda Kalansuriya

alias Raja V. The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka C.A.

28/2009, Decided on 13.02.2013, it was held that It is an accepted

principle that a criminal case cannot be proved with a mathematical

accuracy as it has to be proved by the evidence given by human

witnesses. Thus, discrepancies, errors and contradictions are bound

to occur. If they do not create a reasonable doubt in the prosecution

case, Court should disregard them. Courts should not reject evidence

of witnesses on the basis of minor discrepancies and contradictions.

The Learned High Court Judge had correctly analyzed the evidence

relating to the raid. Reasons are sufficiently given for the findings.

Although, the aforesaid discrepancies relating to the information were

not considered and analyzed by the learned High Court Judge, those

discrepancies have no impact on the final decision of the case, for the

reasons stated above.

9

In the circumstances, I find no reason to interfere with the judgment

of the learned High Court Judge. Accordingly, the judgment dated

30.10.2019, the convictions and sentences are affirmed.

The appeal is dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K. Priyantha Fernando, J (P/CA)

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL