CA/HCC/434/19

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal Case No.

CA/HCC/ 0434/2019 Mohamed Rasheed Nazeera

High Court of Colombo

Case No. HC/7811//2015

Accused-Appellant

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

Complainant-Respondent

BEFORE : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

P. Kumararatnam, J.

COUNSEL : Rushdie Habeeb with Waseemul Akram and

A. Perera for the Appellant.

Suharshi Herath, DSG for the Respondent.

CA/HCC/434/19

2 | P a g e

ARGUED ON : 11/09/2024

DECIDED ON : 02/12/2024

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) was indicted by the Attorney General under Sections 54(A) (b) and

54(A) (d) of the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs Ordinance as amended

by Act No. 13 of 1984 for trafficking and possession respectively of 5.58

grams of Heroin on 25th June 2014 in the High Court of Colombo.

The Prosecution had called eight (8) witnesses in support of their case and

marked productions X1-X9 and Y and Y1 and had closed the case. When the

defence was called, the Appellant only made a statement from the dock.

After the trial, the Appellant was found guilty on the 2nd count and the

learned High Court Judge of Colombo had sentenced her to life

imprisonment on 01.03.2019. She was acquitted from the 1st count by the

learned High Court Judge.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

CA/HCC/434/19

3 | P a g e

The learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the Appellant

has given consent to argue this matter in her absence. During the argument

she was connected via zoom from prison.

On behalf of the Appellant the following Grounds of Appeal are raised.

1. The prosecution has failed to prove the charge beyond reasonable

doubt.

2. The variation in the quantity of the production goes to the root of

the case as the prosecution had failed to prove the chain of custody

beyond reasonable doubt.

3. The dock statement was not considered in light of the decided

cases.

Background of the case albeit briefly is as follows:

On 25/06/2014 IP Chandana attached to the Colombo Crime Division had

received information from one of his informants that the Appellant being the

mother-in-law of a lady called Nilanthi is attempting to traffic drugs. After

performing all formalities PW1 with nine (9) other police officers including a

female police officer had set off from the Bureau at 12.35 hours in a van.

Except PW1 the others were clad in civil attire and PW4, PS 33936 Bandara

had carried the sealing equipment. As per the information the police party

had gone to Stacepura, which is situated in Grandpass Police area. They had

parked the vehicle on the main road close to a fruit stall and entered

Stacepura through a by road. PW1 had assigned two police officers to look

after the vehicle. As they proceeded to Stacepura they had observed a lady

wearing a frock (her appearance had tallied with the description given by the

informant) walking towards them. After seeing him (PW1) with the others,

the lady had turned back and walked away in the opposite direction. PW1

had quickly rushed to her and had directed the lady police officer PW9 WPC

CA/HCC/434/19

4 | P a g e

8041 Anusha to check the Appellant. PW9 had uncovered a parcel from the

right-side pocket of her frock. When PW1 examined the parcel, he had found

some brown coloured powder in it. As the substance in the parcel reacted for

Heroin, the Appellant was arrested at 13:15 hours, and the production had

been sealed in front of the Appellant.

Thereafter, PW1 along with some other police officers including the woman

police constable had gone to the Dadigama Jewellery Store to weigh the

production. The substance weighed to be 25.110 grams. The production was

handed over to the reserve police officer of the Colombo Crime Division, PC

41295 Ranatunga under PR No. 121/2014.

PW3, WPC 8041 Anusha was called to corroborate the evidence given by

PW1.

After the conclusion of the prosecution case, the defence was called, and the

Appellant opted to make a statement from the dock. She admitted the arrest

but denied the recovery of any illegal substance from her possession on that

date.

Under the first ground of appeal, the learned Counsel for the Appellant

strenuously argued that this is not a genuine raid as claimed by the

Prosecution.

According to PW1 his informant had only said that the mother-in-law of one

Nilanthi is about to attempt to traffic Heroin. He admitted that he did not

enquire about the whereabouts of the Appellant or about the location of her

house. The Prosecution witnesses never mentioned that the Appellant was

residing in Nilanthis house or that she was living in Stacepura. According to

the prosecution witnesses the Appellant was searched and arrested at

Stacepura Road, Colombo-14. But in the cross examination PW1 admitted

that he did not enquire from his informant as to the whereabouts of the

Appellant nor her residence. The relevant portion is re-produced below:

CA/HCC/434/19

5 | P a g e

Page 92-93 of the brief.

m% ( ks,ka;s hk ;eke;a;shf.a kekaoud jk kiSrd u;a jH /f.k hdug iQodk

jkjd' talfk uy;auhdg ,enqKq f;dr;=r @

ms ( tfyuhs'

m% ( b;ska uy;auhd kslkaj;a Th f;dr;=r fok ukqiaihdf.ka weyqjo fldfya b`oka

fldfyago fjd wrf.k hkafka lsh,d @

ms ( keye' uu tfyu wykak .sfha keye'

m% ( tfyu wykak uy;auhdg wjYH;djhla jqfKa kE @

ms ( keye iajdKS' ta ia;rh lsh, rl:kh ikaos lrd'

This clearly shows that PW1 was not aware as to the residence of the

Appellant before he left from the CCD. But he had gone to Nilanthis house

to arrest the Appellant. In my view this casts a serious doubt about the

method of execution of the raid.

In the second ground of appeal the Counsel for the Appellant contended that

the variation in the quantity of the production goes to the root of the case as

the prosecution had failed to prove the chain of custody beyond reasonable

doubt.

In every criminal case, the burden is on the prosecution to prove the case

beyond reasonable doubt against the accused person. In cases of this nature

the prosecution not only need to prove the case beyond reasonable doubt but

also ensure, with cogent evidence that the inward journey of the production

has not been disturbed at all-material points.

CA/HCC/434/19

6 | P a g e

In the case of Mohamed Nimnaz V. Attorney General CA/95/94 held:

A criminal case has to be proved beyond reasonable doubt. Although we

take serious view in regard to offences relation to drugs, we are of the view

that the prosecutor should not be given a second chance to fill the gaps of

badly handled prosecutions where the identity of the good analysis for

examination has to be proved beyond reasonable doubt. A prosecutor

should take pains to ensure that the chain of events pertaining to the

productions that had been taken charge from the Appellant from the time

it was taken into custody to the time it reaches the Government Analyst

and comes back to the court should be established.

In Perera V. Attorney General [1998] 1 Sri.L.R 378 it was held:

the most important journey is the inward journey because the final

analyst report will depend on that.

In Witharana Doli Nona v. The Republic of Sri Lanka CA/19/99 His

Lordship Justice Abrew remarked thus;

It is a recognized principle that in drug related cases the prosecution

must prove the chain relating to the inward journey. The purpose of this

principle is to establish that the productions have not been tampered

with. Prosecution must prove that the productions taken from the

accused Appellant was examined by the Government Analyst

Therefore, proving the chain of custody is a very important task for the

prosecution. If investigating officers do not do their duty properly, the chain

of custody can be successfully challenged at the trial. This is because the

prosecution always relies on evidence gathered by police officers in cases of

this nature. Just because the law enforcement found drugs on an accused,

it does not mean that he can be convicted.

CA/HCC/434/19

7 | P a g e

According to PW1 the substance recovered from the Appellant weighed about

25.110 grams. The production was properly entered in the production

register and dispatched to the Government Analyst Department. But the

Government Analyst weighed the production at 24.74 grams which is 1.36

grams less than the original weight. Comparing with the net weight 5.58

grams of Heroin, the discrepancy is very much notable in this case. This

cannot be simply disregarded without any plausible explanation. But the

prosecution was unable to explain the discrepancy in the weight of the

production that was evident in their evidence.

The prosecution has the paramount duty to prove that it is the same

production recovered at the time of detection which has reached the

Government Analyst. The main reason is to establish that the evidence,

which is related to the alleged crime, was collected from the accused and was

in its original condition rather than having been tempered with or planted

deceitfully to make someone else guilty. Handling of production evidence is

a lengthy process but the court necessitates it for the proper adjudication of

causes related to drugs cases. This proves the integrity of the production

which had been recovered from the accused has been preserved until it

reaches the Government Analyst Department.

Naturally, the Defence can challenge the chain of custody evidence by

questioning whether the evidence presented at trial is the same evidence as

what was collected from the accused person.

The Appellant takes up the position that the amount of Heroin which had

been mentioned in the indictment was not recovered from her. But she

admits that she was arrested on the date mentioned in the indictment at her

residence.

In this regard, the learned High Court Judge in his judgment had not made

any comments about a discrepancy in weight in the given case. In the

absence of any comment regarding this particular point; no doubt, the

CA/HCC/434/19

8 | P a g e

Appellant had not been afforded a fair trial. Thereby this has caused great

prejudice to her.

In the final ground of appeal, the Counsel for the Appellant contended that

the dock statement of the Appellant was not properly considered by the

learned High Court Judge. Even though the dock statement of an accused

has less evidential value our courts never hesitated to accept the same when

it creates a doubt on the prosecution case. In this case I consider it is very

important to consider the dock statement of the Appellant.

In Don Samantha Jude Anthony Jayamaha v. The Attorney General

CA/303/2006 decided on 11/07/2012 the court held that:

Whether the evidence of the defence or the dock statement is sufficient

to create a doubt cannot be decided in a vacuum or in isolation because

it needs to be considered in the totality of the evidence that is in the light

of the evidence for the prosecution as well as the defence.

In Kathubdeen v. Republic of Sri Lanka [1998] 3 SLR 107 the court held

that:

It is settled law that an unsworn statement must be treated as

evidence. It has also been laid down that if the unsworn statement

creates a reasonable doubt in the prosecution case or if it is believed,

then the accused should be given the benefit of that doubt.

The position of the Appellant in the present case was that she was not

arrested on the road but was arrested at her residence. In this case PW1 had

admitted that he had gone to Stacepura without knowing the location of the

Appellants movement. Further PW1 had admitted that he only knew the

address of Nilanthis house. Hence, the stance taken by the Appellant in her

dock statement creates very serious doubt over the prosecution case.

CA/HCC/434/19

9 | P a g e

As the appeal grounds raised by the Appellant have merit, I set aside the

conviction and the sentence dated 01/03/2019 imposed on the Appellant by

the learned High Court Judge of Colombo. Therefore, I acquit her from the

second charge.

Accordingly, the appeal is allowed.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgment to the High

Court of Colombo along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

SAMPATH B. ABAYAKOON, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL