IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Ceylinco Leasing Corporation

Limited.,

No. 97, Hyde Park Corner,

Colombo 2.

Presently at

No. 283, R.A. de Mel Mawatha,

Colombo 3.

Petitioner

CA CASE NO: CA/RI/297/2011

DC KURUNEGALA NO: 11412/M

Vs.

K.M.C. Wijewardena,

No. 41/1,

Andagala Road,

Kurunagala.

Respondent

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Palitha Kumarasinghe, P.C., with Asanka Ranwala

for the Petitioner.

Jecob Joseph for the Respondent.

Decided on: 24.01.2019

2

Samayawardhena, J.

The petitioner filed this application by petition dated 06.07.2011

for restitutio in integrum seeking to issue an order for restitution

directing the respondent to return the sum of Rs. 254,807/= he

had obtained in an illegal and unlawful manner. In addition to

costs, this is the only relief sought by the petitioner in the prayer

to the petition.

When this matter came up before me for the first time, parties

agreed to dispose of the argument by way written submissions.

According to the petition, when the petitioner came before this

Court the same order had been made by the District Court of

Kurunagala (vide X7) upon the application made to the District

Court by the petitioner (vide X5) seeking the same relief.

The petitioner has filed this application before this Court

because (according to the petition) the respondent had filed an

appeal against that order of the District Court to the Provincial

High Court of the North Western Province, and in the event of

Provincial High Court of North Western Province set aside the

order of the District Court of Kurunagala, irremediable loss and

damage would be caused to the petitioner!

It is abundantly clear that this application of the petitioner is

clearly misconceived in law and absolutely devoid of merit.

When the District Court has already made an order in favour of

the petitioner, the petitioner Company need not and cannot file

this application in this Court seeking the same relief using an

additional word restitution. There is no magic in the word

3

restitution. It appears to me that the petitioner Company has

filed this application to harass the respondent.

In the written submissions, the petitioner has informed Court

that the Provincial High Court has now dismissed the appeal of

the respondent.

The application of the petitioner is dismissed with costs.

As agreed on 25.06.2018, the parties in CA/RI/293, CA/RI/298,

CA/RI/299, CA/RI/300, CA/RI/301 will abide by this

Judgment.

Judge of the Court of Appeal