IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

C.A.N 0.209-210/2006

H.C. Colombo No.B1457/2004

In the matter of an Appeal against

the judgment/ order of the High

Court of Colombo under Section 331

of the Code of Criminal Procedure

Act No.15/1979 read with Section

138 of the Constitution.

1. Visinchi Baduge Palitha Jayaratne.

2. Mapa Musiyanselage Nalaka Mihira

Bandara.

Accused-Appellants

Vs.

Commission to investigate

Allegations of Bribery or Corruption,

No.36, Malalasekera Mawatha,

Colombo 07

Respondent

***********

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

DECIDED ON

DEEP ALI WIJESUNDERA, J.

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

Ani! Silva P. C. for the 1st Accused -Appellant.

Tenny Fernando for the 2nd Accused-Appellant.

Thusith Mudalige D.S.G. for the respondent.

12th March, 2019

23rd July,2019

****************

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, T.

The 1st and 2nd accused-appellants (hereinafter referred to as the //1 st

and 2nd appellants"), by lodging individual petitions of appeal to this

Court, seek to set aside their convictions on certain offences committed

under the Bribery Act, that had been entered by the High Court of

Colombo on 03.05.2006 and the consequent imposition of terms of

imprisonment.

In the indictment presented by the Director General of the

Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery and Corruption, it is

alleged that the 1st appellant committed offences under Sections 19 (b), (c)

and 11 of the Bribery Act in four counts, when he solicited Rs. 5000.00 from

2

one Dissawe Mudiyanselage Amila Prasanga Bandara to abstain from

prosecuting him under Forest Ordinance for transporting timber and

accepting Rs. 2000.00 on 13.01.2003. The 2nd appellant was charged under

Sections 19 (b) and 25 (2) in four counts for aiding and abetting the 1st

appellant.

Being aggrieved by the said conviction and sentence, the 1st

appellant sought to challenge its validity on the basis that;

a. the trial Court has erroneously accepted confessionary evidence

contrary to Section 25 of the Evidence Ordinance,

b. the trial Court had failed to consider the evidence of the Bribery

Officers with caution,

c. the trial Court had erroneously rejected the 1st appellant's

evidence,

d. the sentence imposed on the 1st appellant is excessive in view of

the long duration of time since the date of offence to his

conviction.

The 2nd appellant relied on the following grounds of appeal in

support of his appeal;

a. the trial Court has erroneously rejected the defence of alibi which

was supported by independent evidence,

b. the trial Court had failed to consider the unreliability of the

evidence of the virtual complainant.

3

The prosecution presented its case based primarily on the evidence

of the virtual complainant Amila Prasanga Bandara, his friend Seneviratne

Bandara (PW3) and PC 19901 Ajith Kumara (PW4) who acted on the

complaint against the Appellants.

It was revealed from the evidence of the prosecution that Amila who

was employed as a Home Guard attached to Uhana Police in Ampara at that

time. In the evening of 13.01.2003 he had taken few logs of Pulun wood to

a nearby sawmill to have them sawn into planks. He had then loaded the

sawn planks into a two wheeled tractor that had been borrowed from one

of his uncles. It was already dark and Amila and PW3 proceeded towards

Manda Oluwa Junction in order to reach his partly constructed home. As

they drove along the highway, a motor cyclist (later identified as the 1st

appellant) who was with a pillion rider (the 2nd appellant), motioned them

to stop. The 1st appellant asked Amila whether he had a permit to transport

timber. When Amila answered that he had none, the 1st appellant told him

to follow his motorcycle and they were led to a house at Bogas Handiya.

Amila later realised that it was the house of one Priyantha, a Samurdhi

officer of the area.

The appellants then indicated Amila that the stand of timber he had

transported without any permit had to be produced before Court. Amila

pleaded with the appellants which made them to have a brief discussion

among themselves and also with Priyantha who arrived at that juncture in

his motorcycle. Thereafter, the 2nd appellant informed Amila that they

4

"

could release the tractor and the stand of timber they transported, if he

gives them Rs. 5000.00. The 1st appellant was also standing nearby when

the 2nd appellant made this solicitation.

When Amila indicated he did not have Rs 5000.00 at that point of

time, the 1st appellant had said if that is the case then they would have to

produce the timber and tractor in Court. The appellants then directed

Amila to talk to his companions and to indicate his position. Amila had

only Rs. 1000.00 with him and after having borrowed another Rs. 1000.00

from his friend, a total of Rs. 2000.00 was given to and accepted by the 1st

appellant. Having accepted the partial payment of Rs. 2000.00, the 1st

appellant had let Amila to take the tractor along, with the instructions that

he could take the timber only after settling the balance of Rs. 3000.00.

After returning home, Amila decided to lodge a formal complaint

about this 1/ qo6)QC-''' to the Commission to Investigate Allegations of

Bribery and Corruption and did so, having travelled to Colombo in the

following morning. He returned home after his statement was recorded

and PW4 came to see him in Ampara. He was instructed to meet up with

the appellants and also to introduce PW 4 to them as the uncle who owns

the two-wheel tractor in which the timber was transported.

At Uhana town, Amila and PW4 met the 1st appellant. Amila

introduced PW4 as his uncle and told him that money is ready and to

5

release his timber. The 1st appellant then instructed Amila to follow him

and had stopped his motorcycle at a certain point along Weeragoda Road,

away from the town. The 1st appellant then told Amila that he (the virtual

complainant) could have lost his employment due to this detection and

cautioned him not to repeat this offensive conduct. Amila pleaded for

clemency and repeated that /I euo)O)(.j) @@~g o@C9 (3)~)a) G5 ~z@ (0)

lcdJ~". PW4 kept Rs. 3000.00 with him but the 1st appellant replied 1/ alcJ

o@@ ~dJ~dJl ~z@ (0) q6dJ (.jdJ~". Amila had thereafter removed the

planks from the residence of Priyantha with the help of the officers from

the Commission.

The 1st appellant's main contention is based on the words that are

attributed to him by Amila in his evidence to the effect that "ale) o@@

~dJ~dJl @z@ O~ q6dJ (.jdJ~ 1/.

Learned President's Counsel, on behalf of the 1st appellant,

contended that the said portion of evidence should not have been admitted

and relied upon by the trial Court as it clearly violates the statutory

provisions contained in Section 25 of the Evidence Ordinance since those

words were allegedly uttered by the 1st appellant to PW 4, who is in fact a

police officer, although attached to the Commission.

In countering the said contention, learned Deputy Solicitor General

submitted that the 1st appellant made this confessionary statement only to

6

Amila and PW4 only a witness who heard that dialog and as such the

prohibition imposed by Section 25 has no application to the instant appeal.

Having referred to the authoritative text from the Law of Evidence by

E.R.S.R. Coomaraswamy, in support of his submission, he also stated that

the 1st appellant has had no knowledge that PW4 is a Police Officer at the

time of making that confessionary statement and therefore it has no impact

of the validity of the confession.

Learned DSG also addressed the issue whether Amila's employment

as a Home Guard could be considered as a Police Officer or not and

invited attention of Court to consider the said issue in the light of the

statutory provisions contained in Section 52(1) of the Mobilization and

Supplementary Forces Act No. 40 of 1985 and Government Gazette No.

1462 of 13.09.2006 by which the Home Guard Force was converted into

Department of Civil Defence.

This particular ground of appeal thus presents an interesting

question of law. It is evident from the submissions made by the parties the

pivotal point of contest is whether a confessionary statement by an

accused to another, made in the presence of a Police Officer, is admissible

evidence against its maker in view of the prohibition contained in Section

25(1) of the Evidence Ordinance?

7

,

Section 25(1) of the Evidence Ordinance reads as follows;

/lNo confession made to a police officer shall be proved

as against a person accused of any offence. If

Plain reading of the said section indicates that the prohibition

imposed by this section applies to confessionary statements which are

II made to a police officer". This prohibition was considered by the Court as

an absolute prohibition. In Seyadu v The King 53 N.L.R. 251, the Court of

Criminal Appeal reiterated this position as its judgment states;

/lIn The King v. Kiriwasthu [(1930) 40 N. L. R. 289.]

a Divisional Bench of the Supreme Court, dealing with

a precisely similar objection, upheld the submission

that, in the present state of the law of this country, the

prohibition contained in Section 25 of the Evidence

Ordinance is absolute. The unanimous opinion of the

Court was that " a confession made to a Police Officer

is inadmissible as proof against the person making it

whether as substantive evidence or in order to show

that he has contradicted himself.

The question that had been placed before this Court concerns the

admissibility of a confession made in the presence of a police officer. In

8

The King v Sudhamma26 N.L.R. 220, Jayewardene J considered a situation

where,

"One of the statements objected to appears in the

evidence of the witness Mr. Dassenaike, Chief Clerk of

the Post Office Savings Bank, who stated that when

Inspector Koelmeyer brought the accused to his

counter he identified the accused. " Then the accused

said he had handed the notice -(that is the notice I F I

to withdraw a sum of Rs. 150) to me. "

and decided that;

"This statement amounts to a confession, it was made

to or in the presence of a police officer, its admission is

prohibited by section 25."

This judgment apparently had added the phrase 1/... in the presence

... " a new condition, in addition to the original phrase" ... made to a police

officer ... " as found in Section 25(1).

However, E.R.S.R. Coomaraswamy in his treatise on Law of Evidence

( Vol. I, at p. 396), under the heading 1/ Effect of presence of the police at

the time of a confession: ", states thus;

"A confession made to a police officer is ruled out by

Section 25. A confession while in the custody of the

police is inadmissible under Section 26. But the mere

9

presence of the police while a confession is made will

not necessarily result in the confession being not a

voluntary confession or being inadmissible. What

would be material is the effect that the presence of the

police had on the person making the confession. /I

Coomaraswamy had placed emphasis on the effect that the presence

of the police had on the person making the confession in determining its

admissibility under these two sections. The judiciary, in order to protect

the rights of an individual, had sought to provide a reason of this

prohibition in several of its judgments. The judgment of the apex Court in

Rajapakse and Others v The State (2010) 2 Sri L.R. 113, revisited this issue

when it considered the question of admissibility of confessions made to

military officers and quoted Viscount Radcliff who delivered the following

opinion of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council on the policy

behind the enactment of these two sections in Murugan v. Ramasamy 68

N.L.R.265;

II There can be no doubt as to what is the general

purpose of Sections 25 and 26. It is to recognize the

dangers of giving credence to self - incriminating

statemen ts made to policemen or made while in police

custody, not necessarily because of suspicion that

improper pressure may have been brought to bear for

the purpose of securing convictions. Police authority

10

itself however carefully controlled, carries a menace to

those brought suddenly under its shadow; and these

two Sections recognize and provide against the danger

of such persons making incriminating confessions with

the intention of placating authority and without

regard to the truth of what they are saying. II

It is clear that the Privy Council had restricted the absolute

prohibition under Section 25 and 26 to confessions "made to policemen or

made while in police custody" and not to the ones which were made in the

presence of a policeman. Then why in The King v Sudhamma (supra)

Jayawerdene J expanded the scope of the section to include confessions

"made to or in the presence of a police officer" ?

The answer could be found in the narration of facts that are peculiar

to that matter. When the impugned confession was made by the appellant

to the Chief Clerk of the Post Office Savings Bank, he was already in

custody of the Police. It was the Police who brought him to the bank for

investigations during which period the confession was made. Therefore,

the appellant before Jayawerdene J was entitled to the protection of both

section 25 and 26 of the Evidence Ordinance. It is in this peculiar setting

only Jayawerdene J expressed the view that confessions "made to or in the

presence of a police officer" are inadmissible. Therefore, the said

pronouncement does not lay down a principle making any confession in

the presence of a police officer inadmissible. Thus the quotation of

11

Coomaraswamy is not in conflict with the judgment of The King v

Sudhamma (supra) delivered by Jayawardene J while sitting alone.

In relation to the instant appeal, the evidence is clear that the

confessionary statement of the 1st appellant was made during his

conversation with Amila. PW4 was a mere bystander, although was

present there listening to this conversation. The 1st appellant was not

under arrest at the time and was totally unaware that PW4 was a

policeman since he was introduced to him by Amila as one of his uncles

and also as the owner of the two-wheel tractor in which the timber was

transported. Clearly the 1st appellant was not "in some sort of Police

custody" as per the judgment of Iyer v. Galboda 44 NLR 94.

R.K.W. Goonesekere, in his book titled Bribery - A study in law

making and of the Criminal Process, explains the purpose of the presence

of the bribery officer at detections as follows (at p. 90);

"In the case of a trap the prosecution usually relies on

the evidence of the complainant and of bribery officers

who took part in the trap. These bribery officers either

accompany the complainant to see the money being

given or wait nearby for the signal to burst in and

arrest the accused ... usually in the guise of a relative

('uncle' is a favourite) ... ".

12

There was no indication that the circumstances that existed at the

time when the 1st appellant made his confession, are similar to the

circumstances as envisaged by Murugan v. Ramasamy (supra) and raises

no significant issue demanding consideration of this Court as to "the effect

that the presence of the police had on the person making the confession ", as

Coomaraswamy observes. PW4 remained there only as a neutral observer

waiting for the completion of the offence and had no part to play either to

entice or to discourage the 1st appellant from accepting the balance Rs.

3000.00 of what he solicited from Amila after the "detection of illegal

transportation of timber". Coomaras7,vamy described these type of "traps"

as "legitimate traps" (V ol.II Book 1 at page 395).

The other aspect that had been raised is Amila's official capacity as a

Home Guard.

This Court inclines to agree with the submissions of the learned DSG

that Home Guards do not have investigative powers and as such could

not be equated to Police Officers, thus triggering the prohibition under

Section 25 of the Evidence Ordinance. The statutory provisions contained

in Section 52(1) of the Act No. 40 of 1985 is clear that Home Guards are

considered as an auxiliary forces. Home Guards do not qualify under

Section 25 of the Evidence Ordinance as per the test adopted in Rajapakse

& others v. The State (Supra). The instant appeal does not cover a

situation under Section 58(1) of the Act as envisaged in the said provision.

13

Therefore, it is the considered view of this Court, that the

prohibition imposed by Section 25 or 26 of the Evidence Ordinance has no

application to the situation that had been considered by the trial Court in

relation to the instant appeal and therefore the said confession suffers no

disqualification as an item of evidence against the 1st appellant.

Other grounds of appeals, as raised by learned Counsel for the

appellants concerns that the trial Court's evaluation of the evidence

presented by the prosecution in support of its case against them and also

on behalf of the appellants.

Perusal of the judgment of the trial Court revealed that it had

considered the evidence of the complainant Amila in great detail. It had

applied the tests on evaluation of credibility on the testimony of Amila and

Bandara. Then it decided to accept their evidence also on the demeanour

and deportment. The conclusions reached by the trial Court in relation to

credibility of witnesses are necessarily a questions of fact and an appellate

Court would be very slow to interfere with such a determination unless

some compelling reason to do so emerges. In relation to the evidence of

PW4, the bribery officer, it is apparent that the trial Court had not placed

any significance on it since there was no acceptance that took place in his

presence. His evidence is confined to the above quoted confession by the

1 st appellant and the subsequent recovery of the timber at Priyantha's

residence. The conviction is founded upon the evidence of Amila who

alleges that the appellants have solicited and accepted a part payment on

14

an earlier date in the absence of any bribery officer. The inconsistency

highlighted by the 2nd appellant that Amila implicated him for solicitation

but he was indicted only for aiding and abetting, had in fact been

considered by the trial Court at length. This Court concurs with the

conclusion reached by the trial Court on this issue since the evidence is

clear that both appellants have conveyed to Amila that if they were to

abstain from producing the tractor and timber in Court, a bribe of Rs.

5000.00 needed to be paid. Hence, these complaints by the appellants have

no significant impact on the validity of the conviction.

In relation to the ground of appeal that the trial Court had

erroneously rejected their evidence needed a more detailed consideration.

The 1st appellant admits having stopped the tractor in transporting

timber not with the 2nd appellant, but with another officer called Samantha.

The 1st appellant however claims that they let the complainant proceed

with the timber and he only made a report to his senior officer about it. He

attributes the initiative to make a payment on the complainant, in return of

the favour of letting him go after the detection. The 2nd appellant took up

an alibi and had called his senior officer Arunasiri in support.

In rejecting the appellants evidence, the trial Court had applied the

tests of consistency and probability and concluded that the evidence of the

appellants is not credible. This is a correct conclusion reached by the trial

15

Court on the evidence of the appellants since the involvement of Samantha

in the detection was never put to the complainant or to his witness Bandara

during their lengthy cross examinations by any of the appellants. It was

brought up only during appellant's evidence. Clearly this is an

afterthought on the part of the appellants. The 2nd appellant had merely

suggested to the complainant and the other lay witness that he was not

there on the 13th and Amila had re-emphasised his position that both the

appellants were there on the 13th.

This Court, therefore is of the considered opinion that the appeals of

the appellants are without any merit and accordingly affirms their

convictions.

However, the 1st appellant raised the question of the propriety of

sentence. The date of offence is 13.01.2003 and they were convicted on

03.05.2006. Their appeal was taken up only in March 2019. They were

enlarged on bail pending appeal. In view of the totality of circumstances

and the long gap between the date of offence and the determination of

their appeal, this Court is of the view that it is appropriate that they do not

serve a custodial term.

Therefore, the three year terms of imprisonment imposed on the 1st

appellant in respect of the 1st and 2nd counts are reduced to a term of two

years and suspended it for a period of ten years. Similarly, the three year

16

terms of imprisonment imposed on the 2nd appellant in respect of the 5th

and 6th counts are reduced to a term of two years and suspend it for a

period of ten years. Fines and default sentences are to remain unaltered.

The altered sentences are to take effect from the date of this judgment.

Subject to the above variation of their sentences, the appeals of the

appellants stands dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

DEEP ALI WIIESUNDERA, I.

I agree.

JUDGE OF 1HE COURT OF APPEAL

17