1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

CNWRIT/309/2014

OF SRI LANKA

Vs,

In the matter of an Application for a mandate in

the nature of Writ of Certiorari and Prohibition

under article 140 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

V. W. Gunasekara,

'Asoka', Aluth Thanayamgoda Pahala,

Mapalagama Central,

Galle.

PETITIONER

1. E.M. Gunasekara,

Registrar General,

Registrar General's Department,

No. 234/A3, Denzil Kobbakaduwa Mw,

Battaramulla.

2. P.B. Abeykoon,

Secretary, Ministry of Public Administration and

Home Affairs,

Ministry of Public Administration and Home

Affairs Independence Square,

Colombo 07.

3. Somalatha Jayasinghe,

Additional District Registrar,

Divisional Secretariat- Nagoda,

Galle.

RESPONDENTS

f

r

If!! It I, II

tIt,! I

rII

I

f

~ Il

f I

l ! I I I 1 I

f i ! I ! ! I I i I I I I I ~ I

2

Before: Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J (PICA)

Counsel: J.e. Weliamuna with Pasindu Silva for the Petitioner

Anusha Samaranayake DSG, for the Respondents

Argued On~ 09.09.2016

Order on: 21.10.2016

Order

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J

Petitioner to the present application Vijith Waruna Gunasekara has come before this court seeking

inter alia,

b) Grant and issue a mandate in the nature of writ of Certiorari quashing the decision

reflected in P-5(a) thereto dismiss the Petitioner from the post of Registrar of Births

and Deaths of Mapalagama Athumale Division and Registrar of Marriages (General)

of Gangabadapattuwa Division in Nagoda Divisional Secretariat in the Galle District;

c) Grant and issue a mandate in the nature of writ of Certiorari quashing the decision

reflected in P-5(a) to dismiss the Petitioner from the post of Registrar of Births and

Deaths of Mapalagama Athumale Division and Registrar of Marriages (General) of

Gangabadapattuwa Division in Nagoda Divisional Secretariat in the Galle District;

d) Grant and issue a mandate in the nature of writ of Certiorari quashing the Preliminary

Inquiry reflected in P-3;

!

fi I !,

\I

fIII

~ It

II

t i i I f;

3

e) Grant and issue a mandate in the nature of writ of Certiorari quashing the decision of

the Preliminary Inquiry reflected in P-3 if any;

f) Grant and issue a mandate in the nature of writ of Certiorari quashing the

advertisement P-7 in so far as it is applicable to the post of Registrar of Births and

Deaths of Mapalagama Athumale Division and Registrar of Marriages (General) of

Gangabadapattuwa Division in Nagoda Divisional Secretariat in the Galle District;

g) Grant an issue a mandate in the nature of writ of Certiorari quashing paragraph 6 of

circular P-6 permitting the dismissal of the Registrars solely based on Preliminary

Investigation/Inquiry;

h) Grant and issue a mandate in the nature of writ of Prohibition preventing anyone or

more of the Respondents making any appointment to the post of Registrar of Births

and Deaths of Mapalagama Athumale Division and Registrar of Marriages (General)

of Gangabadapattuwa Division in Nagoda Divisional Secretariat in the Galle District

other than the Petitioner;

The Petitioner was appointed as a Births and Deaths Registrar under the Marriages (General)

Ordinance by the Registrar General with effect from 21.04.2010 for Mapalagama, Athimale and

Gangabadapaththuwa Divisions.

As submitted before this court the petitioner was served with a notice by the Additional Divisional

Secretary Nagoda, directing him to attend an inquiry with regard to the Marriage Certificate No.

1712.

With regard to the said inquiry conducted by the 4th Respondent, the Petitioner had submitted that,

.:. No formal charge sheet was given to the Petitioner no was any evidence led in the

presence of the Petitioner

f! Ift: I

I i I

rI ,I

f r t ':

4

.:. The inquiry officer had informed the Petitioner that he had registered a marriage on

27.10.2011 of which the bride was underage

.:. The Petitioner denied the same and stated that he took steps to register the marriage

after perusing the original birth certificate of the female party, which was produced

by the said party at the respective registration

With regard to the said registration which took place on 27.10.2011 the Petitioner had further

submitted before this court that,

a) On or about 26.10.2011, one Nilanduwage Chamara Madusanka and Bodahandi Nirosha

Sandamali came to the Petitioner's Office to register the marriage of the said

Nilanduwage Chamara Madusanka and Bodahandi Nirosha Sandamali. The said

Nilanduwage Chamara Madusanka and Bodahandi Nirosha Sandamali were accompanied

by the father of the said Nilanduwage Chamara Madusanka (namely, Nilanduwage

Amaradasa - I.D No. 620174998V) and the mother and father of the said Bodahandi

Nirosha Sandamali (namely, Poragoda Kanthi De. Silva-I.D No. 606793774V Bodahandi

larathna De. Silva I.D No-601443350V).

b) The aforesaid Bodahandi Nirosha Sandamali was in appearance more than 18 years of

age. The said Bodahandi Nirosha Sandamali did not produce her National Identity Card

claiming that she had lost it in the Tsunami. Therefore, the Petitioner asked her to

produce the Birth Certificate and she submitted an affidavit affirming that she is over 18

years, which was confirmed by the parents of the bride and the bride groom who were

present thereat. At that instance, the Petitioner insisted them to tender the Birth

Certificate of the said Bodahandi Nirosha Sandamali. Then the Petitioner was told that

they did not bring her Birth Certificate and therefore, they will come to register the

marriage with the birth certificate of the bride. The Petitioner states that no documents

were filled with regard to the respective marriage on that day.

5

c) Thereafter, on 27.10.2011, again the same parties arrived and an original Birth Certificate

of the said Bodihandi Nirosha Sandamali was produced to the Petitioner and the

Petitioner was told by the said Bodahandi Nirosha Sandamali that her Birthday is

accurately stated in the said Birth Certificate. Consequently, the marriage between the

said Nilanduwage Chamara Madusanka and Bodahandi Nirosha Sandamali was

registered, after the perusal of the relevant documents. Thereafter the original Birth

Certificate was returned to the said Bodahandi Nirosha Sandamali and a copy was

retained by the Petitioner.

As referred by the Petitioner an inquiry was conducted by the 4th Respondent and the said inquiry

proceedings and the report was submitted before us by the Respondents marked 1R3. The said

proceeding contained the findings of the inquiry and the statement made by the Petitioner at the said

mqUIry.

Since the Learned Deputy Solicitor General had placed several discrepancies between the documents

submitted by the Petitioner before this court and the material revealed at the said inquiry I would

first like to analyze this position before going to the merits of this matter as argued by the Learned

Counsel for the Petitioner.

As submitted by the Petitioner before this court, the female party to the said marriage and her parents

whilst claiming that the National Identity Card of the female party was lost during Tsunami, had

submitted an affidavit affirming that she is over 18. Since the Petitioner insisted them to produce the

Birth Certificate, the parties agreed to come on the following day with the Birth Certificate.

The following day i.e. 27.10.2011, parties had come with the Original Birth Certificate of the female

party and after satisfying the date of birth, the Petitioner has registered the marriage and obtained a

copy of the Birth Certificate, which is produced before this court marked (P-4g). The notice of

marriage submitted on the same day is also produced by the Petitioner marked (P-4a) and the

j I I ! I J

6

affidavit said to have brought and submitted on the previous day confirming that the bride is above

18 years is also produced marked P-4f.

As observed by this court, in the affidavit submitted by the said Bodahandi Nirosha Sandamali de

Silva, she had affirmed that her date of birth is 27.01.1993, but the Birth Certificate copy said to

have kept by the Petitioner after comparing with its original, the date of birth is recorded as

20.11.1992. We further observed that the date of birth written on the notice of marriage too had been

erased and recorded it as 20.11.1992. However the Petitioner in his statement made before the 4th

Respondent had taken up the position that the female party to the said marriage had informed that

both the Birth Certificate and National Identity Card belonging to the female party was lost due to

Tsunami and an affidavit had been given in place of the said documents.

When considering the two positions taken by the Petitioner, it is observed by this court that the

Petitioner had only relied on the affidavit (P-4t) said to have given by the female party when making

the statement at the inquiry, but also relied on a Birth Certificate to justify his conduct before this

court (P-4g). However by bringing this additional material, the Petitioner has created another

discrepancy with regard to the date of birth of the female party.

As observed by me, the date of birth according to (P-4t) is 27 01.1993 and according to (P-4g) it is

20.11.1992. according to the statement made at the inquiry, the Petitioner had entered the date of

birth in the notice of marriage according to the affidavit given by the female party, but the document

P-4a the notice of marriage filed before this court carries the date of birth on 20.11.1992 which is the

date appeared on the Birth Certificate (P-4g) but not the date appear on the affidavit (P-4t). However

it is clearly visible that the date written on (P-4a) had been erased.

In the said circumstances it is clear that the Petitioner had suppressed material facts before this court

when he submitted before this court that he went through the Birth Certificate of the female party

prior to register the marriage between the parties, when in fact he had admitted before the inquiry

!I

1

f

i IfI I,tt

t IIIf i

1 l 1 I I ;; J I I I I I I I 1 ! 1 j J l i j I , i ! ! I I

7

that the parties failed to submit both the Birth Certificate and the National Identity Card at the time

the marriage was registered. It is further observed that the Petitioner is guilty of misrepresenting

facts, when he submitted an altered document to support the position he has taken up before this

court and also submitting a copy of a Birth Certificate which he had never received at the time he

registered the marriage.

As revealed before this court the alleged inquiry was conducted on an allegation of registering the

marriage of an underage girl and the Petitioner has come before this court seeking a writ of

Certiorari to quash the findings of the said inquiry as one relief among several other reliefs referred

to above. However it is the duty of the Petitioner when he sought relief in the nature of a prerogative

writ, to come before the court with clean hands.

In the leading case of R.V. Kensington Income Tax Commissioners (1917)1 KB 486 Scrutton U

observed that ....... an applicant who does not come with candid facts and clear hands cannot hold a

writ of the court soiled hands suppression or concealment of material facts is not advocacy. It is

jugglery, which has no place in equitable and prerogative jurisdiction.

In the case of Alponso Appuhamy Vs. L. Hettiarachchi and Another 1973 NLR 131 Pathirana J

observed that,

"The necessity of a full and fair disclosure of all the material facts to be placed before the

court when an application for a writ or injunction is made and the process of the court is

invoked is laid down in the case of The King V. The General Commissioners for the purpose

of the Income Tax Acts for the District of Kensington-Ex-parte Princess Edmond de Poignac

- (1917) Kings Bench Division 486. Although this case deals with a writ of Prohibition the

principles enunciated are applicable to all cases of writs or injunctions. In this case a

Divisional Court without dealing with the merits of the case discharged the rule on the

ground that the applicant had suppressed or misrepresented the facts material to her

(II I1I

f

I! 1I! ! I

8

application. The Court of Appeal affirmed the decision of the Divisional Court that there had

been a suppression of material facts by the applicant in her affidavit and therefore it was

justified in refusing a writ of Prohibition without going into the merits of the case. In other

words, so rigorous is the necessity for a full and truthful disclosure of all material facts that

the court would not go into the merits of the application, but will dismiss it without further

examination. "

As revealed before this court the inquiry referred to this case was commenced on a complaint

received against the Petitioner with regard to a marriage registered by him of an underage female

party under the Marriages (General) Ordinance (as amended).

During the argument before this court the Learned Counsel for the Petitioner challenged the validity

of the circular under which the said inquiry was held, which is produced marked P-6.

The last two paragraph of the said circular reads thus,

6

@Q)@)ij/ 800d C}C))3) ~l~t)O <1l(!)6.)C gq)C)~ <10)0 S O~3)) C)l5)O @Q)@)ij

Goci <33 e>oG)dd ~S, tJ 8gQ)~C) C)G)~ 08c.5g)6C)oc) c}8~ ~lOC

gq)5.

flt

~

IIIIIIi 1I

fI[ It

fl I! rI

f, IIt

9

G@@o(';)~O tS)O oSQ)~Q@O~ q~0)6~ @OJJ6G:> ooc5@c5 l;~C)S Ol~t)Od>

O)ogOJ 0)6~ Q)C) l;~C)~."

The Petitioner contended that he was not served with a charge sheet regarding the alleged lapse on

his part and the letter marked P-3 was based on an unfounded allegation. It was further submitted

that he was not given an opportunity to be heard in defence and the arbitrary decision taken based on

the above circular to terminate his service was against the rules of natural justice.

However the Learned Deputy Solicitor General who appeared for the Respondents whilst explaining

P-6 submitted that, the circular P-6 had been issued to all Marriage Registrars informing them of the

importance of ascertaining proper identity and the age of parties contracting marriages in view of the

amendment to the several laws including the Marriages (General) Ordinance No 19 of 1907 (as

amended) and the Penal Code.

In this regard the Respondents have further relied on several circulars issued by the 1st Respondent

time to time, but further submitted that, due to the continues violations reported to the 1st Respondent

against the Marriage Registrars, the 1st Respondent was compelled to issue P-6.

Whilst referring to the letter of appointment issued to the Petitioner which was produced marked

P-2a by the Petitioner, the Respondent took up the position that the Marriage Registrars (including

the Petitioner) holds office at the pleasure of the 1st Respondent and accordingly a Registrar could be

dismissed without a hearing and the provisions of the Establishment Code pertaining to a

disciplinary inquiry has no application to a Registrar.

In this regard this court is mindful of the decision in the case Maduraperumage Karunathilake

Jayawardena Vs. WA. Senarathne and two others CA 2366/2004 CA minute dated 12.03.2007,

when the Petitioner to the above case complained that other than a show cause letter, no charge sheet

was served and an inquiry was not held before terminating his service as the city comer Gampaha.

The Court of Appeal held that, "In view of the facts and circumstances of this case the Petitioner

10

cannot claim that a charge sheet should have been served on him and an inquiry would have been

held. The explanation given by the Petitioner was not accepted by the Respondents. Therefore the

Respondents terminated the services of the Petitioner. In these circumstances the Petitioner cannot

state that the rules of Natural Justice have been denied to him."

However it was revealed before this court that,

a) P-3 had been dispatched notifying the Petitioner to attend an inquiry in respect of a marriage

registered by him under the Marriage (General) Ordinance on 27.10.2011.

b) In the said letter the Petitioner was informed the nature of the complaint and given an

opportunity to produce all documentation with regard to the said complaint.

c) An inquiry had been held by the 4th Respondent and a statement had been recorded from the

Petitioner at that time.

d) In his statement the Petitioner took up the position that, in the absence of the Birth Certificate

or a National Identity Card he had satisfied himself of the age of the female party having

regard to her appearance and the contents of an affidavit submitted by the female party.

e) The documentation produced by the Petitioner did contain a copy of a Birth Certificate given

by the female party even though the Petitioner belatedly claimed that a Birth Certificate was

produced before him by the female party on the following day prior to their marriage was

registered.

) Since the position taken up by the Petitioner before the said inquiry was clearly in violation

ofP-6.

g) Steps had been taken to dismiss the Petitioner.

Even though a charge sheet had not been served on the Petitioner, an opportunity had been given for

him to submit his position at an inquiry held by the 4th Respondent and therefore the Petitioner

cannot take up the position that Rules of Natural Justice have been denied to him.

I

1

11

I see no merit in the argument raised by the Learned Counsel for the Petitioner when he challenge

P-6 before us .For the reasons set out above this court is not inclined to grant relief as prayed by the

Petitioner. Petitioner's application is therefore dismissed with the cost fixed at Rs. 5000/-

Application is dismissed with cost.

President of the Court of Appeal

r

\

f

tI

~ I It

,~

r

f-I!! !

IcI

r!!I