IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Balasathu Hewage Suresh

Buddhi Kumara,

No.98,

Light House Road,

Talpavila,

Devinuwara.

Petitioner

CASE NO: CA/WRIT/326/2016

Vs.

1. State Timber Corporation,

No.82,

Rajamalwatta,

Battaramulla.

2. P. Dissanayake,

Chairman,

State Timber Corporation,

No.82,

Rajamalwatta,

Battaramulla.

2A. Shantha Bandara,

Chairman,

State Timber Corporation,

No.82,

Rajamalwatta,

Battaramulla.

2

3. Pawara Kumara,

Working Director,

State Timber Corporation,

No.82, Rajamalwatta,

Battaramulla.

4. K. Sirinivasa,

General Manager,

State Timber Corporation,

No.82,

Rajamalwatta,

Battaramulla.

4A. Nimal Ruwan Pathirana,

General Manager,

State Timber Corporation,

No.82, Rajamalwatta,

Battaramulla.

5. M.V. Karunaratne,

6. P. Pansalwatte,

7. A.M.C. Perera,

Members of the Board of

Directors,

State Timber Corporation,

No.82,

Rajamalwatta,

Battaramulla.

8. Hon. Attorney-General,

Attorney-Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondents

3

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Razik Zarook, P.C., with Rohana Deashapriya for

the Petitioner.

Ganga Wakista Arachchi, S.S.C., for the

Respondents.

Decided on: 11.12.2018

Samayawardhena, J.

The petitioner filed this application seeking a mandate in the

nature of a writ of certiorari seeking to quash P13 and P14.

The petitioner was a Field Officer Grade I of the 1st respondent-

State Timber Corporation. After a disciplinary inquiry on an

allegation that there had been irregularities in removing trees on

Haputale-Diyatalawa road, he was found guilty for three

charges, and disciplinary actions were taken against himvide

P8. They are: (a) not to pay arrears of salary during the period of

his interdiction; (b) demote from Field Officer Grade I to Field

Officer Grade II, and to place at the initial salary scale of Grade

II; and (c) severe warning.

The petitioner has, as he was entitled to do, appealed against

that order by P9. Having considered that appeal, the 2nd

respondent who was the Chairman of the 1st respondent (with

the agreement of the 4th respondent-General Manager) has, by

P10 dated 07.05.2015, lessened a part of the punishment

whereby the (b) above was amended to read as demote from

Field Officer Grade I to Field Officer Grade II and place in the

salary scale of Rs.18,700/= effective from 03.03.2015.

4

Thereafter, the same Chairman by letter marked P13 dated

30.06.2016, has cancelled the above appeal decision contained

in P10 on the basis that the Government Auditor (in R1) has

pointed out such lessoning of punishment is not permitted. (

, 2015.05.07 .)

This in my view is completely unwarranted. According to clause

25.7 of the Disciplinary Code of the 1st respondent Corporation

marked P6, the decision of the appellate body is final. According

to clause 26.4, the appellate body is, inter alia, permitted to

consider the appeal on compassionate grounds. The Government

Auditor cannot compel the appellate body to withdraw the

appeal decision.

In any event, in my view, what is stated in the Auditors Report

R1 is not factually correct. On the first page of R1, it is stated

that an appeal against a disciplinary order made by the General

Manager should have been presented to the Board of Directors

and therefore the petitioners appeal directed to the General

Manager should have been rejected. This is not correct. The

petitioner is not an executive officer. He is only a Field Officer.

According to clause 3.3 of the Disciplinary Code P6, the appeal

officer/appellate body in respect of employees who are not in the

executive grade is the Chairman. The Board of Directors

becomes the appellate body in respect of executive grade officers.

R1 also says that the appeal had been amended by the General

Manager without submitting it to the Chairman. It is not clear

what is meant by it. Appeal decision P10 has been signed by the

Chairman. R1 further says that by P10, the original

punishment contained in P8 has indirectly been minimized.

5

There is nothing wrong in minimizing the punishment, and that

is the very purpose of the appeal.

The learned senior state counsel in the written submissions says

that the 2nd respondent (the Chairman) is at all times material to

the execution of his duties is bound to adhere to the observations

of the Auditor General and further an illegal decision cannot be

legalized by a subsequent act and hence no legitimate expectation

could exist in the instant application. I cannot understand what

is meant by the Chairman is bound to adhere to the

observations of the Auditor General and on what basis that

statement is made. In my view, observations made on incorrect

facts need not be taken serious note of. I further cannot

understand on what basis the learned senior state counsel says

that the appeal decision P10 is an illegal decision. I see no

illegality in P10. With respect, I also fail to comprehend the

argument of the learned senior state counsel that no writ lie for

a dispute between an employer and employee relationship. The

petitioner has invoked the writ jurisdiction of this Court against

an administrative decision.

I quash the decision contained in P13. I also quash P14 which

flows from P13. Appeal decision P10 shall prevail.

Application is allowed. No costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal