. "

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C A (Tax) Appeal No. 07 / 2015

In the matter of a case stated for the

opinion of the Court of Appeal Under

section 11 A of the Tax Appeals

Commission Act No. 23 of 2011 as

amended by Act No. 20 of 2013.

The Commissioner General

of Inland Revenue.

Department of Inland Revenue,

Inland Revenue Building,

,

2

Sir Chittampalam A. Gardiner Mawatha,

Colombo 02.

-Vs-

Classic Travel ePvt) Ltd.

No. 379/4,

Galle Road,

Colombo 03.

APPELLANT

RESPONDENT

,.

,

"J

3

Before: A H M D NawazJ

P. Padman Surasena J

Counsel: Chaya Sri Nammuni SC for the Appellant.

F N Gunawardana for the Respondent.

Argued on: 2016-11-07

Decided on: 2017 - 04 - 06

JUDGMENT

P Padman Surasena J

1. BACKGROUND

When the Value Added Tax (hereinafter sometimes referred to as 'VAT)

returns were submitted by the Respondent for certain taxable periods on

"

4

the basis that their supplies were zero rated, those returns were rejected

by the Assessor on the basis that the commission income of the

Respondent could not be considered as zero rated supply. The Assessor

then issued a new VAT assessment in terms of section 28 of the Value

Added Tax Act No. 14 of 2002 as amended.

In the appeal against the said decision of the Assessor, the Commissioner

General of Inland Revenue (hereinafter sometimes referred to as

'Commissioner General,), by his determination dated 2013-08-02,

confirmed the decision of the Assessor.

The Respondent thereafter appealed to the Tax Appeals Commission

(hereinafter sometimes referred to as 'Commission'). In that appeal, the

Respondent (Classic Travel ePvt) Ltd.) raised a preliminary issue that the

Commissioner General of Inland Revenue has breached rules of Natural

Justice. The Tax Appeals Commission upheld that argument.

Being dissatisfied with the determination of the Tax Appeals Commission

the Commissioner General of Inland Revenue has taken steps to initiate the

appeal proceedings in this court.

,

5

2. QUESTIONS OF LAW

The questions of law formulated for the opinion of this Court by the

Appellant in terms of section 11 A of the Tax Appeals Commission Act as

amended by Act No. 20 of 2013 and Act No. 23 of 2011, is as follows.

1) Whether the Tax Appeals Commission acted in excess of its limited

jurisdiction as it cannot assume jurisdiction it does not possess to

decide on questions of law.

2) Whether the Tax Appeals Commission has erred in law to determine

the appeal on the matters raised as preliminary objections by the

appellant's counsel.

3) Whether the Tax Appeals Commission was empowered by the Hon.

Minister of Finance who appointed it to hear and determine the

appeal preferred by the Appellant, to give its determination without

hearing the matters raised in the appeal.

4) Whether the Tax Appeals Commission has erred in law in determining

a question of law and failed to give due consideration to the

judgment of the case. A.M Ismail Vs. CIR-(SLTC Vol. VI Page 156)

that question of law have to be decided by courts and the Tax

Appeals Commission can decide on questions of fact.

,

6

5) Whether the Tax Appeals Commission has erred in Law, that coming

in to conclusion that it is a violation of principle of natural justice

where hearing of the appeal by one Commissioner and concluded

hearing and the other commissioner issuing a notice of determination

based on the records maintained by the first Commissioner.

3. CORRECTNESS OF THE DECISION REGARDING COMPLIANCE

WITH RULES OF NATURAL JUSTICE

In an endeavor to find answers to the above questions of law, this Court

must first appraise the sequence of events which formed the background

of the impugned decision.

First and foremost, it has to be noted that it was the Commissioner - K

Dharmasena who has heard the appeal preferred by the Respondent.

According to the document marked Ai (b), the said Commissioner - K

Dharmasena had concluded the proceedings pertaining to this appeal and

had reserved the determination. Commissioner - K Dharmasena has on

2013-03-07, recorded it in following terms;

"

7

" ....... Chair said that hearings were concluded and determination together

with reasons for the determination will be submitted to the Commissioner

(Secretariat) to submit before the Commissioner General of Inland

R

II evenue ......

However, a letter dated 2013-08-02 (marked A 3) had been issued under

the hand of Commissioner D M Somadasa Dissanayake which contained the

following passage.

" ....... Acting under the Authority delegated to me by the Commissioner

General of Inland Revenue to here(sic) and determine the above appeals,

and having considered the written and oral submission made by the

authorized representatives and few officials on behalf of the appellant

company, and the views, explanation, ruling submission made by the

departmental officials on behalf of the revenue. I determine the above

appeals by confirming the assessments issued under the above assessment

b

II num ers .......

,

8

Reasons for the above determination had been given on 2013-08-05.

Although it was Commissioner D M Somadasa Dissanayake who had signed

it, that document still contains the name K Dharmasena in its first pagel.

It is significant to note in the passage quoted from the document marked A

3 above that Commissioner D M Somadasa Dissanayake has stated that he

has considered the oral submissions made by the parties. This is manifest

from the phrase " .... having considered the written and oral submission .... If

in the passage quoted above. However the available material does not

support the fact that any such oral submission has ever been made before

Commissioner D M Somadasa Dissanayake.

Learned State Counsel who appeared for the Appellant was not in a

position to offer any explanation as to why Commissioner D M Somadasa

Dissanayake instead of the Commissioner K Dharmasena had to make the

determination when indeed it was Commissioner K Dharmasena who had

heard the appeal and reserved his determination on 2013-03-07.

Further, the following questions also cry out for explanations in the above

circumstances.

l it was corrected by a subsequent document.

\

9

I. Was the appointment of Commissioner K Dharmasena was cancelled?

II. Is the appointment of Commissioner K Dharmasena still in force?

III. What were the circumstances which prompted the Commissioner

General of Inland Revenue to replace Commissioner K Dharmasena

with some other official?

Learned State Counsel who appeared for the Appellant did not have

answers to any of the above questions also. The statutory power exercised

by the Commissioner-General under section 34 of the Value Added Tax Act

is a power that has to be exercised by him judicially. Therefore, the law

demands that he must act fairly observing rules of natural justice. It is a

fact that the Commissioner General has replaced the officer who was due

to pronounce the determination for which no reason has been assigned. He

is not in a position to offer any explanation for such a move. Thus, this

would, to say the least, be a necessary indication that the Commissioner-

General has not acted fairly.

Further, fact that there is no proof that the appointment of commissioner K

Dharmasena has been cancelled poses the question whether commissioner

D M Somadasa Dissanaike in fact was authorized to make a determination

"

10

of this appeal which should otherwise have been done by commissioner K

Dharmasena.

Thus, what is established before this Court is not the fact that the

Commissioner General of Inland Revenue has complied with the rules of

natural justice, but the quite opposite of it. Section 34 of the Value Added

Tax Act No. 14 of 2002 as amended has conferred a right of appeal to a

person dissatisfied with any assessment issued by an 'Assessor' or

'Assistant Commissioner' under that Act. The word 'appeal' itself denotes a

right, in particular, for the appellant to be heard. This in turn means that

the appellant must be afforded an opportunity to present a reasoned

argument to persuade the authority concerned to re consider his case. One

must be able to find a close link between such hearing and the eventual

decision if the authority concerned has genuinely afforded such an

opportunity to the appellant. In these circumstances it is the opinion of this .

Court that the Tax Appeals Commission has not erred when it held to strike

down the determination by the Commissioner General for his failure to

comply with the rules of natural justice.

11

4. CAN THE CASE BE SENT BACK FOR RE-INQUIRY

Learned State Counsel in the course of her submissions, sought to argue

that the best course of action for the Tax Appeals Commission would have

been to have the case sent back for the Commissioner General to

reconsider the merits of the case.

Thus the next task this Court has to undertake is to ascertain whether it is

possible to have this case sent back for are-inquiry.

The explanation given by the Tax Appeals Commission in its reasoning as

to why such a course of action is not possible, is based on section 34 of the

VAT Act which states as follows,

" ........... every petition of appeal shall be agreed to or determined by the

Commissioner General within two years from the date on which such

petition of appeal is received by the Commissioner General unless the

agreement or determination of such appeal depends on the furnishing of

any document or the taking of any action by any person other than the

appellant or the Commissioner General or an Assessor or an Assistant

Commissioner. where such appeal is not agreed or determined within such

12

period the appeal shall be deemed to have been allowed and the tax

charged accordingly .......... "

The time limit above section has laid down is for a determination to be

made by the Commissioner General when an appeal has been preferred to

him.

The Respondent being a tax payer has been granted by law a right of

appeal to the Commissioner General. The Respondent in this instance has

exercised that right. The Commissioner General is yet to hear that appeal

according to law in its proper spirit as his previous determination has been

invalidated by the Tax Appeals Commission.

According to the 'Appeal Report,2 dated 2012-11-07 the date of appeal of

the instant case is 2011-09-07 and the date the time bar commences to

operate is 2013-09-06. The time period specified in section 34 of the VAT

Act is to be reckoned from the date on which such petition of appeal is

received by the Commissioner General. Thus the Commissioner General will

not have power to hear that appeal at this moment.

2 A report prepared by an Assessor

,

13

The Commissioner General in this instance has failed to accomplish any

lawful hearing of the appeal up to now. Thus, he has failed to comply with

the time frame prescribed in the above section. The invalidation of his

previous determination amounts, in the eyes of law, to the said appeal

being not heard.

Therefore it is clear when this Court holds that the determination by the

Commissioner General is not valid, what remains valid is the determination

by the Assessor.

Section 34 of the VAT Act has specified in no uncertain terms, the effect of

such appeal is not agreed or determined within the specified period. Thus,

in such a situation the appeal shall be deemed to have been allowed.

The above position appears to be in line with the fact that neither section

9(10) nor 11 A (6) of the Tax Appeals Commission Act provide that a case

could be sent back for 're-inquiry'.

Consideration of the above sections in its form would make this position

clear. These sections are reproduced below for easy reference.

Section 9 (10);

"

14

" ..... After hearing the evidence, the Commission shall on appeal either

confirm, reduce, increase or annul, as the case may be, the assessment as

determined by the Commissioner-General or may remit the case to the

Commissioner-General with the decision of the Commission on such

appeal. Where a case is so remitted by the Commission, the Commissioner-

General shall revise the assessment in order that it is in conformity with

such amount as stated in the decision of the Commission ..... "

Section 11 A (6);

" ... Any two or more judges of the Court of Appeal may hear and

determine any question of law arising on the stated case and may in

accordance with the decision of Court upon such question, confirm, reduce,

increase or annul the assessment determined by the Commission, or may

remit the case to the Commission with the opinion of the Court, thereon.

Where a case is so remitted by the Court, the Commission shall revise the

assessment in accordance with the opinion of the Court ...... "

It is to be observed that both the aforementioned sections, the action to be

taken either by the Commission or by the Commissioner-General when a

case is so remitted have been restricted to the revision of the assessment

,

15

in order that it is in conformity with such amount as stated in the said

decision. It is to be observed that these sections do not provide for the

conduct of re-inquiries as has been provided for in the case of regular

appeal proceedings. This could be to avoid any conflict with the operation

of the time bar placed on the Commissioner General regarding the disposal

of appeals made to him.

5. CAN THE TAX APPEALS COMMISSION DECIDE ON A

QUESTION OF LAW?

In terms of section 7(1) (a) of the Tax Appeals Commission Act,

" .......... a person who is aggrieved by the determination -

of the Commissioner-General of Inland Revenue appointed in terms of the

Inland Revenue Act, given in respect of any matter relating to imposition of

any tax, levy, charge, duty or penalty under the provisions of any of the

enactments specified in Column I of Schedule I, or Schedule II to this

Act; ............. .

"

16

may appeal to the commission in qccordance with the provisions

hereinafter set out: ....... "

Section 9(10) of the Tax Appeals Commission Act as set out above,

specifies the actions the Commission may take after hearing the evidence.

It is open for the Commission on appeal either to confirm, reduce, increase

or annul, the assessment determined by the Commissioner-General or to

remit the case to the Commissioner-General with the decision of the

Commission on such appeal. Thus, annulment of the assessment

determined by Commissioner General is we" within the powers of the

Commission.

Section 2 of the Tax Appeals Commission Act requires that each panel of

the Commission shall comprise one retired judge of the Supreme Court or

the Court of Appeal. It is such panels which should hear and determine any

matter before the commission. The Tax Appeals Commission Act has not

placed any restriction on the Commission that they should not decide any

question of law but only questions of fact.

Indeed, if a question of law is raised before the assessor, it will be the

assessor who will decide that question of law first and it will be the same

"

17

question of law that will have to be determined in a subsequent appeal by

the Commissioner-General and then by the Tax Appeals Commission

thereafter. If this Court is to hold the opposite, it would bind the hands of

Assessor who is confronted with a question of law raised before him.

It could be observed that even in the instant case, the 'Appeal Report,3

dated 2012-11-07 prepared by an Assessor sets out the dispute between

parties as;

" .. Whether the total revenue of the company which consists of overriding

commission income and service income falls within the definition of Zero

rating in line with the definition given in the Air Navigation Act No. 55 of

1992 which mentioned under the section 7 of the Value Added Tax Act No.

14 of 2002 .... "

Although this Court did not go into the above question it would suffice at

this stage to state here that a cursory glance through the above phrase

would show the necessity for the decision maker to conSider, interpret and

at least obtain the basic meaning of the provisions of law referred thereto,

in order to hear and dispose the appeal. It is not an exaggeration to say

3 lbid.

"

18

that most of the pOints raised in tax proceedings are nothing but points of

law rather than pOints of facts.

If a question of law or fact or a question mixed with both law and fact is

raised as a preliminary issue which goes to the root of the case,

determining that issue first, would undoubtedly save time and resources of

all stakeholders. Besides this, it is an accepted norm that a party agitating

a question of fact or law must first have it raised before the original

institution tasked to resolve that dispute. This is underpinned by the fact

that such original institution may well uphold such argument saving time

and resources of the appellate forum. Thus, there is also no merit in the

statement that the Tax Appeals Commission has erred in law when it

determined the appeal on the matters raised as preliminary objections by

the learned counsel for the Appellant.

In these circumstances this Court is of the view that there is no merit in

the statement that the Tax Appeals Commission does not possess power to

decide on questions of law and hence it had in this case exceeded its

jurisdiction.

"

19

6. OPINION OF COURT

In these circumstances this Court is of the opinion that it would suffice to

answer 1st and 2nd questions of law stated for its opinion. The opinion of

this court in respect of the said questions of law that have been formulated

is as follows:

Opinion of this Court regarding question of law No. 01

The Tax Appeals Commission has not acted in excess of its

jurisdiction. It possesses jurisdiction to decide on questions of law.

Opinion of this Court regarding question of law No. 02

The Tax Appeals Commission has not erred in law when it determined the

appeal on the matters raised as preliminary objections by the counsel for

the Appellant.

Opinion of this Court regarding question of law No. 03, 04 and 05

It would not be necessary to provide specific answers to the questions of

law No.3, 4 & 5 in view of the opinion of this Court already given above in

respect of the questions of law No. 01 and 02. Nevertheless if one is

20

interested in the opinion of this Court regarding these questions also, they

are to be found amongst the reasoning of this judgment.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

A H M D Nawazl

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL