...

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

CA Case No. 107/2004

HC. (Kalutara) Case No. 43/1999

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

DECIDED ON

1

Attorney General

COMPLAINANT

Vs

Visenthi Durage Linton Silva

ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

~- Visenthi Durage Lilltoll Silva

ACCUSED - APPELLANT Vs

Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo 12.

COMPlAINANT':' RESYONo-ENT_

: Deepali Wijesundera J.

: L. U. Jayasuriya J.

: Dr. Ranjith Fernando for the

Accused - Appe"ant

Harippriya Jayasundera DSG

For the Respondent.

: 28th August, 2017

: 14th November, 2017

L. Jayasuriya J.

The accused appellant (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the

appellant) was indicted in the High Court Kalutara for committing rape on

one Latha, which is an offence punishable under Section 364 of the Penal

Code.

After trial the appellant was convicted and sent~nced to a term of

7 years RI with a fine of Rs. 10,0001= carrying a default term of two years.

This appeal is from the said sentence and the conviction.

The story of the prosecution is that Prosecution Witness Latha has

been working as a domestic at Nandawathi's household. On the day in

question Gnanawathi, who is the sister of said Nandawathi has come to

feed their mother who was bed ridden. Latha has gone to the_weJLto_9-et

- -water as usual and the appettant has come from behind and dragged her

to a close by shrub jungle and has raped her. Latha testifies that she

raised cries and, upon hearing such cries Gnanawathi has come running

and has found the appellant committing rape. She has chased behind the

appellant armed with a club but has failed to catch him.

The evidence reveals that the victim has previously known the

appellant as he was living close by and he used to come to their

house to watch television. Gnanawathi has corroborated the

evidence of the victim on an material points and testified that when she

ran towards the well she saw the appellant on top of the victim. We find

that corroboration of this nature happens very rarely in rape cases.

2

.

Moreover, the Judicial Medical Officer has observed a tear at 6

o'clock position on her hymen and this finding corroborates the evidence

of Latha.

Four grounds of appeal were urged by the counsel for the

appellant.

(1) Learned High Court Judge appears to consider evidence led by

the prosecution on record necessarily falling within Section 155

of the Evidence Ordinance.

The victim has failed to attend courts but her evidence lead at the

Non Summary inquiry had been adopted under Section 33 of the

Evidence Ordinance.

On a perusal of evidence lead before the Learned Magistrate on

22.06.1995 it appears that she was subjected to cross eXarrilrianoh af .

length and not a single suggestion has been made to the victim

challenging her position where she alleged that she was raped by the

appellant. Therefore I hold that her evidence meets the tests of credibility,

promptness, probability and consistency and hence the first ground fails.

(2) Failing to consider material contradiction "inter - sen between

MC/NS deposition of victim and evidence of purported eye

witness to incident.

The counse~ for the appellant high~ighted the following

contradictions inter - se and submitted that extra caution is necessary

before accepting victim's MC/NS deposition.

3

1. (i) Victim says that employer had chased (the accused) with a

club in hand.

(ii) Whereas the employer, makes no mention of chasing the

accused with a club in hand.

2. Victim states that accused was naked/undressed at the time.

Whereas the employer testifies that the accused was clothed at

the time and so was the victim.

3. Victim sta~es that later on the same day went to the police after

going home at 7 p.m.

Whereas the employer says that police com~lalnt was made on

next day at noon.

4. Victim says she trashed clothing before going home.

~~-~~~-W,,",-I-h-R:e~rel;Ca:lO:s~thaempJO-y8C-makesno mention of the same

5. Victim says that she told her employer regarding details of

incident.

Whereas the employer says she asked the victim but nothing

was mentioned to her by the victim.

The Learned High Court Judge has dealt with contradictions inter

- se and held that there is no reason to reject the evidence of the victim

and the High Court Judge has given reasons-for slJChfinding. We are of

the view that the contradictions highlighted do not go to the root of the

case and proceed to reject the second ground.

(3) Erring in law by requiring corroboration of the uncontroverted

evidence on oath given by the accused.

The appellant has admitted in answer to court that he met the victim

at the well (vide page 118 of the brief) and has stated later in his evidence

4

I

f t

that he did not meet the victim near the well but saw the victim at the well

while he was at the bus halt.

According to the evidence of Prosecution Witness no. 6 C.1.

Wegampitiya, the place where the incident happened can not be seen

from-the road as the view was blocked from the shrub jungle and his

evidence on this aspect has not been challenged by the defence.

It was held in Hatharinge Samadasa vs the. Attorney General

CA 11212001 decided on 19.02.2007 that there are number aftests that

have to be applied in evaluating the credibility of a witness such as

----consistency, contemporaneity, spontaneity, prooaDinty----an-d-

corroboration.

In view of the said judgment the evidence of the appellant fails the

tE!sts of consistency and probability. Ther~fo~~ th~~~i_~_1 jucfge-was-correct

in holding that the appellant's evidence laks credibility.

(4) Failure to attach significance to the erroneous procedure

followed by the prosecution which is contrary to the law relating

to criteria applicable in production of M6/N51 depositions.

On a perusal of evidence it appears that the Non Summary

Proceedings have been produced through the court interpreter and

marked as P2. The original too was shown to the witness before

tendering the document marked P2.

5

Therefore one can not say that prosecution has not followed the

laid down procedure. Learned counsel for the appellant cited S Stephen

and 3 others vs The Queen 66 NLR 264 and submitted that the

procedure adopted was illegal.

The legal principle discussed in that case will not apply to the case

in hand as the original of the deposition was shown to the witness and

the photocopy was marked and produced at the trial. The prosecution

has proved that the said deposition came into court fr<?J11" proper custody.

For the foregoing reasons the appeal is dismissed.

Appeal dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OEAP~

Deepali Wijesundera J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

6