i I I I

\ I

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A. Application No. 104/2010

High Court Panadura 1677/2003

The Honorable Attorney General of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of

Sri Lanka

Huldftsdorp, Colombo.

Complainant

Vs

Colombage Chaminda Rohitha

No. 146, Angulana Road

Moratuwa.

2nd Accused - Appellant

BEFORE : Oeepali Wijesundera J.

L.U. Jayasuriya J.

COUNSEL : Yalith Wijesundra for the

Accused - Appellant.

Haripriya Jayasundera OSG

For the Attorney - General

ARGUED ON : 25th January, 2017

DECIDED ON : 10th March, 2017

1

Oeepali Wijesundera J.

The accused appellant and two others were indicted in the High Court

of Panadura for the murder of K.D. Ranjith Niranjan Fernando under Sec. 296

read with Sec. 32 of the Penal Code. They were also indicted for causing

grievous hurt to one Aponso under Sec. 315 read with Sec. 32 of the Penal

Code. The first accused has died before the conclusion of the case and the

third accused had been acquitted. The learned High Court Judge found the

second accused appellant guilty of culpable homicide not amounting to murder

and sentence him to five years RI and ordered to pay a fine of Rs. 10,0001=

carrying a default sentence of 6 months. This appeal is from the said conviction

and sentence.

On the day in question there had been a big match between two Leading

Schools in Moratuwa at the Teron Fernando stadium. At about 5.30 in the

evening a common fight broken out in the stadium and a crowd had given

chase to the deceased. The deceased has sustained stab injuries as a result

of him being attacked by the second accused and some others with a sharp

instrument.

After watching the match witness Aponso had gone to his friend's house

nearby and they have been having tea seated outside in the garden. He had

2

seen the deceased coming out of the stadium and has noticed some people

surrounding and attacking him with clubs and flag poles. Aponso has rushed

to the place to break up the fight and had identified the first accused who was

holding a sharp pointed instrument in his hand. He has also seen the second

and third accused holding poles in their hands. In the mids of this somebody

had attacked Aponso but he has not identified the person who attacked him.

(page 93).

Witness Aponso had identified the second and third accused at an

identification parade held before the Magistrate subsequently. After witnessing

the deceased being attacked Aponso had gone to one Dr. Dalpadadu's house

and had seen his brother lying on the ground with stab injuries.

The Judicial Medical Officer has observed 7 injuries on the body of the

deceased out of which he described wound no. 1 as the fatal wound which he

has testified was caused by a sharp instrument.

On perusal of the evidence given in the High Court we find that the only

person who carried a sharp instrument was the first accused. But the learned

High Court Judge has acquitted him. There was evidence to the effect that the

second accused appellant had given a box with weapons to witness no. 4 the

Grama Niladari. Grama Niladari in the course of his evidence has testified the

3

appellant gave the said box to him on the following day. The High Court Judge

has analysed the evidence and drawn the wrong inference that since the

appellant landed over the said box to the Grama Niladari he was involved in

the incident. We find that by coming into this conclusion the High Court Judge

has erred. Without convicting the first accused who was holding a sharp

instrument the second accused appellant can not be convicted for a lesser

offence on the basis of participatory presence.

Sec. 32 of the Penal Code provides;

"When a criminal act is done by several persons in furtherance

of the common intention of all, each of such persons is liable for that

act in the same manner as ifit were done by him alone".

For the afore stated reason the conviction can not stand. We decide to

set aside the judgment dated 21/01/2010 and acquit the accused appellant.

Appeal allowed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

L.U. Jayasuriya J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

4