==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 22

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal by way of Stated

Case on questions of law for the opinion of

the Court of Appeal under and in terms of

section 11A of the Tax Appeals Commission

Act No. 23 of 2011 (as amended).

Bank of Ceylon,

CA (Tax) No.56/2023, Bank of Ceylon Square,

TAC Appeal No.TAC/VAT/32/2021 No. 01, Bank of Ceylon Mawatha,

CA (Tax) No. 90/2023 Colombo 01.

TAC Appeal No.TAC/VAT/14/2019

CA (Tax) No.91/2023, Appellant

TAC Appeal No.TAC/VAT/007/2020

CA (Tax) No. 97/2023, Vs.

TAC Appeal No.TAC/VAT/004/2018

The Commissioner General of Inland

Revenue,

14th Floor, Secretarial Branch,

Department of Inland Revenue,

Sir Chittampalam A. Gardiner Mawatha,

Colombo 02.

Respondent

Before: M.C.B.S. Morais J.

&

Annalingam Premashanker J.

Page 2 of 22

Counsel: Suren Fernando with K.Wikramanayake and Shiloma David for

the Appellant.

Manohara Jayasinghe, DSG for the Respondent.

Written Submissions: By the Appellant – on 28.08.2025

By the Respondent – on 27.08.2025

Argued on: 16.06.2025

Decided On: 23.10.2025

Judgment

M.C.B.S. Morais J.

This is an appeal by way of a case stated against the determination of the Tax Appeals

Commission dated 19th of June 2023 in the case of CA/TAX/56/2023, determination dated 17th

of July 2023 in the case of CA/TAX/90/2023, determination dated 17th of July 2023 in the case

of CA/TAX/91/2023 and determination dated 19th June 2023 in the case of CA/TAX/97/2023.

This appeal is filed under and in terms of section 11A of the Tax Appeals Commission Act No.

23 of 2011 (as amended). Since the matters CA/TAX/56/2023, CA/TAX/90/2023,

CA/TAX/91/2023, and CA/TAX/97/2023 primarily deal with the same substantial issue of Value

Added Tax (VAT) on Financial Services (FS), these cases are addressed together. Even though,

the observation is mainly based on case No. CA (Tax) No.56/2023, the matters in relation to the

remaining cases has also been addressed under the question of law raised. If the parties wish to

pursue the remaining questions of law undecided, they could do so separately under those cases.

Page 3 of 22

The taxable period for the value addition on Financial Services is from 1st of January 2016 to 31st

of December 2016.

Factual Background

The Bank of Ceylon (sometimes will be referred to as the Appellant) is established under and in

terms of the Bank of Ceylon Ordinance No. 53 of 1938 (as amended). The Appellant is

challenging the determination of the Tax Appeals Commission (hereinafter will be referred to as

TAC) dated 19th of June 2023 by the Commissioner General of Inland Revenue (hereinafter

sometimes will be referred to as the CGIR/ Respondent) in case No. TAC/VAT/032/2021. The

total Tax in Dispute is an amount of Rs.424,062,870.00 and a penalty of Rs.222,074,132.00.

The Appellant Company has filed the returns for VAT for the taxable period 1st of January 2016

to 31st of December 2016, which was rejected by the Deputy Commissioner, and an intimation

letter dated 22nd of May 2019 was issued stating the reasons for refusal. Being aggrieved by the

said assessment, the Appellant Company has made an appeal to the Respondent. After hearing

the appeal, the Respondent has made a determination dated 11th of June 2021 confirming the

assessment of the Deputy Commissioner. Being aggrieved by the said determination, the

Appellant Company has preferred an appeal to the TAC.

The main issue arises from the loan provided by the Appellant to its employees on a

concessionary rate which is less than the market rate. However, the Respondent has considered

the market rate of those loans, which is higher than the concessionary rate provided by the

Appellant in determining the VAT of the Appellant for the period mentioned above.

Appeal to Tax Appeals Commission

After considering the written submissions filed by both parties, the TAC has made a

determination dated 19th of June 2023 by dismissing the appeal. Accordingly the Tax Appeals

Commission determined as follows.

“A. Emoluments payable to all employees in terms of Section 25C of the VAT Act should

be the emoluments payable not only the amount payable in cash but the gross

emoluments payable in cash and all other benefit as well, hence, the amortization of staff

interest is correct as it is within the emoluments.

Page 4 of 22

B. The gains from the sale of shares of Miraka Investment should be liable to VAT on

FS”

Appeal to the Court of Appeal & Questions of Law

Being aggrieved by the determination of the TAC, the Appellant has appealed to the Court of

Appeal, to have the case stated for the opinion of the Court. Accordingly, the following question

of law has been raised by the Appellant;

CA (Tax) No.56/2023

“1. Did the Assessor, the Commissioner - General, and the Tax Appeals Commission, err in law by failing to understand and properly apply the concept of "value addition" in computing the VAT liability on the supply of financial services?

2. Did the Assessor, the Commissioner Appeals Commission, err in law by failing to recognize that; a. Section 25C (1) of the Value Added Tax Act applies only to transaction which result in value addition? b. Notional accounting entries (recorded for the purpose of Sri Lanka Accounting Standards) in respect of the grant of loans to employees, does not create a value addition equivalent to amounts reflected in such notional accounting entries? c. There was no "value addition" as claimed by the Assessor by the grant of loans to employees? d. Notional accounting entries (recorded for the purpose of Sri Lanka Accounting Standards) in respect of loans granted to staff, had no impact on the profit of the Bank, in as much as inter alm the Bank only received interest based on the actual interest rate at which the loans were granted? 3. Has the Assessor, the Commissioner General, and the Tax Appeals Commission, erred in law by failing to recognize that: a) Loans granted to employees did not constitute "emoluments" within the meaning of section 25C of the Value Added Tax Act? b) Notional interest based on notional accounting entries (recorded for the purpose of Sri Lanka Accounting Standards) in respect of loans granted to staff, cannot be considered or deemed to be an "emolument" for the purpose of VAT?

Page 5 of 22

c) Notional interest based on notional accounting entries (recorded for the purpose of Sri Lanka Accounting Standards) in respect of loans granted to staff, cannot be deemed to be an emolument paid and / or payable to the employee? 4. Did the Assessor, the Commissioner General, and the Tax Appeals Commission, err in law by: a. Failing to appreciate that Appellant's primary function of being engaged in the "Banking Business" did not apply to the sale of shares (of Mireka Capital Land (Pvt) Limited), which was a distinct and isolated transaction? b. Failing to recognize that the sale of the shares of Mireka Capital Land (Pvt) Limited was not performed in pursuit of providing financial services? c. Failing to recognize that (in the case of the Mireka Capital Land (Pvt) Limited transaction) the mere transfer of equity will not make such transaction liable to VAT on financial service? 5. Is the Assessment, (and the Determination of the Commissioner General, and the Determination of the Tax Appeals Commission, thereon) contrary to law? 6. In view of the evidence and material before the Tax Appeals Commission, did the Tax Appeals Commission err in law in arriving at the conclusions set out in its Determination?”

CA (Tax) No.90/2023

“1.Did the Tax Appeals Commissioner err in law by failing to recognize that the Inland Revenue Officer assigned to hear the Appeal (to the Commissioner-General) on the 21 February 2019 did not have the power to hear the Appeal?

2. Did the Assessor, the Commissioner General, and the Tax Appeals Commission, err in law by failing to understand and properly apply the concept of "value addition" in computing the VAT liability on the supply of financial services? 3. Did the Assessor, the Commissioner General, and the Tax Appeals Commission, err in law by failing to recognize that; a. Section 25C (1) of the Value Added Tax Act applies only to transaction which result in value addition? b. Notional accounting entries (recorded for the purpose of Sri Lanka Accounting Standards) in respect of the grant of loans to employees, does not create a value addition equivalent to amounts reflected in such notional accounting entries?

Page 6 of 22

c. There was no "value addition" as claimed by the Assessor by the grant of loans to employees? d. Notional accounting entries (recorded for the purpose of Sri Lanka Accounting Standards) in respect of loans granted to staff, had no impact on the profit of the Bank, in as much as inter alia the Bank only received interest based on the actual interest rate at which the loans were granted? 4. Has the Assessor, the Commissioner General, and the Tax Appeals Commission, erred in law by failing to recognize that; a) Loans granted to employees did not constitute "emoluments" within the meaning of section 25C of the Value Added Tax Act? b) Notional interest based on notional accounting entries (recorded for the purpose of Sri Lanka Accounting Standards) in respect of loans granted to staff, cannot be considered or deemed to be an "emolument" for the purpose of VAT? c) Notional interest based on notional accounting entries (recorded for the purpose of Sri Lanka Accounting Standards) in respect of loans granted to staff, cannot be deemed to be an emolument paid and/or payable to the employee? 5. Is the Assessment, (and the Determination of the Commissioner General, and the Determination of the Tax Appeals Commission, thereon) contrary to law? 6. In view of the evidence and material before the Tax Appeals Commission, did the Tax Appeals Commission err in law in arriving at the conclusions set out in its Determination?”

CA (Tax) No.91/2023

“1. Did the Assessor, the Commissioner General, and the Tax Appeals Commission, err in law by failing to understand and properly apply the concept of "value addition" in computing the VAT liability on the supply of financial services?

2. Did the Assessor, the Commissioner Appeals Commission, err in law by failing to recognize that; a. Section 25C (1) of the Value Added Tax Act applies only to transactions which result in value addition? b. Notional accounting entries (recorded for the purpose of Sri Lanka Accounting Standards) in respect of the grant of loans to employees, does not create a value addition equivalent to amounts reflected in such notional accounting entries?

Page 7 of 22

c. There was no "value addition" as claimed by the Assessor by the grant of loans to employees? d. Notional accounting entries (recorded for the purpose of Sri Lanka Accounting Standards) in respect of loans granted to staff, had no impact on the profit of the Bank, in as much as inter alia the Bank only received interest based on the actual interest rate at which the loans were granted? 3. Has the Assessor, the Commissioner General, and the Tax Appeals Commission, erred in law by failing to recognize that; a) Loans granted to employees did not constitute "emoluments" within the meaning of section 25C of the Value Added Tax Act? b) Notional interest based on notional accounting entries (recorded for the purpose of Sri Lanka Accounting Standards) in respect of loans granted to staff, cannot be considered or deemed to be an emolument for the purpose of VAT? c) Notional interest based on notional accounting entries (recorded for the purpose of Sri Lanka Accounting Standards) in respect of loans granted to staff, cannot be deemed to be an emolument paid and / or payable to the employee? 4. Has the Commissioner General, and the Tax Appeals Commission erred in law in failing to recognize that and/or failing to consider the evidence produced demonstrating that expenses for tours abroad for board members and staff constitute business expenses and do not constitute an employment benefit? 5. Is the Assessment, (and the Determination of the Commissioner General, and the Determination of the Tax Appeals Commission, thereon) contrary to law? 6. In view of the evidence and material before the Tax Appeals Commission, did the Tax Appeals Commission err in law in arriving at the conclusions set out in its Determination?”

CA (Tax) No.97/2023

“1.Did the Assessor, the Commissioner General, and the Tax Appeals Commission, err in law by failing to understand and properly apply the concept of "value addition" in computing the VAT liability on the supply of financial services?

2. Did the Assessor, the Commissioner General, and the Tax Appeals Commission, err in law by failing to recognize that;

Page 8 of 22

(a) Section 25C (1) of the Value Added Tax applies only to transactions which result in value addition? (b) Notional accounting entries (recorded for the purpose of Sri Lanka Accounting Standards) in respect of the grant of loans to employees, does not create a value addition equivalent to amounts reflected in such notional accounting entries? (c) There was no "value addition" as claimed by the Assessor by the grant of loans to employees? (d) Notional accounting entries (recorded for the purpose of Sri Lanka Accounting Standards) in respect of loans granted to staff, had no impact on the profit of the Bank, in as much as inter alia the Bank only received interest based on the actual interest rate at which the loans were granted? 3. Has the Assessor, the Commission General, and the Tax Appeals Commission, erred in law by failing to recognize that; (a) Loans granted to employees did not constitute "emoluments" within the meaning of section 25C of the Value Added Tax Act? (b) Notional interest based on notional accounting entries (recorded for the purpose of Sri Lanka Accounting Standards) in respect of loans granted to staff, cannot be considered or deemed to be an "emolument" for the purpose of VAT?. (c) Notional interest based on notional accounting entries ((recorded for the purpose of Sri Lanka Accounting Standards) in respect of loans granted to staff, cannot be deemed to be an emolument paid and/or payable to the employee? 4. Is the Assessment, (and the Determination of the Commissioner Genera, and the Determination of the Tax Appeals Commission, thereon) Contrary to law? 5.In view of the evidence and material before the Tax Appeals Commission, did the Tax Appeals Commission err, in law in arriving at the conclusions set out in its Determination?” Accordingly, the court shall deal with the following questions of law, which would basically cover all the question of law raised.

“1. Did the Assessor, the Commissioner General, and the Tax Appeals Commission, err

in law by failing to understand and properly apply the concept of "value addition" in

computing the VAT liability on the supply of financial services?

Page 9 of 22

2. Did the Assessor, the Commissioner - General, and the Tax Appeals Commission, err

in law by failing to recognize that; Section 25C (1) of the Value Added Tax Act applies

only to transaction which results in value addition?

3. Has the Assessor, the Commissioner General, and the Tax Appeals Commission, erred

in law by failing to recognize that; Loans granted to employees did not constitute

"emoluments" within the meaning of section 25C of the Value Added Tax Act?

4. Did the Assessor, the Commissioner - General, and the Tax Appeals Commission, err

in law by; failing to appreciate that Appellant's primary function of being engaged in the

"Banking Business" did not apply to the sale of shares (of Mireka Capital Land (Pvt)

Limited), which was a distinct and isolated transaction?

5. Is the Assessment, (and the Determination of the Commissioner General, and the

Determination of the Tax Appeals Commission, thereon) contrary to law?

6. In view of the evidence and material before the Tax Appeals Commission, did the Tax

Appeals Commission err in law in arriving at the conclusions set out in its

Determination?”

As above, there are six main questions of Law raised by the Appellant, which I will be dealing in

the following manner.

The first and second Questions of Law relate to the concept of “value addition” and its relevance

to the computation of Value Added Tax on “financial services” will be considered together. The

third and fourth Questions of Law, which pertain to the issues of “emoluments” and the sale of

shares, will be considered separately. The fifth and sixth Questions of Law are consequential

issues which will be addressed finally.

Questions of Law I and II

Question of Law I

Did the Assessor, the Commissioner General, and the Tax Appeals Commission err in law by

Page 10 of 22

failing to understand and properly apply the concept of “value addition” in computing the VAT

liability on the supply of financial services?

Question of Law II

Did the Assessor, the Commissioner General, and the Tax Appeals Commission err in law by

failing to recognize that Section 25C(1) of the Value Added Tax Act applies only to transactions

which result in value addition?

The questions of law I and II are similar in nature and therefore I shall discuss them together.

It is the contention of the Appellant that the Respondent has failed to appreciate the principle of

value addition,hence that there is no value addition by the Appellant to be taxed.

The concept of “value addition” is not expressly defined in the Act or in any other written law.

However, Section 25A of the Act lays down the imposition of VAT on “supply of financial

services on specified institutions or any other persons”. In the context of the application of VAT

on financial services, the relevant provision is Section 25A(1) of the Act, which stipulates as

follows;

“Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapters I, II, III and item (x) of paragraph (b)

of PART II of the First Schedule to this Act, a Value Added Tax (hereinafter in this Chapter

referred to as ‘the tax’) shall be charged in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter

on the supply of financial services in Sri Lanka.

(i) By any specified institution during the period commencing January 1, 2003 and

ending on June 30, 2003; and

(ii) By any person on or after July 1, 2003 but prior to December 31, 2007; and

(iii) By any person other than a co-operative Society registered under the Co-

operative Societies Law, No.5 of 1972, on or after January 1, 2008.

(iv) By any person other than a Co-operative Society registered under the Co-

operative Society Law, No. 5 of 1972, or Lady Lochore Loan Fund established

under the Act, No. 38 of 1951, commencing on or after January 1, 2009, or the

Page 11 of 22

Central Bank of Sri Lanka established by the Monitory Law Act, (Chapter 422)

(with effect from July 1, 2003), or the Sri Lanka Deposit Insurance Scheme

established by regulation made under the said Act, (with effect form April 1,

2018) where such specified institution or person carried on the business of

supplying such financial services.

Provided however, the supply of financial serviced by a Unit Trust or a Mutual Fund

shall not be treated as a financial service for the purpose of this section.”

Therefore, irrespective of the interpretation that could be given to the concept of “value

addition,” under the law—specifically under Section 25A(1) a person is liable to pay VAT on the

supply of financial services. However, the calculation of the VAT on Financial Services are done

in accordance with Section 25C, unless such person falls outside the ambit of Section 25(f),

which defines the supply of financial services. In essence, where a person supplies financial

services as contemplated under Section 25(f), such person becomes liable to pay VAT as

computed under Section 25C of the same Act, irrespective of any definition that can be given to

the phrase “value addition”.

Accordingly, irrespective of the concept of “value addition,” the determining factor in this

instance would be the above criteria as for Section 25A of the Act. Therefore, I will not consider

it necessary to define the concept of Value Addition to answer to the above first and second

Questions of Law stated.

Hence, I do not find that the Respondent has erred in law, and answer the first and second

question of law in the negative.

Question of Law III

Has the Assessor, the Commissioner General, and the Tax Appeals Commission, erred in law by

failing to recognize that; Loans granted to employees did not constitute "emoluments" within the

meaning of section 25C of the Value Added Tax Act?

Page 12 of 22

The primary issue is whether the emoluments, specifically the loans granted to the employees

subject to VAT under Section 25A should be calculated based on the market value or the

actual/ concessionary rate provided to employees. This question arises on the basis that the

assessors of the Respondent has calculated the VAT adding the emoluments using the market

rate, which exceeds by far the actual concessionary rate extended by the Appellant to their

employees. The dispute centers on which valuation method accurately reflects the taxable value

for VAT purposes.

The Respondent contends that when an employee receives a loan from the employer at a

subsidized interest rate, this constitutes a benefit to the employee. This is because the employee

would not have access to such favorable terms if obtaining a loan from a third-party financial

institution at the prevailing market interest rate. Consequently, the difference between the market

interest rate and the subsidized rate represents a benefit accruing to the employee arising from

the employer-employee relationship.

In terms of section 4 of the Inland Revenue Act, it is evident that the market value of any

benefits received or derived by the employee forms part of the profits from employment and is

considered as remuneration. Therefore, the Respondent has considered that the emoluments

payable to all employees in terms of Section 25C of the VAT Act include not only cash

payments but also gross emoluments payable in cash and all other benefits derived from the

employer. On this basis, the Respondent has determined that the amortization of staff interest

should be considered as emoluments payable in computing the value addition for VAT on

financial services.

However, it is the contention of the Appellant that the VAT on financial services can only be

made in respect of the emoluments payable to the employees, which is the actual amount payable

and not the notional sums. The Appellant further contends that the gross remuneration paid or

payable to employees is reflected in the pay sheet, but the notional sums are not included in the

employee remuneration. Therefore, the Appellant argues that the reduced interest rate loans are

accounted for financial accounting and income tax purposes by the Appellant and hence do not

constitute a taxable benefit to the employees.

Page 13 of 22

Section 25C(1) of the VAT Act refers to the exact point on which the VAT is imposed. It is

prior to the payment of income tax and emoluments. Hence, emoluments and payable taxes are

to be added to the Net Profit, subject to an allowance for depreciation. Therefore, the VAT is

imposed on an actual gross profit as stated above.

Accordingly, section 25C of the VAT Act No. 14 of 2002 (as amended) reads as follows;

“(1) Every registered specified institution under this Chapter shall be liable to tax for

each taxable period on its total value addition of such institution which includes the net

profits or loss, as the case may be, before payment of income tax on such profit computed

in accordance with accepted accounting standards, subject to an adjustment for

economic depreciation ,determined by the Minister having regard to the interest of

economy by order published in the Gazette, and the emoluments payable to all the

employees of such institution :

Provided however where the amount of profits for each taxable period cannot be

accurately ascertained, such amount may be estimated on the basis of available

information. The estimated amounts shall be adjusted to reflect the actual amounts with

the audited statement of accounts on yearly basis and such adjustment shall be submitted

within six months after the closing date of the relevant accounting period.

Emoluments paid to all the employees shall include—

(a) in the case of specified employees under Chapter XIV of the Inland Revenue Act, No.

10 of 2006, the gross remuneration payable to such employees and reflected in the pay

sheet maintained under section 119 of the Inland Revenue Act, No.10 of 2006;” and

(b) in the case of an employee other than a “specified employee” the gross remuneration

paid to such employee reflected in the pay sheet maintained under subsection

(2) Calculation of Tax [s 14 (1) (a) of 17 of 2013] [s 14 (1) (b) of 17 of 2013] for the

purpose of this Chapter the value addition of such specified institution shall be computed

:-

Page 14 of 22

(i) for any taxable period commencing prior to January 1, 2011, based on the net profit

or loss prior to the deduction of the tax payable under this Chapter; and

(ii) for any taxable period commencing on or after January 1, 2011, based on the net

profit or loss after the deduction of the tax payable under this Chapter”

The VAT on value addition of a “specified institution” is calculated under section 25C(1)(ii).

Accordingly, for any taxable period commencing on or after 1st of January 2011, the calculation

is based on the net profit or loss after the deduction of tax payable and the economic

depreciation, under Chapter XIV of the Act. On this basis, the VAT on specified institution is

calculated on the taxable amount for VAT, before the deduction of the income tax and the

“emoluments payable to all the employees of such institution”.

In determining the point of VAT taxation, the question arises as to the rate of interest on which

the loans granted to the employees should be considered to be added to the calculation of the

VAT in accordance with the aforementioned provision.

When calculating the profit of an entity for income tax purposes, the emoluments should be

deductible at the rate of the staff loan given on a concessionary basis, as the Inland Revenue

Commissioner (IRC) will not permit any deduction based on the market rate where loans were

granted at a lower concessionary rate. Therefore, the deductible emoluments are those

corresponding to the staff loan provided at the concessional rate. In absence of an interpretation

given in the VAT Act the Respondent has correctly referred to the interpretation given in the

Inland Revenue Act (IR Act) No. 10 of 2006 where “official emoluments” are interpreted in

Section 132(4) of the said act. In there a reference is made to the section 04(1) of the IR Act

where the emoluments are interpreted as profits from employment as for paragraph 4(a)

excluding the pension. Since there is no alternative interpretation of the term “emoluments” other

than that could be gathered by Section 4 of the Inland Revenue Act, no other interpretation of

“emolument” can be applied.

In other words, in calculating the income tax, the emoluments are a deductible expense, however

when loans granted to the employees are considered, they would only be deductible at the actual

rate which is the concessionary rate. Therefore, the word of “emoluments” interpreted in relation

to section 4 of the Inland Revenue Act No. 10 of 2006 (as amended) gives a clear impression that

Page 15 of 22

emoluments should be considered at actual rate, and therefore its quite impossible to give a

different interpretation to the term “emolument” as under the Inland Revenue Act No. 10 of 2006

(as amended) as for the purpose of VAT under section 25A of the VAT Act No. 14 of 2002.

This clearly indicates that the legislature intended VAT to be imposed on the actual gross profit

of the institution, prior to the deduction of income tax and employee emoluments, and subject to

the allowance for economic depreciation. Consequently, artificially expanding the said gross

profit by artificially introducing an excessive interest rate would result in calculating a

hypothetical gross profit rather than the actual one, which contradicts the legislative intent.

Therefore, the underlying important principal should be, “if the said emoluments are deductible

for the income tax purposes, then it should similarly be capable of being added to the net profit

of the entity in calculating the VAT.”

On the same line, regarding VAT on financial services payable in respect of official travel

abroad of employees, if such expenses qualify as deductible emoluments for income tax

purposes, then they must similarly qualify and be added back as emoluments when calculating

VAT. The word ‘Emoluments’ cannot bear two different or inconsistent meanings in tax

computations.

Therefore, the question of law III is hereby answered in the affirmative.

Question of Law IV

Did the Assessor, the Commissioner - General, and the Tax Appeals Commission, err in law by;

failing to appreciate that Appellant's primary function of being engaged in the "Banking

Business" did not apply to the sale of shares (of Mireka Capital Land (Pvt) Limited), which was

a distinct and isolated transaction?

The main question that arises is, does the sale of shares of Mireka Capital Land is a Financial

service which falls within the meaning of “banking business”? It is admitted by both parties that

the Appellant is a “specified institution” which engages in financial services and falls under

section 25C(1) of the VAT Act.

Page 16 of 22

The Appellant contends that the gains made from the sale of shares which the Appellant held in

Mireka Capital Lands (Pvt) Limited were not carried out as part of the business activities of the

Appellant Bank and therefore must be excluded from the calculation of VAT on financial

services. The Appellant held a 40% stake in Mireka Capital Lands (Pvt) Limited and, by the sale

of those shares, reported a gain of Rs. 3,130,000,000.

In the case of Boehm+Leckner Multi Moulds (Private) Limited V. The Commissioner General

of Inland Revenue, case No. CA (TAX) 34/2014, Justice Janak De Silva held that;

“The purpose of accounting is usually to provide information to interested parties

relevant to stewardship, control and decision-making. The requirements of a tax system

can be quite different. The profits and income shown in the accounts prepared in

accordance with accounting standards differ from profits and income computed in

accordance with the provisions of the Inland Revenue Act No. 10 of 2006 as amended.

In fact, the Supreme Court in Rodrigo v. The Commissioner General of Inland Revenue

[(2002) 1 SrLL.R. 384 at 387J held that to arrive at the taxable income consideration

should be given only to the permissible deductions provided by the Act and the Court

cannot take into consideration any other means of computing the deductible amounts. In

doing so, it quoted with approval the decision in Sub Nigel Ltd., v. ClR [(1948) 4 SA 580,

15 S.A.T.c. 381J where Centiliversc.J. held that the Court is not concerned with

deductions which may be considered proper from an accountant's point of view or from

the point of view of a prudent trader, but merely with the deductions which are

permissible according to the language of the Act.”

Therefore, it needs to be noted that the accounting standards prescribed by law is only for the

accounting purpose. Even though the Appellant has shown the market rate of the loan given to

their employees in their accounts, its only for the accountancy and it would not be relevant for

taxation purposes.

Moreover, in considering Section 25C, it is important to pinpoint the exact basis on which VAT

is imposed. According to this section, VAT is levied on the gross profit before the deduction of

income tax and after allowing for the permitted economic depreciation, with the emoluments

paid to employees being added back.

Page 17 of 22

Therefore, I am compelled to conclude that, with respect to Section 25 of the VAT Act, the

amount to be added back in calculating the gross profit on which VAT is imposed should be

based on the actual rate, which is the concessionary rate.

The Appellant asserts that the special circumstances under which the shares was owned,

including the Government’s involvement in requiring the Appellant to continue holding the

investment and the appointment of three directors to the Joint Venture in connection with the

acquisition of such shares, establish that the disposition of these shares was not part of the

conventional course of business of the Appellant Bank. Therefore, the Appellant contends that

the transfer of shares it is a unique transaction carried out outside routine business activities, and

is not liable for VAT on financial services. Therefore, the Appellant asserts that their principal

activity is not trading, and the shares in Mireka Capital Lands (Pvt) Limited were an isolated

occurrence that did not form part of the principal business of the company under section 25G of

the VAT Act.

However, the Respondent contends that the Appellant is liable to VAT on Financial Services

under Section 25F(e) of the VAT Act, which specifies the items that can be considered as

“Financial Services.”

“(e) the issue, allotment, transfer of ownership of any equity security or a participatory

security ;”

The primary issue that arises is whether the sale of shares of Mireka Capital Land falls within the

definition of "banking business." According to Section 86 (Interpretation section) of the Banking

Act No. 30 of 1998, "banking business" is defined as:

“Banking business means the business of receiving funds from the public through the

acceptance of money deposits payable on demand by cheque, draft, order, or otherwise,

and the use of such funds, either in whole or in part, for advances, investments, or any

other operations either authorized by law or by customary banking practices.”

This provision establishes that a registered bank under the Banking Act is authorized to engage

only in the activities encompassed within the above definition. Furthermore, a bank is prohibited

from engaging in any business activities other than those specified in its license.

Page 18 of 22

Section 6 of the Banking Act No. 30 of 1988 provides that:

“Subject to the provisions of section 17, no licensed commercial bank shall— (a) carry

on any banking business other than the business specified in the license; or (b) carry on

any other form of business other than those specified in Schedule II of this Act.”

According to the financial statements submitted by the Appellant, the Commissioner General of

Inland Revenue (CGIR) has considered investment activities as part of the bank’s business

operations, thus regarding any gains derived from such investments as part of the bank’s

business income. Additionally, the Respondent asserts that the paragraph (ii) of Schedule 3 of

Gazette Notification 1868/10 dated 23rd June 2014 mandates that non-financial value addition

must be calculated on a separate basis. Consequently, no income stream can be excluded from

the total value addition calculation. Therefore, considering these facts and circumstances of the

case, the Commissioner General of Inland Revenue has considered the profits gained from the

sales of Mireka Capital Ltd by the Appellant as a Business Transaction within the scope of

Banking Business.

It is noteworthy that the possession of Mireka Capital Ltd by the Appellant has occurred under

special circumstances, and there is no evidence to demonstrate that the Appellant is engaged in

the business of financing or trading shares beyond this instance. Although the Respondent has

stated in their post argument written submissions that the Appellant is involved in purchasing

shares in multiple companies, this claim was neither raised during oral arguments nor referenced

in prior submissions, hence the Appellant had no opportunity to respond to the said claim of the

Respondent. Furthermore, I do not find any materials to substantiate the claim that the Appellant

holds shares in other companies or conducts business related to trading shares. Therefore, this

contention by the Respondent is not sustainable and cannot be accepted.

Furthermore, section 25A(1) of the VAT Act No. 14 of 2002 as amended by Act No.13 of 2004,

clearly implies the applicability of VAT on specified institution for Financial services where,

Page 19 of 22

“where such specified institution or person carries on the business of supplying such

Financial services.”

Therefore, it is established that section 25A can only be applied to an institution which carries on

the business of supplying “such” Financial Services. The TAC has held that the Appellant

provides Financial Services and trading in shares is also a Financial Service. Hence, the

Appellant is liable to pay VAT on this occasion.

I regret that I cannot agree with the above, as the Appellant is a banker and have not engaged in

share trading other than on this occasion, and the law requires the entity to be engaged in such

Financial Services, as a business. A banker engaging in a sale of shares as one-off transaction

cannot be held to be in the business of share trading. In my view both the regular business and

one-off transaction simply being Financial Service is insufficient to hold that the bank has

disposed of shares in the course of its regular business.

Furthermore, in the case of People’s Leasing and Finance PLC V. The Commissioner General

of Inland Revenue, (2021) CA (TAX) 21/2019, CA Minutes 20.07.2021, Dr. Ruwan Fernando, J

held that;

“While the mere acquisition, holding and sale of shares does not by itself constitute

“supply of services” within the meaning of Section 25F of the VAT Act as supply of

financial services, if the purpose of consideration of payment provided was to finance

its business activities only and raise capital for its activities, such activities will not

constitute a supply of services for consideration within the meaning of Section 25F. It

is totally different where the sale of shares was to obtain income on a continuing basis

that goes beyond the compass of the simple acquisition and sale of shares in the course of

a business or trading in securities. Such transactions, would constitute a supply of a

financial services within the meaning of section 25F of the VAT Act. ”.

Therefore, the Respondent has failed to establish a continuation or a different instance where the

Appellant has involved in share Transaction. On this basis, I would answer the question of law

IV in the affirmative.

Page 20 of 22

Question of Law V

Is the Assessment, (and the Determination of the Commissioner General, and the Determination

of the Tax Appeals Commission, thereon) contrary to law?

Question of Law VI

In view of the evidence and material before the Tax Appeals Commission, did the Tax Appeals

Commission err in law in arriving at the conclusions set out in its Determination?

When considering the question of Law V and VI, I would answer in affirmative for the reasons

stated before.

Accordingly, I answer the questions of law raised by the Appellant in the following manner;

CA (Tax) No.56/2023

Question of Law 1 – No

Question of Law 2 (a) - No

Question of Law 2 (b) - Yes

Question of Law 2 (c)– Not decided

Question of Law 2 (d) - Yes

Question of Law 3(a) –Yes

Question of Law 3 (b) -Yes

Question of Law 3 (c) – Yes

Question of Law 4 (a)– Yes

Question of Law 4 (b) - Yes

Question of Law 4 (c) - Yes

Question of Law 5- Yes

Question of Law 6 - Yes

Page 21 of 22

CA (Tax) No.90/2023

Question of Law 1 – Not decided

Question of Law 2 – No (in absence of interpretation for value addition)

Question of Law 3(a) –No (in absence of interpretation for value addition)

Question of Law 3 (b) - Yes

Question of Law 3 (c) – Not decided

Question of Law 3 (d) - Yes

Question of Law 4 (a) – Yes

Question of Law 4 (b) - Yes

Question of Law 4 (c) - Yes

Question of Law 5- Yes

Question of Law 6 - Yes

CA (Tax) No.91/2023

Question of Law 1 –No (in absence of interpretation for value addition)

Question of Law 2 (a) - No (in absence of interpretation for value addition)

Question of Law 2 (b) - Yes

Question of Law 2 (c) - Not decided

Question of Law 2 (d) - Yes

Question of Law 3(a) – Yes

Question of Law 3 (b) - Yes

Question of Law 3 (c) - Yes

Question of Law 4 – Yes

Question of Law 5- Yes

Question of Law 6 - Yes

Page 22 of 22

CA (Tax) No.97/2023

Question of Law 1 –No (in absence of interpretation for value addition)

Question of Law 2 (a) –Not decided

Question of Law 2 (b) - Yes

Question of Law 2 (c) – Not decided

Question of Law 2 (d) - Yes

Question of Law 3(a) – Yes

Question of Law 3 (b) -Yes

Question of Law 3 (c) - Yes

Question of Law 4 – Yes

Question of Law 5- Yes

No cost ordered.

The Registrar of this court is directed to forward a copy of this Judgment to the Tax Appeals

Commission for the necessary action.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Annalingam Premashanker J.

I agree

Judge of the Court of Appeal