IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

Andrew Emmanuel,

Murugan Kovilady,

Linganagar,

Trincomalee.

Defendant-Appellant

C.A.Appeal N 0.429/99 (F)

D.C. Trincomalee Case No. 568/96

BEFORE

COUNSEL

Vs.

Sellathurai Y ogarasa

Murugan Kovilady,

Linganagar,

Trincomalee.

Plaintiff-Respondent

M.M.A.GAFOOR, J.

Rudana Zahir for the Defendant-Appellant

Hiran de Alwis for the Plaintiff-Respondent.

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS

TENDERED ON: 19-02-2018

DECIDED ON 11th July,2018

1

2

M.M.A.GAFOOR, T.

In this case, the learned District Judge of Trincomalee has

delivered the order on 29.04.1999 in favour of the Plaintiff-Respondent

(hereinafter sometimes referred to as the "Plaintiff'). Being aggrieved by

the said order the Defendant-Appellant (hereinafter sometimes referred to

as the "Defendant") filed this appeal.

The Plaintiff-Respondent states that the questioned land is a

State Land situated in Linganagar, 2 miles away from Trincomalee. The

Plaintiff-Respondent cleared the said land and built a cottage and lived in

there since 1987. The Plaintiff testified that he was granted a permit

bearing No.TG/LN/244D/05 to occupy the said land of the State by the

Assistant Land Commissioner of Trincomalee. It was issued on 03.08.1989

and marked as Pl. Due to the violence/unrest in Trincomalee in 1990 the

Plaintiff fled to India and returned to Sri Lanka on 21st March, 1995. To

prove that he was in India as a refugee, he produced the Camp Leaving

Certificate which was issued by the Government Agent, marked as P2 (at

page 94 and 95 of the original brief). In his evidence it was revealed that,

after returning to Sri Lanka, he went to his land and he identified that the

cottage erected by him was not there. Instead of that there was a Olai leaf

cottage and the Defendant was living there. The Plaintiff was debarred

from entering to the said land by the Defendant. Therefore, the Plaintiff

3

lodged a complaint to the police on 19.04.1995 (marked as P4 at pg.98 of

the brief).

Thereafter, the Plaintiff instituted an action in the District

Court of Trincomalee bearing case No.568/96 on 09th January 1996 seeking

a declaration that the plaintiff is entitled to possess the questioned land

and an order against the defendant for ejection from the said land and

damages assessed at the rate of Rs.200/= per mensum from 1995 till the

Plaintiff be placed in the possession of the said land.

According to the Defendant, the permit holder of the said land

IS his mother namely, Micheal Agnes. The case for the Defendant

commenced with the evidence of his mother. Micheal Agnes (mother of

the defendant) testified that she obtained a permit marked as Dl (at page

102 of the brief) on 31st December 1971 and lived in the said land with her

son. She further stated that during the unrest period her family stayed in

Palaiyuttu Church in 1986 or 1987 and returned.

The Court has to examine the validity of the questioned permits of

"Pl" and "Dl".

Referring to the document marked as "PI", the Land Officer stated

in his evidence that he could not trace the questioned permit but he has

4

brought the ledger. After comparison between the permit and the ledger,

witness confirmed that there are ledger entries pertaining to II PI" . The

number of he said permit is TG/LM/244D/05. The name of the permit

holder referred to as Sellathurai Yoganathan (Plaintiff). The date of grant

is 3rd March 1989. Witness also testified that there is no remarks in the

ledger whether the permit is valid or not, but he says that it was a valid

permit for a year. Witness further stated that an annual permit issued to

one who is displaced due to riots will not be cancelled. But if the annual

permit is not renewed after one year it will be expired automatically. At

page 11 of the brief he states as follows :-

Q: When a person displaced due to riots, if trespassed by another

person will you consider the fact that he was displaced due to

riots?

A: Yes, we have got instructions regarding it, we will not cancel

such permits.

According to the permit, the land is situated in Nadarajan Street,

Linganagar. This is a 20 perch extent land. The boundaries are not

mentioned in the permit. Boundaries should have marked in the permit

but did not. He also stated that he cannot say, for which land the permit

was issued. The permit was issued by Deed Officer Thangarasen. A

rubber stamp is placed on the permit "PI" and the permit has not renewed

since 1989. According to the Plaintiff that the Land Officer showed him the

5

boundaries of the said land after the permission was granted. The

boundaries are as follows:-

East-

North-

West-

South-

Kalimuthy

Velayuthan

was a road

was a road.

Referring to document marked as "Dl", Land Officer stated that

"Dl"is an annual permit. He also stated that this is an alternate land

which was given for an encroacher of Plantain Point. That permit was

issued by the District Land Officer and it was issued on 9th November

1971 and that permit has no number. There is no rubber stamp on the

permit "Dl". At page 18, it is stated,

Q: By comparing "PI" and "Dl" can you tell which permit

clearly indicates where the land is situated?

A: In "PI" it has been clearly mentioned as Nadarajan Street.

The Land Officer testified that there was a fire took place in the Land

Registry in 1979 and several documents were burnt. He further added that

before issuing a permit they collect information from those who are living

in the nieghbourhood. According to the Defendant, the boundaries of the

land is as follows:-

West-Joseph

South-

North-

a lane

main road

His land is 10 feet from sea.

6

The next point is whether the Defendant has a right to possess the

said land. According to the evidence of the Defendant, he has failed to

prove that he and his family lived in the questioned land since 1971. The

identity card of the Defendant indicates a different address. The Defendant

obtained his identity card in 1972 and his address was mentioned as No.5,

Orr's Hill, Trincomalee.(at page 33 of the brief). The Defendant stated that

his voters card used to come to Linganagar but, his voting place is

Trincomalee Town. He has failed to submit it to Court.

The credibility of the evidence of the mother of the Defendant (the

permit holder of Dl) has failed, because she contradicted her own

evidence. At page 23 witness stated that a neighbour named Manohara is

the elder brother of Soori ( Plaintiff) and they lived next to her land. But at

page 27 she denied that and stated, she does not know whether they have

a relationship or not. Witness also stated that she signed the permit "Dl/1

but when it was shown to her at the trial, she stated that she couldn't see

the document due to weak eye site. Witness stated that she couldn't

explain the boundaries of the land and her evidence indicates that she

7

doesn't know about her neighbours. According to the aforementioned

evidence Court is of the opinion, that the witness is not a credible witness

and it is unsafe to act upon her evidence.

Having considered the evidence of the Defendant and the mother of

the Defendant, Court is also of the view, that they have failed to prove,

they hold a valid permit to possess the said land and that they occupied in

the said land since 1971.

Therefore, I see no reason to interfere with the judgment of the

learned District Judge. For the foregoing reasons, I dismiss the appeal with

costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

***