==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

Orders in the nature of Writs of

Certiorari, Prohibition and Mandamus

under Article 140 of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

1. Free Trade Zones & General Services

Employees Union,

Ananda Rajakaruna Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

2. Mr. Anton Marcus,

Joint Secretary,

Free Trade Zone & General Services

Employees Union,

Ananda Rajakaruna Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

CA (Writ) App. No. 123/2024

PETITIONERS

Vs.

1. H.K.K.A. Jayasundara,

Commissioner General of Labour (Acting/Covering up), (Ceased to hold office) Department of Labour, Labour Secretariat, Kirula Road, Colombo 05.

2

1A. H.M.D.N.K. Wataliyadda,

Commissioner General of Labour, Department of Labour, Labour Secretariat, “Mehewara Piyasa”, Colombo 05.

2. Assistant Commissioner of Labour,

6th Floor, Colombo Central District, Labour Office, Labour Secretariat, “Mehewara Piyasa”, Colombo 05. 3. N.M.Y. Thushari,

Commissioner Labour Standards, Department of Labour, Labour Secretariat, “Mehewara Piyasa”, Colombo 05. 4. Ansell Lanka (Pvt) Ltd,

Biyagama, Malwana.

RESPONDENTS

3

Before: Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Counsel:

S.N. Mohamed with Laknath Senevirathna and Induka Senanayake for the Petitioner.

Sehan Soysa, S.S.C. for the 1st to 3rd Respondents.

Manoj Bandara with Thidas Herath and Anjalie Fonseka instructed by Sudath Perera

Associates for the 4th Respondent.

Argued on: 06.11.2025

Delivered on: 01.06.2026

4

Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Judgement

Introduction

The 1st Petitioner is a trade union who claims that it has filed this Application for and on behalf of

its members. However, the Petitioner claims that its members are not disclosed due to

confidentiality and security reasons of the said membership. The 2nd Petitioner is its Joint Secretary.

The 1st Respondent is the Commissioner General of Labour, while the 2nd Respondent is the

Commissioner of Labour, the 3rd Respondent is the Director of Labour, and the 4th Respondent is

a company incorporated under the laws of Sri Lanka, capable of suing and being sued in its

corporate name. Further, it is stated that the 4th Respondent is the employer under whom more than

3000 employees are employed, and the 1st Petitioner claims that most of the employees are its

members.

Nevertheless, the Petitioners’ complaint to this Court is that certain handpicked employees chosen

by the 4th Respondent, the company as the employer (4th Respondent), have entered into a

collective agreement which is gazetted and the same is marked as P13; the Petitioners claim that

the said collective agreement contains certain terms that are detrimental to the employees, and

therefore, is violative of the statutory provisions of Section 6 of the Industrial Disputes Act, No.

43 of 1950.

Thus, the Petitioners seek to challenge the same and seek a Writ of Certiorari to cancel the same

by this Application. The Respondents have filed two sets of formal Objections separately;

thereafter, this was argued before this Court on 06.11.2025; hence, this judgement.

5

Arguments

The Counsel for the Petitioners, Mr. Mohamed’s first contention is that P13 has not been signed

by and between the employer and the trade union. It has been signed by a handpicked crowd of

employees purported to be representatives of the employees; therefore, it is not a proper collective

agreement since what is worded in P13 is “sewaka sabhawa” instead of employees.

He further argued that what is stated in Clause 7(3) of P13(a) is not beneficial to the workmen; it

is detrimental to them. Therefore, the Commissioner could not have been satisfied enough to

publish it in the gazette; thus, it is bad in law.

On the other hand, Mr. Bandara, the Counsel for the 4th Respondent, argued that the Petitioners

have failed to show the nexus between the employees and the Petitioners; therefore, this

Application cannot be maintained. He argued that this Application should also fail because the

Petitioners have failed to state whether this is public interest litigation or a personal interest

litigation. In addition to that, he further argued that this Application cannot be maintained because

the necessary parties are not before Court since the employees who have signed P13 are not made

parties to this Application.

His next argument is that P13 has been signed by and between the employees and the employers;

therefore, it is valid document.

Further, he argued that the collective agreement contained in P13 is consistent with Section 62 of

the Wages Board Ordinance.

The final argument of Mr. Bandara on what is stipulated in Clause 7(3) of P13, similar to what is

stipulated in the Regulation under the Wages Board Ordinance, is that if an employee is working

6

on a Sunday, he is entitled to have the same benefits and overtime benefits as of an employee who

is entitled to benefits granted for working on off-days.

Mr. De Soysa, the learned State Counsel, argued that he is neither sailing with the employer nor

the Petitioners, and therefore, he is only appearing for the Commissioner, whose duty is to look

after the wellbeing of the employees. Mr. Soysa argued that in terms of Section 62 of the Wages

Ordinance, what is expected of the Commissioner is to create minimum conducive conditions for

the employees to work, and ensure that the employers provide for that and not go below that.

Further, he argued that the Petitioners’ so-called trade union does not have enough membership to

prosecute this Application since out of 800 employees, now only 69 employees are its members,

who have also left them now. In addition to that, he agreed with Mr. Bandara’s argument that this

Application cannot be maintained since the necessary parties who signed P13 are not before Court

as parties to this Application.

The Petitioners’ position

The Petitioners claim that there had been a dispute between the Petitioners and the 4th Respondent

with regard to;

(i) Effectually maintaining of unlawful rules of the system,

(ii) The non-payment of overtime wages to employees working during night shifts, and

(iii)The incorrect computation of wages.

Accordingly, the Petitioners assert that they had made an application to the 1st Respondent.

Consequently, the 1st Respondent had gone into the matter and issued certain directions by the

document marked as P1(a); the 1st Respondent had made the application marked as P1, and the 3rd

Respondent had issued P1(a).

7

Further, the Petitioners claim that the payment of wages ought to be made in accordance with the

stipulations contained in the document marked as P1(b).

Thereafter, the Petitioners and the 2nd Respondent had correspondence, which are marked as P2

and P3 annexed to the Petition. Further, the Petitioners had correspondence with the 1st Respondent,

which are marked as P4, P5, P6(a), and P7.

In addition to the above, the Petitioners claim that it had further correspondence with the 2nd

Respondent, as reflected in the documents marked as P9, P10, and P11.

The Petitioners assert that to its great shock and dismay, a notice dated 09.10.2023 had been

published by the 4th Respondent in the Gazette Extraordinary bearing No. 2335/25, a copy of which

is marked as P13.

The Petitioners further assert that the computation of time, overtime, wages, and weekly holidays

is inconsistent with the decisions contained in the Wages Board Regulation for the Rubber

(Including Tyre Manufacturing and Rebuilding), Plastic and Petroleum Resin Products

Manufacturing Trade industry, which is applicable to the matter in issue, as well as with the

directives issued by the 1st to 3rd Respondents in the documents marked as P1(a) and P1(b).

The Petitioners further claim that thereafter, a collective agreement had been entered into between

certain employees and the 4th Respondent, which was published in the Gazette and marked as P13,

and which had been approved by the other Respondents, which the Petitioners challenge in this

Application.

8

The Respondents’ Objections

The 1st to 3rd Respondents have filed their respective Objections separately. According to them,

the Petitioners have instituted the above-styled application challenging the gazetted collective

agreement entered into between the 4th Respondent and the representative of its employees, and

which has been gazetted as per the law; therefore, without disclosing the correct factual position,

the Petitioners have instituted the above Application. Thus, the Petitioners’ Application cannot be

maintained, and as such, the Petitioners’ Application needs to be dismissed in limine for the non-

production of certain material documents which the 4th Respondent has disclosed marked a

document 4R(1).

In addition to that, it is their position that the collective agreement that they had entered into

between the 4th Respondent and its employees under the supervision of the 1st to 3rd Respondents

in accordance with the law.

When it comes to the Statement of Objections of the 4th Respondent, it has raised two preliminary

objections in addition to the objections based on merits based on annexed the documents marked

as R1 to R45 in support of their position.

It is the 4th Respondent’s position that the Petitioner cannot invoke the jurisdiction of this Court

since it is not a party to the document marked as P13, the collective agreement entered into between

the 4th Respondent and the representatives of the 4th Respondent employees’ trade union; in

addition to that, the necessary parties are not cited as respondents to this Application.

Secondly, the Petitioners have not divulged the fact that it does not command any authority

deriving from the employees since no document is annexed to the Petition to establish the number

of members of their union; nevertheless, the 4th Respondent has marked a document marked as

9

4R(1) to establish that more than 85% of its employees are members of a trade union called “Ansell

Api”, whose representatives are only signatories to the collective agreement marked as P13.

Therefore, the Petitioners are guilty of misrepresentation.

In addition to that, there are certain allegations against the Petitioners to state that the Petitioners

had tried to create a chaotic situation within the premises of the factory of the 4th Respondent, and

thus, tried to gain an advantage without even commanding any authority over the employees.

Accordingly, by the Objections, the 4th Respondent has sought a dismissal of this Application.

Now I will consider the collective agreement gazetted in P13, to ascertain whether it is detrimental

to the employees of the 4th Respondent.

In this case, the Petitioners contend that the 4th Respondent and the trade union, having entered

into the agreement which was admitted by the 1st to 3rd Respondents and published in the Gazette

notification marked as P13, is violative of Regulation 24 of the Wages Board Regulations.

Now I will consider the said Regulation 24 along with the terms of the agreement marked as P13.

According to Clause 7 of Regulation 24, it reads as thus;

“IV ක ොටස:

සතිකේ නිවොඩු දිනය (24 වැනි වගන්තතිය) සෑම කසේවකයෝජ කයක්ම තමො යටකේ වැඩ රන සෑම

කසේව යකුටම ඉරිදො දිනය සුමොන නිවොඩු දිනයක් වශකයන්ත දිය යුතුය.

එකසේ නමුදු ඉරිදො දිනය දී වුවද පහත දැක්කවන ක ොන්තකේසි වලට යටේව කසේවො කයෝජ යො විසින්ත

යම් කසේව කයක් කසේවකේ කයදවිය හැකිය.

01. එම ඉරිදො දිනයට ඉක්ිතිව එළකෙන දින හය ඇතුලත දිනයක් කසේව යොට නිවොඩු දිය යුතුය.

තවද, ඉරිදො දිනය දී රන ලද වැඩ සම්බන්තධකයන්ත

10

(අ) මොසි කේතන ලබන කසේව යින්ත සඳහො එකසේ වැඩ ල පළමු පැය 09 සඳහො ( ෑම

පැය ද ඇතුළුව) ඔවුන්තකේ මොසි වම කේතනය 30 න්ත කබදො ලැකබන ප්‍රමොණය නුව 50%

කින්ත වැඩි වූ ප්‍රමොණයක් සහ

(ආ) ඊට පසුව වැඩ රන එක් එක් පැයක් සඳහො (වම දදනි ොල වැටුප් ප්‍රමොණය 8න්ත

කබදො නිශේචය රගේ කහෝ වම මොසි ප්‍රමොණය 240න්ත කබදො නිශේචය රගේ) පය ට

ගැකනන වම ප්‍රමොණය 50% කින්ත වැඩි වූ ප‍රමොණයක් ද, නුක්‍රමි වශකයන්ත එම කසේව යොට

කගවිය යුතුය.”

Thereafter, on a careful analysis of the above regulations, the following position emerges. First, if

a workman is required to work on a Sunday, such workman is entitled to a holiday within the

succeeding six days, in lieu of the Sunday he has worked.

However, when it comes to payment for work performed on a Sunday, it is also provided that for

the first 9 hours, which includes the lunch and tea interval, payment shall be at 150% per hour of

the normal wages, namely daily wages plus 50%. In addition to that, if additional hours are worked,

such hours shall be paid at 200% per day of the normal wages.

Now I will consider how the essence of the above is encapsulated in the document marked P13,

which reads thus;

“7.3 ඒ අනුව සතියක් තුළ පැය 12 බැගින්ත වූ කසේවොමුර 5ක් කසේවකේ කයදීමට කසේව යින්ත එ ඟවන

අතර එම එක් එක් කසේවො මුරකේ මුල් පැය 8 ඉක්ම වූ ( ෑම පැය හැර) සෑම පැයක් සඳහොම අති ොල

ලබොදීමට කසේවකයෝජ එ ඟ කේ. සොමොනය කසේවො මුරය කප.ව. 6.00 සිට ප.ව. 6.00 දක්වො වන

අතර රොත්‍රී කසේවො මුරය ප.ව. 6.00ට ආරම්භ වී පපුදො කප.ව. 6.00 ට අවසන්ත කිරීමට කදපොර්ශේවය

එ ඟ කේ. එකමන්ත ම සොමොනය මුර කසේවකේ එනම් කප.ව. 8.30 සිට ප.ව. 5.00 දක්වො කසේවකේ

කයකදන කසේව යන්ත සඳහොද ඉහත ක්‍රමකේදයට අති ොල ලබොදීමට කසේවොකයෝජ එ ඟ කේ.

11

7.4 ජොතයන්තතර නීති (ILO) වශකයන්ත යම් යම් ොලපරිේකේදවල දියේ රන්තනො වූ නීතිරීති වලට

යටේව ටයුතු කිරීමට කදපොර්ශේවයම එ ඟ කේ. (CSR)

7.5 තම සති නිවොඩු දිනකේ (Off day) කසේවය කයකදන යම් කසේව කයකු කවනුකවන්ත එම සතිය තුළ

වි ල්ප දිනයක් සුති නිවොඩුව කලස ලබොදීමටේ එකසේ සති නිවොඩු දිනය කසේවකේ කයකදන

කසේව කයකු කවනුකවන්ත සොමොනය අති ොල ප්‍රමොණය කමන්ත කදගුණය ප්‍රමොණයක් කගවීමට

කසේවොකයෝජ එ ඟ කේ. එකමන්තම නිෂේපොදන ක්‍රියොවලිකේ සිදුවන්තනො වූ කවනසේ ම් මත දැනට

ක්‍රියොේම වන කමම ක්‍රම කේදය යම් කවනසේ කිරීමක් සිදුවන්තකන්ත නම් ඒ සම්බන්තධකයන්ත සියලුම

කසේව පිරිසේ දැනුවේ කිරීකමන්ත අනතුරව එම කවනසේ ම් සිදුකිරීමට කසේවොකයෝජ එ ඟ කේ.”

For the purpose of further clarity, I will now compare the relevant provisions of the regulation and

the collective agreement by the following table;

If a workman works on a Sunday (Off day):

Regulation 24 of the Wages Board Clause 7 of the Collective Agreement (P13)

Grant one alternative weekly holiday within

the succeeding six days

Grant two alternative holiday as the off

day/weekly holiday.

Make payments calculated as follows -

• The regular daily wage and 50% of the

regular wage for the first nine hours

• The regular hourly wage and 100% of

the regular hourly wage for the

additional hours after the first nine

hours.

Make payments twice the regular overtime rate

for such day of work.

In addition to that, under the terms of the collective agreement, apart from the holiday in lieu of

which the workman is entitled to a holiday on any weekday of the succeeding week, the workman

is further entitled to one additional day as a holiday. Therefore, in effect, if a workman works on

12

a Sunday, he is entitled to two days’ leave. This is clearly a benefit conferred on the workman and

not on the employer. Accordingly, it is not violative of Regulation 24; rather, it is consistent with

and in accordance with the said Regulation.

In addition to that according to the Clause 7(3) of the collective agreement, the payment is also

made to a workman as required by the Regulation 24 of the Wages Board Ordinance. In addition

to that, it is further agreed by and between the parties that the conditions and rules will be made

during the working hours to meet the International Labour Organisation (ILO) standards, which is

something more than what is expected by the Regulation 24 of the Wages Board Ordinance;

therefore, the Petitioners’ contention on merits is baseless.

The collective agreement reflected in P13 is consistent with Section 62 of the Wages Board

Ordinance; in addition to that, the same is consistent with Section 6 of the Industrial Dispute Act,

which reads thus;

“6. Where a collective agreement in respect of any industry in any district has been reduced

to writing and signed by both the parties to the agreement or by the representative of each

party thereto, any such party or any trade union or employer constituting or included in

any such party may transmit the agreement to the Commissioner and the Commissioner

shall forthwith cause the agreement to be published in the Gazette:

Provided that where such agreement contains provisions relating to the terms and

conditions of employment of any workmen in such industry, the Commissioner shall not

cause such agreement to be so published unless he is satisfied that those terms and

conditions are not less favourable than those applicable to any other workmen in the same

or a similar industry in such district

13

For the purpose of this section, terms and conditions of employment set out in any other

collective agreement shall not be deemed to be applicable to any workmen, unless the

agreement has been published in the Gazette under this section and is for the time being in

force.”

The 1st to 3rd Respondents has satisfied the approved provisions of the said collective agreement,

as experts who are appointed to look into the matters in relation to the welfare of the workers; thus,

no third party (as the Petitioner) who has nothing to do with the welfare of the workmen, except

for collecting their own revenue from workmen which it can do, as alleged, by creating disruption

in the place of work, can question it.

Preliminary matters

In addition to that, I will now proceed to consider the preliminary matters raised by both sets of

Respondents.

The Petitioners seek the intervention of this Court to quash P13 on the basis that the Petitioner

trade union, whose members constitute more than 50% of the employees of the 4th Respondent

company and which claims to have bargaining power with the employer, contends that if a

collective agreement is to be entered into, it should have been entered into between the Petitioners

and the 4th Respondent, and not with any other representatives of employees. However, the

Petitioners have failed to establish that it has even 40% membership among the employees of the

4th Respondent.

As opposed to that, the 4th Respondent has produced the document marked as 4R(1) to establish

that more than 85% of the employees of the 4th Respondent establishment are members of the trade

14

union known as “Ansell Api”, and that the representatives of that union have duly acted on behalf

of its membership.

In addition to that, the 4th Respondent has annexed the names and signatures of members of the

“Ansell Api” trade union to establish that more than 85% of the employees of the 4th Respondent

are members of the said trade union.

Further, the 4th Respondent has established by documentary evidence that the said union has duly

elected its representatives, with whom the 4th Respondent has entered into a collective agreement

on behalf of the employees and the employer.

The said collective agreement had been accepted by the 1st to 3rd Respondents, being government

officers, upon due satisfaction and not on any extraneous consideration. Thereafter, they caused

the same to be published in the Gazette as a legally recognised collective agreement. In fact, the

said collective agreement is beneficial to the workmen and not to any unscrupulous trade union

attempting to make inroads into the company and thereby create unconducive conditions and

operational difficulties for the management. It is also noted that such conduct by certain trade

unions has, in some instances, adversely affected economic stability, and there is material to

substantiate the same. Therefore, it is my view that the agreement published in the Gazette marked

as P13 is a legally valid document, not in violation of Regulation 24 made under the Wages Board

Ordinance, but rather consistent with the said Regulations. Accordingly, the application of the

Petitioners is baseless and frivolous.

Further, I wish to consider one more argument advanced by the Respondents. Though the

Petitioners have referred to several documents, including documents from P1 to P15, the

Petitioners have failed to produce document marked 4R(1), which clearly indicates the

15

membership composition of the trade union “Ansell Api”, a party to the collective agreement

marked as P13. Therefore, as correctly submitted by learned Counsel for both sets of Respondents,

the Petitioners have failed to place material facts before this Court, and such omission amounts to

a misrepresentation.

Accordingly, this Application is also liable to be dismissed on that basis. As stated above, the

Petitioners have failed to establish its locus standi to enter into or challenge any collective

agreement with the 4th Respondent, as it does not command sufficient membership among the

employees of the 4th Respondent.

In addition to that, as alleged by the 4th Respondent, that the Petitioner made several attempts to

create disputes unjustifiably to create a chaotic situations within the premises which is stipulated

in paragraph 1(e) of the Statement of Objections of the 4th Respondent, thereby causing hardship

to the management as well as employees and creating an adverse atmosphere for the smooth

functioning of the company. For further clarity I reproduce the paragraph 1(e) of the Statement of

Objections of the 4th Respondent;

“The 1st and 2nd Petitioners are known to be disruptive unions and activist who create

disputes unjustifiably in order to assert their position as bargaining agents to secure check

off. This is the business model of the 1st and the 2nd Respondents. To this end, they instigate

purported industrial disputes and cause disruption within business establishments.”

There is only a mere denial of the same by the counter affidavits, in fact, I wish to observe that the

Petitioners have stated in Paragraph 8 of the Petition that the 1st Petitioner represented the rights

of some of the employees; however, the number of employees is not indicated as such.

16

In addition to that, even when the learned Counsel, Mr. Mohamed stated in his submissions

referring to the fact that due to confidentiality and security reasons it will not disclose its

membership, that itself indicates how mala fide the Petitioners are.

If such attempts were successful, it may even lead to the closure of the company, which provides

more than 3000 employment opportunities and contributes foreign exchange (as asserted by the

4th Respondent), which Sri Lanka is presently in need of. If such elements are permitted to engage

in these types of activities, even by abusing the process of court, the same should not be condoned,

and such conduct must be discouraged.

Conclusion

For the reasons adumbrated above, this Application is dismissed since it is a frivolous application

made by the so-called Trade Union without any basis; accordingly, I decide to impose cost of Rs.

210,000/- (Two Hundred and Ten Thousand Rupees), out of which Rs. 105,000/- (One Hundred

and Five Thousand Rupees) shall be payable to the 1st to 3rd Respondents, and Rs. 105,000/- (One

Hundred and Five Thousand Rupees) shall be payable to the 4th Respondent.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL