IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

Court of Appeal Case No. HCC 238/2018

High Court of Colombo Case No. HC 6186/2012

BEFORE

SRI LANKA

The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Complainant

v.

Bandaranayaka Wanigasekara Mudiyanse Ralahamilage Jayampathi Aluwihare

Accused

AND NOW

Bandaranayaka Wanigasekara Mudiyanse Ralahamilage Jayampathi Aluwihare

Accused Appellant

v.

Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

Complainant Respondent

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J

K. PRIY ANTHA FERNANDO, J

1

COUNSEL R. Bary SSC for the Respondent.

ARGUED ON 19.06.2020

JUDGMENT ON 14.07.2020

K. PRIY ANTHA FERNANDO, J.

01. Accused-Appellant (Appellant) was indicted in the High Court of Colombo for one count of

cheating, punishable in terms of section 403 of the Penal Code. The trial proceeded in the

absence of the Appellant in terms of section 241 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.

However, the Appellant was represented by counsel in his absence at the trial.

02. According to the particulars of the offence as charged, the Appellant had alleged to have

dishonestly induced an employee of the Hatton National Bank, Kotte, to pay him Rs.

127,628/- by pawning fake jewelry making false representations. After trial the learned High

Court Judge found the Appellant guilty, and upon conviction he was sentenced to 7 years

rigorous imprisonment. In addition, the Appellant was ordered to pay a tine of Rs. 30,0001-

and also to pay Rs. 150,000/- to the Hatton National Bank. The Appellant seeks to set aside

the judgment of the learned High Court Judge.

03. Notices issued on the Appellant were returned with the endorsement that the Appellant had

left the given address. Counsel who tiled the petition of appeal, upon notice by this Court has

informed Court that he has no instructions from the Appellant to proceed with this appeal.

Court decided to proceed to consider the merits of the appeal in terms of section 349(3) of the

Code of Criminal Procedure Act.

04. Although the Respondent Attorney General was represented by a Senior State Counsel and a

State Counsel, Respondent failed to assist Court by filing written submissions despite

obtaining two days to tile the same. Hence, Court will proceed to consider the merits of

appeal with the available material which include the proceedings in the High Court including

the judgment of the learned High Court Judge, and the petition of appeal.

2

05. The main ground of appeal urged by the Appellant in his petition of appeal is that the

prosecution had failed to establish the identity of the Appellant as the Accused who pawned

the articles in the banle

06. The main witness to that effect had been the witness Prasad Kalal Jagoda (PW2), who had

been the employee of the bank who accepted the relevant fake articles from the Appellant.

The evidence to prove that the articles were fake was not challenged by the learned defence

counsel in the High Court.

07. Learned High Court Judge has discussed this issue of identification of the Appellant at length

and has carefully considered the same in his judgment. In pages 20, 21, 22, 23 and 24 of the

judgment (pages 259-263 of the appeal brief), the learned Trial Judge has sufficiently dealt

with this issue. He has carefully considered all the relevant evidence on this issue including

the demeanour and deportment of the witness Jagoda. The learned High Court Judge has

given good and sufficient reasons to rely on the witness Jagoda on identification of the

Appellant and also the evidence of the other witnesses.

08. In case of Fradd V. Brown & company Ltd. (20 N.L.R. Page 282) Privy Council held;

"It is rare that a decision of a Judge so express, so explicit, upon a

point of fact purely, is over-ruled by a Court of Appeal, because Courts of

Appeal recognize the priceless advantage which a Judge of first instance has

in mailers of that kind, as contrasted with any Judge of a Court of Appeal,

who can only learn from paper or from narrative of those who were present.

It is very rare that, in question of veracity, so direct and so specific as these, a

Court of Appeal will over-rule a Judge offirst instance .... "

09. I do not find any reason to interfere with the finding of the fact of identification of the

Appellant (Accused), by the learned High Court Judge.

3

In the above premise, I find that the grounds of appeal urged by the Appellant in his petition

of appeal are without merit.

Appeal is dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

4