Page 1 of 5

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

Court of Appeal Case No:

CPA 11/2022

High Court of Colombo Bail

Application No: HC BAIL 267/2021

Magistrates Court of Colombo Case

No: B 43972/2/2020

In the matter of an application for

Revision in terms of Article 138 of

the Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka read

with Section 404 of the Criminal

Procedure Code Act no. 15 of 1979.

Sudirikku Hennadigodage Piyaseeli,

No. 184/4, Wennawaththa, Wellampitiya.

Petitioner

Vs.

1. Officer in Charge

Colombo Crime Division

Dematagoda

2. Hon. Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department

Colombo 12.

Respondents

Sabdeen Mohammed Suber,

Remand Prison Colombo

Suspect

Page 2 of 5

Before: Menaka Wijesundera J.

Neil Iddawala J.

AND NOW

Sudirikku Hennadigodage Piyaseeli,

No. 184/4, Wennawaththa, Wellampitiya

Petitioner Petitioner

Vs.

1. Officer in Charge

Colombo Crime Division

Dematagoda

2. Hon. Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department

Colombo 12.

Respondents Respondents

Sabdeen Mohammed Subair,

Remand Prison, Colombo.

Suspect Respondent

Page 3 of 5

Counsel: Palitha Fernando, PC for the Petitioner.

Indika Nelummini, SC for the State.

Argued on: 12.10.2022

Decided on: 17.11.2022

MENAKA WIJESUNDERA J.

The instant application for revision has been filed to set aside the order dated

18.08.2021 of the High Court of Colombo.

The Presidents Counsel appearing for the suspect stated that he was arrested

on 23.08.2020 at the Katunayake Airport while he was planning to travel

abroad, and he had been produced under the provisions of the Prevention of

Terrorism Act.

While in custody 11 Kilograms of a substance suspected to be heroin had been

taken into custody on 17.10.2020 based on his statement to Police.

The State Counsel appearing for the Attorney General objected to this

application.

Having considered the submissions of both parties this Court draws its

attention to the Law pertaining to the instant matter.

The Suspect in the instant matter is at present in custody for an offence under

the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs Act, falling under section 54 of the

Act.

According to section 83 of the Act a person suspected or accused of an

offense under section 54 of A and B of the Act shall be released on bail only

Page 4 of 5

upon exceptional circumstances. The term exceptional has not been defined

in the statue. But in the cases so far decided it has been concluded that

exceptionality differs from case to case.

The learned Presidents Counsel contended that the suspect being in remand

since 2020 without trial or indictment against him is violating the right to his

personal liberty and contended further that the main item of evidence against

the suspect is a section 27 recovery under the Evidence Ordinance which he

said was not sufficient to prove his guilt.

At this point this Court is not inclined to go into the merits of the case but, we

observe that he has been first taken into custody under the provisions of the

Prevention of Terrorism Act and later produced under the instant Act. But, up

to date the Law enforcement authorities have failed to take any meaningful

action against the suspect.

The state Counsel appearing for the Respondent have failed to state as to

when or whether indictment would be forwarded against the suspect or not.

It has been held in the case of Attorney General is Ediriweera (supra) that

delay is always a relative term and the question to be considered is not

whether there was mere explicable delay, but whether there has been

excessive or oppressive delay and this always depends on the facts of the

circumstances of the case..

The State Counsel has urged that the quantity of the substance taken into

custody from the suspect is commercial in nature.

Page 5 of 5

The exceptionality urged by the Presidents Counsel in the instant matter is

that there is no sufficient evidence against the suspect to prove exclusive

possession of heroin and the period in remand without trial.

As stated above we are unable to go into the merits of the case but we

observe that the alleged substance had been recovered on the statement of

the suspect, as such we note that ends of Justice will be met only by

granting bail to the suspect as stated in the case of Carder Vs. OIC Narcotic

Bureau 2006 page SLR by Justice Eric Basnayake.

Hence, the instant application is allowed and the impugned order dated

18.08.2021 of the High Court is here by set aside and we direct the learned

High Court Judge to enlarge the suspect namely Sabdeen Mohammed Suber

on suitable conditions of bail.

Judge of the Court of Appeal.

I agree.

Neil Iddawala J.

Judge of the Court of Appeal.