In the Court of Appeal of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

CA PHC 108/2010 HC Anuradhapura Revision 34/2010 MC Anuradhapura 866 .................... ~ ... -,,-- .. _ ...... - _ .. _ ......... _ .. _ .. - .. _ .... -_ ..... -'-_._" .... _--"--,,-.'~. ~~~-.---~." -.~.-~~.----.----.-.~,,-.-Abubackerge Jaleel, Nelugollakada, Rathmalgaha Wewa

CLAIMANT -PETITIONER-APPELLANT

Vs

OIC,

Anti-Vice unit, Police Station, Anuradapura

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT -RESPONDENT

Hon Attorney General, Colombo

2ND RESPONDENT-RESPONDENT

1. Sherif Moul 2. M K Jalaeel

ACCUSED-RESPONDENT -RESPONDENTS

Before: A W A Salam, J (PICA) and Sunil Rajapakse,J

Counsel: Upali A Gunaratna, PC with Mahesh Wakishta for the Claimant-Petitioner-appellant and Anoopa De Silva SSC for the Complainant-Respondent-Respondent and Hon Attorney General.

Argued on: 21.02.2014 and 25.06.2014.

Decided on : 26.08.2014

.. A W A Salam, J and Sunil Rajapakse, J August 26 2014 CA PHC 10812010 HC Anuradapura Revision 34/2010 MC Anuradapura 866

A W A Salam, J (PICA)

~e accused-respondent-respondents (hereinafter referred to as 1 the "accused") were allegedly charged in the ~agistrate's Court

for causing cruelty to animals, and transport of cattle.

Under Section 3C of the Animals Act as amended by Act No 46 of

1988, transport of cattle is an offence, which would inevitably

necessitate confiscation proceedings both in respect of the animals!

and the vehicle, resulting in complex factual and legal issues; but no

such permit as provided for in Section 3 is necessary to transport

sheep, goat, pig or poultry which are brought under Part IV of the Act

dealing with "Trespass of animals" and in such an event no

confiscatory steps would entail either in respect of the vehicle or the

animals.

Under Section 136 (1) (b) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act

(hereinafter referred to as the "Code") institution of proceedings in a

Magistrate's Court (in addition to certain other modes) takes place

upon the presentation of a written report complaining of the

commission of an offence. The proceedings in this case had begun

with the complainant-respondent-respondent filing a report under

Section 136 (1) (b) of the Code complaining that the accused had

1 Confiscation of animals was introduced by Animals Act amendment No 10 of 2009

A W A Salam, J and Sunil Rajapakse, J August 26 2014 CA PHC 108/2010 HC Anuradapura Revision 3412010 MC Anuradapura 866

committed the offence of causing cruelty to animals and transporting

them without a permit.

Once a report is filed under Section 136 (1) (b) of the Code, the next

step is to ascertain under Section 182 of the Code as to whether there

is sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused and in the

event of the opinion being favourable to tlie prosecution, the

Magistrate shall frame a charge against the accused. Once the charge

is framed, the Magistrate he shall read it to the accused under 182 (2)

and ask him if he has any cause to show why he should not be

convicted.

Magistrates usually do not frame charges themselves in each every

case but accepts the draft charge which is tendered by prosecuting

party. Yet in law, it is the charge framed by the Magistrate from the

time it is accepted.

Under Section 182 (2) the Magistrate asks the accused whether he

has any cause to show as to why he should not be convicted. In

response to it, if the accused makes a statement which amounts to an

unqualified admission that he is guilty of the offence of which he is

accused, his statement shall be recorded as nearly as possible in the

words used by him and the Magistrate shall record a verdict of guilty

and pass sentence upon him according to law and shall record such

sentence. (Section 183)

A W A Salam, J and Sunil Rajapakse, J August 26 2014

CA PHC 10812010 HC Anuradapura Revision 3412010 MC Anuradapura 866

Even though the Magistrate is said to have explained to the accused

the charges framed against them, admittedly no charge sheet is found

in the original record or in the docket maintained by the High Court.

In Tissera Vs Foster (1891) 9 SCC at page 173, a.full bench ruled that

framing of a charge is a fundamental requirement. The decision was

followed in Perera Vs Cooray (1912) 7 Weerakoon's Report at page 20,

Goonawardena Vs Babun (1908) 4 ACR 141 and in Andiris Appu Vs

Nicolas (1902) 3 Brown's Report at page 144.

The development of the Law relating to framing of charges was

discussed at length by Bertram CJ in the celebrated judgment in

Cooray Vs James Appu reported in 22 New Law Report 206. The

judgment at page 213, states as follows ...

Quote;- The Legislature, deliberately departing from the previous

practice, had declared that in every summary trial, when once the

Court has decided to undertake it, there shall be from the

commencement a definite written charge, which should be read to the

accused, specifying precisely what he has to meet. This charge may

be the subject of reference at any point in the trial, and must be the

basis of any ultimate consideration of the case by the Court of Appeal.

Such a provision may well be regarded as of so fundamental and all-

pervading a character, that its non-observance ought not to be

treated as a mere irregularity. No doubt there may be cases in which

the facts may be so simple, the issues so plain, and the charge so

II

IIf

A W A Salam, Jand Sunil Rajapakse, J August 26 2014 CA PHC 10812010 HC Anuradapura Revision 34/2010 MC Anuradapura 866

inevitable that it cannot make the smallest difference to the accused

whether a written charge is read to him or not. Nevertheless, it is easy

to see that some provisions may in the intention of the Legislature be

of the very essence of the proceedings, while others may be in the

nature of formalities. The existence of a deliberately framed written

charge is obviously a condition which may well be so regarded,

whatever the circumstances of the particular c~se~ Unquote.

In Ebert Vs Perera (23 NLR 362) [Full Bench] Ennis, De Sampayo, and

Schneider JJJ. held that when proceedings were instituted under

Section 148 (b) of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1898, (which

corresponds except a slight negligible variation to the present 136(ls)

(b) in the Code of Criminal Procedure Act) on a written report to the

Magistrate that the accused had committed an offence and the

Magistrate endorsed on the report "charge read from the report, there

was an omission to frame a charge, and that the irregularity was not

covered by Section 425.

Besides, the failure to adhere to the legal requirement of having to

charge the accused by the Magistrate himself after making up his

mind that there is sufficient grounds to proceed against him vitiates

any conviction irrespective of any question of prejudice caused to the

accused. (Vide Goonawardena Vs Babun 1908 1 SCD 84, Deonis Vs

Charles 1915 4 Bal.N.of C 53, Dunuvila Vs Sinno 1915 3 Bal. N. of C

50, De Silva Vs Davit Appuhamy 19197 CWR 19)

A W A Salam, J and Sunil Rajapakse, J August 26 2014 CA PHC 108/2010 HC Anuradapura Revision 3412010 MC Anuradapura 866

The judgments cited above clearly points to the total absence of a

written charge (as is the case in the instant appeal), ought not to be

treated as a mere irregularity. The right to know the charge is a

fundamental requirement. It is a magisterial duty which cannot be

delegated to the police. Whether there is sufficient ground to proceed

against the suspect is in the hands of a judidal officer who is

expected to address his mind judiciously. If the' duty of framing the

charge is to be entrusted to others the purposive approach to Section

182 will be rendered nugatory. The practice of explaining the

accusation from the plaint is an incurable irregularity which shatters

the basis of the conviction and should undoubtedly shock the

conscience of the Court as well. It may well be a conviction entered

per incuriam, if it is entered in ignorance of the provisions of the Code

or the ratio decidendi on the matter.

In Abdul Same em V. The Bribery Commissioner 1991 1 SLR 76, this

Court considered the consequences of the failure to frame a charge.

The case of Abdul Sameem concerns the institution of proceedings

under Section 136( 1) (b) of the Code, on a written report by the

Bribery Commissioner to the Magistrate that the accused committed

certain offences under the Bribery Act. The accused appeared on

summons. The Magistrate adopted the said report by placing a seal. It

was held that that there was a failure to frame a charge by the

Magistrate as required under Section 182(1) and read it to accused as

contemplated under Section 182(2). It was specifically held that the

failure to frame a charge, as required under Section 182(1) is a

I1

f,

!!!

A W A Salam, J and Sunil Rajapakse, J August 26 2014 CA PHC 108/2010 HC Anuradapura Revision 34/2010 MC Anuradapura 866

violation of a fundamental principle of criminal procedure, and is not

a defect curable under Section 436 of the Code of Criminal Procedure

Act No .. 15 of 1979. Quite significantly, the Court whilst

appreciating the pressures on time and the large volume of work

the Magistrate's Courts are called upon to handle, nevertheless

held that it is important, that rights the of :the accused are

safeguarded and that they are brought to' trial according to

accepted fundamental principles of criminal procedure.

[Emphasis added]

In the case of Godage and Others Vs. Officer-In-Charge, Police Station,

Kahawatte - Sri Lanka Law Reports- 1992 - Volume 1, at page 54, a

similar question was considered by this Court which decided the duty

of the Magistrate under Section 182 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act as being imperative whilst endorsing the view

expressed by Dr Asoka Gunawardena J in the case of Abdul Sameem

(supra). In Godage(supra) the learned Magistrate convicted the

accused but there was no charge found in the case record. Following

the authority in the case of Abdul Sameem( supra), Ismail, J set aside

the conviction in appeal after 11 years.

Thus it would be seen that framing of a charge to give validity to a

criminal prosecution or subsequent conviction 1S absolutely

indispensable. The absence of a charge is fatal to the validity of the

trial and conviction as well. This principle has been exhaustively

A W A Salam, J and Sunil Rajapakse, J August 26 2014

CA PHC 108/2010 HC Anuradapura Revision 3412010 MC Anuradapura 866

discussed in Abdul Sameem (supra) in reference to a long line of

decided authorities including a full bench decision.

In the case of Upali Indrathilake Amadoru Vs. Officer-in-Charge,

Special Criminal Investigation Unit, Police Station, Wennappuwa (S.C.

Appeal No. 12A/2009- S.C. Spl. L.A. No. 332/2008) the Supreme

Court pointed out that that only after the charges are read to an

accused can a verdict be given, WHETHER ON ADMISSION OF THE

ACCUSED or after a trial. The correct framing of charges, therefore,

is an indispensable prerequisite to the issuance of a verdict, as it is

on these charges that the Accused is to tender his plea and the Court

is to consider whether to proceed to trial. (Emphasis added to indicate

the relevance of the principle to this appeal)

It is important that no case should be regarded as unimportant.

However, trivial it may be in the estimation of the bench, to the

parties involved, particularly the accused, even a prosecution

concerned with committing a compoundable offence or even a lesser

offence may be more important to him than any of his other affairs.

The very fact that the rubberstamp having been place on the reverse

of the plaint demonstrates the absence of a charge sheet. The

rubbers tamp placed on the reverse of the plaint reads that the

accused was explained the charge even though there were two

accused in the case. The rubberstamp placed confirms that only one

..

2 Singular

3 Singular

4 Singular

5Singular

6 Singular

A W A Salam, J and Sunil Rajapakse, J August 26 2014 CA PHC 10812010 HC Anuradapura Revision 3412010 MC Anuradapura 866

charge had been explained out of the two. Assuming that there was a

valid charge sheet, yet one cannot fmd out which accused has been

called upon to show cause against being convicted. Further, the

accused had been imposed a fine of 30,000/- only but it is not clear

which accused had been fined.

As against the imposition of a fine of Rs 30,000/- on one of the

accused, how the registry collected Rs 30,000/- each from both

accused remains a mystery. There is no evidence that both accused

had pleaded guilty to the charge either. According to the rubberstamp

placed, only one accused had pleaded guilty. This clearly shows as to

why only Rs 30,000/- has been imposed on one accused. Had one of

the accused had remained silent without pleading to the charge, then

the charge against him would have required positive proof. If the

accused who pleaded guilty was not the driver, then no confiscation

could have taken place.

For purpose of ready reference the relevant Journal entry as it

appears from the impression of the rubberstamp is copied below ....

<iC)j~~) OQ)<iO~ ~~o)O)C) 2 a;oC)) <i~. " C)O~tDOz" 3 ozC3 ~~O) 4

gtD)~ tDO SD. <!)~<iG:f5 gtD)~O q~C) <!)~ <iC)j~~)C)C) 6 C)zO~C)Oz Q)C)

7 Singular

A W A Salam, Jand Sunil Rajapakse, J August 26 2014 CA PHC 108/2010 HC Anuradapura Revision 3412010 MC Anuradapura 866

~O~C) tl)O. ...... 30,000/- 7 ~CJ @~@ci a3C) tl)O. ~CJc)

(i,m)(iG)E)(iC))af 68 Q)/C)Z O~O) a3C) tl)O.

This being the set up that prevailed at that time, I am hopeful that

the rubbers tamp which had been affIxed on to the reverse of the

report, is now re-done with the deletion of the Sit:lhala equivalent "I

am guilty / I am not guilty" which phrase presupposes that that the

Magistrate knew as to what exactly the statement of the accused was

going to be in response to the charge. Instead, the phrase "I am

guilty / I am not guilty" may be taken out from the rubbers tamp and

left blank for the Magistrate to fIll the blank in his own handwriting

thus making an attempt to record as nearly as possible the very

statement of one or more of the accused, in compliance of the

requirement of Section 183 of the Code.

On a perusal of the details found in the impression of the

rubberstamp one is at a loss to understand for which offence the fIne

has been imposed. If it is under the Cruelty to Animals Act which is

the 18t charge the maximum fine that can be imposed is Rs 100/ - and

no more. If the fine of Rs 30000 / - had been imposed for count 1, then

the imposition of the fine is illegal.

8 Not specified the days month or Not specified the days, month or year j

I , I !t

A W A Salam, J and Sunil Rajapakse, J August 26 2014 CA PHC 108/2010 HC Anuradapura Revision 3412010 MC Anuradapura 866

It is to be noted that even under the Increase of fmes Act No 12 of

2005 the fine that can be imposed with regard to the offence of.

Cruelty to Animals has not been increased.

The maximum fine the court can impose In respect of transport of

cattle without permit is Rs 50000/-.

The learned Senior State Counsel has contended that it is not open to

the complainant-petitioner-appellant to impugn the conviction now as

both accused have failed to do so in their own rights. I regret my

inability to endorse this contention as being the correct proposition of

the law.

An order of confiscation is in fact a punishment which is imposed in

addition to the ordinary punishment imposed on the offender.

However, if the vehicle used in the commission of the offence belongs

to a third party, it is confiscated only after the third party is afforded

an opportunity of being heard.

The confiscation of the vehicle has to be based on a conviction which

is acceptable in law. If there IS no conviction, then there is no

confiscation. In other words, a valid conviction is a condition

precedent to proceed to call upon the owner of the vehicle, if he is not

the offender, to explain himself.

J} I!

A W A Salam, J and Sunil Rajapakse, J August 26 2014 CA PHC 108/2010 HC Anuradapura Revision 3412010 MC Anuradapura 866

An accused cannot be said to have been lawfully convicted in the

absence of a charge framed by the Magistrate in terms of Section 182

(1), explained under Section 182 (2) and his statement recoded under

183 of the Code.

The legal question raised by the learned Senior S~ate Counsel revolves

round the locus standi of the c1aimant-petitioner-appellant to

challenge the conviction when the accused have not elected to

challenge the same. It has to be borne in mind that an order of

confiscation of property whether movable or immovable leads to

deprivation of property rights of a citizen. Inasmuch as the Court has

to approach the issue relating to the liberty of the subject by giving a

strict interpretation of the Provisions of the law and the same

approach has to be aimed at resolving the issues relating to the

legality of the confiscation orders as well, since the confiscatory

Provisions in any enactment though it may not be strictly called a

draconian measure, yet it has such a draconian flavour.

Under Section 317 (2) an appeal lies even after tendering an

unqualified admission of guilt and been convicted by Magistrate's

Court, if such an appeal is preferred on a matter of law. Accordingly,

the accused in this case had a right of appeal on a matter of law. The

accused have neither appealed nor invoked the revisionary powers of

the High Court to have their conviction set aside. As a matter of fact it

is a moot question whether the accused can now move in revision to

)

~ !

~ I

i

A W A Salam, J and Sunil Rajapakse, J August 26 2014 CA PHC 108/2010 HC Anuradapura Revision 3412010 Me Anuradapura 866

have the conviction set aside on the basis that delay does not stand in

the way of revision of an illegal order made without jurisdiction.

Even then the claimant-petitioner-appellant has every right to

challenge the conviction on any ground permitted in law, as his

property rights are intrinsically interwoven with tpe' alleged conviction

of the accused. In the circumstances, I am of the opinion that the

claimant-petitioner-appellant has made out a strong case backed by

exceptional circumstances warranting the invocation of the

revisionary powers of the High Court against the order of confiscation

made by the learned Magistrate. When the legality of the conviction of

the accused is such which cries out for remedial action and once it is

brought to the notice of Court as to the magnitude of the illegality,

this Court cannot turn a blind eye and affirm the order of confiscation.

In terms of Section 3A where any person 1S convicted of an offence

under Part III or any regulations made thereunder, any vehicle used

in the commission of such offence shall, in addition to any other

punishment prescribed for such offence, be liable, by order of the

convicting Magistrate, to confiscation but, in any case where the

owner of the vehicle is a third party, no order of confiscation shall be

made, if the owner proves to the satisfaction of the Court that he has

taken all precautions to prevent the use of such vehicle or that the

vehicle has been used without his knowledge for the commission of

the offence.

r

!

i

t

A W A Salam, J and Sunil Rajapakse, J August 26 2014 CA PHC 108/2010 HC Anuradapura Revision 3412010 MC Anuradapura 866

In this case the question of calling upon the owner to show cause

against the vehicle being confiscated does not arise as there had been

no conviction acceptable in law.

Even assummg that the owner of the vehicle was under a duty to

show cause against a possible order of confisc~tio'n, I fmd it difficult

to accept the basis on which the learned Magistrate has entered an

order for confiscation on the merits of the inquiry. It was the evidence

of the owner that he had given instructions to the employee (driver)

not to engage the lorry for any other purpose other than to transport

items which do not require a permit. The testimony of the owner has

not been discredited under cross-examination. There has been no

previous instance where the driver has been charged for similar

offence. When someone is under a duty to show cause that he has

taken all precautions against the commission of similar offences, I do

not think that he can practically do many things than to give specific

instruction. The owner of the lorry cannot be seated all the time in the

lorry to closely supervise for what purpose the lorry is used.

The learned Magistrate has stated that SInce the driver has been

employed on a permanent basis by the owner he has to take the

responsibility arising from the transportation of cattle. If this be the

case, a Government Servant such as a Minister, and Member of

Parliament, a Judicial Officer may employ a driver reposing

confidence in him and allow him to drive the vehicle on his behalf in

his absence. If he, in doing so contravenes the law which gives rise to II ; I

A W A Salam, J and Sunil Rajapakse, J August 26 2014 CA PHC 108/2010 HC Anuradapura Revision 3412010 Me Anuradapura 866

an order of confiscation of the vehicle, then however much the owner

comes forward and says that he gave instructions not to make use of

the vehicle for illegal purposes, by reason of the fact that he is on the

monthly payment the vehicle has to be confiscated. This approach

does not appear to be reasonable and acceptable in law. In an inquiry

of this nature, all what the owner has to prove is that he took every

measure to ensure that the vehicle is not used for illegal purposes.

Another reason which led to the confiscation of the vehicle by the

learned Magistrate was the absence of corroborative evidence of the

owner. I do not think that the law casts a duty on the owner to

corro borate the evidence when he is required to show cause against a

possible confiscation.

The evidence of the owner in that respect has not been contradicted

or shown to be lacking any credit worthiness. This is the 1st offence if

at all the accused is alleged to have committed. There is no evidence

to show that the owner of the vehicle has continued to employ the

driver after the commission of the offence. In the circumstances,

guided by the explanation given by the owner, I do not think an order

of confiscation of the vehicle is justifiable.

As such, the confiscation cannot be allowed to stand for 4 reasons.

They are as follows ...

A W A Salam, J and Sunil Rajapakse, J August 26 2014 !Ji;rwl.J;"leIl ;[ltiin'iili.lIiii;{;W~'i.i;H"leIl'.M.'eIiiit.Iliiii:@l

1. There is no valid conviction of the accused and therefore the owner

cannot be called upon to show cause against a possible

confiscation.

2. As there is no valid conviction the confiscation cannot stand on its

own.

3. Assuming the owner was under a duty to show cause his evidence

cannot be simply rejected.

4. The fact that the accused was in the permanent employment of the

owner per se does not give rise to an automatic confiscation.

As such the confiscation order made by the learned Magistrate lS

set aside and the appeal allowed.

<i~-.. Presidentj Court of Appeal

Sunil Rajapakse, J

I agree. ~~~ Judge of the Court of Appeal

TWj-

I

I ! ! II

J t f I f L

If ;

r,i ,