IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Court of Appeal Case No. HCC 260/2015

High Court Chilaw Case No. HC 16112006

Ron. Attorney General, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

Complainant

v.

Watawalakankanamlage Martin

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Watawalakankanamlage Martin

Accused Appellant

v.

Ron. Attorney General, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

Complainant Respondent

1

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS FILED ON

JUDGMENT ON

K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J.

K. K. WICKREMASINGHE, J

K. PRIY ANTHA FERNANDO, J

K. A. Upul Anuradha Wickramaratne for the Accused Appellant.

H. 1. Peiris DSG for the Respondent.

29.08.2019

11.01.2018 by the Accused Appellant.

04.07.2018 by the Respondent.

05.11.2019

01. The Accused Appellant (Appellant) was indicted in the High Court of

Chilaw for one count of murder punishable under section 296 of the Penal

Code. After trial the learned High Court Judge convicted the Appellant and

sentenced him to death. Being aggrieved by the said conviction the

Appellant preferred the instant appeal. The grounds of appeal as settled by

the counsel for the Appellant at the argument of this appeal are;

1. Proceedings before his predecessor have not been properly adopted by

the learned Trial Judge who finally decided on the case.

2

2. The learned Trial Judge has erred in law by admitting and adopting the

deposition of the PWI Damayanthi given in the non-summary inquiry

held before Magistrate's Court of Chi law, in evidence in the High

Court Trial under and in terms of Section 33 of the Evidence

Ordinance.

Ground of Appeal No.1

02. Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the Trial Judge who finally

decided on the case heard only the evidence of PW9. Evidence of all other

prosecution witnesses had been led before his predecessors. Evidence of

those witnesses were not adopted before him. It is the contention of the

counsel that the learned High Court Judge therefore did not have the

opportunity to observe the demeanour of the material witnesses.

03. Counsel for the Respondent submitted that Section 48 of the Judicature Act

provides for continuation of proceedings before the succeeding Judge.

Evidence of the main witness for the prosecution who testified before the

learned Magistrate was adopted in the High Court in terms of Section 33 of

the Evidence Ordinance and therefore the learned Trial Judge in any event

could not have had the opportunity to observe the demeanour of the

witness, counsel submitted.

04. According to the proceedings in this case in High Court of Chilaw,

evidence for the prosecution had been led before two High Court Judges

before Hon. High Court Judge Mr. R. A. Ranaraja assumed duties on

transfer. On 04.03.2015 onwards Hon. High Court Judge Mr. R. A.

Ranaraja continued to hear the case by recording evidence of the rest of the

3

prosecution witnesses and then the statement from the dock made by the

Appellant.

05. Section 48 of the Judicature Act as amended provides for continuation of

proceedings before the succeeding Judge when a Judge becomes disable to

hear the case.

Section 48;

... ... In the case of death, sickness, resignation, removal from

office, absence from Sri Lanka, or other disability of any Judge

before whom any action, prosecution, proceeding or matter,

whether on any inquiry preliminary to committable for trial or

otherwise, has been instituted or is pending such action,

prosecution, proceeding or matter may be continued before the

successor of such Judge who shall have power to act on the

evidence already recorded by his predecessor, or partly recorded

by his predecessor and partly recorded by him or, if he thinks fit, to

re-summon the witness and commence the proceedings afresh.

Provided that where any criminal prosecution, proceeding or

matter (except on an inquiry preliminary to committal for trial) is

continued before the successor of any such judge, the accused may

demand that the witnesses be re-summoned and reheard.

06. Application of Section 48 when a Judge is transferred to another station

was discussed by His Lordship Justice Sisira de Abrew in case of Herath

Mudiyanselage Ariyaratne V. Republic of Sri Lanka. (CA 30712006

[17.7.2013]) where it was said:

4

' ... I now again turn to the contention that succeeding

HCJ in a criminal trial cannot, under Section 48 of the

Judicature Act, continue with the proceedings recorded

before his predecessor. When a HCJ is transferred from his

station he ceases to exercise his jurisdiction in his area and

thereby he suffers from disability to function as HCJ of the

area. Thus, in my view, transfer of a HCJ from a station is

covered by the words 'other disability ' in Section 48 of the

Judicature Act. '

07. Therefore, it is clear that the learned High Court Judge Mr. Ranaraja who

was the succeeding Judge had the discretion and the authority to continue

with the case.

08. More importantly the proviso to Section 48 which was brought by the

amended Act No. 27 of 1999 to provide for the Accused in a criminal case

to demand that the witnesses whose evidence were recorded be re-

summoned and reheard. That clear provision is made to avoid any

prejudice that would cause to the Accused and also to give the Accused a

fair trial. Although the Appellant was represented by counsel in the High

Court no application was made to re-summon or rehear any of the

witnesses. After waiving his right to demand to re-summon or rehear the

witnesses, now at the appeal stage the Appellant cannot claim that he was

prejudiced or was deprived of a fair trial. As rightly pointed out by the

counsel for the Respondent, in any event the learned High Court Judge

could not have observed the demeanour of the main witness PWI as her

evidence in the Magistrate's Court at the non-summary inquiry was

adopted in the High Court.

5

Hence the ground of appeal No. 1 should necessarily fail.

Ground of Appeal No.2

09. Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the procedure adopted by the

High Court in admitting the previous evidence of PWI led in the

Magistrate's Court at the trial is unacceptable and it has deprived the

Appellant of a fair trial. It was further submitted that the testimonies of the

two witnesses called to say that the PWI cannot be found are more or less

hearsay and lacks evidentiary value.

10. Counsel for the Respondent submitted that the evidence to satisfY court that

the witness cannot be found was properly led and the learned High Court

Judge has recorded the evidence for the 2nd time and has satisfied himself.

Evidence ofPWl was properly adopted, counsel submitted.

Section 33 of the Evidence Ordinance provides;

"Evidence given by a witness in a judicial proceeding, or

before any person authorized by law to take it, is relevant, for the

purpose of proving, in a subsequent judicial proceeding, or in a

later stage of the same judicial proceeding, the truth of the facts

which it states, when the witness is dead or cannot be found, or is

incapable of giving evidence, or is kept out of the way by the

adverse party, or if his presence cannot be obtained without an

amount of delay or expense which, under the circumstances of the

case, the court considers unreasonable:

Provided-

(a) that the proceeding was between the same parties or their

representatives in interest;

6

(b) that the adverse party in the first proceeding had the right

and opportunity to cross-examine;

(c) that the questions in issue were substantially the same in the

first as in the second proceeding.

Explanation- A criminal trial or inquiry shall be deemed to be a

proceeding between the prosecutor and the accused within

the meaning of this section. "

11. After leading evidence of Upul Renuka Jayalath who was the

Superintendent of the estate and the 'Grama Niladhari' of the area, the

learned Trial Judge was satisfied that the witness PWI had left the area and

cannot be found. As per the order of the learned High Court Judge dated

21.05.2013 (page 161 of the brief) she has clearly given good and

sufficient reasons as to why she was satisfied that the witness PWI cannot

be found. Although warrants were issued to arrest PW 1 since year 2007

police have failed to arrest her. The evidence of the above two witnesses

were never challenged by the defence by cross examination although

counsel appeared for the Appellant. This Court has no reason to interfere

with findings of the learned High Court Judge that the PWI cannot be

found.

12. Proviso to Section 33 provides certain requisites that are necessary to adopt

the evidence recorded in a previous judicial proceeding. The learned High

Court Judge in her order has clearly discussed those requirements and

given her mind before adopting the evidence under Section 33 (page 162).

7

Proceedings in the Magistrate's Court had been between the same parties.

Appellant had the opportunity to cross examine the witness. The question

in issue was substantially the same in the Magistrate's Court as in the High

Court. Therefore, all requisites mentioned in the proviso to Section 33 are

fulfilled. As per the explanation provided for in Section 33 non-summary

inquiry falls within the judicial proceeding referred to in Section 33.

'One application of the rule against hearsay evidence is that

the evidence given in former judicial proceedings is relevant to the

case before the court. Section 33 of the Ordinance provides an

exception to this rule, when it states that evidence given by a

witness in a judicial proceeding or before any person authorized

by law to take it, is relevant in a subsequent judicial proceeding, or

in a later stage of the same proceeding provided that the conditions

and safeguards laid down in section 33 are present. Such evidence

is relevant for the purpose of proving the truth of the facts which it

states. A criminal trial or inquiry is deemed to be a proceeding

between the prosecutor and the accused within the meaning of this

section. ' (The Law of Evidence (with special reference to the law

of Sri Lanka) By E.RS.R. Kumaraswamy Vol.i)

13. Also, the learned High Court Judge in his final judgment dated 12.10.2015

has carefully analyzed all the evidence adduced at the trial including the

adopted evidence ofPWI. I see no reason to interfere with the judgment of

the learned High Court Judge.

Hence, ground of appeal No.2 also fails.

8

Judgment of the learned High Court Judge dated 12.10.2015 is affirmed.

Appeal dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K.K. WICKREMASINGHE, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

9