1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

In the matter of an Application for mandates in the nature of Writs of Certiorari and Prohibition under Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

CA (Writ) Application No: 220/2016

1) Port Junk Dealers Association, No. 84/5, Bristol Complex, Sir Razeek Fareed Mawatha, Colombo 1. 2) Weligama Palliya Gurunaselage Udaya Senaka De Silva, President, Port Junk Dealers Association, No. 90/2, Deva Kotikawatte, New Town, Mulleriyawa. 3) Kudagama Liyanage Nalindrasiri, Secretary, Port Junk Dealers Association, No. 48, Sumithrarama Mawatha, Colombo 13. PETITIONERS

Vs.

1) Marine Environment Protection Authority. 2) Rear Admiral Rohana Perera, Chairman, Marine Environment Protection Authority,

2

1st and 2nd Respondents at No. 758, Baseline Road, Colombo 9. 3) Sri Lanka Ports Authority, No. 19, Chaithiya Road, Colombo 1. 4) Chulananda Perera. 4A) P.S.M.Charles, Director General of Customs. 4th and 5th Respondents at Customs House, No. 40, Main Street, Colombo 1. 5) Vice Admiral Ravindra Wijeguneratne. 5A) Vice Admiral Travis J.L.Sinniah, Commander, Sri Lanka Navy Naval Headquarters, Colombo 1. 6) Central Environmental Authority, No. 104, Denzil Kobbekaduwa

Mawatha, Battaramulla. RESPONDENTS Before: Arjuna Obeyesekere, J Counsel: Dulindra Weerasuriya, P.C., with Chamith Marapana for the Petitioners Ms. Nayomi Kahawita, Senior State Counsel for the Respondents Oral submissions: 17th September 2019 Decided on: 29th May 2020

3

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J

When this matter was taken up for argument on 17th September 2019, the

learned Presidents Counsel for the Petitioners and the learned Senior State

Counsel for the Respondents gave a brief outline of their respective cases and

moved that this Court pronounce its judgment on the written submissions of

the parties.

The Petitioners have filed this application, seeking inter alia the following

relief:

a) Hold that the decision of the 1st Respondent to charge fees from the

members of the 1st Petitioner is ultra vires the provisions of the Act, and

the Regulations promulgated under the Act;1

b) Hold that charging of fees is ultra vires and illegal and therefore by a Writ

of Prohibition prevent the 1st Respondent charging the fees set out in

paragraph III of the prayer.2

The learned Senior State Counsel, in the course of her submissions, raised a

preliminary objection with regard to the maintainability of this application. She

submitted that even though the Petitioners have claimed in the caption that

this is an application filed in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution for Writs

of Certiorari and Prohibition, the prayer does not contain any relief for a Writ

of Certiorari. The learned Senior State Counsel therefore submitted that this

1 Vide paragraph (II) of the prayer. 2 Vide paragraph (III) of the prayer.

4

Court cannot grant a Writ of Certiorari as no such relief has been sought under

(a) above.

The learned Presidents Counsel for the Petitioners, whilst conceding that

there is a lacuna in the prayer, submitted that the petition makes it abundantly

clear that the Petitioners are seeking a Writ of Certiorari, and that no prejudice

has been caused to the Respondents.

The learned Senior State Counsel drew the attention of this Court to the

judgment in Dayananda vs Thalwatte3 where a situation similar to what has

occurred in this application had arisen, in that the petitioner had failed to

identify the writ he had sought from this Court. In the prayer in that case, the

petitioner had sought (a) to quash the decision of the 1st respondent to

institute proceedings in terms of the State Lands Recovery of Possession Act

and (b) to declare that the quit notice dated 08th April 1997 is of no force or

avail. Upon an objection being taken that (a) the Petitioner has failed to

identify the writ he has sought from this Court, and (b) that the prayer is

misconceived and unknown to the law and therefore neither relief could be

granted, and the petitioners response being identical to what has been taken

up in this application, this Court held as follows:

It is necessary for the Petitioner to specify the writ he is seeking

supported by specific averments why such relief is sought. Even though the

Petitioner has set out in the caption that "In the matter of an application

for writ of quo warranto and prohibition" there is no supporting

averment specifying the writ and there is no prayer as regards the writ

3 (2001) 2 Sri LR 73.

5

that is being prayed for. The failure to specify the writ therefore renders

the application bad in law.

Although it is clear from the pleadings that the Petitioner is complaining about

the vires of the actions of the Respondents, this Court is in agreement with the

learned Senior State Counsel that this Court cannot grant a Writ of Certiorari,

in the complete absence of a prayer to that effect. This situation must however

be distinguished from a situation where there is a specific prayer for a Writ of

Certiorari, and the power of Court to issue the said Writ of Certiorari, albeit in

a modified form, in such situations. It is therefore the view of this Court that

paragraph (II) of the prayer is misconceived in law, and that this Court cannot

grant the said relief.

This Court shall now consider the application of the Petitioners for the

aforementioned Writ of Prohibition, on its merits. This application was

supported for notice on 25th July 2016. Having heard the learned Counsel for

the parties, this Court refused to issue formal notice of this application for the

reasons set out in its order. The Petitioners had thereafter sought Special

Leave to Appeal against that decision.4 The Supreme Court, by its order dated

22nd May 2017 had directed this Court to issue notices and proceed to hear this

matter on its merits.

The 1st Petitioner is the Port Junk Dealers Association, a company limited by

guarantee and registered under the provisions of the Companies Act No. 7 of

2007. The 2nd and 3rd Petitioners are the President and Secretary, respectively,

of the 1st Petitioner. The Petitioners state that its members are engaged in the

4 SC (Spl) Leave to Appeal Application No. 181/2016.

6

business of removing solid waste, waste oil, sludge etc from ships that call at

different Ports in Sri Lanka. This business is commonly referred to as providing

waste reception facilities.

The 1st Respondent is the Marine Environment Protection Authority,

established under the Marine Pollution Prevention Act No. 35 of 2008 (the

Act). In terms of its preamble, it is an Act to provide for the prevention, control

and reduction of pollution in the territorial waters of Sri Lanka or any other

maritime zone, its fore-shore and the coastal zone of Sri Lanka.

Sri Lanka, being an island nation situated close to major sea routes have

vessels passing by on a regular basis and thus, it is important to take measures

to manage, safeguard and preserve the territorial waters of Sri Lanka, and

prevent the pollution of its territorial waters, fore-shore and maritime zone, by

such ships.

In terms of Section 6(e) of the Act, it shall be a function of the 1st Respondent

to provide adequate and effective reception facilities for any oil, harmful

substance or any other pollutant that may be discharged by such vessels.

Section 21 of the Act contains the following specific powers that the 1st

Respondent shall exercise when dealing with waste discharged by ships:

(a) to provide reception facilities within or outside any port in Sri

Lanka, in consultation with the Marine Environmental Council to

enable any ship using such port or traversing Sri Lanka waters or any

other maritime zone, its fore-shore and the coastal zone of Sri Lanka

to discharge or deposit any residue of oil or other pollutants;

7

(b) to direct the person in charge of all ports, harbours, terminals, repair

yards of ships, dry docks or any other marine related facility used by

ships which have any residue of oil to discharge, to provide adequate

reception facilities for the purpose of such discharge:

Although Section 21(b) requires the 1st Respondent to offer and carry out

waste reception facilities for vessels, Section 21(b) provides further that, for

the purposes of this paragraph the Authority may seek the assistance of any

other person for the provision of such facilities or arrange for the provision of

such facilities by any other person.

In terms of Section 51 (2), the Minister may make regulations in respect of

inter alia the following matters:

(a) Specifying the conditions relating to the issue of permits and licences

by the Authority and the fees if any to be charged in respect thereof;

(g) Specifying the conditions subject to which reception facilities shall be

provided, including the registration of persons providing such

reception facilities and the fees to be levied for the provision of such

facilities;

The 1st Respondent, acting in the exercise of its powers in terms of Section

21(b), had invited applications from third parties to provide the service of

waste reception facilities, and as reflected in the letter dated 27th June 2016

annexed to the petition marked P9a informed those third party service

providers that the 1st Respondent would be charging a deposit from them for

8

the services that would be provided. By a further letter dated 1st July 2016,

annexed to the petition marked P9b, the 1st Respondent had informed that a

sum of Rs. 500 would be levied on each cubic metre of oil that would be

removed from a vessel. Being dissatisfied by P9a and P9b, the Petitioners

filed this application seeking the aforementioned relief.

The primary complaint of the Petitioners was that the 1st Respondent is

seeking to levy fees without the Minister having made any regulations in terms

of Section 51. It is however noted that in terms of Section 7(l) of the Act, the 1st

Respondent has the power to charge fees for any services provided by the

Authority from any person or body of persons.5 It is therefore the view of this

Court that even in the absence of regulations, the 1st Respondent has the

power to levy fees in terms of the power conferred on the 1st Respondent by

Section 7(l). Therefore, it is the view of this Court that there is no merit in the

submissions of the Petitioner.

Be that as it may, it is common ground that after this application was dismissed

in 2016, but prior to the aforementioned order of the Supreme Court, the

Minister has promulgated the Marine Environmental Protection (Waste

Reception Facilities) Regulations 2016, in terms of Section 51 of the Act. The

levying of fees is now done in terms of the said Regulations, published in

Extraordinary Gazette No. 1996/27 dated 6th December 2016, and not in terms

of the aforementioned documents marked P9a and P9b. It must be stated

that the Petitioners have challenged the vires of the said Regulations in CA

(Writ) Application No. 271/2017. In these circumstances, it is the view of this

5 Section 7(l) reads as follows: The Authority may exercise all or any of the following powers - to charge fees for any services provided by the Authority from any person or body of persons.

9

Court that events have overtaken this application, and that proceeding with

this application is futile.

In the above circumstances, this Court dismisses this application, without

costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal