1- \ .' )

-~

IN TH COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRTIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

)

(eA. No. 462/2013 (Writ).

In the matter of an application for

.Mandates in the nature of a Writ of Certiorari and Writ of Mandamus under Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

1. Watagala Hewage Thamani

Kumari Watagala

2. Wickremage Ariyawathie

Watagala both of No.557/1, Madampe Road,

Kuliyapitiya

3. Godage Amila Iron Sri

Kariyawasam.'Sarada Surath',

Weerambuwa Kuliyapitiya.

4. Sampath Wijeyabahu

Kariyawasam , Gaiyala,

Kuliyapitiya

1

5. Kalahe Liyanage Susantha

Eden Perera

83/11,Jaya Mawatha, Kuliyapitiya.

6. Kalahe Liyanage Eden Redley

Perera, No.141, Main Street,

Kuliyapitiya.

Petitioners.

Vs.

Road Development Authority,

9th Floor. Sethsiripaya, Battaramulla

And 18 others

Respondents-Respondents.

C.A.No.462/2013 (writ)

Before Padman Surasena,J. IP/CA) and

A.L.Shiran Gooneratne,J.

Counsel K.G.Jinasena with Mithiri Kolambage for

the Petitioners.

H.Withanachchi for the 1st to 4th

Respondents.

2

" I "

Argued and

Decided on

Nayomi Kahawita S.C. for A.G.

12/03/2018

P .Padman Surasena,J .(P leA)

Learned Counsel for all the parties agree that the

applications bearing Nos. C.A.Writ No.462/2013, C.A.Writ

No.463/2013, C.A. Writ No.04/2014 and C.A. Writ No.09/2014

are cases revolve around one issue. Therefore, they agree that

pronouncement of one judgment from this Court would suffice

in all the above cases.

The Petitioner in these applications are owners of

lands situated just by the side of Kuliyapitiya Madampe road

which has been widen.

3

" . "

Parties do not controvert the following facts;

01. The interest of the petitioners in these applications is to

get the state authorities to acquire the remaining portions

of their lands after the rest of the each land was utilized for

the purpose of widening the road up to 33 feet.

02. The respondents never acquired any of the lands of

any of the petitioners in these applications.

03. The respondents with the consent of the petitioners had

used the said portions of the lands to widen the relevant

road up to 33 feet without any opposition by anyone of

them.

04. The widening of the road up to 33 feet has been

completed.

05. Most of these remaining portions of the lands are

comparatively small portions.

4

. '

It is the submissions of the learned counsel for the

petitioner that his expectation by filing these applications is to

compel the state to acquire these remaining portions of the

lands of the petitioners by the state.

Petitioner relies on two main prayers. Those prayers

are I b' and I c ' in the petition.

Para 'b' is for a writ of certiorari to quash the decision

taken by the 1st to 10th respondents to widen the Kuliyapitiya

Madampe road up to 42 feet width.

The prayer 'c ' is for a writ of mandamus to compel

the 1st to 10 respondents to take necessary steps as stipulated

in the Urban Development Authority Act and the Land

Acquisition Act.

5

t' " .

Although, it is the position of the learned counsel for

the petitioner that his expectation from prayer 'c' is to compel

the state to acquire his lands, this Court observes that there is

no purpose for the state to acquire the said lands if it cannot

carry out the decision to widen the road. This is because the

pray 'b' of the petition seeks to quash the relevant decision to

widen the road. It that sense, it is the observation of this Court

that these two prayers are contradictory to each other.

However, learned counsel for the petitioner informs

Court today that he is not pursuing prayer 'b' of the petition

namely, the writ of certiorari.

This Court observes that prayer 'c' has not prayed for

a mandamus to compel the state to acquire his land. All what it

says is to compel the respondents to take necessary steps as

6

. ' .

stipulated in the Urban Development Authority Act and Land

Acquisition Act.

It is the view of this Court that these two Acts contain so

many provisions and the petitioner has failed to specify the

particular Act which he wants this Court to compel the

respondent to do. Since the petitioner is only pursuing prayer

'c' in the petition as at today, the above position is sufficient for

this Court to dispose this application.

Learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General submits that

the state is not interested in acquiring these lands at the

moment. Therefore, in any case this Court is not in a position to

compel the state to acquire any land which the state is not

interested. In these circumstances, this Court sees no merits in

this application. Therefore, all the applications bearing numbers

7

." . . ,

Nos. C. A. Writ No.462/2013, C.A. Writ No.463/2013, C.A. Writ

No.04/2014 and C.A. Writ No.09/2014 ( mentioned above) are

dismissed without costs.

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL.

A.L.SHIRAN GOONERATNE,J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

WC/-

8