Page 1 of 6

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal from the

Provincial High Court of Kandy in

terms of section 331 of the Criminal

Procedure Code.

Court of Appeal Case No. Segusahib Mohamed Aswar,

CA (PHC) 83/2018 No. 01, Habarana Road,

Ganewalpola,

Kekirawa.

Provincial High Court Case No. COMPLAINANT

Rev - 10/20 18 Vs.

Magistrate Court Case No.

77176 Thajudeen Mohamed Hameem,

Elamalpotha, Vahakotte,

Matale.

AND BETWEEN

Segusahib Mohamed Aswar,

No. 01, Habarana Road,

Ganewalpola,

Kekirawa.

PETITIONER

Vs.

Page 2 of 6

1. Thajudeen Mohamed Hameem,

Elamalpotha, Vahakotte,

Matale.

2. The Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

AND NOW BETWEEN

Segusahib Mohamed Aswar,

No. 01, Habarana Road,

Ganewalpola,

Kekirawa.

COMPLAINANT-PETITIONER-

APPELLANT

Vs.

1. Thajudeen Mohamed Hameem,

Elamalpotha, Vahakotte,

Matale.

ACCUSED-RESPONDENT-

RESPONDENT

Page 3 of 6

2. The Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENT

Before : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

: P. Kumararatnam, J.

Counsel : A. L. M. Farook with Rudane Zahir for the appellant

: Randeniya instructed by Salman Ameen for the

Respondent

: Kanishka Rajakaruna, SC for the Attorney General

Argued on : 04-07-2023

Written Submissions : 22-02-2023 (By the Respondent)

: 06-04-2022 (By the Appellant)

Decided on : 21-09-2023

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

This is an appeal preferred by the petitioner-appellant (hereinafter referred to as

the appellant) on the basis of being aggrieved by the order dated 02-05-2018 by

the Provincial High Court Judge of the Central Province Holden in Kandy,

wherein the learned High Court Judge refused to issue notice on application

made by the appellant seeking to invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court.

The said application has been made in order to challenge an order made by thew

learned Magistrate of Dambulla 0n 22-11-2022 in the Magistrates Court of

Dambulla case No 77176.

Page 4 of 6

At the hearing of this appeal, it was the contention of the learned Counsel for

the appellant that the learned High Court Judge was misdirected as to the

relevant law when his application for notice was refused. He urged this Court to

quash the above-mentioned order.

This is a matter where the appellant has filed a private plaint in terms of section

136 (1) (a) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act before the Magistrates Court of

Dambulla. In his draft plaint and charge sheet, the appellant has sought to

charge the accused mentioned in the draft charge namely, Thajudeen

Mohammad Hameem for an alleged offence of cheating punishable in terms of

section 400 and 389 of the Penal Code. It appears that the charge was based on

a lease agreement as well as 2 cheques handed over by the appellant to the

accused mentioned.

When this private plaint was preferred, the learned Magistrate of Dambulla has

very correctly considered whether the appellant has established sufficient

grounds for him to proceed with this private plaint. In that regard the appellant

has given evidence before the Court. The learned Magistrate of Dambulla after

well considering whether the appellant has established sufficient grounds for

him to get the summons issued to the accused mentioned in the charge, has

concluded that the appellant has failed to establish such a ground. Accordingly,

the learned Magistrate has refused to issue summons as requested.

It is against this order the appellant had preferred an application in revision to

the Provincial High Court of the Central Province Holden in Kandy.

When the matter was supported before the learned High Court Judge of Kandy,

the learned High Court Judge being not satisfied that the appellant has a basis

to invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court has refused to issue notice in

that regard by his order dated 02-05-2018.

The appellant giving evidence before the learned Magistrate of Dambulla has

stated that he has a fuel station business and wanted to give that business on

Page 5 of 6

rent to the accused mentioned. In that regard, went to an office of a lawyer,

discussed the conditions, and instructed the lawyer to prepare an agreement.

He has claimed that he signed several blank papers and after several reminders

and several dates after the signing, he was given the copy of the agreement, but

the conditions he wanted to be in the agreement was not there. It was his

contention that the said agreement referred to a power of attorney alleged to have

been given by him to the accused, which was not in accordance with his

instructions to the lawyer. He has also referred to two cheques given by him to

the value of One Million rupees and the accuseds failure to deposit the said

cheques given by the appellant to the appellants account and the losses suffered

by him as a result.

The learned Magistrate in his order has well considered the evidence and has

rightly noted that although the appellant speaks about a rent agreement given

to him by his lawyer, which should be the basis of the allegations against the

accused had not been tendered in evidence and therefore, he is not in a position

to consider the alleged conditions that contain in the document.

The learned Magistrate has well considered the appellants evidence with regard

to two cheques allegedly given by him and has determined that the evidence in

that regard does not fall under the offence of cheating or criminal

misappropriation in terms of the Penal Code.

He has found that the documents tendered by the appellant to Court are

contradictory to each other. In the complaint alleged to have been made to

Kekirawa Police on 12-08-2016, the appellant has referred to the same 2 cheques

he has claimed that was given by him to the accused has been stolen from one

of the files he had with him and he is unaware who took the cheques from his

files.

As correctly considered by the learned Magistrate, this is a statement made

contradictory to the stand taken up by the appellant before the Magistrates

Court. The learned Magistrate of Dambulla having well considered all these facts

Page 6 of 6

and other incidental matters has decided not to issue summons to the accused

mentioned in the draft charge filed before the Court.

When this matter was considered by the learned High Court Judge of Kandy, the

learned High Court Judge too had drawn his attention to the order made by the

learned Magistrate of Dambulla and has correctly concluded that he has no basis

to issue notice of the revision application filed before him, which in my view is

the only conclusion that would have been reached by the learned High Court

Judge.

Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed for want of any merit.

The Registrar of the Court is directed to forward a copy of the judgement to the

Provincial High Court of the Central Province Holden in Kandy and to the

Magistrates Court of Dambulla for information.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P. Kumararatnam, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal