1 I j

1 i ! t , i 1 j I I

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Court of Appeal Case No. CA 201/2012

High Court of Colombo

Case No. HC 4726/2009

In the matter of an appeal under and in terms of Section 333(1) of the Criminal Procedure Code Act No. 15 of 1979.

The Attorney General of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Complainant

Gangodawila Sujeewa Nilanthi Dabare Accused Vs,

And Now Between

Gangodawila Sujeewa Nilanthi Dabare

Accused -Appellant

Vs,

The Attorney General of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Complainant-Respondent

Before : S. Thurairaja PC, J &

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J

Counsel : Saliya Pieris PC with Susil Wanigapura for the Appellant.

Chethiya Gunasekara DSG for the Respondent.

Written Submissions : Accused Appellant - 9th May 2018.

Complainant Respondent- 2nd February 2018.

I

~. ! f I I I I, I! i II !IIf

J 1 l I l I l l t 1 j

~ j I

~ 1 4

~ I l j 1 1 1 1 I

J I i J j ! I

1 i 1

1 1 I i 1 I \ ! i I ! I I I ! I I

~ 1 ! i f I I ! i ! ! I

Argument on : 16th November 2018.

Judgment on : 30th November 2018.

******************

JUDGMENT

s. Thurairaja, PC. J

Honourable Attorney General preferred an indictment against the Accused-

Appellant, Gangodawila Sujeewa Nilanthi Dabare (Hereinafter sometimes referred to

as the "Appellant"), for trafficking and possession of 385.1 grams of Heroin (dicetyl

morphine) which is punishable under Section 54 A (b) and 54 A (d) of the Poisons,

Opium and Dangerous Drugs Act.

Trial was held before the High Court of Colombo, prosecution led the evidence of

Inspector of Police (IP) Moses Neomal Rangajeeva(PW1}, Wannakuwaththa

Mitiwaduge Ashoka Nandani Perera (Registrar of Magistrate Court of Attanagalle),

Sub Inspector of Police (SI) Gunasinghe Mudiyanselage Rohan Chinthaka Gunasinghe

(PW2), Inspector of Police (IP) Chirath Buddhika Gunasekara and Government

Analyst Pathirage Sandhya Kumuduni Rajapakse.

According to the prosecution witnesses, on the 16th May 2006, I P Rangajeeva

received an information from his personal informant, that a woman and her husband

are involved in trafficking of Heroin. He formed a team and went to Poorvarama

Road, kirilapone, Colombo 5 and laid in ambush in front of a corner shop. Other

officials were stood in a vehicle at the temple. When the IP was waiting with the

team, his personal informant, had told them "here they come", and he left that place.

IP Rangajeewa and SI Gunasinghe rushed towards the Appellant. There the Appellant

was seen carrying a box and standing in front of a gate and calling someone "Akke".

There IP Rangajeewa identified himself as an officer attached to PNB and searched

the box. It had another telephone box (carton). When they opened it, they found 11

packets containing of brown coloured powder in polythene bags. Initially they

examined and suspected as Heroin. Both were arrested and taken to the office of

PNB, there substance was weighed and sealed. The brown coloured powder weighed

and it contained 1 kilogram and 214 grams (1214 grams) in total, which was sent to

the Government Analyst Department. After analyzation, it was found that it contained

385.1 grams of dicetyl morphine, commonly known as Heroin.

The honourable Attorney General preferred an indictment against the Appellant and

the Appellant was tried before the High Court of Colombo. After the trial she was

found guilty and sentenced to death.

Being aggrieved with the said conviction and sentence the Appellant had preferred

this appeal to the Court of Appeal and submitted following grounds of appeal.

1) Prosecution Witness No.1 is unreliable and unworthy of credit.

2) There is a doubt cast as to the chain of production.

3) Contradictions between Prosecution Witness No.1 and No.2.

4) Defence case was wrongly rejected by the High Court Judge.

5) Submissions were not heard before the sentence is passed.

We consider 1st, 2nd and 3rd grounds of appeal together.

The PW 1, IP Moses Neomal Rangajeeva and PW 2, SI Gunasinghe Mudiyanselage

Rohan Chinthaka Gunasinghe gave evidence. These two were actively involved in the

raid. It should be mindful that they have conducted this raid on an information

provided to them by personal informant. The quantity recovered was 1214 grams

which has a huge market value. After analyzation it was found that, it contained 385.1

grams of Heroin. There are no contradictions marked on the evidence of these two

witnesses except on one factor, there was no difference between these two

witnesses. The Counsel submits that, since they are trained Police Officers no

contradictions can be marked. We have seen numerous Police Officers and other

trained officers were giving evidence. We cannot have a common opinion against all

of them. Evidence of every witness was evaluated by the Trial Judge after considering

i I I I I 1 ! 1

;1 1 i I ! I 1 I

~ I ,

1 I I ! I I I !

I

J ,I 1 ! i

\

j 1 I

many material factors. To make witness uncreditworthy, it depends on many factors.

One of those contradictions are per se and inter se. In this case we did see

contradictions regarding the Registration number of the vehicle. That issue will be

discussed subsequently.

The evidence of the witnesses was weighed and assessed by the Learned Trial Judge.

He had found that, the evidence of these two witnesses were acceptable and had

stated the reasons in his judgment. We carefully perused the evidence of these two

witnesses and submissions made by Counsels before us. We find that, the findings of

the Learned Trial Judge is well considered and we have no reasons to interfere with

same.

When the productions were taken over by the 1st witness, it was in his custody until it

reached the PNB, there it was weighed and sealed in the presence of the Appellant

and the other witnesses. Thereafter it was entered in the relevant registry and

handed over to Buddhika who was in reserve. At page No.274 it says it was given at

0305 hours. But when we perused it says it was returned to the PNB at 2145 hours

and he followed the formalities. Thereafter he reserved them at 2310 hours. When we

read 272-274 pages, that the 0305 hours was a typographical error. PW1 was

extensively cross examined of time, distance and many other issues and it was not

suggested or questioned about handing over at 0305 hours. That further confirms

the time marked, there was a typographical error, by the Court typist.

We carefully considered all factors, especially the possession and the chain of

custody. We are convinced that, there are no discrepancies hence these three

grounds of appeal fails on its own merits.

Further the Counsel shown more emphasis on a contradiction which appeared

regarding the registration number of the vehicle they used. PW 1 said they used 61-

7448 and at another occasion he said they used 61-7456. The running chart was also

produced. It appears that there is a mistake in the vehicle number. The PW2

categorically said that, they travelled in 61-7448 and the 2nd vehicle 61-7456 was

used to send productions to the Government Analyst. The witness who transported

the Accused persons to the Magistrate Court used the vehicle which was bearing No.

61-7446. It appears that these are two vehicles at the PNB and both have been used

at different times in this raid.

The question arises whether this contradiction goes to the root of the case and

creates a reasonable doubt. We carefully perused the judgment of the Learned Trial

Judge which contained 26 pages. The Learned Trial Judge has independently

analysed all factors before him including this contradiction and concluded that, this is

not a material contradiction which creates a reasonable doubt in the case of the

prosecution hence he rejected the same and come to his own conclusion.

Considering all factors, we find that, there is no merit in this ground of appeal.

The 4th ground of appeal is that the defence case was wrongfully rejected. It appears

that the Appellant had taken two distinct defences among other minor issues. During

the prosecution case, it was suggested that the production was found in the house of

the Appellant. When the Appellant made a dock statement, she said that when the

Police were about to leave the house after searching, a neighbour lady had came

there and told a parcel was in front of the house compound. It is evidence by the

Court that the Appellant was living in a tiny house of which, her house, front wall

starts from the road and the adjacent house was separated by a same wall of the

house (similar to shanty, line houses). If it was found out of the house as she claims

in her dock statement it was on the road. Will any person leave such a big quantity

with high financial value on the road? The Learned Trial Judge had carefully

considered all factors and rejected the defence version. We are in agreement with

the findings of the Learned Trial Judge. We find that, this ground of appeal also fails

on its own merits.

The Counsel for the Appellant submits that, she was not given an opportunity on

submission regarding the sentence. Our law provides only two sentences, to any

person who is possessing Heroin of 2 grams or more, it is death sentence or life

imprisonment. In fairness to the Appellant we invited the Counsel under Article 145

of the Constitution, to submit any ground in mitigation of the sentence. Counsel fails

to submit any reasonable ground for us to reconsider the sentence. It could have

been better the Learned Trial Judge had give an opportunity to the Appellant to

make submissions before imposing the sentence. But considering the facts of this

case and opportunity given by this Court, we find the Learned Trial Judge absolutely

justified in imposing the sentence as he imposed. We have no reason whatsoever to

interfere with the said sentence.

After carefully considering the submissions, judgment and all facts of the case, we

dismiss the appeal and affirm the conviction and the sentence.

Appeal Dismissed.

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL