IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Packwell Lanka (Private) Limited.,

No.26, Second Cross Lane,

Off Kandawela Road,

Ratmalana.

Petitioner

CASE NO: CA/WRIT/328/2016

Vs.

1. M.D. Chandani Amaratunga,

Commissioner of Labour,

Department of Labour,

Labour Secretariat,

Colombo 5.

2. G.W.N. Viraji,

Deputy Commissioner of Labour,

Termination of Employment Unit,

Department of Labour,

Labour Secretariat,

Colombo 5.

3. E.C.S. Weerasinghe,

Assistant Commissioner of

Labour,

Termination of Employment Unit,

Department of Labour,

Labour Secretariat,

Colombo 5.

2

4. D.M. Gunawardena,

No.180/24, Samagipura,

Borupana,

Ratmalana.

Respondents

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Saliya Edirisinghe for the Petitioner.

Anusha Fernando, D.S.G., for the 1st-3rd

Respondents.

Decided on: 13.06.2019

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The petitioner-employer filed this application seeking to quash

by way of certiorari the order of the 1st respondent

Commissioner General of Labour marked P1 made in terms of

section 6 of the Termination of Employment of Workmen (Special

Provisions) Act, No.45 of 1971, as amended, whereby the

petitioner was ordered to reinstate the 4th respondent employee

with back wages.

Learned counsel for the petitioner challenges this order on

several grounds.

One such ground is that the 1st respondent did not have

jurisdiction to hold the inquiry and make the said

determination.

3

According to section 2(1) of the Act, no employer shall terminate

the scheduled employment of any workman without (a) the prior

consent in writing of the workman or (b) the prior written

approval of the Commissioner General of Labour.

Section 2(4) of the Act states that:

For the purposes of this Act, the scheduled employment of

any workman shall be deemed to be terminated by his

employer if for any reason whatsoever, otherwise than by

reason of a punishment imposed by way of disciplinary

action, the services of such workman in such employment

are terminated by his employer.

That means, if the termination is a punishment imposed by way

of disciplinary action, the Commissioner General of Labour has

no jurisdiction to hold the inquiry.

Section 2(5), introduced to the principal Act by Act No.51 of

1988, reads as follows:

Where any employer terminates the scheduled employment

of any workman by reason of punishment imposed by way

of disciplinary action the employer shall notify such

workman in writing the reasons for the termination of

employment before the expiry of the second working day

after the date of such termination.

The effect of section 2(5) is that, when the employer informs the

employee in writing the reasons for termination of employment

given as a punishment by way of disciplinary action within two

working days of such termination, the jurisdiction of the

4

Commissioner General of Labour is automatically ousted. The

Commissioner has, in such circumstances, no jurisdiction to

inquire the genuineness or correctness of that assertion, or

reasonableness or justifiability of the termination of employment

on disciplinary grounds. (Hiddelarachi v. United Motors Lanka

Ltd [2006] 3 Sri LR 411)

However, non-compliance with section 2(5), in my view, does not

confer jurisdiction to the Commissioner General of Labour, if the

Commissioner has otherwise no jurisdiction, because the

termination is a punishment imposed by way of a disciplinary

action.

When there is non-compliance with section 2(5), the moment the

Commissioner General of Labour is prima facie satisfied that the

termination of employment is a punishment imposed by way of

disciplinary action, the jurisdiction, in my view, is ousted. That

can happen before, in the course of, or after the inquiry into the

question whether the termination is in contravention of the

provisions of the Act. (Section 5 of the Act)

The word prima-facie was used here because if there is

material to satisfy at first sight that the termination is a

punishment meted out by way of a disciplinary action, the

Commissioner is not expected to go into minute detail of the

matter to be absolutely satisfied that the assertion is a genuine

one.

The employer is not without remedy. He can go before the

Labour Tribunal in terms of section 31B(1)(a) of the Industrial

Disputes Act, No.43 of 1950, as amended, seeking relief for

5

termination of his services whether it be by way of a disciplinary

action or otherwise.

Here the Commissioner shall be quicker as the workman shall

go before the Labour Tribunal, in terms of section 31B(7), within

six months from the date of termination.

What has happened in this case? The 4th respondent employee

was admittedly an unskilled worker on probation at the time of

termination of his services on 04.07.2014. His complaint to the

Commissioner of Labour dated 29.08.2014 marked X1, when

translated into English reads as follows:

Termination of Employment

I, the aforementioned D.M. Gunawardena, joined Packwell

Lanka establishment under service No. 1391 on

20.02.2013. On 04.07.2014, my services were terminated

unjustifiably. The reason for the termination of my services

was, my stopping machine and proceeding to meet the

Head of the Institution in order to get the sum of Rs.5741/=

deducted from my salary. Upon me being questioned by

Mr. Mangala and H.R. officer on this matter, they asked me

to leave the institution immediately with my belongings if

any, as a workman such as me is not suitable to the

institution. I expect some relief from you, having conducted

an inquiry into this matter.

On the back of this letter under Reason for Termination, the

employee has mentioned because of stopping the machine and

because of going to meet the Head (of the Institution).

6

From this complaint itself it is abundantly clear that the

termination of employment was, rightly or wrongly, a

punishment imposed by way of a disciplinary action.

What is the meaning of punishment imposed by way of

disciplinary action mentioned in section 2(4) of the Act? In St.

Anthonys Hardware Stores Ltd v. Ranjith Kumar [1978-79] 2 Sri

LR 6 at 8, Wimalaratne J. stated:

By section 2 the Commissioner of Labour has been vested

with jurisdiction to order reinstatement if the termination

has been otherwise than by reason of a punishment

imposed by way of disciplinary action. Only termination by

way of disciplinary action ousts the jurisdiction of the

Commissioner. Retrenchment and lay off are not the only

non-disciplinary grounds covered by the Act.

It is also important to note that to oust the Commissioner's

jurisdiction the termination has had to be not only by way

of disciplinary action, but also by reason of punishment

imposed by way of disciplinary action. What then is meant

by termination on disciplinary grounds? When an employee

is guilty of misconduct then termination would be by way of

punishment on disciplinary grounds. Insubordination,

dishonesty, drunkenness whilst at work, malicious damage

to employers property, are types of misconduct which

readily come to mind. Negligence may sometimes amount to

misconduct, depending on the gravity of the breach of the

duty of care. But inefficiency and incompetence denote a

person's inability to perform the work allotted to him, and it

7

is difficult, to see how they could be equated to misconduct

for which punishment by way of disciplinary action may be

imposed within the meaning of the Act.

In my view, on the strength of the complaint of the workman

marked X1, the Commissioner, without holding an inquiry could

have come to the conclusion that termination is a punishment

imposed by way of a disciplinary action and asked the employee

to go before the Labour Tribunal seeking relief because the

employee has come before the Commissioner within less than

two months of the termination of employment. Far from doing

that, the Commissioner, even after the inquiry, has, in item No.3

of P1, come to the conclusion that termination was as a

punishment by way of a disciplinary action has not been

established. This is unmistakably an error on the face of the

record.

In view of this strong finding, there is no necessity to consider

the other valid arguments taken up by the learned counsel for

the petitioner against the impugned order.

The Commissioner has made the order P1 without jurisdiction.

P1 is therefore quashed by way of certiorari.

Application is allowed with costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal