Page 1 of 11

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of

section 331 (1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979, read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Court of Appeal No: Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

CA/HCC/0290/2018 COMPLAINANT

Vs.

High Court of Rathnapura Mawarakanda Wathukarage Ariyaratna

Case No: HC/05/2005 ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

Mawarakanda Wathukarage Ariyaratna,

Gawaragiriya, Kolabewa.

Now, Prison- Welikada.

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENT

Page 2 of 11

Before : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

: P. Kumararatnam, J.

Counsel : Nisasiri Dayananda with Priyangika Hettiarachchi

and Sanjaya Senevirathne for the Accused Appellant

: Chethiya Gunasekara, ASG for the Respondent

Argued on : 04-08-2022

Written Submissions : 28-05-2019 (By the Accused-Appellant)

: 25-08-2019 (By the Respondent)

Decided on : 15-09-2022

Sampath B Abayakoon, J.

This is an appeal by the accused appellant, Mawarakanada Wathkarage

Ariyaratne, (hereinafter referred to as the appellant) on being aggrieved by the

conviction and sentence on him by the learned High Court Judge of

Rathnapura.

The appellant was indicted before the High Court of Rathnapura for causing

the death of one Hewage Don Lyonsingho on 22nd March 1994, an offence

punishable in terms of section 296 of the Penal Code.

After trial without a jury, the appellant was found guilty as charged, and

accordingly, sentenced to death.

Page 3 of 11

At the hearing of the appeal the learned Counsel for the appellant formulated

the following grounds of appeal for the consideration of the Court.

(1) Admissibility of the evidence of PW-02 is questionable.

(2) The death certificate submitted to prove the death of PW-02 is not the

death certificate of PW-02.

(3) The prosecution failed to comply with the provisions of section 33 of

the Evidence Ordinance before admitting the evidence of PW-02.

(4) The prosecution failed to prove the case beyond a reasonable doubt

against the accused.

Before considering the grounds of appeal in detail, I will now consider the facts

as elicited in the evidence.

Facts in Brief

PW-02 Mawarakanda Wathukarage Pathmasiri was the only eyewitness to the

incident. He was about sixteen years of age at that time and was living with the

appellant who was a younger brother of his father, for whom he has referred to

as Bappa (). The appellant was also known as Chuti in the village. On the

day of the incident, around noon, the witness had gone to fetch some water

from the nearby stream. On his return, he has heard a sound of a quarrel.

Upon nearing the house, he has seen the appellant and the deceased whom the

witness referred to as Basunnahe () scuffling with each other.

Although the witness has attempted to separate them, he could not. Later,

when the deceased was leaving pushing his foot bicycle, the witness has seen

the appellant attacking him with a Keththa Knife to the neck of the deceased.

After the deceased fell the appellant has attacked the deceased again to the

neck and the Keththa Knife has broken as a result. As the appellant has

ordered him to run, the witness has run away from the scene of the crime and

had promptly informed the incident to one Senaviratne. The witness has

Page 4 of 11

admitted making a statement to the police on 23-03-1994, a day after the

incident.

Under cross examination, the witness has admitted that his father killed his

mother and the appellant was a witness to that incident, and his father was

sentenced to death over the killing. The position taken up by the appellant was

that the witness was lying and he was away from the village on the day of the

incident.

The Seneviratne mentioned by the PW-02 has given evidence and has

confirmed that on the day of the incident, around 11-11.30 in the morning,

PW-02 came running to his house and informed that the deceased who was his

brother-in-law was attacked and killed by the appellant using a keththa. He

has admitted that the deceased and the appellant were not in good terms. The

suggestion put forward to the witness on behalf of the appellant when he was

subjected to cross examination was that it was, he who attacked the deceased

with a Keththa Knife, which the witness has denied.

The District Medical Officer who has conducted the postmortem at the scene of

the crime has confirmed that the deceased had seven cut injuries. The two cut

injuries he has observed in the neck of the deceased were necessarily fatal

injuries. Other cut injuries had been in the back and the face of the deceased.

PW-04 is a relative of the appellant who has met and spoken to him at the

village on the day of the incident. Although he was unable to give the exact

time he met the appellant, his evidence suggests that it may be mid-day, going

by the way he has explained his activities during the day. PW-05 Jayasena is

another fellow villager who has seen the appellant walking by his house. He

has been specific that he saw the appellant between 11 a.m. and 12 noon on

the day of the incident. Later he has come to know about the attack on the

deceased. PW-06 Kanthihlatha is a relative of the appellant as well as the

Page 5 of 11

deceased. She too has met and spoken to the appellant on the day of the

incident.

PW-08 Chief Inspecter of Police Ajantha Perera was the officer who has arrested

the appellant at the Main Bus Stand of Mathugama on suspicion. In this

matter, several police officers who conducted the investigations as to the crime

have given evidence. Although several items of productions have been

recovered based on the statement given to PW-16 by the appellant, none has

been produced as evidence due to the non-availability of the productions which

have been destroyed as a result of a fire in the production room of the

Rathnapura Magistrate Court. Although the relevant extract of the statement

which led to the recovery of several items has been marked as P-02, there

cannot be any evidential value in it, because of the failure of the prosecution to

produce the items recovered as a result of the statement at the trial.

In this matter the PW-01 named in the indictment was the daughter of the

deceased who has identified his body at the inquest. An admission in that

regard has been recorded in terms of section 420 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act during the trial.

At the conclusion of the prosecution and when the appellant was called for a

defence, he has chosen to make a statement from the dock. He has taken up

the position that on the day of the incident, namely, on 22-03-1994 he left the

village and went to Colombo through Mathugama and from there, went to his

sisters house in Uswetakeiyawa and reached her house around 1.30 in the

afternoon. It was his position that he left the house of the sister around 8 in

the morning of the following day and came to Mathugama Bus Stand, where he

was arrested by the police. He has denied any connection to the murder. He

has claimed that the witness Pathmasiri is angry with him because he gave

evidence against his father and witness Senaviratne also an enemy, who set

fire to his house in 1992.

Page 6 of 11

The sister of the appellant Karunawathi has given evidence to support the

appellant. It was her evidence that she came to her village from Colombo in

order to celebrate her birthday on the 14th of March. It was her evidence that

she, accompanied by the appellant who is her brother, left their house in the

village at 6.20 in the morning of the 22nd of March in order to reach her house.

Consideration of the Grounds of Appeal

As all the grounds of appeal are interrelated, they will be considered together.

The main contention of the learned Counsel for the appellant revolves around

the submission that had been made to the trial Court by the prosecuting State

Counsel at one stage of the trial that PW-02 has died, and the production of a

death certificate in that regard. It was the basis for the argument that the

evidence of the PW-02 was questionable and a wrong death certificate has been

tendered to the Court and also the failure to comply with the section 33 of the

Evidence Ordinance.

As pointed out correctly by the learned ASG for the respondent, by the time the

prosecuting State Counsel made that statement, the PW-02 has already

concluded his evidence. It becomes clear from the extract of the witness

statements that the person who provided the first information as to the crime

was a person named Mawarakanda Wathukarage Pathmasiri whose name was

similar to that of PW-02. He was a person of 32 years of age at the time he

provided the first information to the police and the PW-02 was about sixteen

years of age at the time of the incident. When giving evidence before the High

Court, he has stated his age as 30 years, which goes on to establish that it was

the same person who has seen the incident that has given evidence in the

Court.

It appears that due to this misunderstanding, the death certificate of the then

deceased first informant who was not a listed witness in the indictment has

Page 7 of 11

been tendered to Court, which has led to this confusion as to the witnesses. I

find that the PW-02 named in the indictment has given evidence in this action

and acting under section 33 of the Evidence Ordinance had no relevancy at the

trial, as the first informant of the crime to the police was not a listed witness.

Accordingly, I find no basis for the first three grounds of appeal urged by the

learned Counsel for the Appellant.

Therefore, the next matter to be considered in this appeal is whether the

contention that the prosecution has failed to prove the charge against the

appellant beyond reasonable doubt has any merit.

It is correct to say that there was only one eyewitness testimony as to the

actual incident. However, that alone is not sufficient to argue that the

prosecution has failed to prove the case, as it is the quality of the evidence that

matters and not the quantity. Even in a case where there was only a single

witness, if the testimony was cogent, trustworthy and without any material

contradictions or omissions, a trial Court can rely on such evidence to find an

accused guilty.

The relevant section 134 of the Evidence Ordinance reads as follows;

134. No particular number of witnesses shall in any case be required

for the proof of any act.

In the case of Mulluwa Vs. The State of Madhya Predesh 1976 AIR 989 it

was stated that,

Testimony must always be weighed and not counted.

After considering the relevant principles, Jayasuriya, J. in the case of

Sumanasena Vs. Attorney General (1999), 3 SLR, 137 stated thus;

The Court could have acted on the evidence of solitary witness

Nandasena, provided the trial judge was convinced that he was giving

cogent, inspiring and truthful testimony in Court. The learned trial judge

Page 8 of 11

has come to such a favourable finding in favour of witness Nandasena as

regards to his testimonial trustworthiness and credibility.

PW-02 was a close relative who was living with the appellant at the time of the

incident. He was about sixteen years of age at that time. Although it has been

claimed on behalf of the appellant that since the appellant was a witness to the

murder of the mother of the PW-02 by his father, the witness held a grudge

against him, I find no basis for such a claim. The evidence suggests that after

the death of the mother, the witness had been cared for by the appellant. It

clearly appears that the contention, the witness held a grudge against the

appellant was an afterthought, not based on any acceptable reasoning.

In his evidence, the witness has clearly described what he saw and the injuries

caused by the appellant to the deceased while he was there. The evidence of the

doctor who performed the postmortem is consistent with that of the witness.

The doctor has observed two deep cut injuries on the neck of the deceased

among the other cut injuries which are necessarily fatal injuries. The marked

contradictions are not contradictions that go into the root of the matter. In fact,

the first contradiction marked had been in relation to something the witness

has said in favour of the appellant, while giving evidence at the trial.

The Supreme Court of India in the case of Bharwada Bhoginbhai Hirjibhai Vs.

State of Gujarat, 1983 AIR 753, observed that;

Discrepancies which do not go to the root of the matter and shake the

basic version of the witness therefore cannot be annexed with undue

importance. More so when the all-important probabilities factor echoes in

favor of the version narrated by the witness. The reasons are, by and large

a witness cannot be expected to possess a photographic memory and to

recall the details of an incident. It is not as if a videotape is relayed on the

mental screen

Page 9 of 11

In the case of Bhagwan Jagannath and Others Vs. State of Maharashtra

(2016) 10 SCC 537 it was held:

While appreciating the evidence of a witness, the Court has to asses

whether read as a whole, it is truthful. In doing so, the Court has to keep

in mind the deficiencies, drawbacks and infirmities to find out whether

such discrepancies shake the truthfulness. Some discrepancies not

touching the core of the case are not enough to reject the evidence as a

whole. No true witness can escape from giving some discrepant details.

I am not in a position to find that the truthfulness of the sole eyewitness has

been shaken in any manner in this action.

It had been the evidence of witness Seneviratne that PW-02 came running to

his house and informed that the deceased was cut and killed by the appellant,

whose evidence has not been contradicted on any material points.

The position taken by the appellant when the PW-02 gave evidence was that he

was not in the village on the day of the incident, without specifying, which

amounts to an alibi. However, the contention put forward to the witness

Seneviratne had been that it was Senaviratne who attacked the deceased.

The position of the appellant when called for a defence had been that he was

not in the village at the alleged time of the incident and he left the village with

his sister and went to Uswetakeiyawa where his sister lives. According to the

evidence of the sister of the appellant they have left the village at 6.20 in the

morning.

Apart from the PW-02 Pathmasiri and PW-03 Senaviratne as to the time the

incident happened, the prosecution has led the evidence of PW-04. PW-05 and

PW-06, all of whom are fellow villages and relatives of the appellant. They have

confirmed in their evidence that they met or saw the appellant during the time

Page 10 of 11

relevant to the incident at the village. PW-05 had been specific that he saw the

appellant walking past his house around 11 a.m. and 12 noon on the day of

the incident. None of the said witnesses who confirmed the specific time they

saw the appellant in the village had been confronted in any manner relevant by

the appellant at the trial. In fact, PW-06 had not been cross examined at all.

In the case of Sarwan Singh Vs. State of Punjab 2002 AIR Supreme Court iii

3652 at 3655, 3656 it was stated thus;

It is a rule of essential justice that whenever the opponent has declined to

avail himself of the opportunity to put his case in cross examination, it

must follow that the evidence tendered on that issue ought to be accepted.

His Lordship Sisra de Abrew, J. in the case of Pilippu Mandige Nalaka

Krishantha Thisera Vs. The Attorney General, CA 87/2005 decided on 17-

05-2007 held:

.I hold whenever evidence is given by a witness on a material point is

not challenged in cross-examination, it has to be concluded that such

evidence is not disputed and is accepted by the opponent subject of course

to the qualification that the witness is a reliable witness.

I find that the prosecution has well established the presence of the appellant

and his culpability for the crime beyond reasonable doubt. The stand taken by

the appellant has not created any reasonable doubt as to the truthfulness and

trustworthiness of the evidence of the prosecution.

Although the learned High Court Judge has decided that he will not be

considering the alibi of the appellant for the reason of his failure to give due

notice of the alibi as provided for in section 126A of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act, I find that even if considered, that would have made no

difference to the judgement as for the reasons set out.

Page 11 of 11

For the reasons considered as above, I find no merit in the last ground of

appeal as well.

The appeal, therefore, is dismissed as it is devoid of any merit. The conviction

and the sentence affirmed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P. Kumararatnam, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal