1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Adhikari Appuhamillage Maggiehamine of Wilimbula, Henegama.

4th DEFENDANT-APPELLANT VS. Adhikari Appuhamillage Don Yohanis Appuhamy alias Yohanis Adhikari of Lunugama. PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT

1. Ratha Arachchige Don

Leelasena Abeywickrama Jayatillaka of Henegama.

And 9 others.

DEFENDANT-RESPONDENTS

C. A. APPEAL No. 664/1997 (F) D. C., GAMPAHA CASE No. 29841/P

2

Before : M. M. A. Gaffoor, J.

Counsel : S. A. D. S. Suraweera for the 4th Defendant-

Appellant

Rasika Dissanayake for the Plaintiff-Respondent

Written Submission tendered on : 30.11.2018 (by the 4th Defendant-Appellants) 05.11.2018 (by the Plaintiff-Respondents)

Argued on : 13.10.2017

Decided on : 13.03.2019

*****

M. M. A. Gaffoor, J.

The Plaintiff-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the Plaintiff)

instituted the above styled action in the District Court of Gampaha

seeking inter alia to have partitioned the land more fully described in

the schedule to the plaint.

After summons being received on the Defendants, the 1st, 2nd, 4th, 10th

and 11th Defendants filed their respective statements of claim seeking

undivided shares from the corpus. Accordingly, completion of the

respective pleadings, the case was fixed for trial. When this matter

was taken up for trial on 25.09.1995, both parties agreed to struck-off

the previous proceedings and to start a fresh trial without framing

issues.

It is perceived from the (District Court) case record that the Plaintiff

had not submitted a pedigree and given evidence in the lines of the

2nd and 4th Defendants pedigree. However, at the conclusion of the

trial, the parties were directed by the learned Trial Judge to tender a

common schedule of shares for which the matter mentioned on

3

01.10.1996. Thereafter this matter was mentioned on 02.04.1997 to

consider as to the list of shares to accept since several parties had

tendered separate list of shares. On the said date the 4th Defendant-

Appellant made an application to lead her evidence to prove her title.

However, the learned District Judge refused the said application and

delivered the Judgment on 26.06.1997.

By the said judgment the 4th Defendant-Appellant has not been

allocated any share from the subject matter. Thus, the Appellant had

preferred the instant appeal to set aside the judgment dated

26.06.1997 and remit the case back for a fresh trial.

Counsel for the Appellant stated that in this appeal 4th Defendant

together with late 2nd Defendant who is her husband had filed a joint

statement of claim and claimed a greater share of the corpus,

although, both 2nd and 4th Defendants have not been assigned any

rights in the plaint. However, on the date of the trial parties had

proceeded to trial without a contest and the learned District judge had

entered judgment without a proper investigation of the title in his

brief judgment dated 20.06.1997. Furthermore, the learned District

Judge had adopted the schedule of shares which had been tendered

by the Plaintiff and which had been objected by the 2nd and 4th

Defendants.

It is in these circumstances, counsel for the Appellant submitted that

the learned District Judge had failed to investigate the title as well as

calculating the share entitlement of each and every part to the case.

Whilst, Counsel for the Plaintiff submitted that the learned District

Judge having considered the documents and the schedule of shares

4

submitted by the parties and have finally delivered the judgment on

the interlocutory decree relying upon the schedule of shares

submitted by the parties for which, most of them agreed upon.

Having heard both parties, I observed that, the gravamen of the

argument of the learned Counsel for the Appellant before this Court is

that the District Judge was in grave error delegating his judicial

function to the parties to prepare and tender schedule of shares and

on that ground alone the Judgment is rendered a nullity.

It is settled law that a judgment in the strict sense of the law cannot

be regarded as a proper judgment in view of only a direction given by

a Judge that the schedule of shares directed to be tendered by the

plaintiff/parties should be accepted as part and parcel of his

judgment. Further, it is an accustomed procedure that in a partition

action a Trial Judge must decide the nature and extent of the interest

each party is entitled to upon an examination of the title in terms of

Section 25 of the Partition Law, No. 21 of 1997 (Vide, Salam, J. in

Ariyasena and Another vs Alen [2014 1 SLR 44]).

Thus, Section 25(1) of the Partition Law is noteworthy:

On the date fixed for the trial of a partition action or on

any other date to which the trial may be postponed or

adjourned, the court shall examine the title of each party

and shall hear and receive evidence in support thereof

and shall try and determine all questions of law and fact

arising in that action in regard to the right, share, or

interest of each party to, of, or in the land to which the

5

action relates, and shall consider and decide which of the

orders mentioned in Section 26 should be made.

The failure of the District Judge to indicate the undivided interest of

each party in the interlocutory decree is a fatal irregularity which gives

rights to the judgment and interlocutory decree having to be set aside.

It is appropriate at this stage to refer to the decision of

Basnayake, C. J. with H. N. G. Fernando, J. in Memanis vs. Eide (59

CLW at p. 46). Their lordships laid down the proposition that it is

imperative to include the undivided interest of each party in the

interlocutory decree. The relevant passage of the said judgment is

quoted below.

In his judgment the learned district judge says;

plaintiffs proctor will file a schedule of shares which

when filed will form part and parcel of this judgment

and there is a schedule of shares filed which he has

adopted in entering the interlocutory decree. Section 25

of the Partition Act, provides that the judge shall

examine the title of each party and shall hear and

receive evidence in support thereof and shall try and

determine all questions of law and fact arising in that

action in regard to the right, share or interest of each

party to, of, or in the land to which that action relates,

and shall consider and decide which of the orders

mentioned in Section 26 should be made. In the instant

case there has been no determination of the shares of

the parties as required by the Partition Act. It is the

shares so determined by the judge that the court is

6

required to enter in the interlocutory decree. The course

taken by the learned district judge is contrary to the

provisions of Section 28 of the Partition Act.

Therefore, my views are fortified as I gather more supports from the

above mentioned cases namely, Memanis vs. Eide (supra) and

Ariyasena and Another vs. Alen (supra).

Further, I wish to recall the following words of Hutchinson, C. J. in

Thayalanayagam vs. Kathiresapillai [(1910) 5 B.L.R 10]

In a partition action such as this is, I think that the

judge has power, and that in some cases it may be his

duty, even after the parties have closed their case, to call

for further evidence. (But if he does, he must do it in a

regular manner)

Thus, I am of the view that the impugned judgment cannot be allowed

to stand as it is inconsistent with the provisions of the Partition Law.

In the circumstance, the impugned judgment is set aside and the case

is sent back for re-trial.

Appeal allowed. Case sent back for re-trail.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL