IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA C.A. No. 97/08 HC. Ratnapura No. 55/98

Abeywickrama Arachchige Basil Pa Botuwa Handiya, Pa Botuwa, Niwitagala.

Accused Appellant Vs. Hon. Attorney General Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

Respondents

C.A. 97/2008

Before

Counsel

Argued &

Decided on

H.C. Ratnapura Case No. 55/98

Vijith K. Malalgoda,PC.J.(P/CA) &

H.C.J. Madawala.J.

Indika Mallawarachchi for the Accused-Appellant

Thusith Mudalige, S.S.c. for the A.G.

19.05.2015

Vijith K. Malalgoda,PC .. J.(P/CA)

The accused-appellant in this case was indicted before the High Court of

Ratnapura along with six others for the murder of Pareigalage Wimaladasa on or

before 01.03.19990. At the time the case was taken up for trial, the 2nd and 3rd

accused were reported dead. At the trial the prosecution had relied on the

evidence of Dayawathi, Siriyawathi and the depositions of Premawathi and

Somawathi whose evidence was led under Section 33 of the Evidence Ordinance

since those two witnesses were dead at the time of the trial. According to the

evidence of Dayawathi, the accused-appellant who had come to the house had

said" Q)6l) Q)i, q~ 6~c)),'. Few minutes thereafter the deceased had come

to their house and at that time the 1 5t accused had stabbed him once. However,

under cross examination she had admitted that in her evidence at the Magistrate's

Court she spoke of a fight. When confronted with her evidence at the Magistrate's

Court she admitted, that she said so at the Magistrate's Court. According to the

evidence of Siriyawathi, the 1 st accused had come to their house and pointing a

knife said " tDOz(!)) tD~ 0)(!)C3 q~ ~C)O tDO~~". According to the

evidence of all these witnesses, 2nd to the i h accused had come to the scene of

crime after stabbing took place. At the conclusion of the prosecution case, the

learned High Court Judge acting under Section 200 of the Criminal Procedure

Code decided to acquit the 4th to the i h accused-appellants. The accused-

appellant whilst making a dock statement before the learned High Court Judge had

said that this incident happened at a time when he went to consume liquor and the

deceased who had come there, had attacked him with the torch and thereafter he

was pushed down and he managed to take a knife which was on a table and

stabbed the deceased once.

Counsel for the accused-appellant further submitted that this cannot be

considered as a case of murder but a case of culpable homicide not amounting to

murder based on a sudden fight.

In support of the above position she submits that even though the witnesses

Dayawathi and Siriyawathi had referred to the fact that the accused had made

certain utterances prior to the deceased's arrival, witness, Dayawathi had admitted

that she said in the Magistrate's Court that there was a fight between the accused

and the deceased. According to the police witnesses, a torch had been recovered

from the scene of crime which corroborates for certain extent the version given by

the accused-appellant. It appears to this Court that the place where the incident

had taken place, was a place where illicit arrack was sold to the people.

We also observe that this is a chance meeting. One cannot expect the

deceased to be present at the scene of crime just after the accused made certain

utterances against him. Both witnesses, Dayawathi and Siriyawathi admitted in

their evidence that the deceased and the accused were good friends.

Learned Senior State Counsel concedes the above position. He submits

that there are favourable factors to the accused in this case specially when

considering the evidence of Dayawathi at the High Court trial. We are also

mindful of the fact that the deceased had received only one stabbed injury. If the

accused was waiting for the deceased to come, as referred by Dayawathi he had

the opportunity of giving more than one blow at the deceased, since he had come

unarmed to the scene of crime.

Considering all those factors, we feel that this is a fit case to convict the

accused-appellant for culpable homicide not amounting to murder based on

exception four, i.e. sudden fight. We therefore, decide to set aside the conviction

for murder imposed on the accused-appellant and convict him for culpable

homicide not amounting to murder an offence punishable under Section 297 of

the Penal Code on the basis of a sudden fight and impose a jail term of 20 years

rigorous imprisonment with a fine of Rs. 5,000/- in default, simple imprisonment

of 2 years.

At this stage counsel for the accused-appellant makes an application to

implement the sentence from the date of conviction considering the age of the

accused. She submits that the accused-appellant is now 68 years of age.

We make order to implement the said conviction of 20 years rigorous

imprisonment from the date of conviction i.e. from 02.06.2008. Appeal is partly

allowed.

Registrar is directed to send this record back to the High Court of Ratnapura

to implement this order and issue a fresh committal.

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

H.C.J. Madawala,J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Cr/-