IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA C.A. No.231/2006 H.C.Kalurtara No. 126/2002

H. Victor H. sumanadasa H. Preethirathna

Petitioners Vs. Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

Respondent

C.A. No.231L2006

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED AND

DECIDED ON

H.C.Kalurtara No. 126L2002

VIJITH K. MALALGODA PCJ (PICA) &

H.C.J. MADAWALA, J.

Tirantha Walaliyadde P.C. for the Accused-Appellants

Dappula de Livera A.S.G. for the respondent.

19th March, 2015.

*********

VIJITH K. MALALGODA P.C.J (PLCA)

The three accused-appellants along with another accused was indicted in

the High Court of Kalutara for the murder of Halwaturage Sirisena an

offence punishable under Section 296 of the Penal Code and causing

hurt to one Mallawarachchige Lalitha Padmini an offence punishable

under Section 314 of the Penal Code. At the conclusion of the High

Court trial before a jury by an unanimous verdict all three accused were

Ii I f

found guilty on the first count and acquitted on the 2nd count. The 4th

accused was found not guilty on all counts. Being dissatisfied with the

said order, the three accused-appellants had preferred this appeal to this

Court. Learned President's Counsel appearing for the accused-t

\ appellants at the very outset submitted that he would be challenging the

conviction on the basis that lot of inadmissible material had placed t

before the jury during the trial and therefore it is unfair to stand the

conviction against them. In support of his contention, he brings to the

notice of this Court the evidence led at page 265 of witness I. P.

Sivagurunathan who was the main investigating officer. I. P.

Sivagurunathan in his evidence had submitted on 3rd October 1990 he

was attached to Mathugama Police Station and around 9.50p.m when he

was out on some official work he has met three persons namely,

Halwathurage Sumanadasa, Halwathurage Victor and Halwathurage

Preethiratne who are the accuseds in this case and when questioned

them, they informed him that one Sirisena had attacked them and they

in return attacked Sirisena but they didn't know as to what happened to

Sirisena. Learned Counsel submits that this evidence is inadmissible.

He further submits that when the three accused were giving evidence on

oath at the trial, they were cross-examined by the prosecutor and

contradictions running into more than 60 were marked from their

statement and he brings to the notice of this Court of the learned High

Court Judge's summing up at page 798 where the learned trial Judge

had referred to the above contradictions and informed the jury not to

consider them as evidence but to consider the contradiction when

considering the credibility of the accused's version. We in fact observed

one such contradiction at page 415 of the brief to the effect "a>> 'i(!)'il5)

'io)~aClD tWC<? ODoe q8 om aD tl'im 'il5)j ol5>Oa;~ &>~'im &>(9C)

~C~a ~ C)l9I?l). which was marked as P 16 and submits that all this

material was placed before jury and the jury was prejudiced against the

accused when they found the accused guilty of the murder count. In

support of his contention Mr. Walaliyadde President's Counsel for the

accused-appellant brings to the notice of this Court several decisions by

the Supreme Court and Court of Appeal including Ranjit Fonseka vs.

The Attorney General 1990 1 SLR page 50 and King vs. Kalubanda 15

NLR page 422. Learned Additional Solicitor General at this stage

concedes that inadmissible material had been placed before the jury,

has caused grave prejudice to them, but Learned Additional Solicitor

General's contention was that if the jury was properly directed, the jury

wouldn't have come to the same conclusion, but would have come to a

conclusion where the accused would be found guilty for culpable

homicide not amounting to murder. Learned Additional Solicitor General

submitted that this Court can consider the above and impose suitable

sentence on the accused. Since the appellant in this case is insisting that

this Court should consider the merits of this case and come to a finding

whether the jury had come to a correct finding from the material placed

before them, we are not gOIng to consider the submissions of the

Additional Solicitor General.

We are of the view that the inadmissible material placed before the

jury during the trial had caused prejudice against the accused and

therefore, we decided to set aside the verdict of guilty and order a retrial

in this matter. The appeal is allowed and the conviction and sentence on

all three accused are set aside. Registrar is directed to return this case

record to the High Court of Kalutara and we direct the High Court Judge

of Kalutara to expeditiously conclude this matter since the alleged

offence was committed as far back as in the year 1990.

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

H.C.J. MADAWALA. J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

WC/-