1

In the Court of Appeal of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

C.A. Case No: DCF-183-97

D.C. Kegalle Case No: 25087/P

In the matter of an Appeal.

01. Henakaralalage Anura Senannayake

Kehelwatta, Wathura 02. Henakaralalage Mahinda Senannayake

Kehelwatta, Wathura

Plaintiffs Vs.

1. Henakaralalage Mudiyanse Senannayake 2. Henakaralalage Dharmasena 3. Henakaralalage Jayasena 4. Henakaralalage Podi Nilame 5. Henakaralalage Podi Ralahami 6. S.M. Rosalin Samarakoon 7. Henakaralalage Sriyalatha Chandrasiri Menike Samarakoon 8. Henakaralalage Daya Kumara Senannayake (dead) (8A) Rajapaksha Pathirage Piyaseeli 9. Henakaralalage Chandrika Pushpa Kumari

Samarakoon 10. Henakaralalage Devika Saman Kumari

Samarakoon 11. Henakaralalage Sriyalatha Chandrawathi Menike 12. Henakaralalage Chandrika Pushpa Kumari

Senannayake 13. Henakaralalage Devika Saman Kumari

Senannayake 14. Henakaralalage Sadamali Senannayake 15. Henakaralalage Amila Kelum Senannayake 16. Rajapaksha Pathiranage Piyasili

all of Kehelwatta, Wathura

Defendants

2

Before: M.T.M. Laffar, J.

S.U.B. Karalliyadde, J.

And now between

1. Henakaralalage Dharmasena 2. Henakaralalage Jayasena 3. Henakaralalage Podi Nilame

all of Kehelwatta, Wathura

2nd, 3rd, 4th Defendant-Appellants

Vs.

01. Henakaralalage Anura Senannayake 02. Henakaralalage Mahinda Senannayake

all of Kehelwatta, Wathura

1st and 2nd Plaintiff-Respondents

08(A)Rajapaksha Pathirage Piyaseeli

11. Henakaralalage Sriyalatha Chandrawathi

Menike 12. Henakaralalage Chandrika Pushpa Kumari

Senannayake 13. Henakaralalage Devika Saman Kumari

Senannayake 14. Henakaralalage Sadamali Senannayake 15. Henakaralalage Amila Kelum Senannayake 16. Rajapaksha Pathiranage Piyasili

all of Kehelwatta, Wathura

8th, 11th - 16th, Defendant-Respondents

3

Counsel: Hirosha Munasinghe for the 2nd, 3rd, 4th Defendant-Appellants

Romesh De Silva P.C. with Shanaka Cooray instructed by Ms. Bushra Hashim

for the Plaintiff-Respondents

Written submissions tendered on:

13.08.2021 and 10.03.2020 by the Plaintiff-Respondents

15.01.2021 by the 2nd, 3rd, 4th Defendant Appellants

Argued on: 13.07.2021.

Decided on: 09.11.2021.

S.U.B. Karalliyadde, J.

This appeal is against the judgment dated 12.03.1997 of the leaned District Judge of Kegalle

in the partition action bearing No. P 25087. The 1st and 2nd Plaintiff-Respondents (hereinafter

referred to as 1st and 2nd Plaintiffs) instituted that action in the District Court seeking to partition

a land called and known as Ambalam owite watte in the extent of one Amuna in paddy sowing

extent. The Court has concluded that the land sought to be partitioned is depicted as lot No. 1

in plan No. 1221 (marked as X, at page 233 of the Appeal Brief) prepared by the Surveyor Mr.

T.M.T.B. Tennakoon. By this appeal the 2nd - 4th Defendant-appellants (hereinafter referred to

as the 2nd - 4th Defendants) seek to set aside the judgment of the learned District Judge on the

basis that the land sought to be partitioned has not been identified correctly. Their argument

before the District Court was that the land shown as lot 1 in the plan marked as X is a portion

of a land known as Balagalahene watta which is the extent of one Amuna in paddy sowing

extent. Prior to the institution of the instant action, the 2nd - 4th Defendants had instituted the

partition action bearing No. P 24926 in the District Court of Kegalle for partitioning the said

Balagalahene watta. The preliminary plan bearing No. 436/P prepared by Surveyor Mr.

A.C.P. Gunasena for the action bearing No. P 24926 has been tendered to Court marked as 2-

-1 (at page 178 in the Appeal Brief) at the trial in the instant action. The position of the 2nd -

4th Defendants in the instant action was that Balagalahene watta is consisting of lots 1 - 6 in

plan marked as 2--1 and lot 1 shown in plan X is the same lot which is shown as lot 6 in plan

4

2--1. Nevertheless, plan 2--1 has not been superimposed on the plan marked as X to establish

that position. The 1st and 2nd Plaintiffs, tendering their statement of claim in the action bearing

No. P 24926 had argued that lot 6 in plan 2--1 is not a part of Balagalahene watta but it is

a different land called and known as Ambalam ovite watta. On that basis, they sought to exclude

lot 6 from the partition. The action in hand has been instituted by the 1st and 2nd Plaintiffs for

partitioning that land which they call as Ambalam ovite watta. Even though, it has not been

recorded as a formal admission at the trial, it has been admitted by both parties that the

Commissioner, Mr. Tennakoon has surveyed lot 6 in Mr. Gunasenas plan as the subject matter

of the action in hand. Nevertheless, the extent of lot 6 in plan 2--1 is less than the extent of

lot 1 shown in plan X by 2.4 Perches.

The position of the 2nd - 4th Defendants was that the boundaries and extent of the land

mentioned in their title deeds marked as 2--1 () to 2--3 for Balagalahene watta tallies

with the boundaries and the extent of the land consisting of lots 1 - 6 in the preliminary plan

marked as 2--1 prepared for the action bearing No. P 24926 and hence, lot 6 in that plan

should be a part of Balagalahene watta. They have drawn the attention of the Court to the

fact that even though, the extent of the land mentioned in the title deeds executed for Ambalan

Ovita watta is one Amuna, which is equivalent to approximately 5 Acres, the extent of the land

surveyed for the purpose of the instant action is only 1A 2R 30P. They argue that Ambalan

Ovita watta is situated to the south of lot 1 in plan marked as X. The position of the 1st and 2nd

Plaintiffs was that Ambalan Ovita watta which is sought to be partitioned in the action was

surveyed by Mr. Tennakoon and it is shown as lot 1 in plan X. They do not accept the position

of the 2nd - 4th Defendants that the land shown in plan X is a part of Balagalahene watta.

The deeds which were marked and tendered at the trial as -3, -4 and -8 deals with both

lands, Ambalan Ovita watta and Balagalahene watta. While deeds marked and tendered as 1,

-2, -5 and -6 deals with only Ambalan Ovita watta, deeds marked as 2--1() to 2--3

deals only with Balagalahene watta. When concluding that the land sought to be partitioned in

the instant action, Ambalan Ovita watta is shown as lot 1 in plan marked as X, the learned

District Judge has considered the following evidence in the case.

As mentioned in the amended plaint dated 12.02.1993, the boundaries of the land sought to be

partitioned are as follows;

- ,

- ,

5

- ,

- .

The boundaries of Ambalan Ovita watta mentioned in deeds marked as -1 and -2 are

identical to the boundaries of the land shown as lot 1 in plan X.

The boundaries of the said land mentioned in the deeds -1 and -2 are as follows;

- ,

- ,

- ,

-

The boundaries of lot 1 in plan X are as follows;

-

-

-

- /

The learned District Judge also has considered the following facts regarding the identification

of the subject matter. That the 2nd Defendant, while giving evidence has admitted that the

parametrical boundaries of the land formed by lots 1-3 in plan 2--1 are identical to the

boundaries of the land known as Balagalahene watta mentioned in the deeds marked as -3,

-4 and -8 which were dealt with both lands, the boundaries of lot 6 in plan 2--1 are

identical to the boundaries of Ambalan Ovita watta which is dealt in deed -3 and that the

boundaries of Ambalan Ovita watta dealt with in deeds -1 and -2 tallies with the boundaries

of lot 1 in plan X.

One of the reasons which the learned Counsel for the 2nd - 4th Defendants argue that the land

depicted in plan X is a part of Balagalahene watta is that in paragraph 9 of the Surveyors

report marked as X1 the Surveyor has reported that the land depicted in his plan is a part of the

land shown in plan No. 436-P (marked as 2--1) prepared by the Surveyor Mr. A.C.G.

Gunesena for partitioning Balagalahene watta in the action bearing No. P 24926. The learned

Counsel for the 2nd - 4th Defendants argue that at the trial, even though, on behalf of the 2nd -

6

4th Defendants points of contests have been raised about the identity of the land, the Plaintiffs

have failed to call the Surveyor who prepared the preliminary plan marked as X to give

evidence to establish the identity of the land.

In paragraph 5 of the report marked as X1, the Surveyor has reported that in his opinion, the

land he had surveyed is substantially same as the land sought to be partitioned as described in

the schedule to the amended plaint. In terms of section 18 (2) of the Partition Law, No. 21 of

1977, the facts stated in the Surveyor plan and the report can be used as evidence without

further proof. Therefore, since the facts stated in a surveyor report can be used as prima facie

evidence, in the instant action the burden of displacing facts stated in the surveyor report by

calling the Surveyor or offering further evidence of an inconsistent or contradictory nature had

been on the 2nd to 4th Defendants. Nevertheless, they have failed to make any application from

Court to summon the Surveyor to examine him or to adduce any inconsistent or contradictory

evidence. Therefore, the Court can come to the conclusion that the Plaintiff has discharged his

onus to prove that the land sought to be partitioned is lot 1 in the preliminary plan marked as

X. Even though, the Surveyor has stated in the paragraph 9 of his report marked as X1 that the

land he had surveyed is a portion of the land shown in plan marked as 2--1, he has not

superimposed 2--1 on the preliminary plan marked as X. The Court cannot believe that a

surveyor would be able to make such a conclusion without preparing a superimposition plan.

Under the above stated circumstances, the Court can conclude that it has been proved that the

subject matter of the action is lot 1 in the preliminary plan marked as X.

The learned Counsel for the 2nd - 4th Defendants further argue that even though, the land sought

to be partition is one Amuna in paddy sowing extent, the plan X does not show a land in the

extent of one Amuna. That argument is based on the fact that according to the Sinhalese method

of measuring the lands, in Kegalle District the extent of one Amuna should be equivalent to

approximately 5 Acres according to the English measurement. The extent of the land depicted

in plan X is only 1 Acre 2 Roods and 30 Perches. The Sinhalese land measures are computed

according to the extent of land require to sow either paddy or kurakkan. The number of seed

requires to sow in a particular extent of land would depend on varies factors like quality and

the size of the seeds, fertility of the soil, etc. Therefore, the land area which require to sow the

same number of seeds would vary from district to district or even in the same district and cannot

be considered as an accurate and standard method of measuring land. When identifying the

corpus in a partition action, the Court should consider the boundaries of the land as mentioned

in the title deeds with the boundaries according to the Surveyor plans.

7

The deed marked as -8 which had been executed in the year 1925 is a vital document in

deciding the subject matter of the instant action. The 2nd Defendant has admitted that Ram

Menike who was entitled to a half share of Balagalahene watta, by -8 had transferred her

rights to Appuhammy, Ukku Banda, Punchirala and Dingiri Banda (at page 127 of the Appeal

Brief). They were the original owners of a half share of Ambalan Ovita watta, which is the

subject matter of the instant action. Deed marked as -8 deals with both lands, Ambalan Ovita

watta and Balagalahene watta. The boundaries of Ambalan Ovita watta as mentioned in that

deed are as follows;

-

-

-

-

Under cross examination, the 2nd Defendant has admitted that Ketakalagaha mula hena is the

land which the Government School is situated (at page 141 of the Appeal Brief). The 2nd

Defendant has further admitted that the boundaries of Ambalan ovita watta mentioned in deed

marked as -8 are identical to the respective boundaries of lot 6 in plan 2--1. (at page 141 of

the Appeal Brief). The boundaries of Ambalan Ovita watta mentioned in deeds marked as -

3, -6 are also identical to the boundaries of the same land mentioned in deed -8.

The boundaries of Balagalahene watta according to the deeds marked as -3, -4 and -8

are as follows;

-

-

-

-

Under cross examination the 2nd Defendant has admitted that the said boundaries are identical

to the respective boundaries of the land formed by lots 1, 2 and 3 in plan 2--1 (at page 143 of

the Appeal Brief).

In plan 2--1, the eastern boundary of lots 1 and 2 is Balagalahene watta owned by H.R.

Appuhamy and the eastern boundary of lot 6 is Ambalan Ovita watta. The 2nd Defendant has

8

admitted that the parties to the actions bearing No. P 24926 and No. P 25087 are not entitled

to the rights of the said two lands and the evidence adduced in the instant action regarding the

pedigrees of Ambalan Ovita watta and Balagalahene watta does not apply to the lands situated

as the eastern boundaries of lots 1, 2 and 6 in plan 2--1 (at page 138 of the Appeal Brief).

According to the evidence of 2nd Defendant the original owner of Ambalan Ovita watta was

Mudiyanse who was his grandfather and Punchirala who is shown as an heir of Mudiyanse was

his father (at page 133 of the Appeal Brief). He has admitted that other than the land sought to

be partitioned, his grandfather or father had no rights in any other land in the name of Ambalan

Ovita watta (at page 137 of the Appeal Brief). By deed -1, said Punchirala had transferred

the inheritance rights from his father, Mudiyanse in Ambalan Ovita watta to Dingiri Appuhamy

and Punchi Mahaththaya.

The boundaries of Ambalan Ovita watta as mentioned in deed -1 are as follows;

- ,

- ,

- ,

-

Those boundaries tallies with the boundaries of lot 1 in plan X and lot 6 in plan 2--1.

It was not in dispute that Mudiyanse who was the grandfather of the 2nd Defendant and Ran

Menike were the original owners of half share each of the land sought to be partitioned.

Mudiyanses rights had been devolved on his son Punchirala who was the father of the 2nd

Defendant. Punchirala had executed the deed marked as -1. When he was executed -1, he

has mentioned that the extent of Ambalan Ovita watta is one Amuna. When Ran Menike was

executing deed -8 for her rights, she has mentioned that the extent of the land is 15 Lahas.

The title deeds in the pedigree under Punchirala had been executed on the basis that the extent

of Ambalan Ovita watta is one Amuna and under Ran Menike on the basis of 15 Lahas.

When considering the above evidence, the Court can be satisfied that the land sought to be

partitioned in the instant action, Ambalan Ovita watta is lot 1 in plan marked as X. Therefore,

I hold that the conclusion of the learned District Court Judge that the land sought to be

partitioned is lot 1 in plan X is according to the evidence of the case. Hence, I affirm the

impugned judgment of the learned District Court Judge and dismiss the Appeal. The 2nd 4th

9

Defendants will pay Rs. 50,000/- as costs of this appeal. I direct the learned District Court

Judge to enter the interlocutory decree according to the impugned judgment.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

M.T. MOHOMAD LAFFAR J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL