IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

C.A.No.193/2017

H.C. Matara No.134/2014

***********

In the matter of an Appeal under and

in terms of Section 331(1) of the Code

of Criminal Procedure Act

No.15/1979

Ponnamperumage Joseph Fernando

Accused-Appellant

Vs.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12

Respondent

.'

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

DECIDED ON

DEEP ALI WIJESUNDERA, J.

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

Asanka Dissanayake with Menaka Kudarathne and Dushanthika Dissanayake for the Accused-Appellant.

Suharshi Herath S.S.C. for the respondent

25th February,2019

24th May,2019

****************

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

The appellant was indicted before the High Court of Matara by the

Hon. Attorney General alleging that he committed the murder of Abeyratne

Weerasekara Patabendige Nuwan Sujith on or about 20.07.2008 at Kulatilaka

Watta of Maliyadda. After trial without a jury, the ap'pellant was found

guilty to the said charge by the trial Court and was accordingly sentenced

to death.

Being aggrieved by the said conviction and sentence, the appellant

sought to set them aside on the basis that the trial Court has failed to

2

consider his lesser culpability on the basis of either grave and sudden

provocation or sudden fight.

Learned Counsel for the appellant, in her submissions highlighted

an item of prosecution evidence where an eye witness to the incident

speaks about an argument between the appellant and the deceased and

the evidence of a continued family dispute.

The prosecution ca.se is that the appellant is the father of the 16 year

old deceased who had lived with another woman after his marriage to the

mother of the deceased had broken down. When that marriage was

subsisting the appellant used to come home in the evening in a heavily

intoxicated state and used to physically assault all members of his family.

He moved out their home sometimes back to live with another woman.

The deceased had three other sisters elder to him and another one younger

to him (Sandya Kumari), who was about 7 years at the time of the incident.

She is the eye witness to the incident, and on whom the prosecution relied

on primarily to prove the allegation of murder.

On the day of the incident, the appellant had come to the house

where the deceased lived with other members of his family at about 6.30 in

the morning. Only the mother and Sandya were at home. The deceased was

not at home at that time as he had left to attend to some other matter. The

appellant had then grabbed Sandya by her hand and took her along with

3

him. The appellant had a knife with a blade of about 2 1/2 feet, tucked to his

waist at that time. The deceased returned home at that point of time and

enquired from his mother as to where the appellant is taking his sister.

Mother replied that only through Police it could be found out. The

appellant had, by then taken the witness about 11 meters away from her

house and was near the fence. The deceased came up to the place where

his sister was, and took her hand. He protested to the appellant that the

latter cannot take custody of the sister and that he (the appellant) should

have done that when she was small. The exact words used by the witness

are as follows; u C)o)o) ~oG3 (3)&io~~ t:;~~ Q)z(3)z. O)C)C)@ <;~~ 6@~~

6)o~) 6)C)C)J" Then the deceased pulled the witness towards him and the

appellant, having assaulted their mother had struck a single knife blow on

the neck of the deceased. Having suffered this injury, the deceased had run

away from the scene. The witness and her mother took refuge in their

house, having bolted its door.

Later the witness learnt that the deceased was found fallen near a

cemetery and had succumbed to his injury in transit to a hospital.

The appellant was apprehended by the villagers after the incident

and handed over to the Police with his long bladed knife.

The medical officer, who performed the post mortem examination

on the body of the deceased, had noted 11 X 4 cm deep cut injury on the

4

neck of the deceased. This deep cut injury had severed several neck

muscles~ carotid vein and artery, resulting in severe blood loss in a short

interval of time culminating in his death. The medical officer expressed his

opinion of the injury by naming it as a necessarily fatal injury. He adduced

his reasons for this opinion. He stated that, if the deceased was

immediately treated with a team of awaiting surgeons who could fuse the

severed blood vessels soon after the injury, then only there existed a slight

chance of preventing his death by medical intervention.

In its judgment, the trial Court had considered the issue of the

applicability of lesser culpability. The position that had been advanced by

the appellant in his dock statement is that he was surrounded and

assaulted by a crowd of persons and then the knife cut happened

automatically due to this situation. The trial Court noted that the position

suggested to the prosecution witness by the appellant was that he was

provoked by the deceased with his verbal abuse. The word used by the eye

witness to describe what took place prior to the incident is an verble

altercation (" ~l,o)(3)l&d"). This item of evidence was also considered by the

trial Court in determining the issue of lesser culpability on the basis of

sudden fight or grave and sudden provocation.

We are in agreement with the conclusion reached by the trial Court

that the evidence does not reveal that the appellant was guilty to culpable

homicide not amounting to murder on the basis of sudden fight or grave

and sudden provocation.

5

Section 294 of the Penal Code has identified several provisos under

the Exception 1 to the said Section and the relevant ones are reproduced

below;

"Pirstly- That the provocation is not sought

or voluntarily provoked by the offender as

an excuse for killing or doing harm to any

person.

Secondly- .....

Thirdly- That the provocation is not given by

anything done in the lawful exercise of the

right of private defence."

Contrary to the claim of the appellant, the evidence of the eye

witness clearly points to a case where the appellant voluntarily provoked

the resistance that had been offered to him by the deceased, with the

appellant's own act of taking the young girl away from her mother

forcibly, whilst having a long bladed knife tucked to his hip. There is no

legitimate reason for the appellant to walk into the house, where only his

former wife and her young children are living, with a long bladed knife

unless he intends to use it if and when an opportunity arose. That

opportunity had arisen for the appellant when the deceased, an unarmed

16 year old juvenile, resisted his action in forcibly removing his younger

sibling. Then it appears that the deceased had acted in self-defence on

behalf of his sister in order to rescue her from the clutches of his ferocious

6

father. The evidence led by the prosecution clearly satisfy both these

provisos.

In the circumstances, the trial Court has correctly refused to apply

lesser culpability under the exception of grave and sudden provocation.

The exception of sudden fight also has no application to this

situation.

The Supreme Court, in its judgment of Bandara v Attoney General

(2011) 2 Sri L.R. 55, stated that;

" ... the lapse of time may grant the opportunity for an

accused to premeditate and make arguments for a fight.

Such a fight is not spontaneous and therefore cannot be

regarded as one that could be described as sudden. If there

was a lapse of time between incidents prior to the final

assault, it is quite clear that the heat of passion upon the

quarrel would have subsided and the death on such an

instance would be regarded as a murder./I

In view of the fact that the deceased was unarmed and did not cause

any injury to the appellant, the appellant following a sudden quarrel had

inflicted fatal blows to the deceased, their Lordships were of the view that

the Exception 4 to Section 294 would not apply in such situations.

7

This Court, in an unreported judgment of Gemunutileka v Hon

Attorney General, CA No. 131/2000 - decided on 10.09.2008 - adopted the

same approach as it observed that the witness's;

that;

1/... testimony neither bears out there was an

exchange of words between the appellant and the

deceased nor that the deceased attacked or attempted to

attack the deceased. The balance of probability tilts in

favour of prosecution that it was more likely that the

appellant took advantage of the situation and with

deliberate de~jgn attacked the deceased with a deadly

weapon."

In these circumstances, their Lordships, in the said appeal, have held

"there is no evidence to suggest that the appellant

acted in a heat of passion generated by the alleged

sudden fight."

Therefore, we are of the firm view that the appellant was rightly

convicted for the offence of murder by the trial Court since the two general

exceptions he had relied on to claim the benefit of lesser culpability have

no application to the evidence presented before the trial Court.

8

r-------------------------------------------------------------------~

We accordingly affirm the conviction and sentence imposed on the

appellant by the trial Court. The appeal of the appellant is dismissed.

JUDGE OF 1HE COURT OF APPEAL

DEEP ALI WITESUNDERA, T.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

9