==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/CPA/0030/2021

Page 1 of 11

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of revision application under

and in terms of Article 138 of the

Constitution of the Republic of Sri Lanka.

R.A. Chandani Ranasinghe,

Induruwagoda,

Payagala.

Petitioner

Vs

1. Thusitha Kularathna,

Chairman,

Western Province Passenger Transport

Authority,

No. 89, Rangamapaya,

Kaduwela road, Battaramulla.

2. Western Province Passenger Transport

Authority,

No. 89, Rangamapaya,

Kaduwela road, Battaramulla.

3. Kumara Rathnayaka,

Chief Operational Manager,

Western Province Passenger Transport

Authority,

Court of Appeal Case No: CPA/0030/2021 HC Writ Application No: HCWA 02/2018

CA/CPA/0030/2021

Page 2 of 11

No. 89, Rangamapaya,

Kaduwela road, Battaramulla.

4. Asanga S. Perera,

Assistant manager (Operations),

Western Province Passenger Transport

Authority,

No. 89, Rangamapaya, Kaduwela road,

Battaramulla.

Respondents

AND NOW BY AND BETWEEN

R.A. Chandani Ranasinghe,

Induruwagoda,

Payagala.

Petitioner-Petitioner

Vs

1. Thusitha Kularathna,

Chairman,

Western Province Passenger Transport

Authority,

No. 89, Rangamapaya,

Kaduwela road, Battaramulla.

1A. Mr. Prasanna Sanjeewa,

Chairman, Western Province Passenger

Transport Authority,

CA/CPA/0030/2021

Page 3 of 11

No. 89, Rangamapaya, Kaduwela road,

Battaramulla

Substituted 1A Respondent-Respondent

2. Western Province Passenger Transport

Authority,

No. 89, Rangamapaya,

Kaduwela road, Battaramulla.

3. Kumara Rathnayaka,

Chief Operational Manager,

Western Province Passenger Transport

Authority,

No. 89, Rangamapaya,

Kaduwela road, Battaramulla.

4. Asanga S. Perera,

Assistant manager (Operations),

Western Province Passenger Transport

Authority,

No. 89, Rangamapaya, Kaduwela road,

Battaramulla.

Respondent-Respondents

Before : D. THOTAWATTA, J.

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Counsel : Migara Kodithuwakku for the Petitioner-

Petitioner.

CA/CPA/0030/2021

Page 4 of 11

Nimal Rajapaksha, Nilanth Kumarage with

Arjun Perera for the 2nd, 3rd and 4th

Respondent-Respondents.

Substituted 1A Respondent-Respondent is

absent and unrepresented.

Argued on : 21.10.2025

Written Submissions

of the

Petitioner-Petitioner

tendered on : 17.12.2025

Written Submissions

of the Substituted 1A

-Respondent-Respondent : Not tendered.

tendered on

Written Submissions

of the 2nd, 3rd and 4th

-Respondent-Respondents

tendered on : 10.12.2025

Decided on : 11.02.2026

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

The instant application in revision has been preferred to this Court by the

Petitioner-Petitioner (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the Petitioner’) against

the 1st to 4th Respondent-Respondents (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the

CA/CPA/0030/2021

Page 5 of 11

1st to 4th Respondents’) seeking to revise and set aside the order of the learned

High Court Judge of the Western Province holden at Colombo dated 12.03.2020

(hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the Order’) made in the exercise of the writ

jurisdiction vested in him by Article 154P(4)(b) of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka (hereinafter called and referred to as

‘the Constitution’) whereby, the learned High Court Judge of the Western

Province holden at Colombo had dismissed the application made thereto, by the

Petitioner seeking a writ of Certiorari to quash the decision made by the 1st and

2nd Respondents and embodied in the document annexed to her petition filed in

the High Court of the Western Province holden at Colombo marked as X12 and

a writ of Mandamus compelling the 1st and 2nd Respondents to issue the

Petitioner a permanent Passenger Service Permit in terms of the document

annexed to her petition filed in the High Court of the Western Province holden at

Colombo marked as X3.

Since, the dismissal of the applications for writs of Certiorari and Mandamus is

founded upon two different findings arrived at by the learned High Court Judge

of the Western Province holden at Colombo, it would I think, be prudent and

convenient to deal with them separately.

The findings of the learned High Court Judge of Colombo leading to the

dismissal of the application for a writ of Certiorari.

As is discernible from the averments contained in the paragraphs of the petition

furnished to this Court by the Petitioner in the instant application in revision,

the application filed by the Petitioner in the High Court of the Western Province

holden at Colombo for a writ of Certiorari to quash the decision contained in X12,

had arisen from granting of approval by the impugned decision of the 2nd

Respondent which was alleged to have been made by him on the instructions of

the 1st Respondent, for the purpose of temporary suspension of the operation of

the bus bearing No. 62-4140 until further notice and until such time as new

timetable was prepared.

CA/CPA/0030/2021

Page 6 of 11

Relying inter-alia, on the binding judicial precedent in Namunukula Plantation

Itd Vs. Minister Of Lands And Others-SC APPEAL NO. 46/2008-Decided on

13.3.2012, the learned High Court Judge of the Western Province holden at

Colombo had proceeded to dismiss the application for a writ of certiorari on the

premise that the Petitioner had not furnished and/or suppressed to Court

material facts relevant to the determination of her application for a writ of

certiorari in that she had not furnished to Court a material document which has

a direct bearing on the adjudication of the issue before it namely; Condition 7

among any other terms and conditions stipulated in page 4 of the Passenger

Service Permit for; it was stated in X12 that approval for the temporary

suspension of the running of the bus in question had been granted in terms of

the Condition No. 07 among any other terms and conditions contained in the

page 4 of the Passenger Service Permit as authorized by the Provincial Council

Statute No. 01 of 1992.

It is in this context, it would be pertinent to examine the relevant part of the

decision contained in X12 and it may be reproduced verbatim the same in the

language it was written as follows;

“බස්නාහිර පලාත් මාර් මගී ප්‍රවාහන අධිකාරියේ 1992 අංක 01 දරණ පලාත් සභා

ප්‍රඥප්තියෙන් බලෙ පවරා ඇි, මගී යස්වා අවසර පත්‍රයේ (පිටු අංක - 04 ) නිෙමෙන් හා යකාන්යේසි

වල අංක 07 ෙටයත් ධාවනෙ තාවකාලිකව නැවතීමට අවසර ලබාදීම පහත සදහන් පරිදි අනුමත

කරමි.”

Hence, it becomes apparent that approval for the temporary suspension of the

running of the bus in question had been granted in terms of the condition No.

07 among any other terms and conditions contained in the page 4 of the

Passenger Service Permit as authorized by the Provincial Council Statute No. 01

of 1992.

In the circumstances, the condition No. 07 among any other terms and

conditions contained in the page 4 of the Passenger Service Permit has a direct

bearing on the adjudication of the issue so raised by the Petitioner in her

ගස්ථ

CA/CPA/0030/2021

Page 7 of 11

application for writ of certiorari before the High Court of the Western Province

holden at Colombo and therefore, it is of the utmost necessity for the learned

High Court Judge of Colombo to carefully, examine the condition No. 07 among

any other terms and conditions contained in the page 4 of the Passenger Service

Permit before coming to a finding as to whether the impugned decision contained

in X12 is intra-vires or ultra-vires. Hence, it is incumbent upon the Petitioner to

furnish to Court along with her petition Condition No. 07 among any other terms

and conditions contained in the page 4 of the Passenger Service Permit by virtue

of which the said decision was made by the 1st Respondent, for the consideration

of Court, for; decision of the Court would no doubt, rest on the Condition No.

07 contained in the page 4 of the Passenger Service Permit. However, it is

significant to observe that the Petitioner had not adduced any reason why she

had not furnished to Court such a very material document as is necessary for

the adjudication of the issue before it, namely; the Condition No. 07 contained

in the page 4 of the Passenger Service Permit for consideration by the Court; nor

had she reserved to herself the right to tender it at a latter stage of the

proceedings; nor, had she prayed for an order directing the Respondents to

tender it to Court if it is in their possession or power.

It is in this context, it would be most relevant and material to consider the

observations made by Court in Namunukula Plantation Itd Vs. Minister Of

Lands And Others (Supra) wherein it was stated at page 8 thereof that “It is

settled law that a person who approaches the Court for grant of discretionary

relief, to which category an application for certiorari would undoubtedly belong,

has to come with clean hands, and should candidly disclose all the material facts

which have any bearing on the adjudication of the issues raised in the case. In

other words, he owes a duty of utmost good faith (uberrima fides) to the court to

make a full and complete disclosure of all material facts and refrain from

concealing or suppressing any material fact within his knowledge or which he

could have known by exercising diligence expected of a person of ordinary

prudence. Learned Deputy Solicitor General has in this connection invited our

CA/CPA/0030/2021

Page 8 of 11

attention to the decision of this Court in W.S.Alphonso Appuhamy v L.

Hettiarachchi (Special Commissioner, Chilaw), (1973) 77 NLR 131, in which it

was found that an applicant for a mandate in the nature of a writ of mandamus

had suppressed and misrepresented material facts. This Court decided the case

on its merits, but observed that the case was one in which the principles set out

in the celebrated English decision of King v The General Commissioners for the

Purpose of the Income Tax Acts for the District of Kensington-Ex-parte Princess

Edmond de Poignac (1917) 1 K.B. 486 would have applied, and the Court, in its

discretion, could have dismissed the application in limine.

It was further held by Court in Namunukula Plantation Itd Vs. Minister Of

Lands And Others (Supra) at Page 9 that, “If any party invoking the discretionary

jurisdiction of a court of law is found wanting in the discharge of its duty to

disclose all material facts, or is shown to have attempted to pollute the pure

stream of justice, the court not only has the right but a duty to deny relief to

such person.”

It was held in Alphonso Appuhamy v. Hettictrachchi 1973 NLR 131 at page

136 that, “The necessity of a full and fair disclosure of all the material facts to

be placed before the Court when an application for a writ or injunction is made

and the process of the Court is invoked is laid down in the case of The King v.

The General Commissioners for the Purpose of the Income Tax Acts for the

District of Kensington Ex-parte Princess Edmond de Poignac — (1917)1 Kings

Bench Division 486. Although this case deals with a writ of prohibition the

principles enunciated are applicable to all cases of writs or injunctions. In this

case a Divisional Court without dealing with the merits of the case discharged

the rule on the ground that the applicant had suppressed or misrepresented the

facts material to her application. The Court of Appeal affirmed the decision of the

Divisional Court that there had been a suppression of material facts by the

applicant in her affidavit and therefore it was justified in refusing a writ of

prohibition without going into the merits of the case. In other words, so rigorous

is the necessity for a full and truthful disclosure of all material facts that the

CA/CPA/0030/2021

Page 9 of 11

Court would not go into the merits of the application, but will dismiss it without

further examination. Lord Cozens-Hardy M. R., after stating that the authorities

in the books are so strong and so numerous quoted the high authority of Lord

Langdale and Rolfe B. in the case of Dalglish v. jarvie—2 Mac. & G. 231, 238,

the head note of which states : — “ It is the duty of a party asking for an

injunction to bring under the notice of the Court all facts material to the

determination of his right to that injunction; and it is no excuse for him to say

that he was not aware of the importance of any facts which he has omitted to

bring forward.” He then quoted the observations made in the course of the

argument by Lord Langdale :— “ It is quite clear that every fact must be stated

or, even if there is evidence enough to sustain the injunction, it will be dissolved.”

Lord Cozens-Hardy M. R., commenting on this stated “ That is to say, he would

not decide upon the merits, but said that if an applicant does not act with

uberrima fides and put every material fact before the Court it will not grant him

an injunction, even though there might be facts upon which the injunction might

be granted, but that he must come again on a fresh application ”. Rolfe B., added

: — “ I have nothing to add to what Lord Langdale has said upon the general

merits of the case ; but upon one point it seems to me proper to add thus much,

namely, that the application for a special injunction is very much governed by

the same principles which govern insurance, matters which are said to require

the utmost degree of good faith, ‘ uberrima fides‘ .In cases of insurance a party

is required not only to state all matters within his knowledge, which he believes

to be material to the question of the insurance, but all which in point of facts are

s o ........................................................................ So here, if the party applying

for a special injunction, abstains from stating facts which the Court thinks are

most material to enable it to form its judgment, he disentitles himself to that

relief which he asks the Court to grant.” Lord Cozens-Hardy M. R., adds this

comment: — “ That is merely one and perhaps rather a weighty authority in

favour of the general proposition which I think has been established, that on an

ex-parte application uberrima fides is required and unless that can be

established, if there is anything like deception practised on the Court, the Court

CA/CPA/0030/2021

Page 10 of 11

ought not to go into the merits of the case, but simply say, “ We will not listen to

your application because of what you have done.”

In light of the law and the facts set out above, I would hold that there had been

a suppression of material facts directly, arising out of the Condition No. 07

among any other terms and conditions contained in the page 4 of the Passenger

Service Permit by virtue of which the said decision was made by the 1st

Respondent document and therefore the High Court of the Western Province

holden at Colombo was justified in refusing a writ of certiorari without going into

the merits of the case, for; so rigorous is the necessity for a full and truthful

disclosure of all material facts that the Court would not go into the merits of the

application, but will dismiss it without further examination.

Hence, I would see no reason to interfere with the aforesaid findings of the

learned High Court Judge of Colombo which led him to have dismissed the

Petitioner’s application for a writ of certiorari against the 1st and 2nd Respondents

and therefore, they should be affirmed.

The findings of the learned High Court Judge of Colombo leading to the

dismissal of the application for a writ of mandamus.

It is settled law that mandamus is an order from a Court commanding a public

authority or official to perform a public duty, in the performance of which the

applicant has a sufficient legal interest.

The Petitioner’s application for a writ of mandamus is based on the document

annexed to the petition filed in the High Court of the Western Province Holden

at Colombo marked as X3. However, it is a receipt issued by the 2nd Respondent

apparently, to the Petitioner in receipt of tender charges and it does not in any

manner, impose a public duty to issue to the Petitioner a permanent Passenger

Service Permit to operate a Bus as rightly, observed by the learned High Court

Judge of Colombo.

CA/CPA/0030/2021

Page 11 of 11

Hence, the learned High Court Judge of Western Province holden at Colombo is

entirely, justified in refusing to grant a writ of mandamus against the 1st and 2nd

Respondents compelling them to issue to the Petitioner a permanent Passenger

Service Permit to operate a Bus.

Hence, I would see no reason to interfere with the aforesaid findings of the

learned High Court Judge of Colombo which led him to have dismissed the

Petitioner’s application for a writ of mandamus against the 1st and 2nd

Respondents and therefore, they should be affirmed.

In view of the foregoing, I would hold that the instant application in revision is

not entitled to succeed both in fact and law and as such it should be dismissed

in-limine with costs fixed at Rs. 25,000/- payable only to the 2nd Respondent.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL