Page 1 of 11

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRETIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of

section 331 (1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No- 15 of 1979, read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Court of Appeal No: Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

CA/HCC/0005/19 COMPLAINANT

Vs.

High Court of Colombo Case No:

HC/4664/2009 1. Gamage Chandana Ajith Kumara Alias

Lal

2. Mahage Sampath Fernando alias

Champika

3. Migel Julige Surantha alias Army Malli

4. Karandeya Mahadurage Ajith alias Gora

Ajith

ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

Mahage Sampath Fernando alias

Champika

(Second Accused-appellant)

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Page 2 of 11

Vs.

The Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department

Colombo 12

RESPONDENT

Before : K Priyantha Fernando, J. (P./C.A.)

: Sampath B Abayakoon, J.

Counsel : Neranjan Jayasinghe with Harshana Ananda and

Dulshan Katugampola for Accused-Appellant

: Lakmali Karunanayake, D.S.G for the Respondent

Argued on : 17-12-2021

Written Submissions : 19-05-2021 (By the Accused-Appellant)

: 29-10-2021 (By the Respondent)

Decided on : 27-01-2022

Sampath B Abayakoon, J.

This is an appeal by the 2nd accused appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

appellant) on being aggrieved by the conviction and the sentence of him by the

learned High Court Judge of Colombo.

The appellant, along with the now deceased 3rd accused and two others were

indicted before the High Court of Colombo for agreeing and abetting to

conspiracy, along with one Asoka Upaneetha Perera alias Pamankada Asoka

who is also dead, between 18th September 1999 and 25th September 1999 to

murder U.D.Dilantha Saman Kumara, an offence punishable in terms of

section 296 read with sections 102 and 113A of the Penal Code.

Page 3 of 11

After trial without a jury, the appellant and the now deceased 3rd accused were

found guilty as charged by the learned High Court Judge and sentenced

accordingly. The 1st and the 4th accused were acquitted of the charge.

The main contention of the learned Counsel for the appellant at the hearing of

the appeal was that since this was a charge based on an alleged conspiracy to

murder, it was necessary for the prosecution to prove the agreement in that

regard with the main suspect, namely, Ashoka, for the murder of the deceased.

It was his position that the prosecution failed to prove beyond reasonable

doubt such an agreement, hence, the conviction is bad in law.

It was the contention of the learned Deputy Solicitor General (DSG) that the

prosecution proved the necessary ingredients of conspiracy to murder. It was

her position that since the learned High Court judge has considered all the

relevant evidence and the law before coming to his findings with sound

reasoning, there exists no basis to interfere with the conviction.

The following are the facts that transpired in evidence relating to the charge of

conspiracy.

This is an incident that had resulted due to a gang rivalry between two

underworld gangs, of which the deceased was a prominent member of one

gang. There had been several killings and counter killings between the two rival

gangs and the deceased was suspected of killing some members of the gang led

by Asoka, the person named in the indictment. It has been revealed that both

sides were looking for an opportunity to kill each other and were hiding from

each other due to that.

On 25th September 1999 the deceased Dilantha and five others were gunned

down while travelling in a car near Delkanda junction in Nugegoda. There were

no eye witnesses to the incident. The main suspect for the killings was the

earlier mentioned Asoka and members of his gang.

Page 4 of 11

Some days after the incident, the officers of the Criminal Investigation

Department (CID) arrested Asoka in the company of the four accused named in

the indictment, one of whom is the appellant, when they were coming to a

temple in the Kalutara area. Subsequently, Asoka, the main suspect of the

murder was also killed while being kept in the remand cell of the Gangodawila

Magistrate Court premises using a remote-controlled bomb placed in the

remand cell.

The prosecution has relied on the evidence of following witnesses to establish

the conspiracy charge against the accused.

(1) Evidence of PW-01, the sister of the deceased who says that in mid-

August, which was about one and half months before the incident, the

appellant, who was well known to her as he lived previously at their

home, telephoned her on two occasions and informed that her brother

will be killed by them.

(2) The evidence of PW-02, who says that he was a friend of Asoka who

maintained contacts with him and visited him in his hiding place,

where he saw the appellant in the company of others giving protection

to Asoka. It was his evidence that he met Asoka while travelling in a

van in the company of three others including the appellant a week

before the incident. He was also the person who has returned the van

used by Asoka which had a broken window and a door lock, on his

instructions to the person from whom the vehicle was rented.

However, he has not overheard any conversation relating to a

conspiracy to kill the deceased.

(3) Deposition made by PW-03 Kumudu Preethi at the Magistrate Court

non-summary inquiry led under the provisions of section 33 of the

Evidence Ordinance, as he was not available to give evidence before

the High Court.

Page 5 of 11

He was earlier a friend of the deceased who fell out with him after the

killing of one Naushard and joined the gang led by Asoka. He has also

been with Asoka at his hiding place from time to time, but never a

part of any discussion Asoka had with other members of the gang. He

has seen Asoka using a white-coloured van and supposed to have

seen him leaving in the same van in the company of the appellant at

around 6.30 in the evening of the day of the incident, and returning at

around 8.30 in the night.

Apart from the above main pieces of evidence, Senior Superintendent of Police

(SSP) Shani Abeysekara who has led the team of CID investigators into the

incident has given evidence that he arrested the appellant in the company of

Asoka and the other accused while they were entering the premises of the

Kalutara Bodhi temple on 18th October 1999. He has also recovered the van

alleged to have been used in the commission of the offence. It was his evidence

that there were some bullet marks in the vehicle when he recovered the same,

apart from other damages to the vehicle as described by PW-02.

Consideration of the Grounds of Appeal: -

It is an accepted fact that finding an eyewitness in a case where a conspiracy is

involved is a rarity, unless the witness is an accomplice to the crime in some

way or the other. Hence, it is usually by way of circumstantial evidence a

charge of conspiracy is sought to be proved as in the case under appeal.

In the case of The King Vs. Abeywickrama 44 NLR 254 it was held:

Per Soertsz J.

In order to base a conviction on circumstantial evidence the jury must be

satisfied that the evidence was consistent with the guilt of the accused

and inconsistent with any reasonable hypotheses of his innocence.

Page 6 of 11

In Don Sunny Vs. The Attorney General (1998) 2 SLR 01 it was held:

1) When a charge is sought to be proved by circumstantial evidence the

proved items of circumstantial evidence when taken together must

irresistibly point towards only inference that the accused committed the

offence. On consideration of all the evidence the only inference that can

be arrived at should be consistent with the guilt of the accused only.

2) If on a consideration of the items of circumstantial evidence, if an

inference can be drawn which is consistent with the innocence of the

accused, then one cannot say that the charges have been proved

beyond reasonable doubt.

3) If upon consideration of the proved items of circumstantial evidence if

the only inference that can be drawn is that the accused committed the

offence, then they can be found guilty. The prosecution must prove that

no one else other than the accused had the opportunity of committing

the offence. The accused can be found guilty only if the proved items of

circumstantial evidence is consistent with their guilt and inconsistent

with their innocence.

A trial judge also has to be mindful that suspicious circumstances do not

establish guilt and the burden of proving a case beyond reasonable doubt

against an accused is always with the prosecution.

In the case of The Queen Vs. M.G. Sumanasena 66 NLR 350 it was held:

In a criminal case suspicious circumstances do not establish guilt. Nor

does the proof of any number of suspicious circumstances relieve the

prosecution of its burden of proving the case against the accused beyond

reasonable doubt and compel the accused to give or call evidence

However, in considering the circumstantial evidence, what has to be considered

is the totality of the circumstantial evidence before coming to a firm finding as

Page 7 of 11

to the guilt of an accused, although each piece of circumstantial evidence when

taken separately may only be suspicious in nature.

In the case of The King Vs. Gunaratne 47 NLR 145 it was held:

In a case of circumstantial evidence, the facts given in evidence may,

taken cumulatively, be sufficient to rebut the presumption of innocence,

although each fact, when taken separately, may be a circumstance only of

suspicion.

The jury is entitled to draw inferences unfavourable to an accused where

he is not called to establish an innocent explanation of evidence given by

the prosecution, which, without such explanation, tells for his guilt.

In the case of Regina Vs. Exall (176 English Reports, Nisi Prius at page

853) Pollock, C.B., considering the aspect of circumstantial evidence remarked;

It has been said that circumstantial evidence is to be considered as a

chain, and each piece of evidence as a link in a chain, but that is not so,

for then, if any one link brock, the chain would fall. It is more like the of a

rope composed of several cords. One strand of the rope might be

insufficient to sustain the weight, but three stranded together may be quite

of sufficient strength.

With the above legal principles in mind, I now draw my attention to the offence

of conspiracy and the ingredients that has to be proved.

The definition of conspiracy as defined in section 113A (1) of the Penal code

reads as follows;

113A (1) If two or more persons agree to commit or abet or act

together with a common purpose for or in committing or abetting an

offence, whether with or without any previous concert or

deliberation, each of them is guilty of the offence of conspiracy to

commit or abet that offence, as the case may be.

Page 8 of 11

The essence of the offence is the agreement between the parties to commit the

alleged offence whether it was committed or not, as argued correctly by both

the learned Counsel.

The charge against the appellant is that he, along with the other accused

conspired and agreed with one Asoka to kill the deceased between the period of

18th to 25th September 1999.

Therefore, it was necessary for the prosecution to prove beyond reasonable

doubt that fact, in order to prove the charge against the appellant.

It was held in the case of The King Vs. M.E.A.Cooray 51NLR 433 that;

The commission of the offence of conspiracy is established within the

meaning of section 113A of the Penal Code in one or the other of the

following circumstances.

(a) If two or more persons agree, with or without any previous concert or

deliberation, to commit an offence or to abet an offence, or

(b) If two or more persons agree, with or without any previous concert or

deliberation, to act together with a common purpose for or in committing

or abetting an offence.

In either set of circumstances conspiracy consists in the agreement or

confederacy to do some criminal act, whether it is done or not.

In order to establish the offence of abetment of conspiracy under section

100 of the Penal Code, an agreement is an essential prerequisite.

The conversation the appellant is alleged to have had over the phone with PW-

01, the sister of the deceased, was nearly one and half months before the

actual incident, and well before the period mentioned in the indictment as the

period of the conspiracy.

Page 9 of 11

Section 10 of the Evidence Ordinance, which referrers to things said or done by

a conspirator in reference to the common intention reads thus: -

Where there is reasonable ground to believe that two or more

persons have conspired together to commit an offence or an

actionable wrong, anything said done, or written by any one of such

persons in reference to their common intention, after the time

when such intention was first entertained by any one of them, is a

relevant fact as against each of the persons believed to be so

conspiring, as well for the purpose of proving the existence of the

conspiracy as for the purpose of showing that any such person was a

party to it.

I am of the view that it was necessary for the prosecution to establish beyond

reasonable doubt that the alleged utterances of the appellant to PW-01 has a

direct nexus to the conspiracy that is alleged to have been hatched some weeks

after the said conversations. It may even be independent utterances of the

appellant since he was well known to the sister of the deceased, to whom he

has addressed as elder sister according to the evidence of the PW-01. I

am unable to find any evidence that eliminates such a doubt in this action.

There is also a doubt cast upon the accuracy of the words spoken allegedly by

the appellant with PW-01 as she has stated about the threat received by her

only when her statement was recorded by the CID, admittedly, one and half

months after the incident. Although she says that she gave the information to

the Mirihana Police soon after the incident, no evidence had been produced by

the prosecution to substantiate that fact. There is evidence in this action that

in the process of investigations the CID had called for the relevant telephone

details, obviously to verify the correctness of the statement of PW-01. However,

the prosecution has not produced such details as evidence at the trial.

Page 10 of 11

The evidence of PW-02 only speaks about of him seeing the appellant in the

company of Asoka giving him protection at his hiding place, and travelling with

him in a van one week before the incident. According to the evidence of SSP

Shani Abeysekara when the appellant was arrested by him some three weeks

after the incident the appellant was in the company of Asoka the main suspect

of the killing.

At this juncture I would like to draw my attention to the Indian Supreme Court

case of Sardul Singh Caveeshar Vs. State of Bombay A.I.R. (1958) S.C. 747;

Crim. L.J. 1325, where it was held that evidence as to the activities of any

conspirator after the expiry of the period of conspiracy is not admissible either

to prove the existence of the conspiracy or the participation of the follow

conspirators therein.

It was held in the case of The Queen Vs. Liyanage (1965) 67 NLR 193 that;

Mere evidence of a persons association with the conspirators, in the

absence of words or conduct which prove that they also willingly entered

into the conspiracy is not sufficient for the inference of conspiracy to be

drawn against him.

I find that out of the three main witnesses relied on by the prosecution to prove

the conspiracy, the deposition of PW-03 Kumudu Preethi was the one that

needed the most careful scrutiny as he was also a member of the gang led by

Asoka and had all the reasons to save his skin of any involvement to the crime.

Besides that, he was not a person whose testimony was available for the test of

cross-examination at the trial, although he had been cross-examined at the

non-summary inquiry. According to his deposition, he had not been invited to

any of the discussions that took place, and has not overheard any conspiracy

to kill the deceased. He has seen the appellant leaving with Asoka in a van on

the evening of the day of the incident and returning in the night. This may lead

to high suspicion being levelled at the appellant of his involvement in the crime

that took place on that day, but that in itself is not sufficient to prove a

Page 11 of 11

conspiracy unless it is supported by other circumstantial evidence when taken

together.

I am of the view that although the evidence leads to the suspicion being

pointed at the appellant in his involvement in the crime, even when taken

together the evidence in its totality, it does not elevate to the level of proving

suspicions beyond reasonable doubt.

I am unable to agree that the evidence placed before the High Court was

sufficient to conclude without any reasonable doubt, of an agreement between

the appellant and the other alleged conspirators given the unreliable nature of

the evidence of the witnesses called by the prosecution for the given reasons.

Although an appellate Court is reluctant to interfere with findings of facts by a

trial judge who had the benefit of seeing and listening to the evidence, an

appellate Court would not hesitate to intervene when in it is not in agreement

with the findings of facts by the learned trial judge.

For the aforesaid reasons, I am of the view that it is not safe to let the

conviction and the sentence of the appellant be allowed to stand.

Therefore, allowing the appeal, I set aside the conviction and the sentence and

acquit the appellant of the charge against him.

Appeal Allowed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

K Priyantha Fernando, J. (P./C.A.)

I agree.

President of the Court of Appeal