==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0029/2023

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979.

Court of Appeal Case No. Weerakoon Mudiyanselage Pradeep

CA/HCC/0029/2023 Kumara Weerakoon alias Victe Aiya

High Court of Ampara

Case No. HC/1828/2017 ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

COUNSEL : Ershan Ariyaratnam for the Appellant.

Maheshika Silva, DSG for the Respondent.

CA/HCC/0029/2023

2 | P a g e

ARGUED ON : 24/07/2026

DECIDED ON : 18/09/2026

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Appellant was indicted by the Attorney General for

committing one count of Kidnapping punishable under Section 354 and one

count of grave sexual abuse punishable under Section 365B (2) (b) of the

Penal Code on Marappuli Gedera Ushan Govinda on or around the date of

12.11.2016.

The trial commenced on 26/11/2019. After leading all the necessary

witnesses, the prosecution had closed the case. The Learned High Court

Judge had called for the defence and the Appellant opted to give evidence

from the witness box and called two witnesses on his behalf.

The Learned High Court Judge after considering the evidence presented by

both parties, convicted the Appellant as follows:

For the 1st count the Appellant was sentenced to 2 years rigorous

imprisonment with a fine of Rs.5,000/-. In default 01-month simple

imprisonment was imposed.

CA/HCC/0029/2023

3 | P a g e

For the 2nd count the Appellant was sentenced to 08 years rigorous

imprisonment with a fine of Rs.8,000/-. In default 01-month simple

imprisonment was imposed.

In addition, a compensation of Rs.75,000/- was ordered with a default

sentence of 03 months simple imprisonment.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the Appellant

has given consent to argue this matter in his absence. At the time of the

argument, he was connected via the Zoom platform from prison.

Before the commencement of arguments, as a preliminary issue, the Learned

Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the evidence given by the

victim did not disclose the act which could be brought within Section 365B

(2) (b) of the Penal Code.

The Victim, PW1 in his evidence stated that on the date of incident, while he

was in the midst of running an errand for his mother, the Appellant had

stopped the victim’s bicycle and dragged the victim to his house on the

pretext of giving the victim some Guava fruits. The victim was taken to his

house through the back door despite his resistance. Inside the house, the

Appellant had lowered his trouser and touched his penis before trying to kiss

his penis. At this point, the victim had managed to kick the Appellant’s chest

area and escape. The Appellant had threatened to kill the victim if he

disclosed this incident to anyone.

The victim had informed about the incident to his mother, PW2, after which

a complaint was lodged at the Central Camp Police Station. The victim had

not disclosed about any other act being performed on him during that time

except the act of the Appellant touching his penis. As per the indictment, the

Appellant was charged only for touching the penis of the victim. The victim

CA/HCC/0029/2023

4 | P a g e

giving evidence reiterated that the Appellant only touched and attempted to

kiss his penis.

According to the prosecution, the victim was 13 years old when he

encountered this unfortunate incident. When giving evidence, he was 16

years old and a more matured child.

The Appellant had given evidence from the witness box and denied the

charge.

The Learned Deputy Solicitor General, strenuously argued that the act

committed on the victim by the Appellant falls within the ambit of grave

sexual abuse. The learned Counsel for the Appellant, citing several

judgements delivered by this court, reiterated that the the act said to have

been committed on the victim by the Appellant does not fall under the scope

of grave sexual abuse. He pointed out that the prosecution has elicited only

the act mentioned in the indictment and nothing else.

In criminal trials, the charge would serve as the most basic foundation. The

charge would inform the accused regarding the nature of the allegation

levelled against him. thus, the charge must accurately identify the act

committed by the accused as well as the law alleged to have been violated by

him. Moreover, the relevant details regarding the alleged offence must be

clearly mentioned in the charge.

The Supreme Court in The Queen v Liyanage and Others (1963) 65 NLR

337, stated that:

“… on a trial upon Indictment, by the very essence of the pre-trial

procedure, an accused person becomes aware of all the evidence relied

upon by the Crown in support of the Indictment and which the Crown

intends to place against him at the trial. He is entitled in law to know such

CA/HCC/0029/2023

5 | P a g e

evidence before he is called upon to plead to the Indictment. It is a right of

his, inherent in that procedure.”

In Hattuwan Pedige Sugath Karunaratne v Hon. Attorney General SC

Appeal 32 of 2020 dated 20.10.2020 his Lordship Aluvihare, J. held that:

“……………… No doubt the duty of a State Counsel is to present the

prosecution in an effective manner to the best of their ability in furtherance

of securing a conviction, if the evidence can support the charge. The

Prosecutor, however, is an officer of the court and their role is to assist the

court to dispense justice. Thus, it is not for a Prosecutor to ensure a

conviction at any cost but to see that the truth elicited, and justice is meted

out”.

In the case of Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka v. Andravas

Patabendi Ganendra De Vas Gunawardane and Others, S.C. TAB No. 01A–

01F/2017 decided on 08.08.2024 it was held:

“This pronouncement also indicates that ‘equality of arms’ is not a one-

way street where only the prosecution is bound to disclose what they

intend to produce, but also the accused too must make a disclosure on his

part. The entitlement of an accused to a fair trial conducted before a

competent Court as a fundamental right was recognised by Article 13(3) of

the 1978 Constitution.

With the conferment of the entitlement to a fair trial as a fundamental right,

the Legislature, in enacting Section 162 of the Code of Criminal Procedure

Act, ensured that an accused who is tried upon an indictment is entitled to

not only to the statements made by himself along with that of the

witnesses who are listed in the indictment but also to copies of preliminary

inquiry proceedings, inquest proceedings, reports, sketches, notes of

CA/HCC/0029/2023

6 | P a g e

identification parade, statements made under Section 127 by the accused

and any witness listed in the indictment along with copies of such portions

the notes, scene observations made during investigations by a police

officer. In relation to trial before a High Court at Bar, Section 450(7),

reaffirms the duty on the prosecution to provide such material and ensures

that the accused person could also make a request to Court and thereby

ensuring the fundamental right conferred by Article 13(4).”

In the case of Rowe and Davis v the United Kingdom [2000] ECHR, The

European Court of Human Rights held:

“… in a criminal case, that both prosecution and defence must be given the

opportunity to have knowledge of and comment on the observations filed

and the evidence adduced by the other party.”

In the case of Edwards and Lewis v. United Kingdom (2004) 40 EHRR 593

it was held that:

“It is in any event a fundamental aspect of the right to a fair trial that

criminal proceedings, including the elements of such proceedings which

relate to procedure, should be adversarial and that there should be

equality of arms between the prosecution and defence. The right to an

adversarial trial means, in a criminal case, that both prosecution and

defence must be given the opportunity to have knowledge of and comment

on the observations filed and the evidence adduced by the other party

(ibid., § 51). In addition, Article 6 § 1 requires that the prosecution

authorities should disclose to the defence all material evidence in their

possession for or against the accused (ibid.).”

CA/HCC/0029/2023

7 | P a g e

In this case, it would be necessary to discuss the relevant sections of the

Penal Code in order to determine the most applicable Section in this

scenario.

Section 365 B (1) states:

Grave Sexual Abuse is committed by any person who, for sexual

gratification does any act by the use of his genitals or any other part of

the human body or any instrument on any orifice or part of the body of

any other person being an act which does not amount to rape under

section 363…

In the case of Jayathilaka v. Attorney-General [2008] 2 Sri L.R. 117, rape

and grave sexual abuse was distinguished as follows:

“In a charge of rape, the prosecution must prove penetration, in a charge

of grave sexual abuse prosecution is not required to prove penetration. The

ingredients in a charge of rape are different from the ingredients that must

be proved in a charge of grave sexual abuse.”

Further, in the case of Yoga v. Attorney-General [2010] 2 Sri L.R. 162 it was

held that:

“To establish a charge under section 365 (B) of the Penal Code the

prosecution must establish that the alleged act was done with the intention

of having sexual gratification. This aspect must be proved beyond

reasonable doubt.”

In Mahalakotuwa v. The Attorney General [2011] 2 B.L.R 406 D.S.C

Lecamwasam, J. held that:

“On a plain reading of the above section it is clear, that the section

envisaged a grave situation which falls short of rape. It cannot be a mere

‘Touch’. It has to be much more serious than a touch and to come within

the ambit of ‘Grave Sexual Abuse’ it must be of a very high degree, so

CA/HCC/0029/2023

8 | P a g e

serious and grave in nature that it can only fall short of Rape, but must

surpass situations expected in section 345,365 and 365A”.

It has been alleged in the charge that the Appellant had touched the penis of

the victim with the objective of obtaining sexual gratification. However, the

victim’s evidence only establishes the act of the Appellant touching the penis

of the victim. Therefore, as per the plain reading of Section 365B (1) of the

Penal Code, I hold that the act which had allegedly been committed on the

victim would not constitute an offence under Section 365B (1) of the Penal

Code in this case. Therefore, it would be essential to consider the appropriate

section of the Penal Code pertaining to this case.

Section 345 of Penal Code as amended states:

“Whoever, by assault or use of criminal force, sexually harasses another

person, or by the use of words or actions, causes sexual annoyance or

harassment to such other person commits the offence of sexual

harassment and shall on conviction be punished with imprisonment of

either description for a term which may extend to five years or with fine

or with both and may also be ordered to pay compensation of an amount

determined by court to the person in respect of whom the offence was

committed for the injuries caused to such person.”

EXPLANATION

1. Unwelcome sexual advances by words or action used by a person in

authority, to a working place or any other place, shall constitute the

offence of sexual harassment.

2. For the purposes of this section an assault may include any act that

does not amount to rape under section 363 or grave sexual abuse under

section 365B.

3. "injuries" includes psychological or mental trauma.

CA/HCC/0029/2023

9 | P a g e

As per the facts of this case, the Appellant’s act of forcefully taking the victim

into his authority and intentionally using force on the victim by touching the

victim’s penis, constitutes sexual harassment. Accordingly, the Appellant

has committed an offence under Section 345 of the Penal Code and not under

Section 365B (1) of the Penal Code as amended.

In Mahalakotuwa v. The Attorney General (Supra) the court further held

that:

“Assuming but without conceding, that the act committed by the appellant

falls within both sections 345 and 365B or alternatively if it is uncertain

as to which precise section of the two it falls under, then he should be

convicted under section 345 and not 365B. According to Maxwell on

Interpretation of Statutes 12th edition page 239 Lord Esher M.R. had held

in Tuck and Sons v. Priester (1887 (19) QBD 629 at 638) …..if there are

two reasonable constructions, we must give the more lenient one”

In the case of Bandula v. Almeida and Others [1995] 1 Sri LR 334 it was

held:

“it needs to be mentioned at the outset, that it is clear that a statute which

has the effect of encroaching on the rights of the citizen, whether as

regards person or property, must be strictly construed.”

In the case of Sebastian Fernando v Katana Multi -Purpose Co-operative

Society Ltd and Others (1990) 1 SLR 342 it was held that:

“Statutes which encroach upon the rights of the citizen have to be “strictly"

construed: they should be interpreted, if possible, to respect such rights,

and if there is any ambiguity, the construction which is in favour of the

freedom of the individual should be adopted. Statutes which impose

pecuniary burdens or penalties are subject to the same rule. If there are

two reasonable constructions, one of which will avoid the penalty, that

construction must be preferred.”

CA/HCC/0029/2023

10 | P a g e

In the case of Wickramasinghe v Attorney General and Another (2010) 1

SLR 141 it was held that:

“Assuming that there are two different interpretations of the words in the

Bail Act, is it reasonable, sensible or justifiable to keep a suspect or

accused on remand indefinitely without being prosecuted? I think not. For

these reasons I think that courts will have to interpret the law giving a

meaningful interpretation to the intention of the legislature.”

It is the view of this court that the Learned High Court Judge, in this case,

had not adequately evaluated the ingredients of Sections 365B and 345 of

the Penal Code as amended in order to ascertain the most suitable charge to

be framed against the Appellant. It is evident that if such an adequate and

correct analysis was made, the Appellant would have been sentenced under

Section 345 of the Penal Code.

In Mahalakotuwa v. The Attorney General (Supra) the court further held

that:

“In a case of this nature when the facts clearly show that the accused

cannot brought under 365B (2) b, learned judges should not hesitate to use

their prudence in deciding whether a particular set of facts constitute the

offence contained in the indictment or not. If not, without mechanically

passing the sentence on the indictment already filed they must have the

audacity to act under 177 or 178 of the CPC and convict the accused

accordingly for a different offence.”

As observed above, the evidence adduced by the prosecution does not

adequately establish the act upon which the conviction delivered by the

Learned High Court Judge of Ampara dates 21/10/2022 stands. Thereby, I

set aside the said conviction and sentence and substitute it with a conviction

under Section 345 of the Penal Code as amended, and impose three years

rigorous imprisonment with a fine of Rs. 5000/- with a default sentence of

03 months simple imprisonment.

CA/HCC/0029/2023

11 | P a g e

Further, the Appellant is ordered to pay a sum of Rs. 100,000/- to PW1 as

compensation with a default sentence of 01-year simple imprisonment.

Taking into consideration the circumstances of this case, I order the

sentence to take effect from the date of conviction i.e. from 21.10.2022.

Subject to the above variations, this appeal is dismissed.

The Registrar is directed to send this judgment to the High Court of Ampara

along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL