IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A.(PHC) No. 56{2013

P.H.C. Kandy No. 33{2010

M.C. Kandy No. 17908

In the matter of an Appeal made in terms of Article 154 P(6) read with Article 138 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

U dayasiri Kariyawasam,

Chairman,

Industrial Development Board,

No. 615, Galle Road,

Katubedda,

Moratuwa.

Applicant-Respondent-Petitioner

Vs.

J. M. R.Bandara Jayasundara,

No.40, Ayurweda Hospital Road,

Pallekale.,

Respondent-Petitioner -Respondent

BEFORE

COUNSEL

JANAK DE SILVA, J. & ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

U. P.Senasinghe S.C. for the Applicant-Respondent-Petitioner W.D.Weeraratne for the Respondent- Petitioner-Respondent.

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS TENDERED ON :

DECICEDON

20-07 -2018( by the Respondent) 30-07-2018( by the Petitioner)

06th Aug?st, 2018

*************

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

This IS an appeal by the Applicant-Respondent-Petitioner

(hereinafter referred to as the 1/ Appellant") invoking appellate jurisdiction

of this Court, seeking to set aside the order of the Provincial High Court

holden in Kandy on 15th May 2013 in a revision application by the

Respondent-Petitioner-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the

"Respondent"). In the said revision application, the Respondent sought to

set aside an order of ejection issued by the Magistrate's Court of Kandy,

upon an application filed by the Appellant under Section 5 of the State

Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act No.7 of 1979 as amended.

It is stated in the said application that the Appellant is the

Competent Authority, the land described in the schedule is State land and

2

a quit notice was already served on the Respondent. The Magistrate's

Court directed the Respondent to show cause. In his affidavit, the

Respondent claimed that the land in question in fact belonged to Mahaweli

Authority of Sri Lanka and the Appellant, Sri Lanka Industrial

Development Board, being another State entity, is contesting for its title

with the said Mahaweli Authority.

Having considered the Respondent's claim of contest between two

State entities as regard to the title of the land under dispute, the

Magistrate's Court very correctly held that it is not a matter the

Respondent can agitate before it and he could not challenge the averments

in the application under Section 5, and,proceeded to issue ejectment order.

It appears from the case record that the Respondent has initially lodged an

appeal against the said order of ejectment.

However, he later moved the Provincial High Court to revise the

said order of ejectment primarily on the basis that the Magistrate's Court

had failed to consider that the Appellant is not the Competent Authority

and it has failed to consider the documents tendered before it marked as

X6 to X15.

After an inquiry, the Provincial High Court by its order dated 15th

May 2015 has set aside the order of ejectment issued by the Magistrate's

Court. It relied on the judgment of Senanayaka v Damunupola(1992) 1 Sri

L.R. 621 in relation to its finding on the determinability of the competency

of the Competent Authority as well as the title to the disputed land.

Being aggrieved by the said order, the Appellant sought

intervention of this Court by preferring an appeal against the said order, to

3

set it aside on the basis the permit issued to the Respondent has become

invalid after 31.12.2005 and with the amendments made to principle

enactment Act by the provisions of the State Lands (Recovery of

Possession) Act No. 29 of 1983, once a quit notice is issued by a Competent

Authority, then that land is deemed to be State land.

The order of the Provincial High Court is erroneous on two

fundamental points. Firstly, it failed to appreciate the jurisdiction of the

Magistrate's Court over such an application. Secondly if failed to note the

fact that the Respondent is challenging the validity of the quit notice on an

application to revise the order of ejectment issued by the Magistrate's

Court.

If a party wishes to challenge the validity of a quit notice issued by a

Competent Authority, it must advise itself properly as to the nature of

remedy it should seek from competent Court. In Dayananda v Thalwatte

(2001) 2 Sri L.R. 73, referring to a preliminary objection raised on this

point, Jayasinghe J states thus;

Ii] hold that the application for revision in tenns of Article 138

and on application for Writs of Quo Warranto, Certiorari and

Prohibition under Article 140 of the Constitutions cannot be

combined as they are two distinct remedies available to an

aggrieved party and for that reason the Petition is fatally

flawed. /I

As per the principle enunciated in this judgment, w hen the

Respondent sought to challenge the validity of a quit notice issued by the

Appellant, in a revision application on an ejectment order and not in an

application for judicial review, his application is IIfatally flawed."

4

The Magistrate's Court has no jurisdiction to inquire into the

question of competency of the Competent Authority as the relevant

statutory provisions does not authorise it to undertake such an inquiry.

The reason for this limitation could be found in the provisions contained in

Section 6(1) and (4) of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act.

Once a Competent Authority claims in the application to the

Magistrate's Court that he is the Competent Authority in respect of the

State land under Section 6(1) (a)(i) of the State Lands (Recovery of

Possession) Act, that assertion has to be taken as "conclusive evidence" as

per the provisions of Section 6(4). In view of these clear and unambiguous

statutory provisions, it is clear that ~he Magistrate's Court has not been

conferred with jurisdiction to inquire into the competency of the

Competent Authority. As already noted the Magistrate's Court has

correctly applied the relevant principles and issued the ejectment order but

the Provincial High Court has fallen into error in revising it on a wrong

appreciation of the applicable statutory provisions.

In relation to the applicability of the judgment of Senanayaka v

Damunupola (supra), De Silva J, in CA(PHC)APN 29/2016 - decided on 9th

July 2018, observed that "... the ratio decidendi in Senanayaka v

Damunupola(supra) is no longer valid" since the amendment Act No. 29 of

1983 was enacted which was brought in view of the said judgment" ... to

provide a swift and effective procedure by which the State can recover possession of

5 tate land .. . " .

Therefore, having considered the submissions of the parties

carefully, we are of the view that the appeal of the Appellant ought to be

5

allowed. Accordingly, the order of the Provincial I-Iigh Court on 15th May

2015 is hereby set aside by this Court. The order of ejectment issued by the

Magistrate's Court on 18th May 2010 is affirmed.

The appeal of the Appellant is allowed. Parties will bear their costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JANAK DE SILVA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

6