,

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

e.A. (PHC) 102/2013

WP HCRA 103/2011

M.e. Colombo Case No. 55724/10 Bribery

Director General, Commission to investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption Complainant

v.

Narasinghe Buwelikada Deshika Malkanthi Accused

AND

Narasinghe Buwelikada Deshika Malkanthi

Accused-Petitioner

v.

1. Commission to investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption

2. Director General Commission to investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption

3. The Hon. Attorney General

Respondents

AND NOW

1

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

Narasinghe Buwelikada Deshika Malkanthi

Accused-Petitioner-Appellant

v.

1. Commission to investigate

Allegations of Bribery or Corruption

2. Director General Commission to investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption

3. The Hon. Attorney General

Complainant-Respondents Respondents

K.K. WICKREMASINGHE, J

K. PRIY ANTHA FERNANDO, J

Wijaya Hettiarachchi with Thanushika Hidigaspege for the Accused Petitioner Appellant.

Dilan Ratnayake DSG for the A.G.

30.05.2019

2

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS

FILED ON

JUDGMENT ON

K. PRIY ANTHA FERNANDO, J.

04.01.2019 by the Complainant Respondent Respondents. 08.10.2018 by the Accused Petitioner Appellant.

09.08.2019

01. This is an appeal against the judgment of the learned High Court Judge dated

06.08.2013. In the above case, the Accused Appellant (Appellant) was

charged in the Magistrate's Court of Colombo for committing an offence

punishable under section 70 of the Bribery Act, as amended by Act No. 19

of 1994. A preliminary objection was raised by the Appellant, on the basis

that, the Commission to Investigate Allegation of Bribery or Corruption

(Commission) has no authority to initiate an investigation on an anonymous

complaint. The learned Magistrate by his order dated 02.06.2011, for the

reasons given, rejected the preliminary objection. The Appellant moved in

revision against the learned Magistrate's order in the High Court. After

hearing the said revision application, the learned High Court Judge

delivering his judgment on 06.08.2013, for the given reasons, dismissed the

application. The instant appeal is against the said judgment of the Leamed

High Court Judge, by the Appellant.

3

02. Counsel for the Appellant submitted that, in tenns of section 4 (1) of the Act

No. 19 of 1994, for the Commission to commence an investigation, there has

to be a communication against a person to the Commission. For the

communication to be received by the commission, there has to be a person

who sends the communication. Further, it is submitted that, genuineness of

the communication has to be investigated, and that the identity of the person

who communicated is important for that purpose.

03. It is also the contention of the counsel for the Appellant that, section 4 (1)

has to be read with section 21 of the Act No. 19 of 1994. If the allegation is

found to be false, the person who communicated to the Commission could

be punished in terms of section 21, and for that purpose, the person who

sends the communication has to be an identifiable person, Counsel

submitted.

04. Counsel for the Respondent submitted that, the word 'communication' is not

defined in the Act, and therefore, the function and the objectives of the Act

has to be taken into consideration when interpreting the same. In terms of

section 4 (2), the Commission has to be satisfied that the Communication is

genuine, before an investigation is conducted. Therefore, because of that

filtering process, only genuine communications will be acted upon. It IS

submitted that, in no way that false communications would be acted upon.

05. Counsel for the Respondent further submitted that, to interpret the word

'communication', section 21 has no relevancy. Counsel further submitted

4

that, any informant is privileged and that more communications must be

facilitated.

06. Learned counsel for the Appellant referred to the case of Mahinda

Rajapakse V. Challdra Femando ami Others S.C. (FR) 387/2005 and

invited the attention of Court to a portion from Sohoni's The Code of

Criminal Procedure J973-VoI.2, that was referred to in the above judgment.

It refers to section 154 of the Code of Criminal procedure in India, that

relates to investigation of cognizable offences upon receiving information by

a Police Officer. The similar section in our Code of Criminal Procedure Act

is section 109, which says that, every information received by a Police

officer has to be given orally or in writing and that if given orally, it has to

be reduced to writing and shall be signed by the person who is giving such

information.

07. As rightly concluded by the learned High Court Judge and also by the

learned Magistrate, the issue that was in case of Mahinda Rajapkse (supra)

was whether it was justifiable for the police to initiate an investigation

without a complaint being recorded from a complainant, and that has no

relevance to the instant case. The issue in this case is, whether the

commission can initiate an investigation on an anonymous petition. Part 2 of

the Act No 19 of 1994, provides for receiving communications on

allegations of bribery or corruption. Procedure is also laid down on

investigating into the communications received. Section 109 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act provides for receiving information by a police

officer, and the procedure is laid down on recording such information and

5

acting upon it. Therefore, Mahinda Rajapakse V. Chandra FeTllando

(supra) has no relevance to a 'communication' referred to in part 2 of the

Act No. 19 of1994.

08. The word 'communication' is not defined in the Act. The word used in the

Sinhala text of the Act No. 19 of 1994 for cOl11l11unication is 'I(lll)~'. The

Act No 19 of 1994 does not mention whether such 'col11l11unication' should

be anonymous or onymous, although the procedure to be followed by the

Commission upon receiving the 'communication' is provided.

Section 4 (2) of the Act No. 19 of 1994 provides:

'Upon receipt of the communication under subsection (1) the

Commission, if it is satisfied that such information is genuine and that

the communication discloses material upon which an investigation

ought to be conducted, shall conduct such investigation as may be

necessary for the purpose of deciding upon all or any of the following

mailers: -

(a) Prosecution or other suitable action under the provisions of the

Bribery Act or the Declaration of Assets and Liabilities Law, No.1 of

1975; or

(b) Prosecution under any other Law,

And where the Commission decides, whether before or after the conduct

of an investigation, that a communication received by it should be dealt

with by any other authority, it may forward such communication to such

other authority. '

6

09. Hence, the legislature has made clear provision to filter the 'communication'

received by the Commission. For the Commission to initiate an investigation

on a communication received by it, the Commission has to be satisfied that

such communication is genuine. As rightly stated in his judgment by the

learned High Court Judge, composition of the Commission also carries great

weight in the above filtering process on the genuineness of the

'communication'. Therefore, the 'communication' being anonymous would

not cause any prejudice to the person against whom the anonymous petition

is sent.

10. Counsel for the Appellant contended that, it is mandatory to have an

identifiable person to take action in terms of section 21, if the

communication under section 4 (I) is found to be false or malicious. For the

reasons stated above, I am of the view that it should not be a reason to shut

out anonymous communications completely. Any communication whether

anonymous or onymous will be acted upon only if found to be genuine, after

the mandatory filtering process provided in section 4(2).

11 . Under certain circumstances, there can be reticence on the part of the general

public to come out openly against persons in high office or authority. In such

situations, if the genuineness of the 'communication' can be independently

verified, I see no reason to not to commence an investigation on such

'communication'. It would not cause any prejudice to the person against

whom such 'communication' is made.

7

,

12. It is also important to note that Sri Lanka is a signatory to the United Nations

Convention against Corruption (UNCAC). There is a specific provision in

'UNCAC', where protection should be given to whistle blowers.

Unfortunately, such provision is not available in our legislature. In this

context, I am of the view that, such 'communication' even if it is

anonymous, should be acted upon, if it can be verified independently to be

genuine to commence an investigation.

13. In the above premise, I am of the view that, an investigation can be

commenced on an anonymous 'communication' in terms of section 04 of the

Act No. 19 of 1994, subject to the verification of genuineness of such

'communication' in terms of section 4(2).

14. In the above premise, I see no reason to interfere with the judgment of the

learned High Court Judge.

Hence the appeal is dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K.K. WICKREMASINGHE, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

8