IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

C.A.No. HCC 22-23/2012

In the matter of an Appeal under and In

terms of Section 331(1) of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act No.lS of 1979.

H.C. Avissawella No.HC 4U2003

01. Wickramasinghe Ratnathilaka alias Thilak

02. Kankanampathirage Vipulasena alias Sena

***********

Accused-Appellants

Vs.

Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo 12 .

Complainant- Respondent

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

DECIDED ON

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

DEVIKA ABEYRATNE, J.

Srinath Perera P.C with KR.Probodhini for the 151

Accused-Appellant.

Tenny Fernando for the 2nd Accused-Appellant

Suharshi Herath S.s.c. for the Attorney General.

17th February, 2020

111h September, 2020

****************

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

The 151 and 2nd accused-appellants (hereinafter referred to as the 151 and 2nd

Appellants respectively) were indicted before the High Court of Avissavella for

murder of Malambi Arachchige Don Anthony Joseph on 15.09.1995 at Hanwella. The

151 and 2nd Appellants have opted for a trial without a jury and at its conclusion,

the trial Court found them guilty as charged and sentenced to death.

Being aggrieved by the said conviction and sentence, the 151 and 2nd

Appellants sought to set it aside on the several grounds of appeal they have

urged before this Court.

Learned President's Counsel for the 151 Appellant raised following grounds

of appeal;

a. the non-adoption of evidence by the learned trial Judge who convicted

the 151 Appellant is fatal to the conviction,

2

b. the trial Court had failed to properly consider the infirmities of the

solitary eye witness,

c. the trial Court had failed to consider that the 1st Appellant had no

motive to commit the alleged murder,

d. the prosecution failed to present sufficient evidence before the trial

Court which could sustain a conviction.

The ground of appeal that was relied upon by the learned Counsel for the

2nd Appellant, in addition to the one already raised by the 1st Appellant under

Section 48 of the Judicature Act, was that the trial Court had failed to properly

evaluate the evidence presented by the prosecution in convicting the 2nd

Appellant on common murderous intention.

It is evident from the above grounds of appeal, except to the one that there

was no proper adoption of evidence under Section 48 of the Judicature Act, other

grounds of appeal relate to the primary issue whether there was proper

evaluation of the prosecution evidence by the trial Court which could be

considered in the backdrop of the evidence led before the trial Court and of its

reasoning.

The contention advanced by the learned President's Counsel in support of

the claim there was no adoption of evidence is that, the trial against the

Appellants had commenced on 02.03.2005 and with the change of the presiding

Judge on three occasions, the parties have adopted proceedings before two of

those succeeding Judges, but not before the Judge who finally delivered the

judgment in convicting the Appellants. Since this is a clear violation of the

statutory provisions contained in Section 48 of the Judicature Act as amended, it

was submitted that the conviction of the Appellants should be quashed.

3

Section 48 of the Judicature Act No.2 of 1978 was amended by Section 2 of

the Act No. 27 of 1999, by effectively taking away the entitlement of the

prosecution to ".. . demand that the witnesses be re-summoned and re-heard" by

deletion of the word "either party" from the said Section, resulting in a position

that only the accused will have the alternative to have his trial "commenced

afresh". The words used by the Legislature, in conferring that entitlement on the

accused by amending the proviso to Section 48 of the said Act, are as follows; " ...

the accused may demand that the witnesses be re-summoned and re-heard". This

entitlement accrues to an accused only in the event of any Judge before whom a

prosecution is pending (as in this instance) which had to be continued before the

successor of such Judge.

Section 48 confers power on the succeeding Judge to "act on the evidence

already recorded or partly recoded by his predecessor, in addition conferment of

power to such succeeding Judge to re-summon the witness and commence the

proceeding afresh, if he thinks it fit.

The statutory provisions of Section 48 contemplates two situations. The

first situation as contemplated by the section is that the succeeding Judge, must

decide whether he should re-summon the witness and commence the proceeding

afresh at the point he presides over a trial already commenced by his

predecessor. The second situation is where, if the succeeding Judge decides to

"act on the evidence already recorded or partly recorded by his predecessor".

Only, then it triggers the application of the proviso to the Section 48, where the

accused could make a demand to re-summon and re-hear a witness. If the

succeeding Judge decided ex mere motu to re-summon the witness and commence

the proceeding afresh, neither the prosecution nor the accused will have a choice

4

over that decision, but to comply with the order of Court and a question of

demand does not arise.

In this instant appeal, opportunity for the Appellants to make the demand

as per the proviso to Section 48 arose when the Judge before whom the

prosecution was pending is succeeded by his successor on 27.04.2005. The

evidence of prosecution witnesses Konara Mudiyanselage Nishantha, Liyanage

Sunil, Pindeniyage Wimalasiri, Munagamage Pemawathie, Morris Chrostopher and

Arthur Robert were concluded as at that stage. The Appellants have adopted the

evidence of these witnesses before the 1st succeeding Judge on 27.04.2005.

Evidence of Dr. Dayananda was recorded by the succeeding Judge. At that stage

the 1st succeeding Judge was succeeded by his successor, the 2nd succeeding

Judge, on 07.01.2007. The Appellants have consented to adopt the evidence led

up to that point of time before the 2nd succeeding Judge as well. However, no

evidence was recorded by the 2nd succeeding Judge, who was then succeeded by

the 3rd succeeding Judge, before whom the evidence of witness PS 11453 Gunasiri

and the Registrar of Court were called by the prosecution and closed its case.

The 1st Appellant gave evidence under oath before the said 3rd succeeding

Judge while the 2nd Appellant made a statement from the dock. The impugned

judgment was accordingly delivered by the 3rd succeeding Judge but no formal

recording was made as to whether the Appellants demanded that the witness be

re-summoned.

It is this factor that had been highlighted by the learned President's

Counsel as well as the learned Counsel for the 2nd Appellant who submits that

the conviction entered against the Appellants is therefore vitiated.

5

In view of these submissions, this Court will consider the question

whether the failure to record that the proceedings are adopted by the 3rd

succeeding Judge vitiates the conviction of the Appellants.

There is no record in the proceedings that when the 3rd succeeding Judge

presided over their trial, the Appellants have made the demand to re-summon

and re-hear the witnesses and commence the trial afresh. On the contrary the

Appellants have consented before the 2nd succeeding Judge to adopt

proceedings. That is effectively adopting all the evidence thus far recorded by

the two of his predecessors. In between the 2nd and 3rd succeeding Judges, no

evidence was recorded. In effect, the 3rd succeeding Judge is in the identical

position as the 2nd succeeding Judge in relation to Section 48, since no witness

gave evidence in between their tenure of office as trial Judges in that particular

Court. Even the Appellants, by their conduct have accepted that position as they

presented their respective cases before him after the transition.

There is nothing in the wording in Section 48 indicating the consequences

of a failure to comply with the provision of that Section. It confers power on the

succeeding Judge to continue with the prosecution, unless, he himself decides or

upon the "demand" made by the accused, that the witnesses are re-summoned

and re-heard. Section 48 clearly provided for a prosecution" ... be continued before

the successor of such Judge who shall have the power to act on the evidence already

recorded by his predecessor .. . ".

HNG Fernando J (as he was then) in Mahawasala v Inspector of Police,

Kuhuwela 67 NLR 161, having referred to Section 123 of the Criminal Procedure

Code, Section 88 of Courts Ordinance and the judgment of Windham J in Perera v

Inspector of Police, Maharagama 51 NLR 10, and states;

6

U a new Magistrate had without recording a decision under

Section 152 (3) proceeded to try a case fixed for trial by his

predecessor after the assumption of jurisdiction. In dealing with the

question referred Windham J. (at page 13) held that the Section in

the light of which section 152 (3) should be interpreted is section 88

of the Courts Ordinance and he thus explains the scope and effect of

that section ;-" The section provides that such prosecution may be '

continued before the successor of such judge'. It seems to me that

this provision necessarily implies that the new judge shall step into

the shoes of the original judge and may carryon from the point

where he left off. U

That precedence referred to an instance where the succeeding Judge had

to assume jurisdiction to continue with a prosecution and the then Supreme

Court was of the view U that the new judge shall step into the shoes of the original

judge and may carry on from the point where he left off'. Section 48 does not speak

of assumption of jurisdiction, but as noted earlier on, states that, subject to two

qualifications, a succeeding judge could continue with a prosecution

commenced before his predecessor.

If the submission of the learned President's Counsel is accepted as the one

reflecting the correct legal position, then that would mean the Appellants could

opt to adopt proceedings before Judge A and not before Judge B, since there was

no adoption of proceedings made before Judge B, who is placed at the same

position as Judge A, in relation to the statutory provisions contained in Section

48.

In view of the above reasoning, this Court is of the considered view that

there was in fact a proper adoption of proceeding before the learned High Court 7

Judge, who delivered his judgment convicting the 1st and 2nd Appellants as far as

Section 48 of the Judicature Act is concerned, and therefore the contention that

there was no proper adoption of evidence had taken place before him, cannot

succeed.

The remaining grounds of appeal, as raised by the 1st and 2nd Appellants

are based on the trial Court's acceptance of the prosecution evidence. It is

therefore incumbent upon this Court to consider the whole body of evidence

presented before the trial Court by the prosecution albeit briefly. There was no

contention by the Appellants that their evidence was rejected erroneously

It is clear from the proceedings that the prosecution primarily relies on the

eye witness account of witness Nishantha, in order to prove its allegation of

murder against the two Appellants.

Nishantha was employed as a sand miner by Sunil who operated a sand

depot along the banks of kelani river in Hanwella area. Referring to the events

that took place on the day of the incident, the witness said that due to high water

levels, sand mining could not take place and he decided to visit his brother

residing in Avissavella in the morning. In order to report to work on the

following morning he had returned to his temporary shelter at Hanwella in the

same evening. On his way to Sunil's house, he saw the deceased chatting with

the two Appellants at the sand depot owned by one Devendra. Seeing three of his

fellow sand miners chatting away, the witness too had joined them. He noted

that the deceased was already under the influence of alcohol. The way the three

of them sat on the bench prompted the deceased to query the Appellants

whether they are trying to murder him.

8

Initially, the witness was talking to three of his friends, whilst standing

and as their conversation is continued, the witness sat on the grass patch. With

this act, realising the witness would not leave them in a hurry, the 1st Appellant

told him to go away since they had some business to attend.

The witness became suspicious with the behaviour of the three and

decided to watch them from a distance after hiding himself. He saw the 1st

Appellant pulling down the deceased and hitting him with kicks and punches.

He also saw the 2nd Appellant going into his house, which was standing near the

sand depot, and returning with "some weapon" and attacked the deceased. The

time was about 7.00 or 7.30 p.m. and witness had seen the attack on the deceased

with twilight. The Appellants have thereafter dragged the deceased by holding

on to deceased's legs towards the swollen river. He heard a sound of something

dropped into water. The witness was scared after what he saw and went to

Sunil's house.

While waiting at Sunil's house the 1st Appellant came to see the witness to

convey the message that 2nd Appellant wanted to see him. When the witness

indicated his reluctance, to see him the 1st Appellant told him " q8 ql~()~ ZOIC).

<;~@~ Gil Cle>oB. q~C) ~@~JO~ G@il~ e>B". At that point of time Sunil joined

them. The witness, having excused himself, proceeded to Hanwella town and

thereafter to Avissawella. He then shifted his employment to a sand depot located

about 4 miles from Sunil's due to fear of life.

After about a week since the incident, Sunil and another came in search of

the witness and told him that the Police wanted to question him over the death

of the deceased. Sunil also said that "those two" had told that the witness too

9

was "there". Later he learnt that the deceased's body was recovered from the

river.

Witness Sunil knew both Appellants as sand miners and claimed that it

was he who trained the 1st Appellant to mine sand from river bed, although he

had left his employer subsequently. The 2nd Appellant met him one morning and

pleaded with the witness to save him by paying Rs. 5000.00 as he had killed the

deceased and put him to the river. Sunil informed the 2nd Appellant's former

employer Wimalasiri Mudalali of the confession immediately and, on the latter's

suggestion, inspected the scene for tell-tale marks. At that point of time both

Appellants were employed under the witness.

Sunil suspected this confession could be a joke and had questioned the 1st

Appellant whether this is true. By this time Wimalasiri and Devendra have

informed Hanwella Police about the murder. The Police took the three of them

along the river bank but found no trace of the deceased.

The Police arrested the 1st Appellant and when questioned admitted that

the deceased was killed and put to the river. The 2nd Appellant was also arrested

thereafter who confessed in the presence of the 1st Appellant of his complicity.

Later Devendra and another had identified the body of the deceased at

Ragama Hospital.

Wimalasiri in his evidence confirmed that Sunil told him that 2nd Appellant

confessed to the murder at Devendra's sand depot. It was not unusual for a sand

miner to seek employment elsewhere if the river is swollen and the witness did

not take notice that deceased did not report to work. Then he learned from Sunil

as to the fate of the deceased.

10

Dr.Dayananda had conducted the post mortem examination on the body of

the deceased. The body was putrefied when retrieved from water and was

disfigured with animal bites. The deceased had two significant injuries. His

maxilla was separated from the skull due to a fracture, in addition to a stab

injury on his chest by which the left ventricle was penetrated. The witness noted

there were other injuries caused by a blunt weapon. His death was due to the

stab injury.

The body of the deceased was identified by his relatives due to an old scar

on the head, which is confirmed by the medical witness who noted a healed

triangular shaped depressed fracture on left parietal bone.

In the light of above summary, the contention by both Appellants that the

trial Court had failed to adequately consider the evidence for the prosecution

should be considered at this stage. The remaining grounds of appeal could

therefore be considered simultaneously since they are related to each other in

content.

It was contended by the learned President's Counsel for the 1st Appellant

that belatedness of the solitary eye witness, and he was influenced by Sunil, who

harboured a grudge against the 1st Appellant for leaving him, to falsely

implicate, and the omission to mention the utterance attributed to the deceased

and the prosecution's failure to explain the stab injury all add up to make the

witness's evidence unreliable.

Perusal of the impugned judgment reveals that the trial Court had in fact

considered all these aspects in its evaluation of the prosecution evidence. It is

noted that the delay in making a statement was due to fear of life and relocating 11

himself, which is a probable conduct of a person, if placed under the

circumstances as the witness was placed at that point of time. The fact that

witness relocated himself after the incident is confirmed by Sunil who located

him after several days to convey that the Police wanted to question him.

Referring to the tenor of cross-examination, the trial Court considered the

suggestion put to witness Sunil and rightly concluded that the confessions were

not disputed by the 1st Appellant, except denying making it. There is no

contradiction or an omission marked by the lsi Appellant over making the

confession on the witness's evidence indicating that it was mentioned on the first

available opportunity and thereafter consistently made by the witness. When the

witness denied the suggestion that due to prior animosity the lsi Appellant was

implicated, he did not probe any further by suggesting other instances where he

had acted with such animosity.

The contradiction 1 VI is in relation to the eye witness's claim that it was he

who spoke to the two Appellants when seated together with the deceased,

whereas he told Police that he could not identify the Appellants, until they who

shouted at him" Cl)j!; CJCl)i". Clearly this was due to the limitation of the witness

to express himself describing what took place. He merely said in evidence that

the three were there. Only during cross-examination, it was elicited how he

identified them clearly.

As to the omission marked in relation to the utterance attributed to the

deceased, it was elicited by the lsi Appellant that he made a statement to Police

as well as gave evidence before the Magistrate's Court. The omission was

marked only in relation to his testimony before the Magistrate's Court, justifying

an inference that the witness did mention it in his statement to Police, which was

12

made few days after the incident. When considered in that light, he made that

claim at the earliest opportunity and was inconsistent. Certainly the witness had

not invented this utterance and not mentioned for the first time during the trial.

The conclusion reached by the trial Court that his evidence is truthful and

reliable is therefore could not be assailed.

In relation to the absence of evidence as to the stab injury, it is noted that

witness Nishantha maintained that the 1st Appellant had only punched and

kicked the deceased while the 2nd Appellant attacked the deceased who was

fallen on the ground with some kind of weapon, brought from his horne. The

witness saw the incident from a distance and with the onset of darkness. He also

said that after the 2nd Appellant's attack on the deceased with that "weapon", the

deceased was dragged by his feet and dropped in the river. The death was due to

the single stab injury and the medical witness of the opinion that the deceased

was already dead when he was put to water. This evidence clearly indicate that

the death was due to the injury caused by the 2nd Appellant's "weapon", which

was not clearly identified by the witness due to poor visibility. Hence, there was

evidence presented by the prosecution establishing as to the injury which_ caused

the death of the deceased and who inflicted that injury. Even if there was no

evidence of attack by the 2nd Appellant using a "weapon", mere throwing a man,

who was under the influence of liquor and subdued by continued physical

attack, into a swollen river, is sufficient to impute criminal liability under Section

32 of the Penal Code as he was joined by the 1st Appellant.

The 2nd Appellant's contention that the trial Court had failed to properly

evaluate the evidence presented by the prosecution on common murderous

intention is therefore clearly without merit, in view of the reasoning contained in

the preceding paragraphs of this judgment. 13

It is unfortunate that the learned prosecutor had presented irrelevant

evidence before the trial Court in relation to the confessions made by the two

Appellants in the presence of the Police officers, which is in direct violation of

the prohibition contained in Section 25 of the Evidence Ordinance. This Court

finds no indication that the trial Court considered the said items of irrelevant

evidence or at least was influenced by it in any manner. If the trial against the

Appellants was taken before a jury, the admission of irrelevant evidence of this

nature by an irresponsible prosecutor, alone is sufficient to vitiate the conviction.

This Court is of the considered view that the Appellants were properly

convicted, in spite of the above referred infirmity which caused no miscarriage of

justice. The conviction of the 1st and 2nd Appellants and the sentence of death is

affirmed.

The appeals of the 1st and 2nd Appellants are accordingly dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

DEVIKA ABEYRATNE, I. I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

14