IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal under

section 331(1) of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of

1979 read with Article 138 of the

Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

The Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka

Court of Appeal Case Complainant

No. HCC/321/19

High Court of Colombo Vs.

Case No. 6812/2013

1. Mohomed Buhari Mohomed Razik

2. Pushparaj Delip Kumar

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Pushparaj Delip Kumar

Accused-Appellant

2

Vs.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12. Complainant-Respondent

BEFORE : K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J (P/CA)

WICKUM A. KALUARACHCHI, J

COUNSEL : Asitha Vipulanayake for the Accused-Appellant.

Chethiya Gunasekara, ASG for the Respondent.

WRITTEN SUBMISSION

TENDERED ON : 05.04.2021 (On behalf of the Accused-Appellant)

18.05.2022 & 23.06.2021 (On behalf of the

Respondent)

ARGUED ON : 08.09.2022

DECIDED ON : 05.10.2022

WICKUM A. KALUARACHCHI, J.

The accused-appellant of this case was indicted before the High Court

of Colombo along with the first accused for committing the murder of

one Mohomad Musin Mohomad Rizwan on or about 21.11.2007, an

offence punishable under Section 296 of the Penal Code read with

Section 32 of the same. After granting bail at the initial stage of the

case, the first accused absconded and the trial proceeded against him

3

in absentia. The second accused-appellant was present in court during

the trial and he was represented by counsel. After the trial, both

accused were convicted and sentenced to death by the learned High

Court Judge of Colombo by his Judgment dated 05.08.2019. It is vital

to be noted that the entire trial has been heard by the learned Judge

who delivered the judgment.

This appeal has been preferred by the second accused against the said

conviction and sentence. Written submissions on behalf of both parties

were filed prior to the hearing. At the hearing of the appeal, the learned

counsel for the appellant and the learned Additional Solicitor General

for the respondent made oral submissions.

The grounds of appeal Although, four grounds of appeal have been stated in the written

submissions filed on behalf of the appellant, the learned counsel for

the appellant confined his arguments to the following two grounds.

i. The learned High Court Judge has failed to adequately

consider, properly assess, and evaluate the evidence led in

the case.

ii. The learned High Court Judge has failed to evaluate the dock

statement given by the appellant.

In brief, the incident On the day in question, the 21st of November 2007, PW-8, Police

Constable Athula, and PW-13, Civil Defence Officer (Grama

Aarakshaka Niladhari), Suranga Suraweera, were on patrol duty.

PW-8 stated in his evidence that he heard three gunshots coming from

the direction of Church Street in Wella Weediya around 4.15 p.m.

Then he saw two persons carrying guns chasing another person.

4

PW-13 chased the two men who were running, apprehended them, and

arrested them. PW-13 has also given evidence corroborating PW-8s

evidence regarding this incident. Both witnesses identified the

appellant as one of the men arrested. These two witnesses also

identified two weapons taken from the custody of the appellant and

the first accused. PW-9, the Officer in Charge of Aaduruppu Street

Police Station, Chief Inspector Bodhipaksha, corroborated this

evidence and stated that he was informed about the arrest of two

accused in this case and ordered that they be searched. The two

accused were found with two pistols and two hand grenades, according

to the chief inspector and the aforesaid two witnesses. Subsequently,

the two accused were arrested by the Aaduruppu Street Police and the

items recovered from them were handed over to the Wella Weediya

Police. According to retired Sub Inspector Wijedasa, the distance

between two police stations was about 200 or 250 meters.

During the police investigations, spent bullet casings and bullets were

found at the crime scene. PW-12, the Deputy Government Analyst has

formed his opinion that the two spent bullet casings recovered from

the crime scene match with the pistol marked P-1 recovered from the

first accused.

PW-11, the Assistant Judicial Medical Officer observed four gunshot

injuries, and her opinion was that the death of the deceased was

caused by a gunshot injury to the chest. Furthermore, the doctor

formed the opinion that the shooter would have shot the deceased from

a distance beyond 18 inches.

So, undisputedly, the death of the deceased has been caused as a

result of gunshot injuries. PW-8 and PW-13 saw the appellant and the

first accused, both of whom were carrying pistols, chasing a person.

5

They heard about three gunshots before they saw the chasing.

Anyhow, no one has witnessed the shooting.

The first ground of appeal The learned counsel for the appellant raised the following two

arguments pertaining to the aforesaid first ground of appeal:

I. The improbability of hearing gunshot injuries around 4.15

and deceased dying at 4.20.

II. The improbability of the deceased to run after having

gunshot injuries.

The improbability of hearing gunshot injuries around 4.15 and

deceased dying at 4.20

The learned counsel for the appellant advanced an argument that

gunshot injuries were heard by PW-8 and PW-13 around 4.15 p.m.,

and the deceased died at 4.20 p.m. according to the Post Mortem

Report, therefore, it was not possible that the deceased who had run

and fallen in Dam Street after suffering gunshot injuries to be taken to

the National Hospital in Colombo within five minutes. Further, the

learned counsel pointed out that the wife of the deceased PW-2 stated

that she waited near the ICU in the hospital for half an hour and

thereafter came to know about the death of her husband.

Firstly, it should be noted that just because the PW-2 knew of her

husband's death after waiting about half an hour in the ICU does not

mean that the death occurred after half an hour of the deceased being

admitted to the hospital. It should be noted that PW-2 has also stated

(Page 175 of the appeal brief). Therefore,

the time of death cannot be ascertained on PW-2s evidence.

6

Secondly, the Assistant Judicial Medical Officer has not revealed how

she ascertained the time of the death. The prosecutor failed to lead

that evidence. The deceased may have died while being brought to the

hospital. Even before that, his death could have occurred. Thus, there

is no way of ascertaining the time of the death accurately.

Thirdly, it is to be noted that PW8 or PW13 has not stated the exact

time that they heard the gunshots. It is apparent that they could not

look at the time because as soon as they heard gunshots, they ran

behind the appellant and the first accused to apprehend them. Hence,

the said five-minutes difference could not be considered as an exact

time difference.

Next, It should be considered what the learned counsel for the

appellant is trying to raise by this argument. That argument can only

make one point; it was not the person who was shot around 4.15 p.m.,

but another person who was shot and taken to the hospital, who may

have died.

At this stage, it is pertinent to consider the by-standers evidence that

was considered by the learned High Court Judge in terms of section 6

of the Evidence Ordinance. PW-2, the wife of the deceased also heard

the gunshots. She stated in her evidence that the people who were at

the crime scene when she went there informed her that two persons

shot her husband and those two persons were caught by the police

then and there. The learned High court Judge has correctly admitted

the said evidence in terms of section 6 illustration(a) of the Evidence

Ordinance as whatever was said or done by the by-standers at the

incident or so shortly before or after the incident is a relevant fact.

Although the opportunity was given to the defence, PW-2 was not

cross-examined by the learned defence counsel. Only the learned High

7

Court Judge asked few questions to clarify some points. Therefore,

PW-2s evidence has never been challenged.

The Indian judgment of Sarvan Singh v. State of Punjab (2002 AIR SC

(iii) 3652) pages 3655 and 3656, was cited in the case of Ratnayake

Mudiyanselage Premachandra v. The Hon. Attorney General C.A Case

No. 79/2011, decided on 04.04.2017 as follows:

It is a rule of essential justice that whenever the opponent has declined

to avail himself of the opportunity to put his case in cross-examination,

it must follow that the evidence tendered on that issue ought to be

accepted.

In the case of Himachal Pradesh v. Thakur Dass (1983) 2 Cri. L. J.

1694 at 1701 V.D Misra CJ held that whenever a statement of fact

made by a witness is not challenged in cross-examination, it has to be

concluded that the fact in question is not disputed. Similarly in Motilal

v. State of Madhya Pradesh (1990) Criminal Law Journal NOC 125 MP

it was held that Absence of cross-examination of prosecution witness

of certain facts, leads to inference of admission of that fact.

Hence, PW-2s evidence could be accepted without any dispute. When

considering the aforesaid other circumstances and what PW-2 heard

from by-standers, there is no least doubt or improbability that the

person who died as a result of gunshot injuries was the person who

was chased by the appellant and the first accused. Taking the evidence

of the Government Analyst, the Assistant Judicial Medical Officer,

PW-8, and PW-13 together, it could be concluded that the first accused

caused the deceased's gunshot injuries by the pistol that he carried.

The learned High Court Judge has correctly come to that conclusion.

8

The improbability of the deceased to run after having gunshot injuries The other argument the learned counsel for the appellant advanced

was whether the deceased was able to run after having the gunshot

injuries. The learned Additional Solicitor General contended that the

learned counsel for the appellant had not questioned the doctor and

asserted that the deceased was unable to run after having the gunshot

injuries.

This court considered the obligation of the prosecution to prove their

case beyond a reasonable doubt. In her testimony, the Assistant

Judicial Medical Officer stated that she could not give an exact answer

on how long the deceased would live after the injuries. However, she

stated that there was a chance that he would be alive for a short time.

The deceased was found lying a short distance from the place of the

shooting and not far away. The doctor has never said that the deceased

could not walk or run within that short time that he was alive.

According to the evidence of PW-8 and PW-13, after hearing the

gunshot injuries, they saw a person running and the appellant and the

first accused chasing him. As previously stated, because it was

apparent that the person running was the deceased, the prosecution

has established that the deceased ran after the gunshots were fired on

him.

Although the accused has no obligation to prove anything in a criminal

case, in a situation where the prosecution has proved that the

deceased ran, after having gunshot injuries as described above, and if

the accused-appellant wanted to show that the deceased could not run

after sustaining the gunshot injuries, the Assistant Judicial Medical

Officer should have been questioned, and it should have been elicited

from her by the defence counsel that the deceased could not run after

9

those injuries. The learned counsel who appeared in the High Court

has not asked any question to that effect. In consequence, the learned

counsel for the appellant would not succeed in his argument that the

deceased could not run after the gunshot injuries.

The second ground of appeal

The second ground raised in this appeal by the learned counsel for the

appellant has no merit because the learned High Court Judge has

sufficiently dealt with the dock statement in his judgment under a

separate subtopic. Despite the fact that the dock statement was merely

a denial without giving an explanation for anything arising from the

prosecution evidence against the appellant, the learned Judge has

extensively and correctly dealt with the dock statement on pages 35,

36, and 37 of his judgment.

Establishing the commission of murder with common murderous

intention based on circumstantial evidence.

There is no dispute on the fact that the deceased died as a result of

gunshot injuries. However, nobody has witnessed the shooting of the

deceased. Therefore, the fact that the appellant and the first accused

were responsible for the murder of the deceased has to be established

on circumstantial evidence.

As it was held in the cases of Junaiden Mohamed Haaris v. Hon.

Attorney General - SC Appeal 118/17, decided on 09.11.2018, King v.

Abeywickrama - 44 NLR 254, King v. Appuhamy - 46 NLR 128,

Podisingho v. King - 53 NLR 49 and Don Sunny v. Attorney General

(Amarapala murder case) (1998) 2 Sri L.R. 1, in proving a charge on

circumstantial evidence, the prosecution must prove that no one else

other than the accused had the opportunity of committing the offence,

the accused can be found guilty only and only if the proved items of

10

circumstantial evidence is consistent with their guilt and inconsistent

with their innocence.

As previously stated, the evidence of the Assistant Judicial Medical

Officer and the Government Analyst leads to the conclusion that the

gunshot injuries of the deceased were caused by the pistol possessed

by the first accused. The contention of the learned counsel for the

appellant was that according to the Government Analysts evidence,

there was no firing with the pistol purportedly possessed by the

appellant. Therefore, the learned counsel contended that the common

murderous intention of the appellant has not been established.

According to the testimony of PW-8 and PW-13, after hearing the

gunshots, the appellant and the first accused chased the deceased.

They chased him while carrying pistols. So, it is obvious that the

appellant's presence there was a participatory presence and not a mere

presence. In the case of Wasalamuni Richard v. The State - 76 NLR

534 at page 546 it was held that in the absence of an explanation

from Premadasa, jury were entitled to draw the reasonable inference

from all the circumstances that his presence at the scene was a

participatory presence as distinct from a mere presence which

would have entitled him to an acquittal. In other words, the said

decision implies that if it is not a mere presence and if it is a

participatory presence, the accused is not entitled to an acquittal.

In the same judgment, it is also stated as follows; The 3rd accused was

present at the scene of the crime. Even if the evidence of assault by

the 3rd accused on the deceased is not considered, the fact of the 3rd

accused absconding after the incident and hiding the gun that was

used and the fact of his silence against all this evidence would make

the court draw an inference against the accused with regard to a pre-

arranged plan with the 1st and the 2nd accused.

11

As explained previously, the circumstantial evidence in this case

establishes that the first accused shot the deceased. It is also

established that the appellant, who carried a pistol, chased the

deceased with the first accused, who was also carrying a pistol. So, the

appellants presence at the scene was undoubtedly a participatory

presence."

The appellant and the first accused were apprehended by the police

officer, PW-8 and PW-13 shortly after they witnessed the chasing. Like

in the aforesaid Court of Appeal case, the appellant, in this case, has

not given any explanation why he ran with the first accused while

carrying a pistol. Instead, the appellant simply denied everything in

his dock statement. The appellant stated in his dock statement that

when he went to the Aaduruppu Weediya to buy some goods, police

arrested him, which the learned High Court Judge correctly found to

be an unacceptable denial. The police officer PW-8 and PW-13 have

stated unequivocally that they apprehended the appellant and the first

accused while chasing a man. There is no reason to doubt their

testimony because the PW-8 and PW-13 who were on patrol duty had

no reason to run behind them and arrest the unknown appellant and

the first accused if they had done nothing.

It is to be noted once a participatory presence in furtherance of a

common intention is established at the commencement of an incident,

it was held in Sarath Kumara v. Attorney General-(CA 207/2008) -

decided on 04.04.2014, that there is no requirement that both

perpetrators should be physically present at the culmination of the

event unless it could be shown by some overt act that one perpetrator

deliberately withdrew from the situation to disengage and detach

himself from vicarious liability.

In this case, the appellant was not only physically present at the crime

scene, but he also chased the deceased with the first accused while

12

carrying a pistol. Therefore, the learned High Court Judge was

perfectly correct in deciding that the facts of the appellant chasing the

deceased with the first accused who shot the deceased, the appellant

also carrying a pistol, and the appellant fleeing from that place with

the first accused draw only the inference as to the appellants common

murderous intention. In addition, the facts that pistols and hand

grenades were possessed by both the accused, and that the deceased

was shot by the first accused using the pistol he carried, clearly show

the pre-arrangement for the murder. The appellants mental sharing

of the common murderous intention with the first accused is also

precisely clear by the appellants act of chasing the deceased with the

first accused even after the deceased was shot.

It is also important to note that even if two people assault someone

and that person dies as a result of the assault, both assailants may

not be liable for murder on the basis of having a common murderous

intention because one assailant may have had the murderous

intention and the other may not have had the murderous intention but

only to injure him. However, the case before us is different. Chasing

the deceased who was shot and injured signifies that both of them had

the only intention of killing him. Hence, I hold that the common

murderous intention of the appellant has been established in this case.

Conclusion

For the reasons stated above, I hold that the learned High Court Judge

has correctly convicted and sentenced the appellant for the offence of

murder. Before concluding, I should state that the judgment of the

learned High Court Judge is a well-considered judgment after carefully

and correctly considering all aspects of the case and properly

evaluating all evidence in the case. Therefore, I find no reason to

interfere with the judgment.

13

Accordingly, the judgment and the sentence dated 05.08.2019 are

affirmed and the appeal is dismissed.

Appeal dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K. Priyantha Fernando, J (P/CA)

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL