I j I

1

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

CA/WRIT/76/2015

OF SRI LANKA

Vs,

In the matter of an Application for a mandate

in the nature of Writ of Certiorari and

Mandamus under article 140 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka

1. S. Gnanasampanthan

2. S. Anandarajah,

No. 15, St. Kildas Lane, 64, Bazar Street,

Vavuniya.

PETITIONERS

1. Dehiwala- Mount Lavinia Municipal Council

Dehiwala

2. Dhanasiri Amaratunga,

Hon. Mayor,

Dehiwala- Mount Lavinia Municipal Council

Dehiwala

3. K.V.B.D.N. Muthugala,

Municipal Commissioner,

Dehiwala- Mount Lavinia Municipal Council

Dehiwala

4. K.S. Withanage,

Chief Accountant,

Dehiwala- Mount Lavinia Municipal Council

Dehiwala

5. Weerakkodi Wyneris Perera of Nugegoda,

Waskadubedda, Panadura, Thotamuna.

RESPONDENTS

i

~f-l ,

Before: Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J (PICA)

Counsel: Faiz Musthapha PC with Faisza Marker for the Petitioners

J.P. Hapuarachchi for the 1st to 4th Respondents

Written Submissions on: 22.09.2016

Judgment on: 26.01.2017

Order

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J

2

Petitioner to the present application S. Gnanasampanthan and S. Anandarajah had come before this

court seeking inter alia,

c) A mandate in the nature of a writ of Certiorari quashing the decision of the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and/or

4th Respondents or anyone or more of them (reflected in P-14) to insert the name of

Weerakkody Wyneris Perera in the Assessment Register/Certificate of Ownership of the 1st

Respondent Council.

d) A mandate in the nature of a writ of Mandamus 1 st,2nd yd and/or 4th Respondents or anyone

or more of them to delete the name of Weerakkody Wyneris Perera in the Assessment

Register/Certificate of Ownership of the 1st Respondent Council.

The two Petitioners who claimed to be the co-owners of premises bearing assessment number 11

Frazer Avenue, Dehiwala had complained of a decision by the 1st to 4th Respondents to insert the

name of the 5th Respondent as a co-owner to the said premises and sought the relief claimed as

above.

~ I

I

t ! I I t i ! I

J I I I j

f

1 \ 1 i i ! 1 ! ! I ! :1 ! I I "

3

Mter the notices were dispatched on all the Respondents, including the 5th Respondent, they were

represented by counsel before this court. The 1st to 4th Respondents decided to file objections before

this court and accordingly the objections of the said Respondents were tendered at the Registry on

22.07.2015.

When this matter came up before this court on 21.10.2015 the Learned President's Counsel who

represented the 5th Respondent had informed the death of his client 5th Respondent and an

undertaking was given to supply the Petitioners with necessary information for the Petitioners to

consider substitution. When the matter was called again on 07.12.2015 for the above purpose, the

Learned President's Counsel had moved further time to supply the necessary material to the

Petitioner. However when the matter was called once again on 20.01.2016 for the above purpose, the

counsel who represented the 5th Respondent had informed court that the "heirs of the 5th Respondent

are not interested in taking part in these proceedings" and no counsel had appeared before this court

representing the 5th Respondent thereafter.

In the absence of any representation or any pleading submitted before this court representing the 5th

Respondent this court decided to proceed with the parties represented before this court and on the

request made by the said parties to dispose this matter on written submissions, the matter was fixed

for judgment by me on the written submissions tendered on behalf of the Petitioners as well as on

behalf of the 1st to 4th Respondents.

As submitted before this court, the two Petitioners above named become the titleholders to the

premises bearing assessment number 11 Frazer Avenue, Dehiwala since 16.12.2004 by the Deed of

Transfer bearing No 92 attested by K. Jeyaraj N.P. The said land depicted as lot 3931 in plan 1704

dated 28.-7.1999 prepared by I.M.C. Fernando Licensed Surveyor to the extent of 24.20 perches was

registered at the Land Registry under volume 84 Folios 245 and 246 and volume 82 Folios 69

and 70.

i

J!

!

~I

4

The Petitioners have further submitted that, prior to the purchase of the said land the Petitioners have

caused a search at the Land Registry and satisfied with the title of their predecessors in title, who

were seized, possessed and sufficiently entitled to it by virtue of Administrators Conveyance bearing

No 260 dated 24.11.2004 attested by G.K Wasantha Ranjith N.P. after receiving letter of

Administration by the District Court of Mt. Lavinia in Testamentary Case bearing No 1163/007T

instituted by the 1 sl vendor as the petitioner in respect of the intestate estate of her late husband

Jerome Ellswyn Ignatius de. Andrado.

In January 2005 the Petitioners through their Attorney at Law had submitted the devolution of title in

respect of the said premises along with supporting documents to register the names of the Petitioners

as the new owners of the said premises, and the 1 st Respondent Council having processed the said

documents, issued the Petitioners the Certificate of Ownership and Non vesting Certificate dated l I

18.01.2005 (P-9).

1 According to the Petitioners, since the said purchase in December 2004 from its predecessors in title

namely Makoladeguruge Therese Anastasia de Andrado, Marie Joan Enoka de Andrado and Ishani

Therese Antonita de Andrado the Petitioners were in peaceful possession of the said land except for

a application filed under section 66 of the Primary Court Procedure Act by one Dhananjayanathan

Tanikairasan making Marie Jhon Enoka de Andrado and the 2nd Petitioner as first and second

Respondents but the said application too was concluded after a settlement reached at the High Court

of Colombo.

In July 2014 the Petitioners made an application to the 1st Respondent Municipality for a certificate

of ownership after re-survey of the said land which confirmed the extent as 24.20 perches as

depicted in plan 1704 dated 28.07.1999 with the intent of developing the land.

It is at this stage only the Petitioners got to know through an official of the 1 sl Respondent Council

that in addition to the names of the two Petitioners, that the Assessment Register of the lSI

IIi

tI!

,

\Jt !

II;

t

I

f[

fE! l i ki i,I

f

5

Respondent Council carries another name of a person by the name Weerakkody Wyneris Perera in

respect of the said premises.

As submitted by the Petitioners produced marked P-14, the certificate of ownership with regard to

No 11 Frazer Avenue, Dehiwala carried the name of G.E. Andrado as the owner for the period of

01.01.1989 to 30.11.2004, for the period at 01.12.2004 to 31.12.2004 the said name had been

changed to Jerome Ellswyn Ignatius de Andrado and thereafter from 01.01.2005 to 31.01.2007 the

names of the two Petitioners namely Sivapathasundaram Gnanasampanthan and Shanmugam

Anandarajah had been entered as the owners of the said premises.

However since 01.02.2007 in addition to the above two names, the name of Weerakkody Wyneris

Perera had also been included as an owner to the said premises. When the Petitioners requested for

the assessment notice for the year 2015, the lSI Respondent had issued an assessment notice which

carries the name of S. Gnanasampanthan, S. Anandarajah and Weerkkody Wyneris Perera.

As revealed from the documents placed before this court by the Petitioners, the Petitioners after

receiving the assessment notice for the year 2015 (i.e. after the Petitioners made an application to the

1 sl Respondent Council for a certificate of ownership) had written to the lSI and the 3rd Respondents

requesting them to remove the name of Wyneris Perera from the certificate of ownership for the

premises in question i.e. No 11 Frazer Avenue, Dehiwala and to correct the assessment register, but

the 3rd Respondent by his letter dated 12.01.2015 refused to remove the name of Weerakkody

Wyneris Perera, since the material available in the file reveals a co-ownership by the said W.W.

Perera for the premises in question.

As noted in this judgment, the 51h Respondent Weerakkody Wyneris Perera or his hairs did not take

part in these proceedings. The Learned President's Counsel who represented the 51h Respondent had

informed this court that the hairs of late Weerakkody Wyneris Perera were not interested in taking

part in these proceedings. Even though the 5Ih Respondent who is the beneficiary by the impugned

f

1 i

f I 1

J I t I i j

I I

i I I I ! I I j j

I t ! l

1 j

j

6

decision of the 1st to 4th Respondents, did not take part in these proceedings the material relevant to

this application, said to have submitted by the 5th Respondent were placed before this court by 1st to

4th Respondents and resisted the application of the Petitioners on the basis of those documents.

As submitted by the 1st to 4th Respondents,

a) By an application of abstract of the title deed dated 16.08.2006 K.D.A. de Silva Notary

Public had made an application to insert Weerakkody Wyneris Perera's name in the

assessment register in respect of the questioned premises

b) That to substantiate the rights of the said W.W Perera, two deeds have been submitted to the

1 st Respondent

c) That under and by virtue of deed No 1663 dated 31st January 1945 attested by J.P. Salgoda

N.P one James Andrew de Andrado of Frazer Avenue Dehiwala was a co-owner to the land

described in the schedule to that deed

d) The aforesaid J.A. de. Andrado by deed 476 dated 21.03.1951 attested by D.L. Salgoda N.P

transferred the same to Trust Insurance Company Ltd

e) The said Trust Investment Company had transferred the same to Weerakkody Wyneris Perera

by Deed No 552 dated 22nd October 1956 attested by F.N. Dias Abeysinghe N.P

f) Having satisfied with the documents submitted to the 15t Respondent the 5th Respondent's

name had been registered in the registries of the 151 Respondent

Whilst challenging the above position taken up by the lSI to 41h Respondents the Petitioners have

relied on the guidelines given by the 1 sl Respondent itself when an application of abstract is

tendered for registrations and argued that the said abstract of title deed was accepted by the lSI

Respondent in violation of the said guidelines which are produced before this court marked X2.

As observed by this court the said guidelines required,

7

a) A surveyor plan of the land to be submitted

b) The correct assessment number and the correct details of the land to be included

c) If the transferor of the property is a company a resolution passed by the Director Board to

sell the property

but none of the said requirement had been fulfilled by the applicant when submitting the abstract of

title for Registration.

As submitted by the Petitioner, the abstract of title refers to a deed of transfer said to have attested on

220d October 1956 but not taken any interest to register the abstract with the 1st Respondent Council

for 50 years which creates a doubt in the mind of and any reasonable person. However when the said

abstract was submitted for registration, the following discrepancies were clearly visible in the

application, namely

No surveyor plan was submitted along with the application but the four boundaries referred to above

were different to the boundaries of the plan submitted for registration by the Petitioner.

The assessment number referred to in the application bears the assessment number as, 19 Frazer

Avenue (vide the certificate by the AAL) but the land referred to bears 11 Frazer Avenue.

The land referred to abstract of title contains 32 perches but the land referred to this application No

11 Frazer Avenue where the abstract of title belonging to the two Petitioners were registered

contained only 24.20 perches.

But the Municipal Authorities said to have proceeded to register the title deed under No 11 Frazer

Avenue without giving any notice to the two Petitioners already registered their title deeds under No

11 Frazer Avenue.

As revealed before this court, the Petitioners were informed of the said registration for the 1st time in

the year 2014 when they make an application for a copy of the Certificate of Ownership for the said

8

land. However the Petitioners have produced the Rate Receipts issued by the 15t Respondent Council

for the year 2012, 2013 and 2014 under the name of the second Petitioner. However for the 15t time

the 15t Respondent Council had issued an assessment notice in the names of the two Petitioners and

the 5th Respondent for the year 2015 after the application was tendered by the Petitioners for a copy

of the Certificate of Ownership in the year 2014.

The Respondents have further submitted some documents to satisfy that they have summoned both

parties for an inquiry to resolve the issue. However in this regard the only document submitted by

the Petitioners before this court is a letter by the 3rd Respondent informing that he cannot implement

the request by the Petitioner to delete the name of Weerakkody Wyneris Perera but no other

document calling the Petitioner for an inquiry.

In this regard the Respondents have produced two documents marked R6 and R 7 to satisfy this court

the steps the 3rd Respondent has taken when he received a complaint from the Petitioners.

As observed by this court R6 is a letter dated 26.11.2014 sent to the 5th Respondent with a copy to

Attorney at Law- K.D.A de Silva who certified the abstract of title, calling for any objection for the

request made by the two Petitioners to remove the name of the 5th Respondent. The 3rd Respondent

had once again sent a letter to the 5th Respondent requesting him to be present for an inquiry before

the 2nd Respondent on 02.01.2015. The 2nd and the 3rd paragraphs of the said letter read thus,

2. CdC) G3~0') Q~~G)(j~ oo~ c))O~Cl(j Q~C5)) (jl!) C)6i G)C))Cl(jd Cl~~ ~ 00

(5)~ O)~O') 0')6~@~~ .55C>(j @Q).!':1) Q~ ~ 8@~~Cl (3)6l ~(3)6)Boc>~)<33

gG))~dCl(j~ OzClldCl.!':1) dlc3t) Q~C5)) 2015.01.02 ~~ O.Cl 10.000 Ol~~

~~aod 0')6.!':1) @Q ~l~~~' CdC) dlc3t) ~(3)6QC5)) (3))C)~lG3@@ 4Cl.!':1) C5)@

3. C)Cl~ ~ Q~C5)) ~C5)C) G3~0')1!) ~dCl.!':1)@~ 8(j(!) O)O~Cl(j~ ClC) 8(j G3~0')

C)C5)g6lC>O @Q)~ Q~ QC5)C5))~ Cl.!':1) @Q ~~Cl) qlC> ~Cl~ Q~C5)~ 0')6~.

I I

I l I I ,

! I !

9

Even though there is reference to summoning the other party for the said inquiry, the Respondents

have failed to submit any notice sent to the two Petitioners requesting their presence for the said

inquiry.

However based on the said purported inquiry said to have been held on 02.01.2015, the Respondents

had submitted further documentation marked R8, R9, R10 and Rll to support the claim of the 5th

Respondent.

As observed by this court, the above Respondents have accepted the documentation submitted on

behalf of the 5th Respondent without giving any opportunity for the Petitioners to challenge the said

documents but 10 days thereafter on 12.01.2015 written to the Petitioners refusing their request to

delete the name of the 5th Respondent from the Assessment Register.

When considering the events took place as revealed before this court, I am mindful of the following

observations made by 'Wade' on the Principles of Natural Justice.

"It is fundermental to fair procedure that both sides should be heard audi alteram partem,

'hear the other side.' This is the more far-reaching of the principles of Natural Justice, since it can

embrace almost every question of fair procedure, or due process, and its implications can be worked

out in great detail. It is also broad enough to include the bias, since a fair hearing must be an

unbiased hearing; but in deference to the traditional dictomy; that rule has already been treated

separate I y.

(Administrative Law HWR Wade & C.F. Forsyth 10th Edition page 402)

When considering the above observation it is clear that the Respondents have acted in violation of

the fundermental to fair procedure by not allowing a fair hearing to the Petitioners. As observed

above the Petitioners decided to purchase the land in question after taking all precautional steps and

after purchasing the land they have promptly submitted the necessary documentation to the 1st

II i ; f I III

f ,It

f ! ! ! ! I t f !i t f f i I I i I Ii ! ! I

10

Respondent and obtained the Certificate of Ownership and the Non-vesting Certificate for the land in

question. They have paid all relevant taxes since then and every time the said payments were made a

receipt had been issued in the name of the Petitioners until 2015. The 1st Respondent had failed to

issue an assessment notice with the name of Weerakkody Wyneris Perera until it was transpired

when petitioners went and asked for a fresh Certificate of Ownership in order to develop the land.

As revealed before this court Weerakkody Wyneris Perera was not a co-owner of the premises

identified as No 11 Frazer Avenue Dehiwala at any time since 01.10.1989. However as observed

above, when the 5th Respondent submitted an incomplete application for a abstract of title, without a

proper plan, to a wrong assessment number, without having proper boundaries and with a different

extent of land, supported by a deed of transfer said to have attested 50 years ago, the 1st to 4th

Respondents have immediately register the said abstract under No 11 Frazer Avenue without giving

any opportunity or notification to the two Petitioners whose title has already being registered under

No 11 Frazer Avenue.

The subsequent conduct of the Respondents specially the 3rd Respondent, clearly establishes that the

above Respondents conduct was bias against the Petitioners, when he summoned only the 5th

Respondent and collected new material without giving any opportunity to the Petitioners to

challenge the said documents, in support of his earlier decision and thereafter written to the

Petitioners his decision not to delete the name of the 5th Respondent from the Assessment Register.

The extent to which the said Respondents conduct was prejudicial, as against the Petitioners were

clearly demonstrates, when the said Respondents have relied on the documents so collected at the

alleged inquiry said to have conducted on 02.01.2015 without notifying the Petitioners and made use

of them to justify their decision before this court by producing them marked as R8, R9, RIO and

R11.

i

1

II

f f IttIrI ii

tf fI! ! I

~ I!I

ft

~ fIr I

~ l , i I ,

,~ i , !t

11

Indian Supreme Court in the case of Canara Bank V. Debasisd Das (2003) 4 see 557 discussed the

main features of the principles of Natural Justice as follows,

"Concept of natural justice has undergone a great deal of change in recent years. Rules of natural

justice are not rules embodies always expressly in a statute or in rules framed there under. They may

be implied from the nature of the duty to be performed under a statute. What particular rule of

natural justice should be implied and what its context should be in a given case must depend to a

great extent on the facts and circumstances of that case, the frame- work of the statute under which

the enquiry is held. The old distinction between a judicial act and an administrative act has withered

away. The adherence to principles of natural justice as recognized by all civilized states is of

supreme importance when a quasi- judicial body embarks on determining disputes between the

parties, or any administrative action involving civil consequences is in issue. Even an administrative

order which involves civil consequences must be consistent with the rules of natural justice. The

expression "civil consequences" encompasses infraction of not merely property or personal rights

but of civil liberties material deprivations, and non-pecuniary damages. In its wide umbrella comes

everything that affects a citizen in his civil life. (Para 19)

Over the year by the process of judicial interpretation two rules have been evolved as representing

the principles of natural justice in judicial process, including therein quasi-judicial and

administrative process. They constitute the basic elements of a fair hearing having their roots in the

innate sense of man for fair play and justice which is not the preserve any particular race or country

but is shared in common by all men. The first rule is "nemo judex in causa sua" or nemo debt esse

judex in propria causa sua" that is, 'no man shall be a judge in his own cause'. The second rule is

"audi alteram partem", that is, "here the other side". A corollary has been deduced from the above

two rules and particularly the audi alteram partem rule, namely "qui aliqllid statllerit, parte inalldita

altera acqllllm licet dixerit, haud acqllum fecerit" that is. "he who shall decide anything without the

other side having been heard, although he may have said what is right, will not have been what is

12

right" or in other words, as it is now expressed, "justice should not only be done but should

manifestly be seen to be done." (Para 21)

In the case of A.K.Kraipak V. Union of India AIR 1970 SC 150 Indian Supreme Court held when

considering bias, that there must be a reasonable likely hood and in deciding in such question human

probabilities and ordinary cause of human conduct must be taken into consideration.

M.R. Mallick in his book title Writs Law and Practice observed the requirement of bias as, "As held

in S. Parthasarathy V. State of Andra Pradesh AIR 1973 SC 2701 it means a substantial possibility

of bias and the same may be made to appear not only from the materials as contained by the party

complaining but from such further facts as he might readily have ascertained and easily verified in

the course of inquiry. Therefore, the question whether a person is biased has to be determined on the

probability to be inferred from the circumstances by the court objectively or upon the basis of the

impression that might reasonably be left in the mind of the party aggrieved or the public at large."

(M.P. Mallick- Writs Law and Practice Second Edition 741)

When considering the circumstances under which the decision to include the name of Weerakkody

Wyneris Perera in the Assessment Register! Certificate of Ownership with regard to No 11 Frazer

Avenue Dehiwala was taken as discussed above, it is clear that the 1st to 4th Respondents above

named had acted in violation of the Rules of Natural Justice and was acted with bias against the

Petitioners above named.

In the said circumstances, I conclude that the Petitioners are entitled for the issuance of a mandate in

the nature of writ of Certiorari to quash the decision of the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and lor 4th Respondents or any

one or more of them (reflected in P-14) to insert the name Werakkody Wyneris Perera in the

Assessment Register/ Certificate of Ownership of the 1st Respondent Council as prayed in to

paragraph 'C' to the Petition.

13

I therefore issue a mandate in the nature of a writ of Certiorari quashing the decision ofthe 1st, 2nd,

3rd and!or 4th Respondents or anyone or more of them (reflected in P-14) to insert the name of

Werakkody Wyneris Perera in the Assessment Register! Certificate of Ownership of the 1st

Respondent Council as prayed in paragraph 'C' to the Petition.

In the said circumstances the necessity to issue a writ of Mandamus directing the said Respondents

to delete the name of Werakkody Wyneris Perera from the said Register will not arise and therefore

this court is not inclined to issue a writ of Mandamus as prayed in paragraph 'D' to the petition.

Application allowed with cost.

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL