CA PHC 37/2021

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made in

terms of Article 138 of the

Constitution read with Article 154P

(3) of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of

Sri Lanka.

Court of Appeal Lanka Caneries (PVT) LTD

Application No: No.25/75, Narahenpita Road,

CA (PHC) 0037/2021 Colombo-05.

COMPLAINANT

High Court of Colombo Vs

HCR 40/2021 T.D.Seneviratne

T.D. Distributors

MC Colombo No.16, Upper Dikson Road,

No. 28578/06 Galle.

ACCUSED

AND

Lanka Caneries (PVT) LTD

No.25/75, Narahenpita Road,

Colombo-05.

COMPLAINANT-PETITIONER

Vs

CA PHC 37/2021

2 | P a g e

T.D.Seneviratne

T.D. Distributors

No.16, Upper Dikson Road,

Galle.

ACCUSED-RESPONDENT

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo-12.

RESPONDENT

AND NOW BETWEEN

Lanka Caneries (PVT) LTD

No.25/75, Narahenpita Road,

Colombo-05.

COMPLAINANT-PETITIONER

-APPELLANT

Vs

T.D.Seneviratne

T.D. Distributors

No.16, Upper Dikson Road,

Galle.

ACCUSED-RESPONDENT

-RESPONDENT

CA PHC 37/2021

3 | P a g e

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo-12.

RESPONDENT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

P. Kumararatnam, J.

COUNSEL : Asthika Devendra with Aruna

Madhusanka for the Apppellant.

Shamal A. Collure with A.P.Jayaweera

and P.S. Amarasinghe for the Accused-

Respondent-Respondent

Kanishka Rajakaruna, SC for the

Respondent.

SUPPORTED ON : 31/07/2023.

DECIDED ON : 09/11/2023.

*****************************

CA PHC 37/2021

4 | P a g e

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

This matter evolved with a private plaint filed by the Complainant-

Petitioner-Appellant (Hereinafter referred to as the Appellant). The

Appellant filed a charge sheet and amended it before the trial being

commenced under Section 25(1) (b) of the Debt Recovery (Special

Provisions) Act No.02 of 1990 for issuing a cheque Bearing No. 051684

by the Accused-Respondent-Respondent (Hereinafter referred to the

Accused) from Account No.0010022270 of the DFCC Vardana Bank,

Galle branch for purchases done from the Appellants Company. When

the cheque was deposited in Appellants account maintained in the

Commercial Bank, the said cheque was dishonoured on 23.11.2012

with an endorsement Cheque not drawn in accordance with mandate

(60). Hence, the Appellant filed this private plaint in the Magistrate

Court of Colombo.

The prosecution led two witnesses and marked documents P1-14 and

closed the case. The Accused was arrested and produced before the

Court as he was evading the Court for a long time. At this juncture, the

Accused without calling witnesses and without even making a dock

statement, proposed a settlement on 18.11. 2018.According to the

settlement, the Accused agreed to pay the Appellant a sum of one

million (Rs.1000,000/-) in Rs.75000/- implements. When the first

instalment was due, the Accused again absconded the Court. As such,

the matter was fixed for judgment by the Learned Magistrate of

Colombo.

CA PHC 37/2021

5 | P a g e

By the judgment dated 05.03.2021, the Learned Magistrate acquitted

the Accused on the basis that the prosecution had not proved that the

cheque written by the Accused had fraudulent intention.

Being aggrieved by the judgment of the Magistrate, the Appellant

sought permission to appeal against the said judgment from the Hon.

Attorney General which had no response within the appealable time. As

such, the Appellant was compelled to file a revision application in the

Provincial High Court of Western Province Holden at Colombo to revise

the judgment of the Magistrate of Colombo. After support, the Learned

High Court Judge had dismissed the said application without issuing

notice to the Accused.

Now the Appellant filed this appeal to set aside the order of the Learned

High Court Judge of Western Province Holden at Colombo dated

12/07/2021.

The Appellant submitted following grounds of appeal:

1. The Learned High Court Judge and the Learned Magistrate had

failed to consider that the Act committed by the Accused (i.e.

issuing a cheque without placing the seal) is an offence falling

under the Section 25(1) (b) of the Debt Recovery Act.

2. The Learned High Court Judge and the Learned Magistrate had

failed to consider that issuing a cheque not drown accordance to

the mandate is sufficient for the guilt of the offence as it a strict

liability offence.

3. The Learned High Court Judge and the Learned Magistrate

erred in law and fact in holding that the prosecution has failed

to establish that the cheque in issue was not a cheque obtained

at the time the parties started their business.

CA PHC 37/2021

6 | P a g e

4. The Learned High Court Judge and the Learned Magistrate had

failed to consider that the suggestions made by the Accused

should not have any validity or only has trivial validity when

there was no evidence presented on the part of the Accused.

5. The Learned High Court Judge of Colombo had failed to issue

notice to the Accused at the first instance in the revision

application bearing No.HCRA 40/20 despite their being

sufficient law and factual circumstances to issue notice on the

Accused.

6. The Learned High Court Judge had misdirected himself when

failing to issue notice on the Accused despite having identified

that there was an error in law in the judgment of the Learned

Magistrate of Colombo.

Among the appeal grounds raised, the Appellant strenuously argued

that the decision of the Learned High Court Judge to not to issue notice

violates the maxim audi alteram partem. It is fundamental legal

principle in which each party is entitled to a fair hearing and given the

opportunity to respond to evidence against them.

In Commissioner of Police v. Tanes (1957-58) 68 CLR 383, the court

held that:

"It is a deep-rooted principle of the law that before anyone

can be punished or prejudiced in his person or his property

by any judicial or quasi-judicial procedure, he must be

afforded adequate opportunity of being heard ... "

In this case the Learned High Court Judge only considering the

judgment of the Magistrate Court of Colombo decided to dismiss the

revision application stating that that the Appellant had failed shock the

conscious of the Court.

CA PHC 37/2021

7 | P a g e

Although the Learned High Court Judge had admitted that there is a

legal error in the judgment of Learned Magistrate of Colombo, he totally

disregarded the same in considering the revision application filed by the

Appellant. The relevant portion of the judgment of the Learned

Magistrate is re-produced below:

Page 23-24 of the brief.

ta wkqj fuu fplam; ffkls; l%sh mmdh wkqj ,shd ksl=;a lr fkdue;s

fplam;la nj ;yjqre f' fuu kvqf ;a;slreg tfrys j meKs,a, iska

fpdaokd k`.d we;af;a" 1994 wxl 09 orK mk;ska ixfYda; 1990 wxl 02 orK

Kh wdmiq wh lr .ekSf (fYaI Odk) mkf;a " 25 (1) (wd) j.ka;sh hgf;a

jrola is lr we;s njg olajks' tlS mkf;a 25 (1) j.ka;sh hgf;a hful=g

tfrys j fplam;a w.re ms<sn`o fpdaokd f.dkq l< yelafla" wKlre iska f.

kj;d we; hk jeros inkaOfhka jk w;r fplam;la u;a j ,shd ksl=;a lr

fkdue;s wjia:djl Kh wdmiq whlr .ekSf mkf;a" 25 (1) (w) j.ka;sh hgf;a

hful= g tfrys j kvq mjrd th mj;ajdf.k hdf yelshdjla fkdue;'

Considering the above, the Learned High Court Judge had come to

following conclusion in his order.

Page 24 of the brief.

isoauh lreKq yd kS;suh lreKq ixikaokh lsrSf oS uq,a wjia:d wlrKh h

fodaIhlg ,la we;s nj f wkqj meyeos,s h' tlS lreKq wkqj m%Yak.;

ksfhda.fha kS;suh fodaIhla we;'

Hence, the Learned Counsel for the Appellant contended that although

the Learned High Court Judge had not come to a direct finding

regarding the legal error in the judgment of the Learned Magistrate, by

refusing notice it had to construe that the Learned High Court Judge

had agreed with the finding of the Learned Magistrate of Colombo.

CA PHC 37/2021

8 | P a g e

Considering the argument advanced by the Appellant that he was not

afforded a fair inquiry, I conclude that the Learned High Court Judge

should have inquired this matter by affording an opportunity to all

necessary parties to present their submissions before he could come to

a conclusion. As this caused great prejudice to the Appellant, I decide

to send this case back to the High Court of Colombo for re-hearing by

affording an opportunity to all necessary parties to present their

submissions.

Accordingly, I set aside the order of the Learned High Court Judge of

Colombo dated 12.07.2021 and send the case back to the High Court

for a fresh hearing on merits.

Therefore, this appeal is allowed.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send a copy of this order to the

High Court of Colombo.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

SAMPATH B. ABAYAKOON, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL