.'

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

CA (PHC) APN 65/2019

H.C. Balapitiya Case No:

Bail 3643/18

M. C Balapitiya

Case No: 7373

In the ffiiltter of an application for Revision

under and in terms of the Article 138 of the

Constitution read together with the Section

365 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act

No.15 of 1979 against the orders dated

12.09.2018 and 01.03.2019 of the refusing

bail by the Hon. High Court of Balapitiya.

Arumahandi Janith Madhusanka Alias

Podi Lesi.

No. 06,

Temple Road, Thelwattha.

(Currently incarcerated in the Prison of

Galle)

Suspect-Petitioner

1. The hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo 12.

2. The Officer in Charge

The Police Station - Batapola.

Respondent-Respondents

1

BEFORE

COUNSEL

DECIDED ON

Hon. Justice K.K. Wickremasinghe

Hon. Justice Devika Abeyratne

Neranjan Jayasinghe with I.B.S. Harshana for the

Suspect-Petitioner

Janaka Bandara SSC for the Hon. AG

14/07/2020

Hon. Justice K.K. Wickremasinghe

Learned Counsel appearing for the Suspect-Petitioner informs Court

that there is no evidence with regard to connection of the Suspect-Petitioner

for possession of Heroin 475 milligrams (net quantity) according to the

material available. Petitioner is in remand since 07/07/2018. Learned

Senior State Counsel informs Court that he concedes to the fact that there is

no evidence against the Appellant to charge him for the intended charge.

Considering the facts of the case, it is evident that there is no

available evidence to connect this Suspect-Petitioner to the intended charge.

The learned Senior State Counsel informs Court that there is no charge

framed against the Suspect-Petitioner and not even a 'B' report filed against

him. The present investigation does not reveal that the Suspect-Petitioner

has any bearing on the above mentioned case. Therefore, the learned Senior

State Counsel concedes to the Application made by the learned Counsel for

the Suspect Petitioner to enlarge him on bail.

Accordingly, this Court order that the Suspect Petitioner to be

enlarged on bail under following stringent Conditions:-

2

...

,.

1. A cash bail of Rupees One Lack (Rs. 100,000/-)

2. A surety bail of Rs. 1,000,000/= each with two sureties suitable

to the learned Magistrate.

3. Not to get involved himself with any other criminal activities or

to influence witnesses in cases.

4. The suspect-Petitioner must report to the Officer-in-Charge,

Police Station, Batapola, Ambalagoda once in two weeks

(Sundays) from 9.00 a.m. to 12.00 p.m.

5. The passport to be handed over to the Police Station Batapola,

Ambalangoda.

6. Immigration Authorities are ordered not to Issue a fresh

passport.

In case if the Suspect-Petitioner violates any above mentioned bail

conditions he will be incarcerated until this pending cases is

concluded.

Registrar IS directed to send a copy of the order to the Prison

Authorities, High Court of Balapitiya, Magistrate's Court of Balapitiya,

relevant Police Station Batapola, Ambalangoda and immigration

authorities.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Hon. Justice Devika Abeyratne

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

3