In the Court of Appeal of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

CA. 72/97 F

DC Kurunegala 4768 /L

P D Nimal Dharmasiri,

Kelaperanakanda, Weuda

Defendant-Appellant

Vs

W A Simion Peiris, No 5, Singhapura, Weuda

Plaintiff -Respondent

BEFORE: A.W.A.SALAM, J

COUNSEL: Kuwera de Soyza PC for the defendant-appellant.

Argument was IIxed for: 13.3. 2013

DECIDED ON: 11.06.2014

A.W.A.Salam, J

The plaintiff-respondent (who is referred to in the rest of this judgment

as the "plaintiff") filed action for a declaration of title and ejectment of

the defendant-appellant (who is referred to in the rest of this judgment

as the "defendant"). Admittedly, the corpus had been the subject of a

grant by the State in favour of the plaintiff under the Provisions of Act

No 43 of 1979.

i I I (

! I I!i

I

f,

rII

,

I i I

t!

The position of the plaintiff was that he was in possession of the corpus

for nearly 14 years from the year 1977 running a grocery and the

defendant on or about 11 November 1994 along with certain others

chased away the plaintiff and unlawfully entered the land, and took

over forcible possession thereof.

The defendant in his answer pleaded inter alia that the land which is

the subject matter of the action was owned by the Land Reform

Commission which was transferred to one R Premadasa. He further

pleaded that Lot No 18 of the land called IIukewalawatta was given to

him. Explaining the manner in which he came to possess the subject

matter of the action, the defendant stated that on an informal writing

he exchanged lot No 18 of the land called IIukewalawatta with the

subject matter of this action with R Premadasa on 2 January 1976 and

remains in the possession thereof. The informal writing by which the

defendant came into possession of the corpus was produced marked as

Pl. It is to be noted that by Pi the defendant has exchanged Lot 18 of

the land called IIukewalawatta with one G D Nimal Dharmadasa and not

with R Premadasa.

As opposed to the informal writing marked as Pi on the strength of

which the defendant claimed that he was in possession of the subject

matter of the action, the plaintiff relied heavily on the grant made by

His Excellency the President under the Land Grants (Special Provisions)

Act, No. 43 of 1979. In terms of Section 3 of the said Act the President

is empowered to transfer, by an instrument of disposition substantially

in the Form set out in the Schedule to the said Act.

) I

I! I ! f

~ 1I

~

t I f ( f i i \

~ ,

\

f [ i ,

The instrument by which the plaintiff has thus become entitled to

possess the subject matter has not been seriously contested by the

defendant. The only objection raised in this appeal against the

impugned judgment relates to the identity of the corpus. The

defendant contended that the village in which the subject matter is

situated has not been specified and therefore the plaint has not been

drawn in compliance of section 41 of the Civil Procedure Code. As has

been admitted by the defendant, in the plaint the land which is the

subject matter of the action has been referred to as being situated

within the Gramasevaka area No 652 in Mawathagama Pradheshiya

revenue officer's division. In addition, the plaintiff has also produced

the survey plan relating to the subject matter. Above all, the defendant

has never contested the identity of the corpus.

The learned district judge having examined the evidence adduced by

both parties had come to the conclusion that the plaintiff is entitled to

a declaration that she is the owner of the subject matter of the action

and is entitled to the possession thereof to the exclusion of the

defendant and all those holding under him. On a careful consideration

of the basis on which the learned district judge has come to the

conclusion, I find it difficult to disagree with the findings of the learned

district judge.

As a matter of fact, the position taken up by the plaintiff in the original

court that he became entitled to the land on Pi, has not been seriously

controverted by the defendant. In the circumstances, I see no reason

to interfere with the findings and the judgment of the learned district

! I I

J t

f , , I[ i I ! f

i ! ! !j

J J

I 'j

i ,

judge granting relief to the plaintiff. Hence, this appeal stands

dismissed subject to costs.

J~c4 ..

Judge of the Court of Appeal

TW/-