1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal No:

CA/HCC/0050/2020 Devage Thusitha Chamara alias Thilan

High Court of Colombo

Case No: HC/8171/2016

Accused-Appellant

vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

Complainant-Respondent

BEFORE : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

P. Kumararatnam, J.

COUNSEL : Kapila Waidyaratna, PC, with Nipuna

Jagodarachchi, Anoj Hettiarachchi and

Akkila Jayasundara for the Appellant.

Janaka Bandara, DSG for the Respondent.

2 | P a g e

ARGUED ON : 12/09/2022, 16/09/2022, 21/09/2022 22/09/2022. DECIDED ON : 01/11/2022

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred as the Appellant)

being aggrieved by the conviction and the sentence imposed on him on

18/06/2020 by the Learned High Court Judge of Colombo, preferred this

appeal to this Court well within time.

The Appellant was indicted by the Attorney General in the High Court of

Colombo under Sections 54A (b) and 54A (d) of the Poisons, Opium and

Dangerous Drugs Ordinance as amended by Act No.13 of 1984 for Trafficking

and Possession of respectively 274.68 grams of Heroin (Diacetylmorphine)

on 14th November 2013.

After trial, the Appellant was found guilty on both counts and the Learned

High Court Judge of Colombo has imposed a sentence of life imprisonment.

The Learned Presidents Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that

the Appellant has given consent to argue this matter in his absence due to

the Covid 19 pandemic. During the argument he was connected via Zoom

platform from prison.

3 | P a g e

The Learned Presidents Counsel, on behalf of the Appellant had raised

following appeal grounds.

1. That the conviction is contrary to law and against the weight of the

evidence led in the case.

2. The Learned Trial Judge has failed to appreciate and take into

consideration the unrealistic and improbable evidence of the

prosecution witnesses.

3. The Learned Trial Judge has failed to properly analyse and evaluate

the totality of evidence and thereby had prevented the Appellant a fair

trial.

4. The Learned Trial Judge had completely disregarded the inter se and

per se contradictions of the evidence of the two main prosecution

witnesses, thereby had erroneously misdirected himself.

5. The prosecution has placed inadmissible evidence acting on

confessionary statements allegedly made by the Appellant in violation

of the Section 25 of the Evidence Ordinance. Further had allowed the

prosecution to lead bad character evidence under Section 54 of the

Evidence Ordinance. The Learned Trial Judge acting on that evidence

had erroneously misdirected himself.

6. The Learned Trial Judge has failed to give due consideration on the

discrepancies in the inward journey of production from the point of

detection to the office of the Police Narcotics Bureau and from the

Police Narcotics Bureau to the office of the Government Analyst.

7. The Learned Trial Judge has misdirected himself by accepting the

prosecution evidence of the police officers version as true while

rejecting the defence version, despite the fact that there is a visible

conflict of evidence on the face of the record and thereby had failed to

apply his judicial mind to come to a finding that the prosecution has

proven its case beyond reasonable doubt.

8. The Learned Trial Judge has failed to give due consideration to the

defence including the evidence of the Appellant and his witnesses,

4 | P a g e

therefore the defence had been wrongly and improperly rejected.

Thereby the conviction is bad in law.

9. The Learned Trial Judge has misdirected himself in examining the

information book entries challenged by the defence while not providing

an opportunity to the defence to have access to the same. Thereby, the

Learned Trial Judge had deprived the Appellant of a fair trial.

10. The Learned Trial Judge had been prejudiced prior to the final

determination as he appeared to have arrived at a decision even before

a complete evaluation and analysis of the evidence. Thereby, the

Learned Trial Judge had denied the Appellant a fair trial guaranteed

by the Constitution.

At the trial, PW1 IP/Stanley Perera, PW2 SI/Udara Chaturanga, PW09

CI/Rajakaruna, PW11 Government Analyst, PW12 SI Gayan Rathnayake,

PW13 Prison Commissioner Pallegama, and PW14 CI/Jayantha were called

by the prosecution to give evidence on behalf of the prosecution. Further, the

prosecution had marked productions P1-P38. The Appellant had given

evidence from witness box and called nine witnesses on his behalf. The

prosecution had marked contradictions and documents PT-1 to PT-27 on the

defence witnesses.

Finally, the prosecution had called 08 witnesses in rebuttal.

Background of the case

According to PW1, he was the Officer-In-Charge of the Drugs Detection Unit-

02 of the Police Narcotics Bureau. On 20/06/2014, while he was engaged in

his usual daily official duties, PW2 SI/Udara had provided an information

about drug trafficking, conveyed to him by an informant. According to the

information a person called Thilan who involved in large scale drug

trafficking, was at his sisters place packeting heroin in kilos. The informant

had requested the officers from Narcotics Bureau to come to

Muththettuwegoda Road, Thalangama where the DSI Stores is situated. The

5 | P a g e

informant had assured that he would show off once the officers arrive at the

given location. Having perused the information of PW2, PW1 had given

instructions to his own team of Unit-02 to prepare for the raid. Having

selected eight officers had left the Bureau at about 10.35 hours after

completing all formalities. Six of them had travelled in a double cab of the

Bureau and two had followed them in a motor bike.

After arriving at the location, the informant was called to the location and he

had guided three officers to the house where the Appellant was expected to

be.

According to PW1, the house was located at a by-road, namely 5th Lane and

the distances was 400 meters from the place where they had met the

informant. The informant had left the place after showing the 3rd house on

the lane to them. PW1, PW2 and PW4 had entered the premises of the house

through a partly opened small gate and remained there until an inmate to

open the door. After about nearly two hours, a person identified as Mahesh,

who is the brother-in-law of the Appellant had opened the door and he was

promptly apprehended by the trio and inquired about Thilan as per the

information. As Mahesh had informed that the Appellant was in the upper

floor, PW1 and PW2 had rushed upstairs and entered into a partly opened

room. Upon entering the room, they had noticed a person who was seated in

front of a dressing table. On the dressing table they had observed three

cellophane covered parcels, an electronic scale and six more cellophane

covers. As one of the parcels was opened, PW1 had examined the substance

contained in the parcel. From its colour and the odour, he had decided that

the said parcel contained Heroin. The Appellant was arrested and the items

on the table were taken in to their custody including a vehicle key.

In the meantime, they had also observed a woman who was sleeping on a

bed and several others including the sister of the Appellant who was also

present in that house at that time. Their statements were recorded several

days after the arrest of the Appellant.

6 | P a g e

After the arrest, the Appellant was subjected to brief interrogation under the

custody of PW1 and PW2. As a result, PW1 had instructed the Appellant to

use his mobile phone to contact another person named Chaminda Dilruk

alias Paravi Sudu and directed the Appellant to request from Chaminda alias

Paravi Sudu to provide him with a quantity of Heroin. But this was not

materializing.

In the course of the same transaction, another person named Suranga was

arrested at Borella at about 20.00 hours for possession and trafficking of

Heroin. Both the Appellant and Suranga and the Heroin detected from them

were kept in the custody of the Police Narcotics Bureau officials until they

returned to the Bureau. Further a group of officers had gone in search of a

person named Sri Lal, who had escaped during the second raid.

As an extension of second raid, the officers had gone towards Colombo

Mortuary at Punchi Borella and recovered a three-wheeler which had been

abandoned there.

The raiding team had returned to the Police Narcotics Bureau at 1.50 hours

on the next day. The productions recovered from the Appellant were kept in

the custody of PW2 and he had handed over them to PW1 at the Police

Narcotics Bureau. Three parcels and the weighing machine which had been

put in to a black coloured Tulip Bag was taken into personal custody of PW1.

Productions had been sealed at the Police Narcotics Bureau using the seal

of PW2.

The Substances which were recovered during the raid were kept in the

personal locker of PW1 until it was handed over to the Police Narcotics

Bureaus production officer PW IP/Rajakaruna on 21/06/2014 at 15.20

hours, after 14 hours of the detection. Six empty cellophane covers and the

key of the vehicle recovered at the time of arrest of the Appellant were handed

over to reserve police officer, PW PS/27706 Kumarasinghe at the Police

Narcotics Bureau.

7 | P a g e

PW2 SI/Udara had corroborated the evidence given by PW1 Stanley.

The productions alleged to have been recovered from the Appellant and

another person had been sent together in one parcel to the Government

Analyst. According to the Government Analysts Report the total weight of

pure Heroin (diacetylmorphine) detected from the brown coloured powder

was 933.15 Grams.

Before closing, the prosecution also led the evidence of PW13, Pallegama, the

Former Commissioner General of Prisons, PW SI/Gayan attached to Airport

Terrorist Investigation Division Unit and PW CI/ Dharmakeerthi attached to

the Colombo Crime Division.

When the prosecution had closed the case after leading the prosecution

witnesses mentioned above, the defence was called and the Appellant had

given evidence from the witness box and called nine witnesses for his defence

and marked 18 documents. The Appellant had admitted the arrest by officers

of the Police Narcotics Bureau on 20/06/2014, but categorically denies

recovering Heroin from his possession as claimed by the prosecution.

Considering the grounds of appeal advanced by the Appellant, I regard it

appropriate to consider the fifth ground of appeal first.

The Learned Presidents Counsel under fifth ground of appeal, strenuously

argued that the inadmissible confessionary items of evidence had been

allowed to creep into the proceedings thereby prejudicing the mind of the

Trial Judge.

In terms Section 25 of the Evidence Ordinance, confessions made to a police

officer is irrelevant and inadmissible. Hence, if an accused has made a

confessionary statement in the course of the police investigations and where

such statement is recorded under Section 110 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act, there is an absolute restriction to use such confession as

evidence at the trial.

8 | P a g e

Section 25 of the Evidence Ordinance states:

25(1) No confession made to a police officer shall be proved as against a

person accused of any offence.

In R v. Martin Singho 66 NLR 391 the court held that:

Any evidence, which, if accepted, would lead to the inference that the

accused made a confession to a police officer is inadmissible.

Similarly, in Queen v. Ramasamy 64 NLR 433 the court held that:

(1) That the statement I am prepared to point out the place where the

gun and the cartridges are buried came within the prohibition in section

122(3) of the Criminal Procedure Code and should not have admitted in

evidence.

Further, in Queen v. Sumanatissa Thero (1962) 61 CLW 97 it was held

that:

It is illegal to use statements made by an accused in the course of an

investigation for any purposes other than those provided in section

122(3) [corresponding section to the current section 110(3)] and such a

statement would only become relevant for the purpose of impeaching a

credit of the witness.

In this case, PW1 admitted that a confessionary statement was made by the

Appellant while he was under their custody. The Appellant had admitted that

a person called Chaminda Dilruk alias Paravi Sudu is the supplier of Heroin

to him. The relevant portions of the evidence of PW1 are re-produced below:

(Page 1339 of the brief.)

m% ( oeka fjk;a lsis kS;s frda fohla f.a we;=f,a keye lsjg miafia Tn m%Odk

jeg,S ks,Odrshd yehg B,`.g fudllao .;hq;= mshjr yehg ;SrKh lf<a @

9 | P a g e

W ( bkamiq fuu fyfrdahska ;s,dka hk whg ,efnk ud.h fudllao lsh,d

;s,dkaf.ka m%Yak l<d'

m% ( m%Yak lsrSfoS pQos;f.ka fudlla yrs wkdjrKh jqKdo @

W ( tfyuhs'

m% ( fudllao wkdjrKh jqfka @

W ( jkd; m%foaYfha mosx pkao os,arela fyj;a mfr iq iska Tyqg fuu nvq

,ndfok nj lshd ishd'

(Pages 1340-1341 of the brief.)

m% ( wOHlaIl;=udg oekq oS,d B,`.g fudlla Tn .;a; ls%hdud.h @

W ( bkamiq ;s,dka hk wh oekq oSula l<d kej; thdf.a nvq wjika fj,d ;sfhkjd

lsh,d rl:k weu;=ula wrka kej; nvq b,a,kak lsh,d oekq oSula l<d

iajdkS'

m% ( meyeos,s keye' oeka Tn wOHlaIl;=udg lsjd fojk jeg,Sulg hkjd lsh,d @

W ( tfyuhs'

m% ( tfyu lsjg miafia Tn fudlla B,`.g .;a; ls%hdud.h @

W ( ;s,dkaf.ka m%Yak l<d'

m% ( m%Yak lsrSf oS fudlla o uy;auhg wkdjrKh jqfKa @

W ( jkd; m%foaYfha oS mosx pkao os,arela fyj;a mfr iq iska ;uhs f nvq

,ndfokafka lsh,d'

10 | P a g e

(Page 1341 of the brief.)

m% ( ta jeg,Su ixOdkfha mshjrla yehg uy;auhd uq,skau .;a; ls%hdud.h

fudllao @

W ( ;s,dka hk whg oekq kakd mfr iqg rl:k weu;=ula ,nd .kak lsh,d

iajdkS'

m% ( fudllao lsh,o Tn f ;a;slreg rl:k weu;=u .kak lsf @

W ( Tyqf.a nvq wjika fj,d ;sfhkjd lsh,d kej; nvq b,a,kka lsh,d'

m% ( nvq lsh,d lshkafka fudkdo @

W ( fyfrdahska'

(Page 1342 of the brief.)

m% ( fudllao wkdjrKh jqfKa @

W ( yrs u,a,s yjia fjkfldg ;uhs fokak fjkafka' jef fi lr,d flda,a tlla

fokak lsh,d lsjd'

m% ( ljqo tfyu lsj @

W ( mfr iq hk wh'

m% ( ldgo lsf @

W ( ;s,dka hk whg'

(Page 1343-1344 of the brief.)

W ( u,a,s ? y; wg fjkfldg ;uhs nvq l fokak fjkfka lshd' fjko tk

fld,a,u ;uhs tkafka u,a,s' Thd tkafka fjko tk iq cSma tflkao @

m% ( Thd tkafka fjko tk cSma tflkao" Th l ;a;sldrhg lsf ljqo @

W ( mfr iq iska'

11 | P a g e

m% ( ;a;sldrhdg tfyu lsjg miafia ;a;sldrhf.a m%;spdrh jqfKa fudllao @

W ( ;s,dka th ia:r l,d'

The above cited portions of evidence given by PW1 clearly indicate that the

Appellant had made confessionary statement to assist PW1 to continue his

detection.

The Learned High Court Judge in his judgment at para 25 stated that after

the arrest and under interrogation, the Appellant had revealed that he

receives Heroin from Chaminda Dilruk alias Paravi Sudu.

Although in paragraph 26 of his judgement the Learned High Court Judge

had stated that he completely disregards this confessionary evidence from

his findings, he had stated that information which had been received about

Paravi Sudu by PW1 had been corroborated in the evidence given by PW2.

(Paragraph 38 of the judgment. Page 2396 of the brief.)

bkamiqj mfr iq hk wh ms<sn`o f;dr;=rla oekf.k .;a mshjr inkaOj me'id'1 f.a

idlaIs ;yjqre lrka me' id' 2 o idlaIs oS ;sf'

In the same ground, the Learned Presidents Counsel contended that the

Learned High Court Judge had allowed the prosecution to lead bad character

evidence under Section 54 of the Evidence Ordinance thereby acting on those

evidence and had erroneously misdirected himself.

Section 54 of the Evidence Ordinance states:

In criminal proceedings the fact that the accused person has a bad

character is irrelevant, unless evidence has been given that he has a good

character, in which case it becomes relevant.

12 | P a g e

Explanation 1.- This section does not apply to cases in which the bad

character of any person is itself a fact in issue.

Explanation 2.- A previous conviction is relevant as evidence of bad

character in such case.

As a result, the fact that the person charged is of good character is always

relevant in criminal proceedings. However, the fact that he has a bad

character is generally irrelevant. Hence, the prosecution should be mindful

not to lead character evidence of the accused, unless evidence has been given

that he has a good character. The trial judge also has a responsibility to

ensure that bad character evidence of the accused does not creep into the

court proceedings.

In R.G.Moses v. The Queen 75 NLR 121 the Court held:

that the conviction of the Appellant must be quashed on the ground

that the evidence of the previous conviction, which was inadmissible

according to Section 54 of the Evidence Ordinance, had been taken into

account in the trial judges judgment and was in a high degree

prejudicial to the Appellant. In such a case the substantial question is

whether or not the accused has been deprived a fair trial.

In L.C. Fernando v. The Republic of Sri Lanka 79(II) NLR 313 the court

held (Wijesundera, J. dissenting) that:

(a) that the evidence of T was both irrelevant and inadmissible and in

view of the express prohibition against the admission of such evidence

in section 54 of the Evidence Ordinance and its highly prejudicial nature,

such evidence should have been excluded by the trial judge; the

improper reception of such evidence had resulted in the accuseds

chance of having a fair trial being prejudiced and in a failure of justice.

13 | P a g e

In Makin v. Attorney General for New South Wales [1894] A.C 57 Lord

Herschell held that:

It is not competent for the prosecution to adduce evidence tending to

show that the accused had been guilty of criminal acts other than those

covered by the indictment, for the purpose of leading to the conclusion

that he is likely, from his criminal conduct or character to have

committed the offence, for which he is tried.

The prosecution had called PW13, Pallegama, former Commissioner General

of Prisons, PW12, SI/Rathnayake attached to the Airport Terrorists

Investigation Unit and PW14, CI/Dharmakeerthi of Colombo Crime Division

to place evidence pertaining to the escape of the Appellant while he was

placed in prison hospital and in remand custody.

Upon a complaint to the Inspector General of Police by PW13, an

investigation was conducted and the Appellant was arrested at the

Bandaranayake International Airport by PW12, while he tried to escape the

country providing a false name.

This evidence, with no doubt, clearly indicates that the prosecution had

placed bad character evidence, whereas, the Appellant had not presented

good character evidence. Leading this evidence, accidently or purposefully,

the prosecution had paved the way for the character evidence to creep into

the proceedings. Ironically, the Learned High Court Judge had considered

this evidence in his judgment under paragraphs 33,34 and 35 of the

judgment. Thus, the Appellant had been denied a fair trial.

The Learned High Court Judge, before he could analyse the entire evidence

presented by both parties, relying on the evidence given by PW1 and PW2,

concluded at paragraph 43 of the judgment that the arrest and recovery of

Heroin from the Appellant could be accepted beyond reasonable doubt. This

approach of the Learned High Court Judge clearly demonstrates that he had

14 | P a g e

been greatly influenced by the confessionary statement and the bad

character evidence which had creeped into the court proceedings. The

prosecution should not have led evidence which contained confessionary

statement and bad character evidence of the Appellant. This leads to a denial

of a fair trial.

In the case of Shiv Kumar v. Hukam Chand and Anr [1999] 7 SCC 104 the

court observed that:

The expected attitude of the Public Prosecutor while conducting

prosecution must be couched in fairness not only to the Court and to the

investigating agencies but to the accused as well. If an accused is

entitled to any legitimate benefit during trial the Public Prosecutor should

not scuttle/conceal it. On the contrary, it is the duty of the Public

Prosecutor to winch it to the force and make it available to the accused.

Even if the defence counsel overlooked it, Public Prosecutor has the

added responsibility to bring it to the notice of the Court if it comes to his

knowledge

Hence, I conclude this ground of appeal has merit.

Next, I take into account the sixth ground of appeal of the Appellant. The

Learned Presidents Counsel contends that the Learned Trial Judge has

failed to give due consideration on the discrepancies in the inward journey

of production from the point of detection to the office of the Police Narcotics

Bureau and from the Police Narcotics Bureau to the office of the Government

Analyst.

Chain of custody issues are very important in cases involving drugs. To prove

chain of custody, the prosecution must present cogent testimonial and

documentary evidence to establish that the items presented is the same item

that had been recovered from the possession of an accused person.

15 | P a g e

The defence can challenge the chain of custody evidence by questioning

whether the evidence presented at trial is the same evidence as what was

collected from an accused person. If there is any discrepancy in the chain of

custody of a production and the prosecution is unable to prove who had the

custody of production until it reached the analyst, the chain of custody

stands broken.

The Appellant takes up the position that the amount of Heroin which had

been mentioned in the indictment was not recovered from him. The said

amount was recovered from another person and he was implicated in this

case due to an existing dispute between him and the police. He had

complained to Geneva Human Rights Commission regarding an attempt to

shoot him by officers of the Police Narcotic Bureau.

According to PW1, the Heroin recovered from the Appellant at his sisters

place was kept in his custody before he went for the second raid. He admitted

that the Heroin recovered from the Appellant was not sealed but was put in

to a Black Coloured Tulip bag. Further, he admitted that he was aware,

according to C 73 of Police Departmental Orders, that recovered productions

should be sealed as soon as possible. But he had not done so, as the team

failed to take sealing equipment when they left the Police Narcotic Bureau.

But he had taken the field test equipment in a Tulip bag. This Tulip bag was

used to put the three parcels of Heroin allegedly recovered allegedly from the

Appellant.

PW1, went on to say that the tulip bag which contained the Heroin recovered

from the Appellant was given to PW2, when he got down from the Appellants

vehicle to conduct the second raid.

After the second raid, PW1 was in possessing of the Heroin which was

recovered from another person and brought to the Police Narcotic Bureau in

the same vehicle. On both occasions the productions recovered from the

Appellant and the other person were not sealed until it reached the Police

16 | P a g e

Narcotic Bureau. After weighing the productions, the parcels recovered from

the Appellant and the person had been handed over to PW9.

The chain of custody is the most important of evidence in a drug related trial.

The prosecution has a paramount duty to prove that it is the same

production recovered at the time of detection. The main reason is to establish

that the evidence which is related to the alleged crime, was collected from

the accused and was in its original condition rather than having been

tempered with or planted deceitfully to make someone else guilty. Handling

of production evidence is a lengthy process but the court need it for the

adjudication of the case. This proves the integrity of production which had

been recovered and it reach to the Government Analyst Department.

In the Attorney-General v. Rawther 25 NLR 385, Ennis, J. states thus: [1987] 1 SLR 155

"The evidence must establish the guilt of the accused, not his

innocence. His innocence is presumed in law, from the start of the

case, and his guilt must be established beyond a reasonable

doubt.

In the case of Mohamed Nimnaz v. Attorney General CA/95/94 decided

on 24/05/1995 the court held that:

A prosecutor should take pains to ensure that the chain of events

pertaining to the productions that had been taken charge from the

Appellant from the time it was taken into custody to the time it reaches

the Government Analyst and comes back to the court should be

established.

17 | P a g e

In Witharana Doli Nona v. The Republic of Sri Lanka CA/19/99 His

Lordship Justice de Abrew remarked thus:

It is a recognized principle that in drug related cases the prosecution

must prove the chain relating to the inward journey. The purpose of this

principle is to establish that the productions have not been tampered

with. Prosecution must prove that the productions taken from the

accused Appellant was examined by the Government Analyst

The above cited judgments clearly shows that the inward journey in a drug

related matter plays a major role. The onus is on the prosecution to prove

that the inward journey was not disturbed until it reached the Analysts

Department.

According to PW1, after the arrest of the Appellant, he had taken the three

cellophane bags with illegal substance into his custody. Thereafter, acting

upon the information through the confessionary statement of the Appellant,

the team had gone for the second raid. Before he could go for the second

raid, he had put the three parcels recovered from the Appellant in to a tulip

bag in which they had brought the field test kit for the raid. As they had not

brought sealing equipment, the productions alleged to have recovered from

the Appellant were not sealed at that time. The relevant portion is re-

produced below:

(Page 1496 of the brief.)

m% ( ;uqka ;djld,sl uqdjlaj;a fhdokak woyia lf kE @

W ( ;djld,sl uqd fhf keye' ksjiska msg;a jk wjia:df kvq NdKav iqrlaIs;j

;nd .ekSu i`oyd lafIa;% mrSlaIK lg,h wrka .sh hq,sma nE.a tfla kvq

NdKav odf.k ;uhs wrka .sfha'

It also noteworthy to mention that the alleged Heroin recovered from the

second person was also not sealed at that time. The relevant portion of

evidence given by PW1 is re-produced below:

18 | P a g e

(Page 1499 of the brief.)

m% ( oeka wks;a iellre ika;lfha ;s,d fudk yrs w;a wvx.=jg .;a;o @

W ( 2 jk iellre ika;lfha ;s,d fyfrdhska w;a wvx.=jg .;a;d'

m% ( oeka fojk iellre ika;lfha ;s ;uqka m%ldY lrk mrsos w;a wvx.=jg .kakd

,o lsisjla ;uqka uqd lsrSug ls%hd lf kE @

W ( keye'

PW1 further admitted that the Heroin recovered from the second accused

was also kept in his custody without sealing. After the raid the team had

spent considerable time and reached the Police Narcotic Bureau at 1.30 a.m.

on the following day.

According to PW2, he had the custody of the tulip bag until it had been

handed over to PW1 at the Police Narcotics Bureau. Thereafter the sealing

process had taken place. The productions pertaining to this case were sealed

using personal seal of PW2, as the personal seal of PW1 was gone missing.

The alleged productions had been recovered from the Appellant were sealed

at the Police Narcotics Bureau and was entered as T1, T2 and T3 under PR

No.136/14.

The Heroin purportedly discovered in the second raid had been marked as

S01 and S02.

Further the Heroin alleged to have recovered from the Appellant and the

second person had been sent to the Government Analyst Department under

same Magistrate Court No. MC/Kaduwella-B/7574/14. The Government

Analyst also considered and issued the results in one report which had been

marked as P37 in the trial.

The Appellant giving evidence from the witness box admitted that he was

arrested by officers from Police Narcotics Bureau on 20/06/2014 at his

19 | P a g e

sisters place. He vehemently denies being in possession of any dangerous

drugs as claimed by the PNB officers in their evidence. His position was that

a case has been fabricated against him due to an animosity he had with

police officers previously. Though the PNB officers said that a warrant had

been issued against him by the Magistrate Court of Maligawatte, he was not

shown any of such warrant. But he was produced in the Magistrate Court

Kaduwela instead of MC Maligawatte.

According to PW1, after the arrest of the Appellant the Heroin said to have

been recovered from the Appellant was put in to a black coloured tulip bag,

which had been used to carry field test equipment. This said to be the

demarcation of the production from the second raid, as no temporary sealing

was taken place. Hence, the tulip bag plays an important role with regard to

the integrity of the productions recovered from the Appellant. In the evidence

of both PW1 and PW2 failed to mention as to what happened to the tulip bag.

It was not being sent to Government Analyst either.

This creates a serious doubt as two raids were conducted one after the other.

In a situation of this nature demarcation of the production is very much

important as the Appellant had taken up the position that this is a fabricated

case against him. Had the prosecution produced the tulip bag along with the

substance recovered from the Appellant, that evidence would certainly have

strengthened the prosecutions case. This missing link created a serious

doubt on the prosecution case.

It is the duty of the prosecution to prove that proper sealing of the seized

articles and complete elimination of tempering with such articles during its

retention by the officers of the Police Narcotics Bureau. In absence of such

evidence, a reasonable doubt would arise as to the reliability of the

production. In this case no plausible evidence led by the prosecution as to

why the tulip bag was not produced in the trial. I consider, this as a serious

shortcoming from the prosecutions case which certainly strengthens the

defence case. Hence, I consider this ground has merit too.

20 | P a g e

Following that, I would further consider the 9th ground of appeal advanced

by the Appellant. In the said ground of appeal, the Appellant contends that

the Learned Trial Judge has misdirected himself in examining the

information book entries challenged by the defence while not providing an

opportunity to the defence to have access to the same. Thereby, the Learned

Trial Judge had deprived the Appellant of a fair trial.

The Learned Trial Judge in his judgment at paragraphs 11.0 and 12.0 has

stated that he examined the Police Information Book to verify certain issues

raised by the defence with regards to entry and exist time of the police

personnel. Despite the fact the Learned High Court Judge indicated that he

chose to read the Police Information Book to do the justice to the Appellant,

he had strengthened the police evidence without allowing the defence to see

the Police Information Book. The relevant portions are re-produced below:

(Pages 2382-2383 of the brief.)

11'0 me'id' 1 f.a idlaIs wkqj msgf igyk 21.06.2014 osk IIB f;dr;=re fmdf;a msgq

wxl 389 ys 178 jk fofhka fh nj mjihs' Tyqf.a idlaIsh wkqj meKSf igyk

fhdod we;af;a" tosk msgq wxl 389 ys u 176 jk fofhah' msgf igyk meKSf igykg

miq fohl i`oyka h fkdyels ksid fuh wi;H igyka fhoSula o tfia ke;ak jeroSula

o hkak mrSlaId lrka hqla;sh bgq lsrSf ldh i`oyd wlrKh iska IIB f;dr;=re

fmdf;a tu igyk mrSlaId lrk ,oS'

12'0 ... fuu kvqf o igyka ta wdldrfhka fhdod ;sf k th jeg,Sf

i;H;djh ms<sn`oj .egjla u;= lrk neka fYaIfhka ;a;slreg hqla;sh bgq lsrSu

msKsi tlS igyk mrSlaId lrk ,oS' ta wkqj wlrKhg meyeos,sj fmkS .sfha meh 10(25

g fhdod we;s msgf igyk 21.06.2014 osk IIB f;dr;=re fmdf;a 389 hk msgqfjys 175

hk fofha igyka lr we;s njhs' 175 jk foh fjkqjg 178 jYfhka idlaIs igyka j,

we;af;a" idlaIslreg jeroSula ksid fkdj" h;=re ,shkh lrk ,o wlrKfha ks,OdrsKshg

isjQ jeroSula ksid nj b;d meyeos,sh' Bg fya;=j 175 foh hkak" uelSula fyda lsis

fjkia lsrSula fkdue;sj meyeos,sj IIB f;dr;=re fmdf;a igykaj we;s neks' ta wkqj

21 | P a g e

msgf igyk 175 jk fofha;a wdmiq meKSf igyk 176 jk fofha;a igyka we;s

nj fmkS hhs' tneka igyka fhoSf lsis .egjla ke;'

In Paulis Appu v. Don Davit 32 NLR 335, the court held that:

The use of Information Book for the purpose of arriving at a decision

was irregular.

In K.A.Shantha Udayalal v. The Attorney General SC. Spl. LA. No.

57/2017 decided on 30/01/2018 Sisira De Abrew, J. held that:

In the present case, it is very clear that the Learned High Court Judge

has used the police statement, non-summary evidence and inquest

evidence which were not properly admitted in evidence. I therefore hold

that the decision of the Learned High Court judge to peruse the said

documents was wrong and contrary to law.

Hence, it is quite clear that perusal of the Information Book without

awarding an opportunity to the defence is wrong and contrary to law. Hence,

this ground also has merit.

Further In the 10th ground of appeal, the Appellant claims that the Learned

Trial Judge was biased before to the final finding since he appeared to have

made a decision without conducting a thorough review and analysis of the

facts. Thereby, the Learned Trial Judge had denied the Appellant a fair trial

guaranteed by the Constitution.

The concept of fair trial is a fundamental principle in every judicial system.

In another sense, the notion of a fair trial secures justice. A trial in criminal

jurisprudence is a judicial examination or determination of the issues at the

hand of the Court to arrive at a conclusion whether the accused is guilty of

the offence or not.

22 | P a g e

The single most important criterion in evaluating the fairness of a trial is the

observance of the principle of equality of arms between the defence and the

prosecution. Equality of arms, which must be observed throughout the trial,

means that both parties are treated in a manner ensuring their procedurally

equal position during the course of a trial.

In this case as stated earlier, the Learned Trial Judge had come to a

conclusion that the evidence given by PW1 and PW2 could be accepted as

true regarding the raid conducted in respect of the Appellant before

considering other evidence adduced by the prosecution and the Appellant

and his witnesses. This clearly shows that the Learned High Court Judge

has been highly influenced on the inadmissible or prejudicial evidence led by

the prosecution. Although the Learned High Court Judge mentioned in his

judgment that he had disregarded the inadmissible or prejudicial evidence

in deciding this case, it has not been properly reflected in his judgment.

Hence, this ground also has merit.

As the pleaded grounds of appeal above have merits which certainly disturb

the judgment of the learned High Court Judge, it is not necessary to address

the remaining grounds in this appeal.

Therefore, I now consider whether this is an appropriate case to send for a

re-trial.

In this case, the prosecution has failed to establish the custody of the

production chain beyond reasonable doubt. As this is a substantial fact, this

ground alone is sufficient to vitiate the conviction in this case. Even though

this case is sent for re-trial, the prosecution will not be able to rectify in the

breaking of chain of custody.

23 | P a g e

In Asrappulige Neel Rohan Gomes v. The Attorney General

CA/276/2007 decided on 03/04/2013, the court held that:

. But the court cannot use its discretion in the interest of justice in

this case. In the event this case is sent back for fresh trial, the court is

encouraging slackness on the part of the investigation and the

prosecution. The court is not only allowing the prosecution to fill gaps in

the prosecution case it is also encouraging the investigators to do now

and what he should have done at the time of the investigation. It is a

bad precedent, and unfair by the accused.

Due to the aforesaid reasons, I set aside the conviction and the sentence

dated 18/06/2020 imposed on the Appellant by the learned High Court

Judge of Colombo. Therefore, I acquit him from both charges.

Accordingly, the appeal is allowed.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send a copy of this judgment to the

High Court of Colombo along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

SAMPATH B. ABAYAKOON, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL