==== BLOCKS ==== 

CPA/0104/25

Page 1 of 13

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for

Revision under and in terms of Article

138 and 154()(4)(1) of the

Constitution of the Republic of Sri

Lanka read with High Courts of

Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No.

19 of 1990 and Section 753 of the

Civil Procedure Code.

1. Imbulpe Heen Mudiyanselage

Wasantha Kumara,

No. 288, Dewalayagawa,

Ratnapura.

Petitioner

Vs.

1. Dilini Dharmadhasa,

Cooperative Commissioner/Registrar,

Department of Co-operative

Development,

Sabaragamuwa Provincial Council,

New Town, Ratnapura.

1A. Nishantha Saman Kumara,

Cooperative Commissioner/Registrar,

Court of Appeal Case No: CPA/0104/25 High Court of Ratnapura Case No. WA 11/2022

CPA/0104/25

Page 2 of 13

Department of Co-operative

Development, Sabaragamuwa

Provincial Council,

New Town, Ratnapura.

Substituted 1st Respondent

2. Co-operative Society Limited,

No. 656,

New Town, Ratnapura.

3. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondents

AND NOW

Imbulpe Heen Mudiyanselage

Wasantha Kumara,

No. 288, Dewalayagawa, Ratnapura.

Petitioner-Petitioner

Vs.

1. Dilini Dharmadhasa,

Cooperative Commissioner/Registrar,

Department of Co-operative

Development,

Sabaragamuwa Provincial Council,

New Town, Ratnapura.

CPA/0104/25

Page 3 of 13

1A. Nishantha Saman Kumara,

Cooperative Commissioner/Registrar,

Department of Co-operative

Development, Sabaragamuwa

Provincial Council,

New Town, Ratnapura.

Substituted 1st Respondent

2. M/S Multipurpose Co-operative

Society Limited,

No. 656,

New Town, Ratnapura.

3. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondents-Respondents

Before : D. THOTAWATTA, J.

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Counsel : T. Palliyaguruge instructed by Isuru

Nanayakkara for the Petitioner-Petitioner.

Pulina Jayasuriya, SC for the 1st and 3rd

Respondents-Respondents.

Shantha Jayawardana and Maithri

Amarasinghe for the 2nd Respondent-

Respondent.

CPA/0104/25

Page 4 of 13

Argued on : 11.05.2026

Written Submissions

of the Petitioner-Petitioner

tendered on : Not tendered

Written Submissions

of the Substituted 1st Respondent

-Respondentand the 3rd Respondent

-Respondent tendered on : Not tendered

Written Submissions

of the 2nd Respondent-Respondent

tendered on : 23.03.2026

Decided on : 17.07.2026

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Instant application in revision arises from an order dated 26.09.2023, made by

the learned High Court Judge of the Sabaragamuwa Province holden at

Ratnapura in the exercise of the writ jurisdiction vested in it by Article 154P(4)

of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

When this matter came on before us on 09.03.2026, for support of the

application for notice, the learned State Counsel for the Substituted-1st

Respondent-Respondent and 3rd Respondent-Respondent had indicated to Court

that he would be taking up a preliminary objection with regard to the

maintainability of the instant application in revision.

CPA/0104/25

Page 5 of 13

This Court heard all the Counsel on the Preliminary Objection and reserved the

order for today.

The preliminary objection is mainly, twofold, namely;

a) Petitioner-Petitioner is guilty of laches;

b) Petition does not disclose exceptional circumstances.

Let me now, deal with them separately.

a) Petitioner-Petitioner is guilty of laches;

The Petitioner-Petitioner (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the Petitioner’)

seeks in the instant application in revision preferred to this Court by him on

07.11.2025 to invoke the extra-ordinary revisionary jurisdiction vested in this

Court by Article 138 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of

Sri Lanka (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the Constitution’) to revise and

set aside the order dated 26.09.2023 made by the High Court Judge of the

Sabaragamuwa Province holden at Ratnapura (hereinafter called and referred to

as ‘the HC order’).

Hence, it clearly, and unequivocally, appears without an iota of doubt that the

Petitioner had thus, sought to invoke the extra-ordinary revisionary jurisdiction

of this Court to revise and set aside the HC order after a lapse of 2 years, 1 month

and 12 days since the pronouncement of the HC order.

In the circumstances, there had been a long and inordinate delay for invocation

of the extra-ordinary revisionary jurisdiction of this Court by the Petitioner.

However, upon a careful perusal of the averments in the petition filed before this

Court by the Petitioner in its totality, it becomes abundantly, clear that not an

iota of reason had been adduced by the Petitioner therein, for such a long and

inordinate delay for invocation of the extra-ordinary revisionary jurisdiction of

this Court by the Petitioner.

CPA/0104/25

Page 6 of 13

However, upon a careful scrutiny of the averments contained in paragraphs 32,

33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38 and 39 of the petition of the Petitioner taken in conjunction

with prayer ‘D’ and ‘E’ of the petition in particular, it becomes abundantly, clear

that the sole objective intended to be achieved by the Petitioner in the instant

application in revision is only, to secure a stay order, staying the execution of

the Arbitral Award granted in favour of the Respondents-Respondents

(hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the Respondents’) against him by the

Arbitrator.

Hence, it becomes abundantly, clear without any doubt that there has been an

inordinate delay for invocation of the extra-ordinary revisionary jurisdiction of

this Court by the Petitioner to revise and set aside the HC order.

However, it is to be observed that the Petitioner had not even made a single

attempt to reasonably, explain the long and inordinate delay for invocation of the

extra-ordinary revisionary jurisdiction of this Court to revise and set aside the

HC order firstly, in the petition or secondly, in the oral submissions made before

this Court opposing the preliminary legal objections so raised by the learned

State Counsel.

It was held by this Court in CA/CPA/0080/2019 Decided on 16.02.2024 that,

“Besides, the Petitioner has invoked the revisionary jurisdiction of this

Court after 9 months from the date of the impugned Order of the High

Court. The delay is not explained to the satisfaction of this Court.

It is settled law that the Petitioner should invoke the revisionary

jurisdiction of this Court within a reasonable time from the date of the

impugned Judgment. What constitutes a reasonable time is a question of

fact to be determined on the facts and circumstances of each individual

case. In essence, the party seeking revision shall come to Court without

CPA/0104/25

Page 7 of 13

undue delay. If there is a delay, it has to be explained in the Petition. In

the instant Application, the delay is not explained.”

As observed by me elsewhere in this order that the Petitioner had invoked the

extra-ordinary revisionary jurisdiction of this Court to revise and set aside the

HC order after the lapse of 2 years, 1 month and 12 days since the

pronouncement of the HC order. However, such a long and inordinate delay has

not in any manner, been explained to the satisfaction of this Court by the

Petitioner.

I would therefore, hold that the Petitioner is guilty of laches.

In the circumstances, I would hold that the preliminary objection a) enumerated

above, is entitled to succeed both in fact and law. Therefore, it is upheld.

Hence, the instant application in revision ought to be dismissed on this Ground

alone.

b) Petition does not disclose exceptional circumstances.

It may now, be examined.

Petitioner himself concedes that appeal had been preferred to this Court by him

from the impugned order which clearly, and unequivocally, shows that he had

availed himself of the effective, efficacious and expeditious alternative remedy

against the order sought to be impugned by him in the instant application in

revision.

It is in this context, let me now, examine the law governing the invocation of the

extra-ordinary revisionary jurisdiction vested in this Court by Article 138 of the

Constitution in instances where an effective, efficacious and expeditious

alternative remedy against the order sought to be impugned will lie.

The extra-ordinary revisionary jurisdiction was exclusively, vested with the Court

of Appeal before the enactment of the 13th Amendment to the Constitution of the

CPA/0104/25

Page 8 of 13

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. However, after the enactment of the

13th Amendment to the Constitution, the revisionary jurisdiction is now, vested

with the High Court of the Province concurrently, with the Court of Appeal.

After an exhaustive analysis of all the authorities on this, it was held in Rustom

vs. Hapangama & Company (1978-79) 2 SLR 225, that “the powers by way of

revision conferred on the Appellate Court are wide and can be exercised whether

an appeal has been taken against an order of the original Court or not. However,

such powers would be exercised only in exceptional circumstances where

an appeal lay and as to what such exceptional circumstances are dependent

on the facts of each case”. [emphasis is mine]

Court in Rustom vs. Hapangama & Co (Supra) further observed in the following

manner; “The trend of authority clearly, indicates that where the revisionary

powers of the Court of Appeal are invoked, the practice has been that these

powers will be exercised if there is an alternative remedy available, only if the

existence of special circumstances are urged necessitating the indulgence of this

Court to exercise its powers in revision.”

It was further observed by Court in the decision in Rustom Vs. Hapangama &

Company(Supra) that, “This Court has the power to act in revision even though

the appeal is available, in appropriate cases. The question which has now to be

decided is whether the instant case is an appropriate case in which we should

exercise our discretionary powers of revision. In his petition and affidavit the

petitioner has not set out the reasons for his seeking this method of rectification

of the order rather than the ordinary method of appeal. Nor has he set out any

exceptional circumstances as to why we should grant him the indulgence of

exercising our revisionary powers when he could have appealed against the order

with leave”.

It was held by Court in Dharmaratne and Another Vs. Palm Paradise Cabanas

Ltd and Others 2003 (3) SLR 24 at page 30 that “Thus, the existence of

exceptional circumstances is the process by which the Court selects the cases in

CPA/0104/25

Page 9 of 13

respect of which this extra-ordinary method of rectification should be adopted.

If such a selection process is not there, revisionary jurisdiction of this Court will

become a gateway for every litigant to make a second appeal in the grab of a

revision application or to make an appeal in situations where the legislature has

not given right of appeal. The practice of Court to insist on the existence of

exceptional circumstances for the exercise of revisionary powers has taken deep

root in our law and has got hardened into a rule which should not be lightly

disturbed. The words used by the legislature do not indicate that it ever intended

to interfere with this ‘rule of practice’.”

It was held in Urban Development Authority vs. Ceylon Entertainments Ltd.

and another reported in 2002 [B.L.R] at page 66 that “the petitioner who

invokes the revisionary jurisdiction of this Court should expressly set out the

exceptional circumstances and an express pleading to that effect is a sine quo

non, for this Court to consider the relief claimed by the petitioner. In the absence

of an express plea, this Court would be precluded from considering the relief

claimed in the application”.

Let me now, quote a passage from the decision in Perera v. Muthalib 45 NLR

412 “I would invite attention to the observations made by Wood-Renton J. in the

King v. Nordeen. He said; I do not think that that power (i.e. , revisionary power)

is at all limited to those cases in which either no appeal lies or for some reason

or other an appeal has not been taken”, but he went on to add that this power

would be exercised only when a strong case is made out “amounting to a positive

miscarriage of justice in regard to either the law, or the judge’s appreciation of

the facts. In the case I am dealing with I should have felt compelled to give relief

solely on the ground that what may well be said to be a failure of justice has

been brought to the notice of this Court, and technical rules must make way for

the granting of redress in such a case. There has been a violation of the

fundamental rule of judicial procedure that a person sought to be affected by an

order shall first be heard. But, in this instance there is yet another ground upon

CPA/0104/25

Page 10 of 13

which this application for revision ought to be exercised and that is that the

petitioner had no knowledge of the order made against him till the time for

preferring an appeal had elapsed.”

In the case of Attorney-General v. Podi Singho 51 NLR 385 it was held that

“even though the revisionary powers should not be exercised in cases when there

is an appeal and was not taken, the revisionary powers should be exercised only

in exceptional circumstances such as (a) miscarriage of justice (b) where a strong

case for interference by the Supreme Court is made out or (c) where the applicant

was unaware of the order.” Court also observes that “the Supreme Court in

exercising its powers of revision is not hampered by technical rules of pleading

and procedure.”

In Bank of Ceylon vs Kaleel and others 2004 [1] SLR 284, at page 287 it was

stated that, “In the circumstances this Court will not interfere by way of revision

when the law has given the plaintiff an alternate remedy and when the plaintiff

has not shown the existence of exceptional circumstances warranting the

exercise of revisionary jurisdiction. In any event, for this Court to exercise

revisionary jurisdiction the order challenged must have occasioned a failure of

justice and be manifestly erroneous which go beyond an error or defect or

irregularity that an ordinary person would instantly react to it. In other words

the order complained of is of such a nature which would have shocked the

conscience of Court.”

In Thilagaratnam Vs. E.A.P. Edirisingha 1982 [1] SLR, P56, it was observed

that “though the Appellate Courts' powers to act in revision were wide and would

be exercised whether an appeal has been taken against the order of the original

court or not, such powers would be exercised only in exceptional circumstances.

There were no exceptional circumstances in this case to justify the exercise of

the Court's powers of revision.”

In Cadaman Pulle Vs. Ceylon Paper Sacks Ltd 2001 [3] SLR, P112, it was held

that “no exceptional circumstances are disclosed why his application for

CPA/0104/25

Page 11 of 13

revisionary relief should be entertained after the lapse of nearly two years. The

existence of exceptional circumstances is a pre-condition for the exercise of the

powers of revision.”

The Supreme Court, in the case of Rasheed Ali Vs. Mohamed Ali 1981 [1] SLR,

P262, held that, “the powers of revision vested in the Court of Appeal are very

wide and the Court can in a fit case exercise that power whether or not an appeal

lies. Where the law does not give a right of appeal and makes the order final, the

Court of Appeal may nevertheless exercise its powers of revision, but it should

do so only in exceptional circumstances. Ordinarily, the Court will not interfere

by way of review, particularly when the law has expressly given an aggrieved

party an alternate remedy such as the right to file a separate action except when

non-interference will cause a denial of justice or irremediable

harm…………………… The fact that a Judge's order is merely wrong is not a

sufficient ground for exercising the powers of revision.”

The Supreme Court in AG. Vs. Najimudeen-SC Appeal No. 62/2016-SC Minute

of 13-03-2020 observed that, “the Defendant has had an alternative remedy

available. In the instant case, what the Provincial High Court was called upon to

exercise was its revisionary jurisdiction. The Defendant has not been successful

in convincing Court that the grounds he had urged have any exceptional

character which is sufficient to move Court to exercise its discretionary

revisionary power. Thus, this Court has no reason to disagree with the

conclusion of the Provincial High Court that there are no exceptional

circumstances to invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court. In these

circumstances and for the foregoing reasons, the appeal is dismissed without

costs.”

In Geethani Nilushika Vs. Waruni Harshika-SC Appeal No. 93/2017-SC

Minute of 18.06.2021 Court observed that; “Revision is a discretionary

remedy. A party cannot invoke this extraordinary jurisdiction of the

Appellate Court as of right. When a right of appeal is available against a

CPA/0104/25

Page 12 of 13

Judgment or an Order, a party seeking to come before Court by way of

revision shall explain in the petition why he did not exercise his right of

appeal. In the revision application filed before the High Court there was no

such explanation at all.” [Emphasis is mine]

In the case of Seylan bank Vs. Thangaveil 2004 [2] SLR, 101 wherein Court

held that, “no revision lies. The petitioner has not resorted to his statutory right

of appeal with leave of court. He has not set out in his petition for revision any

exceptional circumstances.”

See also; Hotel Galaxy (Pvt) Ltd Vs. Mercantile Hotels Management Ltd.

1978 (1) SLR 05, Janita Vs. Abeysekara (Sri skantha Law Report Vol iv Page

22), and Thilagaratnam Vs. Edirisinghe 1982 (1) SLR 56.

In the light of the principle laid down by Court in the aforesaid decisions, an

Appellate Court can exercise its revisionary jurisdiction conferred on the

Appellate Court only and only, in exceptional circumstances, where an

alternative remedy lay. [emphasis is mine]

A careful perusal of the averments in the petition of the Petitioner in its totality,

clearly, shows that no exceptional circumstances whatsoever, had been

disclosed by the Petitioner to show why he had sought to adopt this extra-

ordinary method of rectification in revision of the HC order.

Instead, upon a careful scrutiny of the averments contained in paragraphs 32,

33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38 and 39 of the petition of the Petitioner taken in conjunction

with prayer ‘D’ and ‘E’ of the petition in particular, it becomes abundantly, clear

that the sole objective intended to be achieved by the Petitioner in the instant

application in revision is only, to secure a stay order, staying the execution of

the Arbitral Award granted in favour of the Respondents against him by the

Arbitrator.

Hence, it becomes abundantly, clear without any doubt that the sole objective of

the instant application in revision is only, to secure a stay order, staying the

CPA/0104/25

Page 13 of 13

execution of the Arbitral Award granted in favour of the Respondents against

him by the Arbitrator which clearly, shows that the Petitioner had thereby,

sought to abuse the extra-ordinary revisionary jurisdiction of this Court.

In the circumstances, I would hold that the preliminary objection b) enumerated

above, too, is entitled to succeed both in fact and law. Therefore, it is upheld.

Hence, I would refuse to invoke the extra-ordinary revisionary jurisdiction vested

in this Court to revise and set aside the HC order.

In the result, I would proceed to dismiss the instant application in revision with

costs fixed at Rs. 10,000/- each payable by the Petitioner to the 1st and 2nd

Respondents only.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL