IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Lenadora Sarananda Thero,

No.2, Buddhist College of

Education,

Thennekumbura.

Now at:

Pothgul Raja Maha Viharaya,

Siyambalagoda,

Danture,

Kandy.

Petitioner-Petitioner-Appellant

CA CASE NO: CA (PHC) 120/2015

HC KANDY CASE NO: HC/RA/6/2013

MC KANDY CASE NO: 46692/2012

Vs.

1. Galketiwala Nandarathana Thero,

Sri Suvisuddharamaya,

Gurudeniya.

2. Theripeha Ghanarathana Thero,

Sri Suvisuddharamaya,

Gurudeniya.

Respondent-respondent-

Respondents

2

Before: K.K. Wickramasinghe, J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Upul Ranjan Hewage for the Appellant.

W.D. Weerarathna for the Respondents.

Decided on: 05.11.2019

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The petitioner and the two respondents are Buddhist monks.

The dispute relates to a temple.

The petitioner filed this action on 26.01.2012 in the Magistrates

Court of Kandy against the 1st and 2nd respondents in terms of

section 66(1)(b) of the Primary Courts Procedure Act seeking to

prohibit the alleged disturbances which were being made to his

exclusive possession of the temple by the two respondents and

to confirm his possession.

The 1st respondent, at paragraph 8 of his affidavit dated

12.07.2012, filed in response to the above, whilst tendering

marked 1V15 the electoral list relevant to the temple stated to

Court that, not only the petitioner, but also several other priests

are living in this temple under him. That paragraph reads as

follows:

.

3

(2010 1 15

.)1

In 1V15, the names of all three parties (i.e. the petitioner and

the two respondents) are there2.

The 2nd respondent in his affidavit dated 26.07.2012 has

confirmed what has been stated by the 1st respondent.

The title to the temple or the Viharadhipathyship of the temple is

irrelevant to these proceedings.

Both parties have tendered a large number of documents to

prove possession. I think there is necessity to scrutinise those

documents in view of the above admission made by the 1st

respondent.

After the inquiry concluded by way of written submissions, the

learned Magistrate in his order dated 20.12.2012 has refused

the facts stated in the plaint on the ground that they have not

been established and decided to give possession of the property

to the 1st and 2nd respondents. It reads as follows:

.

1 2

1 Vide page 186 of the brief. 2 Vide page 235 of the brief.

4

01 02

.3

This conclusion, in my view, is not specific and vague.

It is this order, which has been affirmed by the High Court by

order dated 15.08.2015.

The petitioner has filed this revision application against the

Judgment of the High Court.

It is not clear under which subsection of section 68 the learned

Magistrate made the impugned order in favour of the

respondents. In my view, it is crucial as different principles

apply when the decision is based on section 68(1) read with

subsection 68(2), and when the decision is based on section

68(3).

By reading the above conclusion of the learned Magistrate it

appears to me that the learned Magistrate has acted under

section 68(3) when granting reliefs to the respondents as he has

decided to give possession of the property to the 1st and 2nd

respondents. If the said respondents were already in

possession, there was no reason for the learned Magistrate to

give or place them in possession.

But, it was never the position of the respondents that they were

forcibly ejected by the petitioner within two months immediately

prior to the filing of the case in Court for them to be restored in

possession. It is in such a situation, the learned Magistrate

3 Vide the conclusion in last four paragraphs of the Magistrates Court order at pages 176-177 of the brief.

5

could have made the above order in terms of section 68(3) of the

Act.

If I may repeat, the position of the respondents was that the

petitioner was living or staying in the temple under or with the

leave and licence of the 1st respondent, and all of them are in

possession of the temple and the petitioner does not have

exclusive possession to it.

On the other hand, it is clear from the reliefs sought by the

petitioner that his reliefs are based on section 68(1) read with

68(2) as he is seeking to prohibit disturbances to his possession

and to confirm his possession.

But the learned Magistrate without exactly stating what he does,

has refused the facts stated in the plaint on the ground that

they have not been established. I cannot understand how he

says that in the teeth of the admission made by the respondents

themselves that the petitioner was living in the temple with

other priests under the 1st respondent Viharadhipathy.

There is no doubt that the petitioner was in possession of the

temple on the date of filing the action. The doubt is whether he

had exclusive possession of the temple. By taking into

consideration all the facts and circumstances of this case, it is

clear that the petitioner did not have exclusive possession, and

the respondents also had possession of the temple.

Hence I hold that the petitioner and the two respondents are

entitled to possess the temple until the substantive rights of the

parties are decided by a civil court.

6

The respondents never attempted to evict the petitioner from the

temple until the case was filed in Court. It is not clear whether

the petitioner has now been ejected from the temple after the

filing of the case. If he has been so ejected, the learned

Magistrate shall direct the Fiscal to restore the petitioner also in

possession of the temple together with the two respondents.

It is practically not possible to give directions to the parties on

how to maintain common possession.

The Court expects that the 1st respondent, who appears to be

the senior priest and claims to be the Viharadhipathi of the

temple, will act responsibly and in an exemplary manner to the

layman.

In that process, I must mention that the counsel for both parties

also have a heavy responsibility. They also shall, as far as

possible, assist the parties to amicably settle the matter, until

the substantive matter is decided by a civil court.

If again there will be a breach of the peace, the learned

Magistrate shall take steps to prevent it by taking appropriate

action, however harsh it may be, irrespective of the fact that

they are reverend Buddhist monks. The counsel for both parties

shall explain this to the parties in no uncertain terms.

I set aside the order of the Magistrates Court and the Judgment

of the High Court which affirmed it.

The relief sought by the petitioner in the Magistrates Court to

have exclusive possession of the temple shall stand rejected

subject to the above condition that the petitioner and the two

respondents can possess the temple in common.

7

Appeal is allowed. No costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal K.K. Wickremasinghe, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal