1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

CA (PHC) 13/2013 M.C. Case No. 41901111 H.C. Case No 138/11

In the matter of an application to revise the Order of HCRA 138/2001 under Section 154 of the Provincial High Court Act of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Ceylon Electricity Board, No. 50, Sir Chittampalam A. Gardiner Mawatha, Colombo 02.

Plaintiff

VS.

Satharasinghe Kamkanamage Nelson Sathyapala, No. 02 B, C.E.B. Quarters, National Housing Scheme, Aruppala, Mahanuwara.

Defendant

AND BETWEEN

Satharasinghe Kamkanamage Nelson Sathyapala, No. 02 B, C.E.B. Quarters, National Housing Scheme, Aruppala, Mahanuwara.

Defendant-Petitioner

VS.

BEFORE

COUNSEL

Argued on Written submissions filed on Decided on

2

Ceylon Electricity Board, No. 50, Sir Chittampalam A. Gardiner Mawatha, Colombo 02.

Plaintiff-Respondent

Satharasinghe Kamkanamage Nelson Sathyapala, No. 02 B, C.E.B. Quarters, National Housing Scheme, Aruppala, Mahanuwara.

Defendant-Petitioner-Appellant

vs.

Ceylon Electricity Board No.50, Sir Chittampalam A. Gardiner Mawatha, Colombo 02.

Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent

W.M.M. Malinie Gunaratne, J. and P.R. Walgama J.

C.E. de Silva with Sarath Walgamage for the Appellant. S.T.M.H. Gunasinghe for the Respondent.

11.06.2015

21.07.2015 and 28.07.2015 29.01.2016

3

Malinie Gunaratne, J.

The Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent acting under Section 6 of the

Government Quarters (Recovery of Possession) Act No.7 of 1969 (Amended

by Government Quarters Recovery of Possession Amendment Act No.8 of

1981 and Act No.45 of 1985), instituted proceedings in the Magistrate's

Court of Kandy under M.C. Case No. 41901111, on 24.08.2011 praying for

the recovery of possession of Government Quarters situated at No. 2 B,

Aruppala National Housing Scheme, Kandy and for the ejectment of the

Defendant - Petitioner - Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Appellant)

and his dependants from the said quarters.

The Respondent, Competent Authority for the purposes of the

Government Quarters (Recovery of Possession) Act, No. 7 of 1979 as

amended served a notice on the Appellant requiring him to vacate the

premises occupied by him and to deliver vacant possession to them. Section

3 of the Act empowers the Competent Authority to serve a notice to quit on

the occupier of the Government Quarters.

After he was served with summons the Appellant appeared before the

Magistrate's Court on 02.12.2011. The learned Magistrate upon being

satisfied with the documents filed by the Respondent before Court and

acting in compliance with Section 7 of the said Act made Order dated 2nd

December 2011 ejecting the Appellant from the subject quarters.

Being aggrieved by the said Order, the Appellant had preferred a

Revision Application to the High Court of Kandy. The learned High Court

Judge of Kandy, after having heard and considered the submissions of

Counsel for the respective parties, dismissed the Revision Application.

f

f

i

f

!,

iiII

t

I

I ,

l I

I

4

The Appellant has filed this case before this Court seeking the

intervention of this Court to set aside the Order of the learned High Court

Judge and the Order of the learned Magistrate, stating that the Order of both

Courts are against the law and justice.

In the course of the hearing of this case, the main point that was

argued by the learned Counsel for the Appellant was, that the Respondent

cannot be identified as a "Competent Authority" for the purpose of the

Government Quarters (Recovery of Possession) Act. However it is relevant

to note that this fact has not been raised in the High Court. The Petition of

Appeal also do not contain any material to substantiate it.

In the written submissions filed by the Counsel for the Appellant, it

was contended that in the Affidavit filed by the Respondent, the Chairman

Professor Wimaladarma Abeywickrama, has introduced himself as the

person stating facts in the said affidavit. The said Chairman states that this

action had been instituted by the Plaintiff against the Defendant. Further he

contended, therefore that this action had been instituted by the "Ceylon

Electricity Board" who had no jurisdiction to institute this action. The

learned Counsel's contention is, therefore, the learned Magistrate has no

jurisdiction to entertain the said application.

I hold that there is no merit whatsoever in the submissions made by

the learned Counsel. His argument is untenable in view of the definition

given to the words "Competent Authority" by the Government Quarters

(Recovery of Possession) Act. One Wimaladarma Abeywickrema as the

Chairman of the Ceylon Electricity Board has initiated the proceedings in

the Magistrate's Court. The words "Competent Authority" has been

I

II

!IIiIjI

IIIi

~

5

defined in the Government Quarters (Recovery of Possession) Act. In

addition Section 9: 1 of the Chapter XIX of the Establishment Code also has

defined the words "Competent Authority". In view of the provisions of the

Government Quarters Act and the Establishment Code the Respondent of

this case can be identified as a "Competent Authority" for the purposes of

the Government Quarters (Recovery of Possession) Act.

The second ground on which the Appellant relied on was (according

to the written submissions filed in this Court), as there was no valid affidavit

before the learned Magistrate, the learned Magistrate could not have

proceeded to make the said order dated 02.12.2011, on the basis of a valid

application for ejectment. It is the stance of the learned Counsel for the

Appellant, that the said Affidavit is filed by a Buddhist and the jurat does not

state that the said author of the Affidavit has affirmed before signing. In

supporting the contention the learned Counsel has cited several authorities.

However, it is the contention of the learned Counsel for the

Respondent, that the mere technicalities of an affidavit do not amount to a

total dismissal of the action, if there is no substantial prejudice to maintain

this action. The learned Counsel in support of the above submissions has

referred to a recent judgment by Lordship Justice Aluvihare 14.09.2015, in

Case No. SCIFCCAlLAI02114. Apart from that the learned Counsel has

cited a number of cases to strengthen his submission.

The learned Counsel has relied strongly on the judgment of His

Lordship Aluvihare. It was held in that case, the infirmities and

irregularities in an Affidavit are technical in nature that can be cured by

6

application of Section 9 and therefore do not impact on the validity of the

Affidavit.

When I consider the long line of cases cited by the Counsel for the

Respondent, the only conclusion that could be arrived at is that the

infirmities and irregularities in an Affidavit are technical and can be cured.

As such, I am of the view that there is no merit in the submission made by

the learned Counsel, although he has sought to impress upon Court that the

Respondent had not filed a valid Affidavit along with the application. I hold

that the irregularity is not sufficiently grave to have an effect on the validity

of the impugned affidavit. Hence I am of the view that the application filed

in the Magistrate's Court of Kandy, by the Respondent is in conformity with

the provisions of the Government Quarters (Recovery of Possession) Act.

I will now proceed to deal with the next issue raised by the learned

Counsel for the Appellant. He has contended that in the application to the

Magistrate's Court, as the Respondent has given a caption to the application,

it is a procedural error according to the schedule of the Government Quarters

(Recovery of Possession) Act.

The stance of the learned Counsel for the Respondent is, merely

because of giving the caption the substance of the nature of the main case ) does not change. I have no difficulty in upholding the contention of the

Counsel for the Respondent and I am of the view, that there is no merit

whatsoever in the submissions made by the learned Counsel for the

Appellant since it has not caused any substantial prejudice to maintain the

action.

7

The next ground that arises for consideration in this Appeal is whether

the Appellant was not given an opportunity to show cause and as such, was

he denied a fair hearing. However, the learned Counsel for the Appellant

has not placed any material before this Court regarding this aspect.

However, it is relevant to note, in view of the prOVISIons of the

Government Quarters (Recovery of Possession) Act, that every application

for ejectment should be conclusive evidence of the facts as set out therein.

In the case of RE. Vs. D.S.E.P.R. Senanayake 75 N.L.R. 215, it was held

that the Government Quarters (Recovery of Possession) Act makes provision

for the issue of Writ upon an exparte Application and in the first instance

upon an application the Magistrate has no option but to make an order for

the issue of the Writ.

It was held in RE Senanayake, when an application for ejectment in

respect of any Government Quarters is made exparte in regular and proper

form under the Government Quarters (Recovery of Possession) Act, the

Magistrate has, in the first instance, no option but to issue Writ of possession

forthwith in terms of Section 7 of the Act.

Hence, I am of the view that the Government Quarters (Recovery of

Possession) Act does not provide any mechanism to grant an opportunity to

show cause before the Magistrate after filing an application under Section 6

of the Government Quarters (Recovery of Possession) Act.

F or the reasons aforesaid, the view of the Court is, reasons set out by

the Appellant do not find any matters which are legally relevant to the

question of ejectment.

,

i

I

I

!I

I

I I

! I!

~

~ I !fII

8

For the reasons set out above I hold that the learned Magistrate's

Order for ejecting the Appellant is correct and as such there is no reason to

set aside the said Order. I hold the view that the learned Magistrate had

correctly made the Order for ejectment. Therefore, it is not necessary to

interfere with the judgment of the learned High Court Judge who affirmed

the Order of the learned Magistrate. Accordingly, no ground exists which

justifies the intervention of this Court to set aside the Order of the learned

High Court Judge dated 22.01.2013 and the Order of the learned Magistrate

dated 02.12.2011.

F or the above reasons I hold that there is no merit in this Appeal and

dismiss it.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

P.R. Walgama, J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Appeal is dismissed.

1

!

!I!!!IIII! III!II! !!