Page 1 of 9

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

Ven. Ethkandure Sumanasara Thero No. 218, Sri Shailaramaya, Hokandara North, Arangala.

Petitioner

Vs.

1. Buddhist and Pali University of Sri

Lanka Gurulugomi Mawatha, Pitipana North, Homagama. 2. Ven. Kotugoda Dhammawasa

Mahanayake Thero Chancellor, Buddhist and Pali University of Sri Lanka, Gurulugomi Mawatha, Pitipana North, Homagama.

3. Prof. Ven. Neluwe Sumanawansa

Thero Vice Chancellor, Chairman, University Council, Buddhist and Pali University of Sri Lanka, Gurulugomi Mawatha, Pitipana North, Homagama. 4. Prof. Samantha Illangakoon

Member, University Council, Buddhist and Pali University of Sri Lanka, Gurulugomi Mawatha, Pitipana North, Homagama.

In the matter of an Application, mandated in the nature of Writs of Certiorari, Prohibition and Mandamus under and in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

CA/WRIT/118/2021

Page 2 of 9

5. Prof. Ven. Moragolloagama

Uparathana Thero Member, University Council, Buddhist and Pali University of Sri Lanka, Gurulugomi Mawatha, Pitipana North, Homagama. 6. Assistant Prof. Ven. Lenagala

Sirinivasa Thero Member, University Council, Buddhist and Pali University of Sri Lanka, Gurulugomi Mawatha, Pitipana North, Homagama.

7. Snr. Prof. Ven. Uthuravala

Dharmarathana Thero Member, University Council, Buddhist and Pali University of Sri Lanka, Gurulugomi Mawatha, Pitipana North, Homagama.

8. Snr. Prof. Ven. Ilukevala

Dhammarathana Thero Member, University Council, Buddhist and Pali University of Sri Lanka, Gurulugomi Mawatha, Pitipana North, Homagama. 9. T. N. Hettiarachchi

Member, University Council, Buddhist and Pali University of Sri Lanka, Gurulugomi Mawatha, Pitipana North, Homagama. 10. Rajakeeya Panditha Most Ven.

Thirikunamle Ananda Thero Member, University Council, Buddhist and Pali University of Sri Lanka, Gurulugomi Mawatha, Pitipana North, Homagama.

Page 3 of 9

11. Prof. Kapila Gunawardena

Member, University Council, Buddhist and Pali University of Sri Lanka, Gurulugomi Mawatha, Pitipana North, Homagama. 12. Prof. Ven. Niyangoda Vijithasiri Thero

Member, University Council, Buddhist and Pali University of Sri Lanka, Gurulugomi Mawatha, Pitipana North, Homagama. 13. Dr. Ven. Bellanwila Dhammarathana

Member, University Council, Buddhist and Pali University of Sri Lanka, Gurulugomi Mawatha, Pitipana North, Homagama.

14. Snr. Prof. Ven. Indhuranghare

Dhammarathana Thero Member, University Council, Buddhist and Pali University of Sri Lanka, Gurulugomi Mawatha, Pitipana North, Homagama. 15. Snr. Prof. Wimal Wijeratne

Member, University Council, Buddhist and Pali University of Sri Lanka, Gurulugomi Mawatha, Pitipana North, Homagama. 16. Snr. Prof. Uditha Gurusinghe

Member, University Council, Buddhist and Pali University of Sri Lanka, Gurulugomi Mawatha, Pitipana North, Homagama. 17. Kalyananda Thiranagama

Attorney-at-Law Member, University Council, Buddhist and Pali University of Sri Lanka, Gurulugomi Mawatha, Pitipana North, Homagama.

Page 4 of 9

18. Prashantha Lal de Alwis

Presidents Counsel, Member, University Council, Buddhist and Pali University of Sri Lanka, Gurulugomi Mawatha, Pitipana North, Homagama. 19. R. A Piyaratne

Secretary, University Council, Buddhist and Pali University of Sri Lanka, Gurulugomi Mawatha, Pitipana North, Homagama. 20. University Grants Commission

No. 20, Ward Place, Colombo 07. 21. Snr. Prof. Sampath Amaratunga

Chairman, University Grants Commission, No. 20, Ward Place, Colombo 07. 22. Snr. Prof. Janitha A. Liyanage

Vice Chairperson, University Grants Commission, No. 20, Ward Place, Colombo 07. 23. Prof. Rev. Kollupitiye Mahinda

Sangharakkitha Thero Member, 24. Snr. Prof. A. K. W. Jayawardane

Member, 25. Prof. Vasanthy Arasaratnam

Member, 26. Prof. Premakumara de Silva

Member, 27. Palitha Kumarasinghe, PC

Member,

Page 5 of 9

28. R. H. W. A. Kumarasiri

Member, 22nd to 27th Respondents are Members of the University Grants Commission, No. 20, Ward Place, Colombo 07. 29. Dr. Priyantha Premakumara

Secretary, University Grants Commission, No. 20, Ward Place, Colombo 07. 30. Prof. K. Kapila C. K. Perera

Secretary, Ministry of Education, Isurupaya, Battaramulla. 31. Prof. G. L. Peiris

Hon. Minster of Education, Ministry of Education, Isurupaya, Battaramulla. 32. Vijitha Berugoda

Hon. State Minister of Dhamma Schools, Bhikku Education, Pirivena and Buddhist Universities, Ministry of Education, Isurupaya, Battaramulla. 33. Hon. Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department, Hulftsdorp Street, Colombo 12.

Respondents Before : Sobhitha Rajakaruna J.

Dhammika Ganepola J.

Page 6 of 9

Counsel : Sanjeewa Jayawaradane PC with Ridmi Beneragama for the Petitioner.

S. Wimalasena, DSG with Medhaka Fernando, SC for the 1st to 19th and

30th Respondents.

Argued on : 13.12.2022

Decided on : 03.02.2023

Sobhitha Rajakaruna J.

The Petitioner is primarily seeking for mandates in the nature of writs of Certiorari

quashing the decisions of the Respondents to suspend the services of the Petitioner from

his post of lecturer in Sanskrit at the 1st Respondent-Buddhist and Pali University

(University) by and through the letters dated 30.09.2020 and 08.10.2020, marked P32a

and P33, respectively. As per the said letter P33, the payment of salary also has been

suspended with effect from 02.10.2020.

It is admitted that after the suspension of services, a formal disciplinary inquiry has

commenced against the Petitioner based on the charge sheet dated 15.10.2020, marked

P35. Although, the Petitioner argues that the charges contained in the said charge sheet

are pernicious and ill-motivated and made up of the most trivial and baseless allegations,

I am of the view that such issues should be first dealt with at the disciplinary inquiry which

is currently in progress. I am aware that the Establishments Code of the Government of

Sri Lanka has no application to the staff of the University but I need to refer to its Clause

14:1 (of the Chapter XLVIII) which stipulates that the statement of charges need not take

a legalistic form and all that is required is a clear and simple statement of the facts or

omissions for which it is intended to punish the officer. Thus, I see no reason to examine

such charges at this stage as there is no ex-facie illegality or unlawfulness involved in

issuing the said charge sheet.

Page 7 of 9

The question that needs consideration of this Court is whether the suspension of the

services and the payment of salary of the Petitioner are rational. The contention of the

Petitioner is that the said temporary suspension is inter alia ultra vires, unreasonable and

irrational as it has been done without any hearing and giving reasons.

Based on the circumstances of this case, I take the view that it is fit and proper to be guided

by the rationale adopted in some provisions of the University Establishment Code (Code)

in order to determine the issues of this case. I must draw my attention to Chapter XXII of

the Code which deals with disciplinary procedure. The Section 18 of Chapter XXII

illustrates rule on Interdiction and Compulsory Leave.

18:1 Where it is considered undesirable that a person employed in a Higher

Educational institution should continue to exercise the functions of his office,

he may forthwith be interdicted from office by the Chairman of the Commission

or the Principal Executive Officer of the Higher Educational institution

provided that:

a) disciplinary proceedings or criminal proceedings have been or are about to

be instated on charges which if established are sufficiently serious to warrant

his dismissal: or

b) a report has been received from a Court of Law or Statutory Authority in

terms of sub-section 16:1 or an offence has been disclosed in terms of sub-

section 15:1 in a matter sufficiently serious to warrant his eventual dismissal

after the matter has been considered by the appropriate Disciplinary

Authority in terms of sub-para 16:2.

On perusal of the Statement of Objections of the Respondents, it is observed that the

Respondents have failed to demonstrate that the disciplinary proceedings instated on

charges are sufficiently serious to warrant the Petitioners dismissal, if such are established.

The charges contained in the said charge sheet cannot be assumed, at this stage, as criminal

offences or bribery charges. No evidence has been tendered to Court that continuance of

the Petitioner in service is detrimental for the holding of the disciplinary inquiry against

him. Hence, it appears that the decision to suspend the services of the Petitioner has been

taken without a rational basis.

Page 8 of 9

I have observed that even the rationale adopted in the aforesaid Establishments Code

applicable to public servants in reference to interdiction and payment of wages during the

period of interdiction is more or less similar to the provisions of the University

Establishment Code.

The rationale adopted in the said Section 18:3 of the Code is also important and

accordingly, if a person has been interdicted, it is essential that the proceedings against

him should be completed with the least possible delay. The Petitioners services have been

suspended by letter dated 30.09.2020 and however, the formal disciplinary inquiry has not

been concluded up to date. No adequate justification has been submitted to Court for such

delay other than the purported reason that an interim order issued by this Court on

21.11.2022 to maintain the status quo was in operation. Similarly, I am attracted to the

rationale adopted in Section 8:7 of Chapter VI of the said Code. Section 8:7;

If the disciplinary proceedings against a person whose total emoluments have been

withheld under section 8:2 and 8:3 are not completed within a period of one year,

and the facts of the case are not so serious as to justify withholding his total

emoluments any further, the appointing authority may, authorize a payment not

exceeding one half emoluments commencing from a date which is not retrospective

and which falls after a period of one year, from the date of interdiction plus the

period of any postponement of the disciplinary proceeding attributed to or made at

the request of the person under interdiction.

It is noted that a period over two years has lapsed since the suspension of services of the

Petitioner and however, the disciplinary inquiry is yet to be concluded. Moreover, the

withholding of emoluments of an officer under Sections 8:2 and 8:3 is based on an

interdiction on conviction on a criminal charge and interdiction in respect of offences such

as negligence, misappropriation, fraud, forgery or similar misdemeanour committed in

respect of public property causing loss to the government.

On a careful consideration of the whole matter, I have come to the conclusion that by

reason of special circumstances of this case, I should exercise my discretion to quash the

decision of the Respondents to suspend the services of the Petitioner and also the decision

to suspend the payment of salaries.

Page 9 of 9

I am not inclined to examine the matters pertaining to the other reliefs sought by the

Petitioner in the prayer of the Petition as the disciplinary inquiry against the Petitioner

should continue without any encumbrances and the Petitioner should not have a special

privilege during the pendency of the disciplinary inquiry. Anyhow, I have drawn my

attention to the relief sought in paragraph (k) of the prayer of the Petition by which the

Petitioner has sought a writ of Mandamus directing several Respondents to pay back

wages to the Petitioner in the event that the innocence of the Petitioner is proven at the

disciplinary inquiry. I take the view that the decision of payment of back wages and other

emoluments should be taken by the relevant Disciplinary Authority after the conclusion

of such disciplinary inquiry. Hence, I hold that the above conclusion of this Court to lift

the suspension of the payment of salary should not give an additional right for the

Petitioner to obtain back wages for the period prior to the date of this judgement.

In the circumstances, I proceed to issue writs as prayed for in paragraphs (b) and (c) of the

prayer of the Petition of the Petitioner. However, this judgement should not be an

impediment for the relevant Authorities to continue and conclude the formal disciplinary

inquiry against the Petitioner expeditiously. Also, this judgement should not be a

hinderance to take any appropriate decision by the Respondents including the suspension

of services if fresh evidence is revealed during the course of the disciplinary inquiry that

the continuance of the Petitioner in service is detrimental to the holding of the said

disciplinary inquiry.

Application is partly allowed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Dhammika Ganepola J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal