CA/HCC/0174-20

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal No:

CA/HCC/0174/2020 The Attorney General

High Court of Galle Attorney Generals Department

Case No: HC/2982/2007 Colombo-12.

COMPLAINANT

Vs.

Gajanayaka Pathirage Ranjith

Kumara alias Ali Kumara

ACCUSED

AND NOW

Gajanayaka Pathirage Ranjith

Kumara alias Ali Kumara

ACCUSED- APPELLANT

CA/HCC/0174-20

2 | P a g e

The Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department

Colombo-12.

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

P. Kumararatnam, J.

COUNSEL : Darshana Kuruppu with Rahul Jayathilaka

and Sahan Weerasinghe for the Appellant.

Dishna Warnakula, DSG for the

Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 07/09/2023

DECIDED ON : 12/12/2023

******************************

CA/HCC/0174-20

3 | P a g e

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) was indicted in the High Court of Galle as follows:

1. Being a member of an unlawful assembly punishable under Section

140 of the Penal Code;

2. Committing the offence of attempted murder on Thumbagoda

Ganithage Wilson whilst being a member of an unlawful assembly

punishable under Section 300 read with Section146 of the Penal Code.

3. Committing the offence of murder of Opatha Kankanamge

Nandawathie whilst being a member of an unlawful assembly

punishable under Section 296 read with Section 146 of the Penal Code.

4. Committing the offence of attempted murder on Thumbagoda

Ganithage Wilson punishable under Section 300 read with Section 32

of the Penal Code.

5. Committing the offence of murder on Opatha Kankanamge

Nandawathie punishable under Section 296 read with Section 32 of

the Penal Code.

The trial commenced before the Judge of the High Court of Galle as the

Appellant had opted for a non-jury trial. After the conclusion of the

prosecutions case, the learned High Court Judge had called for the defence

and the Appellant had a made dock statement and called four witnesses on

his behalf. After considering the evidence presented by both parties, the

learned High Court Judge had acquitted the Appellant from 1st 2nd and 3rd

charges and convicted the Appellant for 4th and 5th charges and sentenced

him as follows:

CA/HCC/0174-20

4 | P a g e

4th count 12 years rigorous imprisonment with a fine of Rs.5000/- which

also carried a default sentence of six months.

5th count sentenced to death.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid convictions and sentence the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

The learned Counsels for the Appellant informed this court that the

Appellant had given consent for this matter to be argued in his absence due

to the Covid 19 pandemic restrictions. Also, at the time of argument the

Appellant was connected via Zoom platform from prison.

Background of the Case.

PW1 is the husband of the deceased. On the day of the incident at about

7.25 p.m. while returning from Elpitiya, he was attacked by the Appellant

with some unknown persons. After sustaining grievous injuries, when he

managed to go to one of his neighbors PW5, Ariyadasas house, his son PW2

had come rushing and informed that the Appellant had attacked his wife too.

PW1 identified the Appellant with the aid of a torch he was carrying at the

time of the attack. He could not identify the others as they had covered their

faces.

The Appellant has been the neighbor of PW1 for about 8 years. There has

been a land dispute existing between the parties and the Appellant used to

scold the PW1s family in filth whenever he was drunk.

According to PW2, the son of PW1 and the deceased, he was 15 years old

when this incident had taken place. Their house was under construction at

the time of the incident. The main door was only fixed in the morning of the

day of the incident. The house did not have electricity but had 3 oil lamps

burning at the time of the incident. This witness had clearly identified the

Appellant who forcibly entered their house. When the Appellant entered the

house and chased and assaulted the deceased, the deceased had run out

from the kitchen door. Due to fear, PW2 had hidden himself under the

CA/HCC/0174-20

5 | P a g e

kitchen table but clearly identified the Appellant with the aid of the bottle

lamps burning at that time. When he went out to see his mother after hearing

her cries, the witness had seen the Appellant assaulting the deceased on her

head and her body. He could very well witness the incident with full bright

moonlight. The defence could not mark any contradiction or omission on his

evidence.

The Appellant had filed following grounds of appeal.

1. The Learned High Court Judge has failed to consider that the story

of the prosecution is improbable and does not inspire confidence.

2. The Learned High Court Judge has failed to consider that the story

of the Appellant is more probable.

Considering the grounds of appeal raised by the Appellant, it is apparent

that the grounds raised are interrelated. Hence, the said grounds will be

considered together hereinafter. The contention of the Appellant is that the

stance taken by the prosecution is not tenable comparing to the defence

taken by the Appellant.

In this case the Appellant had been acquitted from the unlawful assembly

charge but convicted on the charges with common intention as the witnesses

stated that the Appellant had come with less than five unknown persons.

The Section 32 of the Penal Code states:

When a criminal act done by several persons in furtherance of the

common intention of all, each of such persons is liable for that act in

the same manner as if it were done by him alone.

Hence, the prosecution has to prove that two or more persons who possessed

the same intention got together for the purpose of achieving their common

CA/HCC/0174-20

6 | P a g e

target and they acted in furtherance of the common intention of all,

participated in the commission of the act jointly.

In the first argument, the Learned Counsel for the Appellant contended with

a hypothetical thinking that whether the Appellant would come to the scene

of crime without covering his face when all other persons had covered their

faces with black colored clothes.

In this case, PW1 had not witnessed the Appellant attacking his deceased

wife. He only gave evidence what he had witnessed on that fateful day. PW1

had only identified the Appellant with his torch light when the Appellant and

some others attacked him. He managed to escape from them and had run to

the house of PW5, Ariyadasa. PW5 Ariyadasa had confirmed this in his

evidence.

PW2, who was only 15 years old had witnessed the gruesome incident of

killing his mother. He had clearly identified the Appellant who entered into

the house, chased and assaulted the deceased. Hence, voice identification is

not an issue in this case.

Proper identification of the accused person is a fundamental point that needs

to be determined at the beginning of a criminal trial. In this case it is very

important to discuss whether the prosecution has established the identity of

the Appellant beyond reasonable doubt even though the Appellant had not

contested. If the identification is compromised, the net result would be the

acquittal of the accused person from the case. Hence evidence of

identification should be considered very seriously due to its delicate nature.

In this case, an identification parade had not been held in respect of the

Appellant.

The following judgments are very important as it elaborates the vitality of

identification evidence and discusses how the fate of a case depends upon it.

In Karunaratne Mudiyansege Madduma Bandara v. The Attorney General

CA/190-192/11 decided on 15/03/2013, the court acquitted the accused

on the ground that the identification of the accused persons have not been

proved beyond reasonable doubt because the prosecutrix failed to divulge

CA/HCC/0174-20

7 | P a g e

the names of the accused persons to the police who was known to her prior

to the incident.

Gorle S. Naidu v. State of A.P. [1997] Appeal (Crl) 232-234. In this case the

facts related to the murder of two individuals. In the FIR, the prosecution

witness merely mentioned that the assailants were followers of one of the

appellants, but none were specifically named. However, later in court, they

stated the name of the assailants. The Court held that such omission was a

vital omission.

In R v. Turnbull [1977] QB 224 the court held that:

Where the case against an accused depends wholly or substantially on

the correctness of one or more identifications of the accused-which the

defence alleges to be mistaken-the judge should be cautious before

convicting the accused in reliance on the correctness of the

identification(s). The judge should take into consideration that:

Caution is required to avoid the risk of injustice;

A witness who is honest may be wrong even if they are convinced,

they are right;

A witness who is convincing may still be wrong;

More than one witness may be wrong;

A witness who recognizes the defendant, even when the witness

knows the defendant very well, may be wrong.

In this case PW1 and PW2 had clearly identified the Appellant as he was their

neighbour.

PW2 had clearly stated that the Appellant had assaulted his mother with a

pole. But he is not sure as to whether his mother was assaulted with a sword.

CA/HCC/0174-20

8 | P a g e

This witness was only 15 years of age, all alone at home when the incident

had taken place. Further, he had given evidence in the High Court after

about 8 years of the incident. It is obvious that one cannot expect to give a

perfect account of the incident considering the traumatic experience he has

faced. In this case, PW2 is a child witness and he cannot be expected to give

evidence regarding the incident in detail.

In Daradala Ganage Chandralatha Jayawardena alias Shantha v AG CA

85/2013 decided on 25.05.2018 the Court held that:

Time and again courts have discussed the acceptance of evidence of

children of tender ages. Our judges are not there to test the memory of

the witness, they are expected to find the actual fact and the truth.

Witnesses are human beings; they are not memory machines nor robots

to repeat the incident as it was. Further the natural behaviour of human

beings is to forged incidents, especially sad memories. No one wants to

re-visit painful moments and keep detailed memories with them.

Further, PW2 immediately after incident shouted and informed that the

Appellant had assaulted his mother has been corroborated by the evidence

of PW3, PW4 and PW6.When these witnesses have rushed to the house of

PW2, they had seen the deceased was lying fallen in the garden with injuries.

They have then dispatched the deceased to the hospital in a three-wheeler.

At the same time, PW5 Ariyadasa corroborates the fact that PW1 came

rushing to his house with an injury on his fingers. At that time PW1 had

implicated the Appellant for causing the injuries on him. When PW5 and

PW1 were coming down from PW5s house to catch a three-wheeler to

dispatch PW1 to the hospital, PW2 came shouting saying that the Appellant

has assaulted his mother.

CA/HCC/0174-20

9 | P a g e

The Conduct of the Appellant has been highly suspicious in this case.

According to PW10, Kumara the Appellant wanted him to be taken to the

hospital in a three-wheeler. However, the Appellant and his family who were

in the three-wheeler did not go to the hospital, instead they got into the truck

belonging to one Lal halfway through.

Further, the Appellant and his family were not at their house after the

incident and the Appellant was arrested only after 14 days of the incident at

Elpitiya area.

Section 8(2) of the Evidence Ordinance states:

The conduct of any party, or of any agent to any party, to any suit or

proceeding, in reference to such suit or proceeding, in reference to any

fact in issue therein or relevant thereto, and the conduct of any person

an offence against whom is the subject of any proceeding, is relevant, if

such conduct influences or is influenced by any fact in issue or relevant

fact, and whether it was previous or subsequent thereto.

According to the evidence given by PW1, the Appellant used to scold witness

and his family that he would not allow them to exist. This incident had

happened after one year of that threat. The witness had lodge a complaint

with the police regarding this threat. The relevant portion is re-produced

below:

Page 115 of the brief.

m% ( fudkjd lsh, o nkskafka @

W ( l=kqyrem lshd lshd nkskjd'

m% ( ldgo tfyu l=kqyrem lshkafka @

W ( ug lshkafk' fnd,dg bkak fokafk keye lshkjd' wdKavqfjka iS yuq jqkd lsh,d

nkskjd'

CA/HCC/0174-20

10 | P a g e

m% ( Th isoahg biair fj,d Th isoahg wdikak ld,hl ;a;slre Th jf.a lror

lr,d m%YaK jqkd o@

W ( tfyu lror lr,d wjqreoaog ;r miafia f isoah jqfka'

m% ( l=kqyrem lsh,d ,d lE .yyd nek nek hkjd lsjdfka' ta inkaOfhka

fmd,Sishg meKs,s l<d o @

W ( T'

m% ( ljqo meKs,s lf,a @

W ( uu meKs,s l<d'

m% ( ta wka;sug meKs,a, lf,a fuu kvqjg wod, f,dl= isoahg fldpr biair fj,do@

W ( wjqreoaolg follg ;r biair fj,d'

m% ( ta meKs,a, lf,a ;uqka @

W ( T'

As such, the suspicious conduct of the Appellant previously and immediately

after the incident is highly relevant to this case.

In his dock statement, the Appellant took up the position that PW1 and some

others had assaulted him due to a land dispute that had existed between

them. However, nothing has been stated regarding the death of the deceased

or at least the fact that a 3rd party may have committed the death of the

deceased had not been contemplated by the Appellant at the High Court trial.

Though, initially the Appellant took up the position of total denial, towards

the latter part of his cross examination he took up the position that the 1st

incident was commenced by PW1 due to a land dispute. Nothing had been

suggested that there were others along with the PW1 at the time of the

incident.

CA/HCC/0174-20

11 | P a g e

In this case, the learned High Court Judge had considered the evidence

presented by both parties to arrive at his decision. He has properly analyzed

the evidence given by both sides in his judgment. As the evidence adduced

by the Appellant fails to create a doubt over the prosecution case, the

conclusion reached by the learned High Court Judge in this case cannot be

faulted.

As discussed under the appeal grounds advanced by the Appellant, the

prosecution had adduced strong and incriminating evidence against the

Appellant. The Learned High Court Judge had very correctly analyzed all the

evidence presented by all the parties and has come to a correct finding that

the Appellant was guilty of committing attempted murder of PW1 and

committing the murder of the deceased in this case. Therefore, I affirm the

conviction and dismiss the Appeal of the Appellant.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgement to the High

Court of Galle along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL