==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA PHC APN 102/2024

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for

Revision made under and in terms

of Article 138 of Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal The Attorney General

Revision Application No: Attorney General’s Department

CA(PHC)APN/0102/2024 Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT

Vs.

High Court of Colombo 1. Udakumbare Sadara Susantha

Case No. HC/7259/14 Gunaratne

2. Chamara Chaminda Liyanage

ACCUSED

AND BETWEEN

In the matter of an application for

Bail pending appeal made under

and in terms of section 20(2) of the

Bail Act No. 30 of 1997 as amended.

CA PHC APN 102/2024

2 | P a g e

Udakumbare Sadara Susantha

Gunaratne

(Presently in Welikada Prison)

ACCUSED-PETITIONER

Vs.

The Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo-12.

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

AND NOW BETWEEN

Udakumbare Sadara Susantha

Gunaratne

(Presently in Welikada Prison)

ACCUSED-PETITIONER-

PETITIONER

Vs.

The Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo-12.

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT-

RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

Damith Thotawatta, J.

Amal Ranaraja, J.

CA PHC APN 102/2024

3 | P a g e

COUNSEL : Hejaaz Hisbulla with Maharoof

instructed by Dinika Dias for the

Petitioner.

Malik Azees, SC for the Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 1/11/2025.

DECIDED ON : 19/12/2025.

*****************************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The Accused-Petitioner-Petitioner (Hereinafter referred to as the

Petitioner) had applied for bail pending appeal for him in the High Court

of Colombo in the case bearing the number No. HC 7259/2014. After an

inquiry, the Learned High Court Judge had refused bail on 22.05.2024.

Aggrieved by the said order, the Petitioner had filed this Revision

Application to revise the said order.

The Petitioner was indicted in the High Court of Colombo on charges of

having committed offences under Sections 328, 329 and 298 of the Penal

Code arising out of a motor traffic accident. The indictment contained ten

counts, upon which the learned High Court Judge had convicted the

Petitioner for count numbers 01,02,04, and 09. He was acquitted from

counts 03,05,06,07, 08, and 10. After considering the submissions of the

CA PHC APN 102/2024

4 | P a g e

prosecution and the defence, the learned High Court Judge had

sentenced the Petitioner as follows;

Count 01- Rs.10,000/- fine with a default sentence of 06 months

simple imprisonment and 5 years rigorous imprisonment.

Additionally, he was ordered to pay a compensation of

Rs.100,000/- payable to PW2. This carries a default sentence of 18

months simple imprisonment.

Count 02- Rs.10,000/- fine with a default sentence of 06 months

simple imprisonment and 5 years rigorous imprisonment.

Count 04- Rs.100/- fine with a default sentence of 01-week

rigorous imprisonment.

Count 09- Rs. 1000/- fine with a default sentence of 03 months

simple imprisonment and 02 years rigorous imprisonment.

Additionally, he was ordered to pay a compensation of Rs.50,000/-

payable to PW8. This carries a default sentence of 09 months

simple imprisonment.

In respect of Count number 01 and 02, a payment of Rs. 100,000/- with

a default sentence of 18 months simple imprisonment was ordered to be

made to the Fund established under Section 29 of the Assistance to and

Protection of Victims and Witnesses of Crime Act No. 27 of 2017.

Aggrieved by the conviction and the sentence, the Petitioner had

preferred an appeal to the Court of Appeal on 14.12.2023.

In respect of this application, by a direction of His Lordship the President

of Court of Appeal, a Divisional Bench was nominated to hear the instant

application as supported by the Petitioner.

Upon perusal of the Petition dated 18.07.2024, the Petitioner had

preferred to present the following exceptional circumstances in support

of this revision application:

CA PHC APN 102/2024

5 | P a g e

I. The learned High Court Judge has erred in law disguising the

judgment in the Dachchaini v The Attorney General [2005] 2 SLR

152 case on the grounds that the sentence imposed in the said

case was 1/3 of the sentence imposed in this case, when in fact in

the Dachchaini v The Attorney General (Supra) the Accused was

sentenced to a 7-year prison sentence for each of two counts of

cheating;

II. The learned High Court Judge has refused the application for bail

on the basis that there were no exceptional circumstances and

thereby erred in law;

III. The learned High Court Judge has failed to apply the criteria set

out in Dachchaini v The Attorney General (Supra);

IV. In any event the learned High Court Judge has erred in law in

failing to consider the medical condition of the Petitioner’s wife, the

nature of the offence and that it would be unlikely that the

Petitioner would abscond in exercising his discretion with regard

to the granting of bail.

At the hearing of this revision application, the learned Counsel

strenuously argued that the refusal of the exceptional circumstances

standards is wrong and that a test with specific grounds for bail, similar

to the provisions of Section 14(1) of the Bail Act, is to be adopted for

considering questions of bail pending appeal. He further argued that the

exceptional circumstances test is not found in the Criminal Procedure

Act No. 15 of 1979 nor in the Bail Act No.30 of 1997.

Evolvement of Bail Pending Appeal in our Jurisdiction

The law relating to the release of accused persons, who have already been

convicted by a court of law, pending appeal has received various

interpretations from time to time.

CA PHC APN 102/2024

6 | P a g e

In King v Don Martin (1923) 25 NLR 169 the Court held that:

“There is one other matter I wish to refer to. I find that after the

petition of appeal was filed the proctor for the accused made an

application for bail. This application was refused by the District

Judge on the ground that the accused was a habitual criminal. In

making this order the learned District Judge has evidently over-

looked the provisions of section 341 of the Criminal Procedure Code

by which a Court is bound to make an order for the release on bail

of every convicted person who prefers an appeal. Habitual criminals

are not excluded from the privilege granted by this section”.

Analysing this judgement, it is revealed that no discretion has been

vested in a Magistrate or a Judge of District Court to determine whether

a convicted accused should be released on bail or not.

However, in cases decided under the Court of Criminal Appeal Ordinance,

which was in existence till 1973, the court held a different principle in

deciding bail pending appeal.

In King v Keerala (1942) 48 NLR the Court held that:

“I am unable to allow this application on the grounds stated above

This court does not grant applications for bail in the absence of

exceptional circumstances”.

In King v Cooray (1950) 51 NLR 360 the Court held that:

“Release on bail will only be granted in cases pending appeal in

exceptional circumstances. Having considered this matter carefully,

I consider that there are in these case exceptional circumstances

where I am justified in granting the application”.

In R v Muthuretty (1953) 54 NLR 43 the Court held that;

“In bail pending appeal, court will not grant bail as a rule. Bail is

granted only in exceptional circumstances”.

CA PHC APN 102/2024

7 | P a g e

In Queen v B. Rupasinghe Perera (1958) 62 NLR 238

“The applicant has not satisfied us that this is a case in which we

should take the exceptional and unusual course of granting bail. The

application is therefore refused”.

As per the judgements cited above under the Court of Criminal Appeal

Ordinance, the Court has developed the principle that the application

made under bail pending appeal must only be considered in favour of the

accused only in the existence of exceptional circumstances.

This principle has been further developed under the Administration of

Justice Law No.44 of 1973 (Hereinafter referred to as the AJL). The bail

pending appeal provision was depicted in the Section 325(3) of the AJL.

The said section is re-produced as follows:

“When an appeal against a conviction is lodged, the court may

admit the Appellant to Bail pending the determination of his

appeal.”

The much-celebrated Judgement Ramu Thamodaram Pillai v Attorney

General [2004] 3 SLR 18 was delivered under the AJL the Court held

that:

Per Vythialingam.J.

"Where a statute vests discretion in a court it is of course unwise to

confine its exercise within narrow limits by rigid and inflexible rules

from which a court is never at liberty to depart, nor indeed can there

be found any absolutes or formula which could invariably give an

answer to different problems which may be posed in different cases

on different facts... but in order that like cases may be decided alike

and that there will be ensured some uniformity of decisions it is

necessary that some guidance shall be laid down for the exercise of

that discretion".

CA PHC APN 102/2024

8 | P a g e

(4) Requirement of exceptional circumstances should not be

mechanically insisted upon.

(5) In the special circumstances of this case having regard to the

serious nature of the charge of which the petitioner has been

convicted, the severity of the punishment that was meted out to him,

and the consequent temptation to abscond, the High Court was

correct in refusing to admit the petitioner to bail on the ground of

exceptional circumstances.

In this case, His Lordship held that along with the exercise of the

discretion granted under Section 325(3) a court will have to consider each

and every case separately to ascertain whether the applicant has shown

any exceptional circumstances that must be considered in his favour.

Followed by this case, the Supreme Court in Re Ganapathipillai (1920)

21 NLR and Kannusamy v Minister of Defence and External Affairs

(1961) 63 NLR 214 held that the Court had no inherent right to grant

bail, even under the Common Law.

After enacting the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979

(Hereinafter referred to as CPC) and after the abolition of AJL, and after

enacting Bail Act No.30 of 1997, the legislature has not included either

in the CPC or in the Bail Act the requirement of considering exceptional

circumstances in considering bail pending appeal. But it is pertinent to

note the Public Property Act No.12 of 1982 and Poisons, Opium and

Dangerous Drugs (Amendment) Act, No. 41 of 2022 where statutorily,

exceptional circumstances have been insisted on for the granting of Bail.

Bail pending appeal under CPC is depicted under Section 333(3) and it

states;

(3) When an appeal against a conviction is lodged, the High Court

may subject to subsection (4) admit the appellant to bail pending

the determination of his appeal. An appellant who is not admitted

CA PHC APN 102/2024

9 | P a g e

to bail shall pending the determination of the appeal be treated in

such manner as may be prescribed by rules made under the

Prisons Ordinance.

Under Bail Act, the bail pending appeal provision is laid down at Section

20(2) and it states;

(2) When an appeal against a conviction by a High Court is

preferred, the High Court may subject to subsection (3) release the

appellant on bail pending the determination of his appeal an

appellant who is not released on bail shall, pending the

determination of the appeal be treated in such manner as may be

prescribed by rules made under the Prisons Ordinance.

As the Section 333(3) of the CPC and the Section 20(2) of the Bail Act are

similar in verbatim, in Attorney General Vs Letchchemi & Another SC

Appeal 13 of 2006 dated 04.08.2006 the Supreme Court held that:

“Bail after conviction in the High Court referred to in Section 333(3)

of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 has been

incorporated ‘in verbatim’ in Section 20(2) of the Bail Act No. 30 of

1997. The settled law on this is that where a section has been

incorporated ‘in verbatim’ governing principles applicable are those

contained in the principal enactment”.

Hence, there is no ambiguity in bail pending provisions under the CPC

and the Bail Act.

The learned Counsel for the Petitioner citing Dachchaini v The Attorney

General (Supra) primarily submitted to this Court that the refusal on the

exceptional circumstances standard is wrong and that a test with specific

grounds for bail, similar to the provisions of Section 14(1) of the Bail Act

has to be adopted for considering questions of bail pending appeal as the

exceptional circumstances test is not found in the CPC nor in the Bail

Act.

CA PHC APN 102/2024

10 | P a g e

Dachchaini v The Attorney General (Supra) Divisional Bench of the

Court of Appeal held that:

i. The Bail Act, No. 30 of 1997 which came' into operation on 28th

November, 1997 is the applicable law.

ii. By the enactment of the Bail Act the policy in granting bail has

undergone a major change. The rule is the grant of bail. The Rule

upholds the values endorsed in human freedom. The exception is the

refusal of bail and reasons should be given when refusing bail.

Per Sriskandarajah, J.

"By the enactment of the Bail Act there is a major change in the

legislative policy and the Courts are bound to give effect to this

policy. The High Court judge in the impugned Order has erred in not

taking into consideration the policy change that has been brought in

by the enactment and mechanically applied the principle that the

accused have failed to show exceptional circumstances when this

requirement is no more a principle governing bail pending appeal"

As correctly pointed out by the learned State Counsel, the Petitioner due

to sheer ignorance or in the alternative by devious design, failed to

highlight that the aforesaid Dachchaini case (Supra) has been

specifically overruled by the Supreme Court and that, therefore, the

principles enunciated by the Court of Appeal has been expressly rejected.

In Attorney General v Letchchemi SC Appeal 13/2006 decided on

04.08.2006 reported in 2006 BLR 16, the Supreme Court specifically

refused to endorse the ratio of the Dachchaini case (Supra) and

overruled the said case. The Supreme Court held that;

“The presumption of innocence that inures in favour of those

suspected or accused or connected with the commission of an

CA PHC APN 102/2024

11 | P a g e

offence, ceases to operate after conviction by a court of competent

jurisdiction;

Bail after conviction in the High Court referred to in Section 333(3) of

the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 has been

incorporated in verbatim in Section 20(2) of the Bail Act No.30 of

1997. The settled law on this is that where a section has been

incorporated in verbatim, governing principles applicable are those

contained in the principal enactment. The interpretation of the

principal enactment has always held that there must be exceptional

circumstances.

As Section 20 of the Bail Act No.30 of 1997 is identical to that

contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, in its implementation

the earlier restricted view of the convicted person having to disclose

exceptional circumstances for grant of bail must prevail”.

In Attorney General v Ediriweera SC Appeal 100/2005 decided on

04.08.2006 the Supreme Court held that:

a) the norm is that bail after conviction is not a matter of right but would

be granted only under exceptional circumstances;

d) exceptional circumstances only exist when the facts and

circumstances of the case are such that they constrain or impel the

Court to the conclusion that justice can only be done by the granting

of bail, then and only then should bail be granted after conviction”

…..The said Bail Act has succinctly set out that more stringent

standards should be considered after conviction, which are distinctly

different from those considered prior to conviction. In this sense, the

norm is that bail after conviction is not a matter of right, and the Court

of Appeal correctly held that this principle was applicable. Therefore,

after conviction, bail would be granted only under exceptional

circumstances.”

CA PHC APN 102/2024

12 | P a g e

Although the law is very clear with regard to granting of bail pending

appeal, I am surprised on why the learned Counsel invited this Court to

consider the ratio of Dachchaini case (Supra) which had been overruled

by the Supreme Court.

Routine family matters would not generally be considered as “exceptional

circumstances” in a bail application. This would be due to the fact that

such situations are commonly faced by many individuals who are

detained. In order to be considered exceptional, courts would require

circumstances to be truly unusual, extraordinary or rare.

In Attorney General v Ediriweera (Supra) the Supreme Court held that;

“It is also to be noted in instances where bail after conviction is

considered, the mere fact that he was a father or that the he had a

profession and that he had no previous convictions should not alone

be considered as exceptional circumstances as held in the aforesaid

case of Ramu Thamothrampillai v Attorney General. These

circumstances are not exceptional but circumstances which are

general and operative in almost all the cases. The facts and

circumstances of the case must take it out of the ordinary, creating

circumstances that are sufficiently exceptional to merit the grant of

bail despite the conviction”.

As per the judgment mentioned above, the exceptional circumstances

would vary from case to case and would depend on the circumstances of

the case.

The learned Counsel for the Petitioner, in his written submission drew

the attention of this Court to the fact that the Accused has been

sentenced to 5 years for two charges, which the learned High Court Judge

has made it to run consecutively. If it did not run consecutively and had

run concurrently, then the sentence would be only for 5 years.

CA PHC APN 102/2024

13 | P a g e

This contention cannot be addressed in this revision application, as the

contention raised certainly falls under the grounds of appeal.

In Attorney General v Ediriweera (Supra) Shiranee Thilakawardena, J.

held that:

“In an application for bail after conviction the Appellate Court should

not pre-empt the hearing of substantive appeal and pronounced

upon the merits of appeal. The merits of the conviction are therefore

a matter solely to be determined by the Appellate Court hearing the

Appeal”.

The Court further held:

“…in the case of Ramu Thamodarampillai v Attorney General (SC

141/75) the court followed the well-recognised and uninterrupted

practice of not granting bail pending Appeal to any convict sentenced

to a term of imprisonment of Seven years or more and that this

should be a norm to be adhered to…”.

The High Court Judge in his impugned order had very correctly and

accurately considered the applicable law and legal norms and come to a

correct finding that the Petitioner had failed to demonstrate the existence

of exceptional circumstances. Although the learned Counsel for the

Petitioner submitted that the Petitioner was sentenced to 10 years of

imprisonment, upon examination of the judgement delivered in HC

Colombo Case No.7259/2014, the Petitioner had been sentenced to 12

years and six months imprisonment.

In Bank of Ceylon v Kaleel and Others [2004] 1 SLR 284 it was held

that:

“In any event to exercise revisionary jurisdiction the order

challenged must have occasioned a failure of justice and be

manifestly erroneous which go beyond an error or defect or

irregularity that an ordinary person would instantly react to it-the

CA PHC APN 102/2024

14 | P a g e

order complained of is of such a nature which would have shocked

the conscience of court”.

Considering all the factors submitted above, I see no reason to revise the

order of the learned judge of the High Court of Colombo. I too agree that

the Petitioner had failed to demonstrate the existence of exceptional

circumstances to the satisfaction of the court.

Further, I conclude that the material submitted by the Petitioner has

failed to shock the conscience of this court. As such, I dismiss this

revision application without cost.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Damith Thotawatta, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Amal Ranaraja, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL