1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C. A. 1130/99 (F)

D. C. Ratnapura No. 10468/P

Pallege Arachchillage Gunaratne, Epitawala, Kiriella.

PLAINTIFF VS

1. Pallege Arachchillage

Sumanasekera, Epitawala, Kiriella. 2. Imiyahamillage Jinadasa,

Epitawala, Kiriella. 2A.Nimalawathie Jinadasa, Epitawala, Kiriella.

3. Rupasinghe Arachchillage

Darmasiri Rupasinghe, Mdawala, Ellagawa.

4. Dassanayaka Lekamalage

Sumanawathie Gunaratne Menike, Epitawaala, Kiriella. 5. Dassanayake Lekamalage

Chandrasiri, Epitawala, Kiriella. 6. Pallege Arachchilage Janenona,

Epitiwala, Kiriella. 6A.Amis Wettasinghe Epitawala, Kiriella

7. Dassanayake Lekamalage Kulasiri,

Epitawala, Kiriella. 8. Barallage Amis Singho,

Epitawala, Kiriella. 9. Kurugala Arachchillage Sarlis

Singho, Epitiwala, Kiriella.

DEFENDANTS

2

AND

Pallege Arachchillage Gunaratne, Epitawala, Kiriella. (Deceased)

PLAINTIFF-APPELLANT

1A. Pallage Arachchillage Yathindra

Gunaratne, Epitiwala, Kiriella. 1B. Pallege Arachchillage Chandima

Gunaratne, No. 173/10, 3rd Lane, Elsmoruwatta, Ingiriya. 1C. Pallege Arachchillage Chintha

Nandani Gunaratne, No. 156, 4th Lane, Elsmoruwatta, Ingiriya

SUBSTITUTED-PLAINTIFF-

APPELLANTS

VS

1. Pallege Arachchillage

Sumanasekera, Epitawala, Kiriella. 2. Imiyahamillage Jinadasa,

Epitawala, Kiriella. 2A. Nimalawathie Jinadasa, Epitawala, Kiriella. 2AA. Imiya Hamillage Athula

Ravindra Epitawala, Kiriella.

3. Rupasinghe Arachchillage

Darmasiri Rupasinghe, Mdawala, Ellagawa.

4. Dassanayaka Lekamalage

Sumanawathie Gunaratne Menike, (Deceased)

3

4A. Dissanayake Mudiyansalage

Ranjith Dissanayake, 4B. Dissanayake Mudiyansalage

Nihal Dissanayake, 4C. Dissanayake Mudiyansalage

Nimal Dissanayake, 4D. Dissanayake Mudiyansalage

Sarath Dissanayake, 4E. Dissanayake Mudiyansalage

Chandrakumara Dissanayake 4F. Dissanayake Mudiyansalage

Neel Dissanayake,

All of Epitawala, Kiriella

5. Dasanayake Lekamalage

Chandrasiri, Epitawala, Kiriella 6. Pallege Archchillage Janenona,

Epitawala, Kiriella. 6A. Amis Wettasinghe Epitwala, Kiriella

7. Dassanayake Lekamalge Kulasiri,

Epitawala, Kiriella. 8. Barallage Amis Singho

(Deceased) Epitawala, Kireilla. 8A. Baralage Kirimenike (Deceased)

Epitawala, Kireilla. 8AA. Dissanayake Mudiyanselage Sarath Dissanayake

9.Kurugala Arachchillage Saralis Singho, Epitiwala, Kiriella.

DEFENDANT-RESPONDENTS

4

BEFORE : M. M. A. Gaffoor, J. COUNSEL : Indika Jayaweera & Anuruddha Dharmaratne for

the 1A, 1B and 1C Substituted Plaintiff-Appellant R. M. D. Bandara with Sanjeewa Kaluarachchi

for the 2A, 3A, 5th, 6th and 7th Defendant-Respondents WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS TENDERED ON : 27.08.2018 - by the 1A, 1B and 1C Substituted

Plaintiff-Appellant : 29.10.2018 by the 2A, 3A, 5th, 6th and 7th

Defendant-Respondents DECIDED ON : 10.01.2019

******

M. M. A. Gaffoor, J.

The Plaintiff Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Appellant) had filed a

Partition Action bearing Case No. 10468/P in the District Court of Ratnapura for

the land called Bandara Kumbura alias Thittawelpitiya Kumbura situated at

Epitawela. The Preliminary Plan No. 227 dated 20.05.1994 was made by J.

Somasiri, Licensed Surveyor and the report tendered to the District Court on

31.051994.

The Appellant admitted that in 1973 he was forcibly evicted by the Defendant-

Respondents and there was a dispute in respect of his corpus from the respective

land. He was given advice by the Mediation Board to file an action in the District

Court but he filed Partition Action in 1993 after 18 years.

It is clear according to the Appellants witness that he had not possessed the

corpus for 18 years from 1973 to 1991.

5

All the parties of the Partition case admitted the corpus and the trial commenced

on 31st March 1997 and the land called Bandara Kumbura alias Thittawelpitiya

Kumbura as per the Preliminary Survey Plan is in extent of 2 Acres 3 Roods and

38.7 Perches.

The Appellant had set out the devolution of title prayed to declare that he is

entitled to 69/144th share of the land.

1st to 9th Defendants did not admit the Appellant as a co-owner and pleaded that he

was not entitled to any shares in the above said land.

Having admitted by the corpus of the said land by all parties, the case was taken

up for the trial on 31.03.1997 based on 18 issues.

The issue No. 18 was asked to the Appellant on his own admissions, whether

he had been chased away in 1973 by all the Defendants from the land and as such

he has had no possession since 1973 to date and in the result, have the Defendants

prescribed to the land?

The learned Judge in his Order dated 25.11.1999 saying affirmative to the issue

No-18 and stated the reasons that, the Appellant admitted that the Defendant-

Respondents are encroached the corpus and he had lost his possession since 1973,

after 18 years of dispossessing, he cannot maintain an action before the District

Court and without answering 1-17 issues, therefore, the Court had dismissed the

action.

The Appellant had appealed against the order of the learned Judge of the District

Court of Ratnapura under Section 754(1) of the Civil Procedure Code.

The preliminary objection raised by the Defendant-Respondents was can the

Appellant maintain the instant appeal which is misconceived in law and has been

filed without seeking leave to appeal from this Court in terms of Section 754(2) of

the Civil Procedure Code as much as the order of the learned Judge of the District

6

Court made on 25.11.1999 was not a final judgment in terms of Section 754(1)

read with Section 754(5) of the Civil Procedure Code. Therefore, they argued that

the order was an interlocutory order only.

Another preliminary objection raised by the Defendant-Respondents was that the

Appeal is not pleaded in the caption under the provision of law that the Plaintiff

has appealed against the order of the learned Judge of the District court.

The Appellant in his submission quoted the findings of Supreme Court Appeal

Cases Nos. 41/2015 and S C/CHC Appeal 37/2008 which were decided on 2017

and pleaded that as at the year 2000, there was no such trite Law and some judges

have held that the Order Approach should apply and for some it was the

Application Approach. And further pleaded that one cannot argue that the

approach to taken by the Appellant to institute this action by year 2000 as a Final

Appeal, is against the contemporary law prevailed. Thus, each case was distinctly

attended by the judges and the decision of whether the case is subject to a final

appeal or Leave to Appeal was decided as per the facts of each case.

The fact that germane to the issue is the applicability of Section 754 of the Civil

Procedure Code which states about the types of appeal and the procedure to be

followed in the course of the appeal.

Section 67 of the Partition Law, No. 21 of 1977 as amended states that the

procedure to be followed when appealing against any judgment decree or order is

the procedure prescribed in the Civil Procedure Code.

Section 754(1) of the Civil Procedure Code states that, any person who dissatisfied

with any judgment pronounced by any original court in any civil action

proceedings or matter to which a party may prefer an appeal to the Court of

Appeal against such judgment for any error in fact or law.

Section 754(2) of the Civil Procedure Code provides that a person aggrieved by

the order of the District Court in the course of any civil action, proceeding or

7

matter to which he is, or seeks to be a party may prefer an appeal to the court of

appeal against such order for the correction of any error in fact or in law, with the

leave of the Court of Appeal.

Section 754 reads as follows,

(1) Any person who shall be dissatisfied with any judgment

pronounced, by any original court in any civil action, proceeding

or matter to which he is a party may prefer an appeal to the Court

of Appeal against such judgment for any error in fact or in law.

(2) Any person who shall be dissatisfied with any order made by any

original court in the course of any civil action, proceeding, or

matter to which he is or seeks to be a party, may prefer an appeal to

the Court of Appeal against such order for the correction of any

error in fact or in law, with the leave of the Court of Appeal first

had and obtained.

Section 754(5) of the Civil Procedure Code provides that notwithstanding

anything to the contrary in the Civil Procedure Code, for the purpose of Chapter

105,

Judgment means any judgment or order having the effect of a

final judgment made by any civil court and

Order means the final expression of any decision in any civil

action proceeding or matter which is not a judgment.

It is to be noted that the question arises whether the Interlocutory Order of the

learned Judge of the District Court of Ratnapura falls under Section 754(1) or

754(2) of the Civil Procedure Code.

8

It is observed that an Interlocutory Order or decree of a Partition Act always have

a nature of the Order not the Judgment.

I am of the view that the nature of the order made by the learned Judge of the

District Court was clearly itself shows that is an order with have a final expression

of the decision made by the judge. Therefore, Section 754 of the Civil Procedure

Code upon Appeal of whether Order or Judgment is very clear and without any

absurdity deeply explained the nature and the procedure should be followed

hereof, and in order to appeal the Interlocutory Order made by the learned Judge,

the aggrieved party has to file an application for leave to appeal.

In this instance, the primary step of the Appellant would be that he has to file an

application for leave to appeal.

The appeal made by the Appellant cannot be considered as an instant appeal and

he should comply with the provisions of law when constituting an appeal and

should take steps to insert captions, names, addresses in accordance with the law.

For the foregoing reasons, I dismiss the appeal without costs.

Appeal dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL