1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Von. Dombawela Dhammikka Thero, The Trustee and the Viharadhipathi of Kolawenigama Rajamaha Viharaya, Kolawenigama

17th Defendant-Appellant CA. Appeal/1422/1999 (F) VS.

DC, Matara Case No. 13787/P

Menikpurage Somadasa Bogahawatte, Mahauldeniya, Kolawenigama

Plaintiff-Respondent 1B. Menigpurage Pemedasa, Mahauldeniya, Kolawenigama And 16 others All of Mahauldeniya, Kolawenigama

Defendant-Respondents

2

BEFORE : M. M. A. GAFFOOR, J. COUNSEL : Shantha Karunadara for the 17th Defendant-

Appellant Jayantha Siriwardena for the Plaintiff-

Respondent WRITTEN SUBMISSION FILED ON : 02.02.2018 (by the 17th Defendant-Appellant) : 09.10.2018 (by the Plaintiff-Respondent) DECIDED ON : 27.03.2019

******

M. M. A. GAFFOOR, J.

This is an appeal filed by the 17th Defendant-Appellant (Appellant)

against the decision dated 23.04.1997 delivered by the District Judge

of Matara.

When this matter taken up for hearing, Counsel for the Plaintiff-

Respondent (Respondent) had raised a preliminary objection and

stated that the fateful decision of the learned District Judge of Matara

is an interlocutory decree fell under Section 48(4) of the Partition Law,

No. 21 of 1979 as amended subsequently, which is required a leave of

this Court. Therefore, Counsel for the Plaintiff-Respondent was in a

position that the decision dated 23.04.1997, is an order under Section

754(5) of the Civil Procedure Code, thus the correct procedure would

be to obtain leave to appeal from this Court.

3

However, the Appellant stated that the said decision dated 23.04.1997

of the District Judge is an order having the effect of a final judgment

made by the District Court.

The Appellant submitted that, when the Respondent instituted this

partition action, had not made the Appellant as a party to this action

at the time filing of this action and the Appellant, intervened in the

said action and was added as the 17th Defendant. He further

submitted that on 19.04.1994 the said case was laid by the Court as

the Respondent had failed to take steps to proceed the case and on

09.05.1994 the Court issued notices to the Respondent directing him

to take proper steps. Accordingly, when the case called on 14.10.1996

the District Court fixed the case for trial finally.

The Appellant further submitted that the facts such as above, he was

not given notice of the said application of the Respondent to have the

case entered in to the trial roll and to participate at the trial and claim

the land sought to be portioned. Its further revealed that the

Appellant made an application and took up a position that the

application of the Respondent to have the case entered into the roll

without notice to the Appellant was travesty of justice.

However, a careful perusal of the case record suggested that the

Appellant had participated in the case and when the commission

partitioning was held in the District Court, the Appellant had failed to

file a statement of claim made an application under Section 48(4) of

the Partition Law. This application was dismissed by the learned

District Judge.

Therefore, the above circumstances suggest that, the Appellant had

made an application before the Learned District Judge under Section

48(4) of the Partition Law.

4

In Shubrook vs. Tufnell [(1882) 9 QBD 621], where Jessel, MR and

Lindley, LJ held that, an order is final if it finally determines the

matter in litigation. Thus the issue of final and interlocutory depended

on the nature and the effect of the order made.

Therefore, my views are fortified as I gather more supports from the

decision of Abeygunasekara vs. Wijesekara and Others [(2002) 2

SLR 269], in this case, the defendant appealed against the order made

under section 48(4) of the Partition Law. The Plaintiff raised a

preliminary objection by way of a motion that no appeal lies against

an order made under section 48(4). But the defendant argued that

with the inherent revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal, the

matter can be entertained under section 48(4) of the Partition Law.

But Somawansa, J. held that: the defendant has no right to direct

appeal against the impugned order, therefore, it will not cause any

prejudice to him.

Somawansa, J. further held that:

I am inclined to take the view that the inherent power of

the Court could be invoked only where provisions have not

been made, but where provision has been made and are

provided in section 752(2) of the Civil Procedure Code

inherent power of this court cannot be invoked; inherent

powers cannot be invoked to disregard express statutory

provisions

Therefore, I hold that order given by the learned District Judge is not

a final order and the Appellant should have filed a leave to Appeal

Application under section 754(2) instead of filling an appeal under

Section 754(1) of the Civil Procedure Code.

5

For the forgoing reasons, I allow the preliminary objection of the

Respondent and dismissed the appeal without cost.

Preliminary objection allowed; Appeal dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL