IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

CA (PHC) No. 64/2010

CA (PHC) 64/2010

Vs,

I n the matter of an application made under and in terms of Article 138 read with Article 154 G (6) of the Constitution of The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Udawakage Gunadasa Wallaketiya, Opanayake.

Petitioner

1. Divisional Secretary Opanayake 2. Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Services Ratnapura

Respondents

And Now Between Udawakage Gunadasa Wallaketiya, Opanayake.

Vs, Petitioner - Appellant

1. Divisional Secretary Opanayake 2. Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Services Ratnapura

Respondent-Respondents

JUDGMENT Page lofS

I

I

I

I

Before

Counsel

: S. Devika de L. Tennekoon, J & s. Thurairaja PC, J

: Shanil Rajapakse for the Petitioner - Appellant

Chaya Sri Nammuni, SC for the Respondent- Respondents

Judgment on : 18th January 2018

***********

Judgment

s. Thurairaja PC J

This is an appeal against an order made by the Judge of the Civil Appellate Court of

Ratnapura. The petitioner had originally filed an application at the said high court

above mentioned, seeking a writ of Certiorari and writ of Mandamus. The learned

Judge after giving reasons dismissed the application of the petitioner with costs.

According to the available materials before this court the facts of the case are, the

petitioner was granted a plot of land11 acres 1 rood and 9perches in the extent of

2roods depicted a slot number 794 in FVP 201. The entire extent of the land belongs

to the State. The said land was granted to the Petitioner under Jayabhoomi scheme.

The petitioner claimed that he was cultivating the land from the water flowing from

the natural springs in the said land. The 1st respondent is the Divisional Secretary of

Opanayake and the second Respondent is the Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian

Services, Ratnapura. It is alleged that the 1 st Respondent had disrupted the water

supply by constructing a water tank above the petitioner's land, and a writ of Certiorari

was sought to quash the decision of constructing the said decision. A writ of

Mandamus was sought to compel the respondents to provide the petitioner with

uninterrupted water supply for his paddy field.

CA (PHC) 64/2010 JUDGMENT Page 2 of 5

When the matter was taken up for argument at the High Court, it was observed that

both parties were made to discuss a settlement in this matter. When it failed, it was

proceeded to inquiry and a judgment was delivered.

It is the content ofthe learned high court judge that a material document namely 1V3,

was not submitted by the Petitioner and it was suppressed. The document was written

by the petitioner to the 1st Respondent. In the said letter he had consented for the

project with the condition that he gets water supply.

Considering the available materials before the high court, we note the following

materials with concern: The supply of water to the to the cultivation of paddy field of

the petitioner is important. In the meantime, the tank was built to supply drinking

water to the villagers in that area. The court has to evaluate the benefit of one person

opposed to the basic right of drinking water of several residents of the village. Further

it was observed with concern that the petitioner was granted 2roods of State Land by

the said Jayabhoomi programme. When the officers, of the respondents visited the

area to survey, it was found that the petitioner was occupying lots A, B, C, D, E, G, I and

J. That, it is obvious the petitioner is in need of massive amount of water to feed the

entire area, than he is entitled.

When the matter was before this court, we also requested the respondents to provide

the petitioner with relief, but the petitioner was not agreeable to the proposals of the

respondents. Initially the petitioner wanted water supply in the volume of % inches

pipe line. It is found the respondents had provided water supply in 1 1/2 inches pipe

line. Petitioner being unsatisfied, complains that he wants more from the bottom of

the tank.

Pa e 3 of 5

The question arise here is whether the Petitioner is entitled to make an application to

the Provincial High Court. Because the subject matter to the application namely

Planning of water resources falls within the concurrent list. Therefore, an application

under Article 154 P will not be applicable. Since this matter was concluded at the High

Court, we proceed to consider the judgment of the said court.

The Project of constructing a water tank is now concluded and the drinking water

supply is now in action. Further the petitioner was well aware of the said water project.

1V3 clearly shows that the petitioner was not only aware but also given consent to the

project. Considering these factors, the decision of the learned high court judge is

reasonable and well founded, we have no reason to interfere with the said decision.

The petitioner seeking a writ of Mandamus, was refused by the judge of the high court.

We perused the petition filed at the high court as well as in this court. There, he had

sought a writ of Mandamus to direct the respondent to supply 'adequate' water. It

should be noted that the 'adequate' water is ambiguous. He had not defined the

volume of water he needs. Further as per the deed of grant he will be entitled to posses

the land in an extent of 2 roods. He had illegally captured a larger portion of land and

seeking water from the tank which is now a major source to supply drinking water to

the villagers. The question arise here is whether the petitioner has a statutory right to

get water supply for the land above mentioned. Therefore, the learned high court

deciding not to grant a writ of mandamus is well founded.

The petitioner had submitted many new materials and facts in this appeal. We carefully

considered all relevant materials, we find that there is no sufficient cause to issue a writ

of Certiorari and a writ of Mandamus. Therefore, we dismiss the appeal.

CA PHC 64 2010 JUDGMENT Page 4 of 5

The learned judge of the provincial high court is correct in ordering the costs. We

affirm the said decision and order the petitioner to pay the cost to the 1st Respondent

the Divisional Secretary. We fix the cost as Rupees 52500/- (Rupees Fifty-two thousand

and five hundred)

Appeal dismissed.

S. Devika de L. Tennekoon, J

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

II JnC,MENT Page 5 of5