~ ., .

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Case No. CA 135/2008

In the matter of an Appeal against an

order of the High Court under sec. 331

of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act

No. 15 of 1979.

T.H. Anandasiri ACCUSED-APPELLANT

HC (Matara) Case No. HC 76/2005 VS

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

DECIDED ON

1

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo 12. RESPONDENT

: Deepali Wijesundera J.

: Achala Wengappuli J.

: Indika Mallawarachchi with

K. Kugaraja for Accused-Appellant

Madawa Tennakoon DSG for the

Respondent.

: 10th September, 2018

: 21 st September, 2018

Oeepali Wijesundera J.

The appellant was indicted for murder under section 296 of the

Penal Code and after trial was convicted and sentence to death by the

learned High Court Judge of Matara. This appeal is against the said

conviction and sentence.

The deceased and prosecution witness number one Hemasiri, his

wife (Renuka Oamayanthi prosecution witness number 7) and their child

have been walking on either side of the road towards one Ajantha's house

in the evening. They have been exchanging small talk while walking and

suddenly the deceased had fell silent and Hemasiri has turned back to

see why and had seen the appellant pulling a knife from the deceased's

abdomen, the deceased had run a few feet and had fallen near Ajantha's

House. The first witness for the prosecution did not shout out of fear and

has gone home but told the mother of the deceased who has informed

the police. Hemasiri has made a statement to the police on the following

day, after the appellant was arrested.

2

, ,

Renuka Damayanthi in her evidence has stated that she saw the

deceased being stabbed. These witnesses are the only eye witnesses to

the incident. They have been cross examined and no contradictions were

marked. Their evidence was corroborated by the evidence of the Judicial

Medical Officer, prosecution witness number three, who said there was

one stab injury on the deceased and an abrasion on the right hip bone

which could be due to a fall. He has stated that death was instant in this

kind of a stab injury. Doctor was shown the knife recovered by a sec. 27

recovery and he has said that it could cause the said injury.

The appellant's counsel argued that Hemasiri's statement is

belated and that he failed to tell the police what he saw immediately after

the incident, and that the learned High Court Judge has not taken this

into consideration. Hemasiri in his evidence has stated that he did not go

to the police station immediately out of fear and that his home folk

prevented him from going out that night. But he has given a statement to

the police soon after the appellant was arrested. Although the appellant's

counsel stated that prosecution witness Hemasiri's evidence was not

corroborated by other witnesses, this is not so, his wife who is also an

eye witness had seen the appellant stabbing the deceased and her

evidence corroborates Hemasiri's evidence.

3

, .'

The appellant's learned counsel argued that contradictions inter-se

between prosecution witness number one and the police witness

Wijegunaratne with regard to the scene of the crime throws a doubt on

the prosecution case. This is not correct the scene of the crime is

described as in front of the Ajantha's house which both witnesses

described in evidence this does not cast a doubt on the prosecution

evidence. The defence had failed to mark a single contradiction in witness

number one's evidence.

The learned counsel for the appellant argued that the learned High

Court Judge failed to consider the evidence favourable to the appellant

and thereby denied a fair trial to the appellant. This is not so on perusal

of the judgment. We find that in pages 25 and 26 he has analysed the

dock statement of the accused and right throughout the judgment, he has

considered both sides.

The learned counsel for the appellant cited the judgment in

Ranasinghe vs Attorney General 2007 1 SLR 218 regarding the section

27 recovery. In this case it has been held that;

liThe conclusions reached by the trial Judge about the

recovery of the iron club removed from a well is erroneous

4

, .

since discovery is consequence of a section 27 statement only

leads to the conclusion that the accused had the knowledge

as to the weapon being kept at the place from which it was

detected. "

In the instant case the appellant on his own statement has said he

can show the place where the knife was hidden. This finding does not

apply to the instant case.

It was also held in Ranasinghe vs AG.

lIThe trial court must declare its reasons for the

acceptance of the prosecution evidence and the

rejection of the defence evidence. "

This is exactly what the trial judge has done. There is no merit in

the grounds of appeal urged by the appellant.

5

,

For the afore stated reasons we decide to affirm the judgment and

oonviction dated 02/09/2008 of the learned High Court Judge of Matara

dismiss the appeal.

Appeal is dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

6