Page 1 of 13

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

1. Electricity and Renewable Energy

Assocaition No. 191 F, Jayanthi Mawatha, Himbutana, Mulleriyawa New Town. 2. Mahesha Bandara Illangasinghe

Chairman, Electricity and Renewable Energy Consumers Association, No. 191 F, Jayanthi Mawatha, Himbutana, Mulleriyawa New Town.

3. Prasad Bathiya Amarakoon

Secretary, Electricity and Renewable Energy Consumers Association, No. 256/35 Welivata, Kaduwela. 4. Rasika Madusanka Jayasingha

Attorney-at-Law, 145/1A, Galborella, Kelaniya. 5. Madapathage Don Ranjith Athula

73/2, Yahampath Mawatha, Piliyandala. 6. Koggala Hewage Sanjeewa

Dhammika Hemasiri, 35/8 A, Hadigama, Piliyandala.

In the matter of an application for Orders in the nature of Writs of Certiorari and Mandamus under and in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialists Republic of Sri Lanka.

CA/WRIT/37/2023

Page 2 of 13

7. Centre for Environmental Justice

(Guarantee) Limited No. 20/A, Kuruppu Road, Colombo 08. 8. Withanage Withanage Don Hemantha

Ranjith Sisira Kumara Director and Senior Advisor, Centre for Environmental Justice, 20A, Kuruppu Road, Colombo 08. 9. Pathragoda Kankanamge Dilena

Executive Director, Centre for Environmental Justice, No. 20A, Kuruppu Road, Colombo 08.

Petitioners

Vs.

1. Ceylon Electricity Board

50, Sir Chittampalam A. Gardiner Mawatha, Colombo 00200. 1A. Chairman

Ceylon Electricity Board, 50, Sir Chittampalam A. Gardiner Mawatha, Colombo 00200.

2. Public Utilities Commission of Sri

Lanka 6th Floor, BOC Merchant Tower, St. Michaels Road, Colombo 3. 2A. Janaka Rathnayaka Chairman, Public Utilities Commission of Sri Lanka, 6th Floor, BOC Merchant Tower, St. Michaels Road, Colombo 3.

Page 3 of 13

3. Kanchana Wijesekara

Ministry of Power and Renewable Energy, 437, Galle Road, Colombo 03. 4. Hon. Dinesh Gunawardena

Prime Minister and Minister of Public Administration, Home Affairs, Provincial Councils and Local Government, Ministry of Public Administration, Home Affairs, Provincial Councils and Local Government, Independence Square, Colombo 07. 5. Hon. Keheliya Rambukwella

Minister of Health, SUWASIRIPAYA, No. 385, Rev. Baddegama Wimalawansa Thero Mawatha, Colombo 10. 6. Hon. Nimal Siripala De Silva

Minister of Ports, Shipping and Aviation, No. 19, 1 Chaithya Road, Colombo 01. 7. Hon. Susil Premajayantha

Minister of Education, Ministry of Education, Isurupaya, Battaramulla. 8. Hon. Mahinda Amaraweera

Minister of Agriculture, 80/5, Govijana Mandiraya, Rajamalwatta Lane, Battaramulla.

Page 4 of 13

9. Hon. Pavithra Wanniarachchi

Minister of Wild Life and Forest Resources Conservation, No. 1090, Sri Jayawardenapura Mawatha, Rajagiriya. 10. Hon. Jeevan Thondaman

Minister of Water supply and Estate Infrastructure, Ministry of Water Supply, 1st Floor, Lakdiya Medura, No. 35, New Parliament Rd., Battaramulla.

11. Hon. Nalaka Jude Hareen Fernando

Minister of Tourism and Lands, 7th Floor, Sri Lanka Institute of Tourism and Hotel Management, Galle Road, Colombo 3. 12. Hon. Ramesh Pathirana

Minister of Plantation Industries, Minister of Industries, 11th Floor, Sethsiripaya 2nd Stage, Battaramulla. 13. Hon. Prasanna Ranathunga

Minister of Urban Development and Housing 17th and 18th Floors, SUHURUPAYA, Subhuthipura Road, Battaramulla. 14. Hon. M. U. M. Ali Sabry

Minister of Foreign Affairs, Sri Baron Jayathilake Mawatha, Colombo 01. 15. Hon. Vidura Wickremanayake

Minister of Buddhasasana, Religious and Cultural Affairs, 135, Srimath Anagarika Darmapala Mawatha, Colombo 07.

Page 5 of 13

16. Hon. Ahamed Zenulabdeen Naseer

Minister of Environment, Sobadam Piyasa, 416/C/1, Robert Gunawardena Mawatha, Battaramulla. 17. Hon. Maligaspe Koralage Naleen

Manusha Nanayakkara Minister of Labour and Foreign Employment, 6th Floor, Mehewara Piyasa, Narahenpita, Colombo 05. 18. Hon. Anuruddha Ranasinghe

Arachchige Roshan Minister of Sports and Youth Affairs and Irrigation, No. 500, T.B. Jaya Mawatha, Colombo 10. 19. Hon. Tiran Alles

Minister of Public Security, 14th Floor, Suhurupaya, Battaramulla. 20. Hon. Kachchakaduge Nalin

Ruwanjiwa Fernando Minister of Trade, Commerce, and Food Security, No. 27, CWE Secretariat Building, Vauxhall Street, Colombo 02. 21. Hon. Wijayadasa Rajapaksha

Minister of Justice, Prison Affairs and Constitutional Reforms, 19, Sri Sangaraja Mawatha, Colombo 10. 22. Hon. Douglas Devananda

Minister of Fisheries, New Secretariat, Maligawatta, Colombo 10.

Page 6 of 13

23. Hon. Bandula Gunawardena

Minister of Transport and Highways and Minister of Mass Media, Ministry of Transport and Highway, 7th Floor, Sethsiripaya Stage II, Battaramulla. 24. His Excellency

Ranil Wickramasinghe In his capacity as the Minister of Ministry of Finance, Economic Stabilization and National Policies, Minister of Defence, Minister of Women, Child Affairs and Social Empowerment, Minister of Technology Through Hon. Attorney General, Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12. 25. Hon. Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12.

Respondents Before : Sobhitha Rajakaruna J.

Dhammika Ganepola J.

Counsel : Ravindranath Dabare with Savanthi Ponnamperuma for the Petitioners.

Viveka Siriwardena PC, ASG with Mahen Gopallawa DSG and Amasara

Gajadeera SC for the 1st, 1A and 3rd to 25th Respondents.

Neranjan Arulpragasam with Rasara Jayasuriya for the 2A Respondent.

Page 7 of 13

Supported on : 06.02.2023

Written Submissions: Petitioners - 13.02.2023

1st, 1A and 3rd to 25th Respondents - 13.02.2023

2A Respondent - 13.02.2023

Decided on : 17.02.2023

Sobhitha Rajakaruna J.

The Petitioners are seeking, inter alia, for a mandate in the nature of a writ of Certiorari

quashing the decision of the Cabinet of Ministers (Cabinet) dated 09.01.2023 (P14) and

the General Policy Guidelines on the Electricity Industry (Annexure 01 to P12) as much

as it relates to Item No. 7 of the minutes of the Cabinet meeting held on 09.01.2023.

The Cabinet at its meeting held on 09.01.2023 considering a joint Memorandum dated

02.01.2023 submitted by the Minister of Finance, Economic Stabilization & National

Policies and the Minister of Power & Energy on Proposal for the Revision of Electricity Tariffs

in the year 2023 has decided to amend the existing General Policy Guidelines on the

Electricity Industry (Guidelines). The Petitioners plead that the said Guidelines have by-

passed the provisions of the Sri Lanka Electricity Act No. 20 of 2009, as amended

(Electricity Act) and the Public Utilities Commission of Sri Lanka Act No. 35 of 2002

(PUCSL Act) and accordingly, the said Cabinet decision P14 is ultra vires.

The learned Counsel for the Petitioners making submissions in support of the instant

Application categorically limited his claim only to the provisions in Clauses 12 and 13 of

the amendment to the said Guidelines1. Firstly, the Petitioners raise concerns on the

impugned amendment which provides that the Public Utilities Commission of Sri Lanka

(PUCSL) is expected to verify the published power purchase cost and determine the

power purchase cost to be allowed to the transmission licensee within 15 days of the receipt

1 at p. 140 of the set of documents of the Petition.

Page 8 of 13

of the power purchase cost date from the transmission licensee. The Petitioners complain

that such provisions disrupt the general powers of PUCSL to hold a public hearing in order

to investigate and determine a tariff hike.

The other main concern of the Petitioners is based on the impugned amendment by which

the PUCSL will be compelled to take immediate action when the Cabinet grants,

considering the National importance, special approval for a revision of price and tariffs

based on a transmission and distribution cost. The Petitioners contend that the said

amendment overrides the general powers of the PUCSL as it will be bound to effectuate

such decisions of the Cabinet with immediate effect.

The Court heard the learned Counsel for the Petitioners in support of this Application and

the learned Additional Solicitor General (ASG) who appears for the 1st, 1A and 3rd to 25th

Respondents opposing the instant Application. On the date of the support of this

Application, the PUCSL-1st Respondent was absent and unrepresented and however, the

learned Counsel who represented the Chairman of PUCSL-2A Respondent (Chairman)

sought to make submissions only on behalf of the said Chairman but not on behalf of the

PUCSL. The Chairman was present in Court without a proxy or sanction of the PUCSL.

The learned Counsel for the said Chairman clearly indicated that he was supporting the

Application of the Petitioners. Thus, this Court is unable to accept the issues raised by the

said Chairman as the opinion of the PUCSL, however, the submissions made on behalf of

the said Chairman may provide an influential effect when this Court arrives at a

conclusion in this Order.

The learned ASG referring to several provisions of law submits that the relevant Minister

has the power to formulate Guidelines and the Cabinet has not taken any unlawful

decision in reference to the affairs mentioned in the instant Application.

Now, I need to consider whether this Court should fully consider the facts and

circumstances of this case on affidavits of the Respondents at a final hearing or whether

there is an arguable case which warrants this court to issue formal notice on the

Respondents at this threshold stage.

Primarily, what needs consideration of this Court is whether the relevant Minister or the

Cabinet has the power to amend the Guidelines and whether the amendments approved

thereto by the Cabinet are lawful.

Page 9 of 13

Copies of two legal opinions expressed by the Attorney General on 28.07.2022 and

04.11.2022 are annexed to P12. Those opinions have been issued under the heading of

Request for clarifications on the powers vested with the Minister in-charge of the Electricity Industry

on revision of electricity tariffs. Those opinions of the Attorney General illustrate the legal

background to his reason why the PUCSL is duty bound and obliged to give effect to

policy Guidelines issued with the approval of the Cabinet.

In terms of Section 5(1) of the Electricity Act, the relevant Minister shall have the power

to formulate general policy guidelines in respect of the electricity industry. The Section

5(3) of the said Act provides that the Minister has the authority to forward the general

policy guidelines formulated under subsection (1) to the Cabinet for its approval. All

amendments sought to be made to the guidelines approved by the Cabinet, shall also be

required to be approved by the Cabinet. The Minister by virtue of Section 5(2)(d), in

formulating the general policy guidelines, should take into consideration, among other

matters, pricing policy in respect of the supply of electricity to facilitate the sustainable

economic growth.

As per Section 30(1)(a) of the PUCSL Act, the Cabinet of Ministers shall in consultation

with the Minister in charge of a public utilities industry, formulate where it sees fit, general

policy guidelines and issue such guidelines to the PUCSL through the Minister, inter alia,

on any matter identified in or under such industry Act for which general policy guidelines

may be made.

The Section 30 of the Electricity Act deals with tariffs whilst the section 30 of the PUCSL

Act deals with Policy Guidelines. In terms of Section 30(2)(b) of the Electricity Act,

transmission and bulk sale tariffs and distribution and supply tariffs, as the case may be,

shall, in accordance with conditions specified in the relevant licence permit the relevant

licensee to recover all reasonable costs incurred in the carrying out of the activities

authorized by its licence on an efficient basis.

The provisions in Section 30(2)(c) of the Electricity Act is also pertinent to the issues of

this Application and in terms of such provisions the PUCSL is duty bound to approve

transmission and bulk sale tariffs and distribution and supply tariffs in accordance with

the policy guideline approved by the Cabinet under Section 5. Hence, I am inclined to

accept the contention of the learned ASG that neither the Electricity Act nor the PUCSL

Page 10 of 13

Act empowers the PUCSL to act in variance of such Guidelines. The Petitioners have not

raised any contrary argument on this point of view.

The learned ASG emphasizing this point drew the attention of this Court to the Preamble

of the Electricity Act and also to Section 55 of the said Act. The contention of the learned

ASG is that both the Electricity Act and the PUCSL Act should be read in conjunction

and in a harmonized manner.

The learned Counsel for the Chairman sought to explain why the said Chairman is raising

objections against the said amendments to the existing Guidelines approved by the

Cabinet. His claim is based on the following paragraph of the Cabinet Decision, marked

P14 (at p.02);

(b) to request the Public Utilities Commission of Sri Lanka-

(ii) to permit the CEB to implement the proposed electricity tariff revision a

indicated in Annex-03 to the Memorandum dated 2023-01-02 with effect from

2023-01-01, as an interim measure until the PUCSL takes a decision as per

(b)(i) above; and

The Chairman contends that the Cabinet is not empowered to amend those Guidelines

with a retrospective effect. The learned ASG asserts the wordings in P14 clearly envisage

that the Cabinet has made only a request to the PUCSL and not a direction and that

request is to permit the Ceylon Electricity Board (CEB) to implement the proposed Tariff

revision with effect from 01.01.2023 as an interim measure until PUCSL takes a decision

in respect of the said Tariff revision. The learned ASG relying on the dicta enunciated by

the Supreme Court of India in the case of Kanoria Chemicals and Industries Ltd. and another

vs. State of Uttar Pradesh and others and Vice Versa 1992 SCR (1) 151 submits that there is

no statutory bar to implement tariff revisions with retrospective effect.

Anyhow, upon an inquiry made by Court on 17.02.2023 in open Court, the learned ASG

confirmed that the PUCSL had approved the proposed Tariff Revision with effect from

15.02.2023 and the relevant decision had already been communicated to CEB. In such a

backdrop, there is no necessity for this Court to make an examination whether the said

decision of the Cabinet is merely a request or whether any amendment has been effected

retrospectively violating the law. I consider it as a futile exercise at this stage to consider

Page 11 of 13

such issues as the PUCSL has not approved the revised tariff revision with effect from

01.01.2023 as proposed by the Cabinet. It appears that CEB also has implemented such

tariff revision only with effect from 15.02.2023.

Further, the Chairman is in disagreement with the words; National Importance

embodied in Clause 13 of the said amendment to the Guidelines. The effect of the decision

taken by the Cabinet therein, to my mind, is that there should be a mechanism to approve

a revision of price and tariff based on a transmission and distribution cost without any

delay, on an exigency arising on an important National issue. For the purpose of assaying

the effect of such words in the said Clause 13, one must draw the attention to the

justification reflected in the Cabinet Memorandum dated 02.01.2023 and the Joint Cabinet

Memorandum dated 06.02.2023. The said Joint Cabinet Memorandum, marked C,

tendered to Court by the learned ASG declares, inter alia;

01. Electricity Tariff revision-2023

Ceylon Electricity Board (CEB) has made a proposal to revise the electricity tariff

to recover the cost of operation in line with the tariff methodology introduced by

the Public Utilities Commission of Sri Lanka (PUCSL). The Cabinet of Ministers

via the decision on 10th January 2023 requested Public Utilities Commission to

implement the proposed tariff revision by 15th February 2023, with effect from 01st

January 2023. This tariff revision is imperative as the General Treasury is not in a

position to provide funds to cover the costs of the Ceylon Electricity Board as CEB

cannot maintain an uninterrupted power supply without having a cost recovery

tariff structure.

The absence of a cost recovery pricing structure has created financial distress for

CEB and borrowing itself is not an alternative solution as the high cost of

borrowing will be a further burden to the electricity consumers ultimately. CEB has

already defaulted the payments to Non-Conventional Renewable Energy (NCRE)

generators leading the entire NCRE sector unsustainable. This will further worsen

the financial situation of CEB by losing their low-cost NCRE sources while the gap

is again filled by high-cost thermal sources. The delay in the implementation of

cost-reflective tariff will create a spiraling effect on the sectors including, CEB,

Ceylon Petroleum Corporation (CPC) and all the other connected organizations

Page 12 of 13

such as state banks. The state banks have already in liquidity constraints due to

pressure coming from the CEB and the CPC. Therefore, it is essential to revise the

existing tariff to achieve cost reflection in order to ensure sustainability to the power

sector and to arrest the inevitable trickle-down effect on the entire economy.

Having recognized the seriousness of this situation, the National Economic

Council Chaired by the Hon. Speaker of the Parliament, with the participation of

the Prime Minister and leaders of represented by the political parties of the

Parliament, has reviewed the tariff proposal and difficulties faced by the CEB and

has instructed the PUCSL to implement this proposal on 15th February 2023

following the due process. Accordingly, the PUCSL has agreed to implement the

proposed tariff revision by following the due process by 15th February 2023. In this

context, it is essential to implement the tariff revision with effect from 15th February

2023 and the residual losses shall be taken into account in the next tariff revision

i.e. tariff revision to be done with effect from July 1, 2023. As such, it is emphasized

to the PUCSL to make their internal process in line with this time frame in order

for CEB to be financially viable in order to ensure uninterrupted power supply.

In light of the above, I need to bear in mind, for proper adjudication of this matter, the

severe economic crisis prevailed in the country very recently as I have pronounced and

explained in my order, Public Utilities Commission of Sri Lanka vs. Kanchana Wijesekera

Minister of Power and Energy and others, CA/Writ/56/2023 dated 10.02.2023. The

Preamble of the PUCSL Act declares that its an Act for the establishment of the PUCSL

to regulate certain utilities industries pursuant to a coherent national policy. If the PUCSL

issues a direction against the coherent national policy, then a reasonable doubt arises

whether such direction is practical and also sometimes whether lawful. I take the view that

it is the duty of the Authorities under both above Electricity Act and the PUCSL Act to

strike a proper balance and take a coordinated effort for the best interest of the consumers.

It is to be noted that the Cabinet in P14 has requested the PUCSL [see-paragraph (b)(i)]

to take necessary actions, as mentioned therein, subject to adjusting any difference

between the proposed tariff and the tariff is to be decided by the PUCSL through

subsequent electricity bills of consumers. Hence, it seems that the immediate

implementation of the said tariff revision (as per Clause 12 of the said Guidelines) does

not create any adverse effect to the relevant provisions of the PUCSL Act.

Page 13 of 13

In the circumstances, I take the view, based on the legal provisions referred to above and

on the circumstances of this case, I cannot assume that the amendments introduced to the

Guidelines in the said Clauses 12 and 132 have been adopted exceeding the jurisdiction

and by violating a statutory requirement which eventually comes under any of the

established grounds of judicial review. For the reasons setout above, I am of the view that

the Cabinet has the authority to amend the existing Guidelines as mentioned above and

the Petitioners & the Chairman have failed to establish that the impugned decisions are

guilty of an illegality. Further, no viable legal ground has been presented by the Petitioners,

for this Court to declare the impugned amendments to the Guidelines ultra vires.

In view of the foregoing, I take the view that there are no other facts and circumstances of

this case which need examination on affidavits of the Respondents at a final hearing.

Further, I am convinced that there is no arguable ground for judicial review which has a

realistic prospect of success which warrants this Court to issue formal notice of this

Application on the Respondents. Therefore, I proceed to refuse this Application.

Application is dismissed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Dhammika Ganepola J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

2 Supra note 1