==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/175/23

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal Case No. Ramar Udayakumar alias Appu

CA/HCC/ 0175/2023

High Court of Ratnapura

Case No. HC/39/2017 APPELLANT

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

CA/HCC/175/23

2 | P a g e

COUNSEL : Mohan Senavirathne with Nandana

Malkumara and L. Rajapaksha for the

Appellant.

Hiranjan Peiris, ASG for the Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 28/10/2025

DECIDED ON : 09/12/2025

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Appellant was indicted by the Attorney General on

25.11.2016 under Section 365 B (2) (b) of the Penal Code for committing

three counts of grave sexual abuse on Punniyadevan Parwathi between the

period of 23.11.2012 to 23.11.2013.

The trial commenced on 13.03.2021. After leading all necessary witnesses,

the prosecution closed the case. The learned High Court Judge had called

for the defence, and the Appellant had given evidence from the witness box

and had called his wife and closed his case.

CA/HCC/175/23

3 | P a g e

The learned High Court Judge after considering the evidence presented by

both parties before him and his predecessor, convicted the Appellant on the

1st count and sentenced the Appellant to 10 years of rigorous imprisonment

and imposed a fine of Rs.10,000/- subject to a default sentence of 03 months

rigorous imprisonment.

In addition, a compensation of Rs.150,000/- was ordered with a default

sentence of 06 months rigorous imprisonment.

The Appellant was acquitted from count No. two and three.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the Appellant

has given consent to argue this matter in his absence. During the argument

he was connected via the Zoom platform from prison.

The Facts of this case albeit briefly are as follows.

PW1 - the victim of this case, had been about 14 years old and was schooling

when she faced this grave violation. When she gave evidence, she was 22

years old. The victim has three siblings and she had been in grade 08 at the

time of this incident.

On the day of the incident the victim had gone to the Appellant’s house in

search of his wife. At that time the Appellant was the only occupant of the

house. The Appellant, using this opportunity, dragged the victim to the

kitchen, forcibly made her lie on the ground, removed her clothes, and

performed intercrural sex on the victim. The Appellant had told her not to

shout when performing the sexual act on her. In the evening of the incident,

the Appellant had come to her house and held her hand. On a previous

occasion the Appellant had held the victim from behind while she was

working at the vegetable garden.

A few days afterwards, the victim had divulged the incident to the Appellant’s

wife, who in turn had informed the same to the victim’s father. The victim’s

father had taken the victim and the wife of the Appellant to the police station

CA/HCC/175/23

4 | P a g e

to lodge a complaint. After making a statement to the police, the victim was

produced before the JMO for examination. According to him, she did not tell

anything to the doctor, but the history was narrated by the wife of the

Appellant.

The JMO who had examined the victim had not excluded the possibility of

sexual abuse. But he ruled out the possibility of rape being committed on

the victim.

After the closure of the prosecution’s case, the defence was called, and the

Appellant denied the charges while giving evidence from the witness box, and

further, called his wife to give evidence on his behalf.

In the first ground of appeal, the Learned Counsel for the Appellant

strenuously argued that the Appellant was not afforded a fair trial which has

been guaranteed under Article 13(3) of the Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, as the prosecution has failed to tender the

second statement recorded from the victim either to the court or to the

defence, upon the instruction of the Hon. Attorney General on 03.03.2015.

PW9 W/IP Subaratne Menike giving evidence before court admitted that she

had recorded a further statement from the victim on 03.03.2015 on the

direction of the Hon. Attorney General. The relevant portion is re-produced

below:

Pages 168-169 of the brief

m% ( Tn wo osk .re wêlrKhg meñKsfha ljr ldrKhla iïnkaOfhka idlaIs fokak

o@

W ( 2013.11.24 jeksod rlajdk fmd,siSfha <ud yd ldka;d ld¾hdxYh Ndrj rdcldrS

l,d' 2013.11.24 osk meh 1.30 g fmd,sia ia:dkhg meñKs,a,la jd¾;d ù

;sfnkjd wekaodk ,smskfha jhi wjqreÿ 14la jk mqKHfoajka md¾j;S lshk

nd,jhialdr oershg ia;%S ¥Ikhla isÿ l,d lshk meñKS,a, jd¾;d jqkd' meñKS,a,

iïnkaOfhka úu¾Yk lghq;= isÿ lr,d meñKs,a, igyka lr,d ;sfhkafka fjk;a

ks,Odrskshla' ta iïnkaOfhka úu¾Yk lr,d kej; kS;sm;s fomd¾;fïka;=jg

CA/HCC/175/23

5 | P a g e

WOD; heùfuka miq ue;sKshks tu mqKHfoajka md¾j;S hk nd,jhialdr oershf.a

m%ldYfha mriamr;djhka ;sfnkjd lsh,d kej; m%ldYhla .kak fmd,sia ia:dkhg

okaj,d tj,d ;snqkd' ta wkqj ;uhs kej; m%ldYhla igyka lrkafka uu

2015.03.03 jeksod'

m% ( t;fldg oeka Tn fuu kvqfjys úkaos; ;eke;a;sh tkï mqKHfoajka md¾j;S hk

;eke;a;shf.a uq,a lgW;a;rh ,nd .ekSula isÿ l,d o@

W ( uu uq,a meñKs,a, igyka lf,a kE ue;sKshks'

m% ( Tn kej; m%ldYhla igyka l,d lsh,d Tn .re wêlrKhg lsõjd@

W ( Tõ'

m% ( Tn ljr oskhloSo igyka lf,a@

W ( 2015.03.03 jeksod'

m% ( ljr fj,djloSo@

W ( meh 10.40 g'

m% ( ljr ia:dkhloSo igyka lf,a@

W ( rlajdk fmd,sia ia:dkfha oS'

According to PW9, the reason for recording the second statement is the fact

that the Hon. Attorney General had observed a contradictory position in the

1st statement of the victim. To be clear, the police were directed to record a

second statement, and I most definitely consider the availability of the same

to be very essential to dispense justice.

In Hattuwan Pedige Sugath Karunaratne v Hon.Attorney General SC

Appeal 32 of 2020 dated 20.10.2020 his Lordship Aluvihare held that:

“……………… No doubt the duty of a State Counsel is to present the

Prosecution in an effective manner to the best of their ability in furtherance

of securing a conviction, if the evidence can support the charge. The

Prosecutor, however, is an officer of the court and their role is to assist the

CA/HCC/175/23

6 | P a g e

court to dispense justice. Thus, it is not for a Prosecutor to ensure a

conviction at any cost, but to see that the truth is elicited, and justice is

meted out. A Prosecutor is not expected to keep out relevant facts either

from the court or from the Accused. If the investigation has revealed

matters which are favourable to the Accused and the Accused is unaware

of the existence of such facts, it is the bounden duty of the Prosecutor to

make those facts available to the court and to the defence. Rule 52 of the

Supreme Court Rules (Conduct and Etiquette for Attorneys at Law) Rules

1988 requires an Attorney at Law appearing for the prosecution to bring it

to the notice of the court any matter which if withheld may lead to a

miscarriage of justice………”

In Wijepala v The Attorney General [2001] 1 SLR 46 at pages 49 and 51

His Lordship Mark Fernando, J. held that:

“Quite apart from that being a failure to make such disclosure as the

statutory provisions require, the non-disclosure of that statement to the

defence and to the Court resulted - for the reasons I set out below - in the

impairment of the right of the Appellant to a fair trial which was his

fundamental right under Article 13(3). That Article not only entitles an

accused to a right to legal representation at a trial before a competent

Court, but also to a fair trial, and that includes anything and everything

necessary for a fair trial. That would include copies of statements made to

the police by material witnesses”.

“The failure to disclose to an accused the existence and contents of the first

information - which might have cast serious doubt on the informant's

credibility - may well result in a miscarriage of justice. Rule 52 of the

Supreme Court (Conduct of and Etiquette for Attorneys-at-Law) Rules,

1988, requires an Attorney-at-Law appearing for the prosecution to bring

to the notice of the Court "any matter which if withheld may lead to a

miscarriage of justice". That is a professional obligation founded on a

constitutional right to a fair trial”.

CA/HCC/175/23

7 | P a g e

In the case of Rowe and Davis v the United Kingdom [2000] ECHR, The

European Court of Human Rights held:

“… in a criminal case, that both prosecution and defence must be given the

opportunity to have knowledge of and comment on the observations filed

and the evidence adduced by the other party.”

The Supreme Court in The Queen v Liyanage and Others (1963) 65 NLR

337, stated that:

“… on a trial upon Indictment, by the very essence of the pre-trial

procedure, an accused person becomes aware of all the evidence relied

upon by the Crown in support of the Indictment and which the Crown

intends to place against him at the trial. He is entitled in law to know such

evidence before he is called upon to plead to the Indictment. It is a right of

his, inherent in that procedure.”

A fair trial would refer to the legal procedure which has been set in place to

guarantee the fair and just treatment of individuals accused of crimes, which

includes rights such as public hearings by an independent and impartial

court within a reasonable time period. Other key rights include the

presumption of innocence until proven guilty, the right to legal

representation, the ability to present one’s case and the right to question and

cross examine evidence against them. Such a legal guarantee is an

internationally recognised human right which is absolutely necessary to

ensure democracy and a just legal system.

Accordingly, in my view, the failure to provide the copy of the second

statement to both the defence and the court has resulted in a great prejudice

against the Appellant. Further, such a critical point not being noticed by the

Learned High Court Judge has resulted in it being even more unjust to the

Appellant.

Secondly, the Learned Counsel for the Appellant, submitting certified copies

of the case record bearing number HCR/38/2017 of the High Court of

CA/HCC/175/23

8 | P a g e

Ratnapura, contended that the Appellant had already been indicted and

convicted by the Learned High Court Judge of Ratnapura upon his guilty

plea regarding the same incident.

In HCR/38/2017, the Appellant was charged for committing rape on the

victim Punniyadevan Parwathie, under section 364(2)(e) of the Penal Code

between 23.11.2012 and 06.06.2013.

On the 09.02.2022, upon indicating that the Appellant was willing to plead

guilty to a lesser offence, the Learned State Counsel had filed an amended

indictment and had brought the rape charge from section 364(2) of the Penal

Code to sexual harassment under section 345 of the Penal code. The

prosecution had used the same Medico Legal Report of the victim which had

been filed in HCR/39/2017 to re-consider the charge.

The Appellant pleaded guilty to the amended indictment 29.03.2022 and was

sentenced to two years rigorous imprisonment suspended for five years with

a fine of Rs.5000/- subject to default sentence of 03 months simple

imprisonment. Additionally, a compensation of Rs.150,000/- was ordered

with a default sentence of 01-year simple imprisonment. The Appellant had

already paid the fine and the compensation.

Both the indictments were filed on the same day, that was on 25.11.2016 at

the High Court of Ratnapura.

As the prosecution reduced the charge of rape to sexual harassment

considering the same Medico legal report of the victim, I conclude that the

prosecution should not have forwarded the indictment pertaining to this case

under section 365 B (2) (b) of the Penal Code in the High Court of Ratnapura.

Once the MLR is compromised, it cannot be used to file additional charges

against an Accused.

The Learned Additional Solicitor General, in keeping with the highest

tradition of the Attorney General’s Department, endorsed that there is merit

in the appeal grounds discussed above.

CA/HCC/175/23

9 | P a g e

The Appellant has been in remand since 09.05.2023, the date of judgment.

Considering the evidence led in this case and guided by the judgements

mentioned above, I conclude that this is an appropriate case to acquit the

Appellant from the conviction. Hence, he is acquitted from this case.

The appeal is allowed.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgment to the High

Court of Ratnapura along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL