IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Suraweera Arachchige Somalatha

Indumathie Suraweera,

Warakapola.

4th Defendant-Appellant (deceased)

Nanhimi Achchi Kankanamlage

Hemachandra Kulasekera,

Meerigama Road,

Warakapola.

4A Defendant-Appellant

CASE NO: CA/839/1998/F

DC KEGALLE CASE NO: 22133/P

Vs.

Dahanaka Arachchige Amarasena

Gunapala,

Warakapola.

Plaintiff-Respondent

And Several Other Defendant-

Respondents

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Manohara De Silva, P.C., with Hirosha

Munasinghe for the 4A and 4B Defendant-

Appellants.

2

Chandana Wijesuriya for the 1A and 2A

Defendant-Respondents.

Dr. Sunil Cooray for the 3rd and 5th Defendant-

Respondents.

Decided on: 01.08.2019

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

This is an appeal filed by the 4th defendant-appellant against the

Judgment of the District Court dated 24.07.1998.

When this appeal was taken up for argument, the learned counsel

for the respondents took up a preliminary objection to the

maintainability of this appeal on the premise that Notice of Appeal

has been signed by the appellant herself and not the Attorney on

record and therefore the appeal is not properly constituted. There

is no dispute that the Petition of Appeal which followed the said

Notice of Appeal has been signed by the Attorney on record.

The short question to be decided at this stage of the case is, in the

said circumstances, whether there is no valid appeal before this

Court to be decided on merits.

The learned counsel for both parties agreed to decide the matter on

written submissions.

The learned Presidents Counsel for the appellant in his written

submissions drawing the attention of this Court to section 754(4)

of the Civil Procedure Code says that, according to the said section,

there is no necessity to sign the Notice of Appeal, and what is

necessary is to present the Notice of Appeal to Court within the

3

stipulated time, and therefore the Court cannot refuse to receive it

on the aforesaid basis.

Section 754(4) of the Civil Procedure Code reads as follows:

The notice of appeal shall be presented to the court of first

instance for this purpose, by the party appellant or his

registered attorney within a period of fourteen days from the

date when the decree or order appealed against was

pronounced, exclusive of the day of that date itself and of the

day when the petition is presented and of Sundays and public

holidays, and the court to which the notice is so presented

shall receive it and deal with it as hereinafter provided. If

such conditions are not fulfilled, the court shall refuse to

receive it.

Then the learned Presidents Counsel refers to section 755(1),

which reads as follows:

Every notice of appeal shall be distinctly written on good and

suitable paper and shall be signed by the appellant or his

registered attorney and shall be duly stamped. Such notice

shall also contain the following particulars:-

a) the name of the court from which the appeal is

preferred;

b) the number of the action;

c) the names and addresses of the parties to the

action;

d) the names of the appellant and respondent;

e) the nature of the relief claimed:

Provided that where the appeal is lodged by the Attorney-

General, no such stamps shall be necessary.

4

It is the submission of the learned Presidents Counsel for the

appellant that non-compliance of section 755(1) shall not be a

ground to refuse to receive such Notice of Appeal, and Notice of

Appeal can only be refused if conditions set out in section 754(4)

are not fulfilled and not otherwise. The learned Presidents

Counsel places emphasis on the last sentence of section 754(4)

which says that If such conditions are not fulfilled, the court shall

refuse to receive it and says no such phraseology has been used in

section 755(1).

Then the learned Presidents Counsel draws the attention of Court

to section 755(3) which deals with the Petition of Appeal and states

that in that section, unlike in section 755(1), it has clearly been

stated that if the Petition of Appeal has not been signed by the

appellant or his registered attorney, the Court shall refuse to

receive the appeal.

Section 755(3) reads as follows:

Every appellant shall within sixty days from the date of the

judgment or decree appealed against present to the original

court a petition of appeal setting out the circumstances out of

which the appeal arises and the grounds of objection to the

judgment or decree appealed against, and containing the

particulars required by section 758, which shall be signed by

the appellant or his registered attorney. Such petition of

appeal shall be exempt from stamp duty. Provided that, if

such petition is not presented to the original court within sixty

days from the date of the judgment or decree appealed

against, the court shall refuse to receive the appeal.

5

It is the final submission of the learned Presidents Counsel for the

appellant that although a Petition of Appeal cannot be tendered

without signing, a Notice of Appeal can be so tendered, and

therefore, it is immaterial to consider who signed the Notice of

Appeal.

I cannot bring myself to accept that line of argument.

According to that argument, although section 755(1) of the Civil

Procedure Code says that every Notice of Appeal shall be signed by

the appellant or his registered attorney, there is no necessity to

sign the Notice of Appeal and mere presentment of the Notice of

Appeal without any signature is sufficient.

If that argument is accepted, the registered Attorney, the appellant

or even a stranger can present a Notice of Appeal upon Judgment

being pronounced. No Court will accept such an argument.

Section 754(4) cannot be read in isolation. It shall be read in

conjunction with section 755(1) and the other sections of the Code.

Maxwell states that Every clause of a statute is to be construed

with reference to the context and other clauses of the Act, so as, as

far as possible, to make a consistent enactment of the whole

statute.1

If the Notice of Appeal does not bear the name and the signature of

the person who presents it, on that ground alone, it shall be

rejected. Court should know who presents the Notice of Appeal.

That is not high-flown law, but common sense. Law is consistent

with common sense and logic.

1 Maxwell on The Interpretation of Statutes, 12th Edition (Butterworths), page 47.

6

The learned Presidents Counsel for the appellant has cited

Medhananda Thero v. Dhammananda Thero2 in support of his

argument. In that case it has been held that there was a sufficient

compliance with the requirements of section 755 of the Civil

Procedure Code, where a Petition of Appeal did not bear the

signature of a Proctor or Advocate but the stamps on the Petition

were cancelled by the signature of the Proctor.

The law and the facts involved in that case differ from those of the

instant case.

In Medhananda Theros case, the signature of the Proctor appeared

in the Petition of Appeal.

More importantly, that case has been decided in 1944. According

to the 1956 Revised Edition of the Legislative Enactments of

Ceylon, section 755 of the Civil Procedure Code (Chapter 101), as it

stood at that time, reads as follows:

All petitions of appeal shall be drawn and signed by some

advocate or proctor, or else the same shall not be received.

It is clear that the procedural law has drastically been changed

between then and now. The Petition of Appeal cannot now be

signed by some advocate or proctor. It shall necessarily be

signed, if there is a registered Attorney, by the registered Attorney

of the appellant and no one elsenot even the appellant.

However, the question here is not whether an unsigned Notice of

Appeal is acceptable, but whether a Notice of Appeal signed by the

appellant himself when there is an Attorney on record is

acceptable. This question has not been addressed by the learned

2 (1944) 46 NLR 117

7

Presidents Counsel for the appellant straightforwardly. The answer

to that question is emphatically in the negative.

It is well settled law that when there is an Attorney on record, a

party cannot take any step in the case on his own. Until the

Attorney on record is removed or incapacitated on the grounds

stated in section 27(2) of the Civil Procedure Code, or simply

stated, until the proxy is revoked, every step in the case shall be

taken through such Attorney.3

When there is an Attorney on record, if a party is allowed to take

steps, there can be situations where both the party and the

Attorney taking the same steps in a case simultaneously. In that

event, Notice of Appeal and Petition of Appeal can even be filed by

both of them on different grounds. Can that be allowed?

Although both sections 755(1) and 755(3) state that Notice of

Appeal and Petition of Appeal can be signed by the appellant or his

registered Attorney, the appellant can sign them and file in Court

only if there is no registered Attorney on record.4

In Somawathie v. Buwaneswari5, Seelawathie v. Jayasinghe6,

Hameed v. Deen7, Fernando v. Sybil Fernando8, the Notices of

Appeal signed by the appellant were held to be bad in law.

3 Seelawathie v. Jayasinghe [1985] 2 Sri LR 266 at 270, Jinadasa v. Sam Silva [1994] 1 Sri LR 232 at 266, Fernando v. Sybil Fernando [1997] 3 Sri LR 1

4 Reginahamy v. Jayawardane [1917] 4 CWR 390, Silva v. Cumaratunga (1938) 40 NLR 139, Perera v. Perera [1981] 2 Sri LR 41, Somawathie v. Buwaneswari [1990] 1 Sri LR 223, Seelawathie v. Jayasinghe [1985] 2 Sri LR 266

5 [1990] 1 Sri LR 223

6 [1985] 2 Sri LR 266

7 [1988] 2 Sri LR 1

8 [1996] 2 Sri LR 169

8

Finally, in Fernando v. Sybil Fernando9 the Supreme Court10

authoritatively held that:

The provision in section 755(1) Civil Procedure Code, that

every notice of appeal "shall be signed by the appellant or his

registered attorney" must be conferred with reference to the

content and other clauses of the Code. Where the notice of

appeal is signed by the appellant himself when he had a

registered attorney on record, the lapse is fatal and is not

curable in terms of section 759(2) Civil Procedure Code.

For the aforesaid reasons, preliminary objection is upheld and the

appeal is dismissed but without costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

9 [1997] 3 Sri LR 1

10 Judgment was delivered by Amarasinghe J. with the agreement of Perera J. and Bandaranayake J.