THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA. CA (PHC) APN 125/2013 HC Colombo Case No : H.C.B.A.784/2013

Thennahandi Chalani Anuruddhika Silva, No. 415/134/A, Atambagahawatta, Uthuru Kadirana, Demanhandiya. Petitioner Vs. 01.0fficer-in-Charge Maritime" Unit, Crime Investigations Department, Colombo 12. 02. Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

Respondents And Now Between Thennahandi Chalani Anuruddhika Silva, No. 415/134/A, Atambagahawatta, Uthuru Kadirana, Demanhandiya.

Petitioner - Petitioner Vs. Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

Respondents-Respondents Warnakulasooriya Tharanga Pushpashantha Fernando Suspect (Presently at Remand prison)

1 I

t j l 1 l

f l 1 1

1

\ I

C.A.(PHC)APN No. 125/2013 H.C.Colombo No. HCBA784/2013

M.C.Colombo No.B/3344/01/12

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED AND

DECIDED ON

A.W.A.SALAM, J. (P/CA)

A.W.A.SALAM, J. (PICA) &

SUNIL RAJAPAKSHE, J.

Inoka Gamage for the petitioner.

Rajinda Jayaratne S.C. for the respondent.

03rd June 2014.

********

1

Heard Counsel for the petitioner in support of the application and

the learned State Counsel in opposition.

This is an application to revise the order of the learned High Court

Judge of Colombo dated 08.08.2013. By the said order the suspect who had

been reported to have committed or was concerned in the commission of an

offence under section 45(c) of the Immigration and Emigration Act was refused

to be enlarged on bail. When he was refused bail the suspect had been on

remand for more than a year. Significantly, the minimum sentence, if found

guilty under section 45(c) of the Immigration and Emigration Act is one year

rigorous imprisonment and the maximum five years. It is to be observed that

f!

rt

!

;

I

1 I l ! ! t I

~ j I 1 I I i I \

2

there was proof of exceptional circumstance for the suspect to be released on

bail as he had been in incarceration for more than one year which is the

minimum custodial sentence that could be imposed on him. As at today, the

suspect has been on remand for one year and eleven months which is

equivalent to two fifth of the maximum custodial sentence that can be imposed

on the suspect. This means that if an application to the High Court is made

today, the learned High Court Judge will have no option but to release the

suspect on bail, on the basis that he had been on remand for almost two years.

Therefore, to refer the matter back to the High Court to make an

appropriate order would prolong the agony and involves waste of precious time

of that Court and the suspect having to go through the inquiry once again.

Learned Counsel for the suspect submitted that the suspect in this case lives

in abject poverty which I understand that he cannot afford the luxury of

having to go through another bail application in the High Court.

In the circumstances, we consider the fact of the suspect

(Warnakulasuriya Tharanga Pushpashantha) being on remand for one year and

eleven months as proof of exceptional circumstances and revise the order of

the learned High Court Judge dated 08th August 2013 by granting cash bail

in a sum of Rs. 10,000/= (Ten thousand Rupees) and a sum of

f

! f

Jt[l

J

1

I

~ I , I

~ I I I I

!

3

Rs.1 ,000,000 j=(One Million Rupees) surety bail with six sureties from and

among the family members of the suspect to be approved by the learned

Magistrate. The suspect is directed to report to the Magistrate's Court of

Negombo until 05.12.2014 on every Friday between 9.00a.m. and 2.00 p.m.

After 05.12.2014 he is required to report to the Magistrate's Court of Negombo,

in the same manner, on the last working day of every month. The Registrar of

the Magistrate's Court is required to maintain a separate register for the

suspect to report to that Court.

An additional copy of this order to be dispatched to the Magistrate

of Negombo to give effect to the order permitting the accused to report to Court

as laid down above.

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

SUNIL RAJAPAKSHE, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Kwkj=