IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

John Keells Holdings PLC., Cinnamon Lakeside Commercial Centre, 117, Sir Chittampalam A. GardinerMw., Colombo 02.

Appellant

CA Case No.: TAX/0026/2013

Tax Appeals Commission Case No.: TAC/OLD/IT/017

Commissioner General of Inland Revenue, Department of Inland Revenue, Sir Chittampalam A.Gardiner Mawatha, Colombo 02.

Respondent

Before: Hon. D.N. Samarakoon, J.

Hon. Sasi Mahendran, J.

Counsel:Mr. Faiz Musthapha PC., with Dr. Shivaji Felix & Ms. Thushani Machado for the Appellant.

Mr. Saheeda Barrie, DSG., for the Respondent.

Argued on: 16.07.2021

Written submission tendered on: 30.08.2021 (final consolidated written

submissions of the Appellant.)

31.08.2021 by the Respondent.

1 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

Decided on: 16.03.2022

D.N. Samarakoon, J

The case stated contain the questions of law as below.

1. Did the Tax appeals Commission err in law in its application of section 63

of the Inland Revenue Act No. 10 of 2006 (as amended) insofar as it

applies to the Appellant?

2. Did the Tax Appeals Commission err in law when it came to the

conclusion that section 10 of the Inland Revenue Act No. 10 of 2006 (as

amended) had no application to the Appellant?

3. Did the Tax Appeals Commission err in law when it came to the

conclusion that its determination was not time barred?

4. Did the tax appeals Commission err in law when it came to the conclusion

that the initial assessment was not time barred?

5. Did the Tax Appeals Commission ignore the fact that the delegate of the

Commissioner General of Inland Revenue has gone beyond his statutory

remit by treating dividend income received by the Appellant as

constituting part of its statutory income?

6. In view of the facts and circumstances of the case did the Tax Appeals

Commission err in law when it came to the conclusion that it did?

Question of Law No. 01.

The term "dividend" is defined in section 217 of the Inland Revenue Act No. 10

of 2006 (as amended)

"dividend" includes

2 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

(a) any distribution of profit by a company to its shareholders, in the form of - ....

(b) the amount of any capital returned or distributed....

The same section defines the term "statutory income". It includes income under

section 3(a) which is business income and income under section 3(e) which is

dividend income.

It is true that all income whether business or dividend income is income liable

for income tax as the State argues.

But section 63 exempts a dividend received from a resident company if such

dividend has been either tax paid, tax exempt or tax excluded from the

statutory income of the receiving company.

The question in the phrase in the aforesaid passage which is in bold letters

does not arise for decision of this court as it is not mentioned in the Case

Stated that came up in terms of section 11A of the Tax Appeal Commission Act

No. 23 of 2011 (as amended), as the jurisdiction exercised by this court in

relation to a Stated Case is a jurisdiction conferred by the Tax Appeal

Commission Act No.23 of 2011 (as amended), within the contemplation of

Article 138 of the Constitution, because the jurisdiction is limited to express

the opinion on a question of law. It may also be noted that the assessor was of

the view that the appellant was entitled to the benefit of section 63 of the

Inland Revenue Act No.10 of 2006 and what he disputed was the deductibility

of certain expenses, whereas the respondent has taken a different view that

section 63 does not apply to the appellant.

As per the learned President's Counsel for the Appellant this a policy that has

commenced with the Open Economic policies in 1979.

It has commenced by section 35 of the Inland Revenue Act No. 28 of 1979

which read -

3 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

"35. Where a dividend is paid by any resident company to any resident or non

resident company and either

(a) a deduction has been made under section 38 in respect of that dividend by

the first mentioned resident company; or

(b) that dividend is exempt from income tax under section 11; or

(c) that dividend consists of any part of the amount of a dividend received

by the first mentioned resident company from another resident company;

or

(d) that dividend is a dividend declared by a quoted public company on or

after April 01st 1980 but before April 01st 1984; or

(e) that dividend is a dividend declared by a quoted public company on or

after April 01st 1991

that dividend shall notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any other

provision of this Act be deemed not to form part of assessable income of

the second mentioned company".

It was repeated in section 58 of Inland Revenue Act No. 38 of 2000 which

read -

" Where a dividend is paid by any resident company to any resident or

non resident company and either

(a) a deduction has been made under section 61 in respect of that dividend

by the first mentioned resident company; or

(b) that dividend is exempt from income tax under section 11; or

4 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

(c) such dividend consists of any part of the amount of dividend received

by the first mentioned resident company from another resident company;

or

(d) such dividend is a dividend declared by a quoted public company,

such dividend shall notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any other

provision of this Act be deemed not to form part of the assessable income

of the second mentioned company".

Then it came to section 63 of Inland Revenue Act No. 10 of 2006 which

reads -

"Where a dividend is paid by any resident company to any resident or

non resident company and either

(a) a deduction has been made under section 65 in respect of that dividend

by the first mentioned resident company;

(b) that dividend is exempt from income tax under section 10; or

(c) such dividend consists of any part of the amount of a dividend

received by the first mentioned resident company from another resident

company; or

(d) such dividend is a dividend declared by a quoted public company,

such dividend shall notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any other

provision of this Act be deemed not to form part of the total statutory

income of the second mentioned company".

Section 63 was amended twice in 2014 and 2015.

5 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

The words "such dividend shall" in section 63 of Inland Revenue Act No.

10 of 2006 were replaced by words "profits and income of such dividends

shall" by section 27 of Inland Revenue (Amendment) Act No. 08 of 2014

which amended section 63 aforesaid.

A further clause to this section was added by section 23 of Inland

Revenue (Amendment) Act No. 09 of 2015 which read

"For the purpose of this section the profits and income from such dividends

which form part of the profits under section 3(a) of this Act means profits

and income after deducting expenses in ascertaining the profits from such

business of receiving dividends".

It may be noted, that this amendment in 2015 is referred to not

because it applies to the years of assessment in question in this

case, but because it shows the intention of the legislature to apply

section 63 even if the dividend income is classified under section

3(1)(a).

Hence it appears that the amendments in 2014 and 2015 has a further

purifying effect on the principle embodied in section 63 of the Act.

It has been stated in paragraph 29 of the complete written submissions

of the Appellant that

"The amendment made in 2015 would have no sense if section 63 of the

Inland Revenue Act No. 10 of 2006 had no application to the dividends

received that formed part of business income within the contemplation of

section 3(a) of the Act".

Section 63 is only applicable when the dividend paid by a resident

6 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

company is received by another resident or non resident company and

not by an individual.

The Appellant's complete written submissions from paragraphs 42 to 50

cites authorities with regard to the interpretation of taxing statutes.

It is stated that Maxwell on The Interpretation of Statutes [London:

Sweet and Maxwell 1969] P St J Langan Edition at page 29 states,

"Where the language is plain and admits but one meaning the task of

interpretation can hardly be said to arise....The desirability or

undesirability of one conclusion as compared with another cannot furnish

a guide in reaching a decision".

In the same book it is stated at page 256,

"....the subject is not to be taxed unless the language of the statute clearly

imposes the obligation and language must not be constrained in order to tax a

transaction which had the legislature thought of it would have been covered by

appropriate words...."

In Cape Brandy Syndicate vs. Inland Revenue Commissioners (1921) 12

TC 358 at page 366 Rowlatt J. said,

"In taxation you have to look simply at what is clearly said. There is no room for

any intendment; there is no equity about a tax; there is no presumption as to a

tax; you read nothing in; you imply nothing but you look fairly at what is said

and at what is said clearly and that is the tax".

It was said in Inland Revenue Commissioners vs. Ross and Coulter [1948] 1

All E R 616 at page 625 by Lord Thankerton that,

7 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

"On the other hand if the provision is reasonably capable of two alternative

meanings the courts will prefer the meaning more favorable to the subject".

This last mentioned dictum agrees with the position that there is no

presumption as to a tax.

In Partington vs. Attorney General (1969) LR 04 HL 100 at page 122 Lord

Cairns said,

"If the person sought to be taxed comes within the letter of the law he must be

taxed however great the hardship may appear to the Judicial mind to be. On the

other hand if the Crown seeking to recover the tax cannot bring the subject

within the letter of the law the subject is free however apparently within the

spirit of the law the case might otherwise appear to be. In other words if there be

admissible in any statute what is called an equitable consideration certainly

such a construction is not admissible in a taxing statute where you can simply

adhere to the words of the statute".

Hence as it was said, there is no equity in a tax.

It was said in W T Ramsay vs. CIR [1981] 1 All E R 865 by Lord Wilberforce

that,

"A subject is only to be taxed upon clear words not upon "intendment" or upon

the "equity" of an act".

Although it was not a tax case, it was decided by H N J Perera C J while

delivering the judgment of the Seven Judge Bench in the Supreme Court in

Sampanthan vs. Attorney General SC FR 350/2018,

"....A court is not entitled to twist or stretch or obfuscate the plain and clear

meaning and effect of the words in a statute to arrive at a conclusion which

attracts the court".

8 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

The Tax Appeals Commission in its judgment said about the applicability of

section 63,

"On a careful examination of sections 03,25,26,30 and 32 of the Inland

Revenue Act it is quite clear that section 63 of the Inland Revenue Act

applies where the source is treated as a separate source of income other

than the main source of income of the business. Sections 63 does not have a

bearing where the dividend income is earned as part of statutory income

falling under section 3(a) of the Inland Revenue Act No. 10 of 2006".

It is stated in the complete written submissions of the Appellant that the Tax

Appeals Commission has erred in law by merely repeating an incorrect

assertion made by the delegate of the Commissioner General of Inland Revenue

in his reasons for the determination which said,

"A careful examination of the whole of section 03 section 25,26,30,31,32 and

63 it is quite clear that section 63 only is applied for the source of dividend

on which it is treated as separate source of income. Section 63 does not give

any effect for the dividend is represented as part of the trade income".

Whether the judgment of the Tax Appeals Commission is a mere repetition of

this assertion without any deliberation or not there was no basis for the Tax

Appeals Commission to say that "Sections 63 does not have a bearing where

the dividend income is earned as part of statutory income falling under section

3(a) of the Inland Revenue Act No. 10 of 2006", since that is what section 63

has stated in plain language. When the dividend is paid by a resident company

to a resident or non resident company and when it is a dividend either tax

paid, tax exempted or tax excluded it does not form a part of the statutory

income of the receiving company whether the said statutory income was under

section 3(a) which is business income or under section 3(e) which is dividend

income.

As the Appellant has stated if the legislature was of the view that section 63

9 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

applied only to dividend income that came within the contemplation of section

3(e) there would have been no necessity to amend section 63 because no

expenses are deductible when determining dividend income under section 3(e)

The respondent in his written submissions before this court filed on 26th July

2016 states as reproduced below,

13. Thus the trade and business of the company was primarily in the sphere

of investment.

.

17. The dividend income contemplated in section 3(e), is where the dividend is

not derived from the investment in the ordinary course of business of a company

but earned from a distinct and separate source.

18. This position is supported by the decision in the case of Financial

Investment Ltd. vs. Commissioner of Income Tax (Ceylon Tax Cases, Vol.I page

235). In that case Howard C. J. concluded that the company in question was a

holding company. He went on to hold as follows: I am therefore of the opinion

that the income derived by the appellant company from dividends and interest

fall within the words profits from any business under section 6(1)(a).

19. Further in the case of Commissioner of Income Tax vs. Arunachalam

Chettiar 37 NLR 135 it was held that if a subjects income fell under either profit

of business or income arising from interest, the crown has a choice of levying

the charge under either of the two heads.

Thus the case decided by a Five Judge Bench headed by Howard C. J. was

cited for the respondent in the present case.

The case is Ceylon Financial Investment Limited vs. Commissioner of

Income Tax decided under Income Tax Ordinance No. 02 of 1932.

10 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

The question in Ceylon Financial Investments Limited vs. Commissioner of

Income Tax was since the company was only a holding company, whose

income is derived from dividends declared by companies in which it owns

shares and interest on money lent out by it, whether the declaration of an

expense of Rs. 1270/- as management expenses which includes the Directors'

Fees, Secretaries' Fees and Auditors' Fees, which if not exempted that incurred

Rs. 153.96 of income tax, is liable to be taxed.

Hence the Assessee or the Appellant wanted to argue that what it does is

"business". This is contrary to the position of the Appellant in the present

appeal.

However it must be said that in the present case, the learned President's

Counsel for the Appellant does not say for a moment that the dividends

the Appellant receives do not form part of profits under section 3(1)(a) of

the Inland Revenue Act No. 10 of 2006. His position is that even if it falls

under that section, section 63 of the said Act would make him not liable

for income tax.

But if not for this alleged effect of section 63, the Appellant would have been in

a better position if the dividend income of the Appellant falls within section 3(1)

(e)

But in the Ceylon Finance Investment Ltd. vs. Commissioner of Income

Tax, the Assessee or the Appellant wanted to be treated under section 6(1)(e)

[which in substance is similar to present section 3(1)(e) which includes

dividends] because it wanted to argue that it is doing "business" in order to

qualify to deduct management expenses out of "profits".

Interestingly the Assessor and the Commissioner of Income Tax argued in

Ceylon Financial Investment Limited vs. Commissioner of Income Tax that the

11 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

Appellant in that case, which is a holding company is coming under section

06(1)(e) which is "dividends, interest or discounts;" which is same as section

3(1)(e) of the Inland Revenue Act No. 10 of 2006.

It is to be noted that the provisions in sections 3(1)(a) and 3(1)(e) of the present

Act is similar in verbatim to the provisions in the corresponding sections of

section 06 in Income Tax Ordinance No. 02 of 1932 (as amended) on which the

Ceylon Financial Investment Limited vs. Commissioner of Income Tax is

based.

It is also interesting to see that certain portions of the order of the Tax Appeals

Commission has been directly taken from the ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF

ASSESSEE, APPELLANT in Ceylon Financial Investments Limited case. For

example, page 237 of the Law Report of the said case in summarizing the

arguments in that case of Mr. H.V. Perera K.C. with E.F.N. Gratiaen for

appellant states,

There is a difference between investments of a private individual and

investments by a company carrying on the business of making investments. In

the former case each investment is an isolated source of income; whereas when

a company exists for the purpose of making investments, the source of income is

the business and the receipts of the business must be taken as a whole. National

Bank of India V. Commissioner of Income Tax.

The Tax Appeal Commission in its order (page 138 of the brief) says,

There is a difference between investments of a private individual and

investments by a company carrying on the business of making investments. In

the former case each investment is an isolated source of income, whereas when

a company exists for the purpose making investments, the main source of income

emanates from that business and therefore, the receipts of the business must be

taken as a whole.

12 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

It may be noted that except for a minor change towards the end (which is

underlined) most of the passage is same as the argument of the appellant in

the Ceylon Financial Investment Limited case.

It may be recalled that the learned President Counsel for the appellant in the

present case also drew the attention of the court to certain portions of Tax

Appeals Commissions order which has been taken from the order of the

Commissioner General of Inland Revenue.

Furthermore, the Commissioner General of Inland Revenue in his order cites

the cases of

i.Commissioner Inland Revenue Vs. Korean Syndicate Limited (12TC

181)

ii.The Commissioner of Inland Revenue Vs. The Tire Investment Trust

Limited (12TC 646)

iii.The Commissioners of Inland Revenue Vs. The South Bihar Railway

Company Limited (12TC 657)

iv.The Commissioner of Inland Revenue Vs. Dale Steamship Company

(12TC 712)

v.The Glamorgan Coal Company Limited Vs. The Commissioners of

Inland Revenue (12TC 1027)

vi.Henry Briggs Son and Company Limited Vs. Commissioner of Inland

Revenue (39TC 410),

all of which except the last case has been cited by Mr. H.V. Perera K.C. in the

above case for the appellant.

In the Ceylon Financial Investments Limited Case, the judgment was in favor of

the appellant since it was decided that the company is doing business it

earns profits and it can deduct management expenses from the profits.

13 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

The position of the Commissioner of the Income Tax or the respondent in that

case was that The English cases cited on behalf of the appellant were based

on the Excess Profits Duty Act and the Corporation Profits Tax Act. The term

business in those Acts has a much more extended meaning than in our

Income Tax Ordinance. (Page 238 of the Law Report)

It was also the position of the Commissioner of Income Tax in that case that

With regard to section 6 the arrangement in our Ordinance is not the same as

in the English Acts where the schedules are more or less exclusive. The

contention that the present case falls exclusively under section 6 (1) (a) is

untenable. (Page 238 of the Law Report)

The Commissioner of Income Tax further argued The dividends and interest in

this case fall exclusively under section 6 (1) (e) and The appellant

company does nothing to produce the dividends. (Page 239 of The Law

Report)

Not stopping there, it was further argued for the Commissioner of Income Tax

Even if the income falls under section 6(1) (a), the taxing authority has the

right of option to elect between section 6 (1) (A) and section 6 (1) (E) when the

two heads are equally applicable.

Ceylon Financial Investments Limited vs. Commissioner of Income Tax

was initially heard by the Chief Justice and Keuneman J. but was later

referred to a bench of five judges.

Howard CJ writing his Lordships Judgment said that on the facts it is evident

that the Companys activities, so far as they are material, during the year of

assessment, were limited to receiving dividends and interest and accounting for

them. (Page 240 of The Law Report)

His Lordship also said in order to meet the contention of the Crown that the

appellant Company should be assessed under section 6 (1) (e) and not as a

14 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

business under section 6 (1) (a) Counsel for the appellant has referred us to

numerous English authorities to establish the proposition that, although the

income of the Company was derived solely from dividends declared by other

companies in which it owned shares and interest on moneys lent out by it and

its operations included no other trading enterprise, it was carrying on

business. (Page 242 of The Law Report )

It was said following the judgment in Eccentric Club Ltd. at pages 688 and 689

by Pollock M. R., that its business may be quiescent and to a large extent, a

matter of routine. Its receipts may be derive, if not wholly, at least almost

entirely from the annual payments made to it by the Secretary of State; but it

remains a company alive and still requiring if only in smaller details, the

direction of its directors and the duties carried out by its secretary. It is still

concerned in the business of disposing of and diving the profits which it has

become entitled to by reason of its greater activity in the past and that activity

as well as possibly others may be awakened and quickened in the future. For

these reasons I am of opinion that the appeal must be allowed, with costs here

and below. (Page 243 of The Law Report)

Referring to the argument of the Crown the Chief Justice said The Acting

Solicitor General has contended that the interpretation given by the English

Courts in the cases I have cited as to what activities constituted carrying on

business turned on the special meaning of this term in the Acts imposing

duties on excess profits and can have no application to the term as employed

in the Ceylon Income Tax Ordinance I am unable to accept this contention.

(Page 243 of The Law Report)

It was further said Moreover the Chairman of the Board of Review in his

judgement states that on the facts it is evident that the companys activities, so

far as they are material, during the year of assessment, were limited to

receiving dividends and interest and accounting for them. I am of opinion that

15 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

so far as this aspect of the case is concerned the Commissioner and the Board

have regarded the matter from the wrong angle. (Pages 244, 245 of The Law

Report)

Having considered several other judgments cited, the learned Chief Justice

towards the end of his Lordships judgment said for the enumeration of

sources we must turn to section 6 (1). Can it be said that these sources like the

Schedules in England are mutually exclusive? The wording of sources (a), (b)

and (c) shows that these sources are mutually exclusive. (d) excludes (a), (b)

and (c), and (h) excludes all previous sources. But there are no words in (e) to

show that this source does not apply to dividends, interest or discounts arising

from a trade or business. If the business of a company consists in the

receipt of dividends, interest or discounts alone or if such a business can

be clearly separated from the rest of the trade or business, then any special

provisions applicable to dividends, interest or discounts must be applied

Therefor His Lordship said I agree, therefore, with Keuneman J. that the

Commissioner was empowered to charge the appellant Company under section

6 (1) (e) in respect of the dividends and interest received from undertakings in

which its capital was invested.

In any event, His Lordship finally said The only remaining question for

consideration is whether there are any provisions permitting the deduction of

management expenses in arriving at the net income of a Company when such

income is derived from source (e). This involves the interpretation of sections

09 and 10. Subject to subsections (2) and (3), section 09(1) permits the

deduction of all outgoings and expenses incurred by a person in the production

of income and applies to profits and income from any source and would

therefore prima facie apply to all sources in section 06(1)(a) to (h). Section 09(3)

provides that income from interest shall be the full amount without any

deductions for outgoins or expenses. Section 10(b) provides that no deduction

16 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

shall be allowed for any disbursements or expenses not being money expended

for the purpose of producing the income. Can it be said that the management

expenses were disbursements expended for producing the dividends received

by the appellant Company from investments in other Companies? I do not

think it can be. In England by virtue of section 33 of the Income Tax Act, 1918,

the management expense of any Company whose business consists mainly in

the marking of investments are deductible. No such provision exists in the

Ceylon Ordinance and having regard to its absence I am unable to say that

management expenses can be deducted in order to ascertain the assessable

income.

Hence as per Howard C. J., business expenses could not be deducted.

In Ceylon Financial Investments Limited vs. Commissioner of Income Tax

Soertsz J., said,

In regard to the next contention of the Acting Solicitor General that even if the

appellant company was carrying on a business and for that reason, came under

section 06(1)(a) and was entitled to claim deductions on account of the

management expenses of that business, under section 09(1) yet as the gain

derived by it from dividends and interest falls within the words dividends,

interest or discounts of section 06(1)(e) as well, the crown is entitled to elect

under which of these heads 06(1)(a) or 06(1)(e) it will make its assessment, I

greatly regret that I cannot assent to the view taken by My Lord the Chief Justice

in upholding that contention. On that point while I agree with my brother

Keuneman that the crown has no such option and that it was the intention of

the Ordinance to regard dividends, interest or discounts as a separate source. I

venture to differ when he says that,

If then the business of an individual or a company consist in the receipt

of dividends, interest or discounts alone, or if the business receiving

dividends, interest or discounts can be clearly separated from the rest of

17 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

the trade or business, then any provision applicable to dividends, interest

or discount must be applied, in so far as that statement, as I understand

it, implies that section 09(3) will uniformly apply if the interest part of the

gains of such business is separate or separable from the dividends part

of it.

Hence Soertsz J., while disagreed with the Chief Justice that crown has an

option to assess under section 06(1)(a) or 06(1)(e), as it pleases, agreed with

Keuneman J., that the crown has no such option. Soertsz J., also disagreed (as

it appears with both the Chief Justice and Keuneman J.) that if the business

consist of the receipt of dividends, etc., or if that can be clearly separated from

the rest of the business, then any special provision applicable to dividends,

etc., must be applied.

Keuneman J., in regard to cases cited for the Appellant by Mr. H. V. Perera

K.C. said,

As regards the first matter argued, a number of cases were cited to us. In the

case of The Commissioner of Inland Revenue vs. The Korean Syndicate Ltd., 12

Reports of Tax Cases 181, a syndicate was registered in 1905 as a company for

the purpose, inter alia, of acquiring and working concessions and turning them to

account and of investing and dealing with any moneys not immediately required.

In 1905 the syndicate acquired a right to concession in Korea, but in 1908 it

assigned its rights to a development company under an agreement. During the

years material to the case, the syndicate activities were confined to receiving the

bank interest and royalties, its only income, distributing the amount among its

shareholders and paying premiums on a sinking fund policy. It was held, that

the syndicate was carrying on the business for which it was incorporated of

acquiring concessions and turning them into account and that the profits derived

therefrom were liable to Excess Profits Duty.

His lordship further said,

18 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

The remarks of Atkin L. J. also are in point, I myself have no difficulty at all in

coming to the conclusion that this company is in fact carrying on business and it

carried on a business of receiving the profits from the concession, in which it still

retains an interest. It is true that it may be called, if you please, a passive

carrying on of business as opposed to an active carrying on of

business.Personally, if any emphasis is attached to the word active, I think it

would narrow the meaning of the word; for I see nothing to prevent a holding

company, which is a very well known method of carrying on business in these

days, from carrying on business.

Referring to another case cited, His lordship said,

Further in The Commissioners of Inland Revenue vs. The South Behar Railway

Co., 12 Reports of Tax Cases 657, decided in the House of Lords, Viscount Cave

L. C. said: It is true the company carries on no trade or manufacture and that its

principal and only function at the present moment is to receive and distribute the

fruits of its undertaking; but that is a part and a material part of the purpose for

which it came into existence. It was not intended to be a trading but a financial

company;.The company can no longer be called upon to fulfil its first purpose,

namely, to make advances for a construction of the line, because all the

necessary funds have already been advanced; but it is still fulfilling its second

purpose, which was to receive an income for its shareholders.and to distribute

it among them, .I think, therefore, that the company still carries on a business

or similar undertaking within the meaning of section 52 of the Finance Act 1920.

Refuting the argument of the Commissioner of Income Tax, that, in those cited

cases, the word, business was given an especial meaning, His lordship said,

It has however been contended for the Commissioner that the interpretation of

the word business in these cases has particular relation to the meaning of that

word in its special context. I do not think this is correct.

19 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

Analysing various items in section 06(1) of Ordinance No. 02 of 1932 His

lordship said,

If we examine section 06(1) of our Ordinance we see that source (a) deals with

the profits from any trade, business, profession or vocation. Source (b) deals with

a very distinct matter, viz., the profits from any employment. Source (c) deals

with the net annual value of land occupied by or on behalf of the owner, in so far

as it is not occupied for the purpose of a trade, business, profession or vocation.

There is a clear differentiation between source (c) and source (a) and I think the

language shows that it is distinct from source (b) also. Source (d) deals with the

net annual value of land used rent free by an occupier, etc., in so far as it is not

included in sources (a), (b) and (c). So far I think those sources are mutually

exclusive.

The difficulty arises with regard to sources (e), (f) and (g). In these cases there

are no words employed to show that the earlier sources are excluded. For

example take source (e), viz., dividends, interest or discount. There are no

words to show that this source does not apply to dividends, interest or discounts

arising from a trade or business.

His lordship at the end decided,

How then are we to treat income which comes under source (e) but can also be

regarded as coming under source (a)? In my opinion it was the intention of the

Ordinance to regard dividends, interest or discounts as a separate source. If then

the business of an individual or a company consists in the receipt of dividends,

interest or discounts alone, or if the business of receiving dividends, interest or

discounts can be clearly separated from the rest of the trade or business, then

any special provision applicable to dividends, interest or discounts must be

applied. I do not think any question of option arises.

Hence with regard to the applicability of special provisions applicable to

dividends, etc., when they come both under source (e) and source (a),

20 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

Keuneman J., agreed with Howard C. J. (although it was not said expressly,

because as it would be recalled the Chief Justice also came to the same

conclusion on the said point) although Soertsz J., has not agreed on that point.

But De Kretser J., (who did not write a separate judgment) and Wijeyewardene

J., (who gave his lordships conclusions in point form) have agreed with

Keuneman J. Hence 04 judges out of 05 have agreed on that point, which is

hence the decision in that case.

That is that, if dividends, etc., comes under source (e) as well as source (a), if

the business of the company consists in the receipt of dividends, etc., alone, or

if the business of receiving dividends, etc., can be clearly separated from the

rest of the trade or business, then any special provisions applicable to the

dividends, etc., must be applied without there been any question of an option.

Thus the case of Ceylon Financial Investments Limited vs. Commissioner of

Income Tax although cited for the respondent, to show that the company

receiving dividends, etc., only was decided to be coming under section 06(1)(a)

of the Ordinance, in its ratio decidendi has assisted the appellant in the

present case.

It may be noted that Keuneman J., further said,

It is no doubt true that the divisions into sources under section 06(1) does not

appear to be scientific and it is difficult to see on what grounds the division is

made. But we must take the Ordinance as we find it.

Thus the majority of the 05 judge Bench classified the appellant in that case

under source (e) as well as source (a) and also decided that any special

provision applicable to dividends, etc., must apply.

Hence the question of law No. 01 must be decided in favour of the appellant.

Question of Law No. 02.

21 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

Question of law No. 02 is the applicability of section 10(1) of the Inland

Revenue Act No. 10 of 2006. The said section reads

"There shall be exempt from the income tax - [it continues from sub paragraph

(a) to (j) and also continues in sub section 02(a) and (b)]

This becomes relevant under section 63(b) of the Inland Revenue Act No. 10 of

2006.

The Tax Appeals Commission in its judgment states that,

"Even though the representative of the Appellant referred to section 10 of

the Inland Revenue Act he failed to show how Section 10 is applied to the

Appellant's case. Further a close examination of the provisions in section 10

of the Inland Revenue Act shows that section 10 has no application to the

Appellant's case".

However, any dividend received by the Appellant coming within the scope of

section 10 of the Inland Revenue Act would enjoy an exemption from income

tax, one reason being that any such dividend received by the appellant would

not constitute part of its statutory income in view of the express provisions to

this effect in section 63(b) of the Inland Revenue Act. The tax exemption

conferred by section 10 is not dependent upon the application of section 63.

Hence question of law No. 02 must be decided in favour of the appellant.

Question of Law No. 03.

Question of law No. 03 is did the Tax Appeals Commission err in law when it

came to the conclusion that its determination was not time barred.

Section 10 of the Tax Appeals Commission Act No. 23 of 2011 provided that an

appeal must be heard and concluded within 180 days of the commencement of

the hearing.

22 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

But with regard to the appeals transferred from the respective Board or Boards

of Review it was provided that such an appeal must be heard and concluded

within 180 days of the transfer.

The Tax Appeals Commission Act was certified on 31.03.2011. Hence that is

the date on which an appeal before the Board of Review will stand transferred

to the Tax Appeals Commission. In this manner the appeal will be prescribed

by 180 days or by 27.09.2011.

The appeal of the Appellant from the decision of the delegate of the

Commissioner General of Inland Revenue was made in this appeal to the Board

of Review. Hence the particular appeal gets transferred to the Tax Appeals

Commission on 31.03.2011. Hence it would be prescribed by 27.09.2011.

This would have been the situation if not for the Tax Appeals Commission

(Amendment) Act No. 04 of 2012. The said Amendment Act changed the time

limits by its section 07 and the amendment to section 10 by the said

Amendment Act was made retrospectively applicable from 31.03.2011 by its

section 13.

It was said that 31.03.2011 was the commencement of the principal Act and

hence the date of the transfer of appeals pending before the Board of Review.

Therefore the effect of this amendment in 2012 was to keep such an appeal

alive for a longer period. The amendment extended the time period for the

hearing and conclusion of a newly filed appeal for 270 days and in respect of

transferred cases it was stipulated that such appeals must be heard and

concluded within 12 months from the date of the commencement of the sittings

of the Tax Appeals Commission.

Although the Tax Appeal Commission Act was enacted on 31.03.2011 the Tax

Appeals Commission as per a notice published by the Ministry of Finance in its

23 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

website commenced sittings on 08.03.2012. It is submitted for the Appellant

that the reference date is the date on which the Commission commenced

sittings qua Commission and not the date on which the Commission

commenced hearing a particular appeal. This position is correct. Hence it

would appear that for all appeals transferred to the Commission from the

Board of Review the transfer date is 31.03.2011 and for the purpose of the

amendment the date on which prescription commence to run in respect of all

such appeals is 08.03.2012. This would show that under the said Amendment

the Appellant's appeal will be prescribed by 07.03.2013.

But the Tax Appeals Commission Amendment Act No. 20 of 2013 effected a

further amendment. By this amendment the time period for appeals was

changed to 270 days from the commencement of hearing of each such appeal.

In respect of transferred appeals it was stated that they must be heard and

concluded within 24 months of the date of the commencement of hearing of

each such appeal.

This amendment came into effect from 01.04.2011.

The said Amendment Act brought another section 15 for the avoidance of

doubts which read

"For the avoidance of doubts it is hereby declared that the Commission shall

have the power in accordance with the provisions of the principal enactment as

amended by this Act to hear and determine any appeal that was deemed

transferred to the Commission under section 10 of the principal enactment

notwithstanding the expiry of twelve months granted for the determination by

that section prior to its amendment by this Act".

If there were no section 15 what would have been the position?

After the second amendment the provisions of section 10 of the Tax Appeals

Commission Act read

24 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

"The Commission shall hear all appeals received by it and make its

determination in respect thereof within two hundred and seventy days from the

date of commencement of its sittings for the hearing of each such appeal.

Provided that all appeals pending before the respective Boards or Boards of

Review in terms of the provisions of the respective enactments specified in

Column I of Schedule I or Schedule II to this Act notwithstanding the fact that

such provisions are applicable to different taxable periods as specified therein

shall with effect from the date of the coming into operation of the provisions of

this Act be deemed to stand transferred to the Commission and the Commission

shall notwithstanding anything contained in any any other written law make its

determination in respect thereof within twenty four months from the date on

which the Commission shall commence its sittings for the hearing of each such

appeal".

Since this amendment was retrospectively effective from 01.04.2011 the effect

was to consider the appeals having been transferred on 31.03.2011 were alive

until the Commission commences its hearing in respect of each such appeal

and then continue to be alive for two years.

In such a situation any appeal that stood transferred on 31.03.2011 would

have been alive in view of the said last amendment until the commencement of

hearing of the particular appeal and for two years from that date.

There is no doubt that the said "avoidance of doubts" Clause was enacted to

further make this position clear.

But the wording of the "avoidance of doubts" clause as it appears to this court

brings a further complication. The reason appears to be that the "avoidance of

doubts" clause referring not to the principal enactment as it stood on

31.03.2011 but to its amended version after the first amendment because it

25 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

says "any appeal that was deemed transferred to the Commission under

section 10 of the principal enactment notwithstanding the expiry of the twelve

months granted for its determination in that section prior to its amendment by

this Act".

Had it simply referred to the original enactment it would have been one

hundred and eighty days and not twelve months.

This is referred to by the Appellant stating in the complete written submissions

as "The avoidance of doubts clause applies for the interpretation of section 10

as amended with effect from the date of the amendment and not from the date

of enactment of the principal enactment".

It is stated in the very next paragraph,

"Section 15 of the Tax Appeals Commission (Amendment) Act No. 20 of 2013

does not have the effect of resurrecting appeals that have already been

determined by operation of law. The 2013 amendment substituted a new

Schedule I to the principal enactment which resulted in a number of new

transferred appeals. The avoidance of doubts provision would apply to such

transferred appeals and not to those appeals that have already been

determined. If the appeals that are time barred by operation of law are to be

resurrected and resumed there would be a need for clear language as in the case

of the Inland Revenue (Regulation of Amnesty) Act No. 10 of 2004 where vested

rights were expressly disturbed".

But the appeal in this case as it was seen was kept alive until 07.03.2013 by

the second amendment to section 10 of the Tax Appeals Commission Act. It

was to be heard and concluded within twelve months. The "avoidance of

doubts" Clause states that "the Commission shall have the power in

accordance with the provisions of the principal enactment as amended by this

Act to hear and determine any appeal that was deemed transferred to the

26 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

Commission under section 10 of the principal enactment notwithstanding the

expiry of the twelve months granted for its determination by that section prior

to its amendment by this Act".

The appeal of the Appellant to the Board of Review was an "appeal that was

deemed transferred to the Commission under section 10 of the principal

enactment". If so the phrase "notwithstanding the expiry of twelve months"

applies.

Hence the authorities referred to by the Appellant in paragraphs 89, 92, 94 and

95 of the complete written submissions will have no applicability since the very

provision of the second amendment to section 10 togetherwith the provisions of

section 15 is to give the Commission jurisdiction to hear an appeal

notwithstanding the twelve month period. There cannot be any other appeal to

which such words refer except for an appeal prescribed due to the expiry of

twelve months or determined by the operation of the law as the Appellant has

termed.

The Appellant has also referred to Stafford Motor Company (Private) Limited vs.

Commissioner General of Inland Revenue CA Tax 17/2017 decided by a

learned previous Bench of this court on 15.03.2019 and Kegalle Plantations

PLC vs. Commissioner General of Inland Revenue CA Tax 09 of 2017 decided

by the same learned Justices of this court on 04.09.2018. The Appellant invites

this court to depart from the judgments in those appeals.

But Stafford Motor Company (Private) Limited vs. Commissioner General of

Inland Revenue CA Tax 17/2017 was in respect of an appeal made directly to

the Tax Appeals Commission and not an appeal that was preferred to the

Board of Review and then deemed to have been transferred as in this case and

hence the provisions with regard to the time limits referred to in that case were

27 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

different. Section 15 in the second amendment applies only to "any appeal that

was deemed transferred to the Commission" and hence in that case the appeal

to the Tax Appeals Commission was not governed by that section. Hence for

the purpose of the argument in this case the distinguishing of the decision in

Stafford Motor Company (Private) Limited vs. Commissioner General of Inland

Revenue CA Tax 17/2017 is not necessary.

Basically the question in Stafford Motor Company (Private) Limited vs.

Commissioner General of Inland Revenue CA Tax 17/2017 was whether the

time limits stipulated in section 10 are mandatory or directory. That question

does not arise for determination in this appeal.

Kegalle Plantations PLC vs. Commissioner General of Inland Revenue CA Tax

09 of 2017 also dealt with an appeal directly made to the Tax Appeals

Commission. Hence the question that arose in that appeal too was whether the

time limits are mandatory or directory which as aforesaid does not arise for

determination in this case.

Hence even if the Appellant had a vested right on the appeal being determined

by 07.03.2013 as it argues it is vitiated by the revival, if not resurrection, of the

appeal by the provisions of section 15 of the second amendment.

Hence the Tax Appeals Commission has not erred in deciding that its

determination is not time barred as per the provisions applicable in this

appeal.

Hence the question of law No. 03 must be answered in favour of the

respondent.

Question of Law No. 04.

Question of Law No. 04 is Did the tax appeals Commission err in law when it

came to the conclusion that the initial assessment was not time barred?

28 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

With regard to the aforesaid, the Tax Appeals Commission in its order said,

The time bar period imposed by section 163(5) of the Inland Revenue Act

relates to the time within which the assessment is required to be made by an

assessor. However the requirement to send the notice of assessment in

terms of section 164 of the Act, does not impose a time limit within which

such notice is required to be sent. Even the amending Act No. 19 of 2009 did

not make any change to this position. It would appear that section 164 of the

Inland Revenue Act does not contemplate any specific time within which the

notice of assessment is required to be sent, unlike in the case of making an

assessment. However it does not mean that an inordinate delay in sending

the notice of assessment is permitted by section 164 of the Inland Revenue

Act. The delay of few days, as has happened in this case, cannot be

considered as a serious violation of section 164 of the Inland Revenue Act so

as to make the assessment invalid. Moreover section 165(1) of the Inland

Revenue Act which provides for the making of an appeal, against any

assessment made under the Act provides that an appeal could be made to

the respondent (Commissioner General of Inland Revenue) within a period

of thirty days after the date of notice of assessment. Hence it would appear

that the appellants right to appeal has not been denied due to the said

delay and therefore no prejudice has been caused to the appellant. Even in

the case cited by the representative of the appellant, D.M.S. Fernando vs.

Ismail Sri Lanka Tax Cases Vol. 184, the Supreme Court in dealing with the

Inland Revenue Amendment Law No. 30 of 1978 which, inter alia, required

the assessor to communicate his reasons for not accepting the return held

that the communication of those reasons was mandatory and that this

should be done at or about the time he sends his assessment on an

estimated income (page 194). In the case of Upali Wijewardena vs.

Kathiragamer and another, Sri Lanka Tax Cases Vol. iv page 313, the Court

of Appeal held that, if the assessment is made within the stipulated time and

is sent to the assessee at or about the time such assessment is made,

29 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

there is substantial compliance with the requirement of the law. Further in

the English case of Honig vs. Sarsfield 59 Tax Cases page 337 at pages 349

350 the Court of Appeal drew a distinction in making of an assessment and

the notice of assessment and said that they were different, the assessment

being in no way dependent upon the serving of notice. The court was of the

view that the issuing of the notice was independent of the making of valid

and effective assessment. Therefore in the present case the assessment has

been made within the stipulated time. However the notice of assessment has

been sent to the appellant after few days delay. Therefore it would appear

that, there has been substantial compliance with the requirement of section

163(5) of the Inland Revenue Act. Besides as stated above, no prejudice has

been caused to the appellant, as the appellant had the opportunity to

appeal.

If this argument of the Tax Appeal Commission is accepted, it means that the

assessor only has to make the assessment within the stipulated time but he

can indefinitely delay the sending of the Notice of Assessment.

But section 163(1) refers to assess the amount and shall by notice in

writing require such person to pay forthwith .. section 163(1) also

says subject to the provisions of subsection (3) and (5). It is section 163(5)

which has the time limit. Hence sending of notice also has to be done within

the prescribed time.

This shows that the duty to assess is not only coupled with the duty to serve

notice in writing but both are subject to the provisions of subsection (3) and

(5) of section 163 of the Act.

If not the assessor will be able to make an assessment even after the stipulated

period and send Notice of Assessment to the assessee. If the assessee takes the

position that the assessment was not made within the prescribed time the

assessor will be free to produce a document made after the prescribed time but

30 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

incorrectly bears a date within the prescribed time as evidence of making the

assessment.

Furthermore, E.Goonaratne, says in INCOME TAX IN SRI LANKA, first edition

at page 393, Making an assessment culminates in the notice on the

person assessed. An assessment is made when the assessment is sent.

Honig and others vs. Sarsfield (Inspector of Taxes) (1986) BTC 205, the case

cited by the Tax Appeal Commission was decided in the United Kingdom.

In that case Fox L.J., drew a distinction in making of an assessment and the

notice of assessment and held them to be different, the assessment being no

way dependent on the service of notice.

In the law report of Honig and Others (administrators of Emmanuel Honig)

vs. Sarsfield (H. M. Inspector of Taxes) Reported (Ch.D) [1985] STC 31;

(CA) [1986] STC 246 it is said,

.A back duty enquiry was instituted in 1970 and, on 16th March 1970, an

Inspector of Taxes signed a certificate in volume 1 of his District Assessment

books stating that he had made assessments on the administrators for the years

1960-61 to 1966-67 inclusive. The notices of assessment were issued on 16th

March 1970, but did not reach the administrators until after 07th April 1970. It

was common ground that the assessments would be out of time unless made

before 06th April 1970 by reason of the provisions of section 34 and section 40(1)

of the Taxes Management Act of 1970. The administrators appealed.

The Special Commissioners held that (1) the assessments were made on 16th

March 1970, when a duly authorized Inspector signed the certificate in volume 1.

They were therefore not out of time; (2) the increases to the assessments

contended for by the Inspector were supportable. They did not accept the oral

evidence of the son, M. Honig, one of the administrators, that the increases in

31 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

capital disclosed by the statements were attributable to rental income arising to

the son, not the deceased.

The Chancery Division, dismissing the appeal, held that on the first point, it was

clear on a proper construction of sections 29 and 114 of the Taxes Management

Act of 1970, that the making of the assessment was not dependent on the

service of the notice of assessment. The Special Commissioners were plainly

right to hold that the assessments were made on 16th March 1970 and so within

the time limit prescribed by sections 34 and 40 (1) of that Act. On the second

point, there was no possible ground on which the court could hold that the

Special Commissioners conclusion was perverse; there was ample evidence

before them on which to make their findings of fact.

The administrators appealed to the Court of Appeal on the first point only,

namely the date when the assessments were made.

Held, in the Court of Appeal, dismissing the appeal, that the assessments were

made on 16th March 1970 when the Inspector of Taxes signed the certificate in

volume 1 of the assessment book.

Thus it is clear that the procedure in England was different. The assessment

was made when the Inspector of Taxes authorized to make such assessment

signs the certificate in the assessment book. It is because under the Taxes

Management Act of 1970 the Inspector of Taxes was obliged to maintain an

assessment book. In this country the Inland Revenue Act No. 10 of 2006 does

not require the assessor or the Commissioner of Inland Revenue to maintain

such a register.

Hence the argument of the Tax Appeal Commission in the present case that the

effective date for the commencement of the time bar is the date of making the

assessment and not the date of sending the notice could have been accepted

if there was a book or a register maintained by the Commissioner of Inland

Revenue which will be evidence of the date of making of assessment.

32 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

The Tax Appeal Commission has also cited Philip Upali Wijewardene

(Appellant) vs. C. Kathiragamer and another (Respondent) decided in 1992.

The facts and the decision in that case is summarized as given below.

Assessment for the years of assessment 1972/73, 1973/74, 1974/75,

1975/76 were dated 29.03.1979 and received by the assessee on 04.04.1979.

Section 96 (c) of the Inland Revenue Act as amended by Act 30 of 1978 states

that no assessment of income tax or wealth tax or gift tax for the Y/A 01st April

1972 01st April 1973 and 01st April 1974 shall be made after 31st March 1979.

The aforesaid assessments were dated 29.03.1979. Therefore they were made

within the stipulated time.

Following the Supreme Court case of D.M.S. Fernando vs. Ismail 1982 (1) SLR

272, W.N.D. Perera J., said,

Communication of reasons for rejecting a return is mandatory and has to be

done at or about the time, an assessment is made on an estimated income. In

the instant case the assessments have been sent to the assessee at or about the

time, the assessments were made. There is therefore substantial compliance

with the requirement of the law.

The said judgment cannot be accepted for two reasons, one is intrinsic whereas

the other is extrinsic. D.M.S. Fernando vs. Mohideen Ismail 1982 and the

Court of Appeal decision on which it was based, Ismail vs. Commissioner of

Income Tax 1981, dealt with the question whether giving reasons for not

accepting a return is mandatory. Both courts decided that it was mandatory.

The Court of Appeal decided that reasons must be given before sending the

notice of assessment. The Supreme Court decided that the reasons can be

given at or about the time when the notice of assessment is sent. It is from

that decision the court in Philp Upali Wijewardene (appellant) vs. C.

Kathiragamer and another in 1992 has taken the phrase at or about the time.

The Supreme Court in D.M.S. Fernando vs. Mohideen Ismail 1982 did not say

33 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

that notice or the assessment can be sent at or about the time. This

intrinsic defect is even seen in the last quoted passage from Justice W.N.D.

Pereras judgment. In the aforequoted passage the first sentence refers to

reasons while the second sentence refers to the assessment. This is, with

respect, the inherent defect in that decision. The extrinsic reason for the

inability of this court to apply that decision lies in the difference between the

relevant revenue legislations then and now. The case of Philp Upali

Wijewardene (appellant) vs. C. Kathiragamer and another (respondent) 1992

was decided on Inland Revenue Act No. 04 of 1963 as amended by Inland

Revenue (amendment) Law No. 30 of 1978. The said amendment dealt with the

duty to give reasons for not accepting the return which was not a requirement

in the law as existed prior to the said amendment. Giving of the notice was

referred to in section 95(1) of the Act which said,

95.

(1) An Assessor shall give notice of assessment to each person who has been

assessed stating the amount of income, wealth or gifts assessed and the

amount of tax charged.

Hence a separate provision dealt with the duty to give notice of assessment.

But in the present Inland Revenue Act No. 10 of 2006, the same provision

deals with the making of the assessment and giving notice of assessment while

both requirements operate subject to the provision that stipulate the time limit.

Hence it is provided,

Assessments andadditionalassessments.

163.

(1) Where any person who in the opinion of an Assessor isliable to any income tax for any year of assessment, has notpaid such tax or has paid an amount less than the properamount which he ought to have paid as such tax for suchyear of assessment, an Assessor may, subject to theprovisions of subsection (3) and (5) and after the fifteenthday of November immediately succeeding that year ofassessment, assess the amount which in the judgment of

34 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

the Assessor ought to have been paid by such person,and shall by notice in writing require such person topay forthwith

(a) the amount of tax so assessed, if such personhas not paid any tax for that year of assessment;or

(b) the difference between the amount of tax soassessed and the amount of tax paid by suchperson for that year of assessment, if such personhas paid any amount as tax for that year ofassessment:

..

(5) Subject to the provisions of section 72, no assessment of theincome tax payable under this Act by any person or partnership

(a) who or which has made a return of his or its income on or before the thirtiethday of September of the year of assessment immediately succeeding that year ofassessment, shall be made after the expiry of eighteen months from the endof that year of assessment;

Therefore the notice of assessment must be given subject to section 163(5)

which deals with the time limit. As already said the Tax Appeal Commission

has accepted that the notice of assessment given in the present case was given

after the stipulated time. It says a few days delay will not make the

assessment invalid. But its decision is in violation of the provisions in section

163(1) read with section 163(5) of the Inland Revenue Act No. 10 of 2006.

Hence question of law No. 04 must be answered in favour of the appellant.

Question of Law No. 05.

Question of Law No. 05 is did the Tax Appeals Commission ignore the fact that

the delegate of the Commissioner General of Inland Revenue has gone beyond

his statutory remit by treating dividend income received by the Appellant as

constituting part of its statutory income?

It appears that the delegate of the Commissioner General of Inland Revenue

has varied the contours of the assessment with effect making a fresh

35 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

assessment by deciding to tax income which the Assessor himself had excluded

from the Appellants total statutory income. The delegate of the Commissioner

General of Inland Revenue has treated the dividend income of the Appellant as

part of its trading receipts and included it as constituting part of the

Appellants statutory income contrary to the position adopted by the Assessor

who has observed the relevant statutory provision.

The Tax Appeals Commission has erred in law when it took the view that the

Respondent was entitled to widen the scope of the assessment when arriving at

its determination.

Hence question of law No. 05 must be answered in favour of the appellant.

Question of Law No. 06.

Question of Law No. 06 is whether in view of the facts and circumstances of the

case did the Tax Appeals Commission err in law when it came to the

conclusion that it did.

The questions of law No. 01,02,04 and 05 being answered in favour of the

appellant and only question of law No. 03 answered in favour of the

respondent, question of law No. 06 must be answered in favour of the

appellant.

In the circumstances discussed as aforesaid, this court answers the questions

of law as below.

1. Yes.

2. Yes.

3. No.

4. No.

5. Yes.

6. Yes.

36 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

If what was said in the present judgment is summarized it will appear as

below,

1. It is true that all income whether business or dividend income is income

liable for income tax, as the State argues.

2. But section 63 of the Inland Revenue Act No. 10 of 2006 exempts a

dividend received from a residential or non residential company, if such

dividend has been either tax paid, tax exempt or tax excluded from the

statutory income of the receiving company.

3. A further clause to this section was added by section 23 of Inland

Revenue (Amendment) Act No. 09 of 2015 which read,

For the purpose of this section the profits and income from such

dividends which form part of the profits under section 3(a) of this Act

means profits and income after deducting expenses in ascertaining the

profits from such business of receiving dividends.

4. The amendment made in 2015 will have no sense if section 63 had no

application to the dividends received that formed part of business income

within the contemplation of section 3(a) of the Act.

5. The Tax Appeal Commission in its determination said that Section 63

does not have a bearing where the dividend income is earned as part of

statutory income falling under section 3(a) of the Inland Revenue Act No.

10 of 2006.

6. There was no basis for the Tax Appeal Commission to say what was

stated in 05, since that is what section 63 said in plain language.

7. If the legislature was of the view that section 63 applied only to dividend

income under section 3(e), there will be no necessity to amend section 63

because no expenses are deductible when determining dividend income

under section 3(e).

8. The respondent cited the case of Ceylon Financial Investment Limited vs.

Commissioner of Income Tax as the learned Chief Justice decided in that

37 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

case, I am therefore of the opinion that the income derived by the

appellant company from dividends and interest fall within the words

profits from any business under section 6(1)(a).

9. The question in that case was, that since the company was only a holding

company, management expenses on which income tax has been charged

could be deducted, the deduction being possible only if the dividend

income could be classified under section 6(1)(a).

10.Hence the assessee or the appellant wanted to argue that what it does is

business.

11.It must be said that in the present case the learned Presidents Counsel

for the appellant does not argue that what the appellant receives does not

form part of profits under section 3(1)(a). His position is that even if it

falls under that section, section 63 will make him not liable for income

tax.

12.The assessor and the Commissioner of Income Tax argued in that case

that the appellant came under section 6(1)(e) which is dividends, interest

or discounts which is same as section 3(1)(e) of the present Act.

13.The provisions in section 3(1)(a) and 3(1)(e) of the present Act are

ipsisima verba (similar in verbatim) to the corresponding provisions in

section 6 of Ordinance No. 02 of 1932 under which that case was

decided.

14.In that case the decision was in favour of the appellant since it was

decided that the appellant is doing business it earns profits and it can

deduct management expenses from the profits.

15.The learned Chief Justice said, If the business of a company consists in

the receipt of dividends, interest or discounts alone or if such a business

can be clearly separated from the rest of the trade or business, then any

special provisions applicable to dividends, interest or discounts must be

applied.

38 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

16.Soertsz J., while disagreeing with the learned Chief Justice that the

Crown had the option to assess either under section 6(1)(a) or 6(1)(e), also

disagreed with Keuneman J., that if the business consist of the receipt of

dividends, etc., or if that can be clearly separated from the rest of the

business, then any special provision applicable to dividends, etc., must

apply.

17.Keuneman J., said, The difficulty arises with regard to sources (e), (f)

and (g). In these cases there are no words employed to show that the

earlier sources are excluded. For example take source (e), viz., dividends,

interest or discounts. There are no words to show that this source does

not apply to dividends, interest or discounts arising from a trade or

business.

18.Keuneman J., at the end decided, How then are we to treat income

which comes under source (e) but can also be regarded as coming under

source (a)? In my opinion it was the intention of the Ordinance to regard

dividends, interest or discounts as a separate source. If then the business

of an individual or a company consists in the receipt of dividends,

interest or discounts alone, or if the business of receiving dividends,

interest or discounts can be clearly separated from the rest of the trade or

business, then any special provision applicable to dividends, interest or

discounts must be applied. I do not think any question of option arises.

19.Hence with regard to the applicability of especial provisions applicable to

dividends, etc., (such as section 63) Keuneman J., agreed with the

learned Chief Justice (since the latter as said in 15 decided the same

thing). Although Soertsz J., differed on this point, De Kretser J. and

Wijeyewardene J., agreed with Keuneman J. Hence 04 Judges out of 05

agreed on that point which becomes its decision.

20.Thus the case of Ceylon Financial Investments Limited vs. Commissioner

of Income Tax, although cited for the respondent in the present case to

show that the appellant receiving dividends, etc., only was decided to be

39 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

doing business under section 6(1)(a), in its ratio decidendi it assists the

appellant in this case, because the appellant relies on the applicability of

a special provision regarding dividends, etc.

21.Any dividend received by the appellant under section 10 of the Inland

Revenue Act No. 10 of 2006 would enjoy an exemption from income tax,

one reason being that any such dividend received by the appellant would

not constitute part of its statutory income in view of the express

provisions to this effect in section 63(b) of the Inland Revenue Act.

22.The determination of the Tax Appeal Commission would have been time

barred if not for the Tax Appeal Commission (Amendment) Act No. 04 of

2012.

23.Since the Tax Appeal Commission commenced its sittings on 08.03.2012,

under the said Amendment the appellants appeal will be prescribed by

07.03.2013.

24.But Tax Appeal Commission Amendment Act No. 20 of 2013 effected a

further amendment. By this amendment the time period for appeals was

changed to 270 days from the commencement of hearing of each such

appeal.

25.The said Amendment Act brought a section 15 for the avoidance of

doubts, which read, For the avoidance of doubts it is hereby declared

that the Commission shall have the power in accordance with the

provisions of the principal enactment as amended by this Act to hear and

determine any appeal that was deemed transferred to the Commission

under section 10 of the principal enactment notwithstanding the expiry of

twelve months granted for the determination by that section prior to its

amendment by this Act.

26.The appeal of the appellant to the Board of Review was an appeal that

was deemed transferred to the Commission under section 10 of the

principal enactment. If so the phrase notwithstanding the expiry of

twelve months applies.

40 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

27.Although the appellant invited the court to distinguish the judgment in

Stafford Motor Company (Private) Limited vs. Commissioner General of

Inland Revenue CA (TAX) 17/2017, that case was in respect of an appeal

directly made to the Tax Appeal Commission and the provisions with

regard to time limits in that case are different. Hence distinguishing the

judgment in that case, which basically decided the question whether the

time limits are directory or mandatory does not arise.

28.The same reason applies to Kegalle Plantations PLC vs. Commissioner

General of Inland Revenue CA (TAX) 09/2017 too.

29.Hence even if the appellant had a vested right on the appeal being

determined by 07.03.2013 as it argues, it is vitiated by the revival, if not

resurrection, of the appeal by the provisions of section 15 of the second

amendment.

30.If the argument of the Tax Appeal Commission that a few days delay in

sending notice of assessment is immaterial is accepted, the assessor only

has to make the assessment within the stipulated time but he can

indefinitely delay the sending of the notice of assessment.

31.But section 163(1) refers to assess the amount.and shall by notice in

writing require such person to pay forthwith. Section 163(1) also says

subject to the provisions of subsection (3) and (5). It is section 163(5)

which has the time limit. Hence sending of notice also has to be done

within the prescribed time.

32.Furthermore, E. Goonaratne says in Income Tax in Sri Lanka, first

edition at page 393, Making an assessment culminates in the notice on

the person assessed. An assessment is made when the assessment is

sent.

33.Honig and others (administrators of Emmanuel Honig) vs. Sarsfield (H.

M. Inspector of Taxes) cited by the Tax Appeal Commission has to be

distinguished because in England there was a book or a register to enter

the assessment, which is not the case in this country.

41 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

34.Philip Upali Wijewardene vs. C. Kathiragamer and another cannot be

accepted for two reasons, one is intrinsic whereas the other is intrinsic.

The intrinsic reason is that in that case the court referred to the

reasons and assessment, interchangeably due to confounding what

was said in D.M.S. Fernando vs. Mohideen Ismail regarding at or about

the time, which is a case specifically dealt with the duty to send reasons

and not the duty to send notices within the time limit. The extrinsic

reason is that unlike section 163(1) in the present Act where the making

of the assessment and sending of notices are included in one and the

same provision, which is also subject to the time limit, in that case under

the law No. 30 of 1978, which was the relevant legislation there was a

separate section 95 dealing with notice.

35.Hence the decision of the Tax Appeal Commission that a few days delay

will not make the assessment invalid, is in violation of the provisions of

section 163(1) read with section 163(5).

36.The delegate of the Commissioner General of Inland Revenue has varied

the contours of the assessment with effect making a fresh assessment by

deciding to tax income which the assessor himself has excluded from the

appellants total statutory income. The delegate has treated the dividend

income as part of appellants trading receipts and included it as

constituting part of appellants statutory income without observing the

relevant statutory provisions.

Hence the case stated in the form of an appeal is allowed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

42 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .

Hon. Sasi Mahendran

I agree

Judge of the Court of Appeal

43 | C A ( T A X ) 2 6 2 0 1 3 J u d g m e n t J u s ti c e D u s h m a n t a N . S a m a r a k o o n a n d J u s ti c e B . S a s i M a h e n d r a n .