IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

7. Lokupetiyapege Samel,

No. 525,

Goonadeniya,

Wekendawala.

8. Lokuketiyapege Adline,

Gulugahawatte,

Bowala,

Walasmulla.

Defendant-Appellants

CASE NO: CA/1041/2000/F

DC WALASMULLA CASE NO: 485/P

Vs.

Seethawaka Liyanage Don

Juwanis,

Bowala,

Walasmulla.

Plaintiff-Respondent

And Several Other Respondents

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Samantha Vithana for the 7th and 8th

Defendant-Appellants.

Saman De Silva for the Plaintiff-Respondent.

Decided on: 29.03.2019

2

Samayawardhena, J.

The plaintiff instituted this action seeking to partition the

contiguous allotments of lands known as Lenangaharuppa,

Middeniyegedarawatta,Hamasgaharuppa,Paluraanagedarawatta,

Medawatta and Katakalagahawatta alias Mahagedarawatta in

extent about 9 Acres. The Preliminary Plan marked X depicts a

land in extent of 6 Acres 3 Roods and 15.5 Perches. After trial

the learned District Judge in his Judgment has excluded Lot 5

and partitioned Lots 1-4 and 6, among the plaintiff and 1st-6th

defendants, and left 51/144 shares unallotted. Being

dissatisfied with the Judgment, only the 7th and 8th defendants

have preferred this appeal.

The 7th and 8th defendants raised the following issues at the

trial.1

19. Shall the land known as Katakalagahawatta depicted as

Lot 6 in Plan No.1703 of Surveyor Kumarage be excluded

from the corpus?

20. Did the 7th defendant purchase of that Lot?

21. Did the 7th defendant cultivate the Lots 2-4 of the said

Plan?

22. Have the 7th and 8th defendants acquired prescriptive

rights to those Lots on long possession?

There cannot be any dispute that Katakalagahawatta is one of

the lands sought to be partitioned, and Lot 6 of the Preliminary

Plan is comprised of Katakalagahawattavide the schedule to

the plaint and the Preliminary Plan. Therefore there is no

1 Vide page 55 of the Appeal Brief.

3

necessity to exclude Lot 6. It is the evidence of the 7th defendant

that he purchased 1/4 of Katakalagahawatta by Deed marked

7V1.2 The learned District Judge in his Judgment has stated

that the said Deed has not been tendered to Court for the Court

to consider the said claim. Learned Counsel for the appellants

did not produce that Deed at least to this Court. If what the 7th

defendant has stated in evidence is correct, that is not a ground

to exclude Lot 6 from the corpus. He might be able to produce

that Deed and claim undivided rights from Lot 6. The learned

District Judge has left some shares unallotted.

Regarding the issue on prescription, the position of the

appellants is that the 7th defendant planted the coconut trees

and the 8th defendant possessed them.3 Both of them are not

living on the land.4 Even assuming they did so, by Mortgage

Bonds marked 2V2 and 2V6, it is seen that the 7th defendant

has started possession as a usufructuary mortgagee and there is

no evidence about his change of character of possession and

commencement of adverse possession against all the co-owners

of the said Lots. The appellants have no other Deeds5, may be

except 7V1, which was not produced. Even if the 7th defendant

did not enter possession as a usufructuary mortgagee, mere long

possession by the 8th defendant is not prescriptive possession.

The 7th defendant is now not in possession.6

It is noteworthy that, the appellants, in their written

submissions tendered to this Court, have not dealt with what

they have put in issue at the trial. They do not say that those

2 Vide page 107 of the Appeal Brief. 3 Vide inter alia page 149 of the Appeal Brief. 4 Vide inter alia pages 148, 149 of the Appeal Brief. 5 Vide page 143 of the Appeal Brief. 6 Vide page 149 of the Appeal Brief.

4

issues should have been answered in their favour. It appears

that they now concede that they cannot succeed on those two

grounds. Instead they say that the plaintiff has not proved the

pedigree/the land to be partitioned has not been properly

identified/Deeds are not relevant etc. They did not put any of

those matters in issue at the trial Court. The appellants rejected

the plaintiffs pedigree in toto in the trial Court but did not

tender a separate pedigree. They, as I have already stated,

sought exclusion of Lot 6 and claimed Lots 2-4 and 6 of the

Preliminary Plan on prescription. In other words, they did not

claim undivided rights from the landthey were outsiders.

Having done so, the appellants cannot now seek dismissal of the

action on extraneous grounds such as that the plaintiff did not

prove the pedigree/corpus has not been properly

identified/Deeds are not relevant etc. They are questions of fact

which should have been raised in the District Court. The

District Judge has satisfied with the evidence and entered

Judgment accordingly. On the general principles that the

plaintiff shall make out his title and it is the duty of the District

Judge trying a partition action to investigate title fully etc., this

Court cannot play the role of the District Judge nor dismiss the

partition action summarily especially when those matters have

not been put in issue in the District Court. There is no

necessity to interfere with that Judgment so long as the issues

raised by the appellants have been properly answered.

I dismiss the appeal with costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal