, .

I I I

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Case NO. CALA 12/2016

HC Puttalam Case No. 24/2004

1

In the matter of an application for leave to

appeal and an Appeal to the Court of

Appeal in terms of s.331 of the Criminal

Procedure Act read with s.15 and 16 of

the Judicature Act.

The Hon. The Attorney - General

Hulftsdorp

Colombo 12.

COMPLAINANT

Vs

1 . Mahinda Gamini Samarakoon

Aluthwatta, Narammala.

2. Oevatha Periyaduwalage Piyal

Kusumsiri

No. 172, Saliyawewa Junction

Neelabamma, Ottupallama.

ACCUSED

Oaundalage Pushpakumara

21, Miles Post, Saliyawewa Junction

Ranawarapitiya, Puttalam.

AGGRIEVED PARTY

AND NOW BETWEEN

Oaundalage Pushpakumara

21 Mile Post, Saliyawewa Junction

Ranawarapitiya, Puttalam.

AGGRIEVED PARTY-APPELLANT-PETTITIONER

Vs

'.

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

DECIDED ON

L.U. Jayasuriya J.

1. Mahinda Gamini Samarakoon

Aluthwatta, Narammala.

2. Devatha Periyaduwalage Piyal

Kusumsiri

No, 172, Saliyawewa Junction

Neelabamma, Ottupallama.

ACCUSED - RESPONDENTS

The Attorney - General

Hulftsdorp

Colombo 12.

COMPLAINANT - RESPONDENT

: Deepali Wijesundera J.

L.U. Jayasuriya J.

: J.C. Weliamuna PC with

P. Hewamanna for the Aggrieved

Party Appellant Petitioner.

N. Ladduwahetti PC with

V. Ranasinghe for the Respondents

Chanaka Wijesinghe DSG for the

Attorney General.

: 12th July, 2017

: 17th July, 2017

The first and second accused appellants were indicted in the High

Court of Puttalam for torturing the aggrieved party-appellant which is an

2

i

I

I

I!I

J

~ tllIIl IJ I I il I

1

. ~

f

offence punishable under section 2 (4) of the convention against the

Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment

Act no. 22 of 1994.

The story of the prosecution is that the appellant was arrested by

Saliyapura Police for an allegation of a theft of a chain, he was tied and

hung and was assaulted by "Rathu Mahatthaya" at the said Police station.

The evidence reveals that an identification parade was not-held to identify

the suspects but the first and second accused were identified in the dock

whilst the appellant was testifying before the High Court.

After the case for the prosecution was closed the defence had

made an application under section 200 (1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act and the learned High Court Judge had delivered the

impugned judgment on that basis. This appeal is from the said acquittal.

It appears from the proceedings that the state counsel has not objected

to the application made by the defence.

Section 200 (1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act

provides thus;

3

lilf the Judge wholly discredits the evidence on the part of

the prosecution or is of the opinion that such evidence fails

to establish the commission of the offence charged against

the accused in the indictment or of any other offences of

which he might be convicted or such indictment he shall

record a verdict of acquittal".

The counsel for the appellant argued that the first accused set

up a false alibi, on a perusal of the proceedings we find that this

position is not correct.

Under cross examination there was a suggestion to the

effect that the first accused was not physically present at the police

station when the assault took place which does not amount to a

defence of alibi.

If an accused person takes up the defence of alibi such

person should take steps set out under ~ection 126 A of the Code

of Criminal Procedure Act. Learned counsel for the appellant

argued that the learned High Court Judge has correctly concluded

that the prosecution has established that the offence set out in the

indictment had been committed.

4

[

tf

f

I! I

\I

He further argued that the finding that there remains a doubt

as to who committed the offence is erronious. The appellant's

counsel argued that the identification of the first accused and

second accused was a proper identification and therefore the

learned High Court Judge should have acted upon such evidence.

On a perusal of the indictment the offence was committed on

01.09.2003 and the identification in the dock was made only on

29.08.2007 nearly four years after the commission of the offence.

It was held in Oayananda Lokugalappaththi and eight others vs

The State 2003 3 SLR 362 that "Law relating to identification does

not shut out evidence of dock identifications. The trial Judge must

examine clearly the circumstance under which the identifications

by the witness came to be made".

On a perusal of the evidence of the appellant we find that he

refers to the first accused as "6q) @e5)o)rnG3J" and second accused

as "(,2)JJ6e:D@t:D". In the statement made to the police on 1 0.09.2003

the appellant refers to a person called "@@J~ @e5)o)rnG3J" and has

stated that he can identify the officer who assaulted him. Further

he has not stated a word about "(,2)JJ600e:D".

5

I

\

II

Il

. ,

When a person states in a statement made to the police that he

can identify a person who committed a particular offence it is the

normal practice of the police to include the description of the

appearance of the offender in the said statement.

Although the appellant had stated in the complaint that he can

identify the offender the officers conducting the investigations have

failed to hold an identification parade in the Magistrate Court as

provided for under section 124 of the Code of Criminal Procedure

Act. If an identification parade was held the Judge would have

observed whether there was any material discrepancy between the

discription of the accused given to the police by the witness when

first seen by him and his actual appearance. (Turnbul guidelines)

It was held in the Attorney General vs Joseph Aloysius 1992

(2) SLR 264 that "An identification parade is a means by which

evidence of identify is obtained. But it is certainly not the only

means by which it could be established that a witness identified

accused as the person who committed the offence. Identification

can take place, depending on the circumstances even where in the

course of an investigation the witness points out the person who

committed the offence to the police. That evidence too would be

6

III i

.' .

relevant and admissible subject however to any statutory provision

that may specifically exclude it at the trial."

In the attendant circumstances of this case the learned High

Court Judge has correctly concluded that the identity of the

accused has not been established by the prosecution. It was held

in The Attorney General vs Baranage that "in a trial by a Judge

without a jury, the Judge is the trier of facts and "as such at the end

of the prosecution case in order to decide whether he should call

upon the accused for has defence he is entitled to consider such

matters as the credibility of the witnesses, the probability of the

prosecution case, the weight of the evidence and the reasonable

inferences to be drawn from the proven facts. Having considered

those matters, if the judge comes to the conclusion that he connot

place any reliance on the prosecution evidence, then the resulting

position is that the judge has wholly discredited the evidence for

the prosecution. In such a situation the judge shall enter a verdict

of acquittal."

However I think it is fit to set out guidelines when a complaint of

torture is received by the police. The officer conducting the

investigation or recording the statement should include in the

7 I }

1

J I I I !

f ! I I I I I

I

..

,

complaint a description of the appearance of the offender. Such

officer should take steps to conduct an identification parade in the

Magistrate Court as soon as the complaint is received. The

Honorable Attorney General should be notified about such

complaint so that he can supervise the investigation right from the

beginning.

After a conviction is pronounced the duty officer' of the police

station should be severely penalized for not making notes about

abuse of authority if the High Court concludes that an assault has

taken place in the police station.

Whilst condemning the acts done by the police I quote a verse

in Dhammapada.

"Q~mO)Q~~~ ~~ 000)0 8cBo

qOOJei)o eoo ~

t5)~t5)~"

Which means, all are afraid of the stick, all hold

their lives dear. Putting oneself in anothers place,

one should not beat or kill others.

8

} j I . .,.

1 j I I I I

Long before the Torture Act came into operation Buddha preached

little over two thousand five hundred years ago that one should not torture

others.

For the foregoing reasons I refuse to grant leave and proceed to

dismiss this application.

Application dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Oeepali Wijesundera J.

I Agree

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

9

I I ! I

~ tI [If ; r