H~_ TI-{E COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DE110CRATIC SOCJALI3T

REPUBLIC OF SRI LAN,KA.

In the rnatter of an Application for revision under C()I1stitution 138 and 145 of the Constit-"tion from an order of High Court of the vVestenl Province Holden at Gampaha.

OJ. Nakandalage Don Chandra JaYTnthi ..

No.220j2, Pahala Karagahamuna,

Kadawatha.

02. Sudath Janaka Indra Kumara,

C.A_(PHQNo.11/2013

fHC_amp,!ha No. 31/2008(REV)

No. 219/4, Pahala Karagahamuna,

Kadawatha.

RESPONDENT -PETITIONER-

APPELLANTS

Vs.

Urban Development Authority,

No.27, D.R. Wijewardhana Mw.,

Colombo 10

Presently Sethsiripaya

Sri J ayawardhanapura, Kotte,

BattararILulla.

PETITIONER-RESPONDENT -RESPONDENT.

1

BEFORE

COUNSEL

JANAK DE SILVA, J. & ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

Sumith Senanayake with H.A.P. Rashmika for

the Respondent-Petitioner-Appellants.

Sumathi Dharmawardane S.D.S.G. for the

Petitioner-Respondent-Respondent.

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS

TENDERED ON :

DECICEDON

04.06.2018 (by the respondent)

26.06.2018 (by the appellants)

13th July, 2018

*************

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

The Respondent-Petitioner-Appellants (hereinafter referred to as the

"Appellants") invokes appellate jurisdiction of this Court to set aside the

order of the Provincial High Court holden in Gampaha by which their

revision application was dismissed. With the revision application, the

Appellants sought to set aside the order of demolition issued by the

Magistrate's Court of Gampaha on an application made by the Applicant-

Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the "Respondent")

2

.,

under Section 28A(3) of the Urban Development Authority Act No. 41 of

1978 as amended.

With the application filed before the Magistrate's Court, the

Respondent sought an order of Court to demolish parapet walls

constructed by the Appellants obstructing road access to premises bearing

assessment No. 219/3A. This construction has been carried out by the

Appellants without any authority by the Urban Development Authority. A

sketch showing the obstruction to road access is annexed to the application

marked as Pl. In the said application jt is stated that the Appellants were

notified by registered post.

Upon an application made by the Respondent, the Magistrate's

Court has issued notices on the Appellants and since they failed to appear

before Court, a warrant was also issued. On 31.07.2008, the Magistrate's

Court issued an order of demolition of the specified unauthorized

construction in the absence of the Appellants. On 21.08.2008, the Fiscal of

Court reported that he has demolished certain parts of the unauthorized

construction but allowed certain parts to remain as its removal could

damage the buildings adjacent to it.

Thereafter, the Appellants have moved in revision and obtained

interim relief by staying the continuation of demolition activities. After an

inquiry, the Provincial High Court made order dismissing the Appellant's

3

petition on the basis that they failed to satisfy Court that there are

exceptional circumstances to invoke its revisionary jurisdiction.

Being aggrieved by the said order of dismissal, the Appellants

lodged an appeal addressed to this Court.

At the hearing of the appeal on 4.06.2018, parties invited this Court

to pronounce its judgment on written submissions.

The Appellant's grievance agc:inst the order of dislnissal is confined

to the failure of the Provincial High Court to consider the fact that the

demolition order was issued in respect of premises bearing assessment No.

219/3A whereas the demolition was carried out in respect of premises

Nos. 220/2 and 219/4. It is contended by the Appellants that this disparity

should have been accepted as an exceptional circumstance by the

Provincial High Court.

This submission made by the Appellants is based on a mistaken

notion of the factual position. It is clear from the application and the

annexed sketch tendered to the Magistrate's Court, that the parapet walls

that were constructed on either side of the road access to the premises

bearing No. 219/3A. Hence the reference to that assessment number in the

application. When the order of demolition is carried out by demolishing

the two parapet walls, the Fiscal has demolished the parapet walls

4

constructed on the boundary of premises bearing assessment Nos. 220/2

and 219/4.

If this submission is accepted, then the order of demolition was

issued by the Court to demolish the premises bearing assessment No.

219/3A. The demolition order was issued by the Magistrate's Court is, in

effect, to clear the obstruction to road access of premises bearing No.

21_9/3A and not to demolish that premises.

The Respondent instituted proce~~ings under Section 28A(3) of the

Urban Development Authority Act No. 41 of 1978 upon a complaint by the

owner of premises bearing No. 219/3A. The 1st and 2nd Appellants occupy

the premises bearing assessment Nos. 220/2 and 219/4 respectively.

Therefore, when the demolition order is carried out clearing the

obstruction to premises at No. 219/3A, it is inevitable that the parapet

walls of premises Nos. 220/2 and 219/4 are demolished. However, that

fact could not be stretched to denote a position that the fiscal was only

authorized to demolish premises No. 219/3A but instead of the said

specific order, he carried out demolition of premises bearing Nos. 220/2

ond 219/4.

In view of this reasoning, it is our considered view that the appeal of

the Appellant is devoid of any merit and ought to be dismissed.

5

Accordingly, the order of the Provincial High Court dated 08.02.2013

is hereby affirmed.

The appeal of the Appellants is dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JANAK DE SIL V At J.

I agree. I.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

6