IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

Court of Appeal Case No: The Democratic Socialist Republic of

HCC 0433 2019 Sri Lanka.

High Court of Colombo Case No: Complainant

HC / 3264 / 2006 Vs.

1. Uduwarage Anurudda Saman Silva

2. Degiri Susantha Priyadarshana Silva

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Degiri Susantha Priyadarshana Silva

2nd Accused Appellant

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department

Colombo 12.

Complainant Respondent

Before : Menaka Wijesundera J.

B. Sasi Mahendran J.

Counsel : Shanaka Ranasinghe P.C. with Niroshan

Mihindukulasooriya for the Accused Appellant.

Sudarshana De Silva D.S.G. for the State.

Argued on : 18.07.2023

Decided on : 05.09.2023

2

MENAKA WIJESUNDERA J.

The instant appeal has been lodged to set aside the judgment dated 28.11.2019 of the

High Court of Colombo.

The accused appellant (hereinafter referred to as the appellant) has been indicted

along with the 1st accused who had been acquitted by the trial judge, under section

296 of the Penal Code on the basis of common intention.

The grounds of appeal of the appellant were that,

(1) The trial judge failed to consider the improbability of the prosecution version,

(2) The trial judge could not have convicted the appellant after acquitting the 1st

accused on the evidence placed before Court,

(3) The trial judge failed to consider the confusion with regard to the recoveries made

on the statements of the accused.

The version of the prosecution is that on the day of the incident in the evening the

appellant and the 1st accused had arrived at the scene to clear the land adjacent to

where the deceased had been living on the request of the deceased and had left

manna knives under the chair of the deceased. Thereafter after a while they had

arrived again and had called his son the pw1 to bring a crow bar and soon afterwards

they had seen the 1st accused assaulting the deceased and the wife of the deceased

and his other two children who had been inside the house had come running to the

scene and they had seen the 1st accused brandishing the manna knife in his hand, and

then afterwards both the appellant and the 1st accused had left the scene together.

The witnesses had identified the appellant using the manna knife marked as P1 and

there had been another manna knife marked as P2. Both manna knives had been

recovered from the custody of the appellant and the accused. On the statement the

manna knife marked as P1 had been recovered on the statement of the appellant and

3

the manna knife which had been marked as P2 had been recovered on the statement

of the 1st accused appellant.

The doctor who conducted the post mortem had observed 7 injuries on the deceased

and the manna marked as P1 has had a blunt edged whereas the manna knife marked

as P2 has had a curved edge. The doctor had said that injuries on the deceased could

have been caused by both knives.

At the conclusion of the prosecution the accused had made dock statements stating

that at the time of the incident they had been in the house adjacent to the deceased

and they have over heard the noise and this position has not been put to the

prosecution witnesses at the time of cross examination. As such we see this as a

belated defense.

Hence on the evidence of the prosecution it has been established that the appellant

and the accused had come together to the scene and while the 1st accused held a

manna knife in hand the appellant had assaulted the deceased and both had fled

together. But the manna which had been identified as being used by the appellant had

been recovered on the statement of the appellant and furthermore the doctor had

identified injuries on the deceased which could have been caused by both the knives

marked by the prosecution.

But we observe that the learned trial judge had acquitted the 1st accused and had

convicted the appellant. We fail to understand the merit behind this, because we

observe that both the accused had come together to the scene of crime and have been

armed with manna knives and after the appellant had committed the act both have

left together.

The attorney general had indicted the accused on the basis of common intension

which is classified under section 32 of the Penal Code which read as follows;

4

When a criminal act is done by several persons in furtherance of common

intention of all, each of such persons is liable for that act in the same manner

as if it were done by him alone.

The above had been discussed in the case of The Queen vs. Vincent Fernando 65 NLR

265 by Basnayake J,

a mental sharing of the common intention is not sufficient the sharing must

be evidenced by a criminal act, or illegal omission manifestation the sharing

the state of mind .

As such in the instant matter we find that both accused have come to the scene armed

with manna knives before the alleged incident and had left the knives under the chair

of the deceased and had come back again together and had been together while the

act was committed and there after they have left together. Therefore, we see that

they have shared the common intention of causing hurt to the deceased and had acted

together in furtherance of the common intention. The injuries identified on the

deceased had caused the deceased to succumb to his death due to shock and

hemorrhage due to the cut injuries.

The appellant had committed the act although contradicted and the 1st accused had

been brandishing a manna knife according to some witnesses and according to others,

he had assaulted the deceased in passing.

But none of these had been considered by the trial judge. The trial judge had

considered the culpability of the 1st accused and had concluded that it was mere

presence although he was armed with a manna knife and there is evidence to say that

he had been brandishing the knife while the act of assault was taking place.

Hence, we are unable to agree with the findings of the trial judge of acquitting the 1st

accused and convicting the appellant.

5

We also note that the weapon identified in the hands of the appellant had been

recovered on the statement of the 1st accused. The other weapon marked as P4 had

been recovered on the statement of the appellant. This discrepancy had not been

considered by the trial judge and the culpability of each accused also had not been

considered by the trial judge.

Therefore we see that the trial judge had failed to consider the evidence of the

prosecution in the correct perspective and thereby has failed to appreciate the

ingredients of common intention meaningfully.

At this point we draw our attention to a judgment cited by the Counsel for the

respondents and observe that the sentiments expressed in the said judgment had not

been followed by the trial judge. It is as follows,

Rodrigi J in James Silva v Republic of Sri Lanka 1980 2 SLR 167 had said,

A satisfactory way to arrive at a verdict of guilt or innocence is to consider all

the matters before the Court adduced whether by the prosecution or by the

defense in its totality without compartmentalizing and, ask himself whether

as a prudent man, in the circumstances of the particular case, he believes the

accused guilty of the charge or not guilty. See the Privy Council Judgment in

Jayasena vs. Queen 72 NLR 313.

As such we are compelled to set aside the conviction and the sentence against the

appellant and allow the instant appeal but as the incident had taken place in 2003

which is 20 years ago, we do not think it is fair to send the matter for a retrial.

As such the instant appeal is allowed and the sentence and the conviction of the

appellant is here by set aside.

6

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Hon. Justice B. Sasi Mahendran

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL