Page 1 of 5

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

Court of Appeal Case No:

CPA / 62 / 2022

High Court of Colombo Case No:

HC/ 2281 / 2005

In the matter of an application for

Revision under and in terms of article

138 of the Constitution read together

with section 365 of the code of criminal

procedure Act No. 15 of 1975 against

the order dated 11/03/2022 of the High

Court of Colombo.

The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Plaintiff

Vs.

Sudath Kumara Perera

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Sudath Kumara Perera

Accused Appellant Petitioner

Vs.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondent

Page 2 of 5

Before: Menaka Wijesundera J.

Neil Iddawala J.

Counsel: Muditha Perera with Nihal Weerasinghe for the Accused Appellant

Petitioner

Lakmini Girihagama, DSG for the Respondent.

Argued on: 09.08.2022

Decided on: 06.09.2022

MENAKA WIJESUNDERA J

The instant application of revision has been filed to revise the order dated 11.03.2022 of

the High Court of Colombo. The Counsel for the accused appellant petitioner

(hereinafter referred to as the petitioner) stated that the petitioner had been indicted

under Section 364 and 345 of the Penal Code.

Trial against the petitioner had been concluded and he had been convicted with a

sentence of 15 years rigorous imprisonment, compensation and a default sentence. The

petitioner had lodged an appeal against the conviction and the Court of Appeal has set

aside the sentence and conviction on the basis that the petitioner has not been given a

fair trial because the learned High Court Judge had misdirected herself by commenting

on the Appellants failure to give evidence. Therefore, the Court of Appeal had ordered a

re-trial.

Once the re-trial has commenced Witness No.1 who is the victim in the instant matter

had been abroad and Witness No.2 had been dead. Therefore the prosecution has made

an application under Section 33 of the Evidence Ordinance to adopt the evidence led in

Page 3 of 5

the initial trial. The petitioner had objected but nevertheless, the learned High Court

Judge had allowed the application. The said Order is currently on review.

The Counsel appearing for the respondent vehemently objected for notices being issued

in this matter on the basis that the Court of Appeal in ordering a re-trial had based the

judgment on the fact that the learned Trial Judge had chosen the right of the petitioner

to make a Dock Statement instead of giving evidence is a misconception of the law

relating to the rights of the accused. The Counsel for the respondents strenuously

argued that the Court of Appeal had not evaluated the evidence but has only relied on

the principle of a fair trial stemming from the Learned High Court Judges comment with

regards to the petitioners Dock Statement and had not commented on the evidence led

at the trial. Therefore, she further commented and stated that the Witnesses No. 1 and

2 have been led in evidence and have been very lengthily cross examined in the high

court during the initial trial and as such falls within the meaning of Section 33 of the

Evidence Ordinance. As such she commented the learned High Court Judges impugned

order is not illegal or capricious on the face of it.

Having considered the submissions of both parties we note that, at this juncture what

this Court has to consider is whether there is a case to be reviewed on the face of the

record, as per the latest judgment, by Arjuna Obesekara J. of the Supreme Court in SC

Appeal No.59 of 2021 where it was held that Appellant must establish a prima facie

case of an illegality which warrants full investigation with the participation of all

parties ..The same judgment has further said that the power of revision is an

extraordinary power. A person invoking the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of

Appeal must inter alia (a) demonstrate the error or illegality on the face of the record

which would occasion a failure of justice and (b) plead and establish exceptional

circumstances warranting the exercise of revisionary powers in order to succeed with

his or her application. The presence of exceptional circumstance is the process by

Page 4 of 5

which the Court selects the cases where the extra ordinary power of revision should be

exercised .Therefore what this Court must decide at this juncture is whether there is a

prima facie error or irregularity established in the order in review to issue notice on

the respondents.

Keeping the principles laid down in the above case, this Court draws its attention to

another judgment of the Supreme Court SC Appeal 7/2004 by Justice Marsoof where

Section 33 of the Evidence Ordinance has been extensively analyzed. In the same

judgment their Lordships have quoted ERSR Kumaraswamy, The Law of Evidence, Vol 1

(pages 492 to 493) where it has been stated, the Court has to exercise the power given

in Section 33 with great caution and must insist on strict proof before holding that the

witness is dead or cannot be found or has become incapable of giving evidence or has

been kept out of the way by the adverse party or his presence cannot be secured

without an unreasonable amount of delay and expense. But once any of the first four

conditions of death, not being found, incapacity to give evidence, or being kept out of

the way by the adverse party has been proved , the Court has no discretion and must

admit the deposition , since Section 33 declares such deposition to be relevant and

therefore admissible. The judgment further says that, Kumaraswamy concedes that a

Court of law does have the discretion with respect to the last condition in Section 33

relating to a witness whose presence in court cannot be obtained without an amount

of delay or expense which the Court decides to be unreasonable. The present case does

not arise from such a situation and there is no such a way for a dead witness to give

evidence.

In the instant matter the respondents have taken steps to satisfy the Learned High Court

judge that Witness No. 1 and 2 cannot be brought to Court without unreasonable delay.

Therefore, the High Court Judge has held that the said steps taken by the respondents

fall within the ambit of the Section 33 of the Evidence Ordinance.

Page 5 of 5

Hence, on the face of the record the impugned Order cited by the petitioner does not

envisage a situation which is irrational, illegal and capricious under the law which

amounts to be exceptional to invoke the powers of revision as stated by the Supreme

Court in the above quoted cases.

This court also notes that the Court of Appeal in the Appeal lodged by the petitioner

against the conviction and the sentence have based the judgment on the petitioner of

not having a fair trial is purely on the comment by the trial judge with regards to the

petitioner not giving evidence from the dock and adopting to make a dock statement. In

fact, this Court is of the view that the Court of Appeal has ordered a re-trial for the

reason that there was evidence to be considered given by the Witnesses. Therefore, in

ordering to adopt the evidence of PW 1 and PW 2 by the learned High Court Judge is not

exceptional enough to issue notices on the respondents to act in review. As such,

notices on the respondents are refused and the application is dismissed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal.

I agree.

Neil Iddawala J.

Judge of the Court Of Appeal.