1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C A (PHC) / 85 / 2004

Provincial High Court of

Southern Province (Hambantota)

Case No. HCA 102/ 2002

In the matter of an Appeal under Article

154 P (6) read with Article 138 of the

Constitution against judgment of

Provincial High Court exercising its writ

jurisdiction.

Chamal Athukorala Kodithuwakku,

Chamal Niwasa,

Maheela,

Beliaththa.

PETITIONER - APPELLANT

..

Before:

2

-Vs-

Chairman,

National Housing Development

Authority,

Sir Chiththampalam Gardiner

Mawatha,

Colombo 02.

RESPONDENT - RESPONDENT

K K Wickremasinghe J

P. Padman Surasena J

Counsel; Bandara Senarath for the Petitioner.- Appellant.

Chaya Sri Nammuni SC for the Respondent - Respondent.

3

Decided on: 2017 - 09 - 27

JUDGMENT

P Padman Surasena J

Learned counsel for all the Parties when this case came up on 2017-07-19

before us, agreed to have this case disposed of by way of written

submissions, dispensing with their necessity of making oral submissions.

Therefore, this judgment is based on the material that has been adduced

by parties in their pleadings and the written submissions.

The Petitioner- Appellant (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the

Appellant) had filed an application in the Provincial High Court of Southern

Province holden at Hambantota praying for a writ of certiorari to quash the

application filed in the Magistrate's Court of Ti~samaharama by the

Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the

Respondent) under section 5 of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession)

4

Act. The said application had sought an order from the Magistrate's Court

to evict the Appellant from the land described in the schedule thereto.

Learned Provincial High Court Judge for the reasons set out in his

judgment dated 2003-12-10 has refused and dismissed the said

application. The Appellant has filed the instant appeal against that

judgment.

It is to be observed at the outset that the Supreme Court in the case of

The Superintendent, Stafford Estate and two others Vs. Solaimuthu Rasu1

had clearly held that the jurisdiction conferred on the Provincial High

Courts under Article 154 P 4(b) does not extend to matters in respect of

powers relating to recovery/dispossession encroachment or alienation of

state lands since they are not found in the Provincial Council List (List 1) in

the 9th Schedule to the 13th amendment to the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Thus, it is now settled law that the Provincial High Court does not possess

jurisdiction to issue under Article 154 P 4(b), writs of this nature, in respect

of matters relating to alienation of state lands since such a subject is not

1 2013 (1) Sri. L. R. 25.

,

5

found in the Provincial Council List (List 1) in the 9th Schedule to the 13th

amendment to the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka. \

In these circumstances, this Court takes the view that this appeal is not

maintainable and hence, proceeds to dismiss this appeal with costs.

Appeal is dismissed with costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL i ! !

K K Wickremasinghe J

I agree,

{I!

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL f I

I

I!

\

~