IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRAIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

Court of Appeal case no. CAlPHC/09/200S

H.C. Negombo case no. 220/2004

M.C. Wattala case no. 90478

Ranjith Hewawitharana,

No.253, Weralla Watta, Yakkala.

2nd Respondent Respondent Appellant

Ronald Ashoka Hewawitharana,

No.253, Weralla Watta, Yakkala.

Added Respondnet Respondent Appellant

Vs.

Warnakula Patabendige Rukshan Anthony Perera,

P.O.Box No.2, Dikovita, Hendala, Wattala.

1 st Respondent Petitioner Respondent.

Officer in Charge,

Police Station, Wattala.

Informant Respondent Respondent

Before : P.R.Walgama J.

: L.T.B. Dehideniya J.

Counsel : Parties were absent and unrepresented.

Decided on : 22.11.2016

L.T.B. Dehideniya J.

This is an appeal from the High Court ofNegombo.

The notices were issued to parties on several times but they did not take interest

in participating at the hearing. The notices never returned undelivered. The Court

presumed that the notices were served and fixed the case for judgment.

1

2

The police filed information in the Magistrate Court of Wattala under section

66( 1) of the Primary Court Procedure Act informing that a land dispute

threatening breach of the peace has arisen. After filing the affidavits, documents

and the written submissions of the parties, the learned Magistrate pronounced her

determination.

In her order the learned Magistrate has determined that the 1 st party Respondent

Petitioner Respondent (the Respondent) was in possession in the disputed land

which was described in the in the affidavit of the Respondent and decided that

the Respondent is entitle to possession until it is varied by virtue of an order or a

decree of a competent Court and prohibited all disturbance or interference.

The learned Magistrate further ordered that the status quo shall be maintained

until it is varied by a competent court and the Respondent and two other

Directors of the Pegsaus Reef Hotel Ltd. were ordered to enter to a bond of Rs.

1,000,000.00 each to maintain the status quo. The Respondent being aggrieved

by the said two additional conditions moved in revision in the High Court

Negombo. The learned High Court Judge acting in revision set aside the said two

conditions. The 2nd party and added 3rd party Respondents Respondents

Appellants (the Appellants) appealed to this Court from the said order of the

learned High Court Judge.

The determination that the Respondent is entitled to posseSSIOn was not

challenged in the High Court. That part was accepted by the Respondent. The

Appellants did not move in revision against the order. Therefore we need not

consider the part that was accepted by the parties.

The part that was disputed is the two conditions imposed by the learned

Magistrate. This dispute being a dispute on possession the judge of the Primary

Court (the Magistrate in this instant) has correctly decided that one party was in

possession at the time of filing the information and no dispossession has been

proved, ordered that party to be entitle to possession. Once the order on

possession was made, any violation will be punished as a contempt of court. The

j

I

/

3

judge is empowered to make that determination under part VII of the Primary

Court Procedure Act but not empowered to order any party to maintain the status

quo indefinitely.

Under section 70 of the Act the Magistrate can order security on possession. The

section reads;

70. An order made under this Part may also contain such other directions as

the Judge of the Primary Court may think fit with regard to the furnishing of

security for the exercise of the right of possession of the land or part of it or

for the exercise of any right in such land or with regard to the sale of any crop

or produce or the manner of exercise of any right in such land or the custody

or disposal of the proceeds of the sale of any crop or produce.

This section does not give any authority to the Magistrate to order the status quo

to be maintained. In this case the two Directors of the Hotel, who were not parties

to the action, were also ordered to enter in to a bond. The title of the land may be

with a third party or there may be a dispute with a third party, but without making

him/they party/parties, and giving he/them a hearing, Court cannot make an order

against him/them. Any such order is a violation of natural justice. The learned

High Court Judge has correctly removed the violation of the natural justice.

We see no reason to interfere with the order of the learned High Court Judge.

The appeal is dismissed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P.R.Walgama J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal