1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal under Article

154 P (6) read with Article 138 of the

Constitution against judgment of

Provincial High Court exercising its writ

jurisdiction.

C A (PHC) / 105 / 2007

Provincial High Court of

Sabaragamuwa (Rathnapura)

Case No. HCR/WA 02 / 2006

1. A Gunerathna Menike

Uru Pelewwa,

Kuruwita.

\ I I

t I

! I

~ III

t1III

~ t

\

2

2. Pahala Gamaralalage Nandawathie

Menike,

Uru Pelewwa,

Kuruwita.

RESPONDENT - APPELLANTS

-Vs-

1. Witharamalage Dhanarathna

Menike,

Tissa,

Uru Pelewwa,

Kuruwita.

PETITIONER RESPONDENT

2. W P Wijerathna,

Divisional Secretary,

3

Kuruwita.

3. W A Karunarathna,

Provincial Land Commissioner,

Sabaragamuwa Provincial Council,

New Town,

Rathnapura.

RESPONDENT - RESPONDENTS

Before: K K Wickremasinghe 1

P. Padman Surasena 1

Counsel; Rajitha Weerasinghe instructed by Achala Kulasuriya for the

Respondent - Appellants.

Yadeesh Tennakoon instructed by A De Silva for the Petitioner

Respondent.

Suranga Wimalasena sse for the Respondent - Respondents.

,

f

!

\

t II

I

f !

4

Decided on: 2017 - 10 - 30

JUDGMENT

P Pad man Surasena J

Learned counsel for all the Parties when this case came up on 2017-08-29

before us, agreed to have this case disposed of by way of written

submissions, dispensing with their necessity of making oral submissions.

They agreed that this Court could pronounce the judgment after

considering the written submissions they would file.

The Petitioner- Respondent (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the 1st

Respondent) had filed an application in the Provincial High Court holden at

Rathnapura praying for a writ of certiorari to quash a decision taken by the

2nd Respondent Respondent accepting the 2nd Respondent - Appellant as

the successor as nominated by the pt Respondent - Appellant in terms of

section 48 of the Land Development Ordinance.

Thus, the subject matter of this application as a whole is clearly pertaining

to alienation of state lands.

I I

5

At the outset, it must be noted that the Supreme Court in the case of The

Superintendent, Stafford Estate and two others Vs. Solaimuthu Rasu1 had

clearly held that the jurisdiction conferred on the Provincial High Courts

under Article 154 P 4(b) does not extend to matters in respect of powers

relating to recovery/dispossession encroachment or alienation of State

lands since they are not found in the Provincial Council List (List 1) in the

9th Schedule to the 13th amendment to the Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Therefore, it is now settled law that the Provincial High Court does not

possess jurisdiction to issue under Article 154 P 4(b) writs of this nature in

respect of matters relating to alienation of state lands since such a subject

is not found in the Provincial Council List (List 1) in the 9th Schedule to the

13th amendment to the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of

Sri Lanka.

1 2013 (1) Sri. L. R. 25.

6

Perusal of the judgment of the learned Provincial High Court Judge shows

that he has failed to consider this aspect of the jurisdiction of the Provincial

High Court before he made the impugned order.

In these circumstances, it is clear that the Provincial High Court has

pronounced the judgment in this case without having any jurisdiction in

that rega rd.

Although the contesting parties had undertaken to file written submissions

only the Appellant had tendered the written submission to this Court.

However, it is unfortunate that the learned counsel for the Appellant had

not raised the above issue pertaining to the lack of jurisdiction. The

arguments put forward by him are on other issues. Since this Court has

held that the Provincial High Court in this case, had issued the impugned

writ without jurisdiction, it would not be necessary for this Court to

consider those other issues. Since the Respondent has not taken any

interest to file written submissions on his behalf, this Court has to conclude

that the Respondent has no valid ground to be placed before this Court.

I

I r I

7

For the foregoing reasons, this Court decides to set aside the judgment

dated 2007:-05-24 entered into by the learned Provincial High Court Judge.

The application made to the Provincial High Court must stand refused and

dismissed. No Cost is ordered.

Appeal is allowed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K K Wickremasinghe J

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

! I I

f I