1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979

Court of Appeal No:

CA/HCC/0102-103/2020 1.Basnayake Appuhamilage Sudath

Rohana Thissera

High Court of Kuliyapitiya 2.Madurawalage Janaka Pradeep

Case No. HC/39/2009 Kumara

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

1.Basnayake Appuhamilage Sudath

Rohana Thissera

2.Madurawalage Janaka Pradeep

Kumara

Accused- Appellants

vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

Complainant-Respondent

BEFORE : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

P. Kumararatnam, J.

2 | P a g e

COUNSEL : Chamari Mahanayake for the 1st Accused-

Appellant.

Nalin Ladduwahetti, P.C. with Kavithri

Ubeysekere for the 2nd Accused-Appellant.

Dilan Ratnayake, SDSG for the

Respondent.

WRITTEN SUBMISSION

OF THE APPELLANT : 24/03/2022

WRITTEN SUBMISSION

OF THE RESPONDENT : 04/05/2022

DECIDED ON : 26/07/2022

*******************

ORDER

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellants (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellants) were indicted with some others unknown to the prosecution in

the High Court of Kuliyapitiya under Section 296 read with Section 32 of the

Penal Code for committing the murder of Mohamed Anzarge Rumesh Imran

on or about 17th April 2007.

After a non-jury trial, the Appellants were found guilty of the charge of

murder and the Learned High Court Judge of Kuliyapitiya has imposed a

death sentence on them on 04th September, 2020.

3 | P a g e

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence the Appellants

preferred this appeal to this court.

At the hearing, the Learned Presidents Counsel who appeared for the 2nd

Appellant sought the indulgence of this Court to make a preliminary

objection with regard to the certified copy of the full proceedings of the High

Court of Kuliyapitiya obtained from the same Court as it contains matters

different to the original case record and he informed court that he wishes to

obtain a ruling from this Court with regard to the said objection before he

would consider whether to pursue the merits of the appeal.

As the Learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General has no objection, this court

allowed the application of the Learned Presidents Counsel on the

preliminary question raised by him. Both parties agreed to dispose this

preliminary objection by way of written submissions.

The Learned Counsel for the 2nd Appellant also informed this court that the

2nd Appellant has given consent to argue this matter in his absence due to

the Covid 19 pandemic. During the argument he was connected via Zoom

from prison.

On behalf of the 2nd Appellant the following Grounds of Appeal were raised

in his Petition of appeal.

1. That the Learned High Court Judge failed to evaluate the evidence of

the main eye witness PW2 in terms of the law.

2. That the Learned High Court Judge failed to evaluate the vital omission

which goes to the root of the case and apply the benefit to the accused.

3. That the Learned High Court Judge failed to evaluate the medico-legal

evidence with that of the evidence of the eye witness and thereby

judicially evaluate the evidence as a whole causing grave prejudice to

the accused.

4 | P a g e

4. That the Learned High Court Judge in his judgment has on several

occasion failed to evaluate the credibility of witnesses judicially using

the tests of credibility.

5. That the Learned High Court Judge has based his judgment on

conjecture, surmise and pre-conceived notion.

Background of the case

According PW2, the mother of the deceased, four persons had come to her

house on two motor bikes on the date of the incident and searched for her

husband who was managing a foreign job agency. At that time the deceased

was playing carrom with his friends in front of the house. The mother had

identified the 1st accused and the Appellant at that instance as she had

known them before. Having failed to apprehend her husband, the Appellant

and the 1st accused had assaulted the deceased who ran out from the house

for safety. After chasing the deceased, the Appellant had stabbed him in his

abdomen with a knife and the 1st accused had pushed the deceased to the

other side of the road after the stabbing. The deceased had been taken to the

Sandalankawa Hospital but was pronounced dead on admission.

The investigation had been conducted by the Police in Pannala and they had

arrested the 1st accused and the Appellant in connection with the murder.

The Counsel for the 2nd Appellant contends that the Court Record is the sole

guide to judicial conclusions as was held by his Lordships in the case of

Hettiarachchige Chandana Hettiarachchi v. AG CA/130/2005 decided on

13/07/2012 the Court held that:

In this regard I have to be guided by the case record and whatever the

entries found in the Record cannot be lightly disregarded. The Record is

the sole guide to what actually transpired in court and the Record cannot

be impeached or supplemented without a substantial reason.

According to the counsel for the 2nd Appellant, he has obtained the first brief

of the proceedings of this case from the High Court of Kuliyapitiya on

5 | P a g e

23/09/2020 and he has received the 2nd brief from Court of Appeal on

10/02/2021 after filing the appeal.

The Counsel appearing for the 2nd Appellant has highlighted three instances

of discrepancies in the brief which he obtained from the High Court of

Kuliyapitiya after comparing the same with the brief issued by the Court of

Appeal. He has marked the discrepancies as A1, B1, and C1. The

corresponding pages in the Court of Appeal brief are marked as A, B and C.

In the proceedings dated 21/02/2017, in the proceedings marked as A the

presiding judges name has been recorded as M.C.B.S. Moraes. But in the

proceedings marked as A1, its recorded as K.M.G.H. Kulatunga. Apart from

the discrepancy in the names of the presiding judges, the proceedings are

otherwise accurate.

Likewise in the proceedings dated 11/03/2015, in the proceedings marked

as B the presiding judges name has been recorded as R.M.P. Sunanda

Kumara Ratnayake. But in proceedings marked as B1 it reads as K.M.G.H.

Kulatunga. Further in B1 the date given after the judges signature is also

inaccurately stated as 2016.01.13 when it should be 2015.03.11 as per B.

Apart from these changes the other content of the proceedings are accurately

stated.

In the proceedings dated 19/02/2010, marked as C the presiding judges

name has been recorded as Manilal Waidyatilake. But in the proceedings

marked as C1, it reads as Manel Premaratne. This discrepancy is obviously

a typographical error as the name of the stenographer who has taken notes

on that day is Manel Premeratne. Even both the proceedings C and C1 were

signed by the said Manilal Waidyatilake. Apart from the discrepancy in the

names the rest of the proceedings are accurate.

Considering the discrepancies highlighted in A, B and C, it is apparent that

only the names of the judges who presided and the date (in one instance)

have been wrongly mentioned. The discrepancy marked as C1 of course is a

6 | P a g e

typographical error. But no discrepancies highlighted from the evidence

recorded in this case. Hence, it is not correct to argue that some

unauthorized person had accessed and changed the official record of the

court. These are of course typographical errors made by the stenographers

who recorded the proceedings.

Upon perusal of the original case record it becomes clear that when this case

was called in the High Court of Kurunegala for the first time, the presiding

High Court Judge was Hon. Manilal Waidyatilaka. (Page 78 of the brief).

This case was first called on 17/09/2014 in the Kuliyapitiya High Court,

following the establishment of the said court. At that time the presiding judge

was Hon. R.M.P. Sunanda Kumara Ratnayake. (Page 87 of the brief)

As the 1st accused had absconded the court, an inquiry under Section 241

of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 was held before Hon.

K.M.G.H. Kulatunga who was the presiding judge at that time. (Page 99-130

of the brief)

The trial was commenced on 20/02/2017 before the judge of the High Court,

Hon. M.C.B.S. Moraes. (Page 131 of the brief)

Hence, it is quite clear that the names of the High Court Judges mentioned

in the High Court proceedings are the judges who had presided in the High

Court of Kuliyapitiya from time to time.

Section 436 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 reads:

Subject to the provisions hereinbefore contained any judgment

passed by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be reversed or

altered on appeal or revision on account

a) of any error, omission, of irregularity in the complaint,

summons, warrant, charge, judgment, summing up, or

other proceedings before or during trial or in any inquiry

or other proceedings under this Code; or

7 | P a g e

b) of the want of any sanction required by section 135,

unless such error, omission, irregularity, or want has occasioned a

failure of justice

In Manuel v. Kanapanickan 14 NLR 186 the court held that:

Irregularities in criminal proceedings constitute no ground for the

reversal or alteration of sentences on appeal, unless there has

been a failure of justice.

Article 138 of The Constitution of Democratic Republic of Sri Lanka

states:

The Court of Appeal shall have and exercise subject to

the provisions of the Constitution or of any law, an

appellate jurisdiction for the correction of all errors in fact

or in law which shall be committed by the High Court, in

the exercise of its appellate or original jurisdiction or by

any court of First Instance, Tribunal or other institution

and sole and exclusive cognizance, by way of appeal,

revision and restitutio in integrum, of all causes, suits,

actions, prosecutions, matters and things of which such

High Court, Court of First Instance, tribunal or other

institution may have taken cognizance;

Provided that no judgment, decree, or order of any court

shall be reversed or varied on account of any error, defect

or irregularity, which has not prejudiced the substantial

rights of the parties or occasioned a failure of justice.

The above-mentioned provision of the Constitution and Section 436

of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 clearly

demonstrates that any failure to adhere to legal provisions can be

8 | P a g e

considered only if such failure proves prejudicial to the substantial

rights of the parties or occasion a failure of justice.

In this case there is no apparent prejudice caused to the 2nd

Appellant as the noted discrepancies are merely typographical

errors, which certainly do not affect the integrity of the proceedings.

The Learned SDSG has correctly pointed out that the content of the

proceedings has in no way been affected even in the instances

shown by the Appellant. The typographical errors made with regard

to the names of the presiding judges in the proceedings had not

caused any prejudice to the appellant or caused a miscarriage of

justice.

In the case of Elal Jayantha v. Officer-In-Charge, Police Station,

Panadura 1986(1) SLR 334 the Court of Appeal held that:

Although the correct procedure had not been followed yet

no substantial prejudice had been caused nor a failure of

justice occasioned. Further four years had elapsed and

sending the case back would cause hardship

An error by a judge in the conduct of a trial that an appellate court

find was not damaging enough to the appealing partys right to a fair

trial to justify reversing the judgment. Harmless errors include

typographical and technical errors that have no bearing on the

outcome of the trial. In general, the more overwhelming the evidence

against the appealing party (appellant), the harder it will be to convince

the appellate court that any errors were harmful. In such situations,

courts rule that even in the absence of the errors, the appellant could

not have won his appeal.

9 | P a g e

In accordance with the above-mentioned authorities, it is very clear

that the 2nd appellant had not suffered any prejudice due to the

existence of typographical errors in the court proceedings obtained

from the High Court of Kuliyapitiya. I conclude this has not caused a

failure of justice.

Further, this court emphasize the fact that if the error in the court

proceedings has not prejudiced, the rights of the parties or occasioned

a failure of justice, no judgment, decree or order of any court shall be

revised or varied.

Therefore, the 2nd Appellants preliminary objection with regard to the

discrepancies in the certified copy of the full proceedings of the High

Court of Kuliyapitiya is rejected and the case is fixed for argument.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

SAMPATH B. ABAYAKOON, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL