==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

Orders in the nature of Writs of

Certiorari, Prohibition and Mandamus

under Article 140 of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Algewaththage Kasun Sanjaya,

No. 370/9A, Bonavista, Unawatuna.

CA (Writ) App. No. 746/2025

PETITIONER

Vs.

1. Director General,

Coast Conservation and Coastal Resource Management Department, 4th Floor, Ministry of Fisheries Building, Maligawatta, Maradana, Colombo 10.

2. Dr. T.L.C. Vinod,

Galle Regional Engineer and Deputy Director, Coast Conservation and Coastal Resource Management Department, Galle.

2

3. Secretary,

Ministry of Environment, Sobadam Piyasa, No. 416/C/1, Robert Gunawardana Mawatha, Battaramulla.

4. Mr. Thushara Chaminda Kariyawasam

Paranawithana, Competent Authority,

Chief Engineer (Civil), Sri Lanka Ports Authority, No. 19, Chaithya Road, Colombo 01.

5. Director General,

Department of Wildlife Conservation, No. 811A, Jayanthipura, Battaramulla.

RESPONDENTS

Before: Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Counsel:

Saliya Pieris, P.C. with Thanuka Nandasiri and Himesh Tharuka for the Petitioner.

Medhka Fernando, S.C. for the Respondents.

Argued on: 03.03.2026

Delivered on: 29.04.2026

3

Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Judgement

Introduction

The counsel on all sides agreed that both the Writ Applications bearing Nos. 746/2025 and

747/2025 can be disposed of by one judgement; therefore, the judgement given in this Application

applies to the connected Writ Application bearing No. 747/2025.

The Petitioner was served with a certain notice dated 27.06.2025; the same is marked as P10

annexed to the Petition. The said P10 has been issued in terms of Section 31(4) of the Coast

Conversation Act No. 57 of 1981, informing the Petitioner to remove the unauthorised structures

erected by him on the seashore which belongs to the public and comes within the purview of Coast

Conservation and Coastal Resource Management Department, and the Petitioner is challenging

the same by this Application.

The Petitioner’s argument is that without giving him notice under Section 31(2) of the Coast

Conversation Act, No. 57 of 1981 (as amended) (hereinafter referred to as “the Act”), the

Respondents cannot take actions under Section 31(4); therefore, the said P10 is invalid in law.

In addition to that, it is the position of the Petitioner, that P10 has not been given by the competent

authority; as such, since the power is not delegated to the person who has signed the said document

P10, it is ultra vires.

4

After issuance of formal notice, the Respondents filed their Objections. The Respondents have

taken up the position that the Petitioner had already been given notice under Section 31(2) by the

competent authority, long before the issuance of P10; the said notices are marked and annexed to

the Objections as X12(a) and X12(b), dated 02.08.2024. Therefore, P10, which is marked as X13

annexed to the Objections, is only issued pursuant to Section 31(4). As such, the said notice is

given before the removal of the unauthorised structure for the Petitioner to remove, otherwise,

expenses to remove will also be charged from the Petitioner. Thus, P10 or X13 is a document

which is intra vires and had been sent to the Petitioner by the authorised officer who falls within

Section 3 of the Act.

This was argued before me on 03.03.2026, and the following arguments were advanced by the

counsel; hence, this judgement.

Arguments

The first contention of Mr. Pieris is that the P10 is bad in law as it has been sent not by the Director

General but by an engineer. Therefore, it appears to be with the delegated authority. However, in

terms of Section 5 such delegation cannot be made unless such an officer is an officer contemplated

by Section 5. In addition to that, Mr. Peiris contended that by the document marked as X14, the

authority cannot be delegated. Therefore, both those documents are bad in law.

Further, he argued that in X12(a) and X12(b), the Respondent has given notice one year before.

However, without taking steps for about a year, the Respondents waited, and therefore suddenly

they have given notice under P10. As such, the P10 notice should be treated as a notice given in

5

terms of Sections 31(2) and not under Section 31(4). Further, he argued that P10 is bad in law, as

demolition should be carried out by the Director General, not by any other subordinate officers.

On the other hand, Mr. Medhaka Fernando argued that document P10 itself refers to Section 31(2)

of the Act. Accordingly, the notices have been given by X12(a) and X12(b) under Section 31(2).

Though steps had not been taken to demolish after the period contemplated by X12(a) and X12(b),

by P10, before demolition, notice has been given in terms of Section 31(4) to avoid any situation

of recovering expenses of the implementation of such a demolition order, as that has to be

recovered from the unauthorized person.

He further argued that therefore, the person who has been assigned to remove the unauthorized

structure directed the Petitioner by P10, giving notice for him to remove it without further incurring

any expenses recoverable by the Respondents. Further, he argues that the P10 is only a second

chance to take action for the faulty party.

Further, he argued that Section 3 empowers the Director General to obtain the assistance of

subordinate officers to carry out the order. Accordingly, P10 is valid.

Factual matrix

On a perusal of the record, I found that it is asserted that the Petitioner is operating a hotel with

the aim of serving foreign visitors, and he operates the same in an area close to the seashore.

Initially, according to the Petition, the Petitioner had been issued with certain notices by the

competent authority under the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act, which the Petitioner has

marked as X and Y. However, pursuant to the said notices, the competent authority had instituted

6

action against the Petitioner in the Magistrate’s Court of Galle. After securing an order of ejectment,

the Petitioner has canvassed the same in a Revision Application before the High Court, which is

also part of the said document marked as X. However, after the dismissal of the said revision

application, the Petitioner has filed two appeals before this Court bearing Nos. CPA 47/2025 and

CPA 48/2025; and the said matters are still pending before the Court of Appeal.

The Petitioner’s complaint

In the meantime, the Department of Coastal Conversation and Coastal Resources Management has

issued the document marked as P10, directing the Petitioner to remove the structures belonging to

the Petitioner. The Petitioner had responded to the said document P10, by the document marked

as P11 through his lawyer and had appealed to the Secretary to the Ministry of Environmental

Affairs by the document marked as P12. Since there was no response, the Petitioner has sought to

invoke the jurisdiction of this Court.

Objections

After the issuance of formal notice, the Respondents have filed their Objections. According to the

Respondents, the 1st Respondent is the Director General of the Coastal Conversation and Coastal

Resources Management Department and is the competent authority, whose powers are properly

published as enunciated in the Coast Conversation Act, No. 57 of 1981 (as amended), and relevant

Gazettes marked as X7 and X8 annexed to the Objections.

The Respondents have further filed aerial photographs marked as X9 and X10, to indicate the area

that falls within the purview of the Respondents and the unauthorised construction effected by the

7

Petitioner, respectively. Further, the Respondents have referred to the two documents X12(a) and

X12(b) sent under Section 31(2) of the Act, directing the Petitioner to remove the unauthorised

structure within the time stipulated. Additionally, another letter marked as X13, which is a letter

responding to the said letters, addressed to the Secretary of the Ministry of Environmental Affairs,

and the letter authorising the engineer under the 1st Respondent, who had given P10, marked as

X14, is also annexed to the Objections. Therefore, it is the position of the Respondents that the

Petitioner does not have any right to maintain this Application, and the way that the Petitioner’s

Application is formulated, it should fail as the correct procedure has already been followed in

terms of the Act by the relevant competent authorities.

According to the above-mentioned facts and arguments advanced by the parties, it is my view that

the following questions arise for my consideration;

(i) Whether the Petitioner has effected any unauthorised structure in the area proscribed by

law

(ii) Whether such construction can be removed by the 1st Respondent under the Act

(iii)Whether the 1st Respondent has given due notice to the Petitioner

(iv) Whether the 1st Respondent has duly authorised the engineer to carry out the orders to

remove the said unauthorised structure

(v) Whether the said engineer falls within Section 3 of the Act

As I have raised the above questions, it is my view that by answering these questions, the issues

that have arisen in this Application will be resolved. Accordingly, as placed before me, now I will

consider the relevant factual matters.

8

Unauthorised construction by the Petitioner

According to the Coast Conservation Act, regulations have been made and gazetted, and they are

marked as X1 annexed to the Objections. According to these regulations, rules have been made to

identify the ‘setback area’. The setback area is determined according to the vegetation line (from

the vegetation line, inwards). Sri Lanka being an island and surrounded by the Indian Ocean (sea),

ninety-two setback areas have been identified under the said rules. Within such a setback area,

there are two areas identified as ‘Restricted area’ and ‘Reservation area’.1 The ‘Reservation area’,

being closest to the shoreline, serves as a ‘No Build Zone’, where only absolute essential activities

are permitted. Conversely, the ‘Restricted Area’ allows for certain low impact development

activities, provided that a permit is obtained based on recommendations of the Advisory Council

prescribed under the Act.2

The setback area relevant to the instant case has been identified as ‘Setback Area No. 20’, and the

1st Respondent being the competent authority under the Act, is of the opinion that the Petitioner

has carried out certain development activities or constructions without obtaining permission under

the Act and rules in the said restricted area; therefore, as mentioned above, X12(a) and X12(b)

have been served on the Petitioner. Nevertheless, the Petitioner has not removed the said

construction and development effected on the restricted area complying with the said notices.

1 Paragraph 3(III) of the Statement of Objections; vide document marked as X8 annexed to the Statement of Objections.

2 Part III of the Coast Conservation Act, No. 57 of 1981 (as amended).

9

However, after a year from the issuance of the said notices given under Section 31(2) of the Act,

the Petitioner has been further asked to remove the said constructions, by the impugned document

marked as P10, on which the Petitioner is seeking a Writ of Certiorari. It is further stated that if

the Petitioner does not comply with the said notices, the competent authority can authorise a person

to carry out such removal; then the expenses incurred has to be borne by the Petitioner. To avoid

this, the document marked as P10 had been issued on the Petitioner, which the Petitioner

challenges.

Accordingly, it is very clear that the Petitioner has effected unauthorised structure in the setback

area as prescribed by law.

Authority of the 1st Respondent

The 1st Respondent is the competent authority equipped with the necessary powers to remove the

unauthorised structure effected in the restricted area falls within the setback area. Further, the

Petitioner has not placed any material before the Court to establish that he had already obtained

permission from the relevant authority under the Act and Rules to effect such improvements and

constructions.

Therefore, the 1st Respondent is empowered under the Act to remove such unauthorised

constructions effected within the restricted area; Section 31(4) of the Coast Conservation Act, No.

57 of 1981 clearly spells out the same. In terms of Section 31(4) of the Act, where a person fails

to comply with a notice issued under Section 31(2) requiring the removal of an unauthorised

construction, the 1st Respondent is empowered to remove such unauthorised construction.

10

Accordingly, the 1st Respondent, exercising his powers conferred on him, has issued X12(a) and

X12(b) on the Petitioner in terms of Section 31(2). Thereafter, as the 1st Respondent is empowered

to delegate his powers to remove such unauthorised construction, has empowered the 2nd

Respondent, an engineer, to remove the same. However, the 2nd Respondent, out of abundance of

causes, had given further notice by P10; such authorisation can also be given in terms of Section

5 read with Section 3, which stipulates thus;

“3. For the purposes of this Act

(a) there shall be appointed a Director-General of Coast Conservation and Coastal

Resource Management (hereinafter referred to as 'the Director-General');

(b)there may be appointed

(i) such number of Directors, Deputy Directors and Assistant Directors; and

(ii) such other officers

as may be necessary to assist the Director in the administration and implementation of

the provisions of this Act.”

Section 5 of the Act reads thus;

“5. The Director-General may, delegate by an authorization in writing in that behalf to

any Divisional Secretary of a Division within which any part of the coastal zone in situated

or to any prescribed public officer, as the case may be, any power, duty and function

conferred or imposed on, or assigned to, the Director-General, by this Act, other than any

11

power, duty or function falling within Part III of the Act. The Divisional Secretary or the

prescribed public officer shall within such Divisional Secretary's Division or other area of

authority exercise, perform and discharge the power, duty or function so delegated subject

to the general direction and control of the Director-General.”

Accordingly, the 1st Respondent is empowered to remove any unauthorised constructions in terms

of the Act and is also empowered to delegate its powers to the 2nd Respondent to remove such

constructions since the 1st Respondent is physically and officially unable to carry it out personally.

Due notice to the Petitioner

The next question that arises for my consideration is whether the 1st Respondent has given due

notice to the Petitioner.

As mentioned above, on a perusal of the notices marked as X12(a) and X12(b), the 1st Respondent

has given due notice in terms of Section 31(2), to the Petitioner. However, the Petitioner has not

complied with the said notices.

Thereafter, once the power was delegated to remove to another officer who falls within Section 3,

the 3rd Respondent, had given further notice to avoid any inconvenience or expenses recoverable

as a duty cast upon the officers once such a removal incurs any expenses, to avoid further

embarrassment or losses to the Petitioner.

Therefore, it is my view that both the 1st and 3rd Respondents have so far followed the rules and

the Act.

12

Authority and legality of the Engineer

The next question that arises for my consideration is whether the 1st Respondent has duly

authorised.

In terms of Section 5 of the Act, as reproduced above, the Director-General may delegate his

powers, other than those falling within Part III of the Act. Part III relates to the issuance of notices.

Therefore, the removal of unauthorised constructions does not fall within Part III, and such

functions are capable of being delegated. Accordingly, the said powers have been delegated to the

2nd Respondent, who is the Engineer and has been duly empowered by the 1st Respondent through

the document marked X14, to carry out the removal of unauthorised structures.

Therefore, it is my view that, as submitted by learned State Counsel, the 2nd Respondent is duly

authorised to carry out the removal of unauthorised structures in terms of Section 31(4) of the

Coast Conservation Act, No. 57 of 1981.

Alternative remedies not considered by the Petitioners

In addition to that, I must address the argument advanced by the learned Counsel for the

Respondents, Mr. Fernando, that the Petitioners in both Applications have failed to resort to

alternative remedies provided for in Section 31(3) of the Act, where they could have appealed to

the Secretary to the line Ministry to obtain administrative relief, without coming before this Court

first.

13

Thus, it is my view that there is no merit in this Application, and as such, this Application is liable

to be dismissed.

Conclusion

For the reasons adumbrated above, I dismiss this Application.

However, for the purpose of record I will order nominal cost restricted at Rs. 5,250/- (Five

Thousand Two Hundred and Fifty Rupees).

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL