IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Court of Appeal Case No: CA-BAL-00IO-20

M.C.Colombo Case No. B 15353/2019

In the matter of an application for Bail in terms of Section 10(1 lea) of the Assistance to and Protection of Victims of Crime and Witnesses Act No. 04 of 2015.

The officer in Charge, Gang Robbery Unit, Criminal Investigation Department,

Colombo 01.

Complainant

Vs.

1. Muthuwahandi Aruna Thushara Mendis 2. Kathri Arachchige Gamini 3. Hewa Aluth Sahal Arachchige Ajith Prasanna

Suspect

And now Kathri Arachchige Gamini, 558, Madana, Damana, Ampara

Presently at Remanded Prison, Colombo.

2nd Suspect Petitioner

Vs.

I. The officer in Charge,

Gang Robbery Unit, Criminal Investigation Department, Colombo 01.

1 SI Complainant Respondent 2. Hon Attorney General, Attorney Generals Dept., Colombo 12. 2nd Respondent

Page 1 of 3

Before

Counsel

Decided on

Hon. Justice K.K. Wickremasinghe Hon. Justice Devika Abeyratne

Anil Silva, PC with Nandana Perera for the Petitioner. Janaka Bandara, SSC for the AG.

01107/2020

Hon. Justice K.K. Wickremasinghe

On representations made by the President's counsel for the Petitioner to the Attorney

General, learned Senior State Counsel concedes the application for bail.

Senior Counsel appearing for the Respondent informs court that, facts and circumstances of

the case and also considering the fact that this Petitioner will be a State witness in the

substantive case, he is willing to agree with the application made by the learned President's

Counsel to enlarge the Petitioner on bail. Accordingly, this court decides to enlarge the

Petitioner on bail under following conditions.

I. Cash bail of Rupees Fifty Thousand (Rs. 50,000/-)

2. Surety bail of 50,000/= each, with two sureties acceptable to the learned Magistrate.

3. The Suspect - Petitioner must report to the Officer-in- Charge of the relevant Police

Station, on the last Sunday of every month between 8.00 a.m. - 12.00 noon.

(Since the Petitioner is living in Ampara he is permitted to report to Police Station,

Ampara.)

4. The Suspect-Petitioner is ordered not to influence or threaten or interfere with

witnesses of the substantive case.

If the Petitioner violates any of the above mentioned bail conditions, he will be remanded

until final determination of the substantive case.

Page 2 of 3

Registrar is directed to send copies of the order to the relevant Police Station, Ampara and

the Magistrate's Court of Colombo and the Prison Authorities.

Hon. Justice Devika Abeyratne

I agree.

NS/

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Page 3 of 3