IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Nanayakarawasam Godakanda

Arachchige Seelawathi,

Hapugala,

Batalewatte,

Wakwella.

1st Defendant-Appellant

Nalindra Wickramasinghe

Madanayake,

Hapugala,

Batalewatte,

Wakwella.

Substituted 3rd Defendant-

Appellant

CASE NO: CA/1138/1998/F

DC GALLE CASE NO: 12543/L

Vs.

Meetiyawala Gamage

Gnanawansa,

No. 282,

Wakwella Road,

Galle.

Substituted Plaintiff-Respondent

2

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: T.M.S. Nanayakkara for the Defendant-

Appellants.

Anura Gonarathne for the Plaintiff-

Respondent.

Decided on: 08.05.2019

Samayawardhena, J.

The plaintiff filed this action against the three defendants

seeking declaration of title to the land described in the schedule

to the plaint, ejectment of the defendants therefrom, and

damages. On the summons returnable date, all three

defendants filed a joint proxy. However the case was fixed for ex

parte trial against the defendants on 15.11.1996 as the answer

was not tendered notwithstanding it was the final day. Ex parte

trial has been held on 31.01.1997, and the Judgment has been

entered for the plaintiff. Upon service of the ex parte decree, the

1st and 3rd defendants have made an application under section

86(2) of the Civil Procedure Code to get the ex parte Judgment

and the Decree vacated on the basis that the 2nd defendant who

is their daughter is a person of unsound mind and she went

missing about five days before the case was to be called for the

answer and all of them were desperately looking for her during

that period and found her two days after the case was to be

called and therefore they could not come to Court on

15.11.1996. At the inquiry into this application, the son of the

1st and 3rd defendants and the brother of the 2nd defendant, who

3

is a teacher by profession, has given evidence. At this inquiry

the fact that the 2nd defendant was a person of unsound mind

has been proved. The diagnosis card of the 2nd defendant has

been marked as Y, and three paper articles where the 2nd

defendants unusual behavior in Court was reported, have been

marked as X. On one day this case was to be called, the 2nd

defendant has sat on the Judges Chair in open Court before the

Judge came to the Bench and acted as if she was the Judge.

Thereafter she has been sent to the Mental Hospital for

treatment. According to 1V1, it is the brother who gave evidence

at the inquiry who has taken charge of the 2nd defendant sister

after the recovery by order of the Court. In that backdrop, the

evidence of this witness that the 2nd defendants mental

condition became worse on and around the date the case was to

be called finally for the answer, and everybody including the 1st

and 3rd defendant parents were not in a proper frame of mind to

come to Court or to give instructions to their lawyer is, in my

view, not unreasonable. The witness has asked the Court to

appoint a guardian to proceed with the case against the 2nd

defendant.

The learned Additional District Judge has refused to vacate the

ex parte Judgment on two grounds.

One is that, when the joint proxy was filed in respect of all three

defendants, the mental derangement of the 2nd defendant was

not disclosed. This cannot, in my view, is a good ground to

refuse the application to purge default. If the 2nd defendant was

of unsound mind at the time of the institution of the action, or

at any time thereafter, the plaintiff and the Court could not have

4

proceeded with the action against the 2nd defendant unless a

guardian is appointed to act on her behalf. The Judgment

entered against her is a nullity.

The second ground is that the defendants have not acted

diligently in preparing the answer in that they cannot meet the

lawyer in the morning of the final date on which the answer was

to be tendered and expect the lawyer to file it on that day itself.

In this case the evidence led was that the 2nd defendant went

missing about five days before the final date for the answer and

therefore the learned Judge cannot say that the 1st and 3rd

defendants waited until the final date.

On the other hand, there is no necessity for the defendants to be

physically present before the Court on the date on which the

answer to be filed. That is the duty of the registered Attorney. It

is not recorded in the journal entry of 15.11.1996 whether or not

the registered Attorney appeared for the defendants and made

any application. The learned Judge should have recorded that

fact as it is directly relevant to the matter in issue. In this case,

the registered Attorney for the defendants is the same

throughout the case up to now.

I must also add that the plaintiff moved for a commission on the

summons returnable date itself and amended the plaint about

three years after filing the original plaint. The defendants did

not object to it. Then the Court has given a date to file the

answer on the amended plaint. On the next date answer was

not filed, and the Court gave a final date for the answer. That is

how 15.11.1996 became the final date for the answer. It is also

5

appropriate to note that the defendants filed the proxy on the

summons returnable date itself without making a fuss. They

never wanted to protract the case by making frivolous objections

to the plan prepared on the commission, amended plaint etc.

This conduct of the defendants is relevant.

In an inquiry into vacation of an ex parte Judgment, the burden

of proof and the standard of proof expected from the defaulting

defendant are not of high degree. This is explicable by plain

reading of section 86(2) of the Civil Procedure Code.

Where, within fourteen days of the service of the decree

entered against him for default, the defendant with notice

to the plaintiff makes application to and thereafter satisfies

court, that he had reasonable grounds for such default, the

court shall set aside the judgment and decree and permit

the defendant to proceed with his defence as from the stage

of default upon such terms as to costs or otherwise as to

the court shall appear proper.

Then it is clear that what the defaulting defendant in an inquiry

under section 86(2) of the Civil Procedure Code shall do is to

satisfy the Court that he had reasonable grounds for such

default. From the language used in that section, it is clear that

the legislature does not expect a very high standard of proof

from the defaulting defendant in order for the Court to purge

default. The same language is used in section 87 also when the

defaulter is the plaintiff. Therefore the Court shall adopt not

rigid but liberal approach in such inquiries. The test is

subjective as opposed to objective. In this process, the Court

6

can also take into account the past conduct of the defaulting

party to come to a right conclusion. (Vide Sanicoch Group of

Companies by its Attorney Denham Oswald Dawson v. Kala

Traders (Pvt) Ltd [2016] BLR 44 (SC) in respect of section 86(2)

and Rev. Sumanatissa v. Harry [2009] 1 Sri LR 31 (CA) regarding

section 87.)

There is another aspect in section 86(2), which relates to the

procedure. Section 86(2) does not specifically dictate the mode

of making the application. It merely says the defendant with

notice to the plaintiff makes application. It does not say that

the application shall be made by way of a petition supported by

an affidavit with documents if any. In practice the application is

made by way of petition supported by an affidavit. However, the

application can be made only by way of an affidavit as the

inquiry can be concluded even without oral testimony. (vide

Inaya v. Lanka Orix Leasing Company Ltd [1999] 3 Sri LR 197)

Similarly, no specific procedure is laid down in the Civil

Procedure how such an inquiry be conducted. In De Fonseka v.

Dharmawardena [1994] 3 Sri LR 49 it was held that An inquiry

on an application to set aside an ex parte decree is not regulated

by any specific provision of the Civil Procedure Code. Such

inquiries must be conducted consistently with the principles of

natural justice and the requirement of fairness. (vide also

Wimalawthie v. Thotamuna [1998] 3 Sri LR 1)

The learned Additional District Judge has not considered the

facts of this case in the light of the above-mentioned principles.

7

Had he done so, I am quite certain that he would have

considered the application of the defaulting party favourably.

I set aside the order of the learned Additional District Judge

dated 13.03.1998.

A guardian can be appointed for the 2nd defendant and a date

can be given for all three defendants to file the answer before the

case is re-fixed for trial.

Appeal allowed. No costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal