IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of a case stated under section

170 of the Inland Revenue Act, No. 10 of

2006 (as amended)

Indian Overseas Bank,

No. 139, Main Street,

P. O. Box 671,

Colombo 11.

Appellant

Case No. CA/TAX/0010/2016

Tax Appeals Commission

No. TAC/IT/007/2014

Vs.

The Commissioner General of Inland

Revenue,

14th Floor, Department of Inland Revenue,

Sir Chittampalam A. Gardiner Mawatha,

Colombo 02.

Respondent

Before : Dr. Ruwan Fernando J. &

M. Sampath K.B. Wijeratne J.

: Riad Ameen with Rushantha Rodrigo

for the Appellant

S. Balapatabendi, A.S.G. with Suranga

Wimalasena, D.S.G. for the Respondent

Argued on : 28.03.2022 & 03.06.2022

Written Submissions filed on

: 22.06.2018 (by the Appellant)

2

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

19.06.2018 (by the Respondent)

Decided on : 15.12. 2022

Dr. Ruwan Fernando, J.

Introduction

[1] This is an appeal by way of a case stated against the determination of the Tax

Appeals Commission dated 28.06.2016 confirming the determination made by

the Commissioner General of Inland Revenue on 09.07.2014 and dismissing the

Appeal of the Appellant. The period relates to the year of assessment 2009/2010.

Factual Background

[2] The Appellant is a banking corporation duly incorporated in India and

carrying on banking business in Sri Lanka through a branch office in Colombo.

The Appellant is a licensed Commercial Bank in terms of the provisions of the

Banking Act, No. 30 of 1998 (as amended). The principal activities of the

Appellant include the provision of a comprehensive range of financial services,

encompassing banking, corporate, personal, trade, finance, treasury and

investment services (Vide-financial statement at p. 55 of the TAC brief).

[3] During the year of assessment 2009/2010, the Appellant received a sum of

Rs. 107,415,575/- as interest income on the foreign currency loan granted to the

Government of Sri Lanka and filed a Return of Income for the year of assessment

2009/2010. The Appellant claimed the exemption of interest under section 9(b)

of the IRA 2006 of a loan granted by the Appellant in foreign currency to the

Government of Sri Lanka and the interest of Rs. 91,385,518.97 on borrowing

funds from the Central Office, India.

[4] The assessor by letter dated 21.03.2012 refused to grant the exemption of

interest claimed by the Appellant under section 9(b) of the IRA 2006 for the

following reasons:

1. The Appellant Bank is engaged in the banking business in Sri Lanka and the

interest income received by the should be treated as receipts from business

and liable to tax unless it is specifically excluded from the IRA 2006;

2. According to the audited statement of accounts, the interest income

received by the Appellant on a syndicated loan granted to the Sri Lanka

3

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

Government has been treated by the Appellant as income of the Appellant

(Colombo branch);

3. The registered office of the Appellant is located in Sri Lanka and therefore,

the Appellant is not entitled to the exemption claimed under section 9(b)

of the IRA 2006;

4. If any decision is taken to grant the claimed interest income, expenditure

incurred in the production of such interest should be identified from the

expenses claimed and should be disallowed.

[5] The assessor disallowed the interest income of Rs. 91,385,518.97 at the rate

of 10%, which had been paid to the Head Office of the Appellant Bank in India,

as specified in the Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement (DTAA) between India

and Sri Lanka.

Appeal to the Commissioner-General of Inland Revenue

[6] The Appellant appealed to the Commissioner-General of Inland Revenue

(hereinafter referred to as the Respondent) against the said assessment. The

Respondent by its determination dated 29.04.2014 confirmed the assessment.

Appeal to the Tax Appeals Commission & the Court of Appeal

[7] Being dissatisfied with the said determination of the Respondent, the

Appellant appealed to the Tax Appeals Commission (hereinafter referred to as

the TAC) and the TAC held in its determination dated 28.06.2016 that the

Appellant is not eligible for the exemption claimed under section 9(b) of the

IRA 2006 and dismissed the appeal for the following reasons:

1. The interest received by the Appellant from its core business activity is

treated as turnover of the Appellant Bank and hence, the interest received

by the Appellant during the relevant period falls into the term turnover as

defined in section 107(3)(c) of the IRA 2006. Therefore, its profits fall

exclusively under section 3(a) and not fall under section 3(e). For those

reasons, the Appellant should be treated as carrying on the business of

banking and therefore, the investment in government development bonds

and the foreign currency loan granted to the government of Sri Lanka to

earn income interest has to be treated as part of the banking activity, which

is liable to tax, unless excluded by any other provision of the IRA 2006;

4

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

2. In Ceylon Financial Investment Ltd v. Commissioner of Income Tax, 43 NLR

01, the Supreme Court unanimously held that the income of a company

derived from dividends and interest falls within the words profits and

income under section 6(1)(a) of the Income Tax Ordinance, 1932, which is

similar to section 3(a) of the IRA 2006;

3. Section 9(b) of the IRA 2006 applies to any person or partnership outside Sri

Lanka. The Appellant (Indian Overseas Bank, Colombo Branch) is operating

under a licence granted in terms of section 5 of the Banking Act, No. 30 of

1988, to function as a domestic banking unit in Sri Lanka. The Appellant

(Indian Overseas Bank, Colombo Branch) is therefore, not a person outside

Sri Lanka to qualify for the interest exemption claimed under section 9 (b)

of the IRA 2006.

Appeal to the Court of Appeal & Questions of Law

[8] Being dissatisfied with the said determination of the TAC, the Appellant

appealed to the Court of Appeal and formulated the following questions of law

in the Case Stated for the opinion of the Court of Appeal.

1. Did the Commission err in law in holding that the interest earned by the

Appellant on the loan granted to the Government of Sri Lanka, in respect

of which the Appellant claimed exemption in terms of section 9 (b) of the

Inland Revenue Act, No. 10 of 2006, exclusively fell within Section 3 (a) of

the said Act?

2. Did the Commission err in law in misreading the decision of Honourable

Justice Soertsz in the case of Ceylon Financial Investment Ltd v.

Commissioner of Income Tax (Reports of Ceylon Tax Cases, Volume 1, page

234) when the Commission said that honourable Justice Soertsz and De

Krester held that dividends and interest received by a company fell only

within the words profits of a business of Section 6 (1) (a) of the Income

Tax Ordinance and not within Section 6 (1) (e) of the Income Tax

Ordinance, whereas honourable Justice Soertsz did not hold such a view

at all, although such a view has been erroneously attributed to Justice

Soertsz by the editor of the case in the head note to the case? (Honourable

Justice De Krester did not write an opinion; he merely agreed with the

views of honourable Justice Soertsz);

5

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

3. Did the Commission err in law, in holding, on the basis of the errors

referred to in the preceding questions of law, that the Appellant is not

entitled to the exemption claimed in terms of Section 9 (b) of the Inland

Revenue Act?

4. Did the Commission err in law in its failure to act on the basis of the

unanimous decision of the judges of the supreme court in the case of

Ceylon Financial Investments Ltd Vs. Commissioner of Income Tax

according to which-

a. Interest and dividends derived by a company fell within both

paragraphs (a) and (e) of Section 6 of the Income Tax Ordinance which

paragraphs are similar to paragraphs (a) and (e) respectively of Section

3 of the Inland Revenue Act, No. 10 of 2006; and

b. Any special provisions applicable to dividends and interest apply to

dividends and interest treated as falling within paragraph (a) of Section

6 of the Income Tax Ordinance?

5. Did the Commission err in law in its failure to recognize, and, to act on that

basis, that, for all purposes of law, it is the Indian Overseas Bank of No.

763, Anna Salai, Chennai 600 002, India, (and not the branch which is not

a person) which, according to the commission itself is a non-resident

banking institution, is the granter of the loan in question and the person

contemplated in Section 9 (b) of the Act?

6. Is not the Indian Overseas bank referred to in the preceding question of

law entitled to the exemption it claimed in terms of Section 9 (b) of the

Inland Revenue Act in respect of the interest it received on the foreign

currency loan it gave to the government of Sri Lanka through its branch in

Colombo?

7. Did the commission fail to properly examine and/or apply and/or

appreciate the facts and the law relevant to this matter?

[9] At the hearing of the appeal, we heard Mr. Riad Ameen, the learned Counsel

for the Appellant, and Mr. S. Balapatabendi, A.S.G. for the Respondent on the

seven questions of law submitted for the opinion of the Court.

Matters to be determined

6

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

[10] The questions of law submitted for the opinion of this Court relate to the

following main issue:

Whether on the facts and circumstances of the case, the interest income of

Rs. 107,415,575/- in foreign currency derived from the loan granted to the

Government of Sri Lanka should be exempted under section 9(b) of the

Inland Revenue Act, No. of 2006.

Analysis

Is interest received by the Appellant a source of income under section 3(a)

or section 3(e) of the Inland Revenue Act?

[11] Now the question is to consider whether the interest income can be

categorized as profits and income earned by the Appellant from business

falling within the ambit of section 3 (a) of the IRA 2006, and if not, whether the

interest income can also fall within the ambit of section 3(e) of the IRA 2006.

[12] Mr. Ameen submitted that the interest received by the Appellant should be

treated as a source under section 3(e) of the IRA 2006, which specifically refers

to interest whereas section 3(a) does not specifically refer to interest. He

submitted that although there is no specific reference to interest in section 3(a),

it is possible for interest to be a source under section 3(a), if it can constitute a

profit from business as observed by the judges in Ceylon Financial Investments

Limited V. Commissioner of Income Tax (supra) (hereinafter referred to as the CFI

judgment). He submitted however, that the judges in the CFI case concluded

that the interest income is a source under section 6(1)(a) of the Income Tax

Ordinance 1932 (correspond to section 3(a) of the IRA 2006), instead of section

6(1)(e) (corresponding to section 3(e) of the IRA 2006).

[13] Mr. Ameen strongly relied on the five-bench decision of the Supreme Court

in Ceylon Financial Investments Limited V. Commissioner of Income Tax (supra) in

support of his contention that the interest received by the Appellant is a source

under section 3(e), which can be clearly separated from the rest of its business,

and therefore, the special provisions relating to interest under section 9 (b) and

9(d) of the IRA 2006 should apply to interest received by the Appellant. He

submitted that contrary to the decision in Ceylon Financial Investments Limited

V. Commissioner of Income Tax (supra), the TAC erroneously decided that the

Appellants interest income falls within the meaning of section 3(a), instead of

7

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

section 3(e) of the IRA 2006 and therefore, section 9 of the IRA 2006 has no

application in terms of the provisions of section 99 of the IRA 2006.

[14] It is not in dispute that section 6(1)(a) of the Income Tax Ordinance 1932 is

corresponding to section 3(a) of the IRA 2006 and section 6(1)(e) of the Income

Tax Ordinance 1932 is corresponding to section 3(e) of the IRA 2006. Mr.

Balapatabendi, however, disputed the submission of Mr. Ameen that the source

of profit or income could fall within two separate subsections in section 3, and

that the judgment in CFI is no authority for the assertion of the Appellant that

the source of profits or income could fall within two separate subsections of

section 3. He further submitted that section 47 of the Income Tax Ordinance

(current section 99 of the IRA 2006), that was in force at the time of the judgment,

would have statutorily precluded the Supreme Court from making a

pronouncement that a source of profit/income could fall within two separate

subsections of section 6 (1) of the Income Tax Ordinance 1932

[15] At the hearing, we had the benefit of full and able arguments from Mr.

Ameen and Mr. Balapatabendi, who made extensive submissions with regard to

the applicability of the judgment in CFI case to the determination of the profits

or income of the Appellant, either under section 3(a) or 3(e) of the IRA 2006. The

Respondent also relied on the judgment of CFI in deciding whether the profits

or income of the Appellant falls under section 3(a) or 3(e) of the IRA (pp.25-26,

167 of the TAC brief) It is therefore, necessary to identify the ratio of the said

judgment and decide whether the interest can be a source under section 3(a) or

3(e) of the IRA 2006, and if so, in what circumstances will interest can be a source

under section 3(a) or 3(e) of the IRA 2006.

Characterization of profits and income earned by the Appellant under

section 3 (a) or 3 (e) of the IRA 2006.

[16] For the purpose of the determination of the Questions of Law, it is necessary,

first, to decide whether the interest income received by the Appellant is a source

of income under section 3(a) or 3(e) of the IRA 2006. Before I embark upon the

rival contentions of the parties, I may proceed to consider the relevant statutory

provisions which have a bearing on the issue before this Court. Section 2 of the

IRA 2006 provides that income tax shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, be

charged at the appropriate rates specified in the First, Second, Third, Fourth and

Fifth Schedules to this Act, in respect of the profits and income of every person

for the year of assessment..

8

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

[17] Section 3 of the IRA 2006 specifies different sources of income and profits

which are chargeable with income tax. Section 3(a) of the IRA 2006 provides as

follows:

For the purpose of this Act, profits and income or profits or income means-

(a) the profits from any trade, business, profession, or vocation for however

short a period carried on or exercised.

[18] On the other hand, section 3 (e) of the IRA 2006 refers to income received

from dividends, interest or discounts. It provides:

(e) dividends, interest or discounts.

[19] It may be noted that the classification of the source of income is significant

as different rates apply to different sources of income specified in the five

Schedules to the IRA 2006. In the circumstance, it is necessary for the assessor

to ascertain and identify the source of income for the purposes of determining

the profits and income chargeable with income tax, and the rates applicable to

such source of income. The list of heads in section 3 is the list of sources is one

source such as profits from one business in section 3(a) is distinct from

employment in section 3(b), or business in section 3(a) is distinct from

dividends, interest or discounts as a source. One of the heads (sources) is the

profits from any trade, business, profession or vocation for however short a

period carried on or exercised under section 3(a), and the other is dividends,

interest or discounts under section 3(e) of the IRA 2006.

Judgment of the Supreme Court in Ceylon Financial Investments Limited V.

Commissioner of Income Tax (CFI Case)

[20] I will now turn to the CFI judgment. The facts of the CFI judgment reveal

that the assessee company was an investment company and its object was to

invest money in shares in other companies. Its income was derived from

dividends declared by companies in which it owned shares, and interest on

moneys lent out by it. The company did not carry on any trade and claimed

deductions from outgoings and expenses in the production of the profits or

income within the meaning of section 9(1) of the Income Tax Ordinance (Chapter

188) (corresponding to section 25(1) of the IRA 2006).

9

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

[21] Unlike in the present case, the assessee argued in the CFI case that the

interest income should be treated as a source under section 6(1)(a) of the Income

Tax Ordinance 1932 (corresponding to section 3(a) of the IRA 2006), and the

assessor in disallowing the management expenses claimed drew a distinction

between an investment company and a company which carried on a trade or

commercial enterprise. The assessor stated however, that (i) an investment

company does not incur any expense in the production of income, and once the

investment was made, no further expenditure was necessary for the production

of its income from the investment; and (ii) section 10(b) also precluded any such

deduction as claimed. The assessor treated the interest income under section

6(1)(e) of the Income Tax Ordinance 1932 (corresponding to section 3(e) of the

IRA 2006) and disallowed the deduction of management expenses in producing

its interest income in terms of section 9(3) of the Income Tax Ordinance 1932

(corresponding to section 25 (4) of the IRA 2006). The Commissioner also

disallowed the management expenses claimed as deductions from the income

of the company and the Board of Review confirmed the determination of the

Commissioner.

[22] It is relevant to note that there was no dispute in the CFI case that the

appellant company though functioning as an investment company only, and that

the investment was the purpose for which it was formed, it still continued to

carry on business in the way of a holding company. The issue in CFI case was

whether the management expenses (such as Directors, Secretaries and

Auditors fees) could be deducted from its income derived from dividends and

interest in ascertaining the assessable income of the company under section 9(1)

of the Income Tax Ordinance 1932 (corresponding to section 25(1) of the IRA

2006). The CFI judgment dealt with the following two issues:

1. whether the income derived from dividends and interest was a source

under section 6(1)(a) or section 6(1)(e) of the Income Tax Ordinance, 1932;

2. Even if the appellant company was carrying on a business and for that

reason, came under section 6(1)(a), was entitled to deduct the management

expenses derived from dividends and interest in ascertaining the net profits

and income, whether under section 9(1) or 9(3) of the Income Tax

Ordinance;

3. Even if the appellant company was carrying on a business and for that

reason, came under section 6(1)(a), and the gain derived from dividends

10

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

and interest falls within the words dividends, interest or discounts of

section 6(1)(e), whether the Income Tax officer was entitled to elect under

which heads 6(1)(a) or 6(1)(e), it will make its assessment.

Whether, in terms of the CFI judgment, the income derived from dividends, interest or discounts falls within the words profits from any business under section 6(1)(a) or within the terms dividends, interest or discounts under section 6(1)(e) of the Income Tax Ordinance, 1932,

[23] The first question that was considered by the judges in the CFI case was

whether the income derived by the company from dividends and interest was a

source under section 6(1)(a) or section 6(1)(e) of the Income Tax Ordinance,

1932, which corresponds to section 3(a) and 3(e) of the IRA, No. 10 of 2006

respectively.

[24] The argument of the Appellant, in that case, was that income should have

been assessed under section 6(1)(a) of the Ordinance as a business and

therefore, such expenses should have been allowed under section 9(1) (current

section 25(1) of the IRA 2006) as all outgoings and expenses incurred by such

person in the production thereof. The Crown argued that the profits or income

of the assessee came exclusively under section 6(1)(e) (current section 3(e) of the

IRA) and could not be regarded as the profits and income of a business.

Alternatively, the Crown argued that if the profits and income came under both

section 6(1)(a) and under section 6(1)(e), the Crown had an option as to the sub-

section under which the tax could be charged.

[25] It may be noted that section 9(1) of the Income Tax Ordinance, which relates

to the deductions allowed in ascertaining profits or income, is identical to section

25(1) of the IRA. It reads as follows:

(1) Subject to the provisions of subsections (2), and (3), there shall be deducted,

for the purpose of ascertaining the profits of income of any person from any

source, all outgoings and expenses incurred by such person in the production

thereof.-

[26] Section 9(3) of the Income Tax Ordinance is identical to section 25(4) of the

IRA 2006 and it reads as follows:

(3) Subject as hereinafter provided, Income arising from interest shall be the full amount of interest falling due, whether paid or not, without any deduction for outgoings or expenses:

[27] Section 10) (b) of the Income Tax Ordinance reads as follows:

11

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

For the purpose of ascertaining the profits or income of any person from any source, no deduction shall be allowed in respect of ,

(b) any disbursements or expenses not being money expended for the purpose of producing the income.

[28] In the light of those facts and the arguments advanced on behalf of the

assessee and the assessor, the Supreme Court proceeded to consider first,

whether the source of profits and income of the assessee in that case fell within

the meaning of section 6(1)(a) or section 6(1)(e) of the Income Tax Ordinance.

The judges in the CFI case then proceeded to lay down tests for determining

whether interest was a source of income under section 6(1)(a) or 6 (1)(e) of the

Income Tax Ordinance. Howard C.J., Keuneman J. and Soertsz J. delivered

separate judgments, and De Kretser, J. did not deliver a separate judgment, but

agreed with the judgment of Soertsz, J. Wijewardene, J. delivered a brief

judgment, but agreed with the reasoning of Keuneman J.

[29] It is relevant to note that in the CFI judgment, both Howard C.J., and

Keuneman J. recognized that the income derived from dividends and interest

falls within the words profits from business under section 6(1)(a), or within the

terms dividends, interest or discounts under section 6(1)(e) of the Income Tax

Ordinance (pp. 7, 8, & 19). Howard, C.J. then proceeded to consider in what

circumstances will interest be a source under section 6(1)(a) or under section

6(1)(e). In order to determine this question, Howard C.J. laid down the following

test at page 250 of the judgment:

If the business of a company consists in the receipt of dividends, interest or discounts alone or if such a business can be clearly separated from the rest of the trade or business, then any special provisions applicable to dividends, interest or discounts must be applied. Applying the principle laid down in the Egyptian case, the appellant company is within source (e) and cannot get out of it. To take such a view does not in any way disturb the scheme of the Ordinance. I agree, therefore, with Keuneman J. that the Commissioner was empowered to charge the appellant Company under section 6 (1) (e) in respect of the dividends and interest received from undertakings in which its capital was invested (Emphasis added). [30] Howard C.J. held that the company is within source (e) and cannot get out

of it and therefore, the Commissioner was empowered to charge the company

under section 6(1)(e) in respect of dividends and interest received from

undertakings in which its capital was invested (p 11). Howard C.J. then proceeded

to consider whether the management expenses are deductible under section

12

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

9(1) as outgoings and expenses incurred in the production of the profits.

Howard C. J. held that as section 9(1) employs the word any source, it must be

regarded as having reference to section 6(1). Accordingly, Howard C.J. opined

that the management expenses of the appellant company are deductible as

incurred in the production of the profits (p. 7.

[31] Keuneman, J., while disagreeing with Howard, C.J. on the option available to

the Income Tax Commissioner, however, agreed with the test adopted by

Howard C.J. Keuneman J. first proceeded to consider in what circumstances will

interest be a source under section 6(1)(a) or under section 6(1)(e). Keuneman J.,

laid down the following test at pp. 261-262 of the judgment:

How then are we to treat income which comes under source (e) but can also be regarded as coming under source (a)? In my opinion, it was the intention of the Ordinance to regard dividends, interest or discounts as a separate source. If then the business of an individual or a company consists in the receipt of dividends, interest or discounts alone, or if the business of receiving dividends, interest or discounts can be clearly separated from the rest of the trade or business, then any special provisions applicable to dividends, interest or discounts must be applied. I do not think any question of opinion arises. (Emphasis Added).

Option of the Income Tax Officer to elect the source of income under section 6(1)(a) or 6(1)(e)

[32] In the question whether the Crown had an option to elect the source of

income, the majority of the Judges, comprising Keuneman J., Soertsz J. and

Kretser J. held that the Crown had no option to elect whether it will assess under

section 6(1)(a) or 6(1)(e). Keuneman, J. specifically stated at p. 20 that section

47 of the Income Tax Ordinance, which correspond to section 99 of the IRA

2006 lends support to this view.

Deduction of Management Expenses

[33] The next question in the CFI case was whether management expenses were

incurred in the production of profits and deductible under section 9(1) of the

Income Tax Ordinance. The deductions claimed by the Appellant in the CFI case

were outgoings and expenses incurred in the production of the profits or

income within the meaning of section 9(1) of the Income Tax Ordinance. The

Crown argued that the management expenses were not incurred in the

production of profits and income. It was not in dispute that though the

13

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

appellant company in the CFI case was formed as an investment company, it

carried on business in the way of a holding company and that everything that

accrued to the company, in the course of its business, by way of pecuniary gain,

whether by way of dividends, interest, discounts or some other thing falls within

the words profits from any business.

Expenses incurred in the production of dividends

[34] Both Howard C. J, and Keuneman J. turned to the management expenses

incurred in relation to dividends, arising from the production of income and

held that they are necessary and reasonable expenses (p. 22). Howard C.J. and

Keuneman J. recognized that section 9(1) which relates to ascertaining of profits

and income of any person applies to all the sources of income set out in

section 6(1), but places interest on a different footing under section 6(1)(e), if

such interest can be separated from the rest of the trade or business.

[35] Howard C.J. having regard to the facts of the case, held that the income

derived by the Appellant from dividends and interest falls within the meaning

of section 6(1)(e) of the Income Tax Ordinance, and the management expenses

can be deducted as outgoings and expenses incurred in the production of

income and profits under section 9(1). Howard C.J. agreed with Keuneman J.

that the Commissioner was empowered to charge the company under section

6(1)(e) in respect of dividends and interest received in the production of profits

and income under section 9(1) of the Income Tax Ordinance.

Expenses incurred in earning dividends

[36] As far the deduction of management expenses in relation to dividends,

which the company obtained was concerned, Keuneman J. rejected the

submission of the Crown that the company has not done anything to produce

the income or profits under section 9(1). Keuneman J., held that section 9(1)

would therefore prima facie apply to all the sources in section 6(1)(a) to (h) (p.

21). Keuneman J., further rejected the argument of the Crown that nothing has

been done by the company to produce the income or profits, and held that the

management expenses claimed in the case have been incurred in the

production of the income. Keuneman J., further held that management

expenses incurring in the production of income can be deducted from any

source, including from source 6(1)(e) and agreed with Keuneman J. that

management expenses incurred by the company could be deducted under

section 9(1) of the Income Tax ordinance.

14

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

[37] Keuneman J. decided that the management expenses can be deducted as

far as they relate to the dividends which the company obtained in producing

the profits or income under section 9(1) of the Income Tax Ordinance 1932.

Expenses incurred in the production of interest-special considerations

[38] In relation to the interest, it was the opinion of Keuneman J. that though

the interest is a separate source under section 6(1)(e), that source is subject to

all outgoings and expenses incurred in the production of the profits or income,

and thus, they must be deducted. Keuneman J. then turned to the deduction of

interest income earned by the company and referred to section 9(1) and 9(3) of

the Income Tax Ordinance. Section 9(1) refers to the deductions for the purpose

of ascertaining the profits or income from any source, all outgoings and

expenses incurred by any person in the production thereof and section 9(3)

refers to income arising from separate interest, whether paid or not, without

any deduction for outgoings or expenses.

[39] Keuneman J. held that had the earning of interest been the sole and

separate business of the company, the special provision in section 9(3)

(corresponding to section 25(4) of the IRA 2006) would apply. Keuneman J.

however, refused to apply the special provision in section 9(3) on the basis that

the company carried on one business, which has two branches, viz. the earning

of dividends and earning of interest, but the interest is only a subsidiary part of

the business, which is not separated from its ordinary financial business.

Accordingly, Keuneman J., refused to apply the special provision in section 9(3),

which corresponds to section 25(4) of the IRA 2006. But His Lordship applied

the general rule of deduction under section 9(1), which corresponds to section

25(1) of the IRA 2006. The findings of Keuneman J. at p. 22 of the judgment

read as follows:

What is the position as regards the items of interest earned by the company? Had the earning of interest been the sole or separate business of the company, no doubt the special considerations under section 9(3) would have been applicable. But it is clear in this case that the company carries on one business, which has two branches, viz., the earning of dividends and the earning of interest and it is clear on the figures available to us (see Document X) that interest is only a subsidiary part of the business, and is not separated from its ordinary financial business. The interest is embedded in the business (in the words of Rowlatt J.) or a mere incident in the business (in the words of Lord Hanworth M.R.)-see Butler v. The Mortgage Company of Egypt, Ltd. I do not think it can be separated off or identified as distinct from

15

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

the general business of the company. I do not think therefore that these items are assessable as such. The ordinary rule under section 9(1) therefore applies and the deductions claimed can be allowed in their entirety [emphasis added].

[40] On the question whether or not the deductions mentioned in the general

rule under section 9(1) (corresponding to section 25(1) of the IRA) applies to all

sources of income under section 6(1), Keuneman J. held that the deductions

mentioned in section 9(1) apply to all sources of profit and income in the

following words (p. 23):

I only repeat that the deductions mentioned in section 9 apply to all sources of profit and income.

[41] It is relevant to note that Keuneman J. took the view that section 9(3)

applies where the interest is a separate source which is not embedded in the

business in producing its aggregate income and refused to apply section 9(3)

as the income was embedded in its general activities in producing its aggregate

income.

[42] Having considered the word any source which is employed in section 9(1),

which refers to either 6(1)(a) or 6(1)(e), Keuneman J. deducted the management

expenses in relation to interest earned by the company under the general rule

in section 9(1) (correspond to section 25(1) of the IRA) and not under the special

rule in section 9(3). On that basis, the deduction of management expenses

claimed arising from interest was allowed as outgoings and expenses incurred

in the production of the income under section 9(1), which corresponds to

section 25(1) of the IRA 2006.

[43] Applying the said principles of law, Keuneman J. finally allowed the appeal

and deducted the management expenses incurred in the production of income

in relation to dividends and interest in ascertaining the assessable income of

the company under section 9(1) (corresponding to section 25(1) of the IRA).

[44] The combined effect of the test applied by Howard CJ., and Keuneman J.

(with Wijewardene, J. agreed) was that if the business of a company or

individual consists in the receipts of dividends, interests or discounts alone, or

if such business can be clearly separated from the rest of the trade, business,

then section 3(1)(e) will apply. In other words, if the business of a company or

an individual consists in the receipts of dividends, interest or discounts and such

business cannot be separated from the rest of the trade or business, and the

16

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

interest is embedded in the business, such interest or dividends or discounts

falls within the meaning of section 3(1(a) of the Act.

[45] The test adopted by Howard CJ., and Keuneman J. applies to identify in

what circumstances will dividends, interest or discounts be a source under

section 6(1)(a) or under section 6(1)(e). That test has no application to the

deductions of expenses mentioned in section 9(1) or 9(3), which relate statutory

exemptions. Accordingly, the CFI judgment ultimately determined the

deduction of expenses derived from dividends and income separately by the

application of the general rule under section 9(1) and the special deduction rule

under section 9(3). Both Howard CJ., and Keuneman J. confirmed that though

the source of income falls under section 6(1)(e), which stands on a different

footing in section 6(1), section 9(1) applies to all sources, whether under 6(1)(a)

or 6(1)(e) and thus, to all outgoings and expenses incurred in the production

thereof. Accordingly, the management expenses incurred in the production of

income or profits earned from dividends and interest were held to be deductible

under the general rule in section 9(1).

[46] It is relevant to note however, that Soertsz J. (with whom de Kretser J.,

agreed) disagreed with Keuneman J. that it was the intention of the Ordinance

to regard dividends, interest or discounts as a separate source (p. 252). Soertsz

J. held that the question whether it was profits from dividends or interests or

discounts falls within section 6(1) or 6(1)(e), and depends on whether or not the

assessor deals with the profits of a business or the income of an

individual. Soertsz J. held that where it is appertaining to an income of a

business, it falls within 3(1)(a), and where it is related to an income of an

individual, as part of his business, it falls within section 6(1)(e). The relevant

passage of the judgment at p. 252 reads as follows:

The view I have reached is that the categories enumerated in section 6 (1) are mutually exclusive, and that the question whether 6 (1) (a) or 6 (1) (e) applies in a particular case, depends on whether we are dealing with the profits of a business or the income of an individual. If it is a case of dividends, interests, or discounts appertaining to a business, they fall within the words profits of any business and section (6) (1)(a) applies. If, however, it is a case of dividends, interest or discounts accruing to an individual not, in the course of a business, but as a part of his income from simple investments, then section 6 (1) (e) is the relevant section, and so far as interest is concerned, section 9 (3) modifies section 9 (1) (Emphasis added).

17

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

[47] The above passage of the judgment of Soertsz J. suggests that the

following test would apply to identify whether the profits and income of an

individual or business fall within section 3(1)(a) or 3(1) (e):

1. If the profits or income received from dividends or interest or discounts

appertains to the business, it will fall within the profits of any business under

section 6(1)(a);

2. If the profits or income received from dividends or interest or discounts

accruing to an individual was earned, not in the course of a business, but

as a part of his income from simple investments, it falls within section

3(1)(e).

[48] The test applied by Soertsz J. that section 6(1)(e) is limited to an income of

an individual and section 6(1)(a) is limited to the profits of any business is

not, in my view consistent with the scheme of the IRA 2006, which does not

restrict the application of section 3(1)(e) to an individual. In my view, the tests

laid down by Howard CJ., and Keuneman J., are significant to identify the source

of profits or income under which chargeability arises and to decide in what

circumstances, will the dividends, interest or discounts be a source under

section 3(a) or 3(e). The identification of the source of profits or income is also

significant to apply the general rule of deduction under section 25(1) or special

rules of deduction under section 25(1)(a) -(w) of the IRA 2006 to particular

sources or profits or income, irrespective of whether the source falls under

section 3(a) or 3(e) of the IRA 2006.

[49] Applying the above principles adopted in the majority decision of the CFI

judgment, we will now proceed to consider whether the interest income earned

by the Appellant falls within the words profits from any business under section

3(a) or under the term interest under section 3(e) of the IRA 2006.

Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement (DTAA) between India and Sri

Lanka

[50] Before, we proceed to classify the source of income of the Appellant under

section 3(a) or 3(e), it is relevant to consider the effect of the Double Taxation

Avoidance Agreement (hereinafter referred to as the DTAA) between India

and Sri Lanka. The DTAA applies to taxes on income and capital imposed on

behalf of each Contracting State irrespective of the manner in which they are

levied (Article 2.2). The existing taxes to which this Convention shall apply in Sri

Lanka are (i) the income-tax, including the income-tax based on the turnover of

18

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

enterprises licensed by the Greater Colombo Economic Commission; and (ii) the

wealth-tax (Article 2.3).

[51] The DTAA is a contract between two Sovereign Governments of India and

Sri Lanka, and the contract has been signed by the two sovereign governments

with full knowledge, understanding and free consent of both governments.

Relief by way of an exemption shall be considered in case of a DTAA in terms

of Section 97 of the Inland Revenue Act, No. 10 of 2006. Section 97 reads as

follows:

97 (1) (a) Where Parliament by resolution approves any agreement entered into between the Government of Sri Lanka and the Government of any other territory or any agreement by the Government of Sri Lanka with the Governments of any other territories, for the purpose of affording relief from double taxation in relation to income tax under Sri Lanka law and any taxes of a similar character imposed by the laws of that territory, the agreement shall, notwithstanding anything in any other written law, have the force of law in Sri Lanka, in so far as it provides for

(i) relief from income tax; (ii) determining the profits or income to be attributed in Sri Lanka to persons not resident in Sri Lanka, or determining the profits or income to be attributed to such persons and their agencies, branches or establishments in Sri Lanka; (iii) determining the profits or income to be attributed to persons resident in Sri Lanka who have special relationships with persons not so resident (iv) exchange of information; or (v) assistance in the recovery of tax payable.

[52] There are two situations under which the relief can be achieved in Sri Lanka under the DTAA between India and Sri Lanka:

(a) Where income tax has been paid under the IRA 2006 of Sri Lanka and the

corresponding Indian Income Act or income tax remains taxable in both

countries (whether at a full or reduced rate), as the country of residence, Sri

Lanka will give a tax credit for the purpose of Sri Lankan taxation; or

(b) Where exemption from taxation exists, Sri Lanka may grant the exemption

from income tax in respect of the agreed source of income under the

DTAA subject to conditions laid down in the domestic law or the DTAA.

[53] As per the IRA 2006 (s. 97), where the government has entered into a DTAA,

then in relation to the assessee to whom such Agreement applies, the provisions

19

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

of the DTAA, with respect to cases to which they would apply, would operate

even if inconsistent with the provisions of the IRA 2006. As a consequence, if a

tax liability is imposed by the provisions of the IRA, the DTAA may be referred

to and relief may be granted either by deducting or reducing the tax liability,

and the Treaty provisions would prevail, and are liable to be enforced in Sri

Lanka and India.

[54] It is not in dispute that the Appellant is a non-resident banking institution

operating through a branch in Sri Lanka and thus, it has a permanent

establishment (PE) in Sri Lanka within the meaning of Article 25 of the Double

Taxation Avoidance Agreement between India and Sri Lanka. The Appellant who

is carrying on business in Sri Lanka through a permanent establishment (PE) is

therefore, subject to the Sri Lankan tax laws in respect of profits attributable to

its permanent establishment (PE) in Sri Lanka subject to the stipulations of

relevant laws in Sri Lanka.

Business activities of the Appellant & the profits and income claimed by

the Appellant

[55] It is relevant to note that the issue in the CFI judgment related to the

deduction of management expenses incurred in the production of dividends

and interest under section 9(1) of the Income Tax Ordinance 1932. In the

present, the issues relate to the exemption of income derived from loans,

investment of moneys in the government securities and euro deposits in banks

under section 9(b) and 9(d). The issue also relates to the interest expenses

incurred in relation to Government Development Bonds under section 9(f) of

the IRA 2006.

[56] In determining whether the interest income falls under section 3(a) or 3(e)

of the IRA 2006, it is necessary to identify the business activities of the Appellant

and the profits and income claimed by the Appellant under a particular source

of income. As noted, section 3 enumerates the sources and categories of profits

and income that are subject to tax and therefore, it includes any profits and

income or profits or income from any source listed in paragraphs (a)-(j) of

section 3 of the IRA 2006. The definition in section 217 provides that profits

or income means the net profits or income from any source for any period

calculated in accordance with the provisions of the Act. The term income is

not however, defined.

20

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

[57] In Thornhill v. The Commissioner of Income Tax (supra), the main question

was whether the sum of Rs. 19,622.19 was received by the Appellant in respect

of his estate under the Tea and Rubber Control Ordinance as tea and rubber

coupons to which he was entitled under the said Ordinance, and realised by the

sale of these coupons constituted profit or income within the meaning of

Section 6 (1) (a) or 6 (1) (b), or whether it represented realisation of capital.

[58] Soertsz J. in that case referred to the statement made in Tennant v. Smith

(1892) A.C. 150 that for income tax purposes, income must be money or

something capable of being turned into money. But, Soertsz J. held however,

that this statement needs qualification as all moneys and all things capable of

being turned into money are not necessarily income for tax purposes. Soertsz

J. referred to the following essential characteristics of income identified by

Cunningham and Dowland in their Treatise on Land and Income Tax and

Practice, at p. 128, and held that these essential elements provide adequate

tests by which to ascertain whether a particular receipt is income or not within

the meaning of the Income Tax Ordinance. They are:

(a) It must be a gain;

(b) It must actually come in, severed from capital, in cash or its equipment; (c) It must be either the produce of property or/and the reward of labour or

effort;

(d) It must not be a mere change in the form of, or accretion to, the value of

articles in which it is not the business of the taxpayer to deal; and

(e) It must not be a sum returned as a reduction of a private expense.

[59] Having applied the above-mentioned tests, Soertsz J. held inter alia, that (i)

the amount in question is profits and income derived from the business of an

agricultural undertaking carried on by the appellant, and is therefore assessable

under section 6 (1) (a); (ii) if it does not fall within the scope of section 6 (1) (a),

it is caught up by the residuary subsection 6 (1) (h) as this is not something

casual or something in the nature of a windfall.

Meaning of carried on or exercised in section 3(a)

[60] Now, it is necessary to determine whether or not the Appellant carried on a

business and earned profits from such business within the meaning of section

3(a), or merely received an income on a different footing, which can be separated

from its business income within the meaning of section 3(e) of the IRA 2006. It

21

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

is relevant to note that the profits from any trade, business, profession or

vacation for however short period. in section 3(a) is subject to a qualifying

phrase carried on or exercised. The word business has been defined in

Section 217 of the Inland Revenue Act of 2006. It reads as follows:

Business includes an agricultural undertaking, the racing of horses, the letting or leasing of any premises, including any land by a company and the forestry.

[61] The definition of business in Section 217 is inclusive and not exhaustive in

nature and thus, it includes an agricultural undertaking, the racing of horses, the

letting or leasing of any premises, including any land by a company and the

forestry. Jessel M.R. in Smith v. Anderson [1880] 15 Ch D 247 (CA) stated that (i)

the word " business " is a word of large and indefinite import and it is something

which occupies attention and labour of a person for the purpose of profit; and

(iii) the word means almost anything which is an occupation or duty requiring

attention as distinguished from sports or pleasure; (iii) it is used in the sense of

occupation continuously carried on for the purpose of profit. He explained the

word business at pp. 258-259 as follows:

Now "business itself is a word of large and indefinite import. I have before me the last edition of Johnson's Dictionary, edited by Dr. Latham, and there the first meaning given of it is, "Employment, transaction of affairs; the second, "an affair; the third, "subject of business, affair, or object which engages the care. Then there are some other meanings, and the sixth is, "something to be transacted. The seventh is, "something required to be done. Then taking the last edition of the Imperial Dictionary, which is a very good dictionary, we find it a little more definite, but with a remark which is worth reading: "Business, employment; that which occupies the time and attention and labour of men for the purpose of profit or improvement. That is to say, anything which occupies the time and attention and labour of a man for the purpose of profit is business. It is a word of extensive use and indefinite signification. Then, "Business is a particular occupation, as agriculture, trade, mechanics, art, or profession, and when used in connection with particular employments it admits of the plural that is, businesses.

[62] The words carrying on or exercised are not defined in the Act. Section 3(a)

however, includes every trade, business, [profession or vacation however short a

period. The question whether a person is or is not carrying on business is an

inference from facts and the circumstances each case. As a general rule, one of

two isolated transactions could not be described as the carrying on of a business

subject however, to certain exceptions (Sikke on South African Income Tax, 3rd

22

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

Ed. 1965, p. 478). For example, a single transaction is of such a nature that it

could be correctly described as a business (supra).

[63] In considering whether a taxpayer is carrying on business, the frequency,

systematically and regularity of the action or the earning of the income

involves the conduct of a series of action that give rise to the carrying on a

business (Sikke on South African Income Tax, 3rd Ed. 1965, p. 478). On the other

hand, the investment of surplus funds in shares in companies, as long as it forms

part of a general scheme of profit-making, can be regarded as carrying on

business (supra).

[64] It is settled law that the terms carrying on or carrying out appears to cover

the habitual pursuit of a course of conduct for the purpose of earning profits

with proof of continuity. The following statement made by Brett, L.J. in Erichsen

v. Last (1881) 4 TC 422, at p. 425 is significant to ascertain whether a business is

exercised or carried on or transacted in a country:

Now, I should say that whatever profitable contracts are habitually made in England, by or for a foreigner with persons in England because these persons are in England, to do something to those persons and, such foreigners are exercising are exercising a profitable trade in England, even although everything done by or supplied by them in order to fulfil their part of the contract is done abroad.

[65] The Appellant has been assessed by the assessor on the basis that the

interest income earned by the Appellant from its banking business is a source

that falls within the terms trade, business for however short a period carried

on or exercised in section 3(a) of the IRA 2006. The Appellant concedes that

the interest received by a bank can fall to be treated as profits of a business

falling within section 3(a) of the IRA 2006 as well as section 3(e) of the IRA 2006

(p. 74 of the TAC brief). The Appellants stand is however, that the special

provisions relating to interest under section 9 applies even if the interest comes

within section 3(a) of the IRA on the basis of the judgment in CFI case (vide p. 74

of the TAC brief).

[66] The Appellant is a non-resident banking institution carrying on banking

business in terms of the provisions of the Banking Act, No. 30 of 1988 (as

amended). Section 86 of the Banking (Amendment) Act, No. 30 of 1988 defines

a banking business as follows:

Banking business means the business of receiving funds from the public through the acceptance of money deposits payable upon demand by cheque,

23

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

draft, order or otherwise, and the use of such funds either in whole or in part for advances, investments or any other operation either authorized by law or by customary banking practices.

[67] Section 6 of the Banking Act, No. 30 of 1988 (as amended) provides that no

commercial bank shall carry on any banking business other than business

specified in the licence. It reads as follows:

6(1) Subject to the provisions of section 17, no licensed commercial bank shall:

(a) carry on any banking business other than the business specified in the

license; or (b) carry on any other business other than those specified in Schedule 11 to

this Act.

[68] At the hearing on 28.11.2022, Mr. Ameen stated that the interest is the core

business of the Appellant, but the interest income can be separated from its

other business activities and therefore, the Appellants interest income falls

under section 3(e). Mr. Balapatabendi, however, submitted that the Appellants

interest income is associated with its banking business and therefore, it cannot

be separated from its other branches.

[69] It is not in dispute that the Appellant is a licensed commercial bank to which

a licence has been issued under the provisions of the Banking Act, No. 30 of 1988

(as amended) for carrying on banking business as defined in section 86 of the

said Act. In terms of item 17 of Schedule 1 of the said Act, the Appellant Bank is

listed as a licensed commercial bank under section 2(3) of the said Act. In terms

of the definition of banking business, the Appellant bank is entitled to engage

in the following business activities inter alia:

1. receiving deposits from the public and paying money upon demand;

2. issuing fixed deposits;

3. providing loans and advances with interest;

4. accepting, discounting, buying, selling, collecting and dealing in bills of

exchange;

5. the purchasing and selling of bonds, scripts or other forms of securities

on behalf of constituents or others;

6. investments in treasury bonds;

7. investment in development bonds issued by the Central Bank of Sri

Lanka;

8. other financial services.

24

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

[70] According to the financial statement of the Appellant, the Appellant

provides a comprehensive range of financial services encompassing corporate,

personal, trade, finance, treasury and investment services (p. 55 of the TAC

brief). The Appellants argument is that (i) the interest earned by the Appellant

in granting loans to the Government of Sri Lanka, investment in Government

Development Bonds and with other banks is a source under section 3(e); (ii)

interest receipts of the Appellant can be separated from the rest of the business

and therefore, interest is a source under section 3(e); and (iii) accordingly, the

special provisions relating to interest under section 9 should apply to interest

earned by the Appellant.

[71] According to the financial statement of the Appellant, the Appellant has

received income from a wide range of banking and financial activities such as:

1. Interest income

(a) interest income from loans and advances to customers;

(b) interest income from treasury bills and treasury bonds & placement with

other banks;

(c) interest income from debenture investment

2. Other income

(a) income from discounts on bills;

(b) income from net foreign exchange gain;

(c) dividend income from securities;

(d) fees and commission income;

(e) profits on sale of fixed deposits;

(f) other income.

[72] According to the financial statement of the Appellant, the Appellant has

incurred expenses from the following banking and other financial activities:

1. Interest expenses

(a) Deposits from customers;

(b) Borrowing from banks.

2. Operating expenses

(a)Auditors remuneration;

(b) depreciation;

(c)financial VAT;

(d)EPF & ETF

(e)litigation

(f)other

25

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

[73] In my view, the income of the Appellant from its banking business which

includes dealing with deposits, borrowing, loans, investment, commission,

discounts, sale of fixed deposits, securities, and other connected banking

activities is income from the same source and whatever accrues in the form of

interest, whether from securities, or loans or investment. It would fall under

section 3(a) unless it can be clearly separated from its banking business because

all the interest accrues from the business carries on by the Appellant is only one

banking business, with several branches.

[74] It is manifest that the interest earned by the Appellant is not its sole

business, and its income is not derived from interest alone. The Appellant has

received income from loan and advances, treasury bills and treasury bonds,

debenture investment and other income including dividends, commission

discounts, foreign exchange gain, and sale of fixed deposits etc. During the

course of the submissions made on 28.11.2022, Mr. Ameen admitted that the

Appellants core business is the interest income earned from its banking

income, but submitted that interest income has been separated from the

audited statement of accounts and therefore, it has been separately identified.

[75] Had the earning of interest been the sole or separate business of the

company, then, the interest alone stands on a separate footing and falls within

the term interest under section 3(e) of the IRA. If it falls under section 3(e),

special deduction rule in section 25(1)(f) read with 25(4), subject to section 26

would apply to expenses. In other words, if the interest is not sole or separate

business of the Appellant, it would fall within the words profits from any

business under section 3(a) of the IRA. In such case, the ordinary rule of

deduction under section 25(1) would apply to outgoings and expenses.

[76] That matter does not end there. The issue here is the application of the tax

exemption under section 9 of the IRA 2006 where the income falls either within

the meaning of section 3(a) or 3(e) of the IRA. I will be shortly dealing, in this

judgment, with the applicability of tax exemption under section 9 where the

profits and income falls under section 3(a) of the IRA 2006.

[77] It is manifest that the business of the Appellant does not consist in the

receipt of dividends, interest or discounts alone and its earning consists of

several other sub-sources of core business activities. Applying the first part of

the test 81dopted by Howard C.J. and Keuneman J., the Appellant would not

fall within the ambit of the first element of the test and therefore, section 3(e)

would not apply to the Appellant under the first element.

26

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

[78] I will now turn to the second element of the test. The Appellant however,

relies on the second part of the test adopted by Howard C.J. and Keuneman J.

and argues that section 3(e) applies on the basis that interest received by the

Appellant can be clearly separated from the rest of the business and the interest

received has been separately quantified for the purpose of tax liability.

[79] A perusal of the financial statement reveals that the Appellant carried on

one banking business, which consists of several branches, viz, the earning of

interest, dividends, commission, discounts, sale of fixed assets, foreign

exchange gain etc. The business income from such branches is derived by the

Appellant by using the funds collected from the depositors through the

acceptance of money deposits for loans, advances, investments or any other

operations authorized by law and by customary banking practices.

[80] The Appellant is not an investment company like in the case of CFI case.

There is nothing to indicate that the interest was earned by the Appellant solely

from a capital investment made by the Appellant, which has no connection

whatsoever, with the funds received by the Appellant from the public through

the acceptance of money deposits, or that a capital investment alone was used

for all investment or granting loans to customers or the Government of Sri

Lanka. A banker thus derives its income for its business as a banker and it does

not acquire another source of income if part of the capital employed in the

business is held in the form of securities. The interest he received for the

securities is income from the business of banking (Huges v. Bank of New Zealand

21 TC 472). The interest received by a bank on overdrafts or loan accounts or

investment by employing moneys employed in the banking business are

receipts of the banking business, and therefore, they cannot be classified as a

separate business carried out by the Bank.

[81] It is clear from the financial statement of the Appellant that the interest is

embedded in the banking business of the Appellant and thus, it cannot be

separated from the ordinary banking business of the Appellant. The mere

reference to separate entries in the audited statement of accounts, in the

absence of separate accounts maintained by the Bank cannot show that the

Appellant carried on a separate business, and derived interest income only from

such business, which is not embedded in the banking business of the Appellant.

[82] On the facts and circumstances of the case, I am of the opinion that the

interest earned by the Appellant cannot be regarded as the sole or separate

business of the Appellant. I am of the view that the income derived by the

27

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

Appellant from interest cannot be separated from the profits earned by the

Appellant from its banking business, as it is embedded in its banking business

activities. I accordingly hold that in the present case, the income derived by the

Appellant from interest falls within the words profits from business under

section 3(a) of the IRA 2006. I do not find any force in the argument of Mr.

Ameen that the interest income earned by the Appellant Bank falls within the

term interest under section 3(e) of the IRA 2006.

Is the Appellant disentitled to the exemption under section 9 where the income earned falls within the words profits from business under section 3(a)?

[83] It was the initial contention of Mr. Ameen that as the interest income in

question falls within the meaning of section 3(e), such interest income should

be exempt in terms of section 9(b) and 9(d) of the IRA 2006. At the hearing on

28.11.2022, Mr. Ameen however, drew our attention to the stand taken by the

Appellants Representative, Mr. Jayanethi, before the TAC (p. 153 of the brief)

that the treatment of interest as business profits does not preclude the grant of

exemption to the Appellant since the interests contemplated in sections 9(b)

and 9(d) are falling to be treated as business profits. The contention of Mr.

Balapatabendi was however, that where the interest in question falls within the

meaning of section 3(a), the exceptions under section 9 are not applied to the

Appellant.

[84] Now the question is whether the exemption claimed by the Appellant under

section 9 applies to the source of profits and income earned by the Appellant

under section 3(e) of the IRA 2006 only, or where the source of income falls

exclusively under section 3(a), the exemption under section 9 is inapplicable to

the Appellant. In other words, the question is whether, the classification of the

interest as business profits under section 3(a) precludes the Appellant from

claiming the benefit to the exemption under section 9 of the IRA 2006.

[85] The TAC in its determination referred to section 107(3)(c) of the IRA 2006

and held that the nature of the business of the Appellant falls exclusively under

section 3(a) and not under section 3(e), the Appellant is not entitled to claim

the exemption under section 9(b) unless specifically excluded by any other

provisions of the IRA 2006. The second is that the TAC decided that the Its

findings at page 128 of the TAC brief reads as follows:

28

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

It is an accepted fact that the interest received by the Appellant Bank from its core business activity is treated as turnover of the said bank. Hence, the interest received by the Appellant bank during the relevant period falls into the term turnover as defined in section 107(3)(c) of the Inland Revenue Act. Therefore, according to the nature of business of the Appellant bank, its profits fall exclusively under section 3(a) and does not fall under section 3. In the above circumstances, the Appellant bank should be treated as carrying on the business of banking and therefore investments in government development bonds and the foreign currency loan granted to the government of Sri Lanka to earn interest has to be treated as part of the banking activity. Therefore, the Appellant bank is not entitled to claim exemption under section 9(b) of the Inland revenue Act. Further, exemption under section 9(b) will not be applicable to interest derived by the bank, since such income is derived as business income and it is liable to tax, unless specifically excluded by any other provision of the Inland Revenue Act.

[86] Section 2 (1) of the IRA provides that income tax shall, subject to the

provisions of this Act, be charged at the appropriate rates specified in the First,

Second, Third, Fourth and Fifth Schedules to this Act .in respect of every

person for that year of assessment. Section 3 which enumerates the sources of

income chargeable to income tax and all income from whatever source derived

is therefore chargeable to income tax.

[87] The income chargeable to tax enumerated in section 3 is the rule and the

exemptions granted are exceptions to the rule. The use of the words Income

tax shall, subject to the provisions of this Act in section 2(1) means that the

income from whatever source derived is subject to the provisions of the IRA

2006, which signifies that the income chargeable with tax in section 3 is subject

to the exceptions under section 9 of the Act. It would make the words income

tax shall, subject to the provisions of this Act no meaning, if section 9 can only

be engaged where interest is attributable to section 3(e) alone. If that the true

meaning, no exemption is permissible from interest income under section 9

where the income falls within the meaning of section 3(a), and if so, the

exemption in section 9 is meaningless.

Exemptions under section 9 of the IRA 2006

[88] A perusal of the TAC determination reveals that it has taken the view that

only the interest income derived from a source under section 3(e) falls within

the exemption under section 9, and that the exemption was not available in

regard to income derived from banking business under section 3(a). The

29

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

legislature has however, inter alia, allowed the following interest accrued to any

person outside Sri Lanka to be exempted from income tax:

The interest accruing to any person outside Sri Lanka, from any security, note

or coupon issued by the Government of Sri Lanka in respect of a loan

granted in foreign currency 9(b) to the Government of Sri Lanka for its

economic progress.

[89] It may be noted that when the receipt of income of a particular kind is

exempted from tax, the exemption attaches to such receipts irrespective the

source from which the receipt is derived (Gooneratne, Income Tax of Sri Lanka,

2nd Ed. p/ 176). The exemption from tax of interest in section 9 makes a

distinction between an individual and a body of persons (supra). All income

from whatever source derived is therefore, is chargeable to income tax subject

to exceptions set out in sections 7-24 of the IRA.

Effect of section 99 of the IRA 2006

[90] The view of the TAC seems to be that only the interest income derived from

a source under section 3(e) falls within the exemption and that the exemption

was not available in regard to income derived from banking business under

section 3(a). At the hearing, Mr. Balapatabendi, relies on section 99 of the IRA

and submitted that when the source of income falls within the meaning of

section 3(a), the exceptions under section 9 have no application. Section 99

reads as follows:

99. Where any provision of this Act expressly relates to any particular source of profits or income referred to in section 3, such provision shall not be applied in the determination of any profits or income arising from any other source referred to in that section.

[91] According to the scheme of the IRA 2006, income tax has to be charged in

respect of the all profits and income for that year of assessment of a person

and all profits and income is defined under section 2(1) to comprise all profits

and income or profits or income from whatever source derived from the

heads specified in section 3, subject to certain exemptions. But what is significant

is that profits and income or profits or income described in section 3 from

whatever source derived is that section 3 is intended as describing different kinds

of profits.

[92] The combined reading of sections 2 and 3, and shows that income tax is to

be charged at the rate or rates prescribed in the IRA 2006 on the all profits and

30

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

income of the person as defined in section 2(1) of the IRA 2006 and computed

from the all profits and income of such person in the words of Viscount

Dunedin in Salisbury House Estate v. Fly (1930) 15 T.C. 266:

Now, the cardinal consideration in my judgment is that the income tax is only one tax, a tax on the income of the person whom it is sought to assess, and that the different schedules are modes in which the Statute directs this to be levied.

[93] Viscount Dunedin, J. further stated that there are no separate taxes under

the various schedules but only one tax. But in order to arrive at the total income

on which tax is to be charged, you have to consider the nature, the constituent

parts, of his (assessees) income to see which schedule you are to apply. Sir

George Rankin in Commissioner of Income Tax v. Chunilal B. Metha (1938) 6 I.T.R.

521, further said:

The effect of section 6 is to classify profits and gains, under different heads for the purpose of providing for each appropriate rules for computing the amount, its language is shall be chargeable.in the manner hereinafter appearing.

[94] These words are useful to consider under what head it appropriately and

specifically falls, and if it falls under one particular head, then computation is to

be made under the section which covers that particular head of income to which

the particular tax rate applies. Thus, each head refers to income or profits

attributable to the source (i) trade, business, profession or vocation,

employment, dividends, interests, discounts employment, rents, royalties etc.

This supports the contention of each head being separate, exclusive and specific.

However, it refers to the income of the person whom it is sought to assess, and

such different heads are modes in which the Statute directs this to be levied

according to the different rates, subject however, to exemptions.

[95] As Viscount Dunedin, J. held in Salisbury House Estate v. Fly (supra), the list

of heads in section 3 contains a list of sources and one source is distinct from

another source. He further held that there are no separate taxes under the

various heads but only one tax, and the different heads are modes in which the

Statute directs profits and or income is to be levied according to the different

rates, subject however, to exemptions granted by the Act. Where the profits and

income or profit or income expressly falls within any particular source under

section 3(a), such source applies to the determination of such profits and income,

or profit or income under that source and none other is the principle behind

31

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

section 99 and nothing more. In the result the assessor or the taxpayer has no

option to elect the head under which the profits and income or profit or income

can be determined by bringing it under any other head in section 3 of the IRA.

This view is further fortified by the following statement of law contained in

Volume 1 of Simons Income Tax (1948 Ed.) p. 54:

These schedules are prima facie mutually exclusive and consequently if a particular kind of income is charged under one schedule, the Crown cannot elect to charge it under another.

[96] There is support for this proposition from the CFI judgment itself. In the CFI

case, the attention of the Court was brought to section 47 of the Income Tax

Ordinance, 1932, which is corresponding to section 99 of the IRA 2006. Section

47 of the Income Tax Ordinance, 1932 reads as follows:

Where any provision expressly relates to any particular source of profits or income mentioned in sub-section (1) of section 6, such provision shall not apply to the determination of any profits or income which is assessable and has been assessed as falling within any other source mentioned in that sub-section.

[97] His Lordship Keuneman J. referring to section 47 of the Income Tax

ordinance, and the test applied to identify in what circumstances, dividends,

interest or discount could fall within the ambit of section 6(1)(a) or 6(1)(e)

rejected the argument of the Crown that the assessor has an option to choose

between the various sources under section 6(1). His Lordship stated that the

Crown has no option to elect between various sources under section 6 and

charge the tax accordingly. Thus, the question whether dividends, interest or

discount could fall either within section 6(1)(a) or 6(1)(e) will depend on the

basis of the CFI test and not on the basis of any option elected by the assessor

or the assessee. His Lordship Keuneman J., after formulating the test stated at

p. 20:

In my opinion, section 47 lends support to this. Section 47 applies to provisions expressly relating to any particular source under section 6(f) to that source and to none other.

[98] It seems to me that where the interest earned is separate and distinct head

under section 3(a) and if a profit or income is chargeable under that head, it is

not open to the assessee to change the head, or to the assessor to charge the

tax under a different head. It is not possible to contend that where income falls

under more than one head and say that the assessee has the option to choose

32

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

the head which makes the burden on his shoulders lighter and rely on the other

source.

[99] The intention of the legislature in introducing section 99 is to recognize the

principle that (i) each head of income of which source has its characteristics for

income tax purposes and falls under one specific head under section 3 of the

Act; and (ii) where any item falls specifically under one head, it has to be charged

under that head and no other. In other words, the principle under section 99 is

intended to deny any option to the assessee or the assessor to elect any

particular head under section 3 and prevent the assessor to charge the tax on

any of the sources which may be chosen by the assessor because each head

being, specific to cover the item arising from a particular source.

[100] Both precedent and on a proper construction of the scheme of the Act,

the income from interest would fall under section 3(a) as it is chargeable within

the terms profits from business and therefore, it cannot be brought under a

different source [(section 3(e)]. This would mean that once an activity is

properly characterized as a business, trade or profession or vocation under

section 3(a), such characterization cannot be changed by the taxpayer, assessor

and brought under a different source referred to in section 3 for the purpose of

determination of profits or income of such person. The principle in section 99

is important in computing profits from a specified source in section 3 since a

particular taxing rule will apply exclusively to that rule, and it cannot be brought

under a different provision in section 3 to which a different rule applies.

[101] The rule in section 99 is not intended to deny the exemption granted to

an assessee where his source falls within the words profits from business, trade,

profession or vocation under section 3(a) and allow the exemption only where

his source falls within the terms dividends, interest or discount. Such an

interpretation is absurd and mischievous to the true intention of the legislature

expressed in the IRA 2006. It permits the assessor to charge the tax on all profits

and income from whatever source derived subject, however, to the provisions

of the Act, which includes tax exemptions.

[102] Silke on South African Income Tax, 3rd Ed. P.123 explains the nature of

exempt income in a taxing statute as follows:

Exempt income is simply income that is free or immune from tax in the same way as receipts or accruals of a capital nature, but there is a fundamental distinction between the two. A capital receipt completely lacks the quality of income and does not form part of the gross income except in

33

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

certain exceptional cases. Except income on the other hand, by its very nature is included in the gross income, but does not form part of the income

[103] In my view, having regard to the intention of the legislature expressly

granting an exemption under section 9 of the IRA 2006, the proposition

enunciated by the TAC that unless the Appellant falls within the term interest

under section 3(e), it would not be entitled to the exemption under section 9 is

manifestly wrong and I reject that proposition of the TAC.

[104] For those reasons, I am of the opinion that the application of section 9 is

not dependent upon the source of income under which interest received is

classified. Accordingly, I hold that the exemptions under section 9 of the IRA

2006 are applicable to a taxpayer from whatever sources derived,

notwithstanding a companys interest income falls under section 3(a) or 3(e),

subject however, to other conditions set out in section 9.

Applicability of section 9(b) to any person partnership outside Sri Lanka

[105] Now the question is whether the conditions set out in the exception

claimed by the Appellant under section 9(b) have been satisfied by the

Appellant to be eligible for the above-mentioned exception. The Appellant

claims that the interest income of Rs. 107,415,575/- accrued to it on foreign

currency loan granted to the Government of Sri Lanka upon Government

security issued by the Government of Sri Lanka is exempt from income tax under

section 9(b) of the IRA 2006. Section 9(b) reads as follows:

9(b) The interest accruing to any person or partnership outside Sri Lanka, from any security, note or coupon issued by the Government of Sri Lanka in respect of a loan granted in foreign currency by that person or partnership to the Government of Sri Lanka, if such loan is-

(i) Granted prior to April 1, 2002, and approved by the Minister as being essential for the economic progress of Sri Lanka, or

(ii) Granted on or after April 1, 2012.

Conditions for the exemption under section 9(b)

[106] The interest accruing to any person under section 9 (b) is exempt from

tax, provided that the following conditions are satisfied by such person:

1. The interest accrued to any person or partnership outside Sri Lanka;

34

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

2. The interest accrued to such person from any security, note or coupon

issued by the Government of Sri Lanka;

3. The said Security should have been issued in respect of a loan granted

in foreign currency by that person or partnership to the Government

of Sri Lanka;

4. The said loan was granted prior to April 1, 2012;

5. The said loan was approved by the Minister as being essential for the

economic progress of Sri Lanka.

Does the exemption under section 9(b) apply only to an individual?

[107] It is significant to consider whether the exemption from tax on interest in

section 9(b) applies only to an individual as opposed to a person. A perusal of

section 9 of the IRA reveals that the exemption applies to the following persons,

company, partnership or other body of persons:

1. a company or partnership or other body of persons outside Sri Lanka is

given exemption from tax on interest coming within paragraph (a) of section

9;

2. An individual is given the exemption from tax on interest that comes within

paragraph 9(h) and 9(i);

3. All persons are given exemption from tax on interest coming within

paragraphs (c), (d), (e), (f) and (g).

Who is a person within the meaning of the IRA 2006?

[108] On the face of the relevant provisions of section 9, it is crystal clear that

the exemption in section 9(b) applies to any person or partnership and the

word individual is not used in section 9(b). The word individual is used only

in section 9(h) and 9(i) of the IRA 2006. If the intention of the legislature is to

limit the application of section 9(b) to an individual, it could have easily used

the word individual instead of using the word person. Section 9(b) applies

to any person and the word person is defined in section 217 as follows:

person includes a company or body of persons or any government.

[109] Section 86(c) of Banking (Amendment) Act, No. 2 of 2005 defines a

company. Company means a company formed and registered under the

Companies Act, No. 17 of 1982 and any other body incorporated within or

outside Sri Lanka. However, the IRA 2006 defines a company and a

35

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

company includes a company incorporated or registered under any law in Sri

Lanka or elsewhere. A company is defined in section 217 often IRA as follows:

Company means any company incorporated or registered under any law in

force in Sri Lanka or elsewhere, and includes a public corporation.

[110] Section 86(c) of Banking (Amendment) Act, No. 2 of 2005 defines a company as follows:

Company means a company formed and registered under the Companies Act, No. 17 of 1982 and any other body incorporated within or outside Sri Lanka.

[111] A body of persons is defined in section 217 of the IRA as follows:

Body of persons includes any local or public authority, anybody corporate or collegiate, any fraternity, fellowship, association or society of persons, whether corporate or unincorporated, and any Hindu undivided family, but does not include a company or a partnership.

[112] It seems to me that the Appellant who is a company incorporated outside

Sri Lanka and operating through a permanent establishment is a person within

the meaning of section 9 (b) of the IRA read with section 217 of the IRA 2006.

[113] Section 28(1) of the IRA 2006 which relates to the basis for the

ascertainment and computing the total statutory income uses the word

person as follows:

28(1). The statutory income of every person for each year of assessment

from every source of his profits or income in respect of which tax is chargeable, shall be the full amount of the profits or income which was derived by him or arose or accrued to his benefit from such source during that year of assessment, notwithstanding that he may have ceased to possess such source or that such source may have ceased to produce income.

[114] The only issue is whether the words his or he in section 28(1) applies

only to an individual and not to a company or a bank. In the Blacks Law

Dictionary (11th Ed.) The word he is defined as follows:

Properly a pronoun of the masculine gender, traditionally used and

constructed in statutes to include both sexes as well as a corporation.

[115] In the Law Lexicon Dictionary (2nd Ed.), the word He is defined as follows:

The pronoun he when used in any Code, includes a female as well as a male, unless there is some express declaration to the contrary. The word

36

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

he, when used in the Revenue act, includes male, female, company, corporation, firm, society, singular or plural number.

[116] The use of the word person in section 9(b) reflects the intention of the

legislature that the legislature intended to apply the exemption to any person

or partnership, instead of any individual as correctly submitted by Mr.

Ameen.

Does a person in section 9(b) or (d) exclude a bank?

[117] The next question is whether the word person in section 9(b) excludes a

bank as the word bank is not specifically stated in section 9(b). It is relevant to

note that section 2 of the Banking Act, No. 30 of 1988, relates to the licensing

of persons carrying on banking business, and in terms of section 2(4), the

Appellant Bank had been issued with a licence to carry on banking business as

a commercial bank in Sri Lanka as set out in Schedule I of the said Acy (vide-

item 17 of the Schedule). The long title of the Banking Act, No. 30 of 1988 reads

as follows:

An Act to provide for the introduction and operation of a procedure for the licensing of persons carrying on banking business and of carrying on the business of accepting deposits and investing such money; for the regulation and control of matters relating to such business; and to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

[118] Section 2 of the Banking (Amendment) Act, No. 33 of 1995 replaced the

long title of the Banking Act, No. 30 of 1988 and inserted the following long

title:

An Act to provide for the introduction and operation of a procedure for the licensing of persons-carrying on the banking business and of carrying on the business of accepting deposits and investing such money; for the regulation and control of matters relating to such business; and to provides for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

[119] It seems to me that there is no any major difference of the long title

between the Banking Act, No. 30 of 1988 and the Banking (Amendment) Act,

No. 33 of 1995. There is nothing to indicate in the language of section 9(b) or

9(d) that its application is limited to a company, which is not a company carrying

on banking business in Sri Lanka through a permanent establishment when the

definition of the company under section 86(c) of the Banking (Amendment)

37

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

Act, No. 2 of 2005 includes a company formed and registered under the

Companies Act, No. 17 of 1982 and any other body incorporated within or

outside Sri Lanka. It is crystal clear that the Appellant commercial bank is a

company both within the meaning of the Banking Act (as amended) and the

IRA 2006 and therefore, it falls within the meaning of a person under section

217 of the IRA 2006.

[120] It is settled law that courts cannot usurp legislative function under the disguise of interpretation and rewrite, recast, reframe and redesign the Inland Revenue or add words to a provision, which are not contained therein, because this is exclusively in the domain of the legislature. In R. v. Wimbleton Justices EX. P. Derwent (1953) 1 Q.B. 380, at 384, it was held that a Court cannot add words to a statute or read words into it which are not there. In Fernando v. Perera 25 NLR 197, Jayawardene J. observed at p. 200 stated that Courts have no power to add to the language of a Statute, unless the language as it stands is meaningless or leads to an absurdity. This proposition was lucidly explained by Lord Simonds in Magor and St Mellons Rural District Council v. Newport Corporation [1952] AC 189, HL. Referring to the speech of Lord Denning MR, Lord Simonds said at page 191:

The duty of the court is to interpret the words that the legislature has used; those words may be ambiguous, but, even if they are, the power and the duty of the court to travel outside them on a voyage of discovery are strictly limited.

[121] MR, Lord Simonds further said at page 192:

It appears to me to be a naked usurpation of the legislative function under the thin disguise of interpretation and it is the less justifiable when it is guesswork with what material the legislature would, if it had discovered the gap, have filled it in. If a gap is disclosed, the remedy lies in an amending Act.

[122] The same proposition was echoed by Arijit Pasayat, J. in the Indian

Supreme Court case of Padmasundara Rao and Others. v. State of Tamil Nadu

and Others. AIR (2002) SC 1334, at paragraph 14 as follows:

14. While interpreting a provision the Court only interprets the law and cannot legislate it. If a provision of law is misused and subjected to the abuse of process of law, it is for the legislature to amend, modify or repeal it, if deemed necessary.

38

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

[123 In Cape Brandy Syndicate v. I.R.C. [1921] 1 KB 64 at 71 (Ch D) that: (1921)

Rowlatt J. stated:

In a taxing Act, one has to look merely at what is clearly said. There is no room for any intendment. There is no equity about a tax. There is no presumption as to a tax. Nothing is to be read in, nothing is to be implied, one can only look fairly at the language used.

[124] The Appellant is a company incorporated in India and operating through

a permanent establishment in Sri Lanka, and is liable to income tax in terms of

section 2 and 97 of the IRA 2006 read with Article 6 of the DTAA between India

and Sri Lanka. The Appellant being a company both within the meaning of the

Banking Act (as amended) and the IRA 2006 is a person to whom the tax

exemption applies under section 9(b) and 9(d) of the IRA 2006.

Is the Appellant a person outside Sri Lanka?

[125] The TAC has disallowed the exemption under section 9(b) on the ground

that the Appellant is not a person outside Sri Lanka and accordingly, the

Appellant is not entitled to claim the exemption under section 9(b). The findings

of the TAC at page 6 of the determination are as follows:

The Indian Overseas Bank, Colombo branch is operating under a license granted in terms of section 5 of the Banking Act, No. 30 of 1988, to function as a domestic banking unit in Sri Lanka. It is the said Indian Overseas Bank Colombo branch which has granted a foreign currency loan to the government of Sri Lanka. The Indian Overseas Bank branch is therefore, not a person outside Sri Lanka, to qualify for the interest exemption claimed under section 9(b) of the Inland Revenue Act, No. 10 of 2006.

[126] At the hearing, Mr. Ameen submitted that the said loan was arranged

outside Sri Lanka by several banks and financial partners and the Appellant Bank

and the Government of Sri Lanka entered into a Facility Agreement for granting

a foreign currency loan to the Government of Sri Lanka for its economic

progress. The said Facility Agreement is not available in the TAC brief. The

assessor-Bank & Financial Services Unit has admitted in his Appeal report (p. 66

of the TAC brief) that a Loan Facility Agreement was signed between the

Government of Sri Lanka and the Appellant with Standard Chartered Bank acting

as agent. It is not in dispute that the Government of Sri Lanka and the Appellant-

Colombo branch signed a Facility Agreement and in terms of the said

Agreement, the Appellant granted a foreign currency loan to the Government of

Sri Lanka for its economic progress.

39

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

[127] The assessor, Bank & Financial Unit has however, reported that the

Appellant is not a person outside Sri Lanka and disentitled to the exemption

since the Indian Overseas Bank-Colombo Branch is located at No. 139, Main

Street, Colombo 11 (Vide-page 65 of the TAC brief). The next point is to consider

whether the Appellant Bank (Indian Overseas Bank, Colombo Branch) having a

permanent establishment in Sri Lanka is a person outside Sri Lanka for the

purposes of the exemption under section 9(b) of the IRA 2006 by virtue of the

application of Article 5 of the DTAA between India and Sri Lanka.

[128] A company is resident in Sri Lanka under section 79 of the IRA 2006 where

it has its registered or principal office in Sri Lanka or where the control and

management of the business are exercised in Sri Lanka. Non-resident company

in Sri Lanka means a company not falling within the meaning of section 79. Thus,

the place of registration or place of principal office or the place of central

management and control are the sole test of a companys residence.

[129] The concept of permanent establishment is relevant for assessing the

income of a non-resident under the provisions of the DTAA between India and

Sri Lanka. By virtue of Article 7 (1) of the DTAA, the business income of

companies which are incorporated in India will be taxable only in India, unless it

is found that they have permanent establishments (PE) situated in Sri Lanka. In

such event, their business income may be taxable to the extent to which it is

attributable to such PEs, would be taxable in Sri Lanka. The word "permanent

establishment" is of course, a concept created by the DTAA for tax purposes, and

it can be described as a taxable entity which is commonly used in all international

Double Taxation Avoidance Agreements,

[130] Article 5 (1) of the DTAA defines the term permanent establishment as a fixed place of business of an enterprise is wholly or partly carried on. It reads as follows

1. For the purposes of this Convention, the term permanent establishment means a fixed place of business through which the business of the enterprise is wholly or partly carried on.

[131] Article 5 (2) describes what permanent establishment includes. It reads as follows:

2. The term permanent establishment shall include especially:

(a) a place of management;

40

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

(b) a branch;

(c) an office;

(d) a factory;

(e) a workshop;

(f) a mine, an oil or gas well, a quarry or any other place of extraction of natural resources; (g) an agricultural or farming estate or plantation;

(h) a building site or construction or assembly project which exists for more than 183 days;

(i) the furnishing of services, including consultancy services, by an enterprise through employees or other personnel, where activities of that nature continue within the country for a period or periods aggregating more than 183 days within any twelve-month period.

[132] The fundamental principle of the DTAA is that for the application of the DTAA, a person, whether an individual or company from one country (Country A) will be taxable in the other country (Country B) only if he has a permanent establishment (PE) in Country B. Thus, if there is a PE, only the income attributable to such PE in Country B will be subject to tax in Country B. Accordingly, a non-resident company will be liable to income tax in Sri Lanka if it carries on a trade in Sri Lanka through a permanent establishment (i.e., a branch or agency)

[133] It may be noted that the concept of permanent establishment is relevant

for assessing the income of a non-resident under the DTAA but the concepts

profits of business connection and permanent establishment should not be

mixed up. While the business connection is relevant for the purpose of

application of Sections 2 and 3, the concept of permanent establishment is

relevant for assessing the income of a non-resident under the DTAA

[134] The Appellant is the Indian Overseas Bank, Colombi branch. It is not in dispute that the Appellant is incorporated in India and is resident in India. It is not in dispute that the Appellant a non-resident (foreign) company in Sri Lanka doing banking business through a permanent establishment in Sri Lanka. The Commissioner Mr. D. Ranagalle at page 97 of the TAC brief confirms this position as follows:

It was revealed that the monetary Board of Sri Lanka has granted a licence to the Indian Overseas Bank of 763, Anna, Salai, Chennai 600002, India to carry on a domestic banking business at No. 139, Main Street, Colombo 11. So. Indian

41

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

Overseas Bank Colombo branch (hereinafter referred to as Bank) is non-resident company doing business in Sri Lanka through a branch.

[135] The Deputy Commissioner-Appeal Mr. M.P. Amaratunga, at p. 63 of the TRA brief states:

The Indian Overseas Bank-Colombo branch is not limited liability company domiciled in Sri Lanka. It is a non-resident company doing business in Sri Lanka through a branch.

[136] I am of the view that the Appellant is a non-resident (foreign) company

having a branch office in Sri Lanka and earning its profits and income from its

business in Sri Lanka through a permanent establishment. The Appellant

company can be treated as a permanent establishment (PE) with a registered

branch office in Sri Lanka within the meaning of Article 5 of the DTAA between

India and Sri Lanka. Accordingly, the Appellant company is subject to taxation in

Sri Lanka, subject to any exemption or deduction, on the profits of a business

carried on in Sri Lanka, through a permanent establishment located in Sri Lanka.

[137] However, it is only a branch of a foreign enterprise, which is resident in

India, which is outside Sri Lanka. The fact that it has been granted a licence to

conduct banking business in Sri Lanka does not change its legal status of a non-

resident foreign company doing business in Sri Lanka. Thus, it will retain the

residence of the parent company in India and so, it will be resident outside Sri

Lanka for tax purposes, even though located within Sri Lanka through a PE.

[138] The TAC has interpreted the words person outside Sri Lanka to a person having a branch in Sri Lanka merely because it has a branch in Sri Lanka, when the Appellant is only a branch of a foreign company, a resident in India, which is incorporated and located outside Sri Lanka. In my view the intention of the legislature is to encourage any person, which includes a non-resident (foreign) bank that grants foreign currency loans to the Government of Sri Lanka and exempt interest accrued on such banks from the interest derived from such loans, notwithstanding whether such company has a permanent establishment in Sri Lanka.

[139] In my view, a non-resident foreign company incorporated in India having a permanent establishment is a person outside Sri Lanka for the purposes of the IRA 2006. In this context, the exemption under section 9(b) applies to any person, which includes a non-resident (foreign) banking company, having a permanent establishment in Sri Lanka, that grants foreign currency loans to the Government of Sri Lanka for its economic progress. I hold that the exemption under section

42

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

9(b) applies to the Appellant who is a non-resident person and thus, the Appellant is a person outside Sri Lanka, notwithstanding whether such non-resident person has a permanent establishment in Sri Lanka.

[140] A tax exemption is granted by the legislature to provide relief to a person

who would be otherwise liable to tax for the purpose of giving a measure of

relief and thus, it must be given its full effect unless, the conditions for its

fulfilment are not met. In Nanayakkkara v. University of Peradeniya (1991) 1 Sri

LR. 97, at p. 102, S.N. Silva, J. as he then was) expounded this proposition in the

following words:

A necessary corollary of applying the rule of strict construction to determine liability under a taxing statute, is that any provision granting an exemption from such liability be given its full effect. Exemptions are provided for by the Legislature for the purpose of giving a measure of relief to a person who would otherwise be liable to tax under the general rule. Therefore, no restriction should be placed on such provision by way of interpretation so as to defeat the purpose of granting such exemption.

[141] I am of the opinion that the Appellant is entitled to the benefit of the

exception under section 9(b) of the IRA 2006 notwithstanding the profits and

income derived from interest falls within the meaning of section 3(a) of the IRA,

provided that the conditions stipulated in section 9(b) are fulfilled by the

Appellant.

Exemption of interest income under section 9(b) on foreign currency loan

granted to the Government of Sri Lanka

[142] In the present case, it is common ground that the Appellant had granted a

foreign currency loan to the Government of Sri Lanka upon a security issued by

the Government of Sri Lanka and an interest income of Rs. 107,415,575/- had

accrued to the Appellant. It was never disputed by the assessor or the

Respondent that the said loan was not granted to the Government of Sri Lanka

for its economic progress and that it was not approved by the Minister in charge

of Finance on behalf of the Government of Sri Lanka.

[143] The Appellant Bank is incorporated outside Sri Lanka. The Agreement had

been arranged by several international banks, including the Standard Chartered

Bank acting as an Agent. The lender of the facility is the Indian Overseas Bank

incorporated in India and the loan was arranged by several overseas banks.

43

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

[144] It is undisputed, however, that the Legislature has clearly recognized that

the interest accruing to any person outside Sri Lanka for granting a loan to the

Government of Sri Lanka in foreign currency upon any security issued by the

Government of Sri Lanka is exempt from tax under section 9(b) of the IRA 2006

subject to certain conditions.

[145] Exemption from tax under section 9(b) has been granted to encourage any

non-resident person to provide a foreign currency loan to the Government of Sri

Lanka for its economic progress upon a security issued by the Government of Sri

Lanka for its economic progress, notwithstanding such a non-resident person

carries on business in Sri Lanka through a permanent establishment (PE).

[146] In the present case, the following conditions set out in section 9(b) have

been satisfied by the Appellant:

1. The Appellant granted a foreign currency loan to the Government of Sri

Lanka, who issued a security in respect of such loan granted to the

Government of Sri Lanka;

2. Interest income of Rs. 107,415,575/- accrued to the Appellant from the

Government of Sri Lanka;

3. The said loan was granted prior to April 1, 2012;

4. The Minister in charge of Finance, on behalf of the Government of Sri Lanka

approved the said loan as being essential for the economic progress of Sri

Lanka.

[147] For those reasons, I am of the opinion that the Appellant is entitled to the

exemption of interest income amounting to Rs. 107,415,575/- on foreign

currency loan granted to the Government of Sri Lanka under section 9(b) of the

IRA 2006.

Conclusion

[148] For those reasons, I answer questions of law arising in the case stated as

follows:

1. No.

2. Yes. The opinion of Soertsz J. was that the question whether section 6(1)(a)

or 6(1)(e) applies in a particular case depends on whether or not the assessor

is dealing with the profits of a business or the income of an individual.

Soertsz J. held that where dividends, interest or discounts appertaining to a

business, they fall within the words profits of any business and section

6(1)(a) apples. If, however, it is a case of dividends, interest or discounts

accruing to an individual not in the course of a business, but as a part of his

44

CA TAX 0010 2016 TAC/IT/007/2014

income from simple investments, then section 6(1) (e) is the relevant section.

Soertsz J. held that so far as interest is concerned, the special rule in section

9(3) modifies the general rule in section 9(1). Justice De Krester agreed with

Justice Soertsz.

3. Yes.

4. (a) Yes

(b) Howard C.J. said that if the business of a company consists in the receipt

of dividends, interest or discounts alone, or if such a business can be clearly

separated from the rest of the trade or business, special provisions under

section 9(3) will apply to such dividends, interest or discounts. Kenueman J.

also said if the business of a company consists in the receipt of dividends,

interest or discounts alone, or if such a business can be clearly separated

from the rest of the trade or business, then any special provisions under

section 9(3) applies to such dividends, interest or discounts. As regards the

deduction of management expenses incurred in relation to dividends,

Kenueman J. held that management expenses had been incurred in the

production of the income and are necessary and reasonable expenses, and

can be deducted under section 9(1). As regards, the deduction of interest

earned by the company, Kenueman J. held that where the earning of interest

has been the sole and separate business of the company, the special

provision in section 9(3) would apply and if not, the ordinary rule under

section 9(1) of the Income Tax Ordinance would apply, and the deductions

claimed can be allowed in their entirety.

5. Yes.

6. Yes

7. Yes (subject to the observations made in this judgment)

[149] For those reasons, I annul the determination made by the Tax Appeals

Commission dated 28.06.2016 and the Registrar is directed to send a certified

copy of this judgment to the Tax Appeals Commission.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

M. Sampath K.B. Wijeratne, J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL