==== BLOCKS ==== 

CPA/0084/23

Page 1 of 25

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for exercise of

Revisionary Powers made in terms of Article

138 read with Article 154P of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

JAMALDEEN MUHIDEEN MEERASAYBU,

Karagasthenna,

Guruthalawa.

PETITIONER

Vs

1. NURUL MUJEENA (SIFANI),

Karagasthenna,

Guruthalawa.

2. HANEEFA BADURDEEN,

Karagasthenna,

Guruthalawa.

RESPONDENTS

AND NOW

1. NURUL MUJEENA (SIFANI),

Karagasthenna,

Guruthalawa.

2. HANEEFA BADURDEEN,

Karagasthenna,

Guruthalawa.

RESPONDENTS-PETITIONERS

C.A. Case Revision No: CPA/84/23 PHC Badulla Case No: Revision/05/2019 MC Welimada Case No: 37683/2018

CPA/0084/23

Page 2 of 25

Vs

JAMALDEEN MUHIDEEN MEERASAYBU,

Karagasthenna,

Guruthalawa.

PETITIONER-RESPONDENT

AND NOW BETWEEN IN A REVISION

APPLICATION IN THE COURT OF APPEAL

JAMALDEEN MUHIDEEN MEERASAYBU,

Karagasthenna,

Guruthalawa.

PETITIONER-RESPONDENT-PETITIONER

Vs

1. NURUL MUJEENA (SIFANI),

Karagasthenna,

Guruthalawa.

2. HANEEFA BADURDEEN,

Karagasthenna,

Guruthalawa.

2A. BADURDEEN NUSRATH

Karagasthenna,

Guruthalawa.

RESPONDENTS-PETITIONER-RESPONDENT

CPA/0084/23

Page 3 of 25

Before : D. THOTAWATTA, J.

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Counsel : Eranda S. Wanasinghe for the Petitioner-

Respondent-Petitioner.

Shabry Haleemdeen with M. Mohamed

and Hasitha Udugamkorala instructed by

Jifry for the Respondents-Petitioner-

Respondent.

Written Submissions

of the Petitioner-Respondent-

Petitioner tendered on : 02.07.2026

Written Submissions

of the Respondents-

-Petitioner-Respondent

tendered on : 31.03.2026

Decided on : 10.07.2026

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

The Petitioner-Respondent-Petitioner (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the

Petitioner”) in the instant application in revision seeks inter-alia, to revise and

set aside the order dated 22.06.2023, made by the learned High Court Judge of

the Uva Province holden in Badulla (hereinafter called and referred to as “the

learned High Court Judge of the Province”) in an action bearing No.

Revision/05/2019 in the exercise of the revisionary jurisdiction vested in it by

Article 154P(3)(b) of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the Constitution”) to be read with

Article 138 of the Constitution, a copy of which was annexed to the petition

CPA/0084/23

Page 4 of 25

furnished to this Court by Petitioner marked as A2 (hereinafter called and

referred to as ‘the HC order”) wherein, the learned High Court Judge of the

Province had revised and set aside the order made in case bearing No. 37683 by

the learned Magistrate of Welimada dated 02.01.2019, a copy of which was

annexed to the petition furnished to this Court by Petitioner marked as A1

(hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the MC order”).

When this matter came on before us on 26.02.2026, attention of this Court was

drawn to the fact that instant application in revision arises from an order (the

HC order) made by the learned High Court Judge of the Province in the exercise

of its concurrent extra-ordinary revisionary jurisdiction vested in it by Article

154P(3)(b) of the Constitution to be read with Article 138 thereof. It is to be borne

in mind that this Court had on a number of occasions, held that this Court has

no jurisdiction to hear and determine an application in revision arising out of an

order made by a learned High Court Judge of the Province in the exercise of its

concurrent extra-ordinary revisionary jurisdiction vested in it by Article

154P(3)(b) of the Constitution to be read with Article 138 thereof. Hence, this

Court directed both parties to file written submissions dealing with the

jurisdictional issue only and written submissions were thus, filed by the

respective parties. Hence, the order on the jurisdictional issue on the strength of

the written submissions.

During the pendency of the instant application in revision, the 2nd Respondent-

Petitioner-Respondent had passed away and the 1st Respondent-Petitioner-

Respondent had been substituted in his place by order of this Court as urged by

the Petitioner.

While clearly, and unequivocally, conceding the fact that a High Court

established by Article 154P(1) of the Constitution, and the Court of Appeal

exercise the concurrent revisionary jurisdiction in certain matters, it was

however, contended in the written submissions, by the learned Counsel for the

Petitioner in countering the jurisdictional issue that mere exercise of the

CPA/0084/23

Page 5 of 25

concurrent revisionary jurisdiction by a High Court established by Article

154P(1) of the Constitution, does not automatically, oust the Constitutional

powers vested in the Court of Appeal. Hence it was submitted by the learned

Counsel for the Petitioner that this Court has jurisdiction to hear and determine

the instant application in revision arising out of the order made by the learned

High Court Judge of the Province in the exercise of its concurrent extra-ordinary

revisionary jurisdiction vested in it by Article 154P(3)(b) of the Constitution to be

read with Article 138 thereof. In support thereof, the learned Counsel for the

Petitioner sought to rely on the submissions made and the authorities cited in

the written submissions. It was on the other hand, contended by the learned

Counsel for the Respondents-Petitioner-Respondent (hereinafter called and

referred to as ‘the Respondents’) that this Court has no jurisdiction to hear and

determine the instant application in revision arising out of the order made by the

learned High Court Judge of the Province (the HC Order) in the exercise of its

concurrent extra-ordinary revisionary jurisdiction vested in it by Article

154P(3)(b) of the Constitution to be read with Article 138 thereof. In support

thereof, the learned Counsel for the Respondents sought to rely on the judicial

precedent cited in the written submissions.

In the light of the jurisdictional issue, the pivotal question that would arise for

our consideration is whether this Court can exercise its extra-ordinary

revisionary jurisdiction vested in it by Article 138 of the Constitution in

relation to an order made by a High Court of the Province established under

Article 154P of the constitution enacted by the 13th Amendment in the

exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction under and in terms of Article

154P(3)(b) of the Constitution to be read with Article 138 thereof.

It may now, be examined.

Before the 13th Amendment, Article 138 of the Constitution read thus;

“The Court of Appeal shall have and exercise subject to the provisions of

the Constitution or of any law, an appellate jurisdiction for the correction

CPA/0084/23

Page 6 of 25

of all errors in fact or in law which shall be committed by any Court of

First Instance, tribunal or other institution and sole and exclusive

cognizance, by way of appeal, revision and restitutio in integrum, of all

causes, suits, actions, prosecutions, matters and things of which such

Court of First Instance, tribunal or other institution may have taken

cognizance:” [Emphasis is mine]

Proviso-not reproduced.

In the light of the Article 138 of the Constitution as it existed before the 13th

Amendment, appellate and revisionary jurisdiction was solely, and

exclusively, vested with the Court of Appeal (Vide-Weragama v. Eksath

Lanka Wathu Kamkam Samithiya and Others 1994[1] SLR 329, at page 295).

[Emphasis is mine]

After the 13th Amendment, Article 138 of the Constitution now, reads thus;

“(1)The Court of Appeal shall have and exercise subject to the provisions

of the Constitution or of any law, an appellate jurisdiction for the

correction of all errors in fact or in law which shall be [committed by the

High Court, in the exercise of its appellate or original jurisdiction or

by any Court of First Instance], tribunal or other institution and sole

and exclusive cognizance, by way of appeal, revision and restitutio in

integrum, of all causes, suits, actions, prosecutions, matters and things

[of which such High Court, Court of First Instance], tribunal or other

institution may have taken cognizance:” [Emphasis is mine]

Proviso-not reproduced

(2)-not reproduced.

Hence, Article 138 of the Constitution was amended by the Thirteenth

Amendment to the Constitution by the substitution for the words “committed

by any Court of First Instance” of the words “committed by the High Court

in the exercise of its appellate or original jurisdiction or by any Court of

First Instance.”[Emphasis is mine]

CPA/0084/23

Page 7 of 25

The Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution enacted Article 154P(1) to the

Constitution and it reads thus;

“There shall be a High Court for each Province with effect from the date on

which this Chapter comes into force. Each such High Court shall be

designated as the High Court of the relevant Province.”

Article 154P(1) of the Constitution so enacted by the Thirteenth Amendment,

made provisions for the establishment of the High Courts in the provinces.

Article 154P(3)(b) of the Constitution enacted by the Thirteenth Amendment to

the Constitution, reads thus;

“Every such High Court shall –

(b) notwithstanding anything in Article 138 and subject to any law,

exercise, appellate and revisionary jurisdiction in respect of convictions,

sentences and orders entered or imposed by Magistrates Courts and

Primary Courts within the Province;” [Emphasis is mine]

Hence, Article 154P(3)(b) conferred upon the High Court so established under

Article 154P(1) the appellate and revisionary jurisdiction in respect of

convictions, sentences and orders entered or imposed by Magistrates

Courts and Primary Courts within the Province notwithstanding anything

in Article 138 and subject to any law. [Emphasis is mine]

Article 154P(6) of the Constitution enacted by Thirteenth Amendment to the

Constitution confers upon any person aggrieved by a final order, judgment or

sentence of any such High Court so established under Article 154P(1) of the

Constitution made in the exercise of its jurisdiction under paragraphs (3)(b) or

(3)(c) or (4) a right of appeal to the Court of Appeal in accordance with Article

138 of the Constitution subject to the provisions of the Constitution and any law

and it reads thus;

CPA/0084/23

Page 8 of 25

“(6) subject to the provisions of the Constitution and any law, any

person aggrieved by a final order, judgment or sentence of any such Court,

in the exercise of its jurisdiction under paragraphs (3)(b) or (3)(c) or (4) may

appeal there from to the Court of Appeal in accordance with Article 138.”

[Emphasis is mine]

Nonetheless, no provision was made with regard to the procedure to be followed

in such High Courts. With a view to providing for the lacuna in the law with

regard to the procedure to be followed in the High Court of the Provinces, so

established under Article 154P(1) of the Constitution which enacted by the

Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution, the High Court of the Provinces

(Special Provisions) Act, No. 19 of 1990 (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the

Act”) was enacted making provision “regarding the procedure to be followed in,

and the right to appeal to, and from, the High Court established under Article

154P of the Constitution”.

The Act also made provision for the appeals to be brought in before the Court of

Appeal as well as the Supreme Court from the High Court. While section 9 of the

Act provides for the appeals to Supreme Court from High Court, section 11

thereof provides for appeals to Court of Appeal from the High Court established

under Article 154P of the Constitution.

Section 9 of the Act reads thus;

“9. Subject to the provisions of this Act or any other law, any person

aggrieved by

(a) a final order, judgment, decree or sentence of a High Court established

by Article 154P of the Constitution in the exercise of the appellate

jurisdiction vested in it by paragraph (3) (b) of Article 154P of the

Constitution or section 3 of this Act or any other law, in any matter or

proceeding whether civil or criminal which involves a substantial question

of law, may appeal therefrom to the Supreme Court if the High Court

CPA/0084/23

Page 9 of 25

grants leave to appeal to the Supreme Court ex mero motu or at the

instance of any aggrieved party to such matter or proceedings :

Provided that the Supreme Court may, in its discretion, grant special leave

to appeal to the Supreme Court from any final or interlocutory order,

judgment, decree or sentence made by such High Court, in the exercise of

the appellate jurisdiction vested in it by paragraph (3) (b) of Article 154P

of the Constitution or section 3 of this Act, or any other law where such

High Court has refused to grant leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, or

where in the opinion of the Supreme Court, the case or matter is fit for

review by the Supreme Court:

Provided further that the Supreme Court shall grant leave to appeal in

every matter or proceeding in which it is satisfied that the question to be

decided is of public or general importance; and

(b) a final order, judgment or sentence of a High Court established by

Article 154P of the Constitution in the exercise of its jurisdiction conferred

on it by paragraph (3) (a), or (4) of Article 154P of the Constitution may

appeal therefrom to the Court of Appeal.”

Section 11 of the Act reads thus;

“(1) The Court of Appeal shall have and exercise, subject to the provisions

of this Act or any other law, an appellate jurisdiction for the correction of

all errors in fact or in law which shall be committed by any High Court

established by Article 154P of the Constitution in the exercise of its

jurisdiction under paragraph (3) (a), or (4) of Article 154P of the

Constitution and sole and exclusive cognizance by way of appeal, revision

and restitutio in integrum of all causes, suits, actions, prosecutions,

matters and things of which such High Court may have taken cognizance

:

CPA/0084/23

Page 10 of 25

Provided that, no judgment, decree or order of any such High Court, shall

be reversed or varied on account of any error, defect, or irregularity which

has not prejudiced the substantial rights of the parties or occasioned a

failure of justice.

(2) The Court of Appeal may in the exercise of its jurisdiction, affirm,

reverse, correct or modify any order, judgment, decree or sentence

according to law or it may give directions to any High Court established by

Article 154P of the Constitution or order a new trial or further hearing

upon such terms as the Court of Appeal shall think fit.

(3) The Court of Appeal may farther receive and admit new evidence

additional to, or supplementary of, the evidence already taken in any High

Court established by Article 154P of the Constitution touching the matters

at issue in any original case, suit, prosecution or action, as the justice of

the case may require.”

Section 10 of the Act deals with the powers of the Supreme Court on appeal and

it reads thus;

“(1) The Supreme Court shall, subject to the Constitution be the final Court

of appellate jurisdiction within Sri Lanka for the correction of all errors in

fact or in law which shall he committed by a High Court established by

Article 154P of the Constitution, in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction

vested in it by paragraph (3) (b) of Article 154P of the Constitution or

section 3 of this Act, or any other law and the judgments and orders of the

Supreme Court shall, in such cases, be final and conclusive in all such

matters.

(2) The Supreme Court shall, in the exercise of its jurisdiction, have sole

and exclusive cognizance by way of appeal from any order, judgment,

decree or sentence made by a High Court established by Article 154P of

the Constitution, in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in such

High Court by paragraph (3) (b) of Article 154P of the Constitution or

CPA/0084/23

Page 11 of 25

section 3 of this Act or any other law and it may affirm, reverse or vary any

such order, judgment, decree or sentence of such High Court and may

issue such directions to such High Court or Court of First Instance or

order a new trial or further hearing in any proceedings as the may require

and may also shall for and admit fresh or additional evidence if the

interests of justice so demands and may in such event, direct that such

evidence be recorded by such High Court, or any Court of First Instance.”

Both sections 5 and 12 of the Act would in my opinion, be significantly,

important for the proper resolution of the jurisdictional objection raised before

us and therefore, it would for clarity and convenience, be useful to reproduce

both of them verbatim the same as follows;

Section 5 of the Act makes provisions for the procedure for appealing to High

Court so established under Article 154P(1) of the Constitution and it reads thus;

“The Provisions of written law applicable to appeals to the Court of Appeal, from

convictions, sentences or orders entered or imposed by a Magistrate's Court, and

to applications made to the Court of Appeal for revision of any such conviction,

sentence or order shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to appeals to the High Court

established by Article 154P of the Constitution for a Province, from convictions,

sentences or orders entered or imposed by Magistrate's Courts, Primary Courts

and Labour Tribunals within that Province and from orders made under section

5 or section 9 of the Agrarian Services Act, No. 58 of 1979, in respect of land

situated within that Province and to applications made to such High Court, for

revision of any such conviction, sentence or order.”

Section 12 of the Act makes provisions where appeal or application in respect

of same matter is filed in Court of Appeal and in High Court and it reads

thus;

“(a) Where any appeal or application is field in the Court of Appeal and an

appeal or application in respect of the same matter has been filed in a High

Court established by Article 154P of the Constitution invoking jurisdiction

CPA/0084/23

Page 12 of 25

vested in that Court by paragraph (3) (b) or (4) of Article 154P of the

Constitution, within the time allowed for the filing of such appeal or

application, and the hearing of such appeal or application by such High

Court has not commenced, the Court of Appeal may proceed to hear and

determine such appeal or application or where it considers it expedient to

do so, direct such High Court to hear and determine such appeal or

application:

Provided, however, that where any appeal or application which is within

the jurisdiction of a High Court established by Article 154P of the

Constitution is filed in the Court of Appeal, the Court of Appeal may if it

considers it expedient to do so, order that such appeal or application be

transferred to such High Court and such High Court shall hear and

determine such appeal or application.

(b) Where the Court of Appeal decides to hear and determine any such

appeal or application, as provided for in paragraph (a), the proceedings

pending in the High Court shall stand removed to the Court of Appeal for

its determination.

(c) No appeal shall lie from the decision of the Court of Appeal under this

section to hear and determine such appeal or application or to transfer it

to a High Court.

(d) Nothing in the preceding provisions of this section shall be read and

construed as empowering the Court of Appeal to direct a High Court

established by Article 154P of the Constitution to hear and determine any

appeal preferred to the Court of Appeal from an order made by such High

Court in the exercise of the jurisdiction conferred on it by paragraph (4) of

Article 154P of the Constitution.” [Emphasis is mine]

Upon a plain reading of Article 138 of the Constitution as amended, Article

154P(1), Article 154P(3)(b), and Article 154P(6) in conjunction with sections 5

and 12 of the Act, it makes it abundantly, clear that both Courts namely; the

CPA/0084/23

Page 13 of 25

Court of Appeal as well as the High Court established by Article 154P(1) of

the Constitution which enacted by the Thirteenth Amendment to the

Constitution, now, enjoy and exercise concurrent or parallel or coordinate

appellate and revisionary jurisdiction on matters referred to in Article

154P(3)(b) of the Constitution as quoted above which the Court of Appeal

otherwise, had solely, and exclusively, exercised before the Thirteenth

Amendment to the Constitution. [Emphasis is mine]

In the circumstances, I am of the view that the revisionary jurisdiction that was

solely, and exclusively, vested with the Court of Appeal before the Thirteenth

Amendment to the Constitution, would after Thirteenth Amendment to the

Constitution, now, be exercised by a High Court established by Article 154P(1)

of the Constitution which enacted by the Thirteenth Amendment to the

Constitution, concurrently or parallel or coordinately with the Court of Appeal.

The view taken by me as aforesaid is fortified and well supported by a plethora

of authorities of the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal and they may now,

be examined.

Supreme Court in dealing with the Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution

and the Provincial Councils bill, had determined on page 323(In RE Thirteenth

Amendment to the Constitution and the Provincial Councils Bill-1987 [2]

SLR 312) as follows;

“The Bills do not effect any change in the structure of the Courts or judicial

power of the People. The Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal continue

to exercise unimpaired the several jurisdictions vested in them by the

Constitution. There is only one Supreme Court and one Court of Appeal

for the whole Island, unlike in a Federal State. “The 13th Amendment Bill

only seeks to give jurisdictions in respect of writs of Habeas Corpus in

respect of persons illegally detained within the Province and Writs of

Certiorari, Mandamus and Prohibition against any person exercising

within the Province any power under any law or statute made by the

CPA/0084/23

Page 14 of 25

Provincial Council in respect of any matter in the Provincial Council list

and appellate jurisdiction in respect of convictions ‘and sentences by

Magistrate’s Courts and Primary Courts within the Province to the

High Court of the Province, without prejudice to the executing

jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal. Vesting of this additional

jurisdiction in the High Court of each Province only brings justice

nearer home to the citizen and reduces delay and cost of ligation. The

power of appointment of Judges of the High Court remains with the

President and the power of nominating them to the several High Courts

remains with the Chief Justice. The appointment, transfer, dismissal

continue to be vested in the Judicial Service Commission. Thus, the centre

continues to be supreme in the judicial area and the Provincial Council

has no control over the judiciary functioning in the Province.” [Emphasis

is mine]

The question before Court in Abeywardene vs. Ajith de Silva 1998[1] SLR 134-

a bench of five judges of the Supreme Court was whether a direct appeal

lies to this court from an order of the High Court in the exercise of its

revisionary jurisdiction without first preferring an appeal to the Court of

Appeal, wherein, Supreme Court had on page 137, inter-alia, held that, “After

the 13th Amendment, section 5 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special

Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990 read with Article 154P (3)(b) of the

Constitution (enacted by the 13th Amendment) entitled him to file such

application in the High Court of the province. The jurisdiction of the High

Court in the matter is concurrent. In Re the 13th Amendment to the

Constitution. In the result, he may file an application in the Court of Appeal

or in the High Court.”[Emphasis is mine]

It was inter-alia, held by the Supreme Court in Gunaratne v. Thambinayagam

and Others 1993 [2] SLR 355 at pages 357 and 358, which was cited with

approval by a bench of five judges of the Supreme Court in Abeywardene vs.

Ajith de Silva(Supra), that, “In each of these cases a dispute relating to land

CPA/0084/23

Page 15 of 25

had been referred to a Magistrate (exercising the powers of the Primary Court) in

terms of S. 66 (1) (b) of the Primary Courts Procedure Act No. 44 of 1979. After

due inquiry, the Magistrate made his determination, the object of which is to

maintain the status quo until final adjudication of the rights in a civil suit. S. 74

(2) of the Act provides that an appeal shall not lie against such determination.

Prior to the 13th Amendment to the Constitution, a party aggrieved with

such a determination used to apply to the Court of Appeal to have it set

aside by way of revision in the exercise of the power of that Court under

Article 138 of the Constitution read with Article 154. S. 5 of the High Court

of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act, No. 19 of 1990 read with Article

154 P (3) (b) of the Constitution (enacted by the 13th Amendment) entitled

him to file such application in the High Court of the Province. The

jurisdiction of the High Court in the matter is concurrent. In Re the

Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution. In the result, he may file his

application in the Court of Appeal or in the High Court……S. 12 of Act No.

19 of 1990 makes provision for resolving some of the anomalies arising by

reason of the provisions of Article 154P which vested new jurisdictions in

the High Court, but concurrently with the existing jurisdiction of the Court

of Appeal in the same sphere.”. [Emphasis is mine]

It was further held by Court in the decision in Gunaratne v. Thambinayagam

and Others (Supra) at page 362 that, “(a) that in the light of the concurrent

jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal and the High Court which still exists,

which fact is confirmed by S. 12 of Act No. 19/1990, the identical dispute

may be decided by the Court of Appeal or by the High Court. A decision in

the High Court would permit two appeals whilst a decision in the Court of Appeal

would permit one more appeal;” [Emphasis is mine]

It was inter-alia, held by Supreme Court in Weragama v. Eksath Lanka Wathu

Kamkam Samithiya and others (Supra) at page 296 that, “These amendments

affected the appellate, revisionary and writ jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal

only in two respects. Firstly, Article 154P (3) (b) conferred appellate and

CPA/0084/23

Page 16 of 25

revisionary jurisdiction (but not writ jurisdiction) in respect of Magistrate’s

Courts and Primary Courts (but not Labour Tribunals, or other courts and

tribunals); this was “notwithstanding anything in Article 138” (and that Article

was in any event “subject to the provisions of the Constitution"), and so either

the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal was pro tanto transferred to the High

Courts or the Court of Appeal and the High Courts had concurrent

jurisdiction.” [Emphasis is mine]

It was further held at pages 299 and 300 that, “….However, the jurisdiction of

the Court of Appeal under Article 138 is not an entrenched jurisdiction, because

Article 138 provides that it is subject to the provisions “of any law"; hence it was

always constitutionally permissible for that jurisdiction to be reduced or

transferred by ordinary law (of course, to a body entitled to exercise judicial

power). That is the reason why I held (in Swastika Textile Industries Ltd. v.

Dayaratne, that section 3 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions)

Act, No. 19 of 1990, conferred concurrent, appellate and revisionary jurisdiction

on the High Courts in respect of Labour Tribunals, and that thereafter section

31D3 of the Industrial Disputes Act, as amended by Act No. 32 of 1990, made

that jurisdiction exclusive, thereby taking away the jurisdiction of the Court of

Appeal in that respect).

It was inter-alia, held by the Supreme Court in SC/Appeal/65/2025-Decided

on 10.10.2025 at page 32 that, “In this context, it would be legally

impermissible and institutionally unsound for the Court of Appeal, in pari

materia, to sit in appeal over judgments and orders pronounced by a Provincial

High Court in the exercise of its appellate or revisionary jurisdiction. A party

cannot pursue successive appeals before two courts of coordinate jurisdiction in

respect of the same matter. This strikes at the very root of the issue. Such a

practice is inimical to legislative intent, imposes unnecessary burdens on the

judicial system, and undermines the principle of finality in litigation. These

considerations make clear that concurrent jurisdiction was intended to provide

CPA/0084/23

Page 17 of 25

an alternative forum for appellate review, not to create an additional tier in the

appellate hierarchy.”.

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in Ramalingam Vs. Parameswary and

Others 2000 [2] SLR 340 at pages 347 and 348 that, “It is to be noted that the

power given under Article 138 of the Constitution to the Court of Appeal to hear

and determine applications in revision against orders made by Primary Courts

was not in any way taken away by either the Thirteenth Amendment or Act No.

19 of 1990. In effect both Courts were conferred concurrent jurisdiction in

respect of these matters……Further, the alleged equation of a Superior

Appellate Court to the High Court of a Province need not be considered

demeaning or debasing. The whole purpose of the Thirteenth Amendment

establishing a High Court in every province was to confer jurisdiction in

respect of certain matters in the High Court granting it concurrent

jurisdiction with the Court of Appeal. When concurrent or parallel

jurisdiction is given by Law to two Courts the question of a superior and

inferior Court would not arise. As far as the jurisdiction granted to the two

Courts in certain matters goes, they are equal……”[Emphasis is mine]

In Sharif and Others Vs. Wickramasuriya and Others 2010 [1] SLR 255, it

was inter-alia, held by this Court at pages 265, 268 and 269 that, “It is thus clear

that both Courts enjoy concurrent jurisdiction on matters referred to in

Article 154P (3)(b). The jurisdiction enjoyed by the Court of Appeal had not

been disturbed by Articles of the Constitution or by the Acts of

Parliament…..Thus both Courts enjoy concurrent jurisdiction with regard

to judgments and orders of the Magistrate/Primary Courts and District

Courts. The powers enjoyed by the Court of Appeal had been given to the

High Court of the Provinces to facilitate the litigants in the provinces and

also to reduce the work load of the Court of Appeal.”. [Emphasis is mine]

In Seylan Bank PLC v. Christobel Daniels (CA/PHC/APN/58/2014, CA

Minutes of 14.12.2016), it was inter-alia, that “The structure of Article 138

CPA/0084/23

Page 18 of 25

would also prevent this Court exercising revisionary jurisdiction when the sole

and exclusive jurisdiction has been vested in the Supreme Court. The revisionary

jurisdiction is bestowed in the Court of Appeal thus in Article 138 of the

Constitution. “.....and sole and exclusive cognizance by way of appeal,

revision and restitutio in integrum, of all causes, suits, actions,

prosecutions, matters and things which such High Court, Court of First

Instance, tribunal or other institution may have taken cognizance”. It is

crystal clear beyond any scintilla of doubt that the revisionary power of

this Court lies only against orders made by such High Court, Court of First

Instance, tribunal or other institution when they have taken cognizance of

causes, suits, actions, prosecutions, matters and things. The words “such

High Court, Court of First Instance, tribunal or other institution” must be

read ejusdem generis and such collocation of words read together with the

words causes, suits, actions, prosecutions, matters and things clearly

indicates that these Courts exercise original jurisdiction. Only when the

High Court of First Instance, tribunal or other institution has exercised

original jurisdiction, revision lies to this court. In other words, only when

the High Court has exercised original jurisdiction, the revisionary

jurisdiction of this Court can be invoked. In my view Article 138

intentionally suggests such a deliberate intendment of Parliament and

when the High Court has sat in its appellate jurisdiction as has happened

in this case, no revision lies to this Court.” [Emphasis is mine]

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA/MC/RE Application No. 04/2017-

Decided on 08.06.2018 at page 5 that, “The petitioner had filed revision

applications in Gampaha High Court seeking revision of the said orders made by

the learned magistrate and the said high court has dismissed the applications.

(Vide paragraph 8 of the petition). It must be noted that high courts now

exercised the same revisionary jurisdiction once this court exercised over

magistrate courts. As he has filed revision applications on the same orders

previously in the High Court of Gampaha he has exhausted his remedy. His

CPA/0084/23

Page 19 of 25

position is that his lawyers have not brought to the notice of High Court the facts

averred in this petition. A party to an action cannot be given a chance to

have a second bite of the same cherry. If this court allows this application it

may create a bad precedent to allow a party who fails to present his case properly

file another application.” [Emphasis is mine]

In the decision in SC/Appeal/65/2025(Supra), the Supreme Court cited with

approval the following observations of this Court made by it in the case in

Malwatta v. Softlogic Finance PLC and Others (CA/CPA/152/2022, CA

Minutes of 31.08.2023). which inter alia, identified several practical difficulties

that would arise if the Court of Appeal were permitted to review judgments and

orders of the Provincial High Courts made in the exercise of their appellate

jurisdiction. The said case concerned a party who, being dissatisfied with a

judgment of the Provincial High Court of Civil Appeal delivered in the exercise of

its revisionary jurisdiction, sought once again to invoke the revisionary

jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal against the judgment of the Provincial High

Court. In practical terms, this amounted to two successive applications in

revision being pursued in respect of the same judgment of the District Court,

although the second application was formally directed against the judgment of

the Provincial High Court as observed by the Supreme Court in the said case in

SC/Appeal/65/2025(Supra).

“Moreover, if litigants are allowed to file a revision application in the Court

of Appeal against a judgment or order given by the Provincial High Court

exercising revisionary jurisdiction it would lead to unnecessary

duplication of court proceedings. This could result in a revision application

being filed in the Court of Appeal while an appeal is pending in the

Supreme Court. It would also have the effect of the Court of Appeal being

given an opportunity to overrule a judgment of the Supreme Court if the

revision application is successful while the appeal to the Supreme Court

is not, which is an unintended absurdity. is highly unlikely that

Parliament or the legislative draftsmen intended to manifestly complicate

CPA/0084/23

Page 20 of 25

the appeal process when the Provincial High Courts have been introduced

to reduce and simplify the court process not to complicate it even further.

According to the legal maxim ‘Boni judicis est lites dirimere, ne lis ex lite

oritur, et interest republicae ut sint fines litium’, it is the duty of a good

judge to prevent litigations, that suit may not grow out of suits, and it

concerns the welfare of the State that an end be put to litigation. It would

be contrary to the practice of a good judge to interpret statutes in a manner

that would give rise to unnecessary complications in the judicial process.

I would also mention here that allowing an appeal or a revision application

from a judgment or order from the Provincial High Court would also lead

to, the Court of Appeal having revisionary jurisdiction over an instance

where the Provincial High Court exercises its revisionary jurisdiction as is

requested for in the instant case. In effect, the Court of Appeal would lie

in revision of a revision application. Seeing as Revisionary jurisdiction is

to be exercised in exceptional circumstances, allowing a revision

application on a revision application would be conceptually contradictory

to the spirit of a revision application. In the instant case, for example, this

court is invited to lie in revision of a revision application filed in the

Provincial High Court.”

It is in this backdrop of the case, I would think it expedient at this juncture to

examine the precise meaning assigned by the law dictionaries to the phrase

“concurrent jurisdiction”.

According to Black’s Law Dictionary-Eleventh Edition at page 1017,

concurrent jurisdiction is defined to mean as follows;

“1. Jurisdiction that might be exercised simultaneously by more than one

court over the same subject matter and within the same territory, a litigant

having the right to choose the court in which to file the action. 2.

Jurisdiction shared by two or more states, esp. over the physical

CPA/0084/23

Page 21 of 25

boundaries (such as rivers or other bodies of water) between them. - Also

termed coordinate jurisdiction; overlapping jurisdiction.”

According to Wharton’s Law Lexicon-Fourteenth Edition at page 228,

concurrent jurisdiction is defined to mean as follows;

“Concurrent jurisdictions, the jurisdiction of several different tribunals,

both authorized to deal with the same subject-matter at the choice of the

suitor. In equity, the jurisdiction was concurrent where no complete relief

was obtainable at law. It was exercised in order to avoid circuity of action

or multiplicity of suits”

In the light of the definition assigned to the phrase “concurrent jurisdiction” by

law dictionaries as referred to above, “concurrent jurisdiction” means and refers

to jurisdiction that might be exercised simultaneously by more than one court

over the same subject matter and within the same territory, a litigant having the

right to choose the court in which to file the action.

Let me then, examine the primary objective intended to be achieved by conferring

concurrent jurisdiction upon more than one Court over the same subject matter

with a litigant having the right to choose the court in which to file the action. It

is in my opinion, to avoid circuity of action or multiplicity of suits with a view to

preventing a wasteful or unnecessary legal process where a party files multiple,

separate lawsuits to resolve issues that could have been dealt with in a single

action, so that it may avoid waste of judicial resources and unnecessary legal

costs.

In my opinion, the cumulative effect of the provisions of Articles 138, 154P(3)(b),

154P(6) and sections 5 and 12 of the Act and of the authoritative and biding

judicial precedent cited above taken in conjunction with the definition assigned

to the phrase “concurrent jurisdiction”, is that when the High Court established

by Article 154P(1) of the Constitution (enacted by the Thirteenth Amendment to

the Constitution) exercises revisionary jurisdiction, it exercises revisionary

CPA/0084/23

Page 22 of 25

jurisdiction hitherto exclusively, vested in the Court of Appeal before the

Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution and therefore, it exercises concurrent

or parallel jurisdiction with the Court of Appeal; and that, the High Court

established by Article 154P(1) of the Constitution (enacted by the Thirteenth

Amendment to the Constitution) when it exercises revisionary jurisdiction, is not

subordinate to the Court of Appeal for; when concurrent or parallel jurisdiction

is conferred by law upon two Courts, the question of a superior and inferior

Court does not arise; and that, as far as the jurisdiction granted to the two

Courts in certain matters goes, they are equal.

It is in this backdrop of the case, let me now, examine the Supreme Court

decision in SC/APPEAL No. 111/2015-Decided on 27.05.2020.

The question of law that arose for determination by the Supreme Court in the

decision in SC/APPEAL No. 111/2015(Supra) as manifest from paragraph 3

thereof, is as follows;

“Having failed to exercise the right to file an appeal in terms of Section 9

of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990

as amended, could a person invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of the

Court of Appeal referred to in Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Republic of Sri Lanka in order to canvass a decision made by a Provincial

High Court exercising its appellate powers?”

In view of the jurisdictional issue so arose before this Court, the pivotal question

of law that would on the other hand, arise for our determination in the instant

application may be set out as follows;

“Does this Court have jurisdiction to hear and determine the instant

application in revision as it emanates from an order given by the

learned High Court Judge of the Province in the exercise of its

concurrent revisionary jurisdiction vested in it by Article 154P(3)(b)

of the Constitution to be read with Article 138 thereof?”

CPA/0084/23

Page 23 of 25

Upon a careful scrutiny of the question of law that arose before the Supreme

Court for its determination as enumerated above, and the question of law that

arose before this Court as enumerated above, it becomes manifestly, clear that

the question of law that arose for determination by this Court in the instant

action is totally, different from that of the one arose before the Supreme Court

for its determination in the decision in SC/APPEAL No. 111/2015(Supra) for;

the question of law that arose for our determination in this case is; Does this

Court have jurisdiction to hear and determine the instant application in

revision as it emanates from an order given by the learned High Court Judge

of the Province in the exercise of its concurrent revisionary jurisdiction

vested in it by Article 154P(3)(b) of the Constitution to be read with Article

138 thereof?, whereas, the question of law that arose for its determination by

the Supreme Court in the decision in SC/APPEAL No. 111/2015(Supra) is;

Having failed to exercise the right to file an appeal in terms of Section 9 of

the Act, could a person invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of

Appeal referred to in Article 138 of the Constitution of the Republic of Sri

Lanka in order to canvass a decision made by a Provincial High Court

exercising its appellate powers?. [Emphasis is mine]

Hence, I would hold that the facts and circumstances of the case in SC/APPEAL

No. 111/2015(Supra) can be clearly, distinguishable from the facts and

circumstances of the instant application and therefore, the decision in

SC/APPEAL No. 111/2015(Supra) has if I may say so with all due respect, no

bearing on the resolution of the jurisdictional issue so arose before us in the

instant application.

There is another vital aspect of the jurisdictional issue which I think, I should

deal with before I depart from this judgment and it may now, be examined.

It was emphatically, delineated by a bench of five judges of the Supreme Court

in Abeywardene vs. Ajith de Silva (Supra) at page 139 that, “The cumulative

effect of the provisions of Articles 154P (3)(b), 154P(6) and section 9 of Act No.

CPA/0084/23

Page 24 of 25

19 of 1990 is that, while there is a right of appeal to the Supreme Court from the

orders, etc., of the High Court established by Article 154P of the Constitution in

the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in it by Article 154P (3) (b) or

Section 3 of Act No. 19 of 1990 or any other law, there is no right of appeal to

the Supreme Court from the orders in the exercise of the revisionary jurisdiction.

An appeal from an order of the High Court in the exercise of its revisionary

jurisdiction should be made to the Court of Appeal. An appeal to the Supreme

Court from the decision of the Court of Appeal would lie, with leave;” [Emphasis

is mine]

It was further held by the bench of five judges of the Supreme Court in

Abeywardene vs. Ajith de Silva (Supra) at page 140 that, “……a direct appeal

does not lie to the Supreme Court from the order of the High Court in the exercise

of the revisonary jurisdiction. An appeal from the order of the High Court in the

exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction should be made to the Court of Appeal.

Where a party is dissatisfied with the order of the Court of Appeal, the party may,

with leave of the Court of Appeal or when such leave is refused by the Court of

Appeal, with leave of the Supreme Court, appeal to the Supreme Court”

[Emphasis is mine]

In the light of the principle enunciated by the bench of five judges of the Supreme

Court in Abeywardene vs. Ajith de Silva (Supra), an appeal from the order of

the High Court in the exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction should be made to

the Court of Appeal.[Emphasis is mine]

In view of the law set out above, I would hold that, the Petitioner cannot invoke

the revisionary jurisdiction of this Court against the order dated 22.06.2023

made by the learned High Court Judge of the Province (HC order) in the exercise

of concurrent or parallel revisionary jurisdiction vested in it by Article 154P(3)(b)

to be read with Article 138 of the Constitution and section 5 and 12 of the Act

for; the Petitioner had already exhausted the remedy available by the law as

enumerated above, and therefore, the Petitioner is now, debarred from invoking

CPA/0084/23

Page 25 of 25

the concurrent or parallel revisionary jurisdiction of this Court against the order

of the learned High Court Judge of the Province made in the exercise of

concurrent or parallel jurisdiction (A2), as rightly, contended by the learned

Counsel for the Respondents.

In the circumstances, I would hold that the jurisdictional issue so arose before

us as to the maintainability of the instant application in revision, is entitled to

succeed in law.

In the result, I would hold that this Court has no jurisdiction to hear and

determine the instant application in revision.

Hence, I would dismiss the instant application in revision with costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL