IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C A. PHC 54/09

PHC CIVIL HC 18/2008

HC ANURADAPURA 29/2007

Densil Wimalasiri, President, Welfare Society, Sri Dharmasoka Resting Hall, No 35, Tissa Mawatha, Old Twn, Anuradapura PETITIONER-APPELLANTS Divisional Secretary Nuwara Gam Palatha- Central, Pandulagama, Anuradapura RESPONDENT-RESPONDENTS

BEFORE: A.W.A.SALAM, J (P/CA) & SUNIL RAJAPAKSHA, J

COUNSEL: Sanath Jayathilaka for the petitioner-appellant

and Janak de Silva Deputy Solicitor General for the Defendant-Resondent.

ARGUED ON: 06.09.2013

DECIDED ON: 23.07.2014

A W A Salam, J (P/CA)

The petitioner-appellants (hereinafter referred to as the

"appellants") have preferred this appeal to have the order

of the learned High Court Judge dated 13 May 2009 set

aside. By the said order the learned High Court Judge

dismissed the case, upholding the preliminary objection

2

that the Provincial High Court lacks jurisdiction to

entertain a writ application and hear the same involving a

State land. The learned High Court Judge dismissed the

writ application on the premise that the subject State

land falls outside the purview of the Provincial Council

list and also that of the jurisdiction of the Provincial High

Court established under article 154 P (4) (b) of the

Constitution of the Republic of Sri Lanka as amended by

the 13th amendment.

When the appeal came up for argument, the learned

Counsel for the appellants raised a question of Law that

the High Court Judge had acted in excess of his

jurisdiction by delivering an order involving the

interpretation of the Provisions of the Constitution. It was

contended that the jurisdiction to interpret the

Constitutional Provisions is within the sole and exclusive

domain of the Supreme Court in terms of Article 125 of

the Constitution and therefore the High Court had erred in

delivering the impugned judgment which involves the

jurisdiction to interpret the Constitution.

Originally, the appellants sought the relief to have the

impugned judgment set aside, but later by way of a motion

wanted a directive to be issued forthwith on the Provincial

High Court Judge to refer the question to the Supreme

3

Court for a determination under and in terms of Article

125 of the Constitution.

Article 125 of the Constitution confers exclusive

jurisdiction on the Supreme Court to hear and determine

any question relating to the interpretation of the

Constitution. Therefore, whenever any question arises in

the course of any proceedings in any court or tribunal or

institution (other than the Supreme Court) which are

empowered to administer justice or to exercise judicial or

quasi-judicial functions, such questions shall be referred

to the Supreme Court for determination. In other words,

the argument of the learned Counsel for the appellant is

that the learned High Court Judge ought not to have

pronounced the order but should have sought the

interpretation of the Supreme Court. The Counsel

contended that the High Court Judge by not referring it to

the Supreme Court had exceeded its jurisdiction. The

leading case on this subject this Billimoria vs Minister of

Lands and Land Development and Mahavalley

Development Board and 2 others 1978-79-80 1 SLR 10.

In that case the Supreme Court analysing the Article, held

inter alia that what is contemplated in article 125 is any

question relating to the interpretation of the Constitution

arising in the course of legal proceedings. This

presupposes that in the determination of a real issue or

4

controversy between the parties, in any adversary

proceedings, there must arise the need for an

interpretation of the Provisions of the Constitution. The

mere reliance on a Constitutional Provision by a party

need not necessarily involve the question of interpretation

of the Constitution. There must be a dispute on

interpretation between the contending parties. It would

appear that Article 125 is so circumscribed that it must be

construed as dealing only with cases where the

interpretation of the Constitution is drawn into the actual

dispute and such a question is raised directly as an issue

between the parties or impinges on an issue and forms

part of the case of one party, oposed by the other, and

which the court must of necessity decide in resolving the

dispute the issue.

In the case of Premachandra Vs Major Montego

Jayawickrama and another 1994 2 SLR page 90 the

Supreme Court stated that a reference can be made under

Article 125 only of a question of constitutional

interpretation; the court making the reference retains

jurisdiction in respect of the case and would ultimately

decide the case applying the interpretation given by the

Supreme Court.

The question as to whether the subject of "State land" falls

5

within the ambit of the jurisdiction of the High Court in

relation to the issuance of writ was decided recently in the

case of Solai Muttu Rasu Vs The Superintendent of

Stafford Estate Ragala and 2 others SC appeal 21/2013.

According to the findings of the Supreme Court, as regards

the subject touching upon "State Land" the Provincial

High Court has no jurisdiction.

Applying the ratio in the above case, even if the High Court

Judge had referred the matter to the Supreme Court for

an interpretation, the opinion of the Supreme Court would

have been same as in the case of Solaimuththu Vs the

Superintendent of Stafford Estate. As was submitted by

the learned Deputy Solicitor General no failure of justice

had occurred in this case to prejudice the substantial

rights of the parties particularly the appellants and

therefore this appeal cannot succeed.

Hence, this appeal is dismissed without costs.

President/ Court of Appeal

Sunil Rajapaksha, J

I agree

Judge of the Court of Appeal.