IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA CA. Writ 53/2014

W.A. Thilakaratne No. 134/25, Stafford Gardens, Mawalamulla Road, Meegoda.

Petitioner Vs. Amila Ranmandala Chairman Road Passenger Transport Authority of the Western Province, Robert Gunawardena Mawatha, Battaramulla. K.A.R.A. Ranjith Operations Manager, Road Passenger Transport Authority Robert Gunawardena Mawatha, Battaramulla. P. Liyanage Zonal Operational Manager Road Passenger Transport Authority Borella Bus Stand, Colombo 08.

Respondents

C.A 53/2014

Before

Counsel

Argued & Decided on

****

1

Writ Application

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J. (P/CA).

H.C.J. Madawala J.

Athula Ratnayake for the Petitioner.

Senaka de Saram with Shaheem Wageer for

1 st and 3rd the Respondents.

13.05.2015.

Vijith K. Malalgoda, PC. J. (PICA).

Heard counsel for both parties in support of their respective cases.

The Petitioner has come before this court seeking a writ of

mandamus compelling 1 st and 3rd Respondents to allow the

Petitioner to operate his bus as permitted in letter dated 03.12.2013

the document marked P9. In other words he wanted this court to

issue a writ of mandamus directing the 1 st and 3rd respondents to

permit him to operate his bus under Route No: 171/2. He further

alleged that by document P-I0 a letter dated 21.01.2014 the

Respondents have cancelled P-9 and the said decision to cancel P-9

is ultravires, illegal and unreasonable. However during the argument

before this court it is revealed that the Petitioner at present is

2

issued with a route permit for route 174 after a proper application

made by the Petitioner to the relevant authorities which is produced

marked R6 by the Respondents. By document R12 the authorities

have issued the relevant route permit to the Petitioner. Petitioner has

suppressed this material from this court when he has filed the

petition. However, the counsel for the Petitioner during the

argument submitted that the Petitioner is making use of said permit

for carrying a staff belonging to the Independent Television Network

from Jayawadanagama to Sugathadasa Stadium through 174 route.

But according to the document R6 which was suppressed to us by

the Petitioner, he has applied for the route Thalawatugoda to Pettah

via Borella and he has indicated that he is charging Rs. 34/- per

ticket in the said route. The application does not refer to any contract

between him and Independent Television Network . This court

observes that the Petitioner has now been issued with a valid route

permit by the Western Province Passenger Transport Authority, but

this fact is suppressed from this court. We find that this suppression

is on a material fact. We are mindful of the decision in Alphonso

Appuhamy V. Hettiarachchi 77 NLR 131 at 135 where it was held

that a full and fair disclosure of all the material facts has to be placed

before court when an application for writ or injunction is made and

the process of court is invoked. Therefore, we are not inclined to

grant relief as prayed by the Petitioner. We decide to dismiss this

3

application with costs fIxed at Rs.15,OOO/ -. Application is accordingly

dismissed.

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL.

H.C.J. Madawala, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL.

Vkg/-