Page 1 of 10

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of Section 331

of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of

1979.

Court of Appeal Case No CA-HCC-219/20 HC of Batticaloa Case No:

HCB/3088/17 The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Complainant

V.

Thureiretinam Balkumar alias Thureirathnam

Balkumar

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Thureiretinam Balkumar alias Thureirathnam

Balkumar

Accused-Appellant

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Complainant-Respondent

Page 2 of 10

Before: Menaka Wijesundera, J.

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

Counsel: Arunandam, PC with Thambiraja Dayamduraja for the Accused-

Appellant

Jayalakshi De Silva, SSC for the Respondent.

Written 29.09.2022 (by the Accused-Appellant)

Submissions: 30.10.2023 (by the Respondent)

On

Argued On: 08.11.2023

Decided On: 07.12.2023

************

Sasi Mahendran, J.

The Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Accused) was indicted in the

High Court of Batticaloa on the following grounds,

Count 1;

For the abduction of Kandaiah Thanganayagi, a girl under the age of 16 years, from

the lawful custody of Kathirkamar Kandaiah on or about 13.09.2011 in Pondukalchenai an

offence punishable under section 354 of the Penal Code.

Count 2 ;

For the committing the offense of rape on the said Kandaiah Thanganayagi, an

offence punishable under section 364 (2) (e) of the Penal Code.

After the trial, the Learned High Court Judge convicted the Accused on both counts

and sentenced him

Page 3 of 10

i. On 1st count 2 years of Rigorous Imprisonment suspended from that date for a period

of 10 years.

ii. On 2nd count 10 years of Rigorous Imprisonment, a fine of Rs.5000, and an order to

pay a compensation of Rs.50,000.

Being aggrieved by the said judgment this Appeal was preferred by the Accused.

The following grounds of Appeal were urged by the counsel for the Accused.

1. The Learned High Court Judge erred in law in allowing the prosecution to ask leading

questions to the detriment of the appellant contrary to the principle upheld in the

judgment in S.C. Appeal 118/17 decided on 09.11.2018.

2. The Learned High Court Judge erred in law in failing to consider that the prosecutrix

was admonished and warned by the prosecution that if false evidence is given, she

will receive punishment.

3. That the Learned High Court Judge failed to consider the infirmities of the

prosecution case as required by the judgments in the cases Wijepala v. The Attorney-

General [2001 1 SLR 46]

The facts and circumstances giving rise to this Appeal are that:

According to the prosecutrix, PW 01 testified that while she was returning from

school, she and her sister and two friends stopped near a mango tree to pluck mangoes, while

they were plucking the Accused approached them and threatened them that he would inform

them to the police. Thereafter the sister and one of the friends ran away. PW01 and her friend

Dilakshana (PW11) remained. The Accused dragged her into the jungle, where she fainted.

On Page 70 of the translated Appeal brief

Q: what took place after that?

A: I dont know what happened thereafter, I lost consciousness and fell; after

that when I got up and looked, my frock had been raised; the Accused held my hand

Page 4 of 10

and lifted me; he asked me to go home; thereafter, when I went home it must have been

5:30 or 6 o'clock

Later we observed that the witness was warned by the prosecution that

she would be punished if she gave false evidence.

Thereafter prosecution has asked the following questions.

On pages 75 to 76 of the translated Appeal brief

Q: Did you narrate everything that took place in the said statement?

A: Yes.

Q: Witness, are you telling the Court regarding the particular incident?

A: Yes

Q: Witness, do you know that, you ought not to give false evidence in Court?

A : Yes.

Q : Even with that knowledge, do you know what the punishment would be if you give false

evidence?

A: I dont know.

Q: Witness, we are conducting this Case, having sent out all those who were seated in this

Court, wasting the valuable time of the Court witness, you have to tell regarding the

incident which took place; if not, you should go away saying you do not wish to give evidence

in this regard; you can do only one of the two; you cannot testify here, the way you wish to

testify; witness, now tell what transpired?

A: All that I am saying is appropriate.

Thereafter Prosecutrix came up with the story about the rape. Learned counsel for

the Accused brought to the notice that the rape story came up because of a leading question

asked by the prosecution counsel which was allowed by the High Court Judge.

Page 5 of 10

I'm of the view these questions are leading questions and as it matters go to the root

of the case. The questions put forward by the prosecution to the witness prompted the

witnesses to answer what the prosecution wanted to prove that the Accused had penetrated

his male organ into her vagina.

For the said purpose I will reproduce the questions put forward by the prosecution

and answers by the witness.

Page 78 of the Translated Appeal brief

Q: Witness, what happened to the underclothes you had been wearing at that time?

A: The underskirt I was wearing had been raised up along with the frock; the panty had

been pulled down.

Q: Witness, did the Accused touch you, after he dragged you inside, from the road?

A: yes

Q: Witness, which part of your body, did he touch?

A: After having dragged me by my hand, he asked me to lie down; I did not obey him; he

pushed me; no sooner I fell, I felt faintish..

.

Q: Witness, when you woke, did you stand up or were you lying down on the ground?

A: I was lying down.

..

Q : Witness, was there blood on any part of your body?

A : Yes.

Q : Witness, which part of your body was bleeding?

A : When I passed urine, there was blood.

Page 6 of 10

Q : Witness, apart from blood in the part of your body from where you urinate, did you

observe anything else?

A : No.

..

Q : witness, inside what, did thus Accused keep his male organ?

A: He kept it in my vagina.

Q : Witness, for how long did the Accused keep his male organ inside your vagina and do it

in that manner?

A : I dont know; it would have been for of an hour approximately.

Q : Witness, at that juncture, didnt you try to push off this Accused and escape?

A : I pushed him; it was then he lifted me and asked me to go home; my mother and father

had come in search of me.

Learned counsel for the Accused has referred, Junaiden Mohamed Haaris and others

v. Attorney General, SC Appeal 118/17, Decided on 09.11.2018, where Justice Aluwihare

has discussed the impact on the leading questions.

According to Vasudevan the utterance had been made by the deceased 2nd accused to

the accused-appellant. At this point, the prosecution had posed a question:

?

To which witness Vasudevan had responded by stating .

In my view, this question is clearly a leading question, as it suggests that the name of the

deceased was referred to by the 2nd accused in the course of the alleged conversation.

.

I also wish to state that the manner in which the prosecution has led evidence in this

case by the prosecution is not desirable. Vasudevan is a belated witness by a considerable

time gap and who had also had some displeasure with the accused-appellant. In this context

Page 7 of 10

the prosecution ought to have allowed the witness to testify freely without prompting or

leading, so that the credibility of the witness could have been properly evaluated.

Immediately after witness Vasudevan had referred to the purported conversation, the

Learned State Counsel had shot the question ?Suggesting that the name of

the deceased transpired during the conversation which was not the case. The Learned State

Counsel should never have asked this question and on the other hand ought not to have been

permitted by the Learned High Court Judge as up to that point of his evidence, Vasudevan

had not referred to the identity of the dead person.

In response to this question, Vasudevan answered Uma-Devi.

The manner of questioning not only diminishes the evidentiary value of the testimony

but also tarnishes the testimonial trustworthiness of the witness, as one could reasonably

expect the witness to have come out with the name Uma-Devi on his own, if that name was

referred to in the conversation between Salam and the accused-appellant.

..

Here again, I observe that the manner in which this witness had been questioned by

Up to this point of questioning, the witness had never said that both the accused

applicant and the deceased 2nd accused had approached him to pawn an item of jewelry.

The question (referred to above) suggests to the witness that both of them (Salam and

the accused-appellant) in fact had come to his shop to pawn jewelry.

Thus, the manner of questioning referred to above has thereby substantially

diminished the probative value of the testimony.

With the above observation by Justice Aluwihare about leading questions, when we

consider the question put forward by the prosecution, soon after prosecutrix said that she

couldnt remember anything as she was unconscious. What the Court can gather is that the

prosecution wants the witness to say to the Court that the Accused has inserted his male

organ into the vagina to prove the charge of rape, by doing so the question arise whether she

was a trustworthy witness.

Page 8 of 10

We are mindful of the words uttered by Justice Sisira Abrew in Dingiribandage

Sumanadasa v. The Republic of Sri Lanka,CA No147/2005, Decided on 18.07.2008 (Appellate

Court Judgment(Unreported) 2008 (Volume II) Cri. )

I hold that the medical evidence does not support the evidence of the prosecutrix.

Thus the case depends only on the evidence of the prosecutrix. Can an accused person in a

case of rape be convicted on uncorroborated evidence of the victim? In this connection I would

like to consider certain judicial decisions.

In Bhoginbhai Hirjibhai Vs. State of Gujarat (2983) AIR S.C. 753 Indian Supreme

Court stated thus:-

"In the Indian setting, refusal to act on the testimony of a victim of sexual assault in

the absence of corroboration as a rule is adding insult to injury".

However, in Gurcharan Singh vs. State of Haryana AIR 1972 S.C. 2661 the Indian

Supreme Court held thus;

" As a rule of prudence, however, Court normally looks for some corroboration on her

testimony so as to satisfy its conscience that she is telling the truth and that the person

accused of rape on her has not been falsely implicated".

In King vs. Athukorale 50 NLR 256 Justice Gratiaen states thus:-

"Where an accused is charged with rape, corroboration of the story of the prosecutrix

must come from some independent quarter and not from the prosecutrix herself. A complaint

made by the prosecutrix to the Police in which she implicated the accused cannot be regarded

as corroboration of her evidence".

In Premasiri vs. The Queen 77 NLR page 86 Court of Criminal Appeal held; "In a

charge of rape it is proper for a jury to convict on the uncorroborated evidence of the

complainant only when such evidence is of such a character as to convince the jury that she

is speaking the truth "

In Sunil and another vs. The Attorney General 1986 I SLR 230 Court of Appeal held

thus;

Page 9 of 10

"Corroboration is only required or afforded if the witness requiring corroboration is

otherwise credible. If the evidence of the witness requiring corroboration is not credible his

testimony should be rejected and the accused acquitted. Seeking corroboration of a witness's

evidence should not be used as a process of inducing belief in such evidence where such

evidence is not credible.

It is very dangerous to act on the uncorroborated testimony of a woman victim of a sex

offence but if her evidence is convincing such evidence could be acted on even in the absence

of corroboration."

Considering all this judicial literature, I hold the view that an accused person in a

charge of rape can be convicted on the uncorroborated evidence of the victim only when her

evidence is of such a character as to convince the Court that she is speaking the truth. If the

evidence of the victim is not credible, it is not proper for the Court to convict the accused even

if her evidence is corroborated by independent evidence.

In the instance case, we hold that her evidence could not be considered to find the

Accused guilty of rape charge.

There is another reason to disbelieve her evidence is that according to prosecution evidence

Dr.Rahuman who examined the prosecutrix stated that he had not seen any injuries in the

genital area, or her body. He categorically stated that :

On Page 141 of the Translated Appeal brief,

Q : Will there be bleeding when the surface of the body is injured?

A: Yes, even when there is an abrasion, when you look immediately, there would be a slight

bleeding, in the least.

Q : When you examined the victim, was there any trace of bleeding in her genitals?

A : No.

On the other hand, the prosecutrix has stated that there has been bleeding in her

body.

For the said reasons We hold that the prosecution has failed to prove the charge of

rape beyond reasonable doubt. Therefore, we acquit the Accused from the second Count.

Page 10 of 10

Now we consider the 1st Count, the charge of Abduction.

According to the prosecutrix she has stated that the accused had forcefully taken her

to the jungle. This was collaborated by witness Dilakshana (PW11), according to her

13.05.2019 on the day of her question she, the prosecutrix, and other two people came back

from school, while they were plucking mangoes, the accused came there and took the

prosecutrix to the jungle. When PW01 shouted he covered her mouth. It should be noted that

this evidence was not challenged by the accused either in cross-examination or when she gave

evidence.

The Sister of the prosecutrix namely, Kandaih Jothy (PW03) who gave evidence on

13.01.2019 while returning from school her elder sister, herself, and two other friends while

plucking the mangoes Accused came and pulled the elder sister by the hand and took her

away.

Considering this evidence, we hold that, the Learned High Court Judge had correctly

come to the conclusion regarding the abduction. Therefore, we affirm the conviction for the

1st count and affirm the sentence. It should be noted that Learned High Court Judge has

suspended the sentence for a period of 10 years from the date of conviction. That is

21.09.2020. This Court suspend the sentence from this date for the period of 10 years.

This appeal is partly allowed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Menaka Wijesundera, J.

I AGREE

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL