IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

5A. Nimal Ranjith Weerathunga,

Karandana,

Dhammulla.

5A Defendant-Respondent

CASE NO: CA/625/2000/F

DC RATNAPURA CASE NO: 2027/P

Vs.

1. Ratu Nakathige Sedoris,

(Deceased)

1A. Rathu Nakathige Yasaneris,

2. Rathu Nakathige Nandoris,

3. Kedhachari Nakathige Burlina,

4. Kedhachari Nakathige Pabalina,

All in Karandana,

Dhammulla.

Plaintiff-Respondents

& Several Other

Defendant-Respondents

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Anuruddha Dharmaratne for the 5A Defendant-

Appellant.

2

Geoffery Alagaratnam, P.C., with Harindi

Seneviratne for the 1A and 3A Plaintiff-

Respondents.

S.W. Premaratne for the 2nd Plaintiff-Respondent.

Rohan Sahabandu, P.C., for the 3rd Defendant-

Respondent.

Argued on: 02.11.2018

Decided on: 26.11.2018

Samayawardhena, J.

This is a partition action. Pending trial, the 5th defendant has

died and his son has been substituted as the 5A defendant. The

5A defendant filed this appeal against the Judgment of the

District Court of Ratnapura dated 26.07.2000.

There is no corpus dispute. There was no pedigree dispute

either. The only contesting defendant was the 5th defendant who

claimed prescriptive title to the Lots C2 and D in Plan No. 245

marked V1.

According to the plaint, the 5th defendant does not come under

the pedigree of the plaintiffs. Nor did the 5th defendant claim

that he was a co-owner of the land. His claim was purely on

prescription. The learned District Judge has rejected the 5th

defendants claim.

3

At the argument before this Court, the learned counsel for the

5A defendant indirectly raised a pedigree dispute for different

purpose. That is to say that the learned District Judge has

failed to investigate title to the land and therefore retrial shall be

ordered.

According to the plaint and the evidence of the 1A plaintiff, there

were three original owners to the land. They were Nakathige

Punchi Baba (4/8 share), Angappuli Radage Angappuliya (1/8

share) and Wanasinghe Mudalige Don Piloris Appuhamy (3/8

share). According to the evidence of the 1A plaintiff, Piloris has

had only one child, namely, Asilin Nona alias Nonahamy.1 But

the learned counsel for the appellant drawing attention to the

plaintiffs own Deed marked P6 dated 14.06.1942 points out that

Piloris has had three children, namely, Wanasinghe Mudalige

Asilin Nona, Wanasinghe Mudalige Magi Nona alias Nonohamy

and Wanasinghe Mudalige Podi Appuhamy. Therefore, the

learned counsel says that at least the share of Wanasinghe

Mudalige Magi Nona alias Nonohamy and Wanasinghe Mudalige

Podi Appuhamy shall be left unallotted (so that the appellant

can have the benefit of it). By Deed P6, it is clear that Piloris

had not one, but three children.

The next question is whether the share of the other two children

of Piloris, which has not been disclosed by the plaintiffs shall be

left unallotted. The answer to that question can be found in the

Deed P6 itself. According to that Deed, all three children of

Piloris have transferred their rights by that Deed to Almon

Weerakoon, whose rights have later devolved on the 1st plaintiff.

1 Page 120 of the Brief.

4

Therefore, there is no room for the share of those two to be left

unallotted.

Learned counsel for the appellant further submits that issue

No.13 which was earlier rejected, has later been answered by the

learned District Judge against the 5A defendant. That is not a

decisive factor.

I must stress at this juncture that there is a misconception that

Judgment shall be understood by reading issues and answers

only. It is not so. When answering a spate of issues in a case at

a stretch, momentary lapses on the part of the Judge might

occur. That is human as Judges are not robots, but mortals

with flesh and blood. However, it should not vitiate the

Judgment unless they go to the root of the case. As Justice

Edussuriya on behalf of the Supreme Court held in

Udugamkorale v. Mary Nona [2003] 2 Sri LR 7 at page 9: the

answers to issues in a judgment are almost always monosyllabic

and are a follow up on the matters in issues discussed, dealt with

and decided in the body of the judgment. Hence the decision of

the case must be arrived at by a careful reading of the body of the

judgment and not on a superficial reading of the answers to the

issues.

The proviso to Article 138(1) of the Constitution states that no

judgment, decree or order of any court shall be reversed or varied

on account of any error, defect or irregularity, which has not

prejudiced the substantial rights of the parties or occasioned a

failure of justice.

5

In Vernon Boteju v. Public Trustee [2001] 2 Sri LR 124 at 128-129,

Justice Weerasekera stated: Proviso to Article 138(1) of the

Constitution provides that no judgment, decree or order of any

Court shall be reversed or varied on an error, defect or irregularity

which has not prejudiced the substantial rights of the parties or

occasioned a failure of justice. The learned District Judge has

arrived at findings on the points for determination upon an

evaluation of the evidence led in this case. Therefore, despite the

error that has occurred in answering issue No. 13 and his failure

to answer some issues it is not open to the defendant-appellant to

assert that prejudice has been caused to his substantial rights or

has occasioned a failure of justice. (Vide also Sunil Jayaratne v.

Attorney-General [2011] 2 Sri LR 91 at 101)

The aforesaid two matters the learned counsel for the appellant

raised before this Court (lack of proper investigation of title and

answering an issue which has already been struck off), have

neither prejudiced the substantive rights of the 5A defendant

nor occasioned a failure of justice. Hence the Judgment cannot

be disturbed on those two grounds.

There is no dispute that Wanasinghe Mudalige Magi Nona was

the mother of Weeratunga Arachchilage Akmon Singho, and

Weeratunga Arachchilage Akmon Singho was the father of the

5A defendant. In other words, the grandmother of the 5A

defendant was Wanasinghe Mudalige Magi Nona.

Notwithstanding the fact that neither the plaintiffs nor the 5A

defendant has taken up such a position at the trial or before this

Court, it appears to me that the said Wanasinghe Mudalige Magi

6

Nona was one of the three children of Wanasinghe Mudalige Don

Piloris Appuhamyone of the original owners of the land referred

to above.

This is also fortified by P9a certified copy of the proceedings in

a Village Tribunal case had between Baba Guraa (the transferee

of the Deed P5) as the plaintiff, and the 5A defendants

grandmotherWanasinghe Mudalige Magi Nona as the

defendant, regarding a dispute in respect of ownership and

possession of Wanasinghe Mudalige Don Piloris Appus share.

In P9, it is, inter alia, recorded as follows: This defendant denies

that she caused any damage to plaintiff by reason of not allowing

plaintiff to possess the said land or pay any house rent as this

defendants father Wanasinghe Mudalige Don Piloris Appu was

the sole owner of the said land and house sold the same to

Wanasinghe Mudalige Don Podi Sinno Appuhamy and that this

defendant is living with the leave and licence of the said Podi

Sinno Appuhamy and this defendant therefore denies liability.

P9 has been marked through the evidence of the 5A defendant.2

It is the submission of the learned counsel for the appellant

before this Court that the Court should not have allowed that

document to be marked through the 5A defendant because he

has stated in evidence that he was not aware of that case.

However, it is noteworthy that, although the 5A defendant was

represented by a senior counsel at that time, the said senior

counsel has not objected to it. If the counsel for the 5A

defendant wanted to object to that document, it should have

2 Page 170 of the Brief.

7

been done when it was being marked, but not at the stage of

appeal.

In a civil case when a document is tendered the opposing party

should immediately object to the document. Where the opposing

party fails to object, the trial judge has to admit the document

unless the document is forbidden by law to be received and no

objection can be taken in appealvide explanation to section 154

of the Civil Procedure Code (Cinemas Ltd v. Sounderarajan

[1998] 2 Sri LR 16. Vide also: Siyadoris v. Danoris (1841) 42 NLR

311, Silva v. Kindersly (1914) 18 NLR 85)

It appears to me that the learned counsel for the 5A defendant

did not object to it, because he was aware of that casevide

cross examination of the 1A plaintiff by counsel for the 5A

defendant at page 135 of the Brief, where the learned counsel

has suggested to the 1A plaintiff that, the said case was

withdrawn, which is correct.

According to P9, Magi Nonathe grandmother of the 5A

defendant was living on the landat that time in 1945, with the

leave and licence of Wanasinghe Mudalige Don Podi Sinno

Appuhamy. According to the Deed P6, the said Wanasinghe

Mudalige Don Podi Sinno Appuhamy is the brother of Magi

Nona.

For the aforesaid reasons, it is clear that Magi Nona, and her

sonthe deceased 5th defendant, and his (the 5th defendants)

sonthe 5A defendant are not total strangers to the co-owners of

the land, who are parties to the action.

8

Magi Nona had earlier been a co-owner, but later alienated her

rights by the Deed P6. Nevertheless, she continued to live on

the land followed by her successors-in-title, the 5th and 5A

defendants, for a very long timemay be more than 45 years.

The 1A plaintiff who was 50 years of age in his evidence admits

that Magi Nona and her son-Akmon had been in possession

from the time he can remember.3

However, long possession alone cannot be regarded as

prescriptive possession. In terms of section 3 of the Prescription

Ordinance, No. 22 of 1871, as amended, such possession to be

treated as prescriptive shall inter alia be adverse to or

independent of that of the real owner. Permissive possession to

become adverse possession, the claimant must establish a

starting point for his acquisition of prescriptive rights. This

cannot be done by forming a secret intention unaccompanied by

an act of ouster.

It is well settled law that a person who entered property in a

subordinate character cannot claim prescriptive rights till he

changes his character by an overt act. He is not entitled to do so

by forming a secret intention unaccompanied by an act of ouster.

The proof of adverse possession is a condition precedent to the

claim for prescriptive rights. (Seeman v. David [2000] 3 Sri LR

23. Vide also: Reginald Fernando v. Pabilinahamy [2005] 1 Sri LR

31 at 37, Chelliah Vs. Wijenathan (1951) 54 NLR 337 at 342,

Mitrapala v. Tikonis Singho [2005] 1 Sri LR 206 at 211-212)

3 Page 127 of the Brief.

9

When the relationship between the parties is close such as in

the instant action, the overt act manifesting the commencement

of adverse possession and strong affirmative evidence for

continuation of such adverse possession are all the more

important. (De Silva v. Commissioner of Inland Revenue (1978) 80

NLR 292, Podihamy v. Elaris [1988] 2 Sri LR 129)

The 5A defendant in this case far from establishing adverse

possession, at least, never took up the position that he and his

predecessors maintained adverse possession against the other

parties of the case.

What the 5A defendant stated in evidence was that he does not

know how and when his grandmotherMagi Nona came into

possession. As Chief Justice G.P.S. de Silva held in Sirajudeen

v. Abbas [1994] 2 Sri LR 365: "Where a party invokes the

provisions of section 3 of the Prescription Ordinance in order to

defeat the ownership of an adverse claimant to immovable

property, the burden of proof rests squarely and fairly on him to

establish a starting point for his or her acquisition of prescriptive

rights. A facile story of walking into abandoned premises after

the Japanese air raid constitutes material far too slender to found

a claim based on prescriptive title."

The prescriptive claim of the 5A defendant fails.

Appeal is dismissed but without costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal