==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

Orders in the nature of Writs of

Certiorari, Prohibition and Mandamus

under Article 140 of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Ambawalage Sujeewa Priyadarshani

Silva,

No. 348, Weniwelpitiya, Haltota.

PETITIONER

CA (Writ) App. No. 675/2024

Vs.

1. Debt Conciliation Board,

No. 35A, Dr. N.M. Perera Mawatha, Colombo 08. 2. Hon. Piyasena Ranasinghe,

Former Chairman of the Debt Conciliation Board, C/O Secretary, Debt Conciliation Board, No. 35A, Dr. N.M. Perera Mawatha, Colombo 08.

2(a). Hon. T.G. Sumith Aruna Perera,

Chairman, Debt Conciliation Board, No. 35A,

2

Dr. N.M. Perera Mawatha, Colombo 08. 3. Hon. Padma Palihakkara,

Former Member of the Debt Conciliation Board, C/O Secretary, Debt Conciliation Board, No. 35A, Dr. N.M. Perera Mawatha, Colombo 08.

3(a). Hon. Kelum Kumarasinghe,

Member, Debt Conciliation Board, No. 35A, Dr. N.M. Perera Mawatha, Colombo 08. 4. Hon. Milton Marasinghe,

Former Member of the Debt Conciliation Board, C/O Secretary, Debt Conciliation Board, No. 35A, Dr. N.M. Perera Mawatha, Colombo 08.

4(a). Hon. H.U. Kariyawasam,

Member, Debt Conciliation Board, No. 35A, Dr. N.M. Perera Mawatha, Colombo 08. 5. Hon. Sarath Chandrasiri Withana,

Former Member of the Debt Conciliation Board, C/O Secretary, Debt Conciliation Board, No. 35A,

3

Dr. N.M. Perera Mawatha, Colombo 08.

5(a). Hon. W.P. Sittampalam,

Member, Debt Conciliation Board, No. 35A, Dr. N.M. Perera Mawatha, Colombo 08. 6. Hon. Somapala Karunathilake,

Former Member of the Debt Conciliation Board, C/O Secretary, Debt Conciliation Board, No. 35A, Dr. N.M. Perera Mawatha, Colombo 08.

6(a). Hon. K.S. Pathirana,

Member, Debt Conciliation Board, No. 35A, Dr. N.M. Perera Mawatha, Colombo 08.

6(b). Hon. Somasiri Pallattarage,

Member, Debt Conciliation Board, No. 35A, Dr. N.M. Perera Mawatha, Colombo 08.

6(c). Hon. W.N. Priyadarshani Herath,

Member, Debt Conciliation Board, No. 35A, Dr. N.M. Perera Mawatha, Colombo 08.

7. D. Subhashini Dayananda,

Secretary,

4

Department of Debt Conciliation Board, No. 35A, Dr. N.M. Perera Mawatha, Colombo 08. 8. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12.

9. Chithrapathra Chamila Surangani,

No. 1068, Water Refinery Mawatha, Udawalawa. C/O Chithrapathra Ashoka Kumari, No. 174/A, Mawathgama Colony, Haltota.

RESPONDENTS

Before: Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Counsel:

Shyamal A. Collure with Prabhath S. Amarasinghe for the Petitioner.

Dilantha Sampath, S.C. for the 7th and 8th Respondents.

Asanka D. Mendis instructed by Sandeepani Wijesooriya for the 9th Respondent.

Argued on: 29.04.2026

Delivered on: 10.06.2026

5

Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Judgement

Introduction

The Petitioner became the owner of the land in suit by the document marked as Y(m) as way back

as in 1998. Later, the Petitioner has mortgaged the said land to the Rural Development Bank and

obtained a loan of Rs. 1,200,000/- (One Million Two Hundred Thousand Rupees), subject to the

interest of 20% per annum.

The Petitioner asserts that she is engaged in rolling beedi, (which is similar to what people smoke

as cigarettes), but popular among rural low-income people, and during the year of 2019, due to her

illness, she was unable to make a living and therefore could not service the bank loan, and as such,

fell into arrears. Then, the Bank insisted that she should revive the loan in arrears instalments, and

thus, she had no other option but to turn to her cousin, who is the 9th Respondent to this Application

and is working abroad, to obtain a loan. Thus, the 9th Respondent has given her Rs. 500,000/- (Five

Hundred Thousand Rupees) in two instalments, one in cash and other by depositing Rs. 300,000/-

(Three Hundred Thousand Rupees) to her account, and in addition to that she also paid some

instalments that the Petitioner could not pay.

However, the Petitioner was compelled to execute a transfer deed to secure the said loan; this was

done on the promise that she is entitled to redeem the property in suit by paying the borrowed

money and paid the instalment. When she had found the money and turned to the 9th Respondent

to redeem the property, the 9th Respondent refused to re-transfer it unless she pays Rs. 2,000,000/-

(Two Million Rupees).

6

In the meantime, the Petitioner has made an application to the Debt Conciliation Board,

(hereinafter referred to as “the Board”) and the 9th Respondent has appeared through her attorney,

who is her sister, before the Board and denied that there is a mortgage and took up the position

that the said deed by which the Petitioner transferred the property was only an outright transfer.

Hence, the Board had to embark upon the usual inquiry to ascertain whether the said deed is a

mortgage or an outright transfer.

After the inquiry, the Board has decided that the said deed is an outright transfer and not a mortgage.

Thereafter, the Petitioner has made another application under Section 54(1) to revisit the said order

of the Board, which was also refused.

Being aggrieved by the said order, the Petitioner has sought to invoke the jurisdiction of this Court

by this Application.

After the issuance of formal notice, only the 9th Respondent has filed her Statement of Objections.

At the hearing, the following arguments were advanced by the counsel; hence, this judgement.

Arguments

The first argument advanced by Mr. Collure, Counsel for the Petitioner is that the Board has come

to an erroneous conclusion despite the overwhelming evidence adduced for and on behalf of the

Petitioner-Applicant, who is the debtor.

The second argument advanced by Mr. Collure is that the Board has erred in fact and in law when

it failed to evaluate the valuation report and in relation to the consideration passed on the deed.

7

The third argument is that the Board erred in law when it came to the erroneous conclusion that

there is a condition to pay off the bank instalment attached to the deed, which is not written therein,

as transpired in evidence.

Finally, Mr. Collure argued that the Z4 is contrary to Section 54(1) and Section 49 of the Debt

Conciliation Ordinance.

Mr. Mendis, Counsel for the 9th Respondent, contended that the Petitioner should have gone before

the District Court to establish her title and, without doing so, had instead gone before the Debt

Conciliation Board.

Secondly, he argued that there is an inordinate delay between the date of the last order and the

filing of the instant application before this Court, as three months have already passed.

Finally, he argued that there has been misrepresentation and suppression of facts, as certain matters

have not been adverted to by the Petitioner in this Petition.

The Petitioner’s position

According to the Petitioner, the Petitioner had become the owner of the property in extent of 1

Rood 27.31 Perches, by virtue of the Deed bearing No. 328, dated 29.01.1998. Thereafter, the

Petitioner states that since she is engaged in rolling (producing) beedi at home, while her husband

is a cinnamon peeler, she was compelled to obtain a loan from the Rural Development Bank; thus,

she obtained a loan from the said bank in the year 2017. To secure the said loan, she has mortgaged

her property in suit to the Bank by the Mortgage Bond marked and annexed to the Petition as X.

8

She asserts that she fell ill in 2019 and was therefore, unable to pay the instalments as agreed; in

proof of her illness, the Petitioner has marked and annexed the documents X2, X2(a) and X2(b)

to the Petition.

Thereafter, since she was unable to settle the loan and fell into arrears, and because the Bank had

insisted, she could only turn to her cousin (the 9th Respondent) and thus, the 9th Respondent was

prepared to give her certain amount of money to come out of the debt that she was in. Accordingly,

the 9th Respondent had promised to give the Petitioner Rs. 500,000/-, which the Petitioner asserts

that the 9th Respondent paid Rs. 200,000/- in cash and the balance Rs. 300,000/- was deposited in

the bank and promised to set off the bank instalments by paying the same, thus, she has paid certain

instalments to the Bank. Additionally, the 9th Respondent has done so on the promise that the

Petitioner mortgaged the property in suit in her favour.

However, instead of a mortgage bond, she was compelled to execute a transfer deed, and when the

transfer deed was executed, the 9th Respondent had promised to re-transfer the property on

payment of the money.

Further, it was her position that when the Petitioner found the money and turned to the 9th

Respondent to redeem the property, she has refused unless she paid the Rs. 2 Million. Thus, the

Petitioner has rushed to the Debt Conciliation Board to obtain a relief on the basis that the said

transfer is a mortgage bond, though it appears to be an outright transfer. Since the 9th Respondent

was not in Sri Lanka, she appeared through her attorney, who is her sister, and denied that it is a

mortgage, and it is her position that it is an outright transfer. In the meantime, there had been a 66

Application as well, where the Petitioner was placed in possession by the Magistrate’s Court.

9

Thereafter, the inquiry before the Board was held to ascertain whether the said deed by which the

Petitioner was supposed to have transferred the property to the 9th Respondent is in fact an outright

transfer or only a mortgage.

After the conclusion of the inquiry where the Petitioner has given evidence and marked the

documents P1 to P34, and the 9th Respondent’s Power of Attorney has given evidence as adduced

in the documents marked as V1 to V35, the Board, by its order marked as Y(e), held that the

impugned Transfer Deed bearing No. 2058 and attested by D.G. Thushara L. Gunaratne, is not a

mortgage but an outright transfer.

Being aggrieved by the said order, the Petitioner has made an application to the Board to revise its

order in terms of Section 54(1). This too was refused by the Board by the order marked as Y(n)

annexed to the Petition.

Being further aggrieved by the said order, the Petitioner has sought to invoke the writ jurisdiction

of this Court to quash the said order of the Debt Conciliation Board.

The 9th Respondent’s Objections

The other Respondents to this Application have not filed their Objections, and the 1st to 8th

Respondents were represented by the State Counsel, who informed the Court that he will abide by

any order given by the Court.

However, the 9th Respondent by her Objections has stated that the Petitioner cannot maintain this

Application before this Court in view of the fact that there is an outright transfer executed by the

Petitioner in favour of the 9th Respondent.

10

Further, by the Objections, she has stated that if at all, the Petitioner should go before the District

Court and assert her rights, and not before this Court.

Inquiry before the Board

The Board has been called upon at that stage, in terms of Section 21A, to first determine whether

the Transfer Deed bearing No. 2058 and attested by D.G. Thushara L. Gunaratne is in fact an

outright transfer or a transfer executed in lieu of a mortgage; therefore, whether the transfer is

merely a sham transaction. For that purpose, the Board is required to evaluate the evidence in

accordance with the following criteria provided in Section 21A(1) of the Ordinance;

(a) Whether the language of the notarial instrument is contained in any other agreement

(b) Whether there is any difference between the sum received as consideration by the transferor

from the transferee and the value of the property transferred

(c) Whether there is a continuation of the transferor’s possession of the property transferred

(d) Whether the transferor is bound to pay the transferee any interest or any sum which may

reasonably considered as interest

The burden to prove that the transfer of the immovable property in question is in fact a mortgage

falls on the transferor, who in the instant application is the Petitioner, as per Section 21A(2) of the

Ordinance.

I will now consider the evidence adduced by the parties before the Board.

Circumstances that lead to the impugned deed

The Petitioner has given evidence at the inquiry before the Board, and according to her evidence,

she had become the owner of the land in suit by virtue of the Deed bearing No. 328 in 1998. She

11

had purchased the said land, which is in extent of Sixty-Seven Perches, after having raised a loan

of Rs. 2 Million from the State Mortgage Bank, which she had later settled.

It was her position that she is engaged in rolling (producing) beedi as her livelihood and her

husband is a cinnamon peeler. In 2017, she had obtained a loan of Rs. 1,200,000/- (One Million

Two Hundred Thousand Rupees) from the Rural Development Bank to be repayable in instalment,

and to secure the said loan, she has mortgaged the said property in suit. After having paid certain

instalments, she serviced the loan in order.

However, in 2019, she had suffered a heart ailment and was therefore unable to service the loan

further; therefore, she fell into arrears. In proof of her heart ailment, she has marked and produced

documents at the inquiry, as reflected in the documents marked X2, X2(a), and X2(b).

After a couple months since she fell into arrears, the Bank has insisted that she should immediately

repay the loan, and by that time, her cousin, who is the 9th Respondent was employed in Lebanon;

therefore, she has turned to her to obtain a loan. Thereafter, the 9th Respondent has promised to

give her a loan of Rs. 500,000/- which she has given, Rs. 200,000/- in cash and the balance Rs.

300,000/- was deposited into her account, to meet her expenses that she met during her illness. In

addition to that, she has promised to pay certain instalments on the promise that she will secure it

through a mortgage, which she has explained in the following manner;

“වැඩිදුර හරස් ප්‍රශ්න:

ප්‍ර:- සාක්ෂිකාරිය තමුන් කලින් දවසස් සාක්ෂි සදමින් ප්‍රකාශ කලා තමුන්ට සෙෙ නඩුසේ ණයහිමි

විසින් තෙන්සේ සේේ ඉඩෙට අදාළව ණය මුදලක්ෂ ලබා දුන්නා කියලා සන්ද?

උ:- ඔේ.

12

ප්‍ර:- කීයක්ෂ දුන්නාද?

උ:- රු. ලක්ෂෂ 2 ක්ෂ ෙසේ අතට දුන්නා. රු. ලක්ෂෂ 3 ක්ෂ ෙසේ බැැංකු ගිණුෙට දැේො.

ප්‍ර:- එතසකාට තෙන්සේ සේ ඉඩෙ සින්නක්ෂකර ඔප්පුවකින් ඒ අයට ලියලා දීලා තමුන්් සේ මුදල්

ලබා දීසේ තමුන් කියන විදිහට ඒ අයට තිබුණු වාසිය සොකක්ෂද?

උ:- ඉඩෙ සින්නක්ෂකරව ලිේවා සනසෙයි ගනුසදනුවක්ෂ සඳහායි එසහෙ කසල්.

ප්‍ර:- ෙෙ අහන්සන් ඒ ගනුසදනුසවන් සේ නඩුසේ ණයහිමි වන වික්‍රෙසිැංහ විෙලා සුරැංගනී කියන

අයට ලැසබන ලාභය සොකක්ෂද?

උ:- ෙෙ අසනීප වුණ නිසයි රු.ලක්ෂෂ 5ක්ෂ ෙෙ ඉල්ලා ගත්සත්.

ප්‍ර:- දැන් ඒ තැනැත්තිය රැකියාවක්ෂ කරලා සන්ද මුදල් උපයා ගන්සන්?

උ:- ඔේ.

ප්‍ර:- එයාට ලැසබන ලාභය සොකක්ෂද?

උ:- ඒ මුදල් ආපසු ගන්න එයාට. ෙට අසනීප නිසයි එසහෙ කසල්. ඇපයට ඔප්පුව ලියලා සදන්න

කිේවා.

ප්‍ර:- එතසකාට සාක්ෂිකාරිය තමුන් දැන් සේ කියන විදිහට සේ ලක්ෂෂ 5 ක මුදල ලබා සගන සේ

සවනසකාට සකාච්චර කල් සවනවද?

උ:- අවුරුදු 3 ක්ෂ විතර සවනවා.

ප්‍ර:- තමුන් සේ අදාල ඔප්පුව ලියලා දුන්සන් සකායි කාසල්ද?

උ:- 2020.02.05 සවනිදා තෙයි ඔප්පුව අත්සන් කසල්.

ප්‍ර:- එතසකාට සේ වනවිට වසර 3 ක කාලයක්ෂ ගතසවලා සන්ද?

13

උ:- ඔේ.”

However, instead of a mortgage, it is the Petitioner’s position that she was compelled to execute a

transfer deed, which she has done because the 9th Respondent’s son was staying with them for his

studies, and he had arranged everything.

Thus, it is her position that when she was able to find the money, the entirety of the property would

be retransferred. However, after finding the money, when she went to the 9th Respondent (her

cousin) to redeem the property, her cousin has refused to do so and asked for two million Rupees

to re-transfer the property. Therefore, the Petitioner had no other option but to go to the Debt

Conciliation Board and file an application.

“ප්‍ර:- දැන් තමුන් ඔය දුන්නයි කියන ලක්ෂෂ 5 සවනුසවන් තෙන් කීයක්ෂ හරි සේ සවනසකාට දීලා

තිසයනවද?

උ:- 2021 ෙෙ එයාසගන් ලක්ෂෂ 5 සදන්න ඇහුවා. නමුත් එයා ෙසගන් ලක්ෂෂ 20 ක්ෂ ඉල්ුවා ඉඩෙ

ආපහු හරවා ගන්න.

ප්‍ර:- ෙෙ තමුන්ට සයෝජනා කරනවා තමුන්ලා සේ ඉඩෙ සේ ණයහිමිට විකුණලා තෙයි රු. ලක්ෂෂ 12

ක මුදලක්ෂ ලබා ගත්සත් කියලා?

උ:- නැහැ ෙෙ එසහෙ වික්ෂසක්ෂ නැහැ.”

Further, in her cross examination, when questioned about the payment in instalments by the 9th

Respondent, the Petitioner admitted that the 9th Respondent had paid up to a certain point of time,

however, she had started to pay again after she had recovered from her illness from 2021.

“ෙණ්ඩලය විසින්:-

ප්‍ර:- තෙන්ට ලක්ෂෂ 5 ක්ෂ නිකේෙ දුන්නද සපාළියක්ෂ නැතිව?

14

උ:- ෙට අසනීප ඉල්ුවට නැහැ ඒ සවනසකාට ණය වුණා සවන අයසගන් ගත්ත ඒවා සදන්න

කිේවා.

ප්‍ර:- සාක්ෂිකාරිය තමුන් ඔය ඉඩෙ ලියන අවස්ථාසවදි ලබාගත්ත මුදලට අෙතරව ඒ අය මීට සදන්න

ලැබිච්ච සේවල් තමුන් විසින් බැැංකුවලින් අරගත්ත ණය මුදලක්ෂ සගේවා සන්ද?

උ:- ඇය වාරික සගවලා දුන්නා. ෙෙ අසනීප නිසයි එසහෙ කසල්.

ප්‍ර:- සාක්ෂිකාරිය ෙෙ තමුන්ට සයෝජනා කරනවා 2020 ඉඩෙ ලියන අවස්ථාවට තමුන්ට රු. ලක්ෂෂ

12 ක මුදලක්ෂ දීලා සේ දක්ෂවා එනේ, අධිකරණ ෙණ්ඩල නඩු වාරික ණය සැමිය තමුන් තමුන්සේ

අතින් බැැංකුවලට සගවලා තිසයනවා කියලා?

උ:- නැහැ එය අසතයයක්ෂ.

ප්‍ර:- එතසකාට තමුන් සගවලා තිසයනවාද ඒ ණය මුදල?

උ:- ෙෙ අසනීප නිසයි ලක්ෂෂ 5 ක මුදලක්ෂ ගත්සත්. ගිය අවුරුේසේ ොසස් සිට නැවත ොසයක්ෂ ෙට

බැැංකුවල ලියුෙක්ෂ ඉදිරිපත් කරලා ෙෙ එය මුදල සගවාසගන යනවා.

ප්‍ර:- ඒ කියන්සන් සේ නඩුවට ණයහිමි විසින් තමුන් විසින් ලබා ගත්ත ණය මුදල සවනුසවන් 2022

අසගෝස්ු සවනකේ ඇය වාරික සගේවා කියලා තමුන් පිළිගන්නවාද?

උ:- 2021 අසගෝස්ු සවනකේ.”

In addition to her evidence, she has called the valuer who has given evidence, and according to

him, when the property was transferred, it was about Rs. 5.8 Million worth. Additionally, at the

time he gave evidence, its worth was around Rs. 7.3 Million.

Thereafter, she has called the Electricity Superintendent, who gave evidence to the effect that

electricity supply was taken to the property in suit in her husband’s name, C. Ananda Silva, and

15

from October 2021, the electricity bill was zero because no one was occupying the house and

nobody has consumed electricity.

Thereafter, the 9th Respondent’s sister, who is the power of attorney holder, has given evidence,

and according to her, the 9th Respondent had given Rs. 500,000/- (Rs. 200,000/- in cash and the

remaining was deposited) and Rs. 1.2 Million was paid; in addition to that, she has also paid certain

instalments to the Bank to service the loan obtained by the Petitioner. According to her, now the

9th Respondent’s son is occupying the house along with his father. She has marked certain

documents issued by the Bank as V1 to V35, to establish that the loan was serviced by her sister.

In the cross examination she admitted that the Petitioner has started servicing the loan.

In view of the facts asserted, the complaint by the Petitioner, the Objections taken up by the 9th

Respondent, and the arguments advanced on behalf of the parties, the following questions arise for

my determination;

(i) Whether the Deed by which the Petitioner is said to have transferred her title to the 9th

Respondent is sham or not

(ii) Whether the Petitioner has passed the tests to establish that the said deed is a sham

(iii)Whether the Debt Conciliation Board (the 1st Respondent) and its members erred in fact

and in law when they decided that the said deed is an outright transfer

(iv) If so, whether the Petitioner is entitled to relief as prayed for in the Petition

Now I will consider them one at a time.

Did the Petitioner continue to be in possession:

In this case, it is quite clear that the Petitioner has never placed the 9th Respondent or her

representative in possession. Her stand is that the 9th Respondent’s son was staying with them since

16

he was studying, and he was the one who arranged the money for the Petitioner to obtain from the

9th Respondent, and to secure the said money, he wanted to have the said deed in favour of his

mother. When the Petitioner mentioned those facts in evidence, those facts were never challenged.

In fact, it was her position that due to her financial difficulties she had to turn to the 9th Respondent,

who had by that time accumulated some money after having secured a foreign employment in

Lebanon; therefore, when she turned to her, she had agreed to give the said Rs. 500,000/- and also

agreed to pay certain instalments on behalf of the Petitioner.

For that, as security, the nephew of the Petitioner (the son of the 9th Respondent) insisted that there

should be a transfer deed executed, which the Petitioner complied with. Accordingly, the Transfer

Deed has been executed.

It is also evident that up until October 2021 after the execution of the said transfer deed, the

Petitioner and her family members had been in possession of the property in suit. A dispute had

arisen between the parties with regard to the possession, and according to the Petitioner, the 9th

Respondent’s son had been the cause of the said dispute, and he had first made a police complaint

over the possession. Then, the Petitioner and her family members were directed to give a statement;

according to the Petitioner, when they left to do so, the 9th Respondent’s son had locked up the

house that he was also staying in and taken the keys. Thereafter, the Petitioner had to leave and is

now living next door with her parents.

“ප්‍ර:- ඒ අනුව තමුන් සපර දිනසේ සාක්ෂි සදමින් ප්‍රකාශ කල ආකාරයට එක්ෂතරා අවස්ථාවකදී 2021

වසසේදී සේ අය සේ නිවසට ආවාද?

උ:- ඔේ. සපාලිසිසේ සදන්සනක්ෂ ඇවිල්ලා අපිව එලියට අඩගහසගන ගියා. එවිට ඉෂාර මුණසිැංහ

ෙසේ දුව එළියට ඇදලා දාලා යුර ගත්තා.”

17

However, the Petitioner’s position is that the land appurtenant to the house is in possession and

occupied by her son and her cousin.

“ෙණ්ඩලය විසින්:

ප්‍ර:- කවුද එසහනේ භුක්ෂති විඳින්සන්?

උ:- ෙෙ. සුනිල් සිල්වා කියලා ෙස්සිනා සකසනක්ෂ වගා කටයුු කරනවා.

ප්‍ර:- ෙෙ තමුන්ට කියනවා තමුන් එකිසනකට සවනස් සාක්ෂිසදන සාක්ෂිකාරියක්ෂ කියලා ෙෙ

සයෝජනා කරනවා.

උ:- නැහැ. ෙෙ කියන්සන් ඇත්ත.

ප්‍ර:- චිත්‍රපත්‍ර තිළිණ ෙධුසැංඛ සිල්වා කියන්සන් කවුද?

උ:- ෙසේ ුතා.”

This clearly shows that the Petitioner never wanted to give the beneficial interest to the 9th

Respondent. In addition to that, there had been a 66 Matter, where the Petitioner had been placed

in possession by the learned Magistrate, as reflected in P32 annexed to the Petition; as such, the

Petitioner has fought the said 66 Matter and obtained possession of the property in suit. Therefore,

the 9th Respondent had never been in possession although they claim that they are in possession.

Further, the Petitioner has called the Electrical Superintendent of the area, who testified to the

effect that the electricity bills are paid and is still under the name of the Petitioner’s husband, C.

Ananda Silva, and the bills were paid only up till 27.10.2020, and thereafter, the bills had become

zero which means that nobody is occupying the house. In fact, if the 9th Respondent claims that

they have been paying the electricity bills as the owner; in that event they should have had it

transferred in their name, which they have so far not done. Therefore, this also shows that the

18

Petitioner continues to enjoy that rights as well which the learned Members of the Board failed to

consider.

Therefore, it is very clear that the 9th Respondent nor her agents were in possession and that the

Petitioner had never intended to transfer the beneficial interests of the property in suit to the 9th

Respondent.

The Board has failed to consider and properly appreciate the evidence adduced to the effect that

the Petitioner never placed the 9th Respondent in possession, nor was the 9th Respondent or her

attorney ever had possession after the execution of the impugned deed. In fact, possession of the

house was taken by deception, as transpired in evidence. In addition to that, the Petitioner continues

to possess the appurtenant land. Further, even the electricity bills, other than the allegedly stolen

bills, are paid by the Petitioner. However, nobody had consumed electricity after the Petitioner left

the house and started living with her father next door.

“ප්‍ර:- දැන් සාක්ෂිකාරිය තමුන් සේ නිවසට අදාලව ොසික විදුලි ඛිලක්ෂ එනවා සන්ද?

උ:- ඔේ.

ප්‍ර:- ඒවා තමුන් ලබාසගන සගවනවද?

උ:- අපි ලබාසගන තිසයනවා. ලබා ගන්න යනසකාට කවුරුහරි ඒක සහාසරන් අරගන්නවා. ගිය

ොසසත් අසශෝකා කුොරි, ජයන්ත කියන ුේගලයයි අපි පැමිණිල්ලකට ගිය අවස්ථාවක ලයි් බිල

අරසගන ගිහිල්ලා තිබ්බා.

ප්‍ර‍:- දැන් සාක්ෂිකාරිය තමුන් කියන විදිහට තමුන්ට අයිති තමුන්සේ ස්වාමි ුරුෂයාසේ නමින් එන

විදුලි ඛිල කවුරු හරි සහාසරන් අරගන්නවා කියලද කියන්සන්?

උ:- ඔේ.

19

ප්‍ර:- තමුන් ඒ ගැන සපාලිසියට පැමිණිල්ලක්ෂ කරලා තිසයනවද?

උ:- පැමිණිල්ලක්ෂ කරන්න ගිසේ නැහැ. ලයි් බිල් ෙහත්තයාසගනුත් අපි ලයි් බිල ගන්න නිසා.

ප්‍ර:- දැන් ඔය තමුන් කියන විදිහට ොස කීයක ලයි් බිල් ඔය වසේ සහාසරන් අරසගන තිසයනවද?

උ:- ොස ගණනාවක ඒවා සහාසරන් අරසගන තිසයනවා.

ප්‍ර:- එතසකාට ලයි් බිල සගවන් නැති වුණාෙ ලයි් කපලා යන්සන් නැේද?

උ:- එයාලා සහාසරන් ගන්න ලයි් බිල් එයාලා සගවනවා.”

Consideration passed:

The next matter that needs to be considered is whether there is a huge discrepancy between the

value of the property and the consideration passed.

According to the Petitioner, the Petitioner has only received Rs. 500,000/- from the 9th Respondent.

To establish that, she has mentioned in her evidence that she had received Rs. 200,000/- in cash

and the 9th Respondent had deposited Rs. 300,000/- in the Petitioner’s bank account; in proof of

that, she has produced the bank account details in her evidence. This evidence was never

controverted, and no evidence was given to contradict the same.

In cross-examination, she has marked documents P9 to P30 to establish that she had paid the

instalments of the loan regularly up to date till she gave evidence. In addition to that, it was

suggested to her that the 9th Respondent had given Rs. 1.2 Million as consideration in addition to

the Rs. 500,000/-, which she flatly denied, and when she was questioned as to why the

consideration on the Deed was mentioned, her explanation was that since it was mortgaged to the

Bank for Rs. 1.2 Million, the lawyer who attested the said deed wanted to put the same amount.

20

“ෙණ්ඩලය විසින්:-

ප්‍ර:- ඔබුොට ලක්ෂෂ 12 ක මුදලක්ෂ දැේසේ ඇයි?

උ:- බැැංකු ණය සගවන්න ෙසගන් ඇහුවා බැැංකුසවන් ලක්ෂෂ කීයක්ෂ අරසගන තිසයනවද කියලා. ෙෙ

කිේවා ලක්ෂෂ 12 ක්ෂ අරසගන තිසයනවා. ඒකට රු. 1,040,000/= ක්ෂ සගවන්න තිසයනවා කියලා.

ඊට පස්සස් ඇහුවා සෙච්චර කීයක්ෂද දුන්සන් කියලා. ෙෙ කිේවා ලක්ෂෂ 5 ක මුදලක්ෂ බැැංකු ප්‍රොණයක්ෂ

ගන්සන් කියලා. ඊට පස්සස් ඇහුවා එසහනේ අවුරුදු 2 ක්ෂ 3 ක්ෂ සගවලා සදන නිසා ලක්ෂෂ 12 ක්ෂ

දැේෙට කෙක්ෂ නැේද ඇහුවා. ෙෙ කැෙති වුණා.

ප්‍ර:- ඒ අනුව සාක්ෂිකාරිය සේ ඉඩෙ ලියන අවස්ථාසවදි සේ ඉඩසෙන් සේපල පැවරීෙ කසල් නැතැයි

යන මුදලක්ෂ ලබාසගන ඉතිරිය බැැංකුවලින් ලබාගත් ණය වාරික ඔවුන් විසින් සගවීෙට පදනෙ ෙත

තො සේ පැවරීෙ කසල් සන්ද?”

However, the 9th Respondent’s position is that in addition to the said Rs. 500,000/-, they had paid

Rs. 1.2 Million when the Deed was signed, but the Petitioner has denied the same. No notary was

called to establish that such an amount was passed at the time of the execution of the Deed. In

addition to that, when the Petitioner denied it, the burden shifted onto the 9th Respondent to

establish by calling witnesses or by producing document as evidence proving that she had in fact

withdrawn money or had paid the same by some other means to the Petitioner, which the 9th

Respondent has failed to establish.

Therefore, this aspect also has not been considered by the Members of the Board.

Discrepancy between consideration passed and the valuation:

The next matter that needs to be considered is whether there is a huge discrepancy between the

consideration passed and the valuation.

21

According to the valuer who had given evidence, as a qualified valuer who has obtained his

qualifications as a valuer, at the time of the execution of the Deed in favour of the 9th Respondent,

the value of the property in suit was about Rs. 5.8 Million, and at the time of giving evidence, it

was Rs. 7.3 Million. He has calculated so in accordance with the market value, and in fact, the

property is in extent of 1 Rood and 67 Perches, which means that 67 Perches property in

Bandaragama area is a valuable property. Therefore, just for Rs. 500,000/- now the 9th Respondent

is going to receive that property.

It is the position of the 9th Respondent that other than for the said Rs. 500,000/-, the 9th Respondent

has only paid certain instalments, and to establish those instalments that the 9th Respondent has

paid, the 9th Respondent’s power of attorney has marked and annexed certain documents as V1 to

V35, which the Petitioner admitted. Therefore, other than for the Rs. 500,000/-, the only other

amount of money that was paid in that behalf is for the said instalments; thus, once that is

calculated, the entire amount that the Petitioner has to pay the 9th Respondent is calculable.

The proposition that Rs. 1.2 Million was passed as consideration on the impugned deed is only a

surmise on which an inference has been drawn by the learned Members of the Board without any

iota of evidence to that effect because the 9th Respondent has failed to establish that fact by

adducing evidence (oral or documentary) when the Petitioner denied it. Therefore, there is a great

error of facts and law when the learned Members of the Board came to their conclusion.

Further, it is the position of the Petitioner that when she went to repay the 9th Respondent, the 9th

Respondent had refused and demanded Rs. 1.2 Million, which the Petitioner was not prepared to

pay and therefore had to turn to the Board.

22

Additionally, when the Petitioner had managed to find money and started paying the loan

instalment, which she has proved by producing the documents marked as P1 to P34 that show that

she has been making regular payments, and which the 9th Respondent has not denied and the

learned Members of the Board have lost sight of when considering this matter.

Therefore, it is my view that the learned Members of the Debt Conciliation Board have erred in

fact and in law when they considered the evidence with regard to the consideration passed and the

valuation of the property.

The Board has failed to consider each and every fact in issue, namely the circumstances that led

to the execution of the impugned deed and whether the Petitioner surrendered possession after the

execution of the impugned deed, as well as the discrepancy between the value of the property, the

consideration actually passed, and the consideration stated in the deed. In particular, the reference

in the deed to a consideration of 1.2 Million was made at the instance of the attorney-at-law who

attested the deed, purportedly on the basis that the value of the mortgage was 1.2 Million; this

aspect was not properly evaluated by the Board.

Further, the Petitioner never intended to transfer the beneficial interest, and that is precisely why

she, throughout, intended to remain in possession of the property.

“ප්‍ර:- දැන් ණයහිමිට ලද ඔප්පුසේ සඳහන් සවලා තිසයනව වටිනාකෙ කීයද?

උ:- ලක්ෂෂ 12යි.

ප්‍ර:- ඇත්ත වශසයන්ෙ තෙන්සේ ස්ථාවරය අනුව තෙන්ට ලැබුසණ් කියද?

උ:- ලක්ෂෂ 5 යි.

ප්‍ර:- අතට කීයක්ෂ ලැබුණද?

23

උ:- අතට ලක්ෂෂ 2 ක්ෂ ලැබුණා. ඉුරු ලක්ෂෂ 3 ෙසේ බැැංකු ගිණුෙට දැේො.”

In addition to the above, the consideration that actually passed was only Rs.500,000/-. Therefore,

I am still unable to understand how the Board decided that, in addition to Rs.500,000/-, a further

Rs. 1,200,000/- (One Million Two Hundred Thousand Rupees), also passed as consideration as

stated in the deed. The Petitioner has flatly denied this and clearly explained in cross-examination,

as I have referred to above, why and how the amount of Rs. 1,200,000/- was inserted as

consideration; namely, due to the value of the mortgage she agreed to at that time, without knowing

the consequences.

Finally, the Board has failed to appreciate the value of the property and the actual consideration

that passed. The Board has further failed to appreciate the fact that the Petitioner never intended

to transfer the beneficial interest, although she transferred the title in lieu of a mortgage.

Beneficial interest never transferred

In view of the above factors, it appears that the Petitioner has never intended to transfer the

beneficial interest of the property in suit to the 9th Respondent or her agent in her place because

she continued to be in possession, and even after she had left the premises, she had started paying

the electricity bills which were not stolen. However, after she left the house, no electricity has been

consumed. Therefore, even if the 9th Respondent claims that they are in possession, this was

established through the evidence of the Electricity Superintendent, who confirmed that nobody has

consumed electricity after July 2021. Thus, no beneficial interest has been passed from the

Petitioner to the 9th Respondent or her agent.

In this case, it is clear that the Board has not considered the attendant circumstances.

24

Where the Board has erred

The Board has not analysed the above-mentioned evidence in terms of the provisions of Section

21A of the Ordinance. Instead, in almost the entirety of the order marked as Y(e), the Members of

the Board have mainly considered the consideration passed as Rs. 1.2 Million, which they relied

on to arrive at their conclusion.

“පැ.34 ඔප්පුසේ සඳහන් අන්දෙට එෙ ඔප්පුසේ සඳහන් රුපියල් ලක්ෂෂ 12ක මුදල ගනුසදනු කරගත්

බව ඉල්ූේකාරිය සහ වගඋත්තරකාරිය පිලිසගන ඇති බැවින් රුපියල් ලක්ෂෂ 12ක මුදලක්ෂ

ඉල්ුේකාරිය විසින් ලබා සගන ඇති බව නිගෙනය කල හැකිය.”1

In addition to that, on the question of possession, the Members of the Board had this to say;

“ඉල්ුේකාරිය සාක්ෂි සදමින් පවසා ඇත්සත් සෙෙ ඉල්ුේපත්‍රයට අදාල ඉඩසේ පිහිටි අැංක 347

දරණ නිවසස් 2021.07.18 දින දක්ෂවා පදිැංචිව සිටි බවත් වග උත්තරකාරියසේ ුතා වන ඉෂාර යන

අය සෙෙ නිවසස් යුර ලබා ගත් බවය. ඉල්ුේකාරිය ඉල්ුේපත්‍රසේ ද සඳහන් සකාට ඇත්සත්

වගඋත්තරකාරියසේ ුත්‍රයා බලහත්කාරසයන් සෙෙ නිවසට ඇුල් වී ඇති බවය. ඒ අනුව

ඉල්ුේකාරියට සෙෙ ඉල්ුේපත්‍රයට අදාල ඉඩසේ පිහිටි නිවසස් පදිැංචියක්ෂ සනාෙැති බවද සපනී

යයි.”2

Based on these factors, the Board had decided to dismiss the application.

For the reasons adumbrated above, the Board has failed to appreciate the essence of the Debt

Conciliation Ordinance and its underlying rationale, which is not to assist creditors but rather to

support debtors in distress and to facilitate the settlement of debts where debtors are in financial

1 Page 6 of the document marked as Y(e) annexed to the Petition. 2 Page 6 of the document marked as Y(e) annexed to the Petition.

25

difficulty. In the present case, the Board has lost sight of this main rationale and has effectively

acted in favour of the creditor; therefore, they have erred in both fact and in law.

In support of this, I rely on the following dictum of Justice Obeyesekere in the case of

Samarasinghe v. Chairman, Debt Conciliation Board and Others [2021]3;

“The Debt Conciliation Ordinance was introduced in 1941 as a piece of welfare legislation

by the colonial legislature to address a pertinent social issue involving civil debts that

particularly affected rural and economically disadvantaged communities. Those who

required financial assistance were compelled to mortgage immovable property in order to

obtain loans and keep paying interest at exorbitant rates until such time as they were able

to redeem their properties. These instruments were usually executed as outright transfers,

due to the disparity in bargaining power between the creditors and debtors, and because

debtors are often desperate to obtain financial assistance and did not have the benefit of

access to legal advice to execute a mortgage which protects their rights. This practice led

to the eventual loss of property which further widened the gap in society and drove the

poor to the depths of poverty (Debt Conciliation Board v. R. D. Hector Jayasiri, 1 Deepali

Wijesundera J.).

The Debt Conciliation Ordinance was therefore introduced to provide some relief to the

debtor in order to prevent capricious, oppressive, and unconscionable conduct on the part

of the creditor. The Department of Debt Conciliation was established to provide relief and

legal protection for debtors to redeem on concessional installments and low interest rates,

immovable properties such as agricultural land or residential premises hypothecated to

3 3 Sri L.R. 539.

26

obtain a loan on a mortgage or a Deed of Conditional Transfer (Parliamentary Debates

of 4th August 1999; speech made by the Minister of Justice when introducing the

amendment to the Ordinance). The culture of informally mortgaging immovable property

for the purpose of obtaining loans exists to date, particularly due to the inability to obtain

loans from the formal banking and financial sector.”

Writ lies

Based on the reasons adumberated above, it is my view that a Writ of Certiorari lies against the

Respondents as the Board has failed to properly consider and analyse the evidence placed before

it in terms of Section 21A of the Ordinance.

I rely on the following passage found in Wade and Forsyth’s classic textbook, “Administrative

Law”;

“A certiorari would be issued to call up the records of justices of the peace and

commissioners for examination in the King's Bench. Failure to return the record into the

High Court was punishable as contempt and, in the seventeenth century, many

commissioners of sewers were fined and incarcerated for disobedience." If any legal

defects were found in the records, the decisions were quashed. At first, there was much

quashing for defects of form on the record, i.e. for error on the face. However, later, as the

doctrine of ultra vires developed, that became the dominant principle of control. Nowadays,

the quashing order is used to bring up into the High Court the decision of some inferior

tribunal or authority in order to be investigated. If the decision does not pass the test, it is

27

quashed-that is to say, it is declared completely invalid and, for this reason, it should not

be respected.”4

Since a writ in the nature of Certiorari is issued, further I issue a Writ of Mandamus to compel the

Board to proceed with the application to settle the debt or issue a certificate in terms of Section 32

of the Ordinance.

In support of this, I further rely on the following passage found in the authoritative textbook of

Wade and Forsyth, “Administrative Law”;

“The essence of a mandatory order is that it is a royal command, issued in the name of the

Crown from the Court of King's Bench (now the King's Bench Division of the High Court),

ordering the performance of a public legal duty. Like the other prerogative remedies, it is

normally granted on the application of a private litigant, though it may also be used by one

public authority against another. While the quashing and prohibiting orders deal with

wrongful action, the mandatory order deals with wrongful inaction. Together, the

prerogative remedies cover the field of governmental powers and duties.”5

4 Wade, W., & Forsyth, C. (12th Edition, Oxford University Press 2023). Administrative Law, Part VII Chapter 16, p. 482. 5 Wade, W., & Forsyth, C. (12th Edition, Oxford University Press 2023). Administrative Law, Part VII Chapter 16, p. 493.

28

Conclusion

Accordingly, since the transfer is a sham, it cannot be sustained; therefore, a Writ of Certiorari is

issued to quash the decision of the Board. Thus, the Board and its members are hereby directed to

proceed to follow the procedure to settle the debt in terms of Section 25 of the Ordinance. As such,

I declare that the impugned deed is not an outright transfer and was executed in way of a mortgage,

and grant the relief as prayed for in prayers (c), (d), and (e) of the Petition.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL