Page 1 of 17

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of n appeal in terms of

Section 331 (1) of the code of criminal

procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

CA HCC 0070/2023

HC Kegalle No: HC 3139/2012

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Complainant

v.

Palamura Hewage Harishchandra

Kumarasinghe

Accused

AND NOW

Palamura Hewage Harishchandra

Kumarasinghe

Accused-Accused

Page 2 of 17

V.

Hon. Attorney general

Attorney generals department

Colombo 12

Complainant-Respondent

Before : B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

Amal Ranaraja, J.

Counsel: Nihara Randeniya for the Accused-Appellant

Sudarshana De Silva, S.D.S.G for the Respondent

Written

Submissions: 03.11.2023 (by the Accused-Appellant)

On 21.12.2023 (by the Respondent)

Argued On: 29.01.2025

Judgment On: 05.03.2025

JUDGMENT

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

The Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Accused) was indicted

before the High Court of Kegalle on the charge of committing the offence of murder

of one Balasooriya Arachchilage Priyantha Balasooriya on 28.09.2010 punishable

under Section 296 of the Penal Code.

Page 3 of 17

The Prosecution led the evidence through twelve witnesses and marking

productions from P1 to P4 and thereafter closed its case. The Accused in his

defence gave evidence under oath. At the conclusion of the trial, the Learned High

Court Judge by his judgment dated 30.11.2022 found the Accused guilty of murder

and imposed the death sentence.

Being aggrieved by the afore-mentioned conviction and the sentence, the Accused

has preferred this appeal to this Court.

The following are the grounds of appeal as set out in the written submission of the

Accused filed on 03.11.2023.

1. The Learned Trial Judge failed to consider that evidence of a sudden fight

emanated from the prosecution case.

2. That the Learned Trial Judge failed to consider and evaluate the

prosecution case properly.

3. That the Learned Trial Judge erred in law by his failure to consider that

the prosecution has not proved its case beyond reasonable doubt.

4. That the Learned Trial Judge failed to consider the favourable evidence for

the defence.

5. That the Learned Trial Judge did not evaluate the defence evidence from

the correct perspective and rejected the same in the wrong premise.

During the argument stage, the main ground urged by the Counsel for the Accused

was that from the evidence led before the Learned High Court Judge, he had failed

to evaluate the possibility of a sudden fight that spontaneously occurred between

the deceased and the Accused. According to him, it is the duty of the trial judge to

consider the plea of a sudden fight if the evidence indicates that the accused had

caused the death in a sudden fight.

Page 4 of 17

The Exception 4 to Section 294 of the Penal Code reads as follows:

Culpable homicide is not murder if it is committed without premeditation

in a sudden fight in the heat of passion upon a sudden quarrel, and without

the offender having taken undue advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual

manner.

Accordingly, the particular exception will apply where the injury which caused the

death has been inflicted by the Accused on the deceased without premeditation in

a sudden fight.

This Section was considered by His Lordship Moseley S.P.J in The King v.

Vidanalage Lanty, 42 NLR 317 at page 319, held that;

Is there then in the present case any basis for a finding that the injury

which the jury have found to have been inflicted by the appellant on the

deceased, was inflicted without premeditation in a sudden fight within the

meaning of exception 4 to section 294 of the Penal Code? There is the

evidence of the appellant to the effect that he was seized by the deceased

and that he held the deceased by the waist, and that, when he asked the

deceased for an explanation, the latter replied " Wait and I'll tell you the

reason " and called upon Kanagan to stab. This is to some extent

corroborated by William Silva. There is, as well, the evidence of Martin to

the effect that the appellant ran into his house saying: " Sinhalese people

are coming to assault me", and that the appellant said he was afraid to go

back to the road. Some of these matters were referred to by the learned

Judge, but only in setting out the defence story and not as evidence upon

which a lesser verdict might possibly be based.

This concept was further discussed by her Ladyship Chief Justice Dr. Shirani A.

Bandaranayake, in Bandara v. The Attorney General, SC Appeal No. 62/5008,

Decided on 12.10.2011, (2011 (2) BLR, 397 at page 399), held that;

Page 5 of 17

The necessary requisites that should be satisfied by a person who intends

to come within the Exception 4 were clearly discussed with reference to

several decided cases (Surinder Kumar v. Union Territory Chandigarh (AIR

(1989) SC 1094), Kikar Singh v. State of Rajasthan (AIR (1993) SC 2426) by

Ratanlal and Dhirajlal, (Law of Crimes, 24th Edition, 1998, page 1339) on

the basis of Section 300 of the Indian Penal Code, which section and the

Exceptions are identical to section 294 of our Penal Code. Accordingly, in

terms of the said section of the Indian Penal Code, the following requisites

must be satisfied:

1. it was a sudden fight;

2. there was no premeditation;

3. the act was committed in a heat of passion; and

4. the assailant had not taken any undue advantage or acted in a

cruel manner.

However as clearly held in Bhagwan Munjaji Pawade (AIR (1979) SC 133)

and State of Himachal Pradesh v. Wazir Chend and Others (AIR (197) SC

315), all the above conditions must exist in order to invoke this exception.

The plea of sudden fight was discussed by Prof. G.L. Peiris, Offences under the

Penal Code of Sri Lanka, 1998, 2nd edn., page 129:

The word "premeditation" in the context of this Exception, does not have

the same meaning as "intention". The accused is entitled to the benefit of

the Exception of sudden fight, although he intended to cause death, so long

as he acted in anger during the quarrel and the other elements of the

Exception are capable of being established. In N. A. Fernand Soertsz S.P.J.,

delivering the judgment of the court of Criminal Appeal, made the following

criticism of the summing-up in the case: "The trial judge explained

'premeditation' as if it was synonymous with 'intention'. There was, then,

misdirection in that respect. The jury, in view of that misdirection and also

Page 6 of 17

in view of the observation made by the judge that if they were not satisfied

that the condition 'without premeditation' was present on the evidence, they

need not consider that exception any further, probably refrained from such

further consideration. A conviction of murder was therefore set aside and

one of culpable homicide not amounting to murder substituted.

In order to ascertain whether there was a sudden fight, we have to consider the

events that had taken place on the day in question.

The PW1, namely Wijesinghe Mudalige Malani who is the mother of the deceased

has stated that the wife of the deceased eloped with the Accused. On the previous

day, the deceased, his father, and PW1 herself visited the place where the

deceaseds wife was residing with the Accused, and the deceased said to his wife

that there was no need for her to come and that he would look after their daughter.

On the day in question, while PW1 was in Karawanella, the deceased called her

and asked her to come home immediately as Harischandra, the Accused had come

there. When the PW1 came to PW2s house, where the incident happened, the

Accused was in the rubber estate and the deceased was near the window speaking

through his phone to the Accused and then the deceased had told the PW1 that

the Accused was here. Later, the Accused has sat in the and has stated

that when the PW1 has told the Accused not to

do anything to her son.

After some time, the Accused went to his house and returned after some time with

an iron rod and a sickle.

On page 77 of the brief;

: ?

: ,

.

: .

:

Page 7 of 17

; , .

: .

According to her, the deceased was in the kitchen during the time when the

Accused tried to enter the house where he was stopped by neighbours. The PW1

has stayed at the door of the house to prevent the deceased from coming out. While

PW1 went inside the house to check on the deceaseds daughter, the deceased had

gone out of the house, and by the time PW1 saw the deceased, he was stabbed and

some internal parts from his abdomen were out. The deceased had fallen near the

water tank and the Accused was holding the deceased from his neck. According to

PW1, there was a knife in the Accuseds hand which was around 8 inches long.

When PW1 made the Accused leave the deceaseds neck, the deceased stood up

and ran for some distance and fell down. In the meantime, the Accused had

removed his shirt and wore the shirt of someone who was there and went from the

scene. Later, the deceased was admitted to Karawenalla Hospital and the PW1

got to know that on the way to the Awissawella hospital, the deceased had passed

away.

During the testimony, the PW1 identified the production marked P1 as the murder

weapon and informed that PW1 identified the body of the deceased during the

post-mortem at the Awissawella Hospital.

During the cross-examination, the counsel for the defence suggested that the PW1

scolded the Accused in filthy language when he went passing the deceaseds house

which was denied by PW1. They proposed that she was the one who initiated the

said fight. Further, they suggested that because of her direct involvement in her

sons death, PW1 cannot give evidence before the Court. In the cross-examination,

she continuously stated that she prevented her son, the deceased from going out

of the house. Further, she has seen the Accused confronting the neighbours and

she confirmed that one Peiris came to stop the fight and later the Accused wore

Page 8 of 17

this Peiriss shirt. The defence suggested that when she was questioned, she could

not remember as she was not in her proper senses on that day.

She further states that while the deceased was inside the house, there was a

quarrel between the Accused and the neighbours. According to her, the deceased

had come out of the house when she went in search of her granddaughter. Further,

it was suggested that the deceased had a knife in his hand during the incident

which was also denied by the PW1. She had not seen her son coming out of the

house. She further stated that she did not know what she said in the Police

statement. She further stated that she was not stable as she witnessed her sons

murder. She had further stated, the reason for the Accused to change the shirt

was that the shirt contained blood stains. It was further suggested by the Counsel

for the defence that the deceased and PW1 threw acid at the Accused where she

questioned who. She had flatly denied claiming it to be a false allegation.

As stated by PW2, Palamura Hewayalage Ariyawathie, the Accused is her

brothers son. The incident happened on 28.09.2010 around 9.30 to 10 AM at her

houseyard. According to this witness, on the day in question when the Accused

was going on the road, she overheard the PW1 telling him not to attack her son

and the incident started with that. The Accused slowly came towards the house

and later left the place saying he would return. He came back after 10 minutes

with a knife, a Sickle and an iron rod. In the meantime, the deceased and his

mother were inside her house. When the Accused tried to enter the house with the

said weapons, the PW2 and some others prevented him thinking that there would

be a fight between the Accused and the deceased. While she was trying to prevent

the Accused, the Accused hit the PW2 near her right eye with the iron rod and

attacked her left shoulder with the Sickle. Then the PW2 went inside the house

and later saw the Accused and the deceased fighting near the water tank and later

she saw the deceased running away from the scene holding his stomach which was

bleeding. Later the deceased was taken to the hospital and PW2 had come to know

that he had passed away. After the incident, the PW2 had seen the Accused

changing his shirt.

Page 9 of 17

During the cross-examination, it was suggested by the Counsel for the defence

that, the incident started when everyone in PW2s house poured acid on the

Accused which was denied by PW2. Further, it was proposed that there was no

need for the Accused to start a fight. Further, she confirmed that she and some

other people prevented the Accused from entering the house. She flatly denied that

the deceased had a weapon in his hand. She further confirmed that the Accused

had an iron rod and a sickle which were brought by him from his house. They

suggested that the Accused picked the Sickle from there to prevent him from

attacking. Further, according to PW2, she did not see the Accused stabbing the

deceased.

According to the testimony of PW3, Maliyange Nilanga Ruwan Kumara, on the

day in question, he was working at the rubber plantation and the incident

happened at around 9.30 to 10 AM at PW2s house. He saw that when the Accused

came to the main road, PW1, the deceaseds mother had shouted at him and PW3

had seen the Accused saying something but had not heard what was said.

According to PW3, when this incident happened, the deceased was inside the

house. Then the Accused went towards his house. After around 15 minutes, the

Accused returned with a Sickle and an iron rod in hand. According to PW3, the

iron rod was 3 feet long and the sickle was with a wooden handle. And he had

identified both the weapons. According to PW3, the Accused had not used the

usual path but a footpath that goes to his house when coming back to the scene.

Then PW3 heard a noise and he rushed to the scene, the PW2s house. When he

reached there, he saw the Accused with the said weapons while the PW1, PW2,

the Accused, and the deceased were there. Both PW1 and PW2 were holding the

deceased and the deceased scolded the Accused in filthy language. When PW3 and

Ruwan went near the Accused to prevent the fight, he threatened to attack them

if they came near him.

On page 145 of the brief;

.

Page 10 of 17

At that time, the PW3 had an injury after the Sickle hit his forehead. During this

time, both the deceased and his mother, PW1 were there at the scene. Then, the

PW2 was hit by the Accused using the Sickle and later the PW3 had taken PW2

inside the house. He has seen the Accused hitting PW1. When he returned, he saw

both the Accused and the deceased standing together, and then the Accused

stabbed the deceaseds abdomen with a knife after which both of them fell on the

ground. According to him, he saw the Accused pulling a knife and pressing it to

the deceaseds abdomen.

On page 148 of the brief;

: ?

: , .

. .

: ?

: . . .

:

?

: . .

; ?

: .

: ,

?

: .

: ?

:

Page 11 of 17

The PW3 has seen the incident from a very close proximity. According to him,

while this incident happened, PW1 and PW2 were there.

After that, he has seen the deceased going away from the scene. Then PW3 held

the deceased and went towards the main road. The PW3 had shouted for help.

Later, the deceased was taken to the hospital.

During the cross-examination, according to PW3, the incident was started by PW1,

the deceaseds mother by scolding the Accused who was returning from home.

However, the deceased was not there.

On Page 155 of the brief;

: , ,

?

: .

; ?

: .

: , , ?

: .

:

?

: .

: ?

: .

The Defence Counsel suggested that the PW1 along with others attacked the

Accused and poured acid on the Accused which was denied by the PW3. He further

affirmed that he saw the Accused stabbing the deceased.

Page 12 of 17

All three witnesses who were the eyewitnesses of the incident are consistent with

their testimonies and have been at the scene when the Accused stabbed the

deceased and they have denied that no one had thrown acid at the Accused.

Further, according to evidence, after the heated argument with the PW1, the

Accused had gone to his house and brought the weapons. It should be noted that

the deceased was not there when this incident happened. We are mindful that

PW1 is the mother of the deceased and the deceaseds wife eloped with the Accused

and was living together with him at the time of the incident. The fact remains that

on the previous day, the PW1, the deceased, and his father had gone to the

Accuseds house and told the deceaseds wife not to come to the deceaseds house.

Further, we observe that the deceased did not have any weapons at the time of the

incident. When we consider all three testimonies of the witnesses together, the

evidence is consistent. This Court sees no reason to reject their evidence.

According to PW6, Madurasinghe Hadunpathirannahelage Wijewardhana, the

Judicial Medical Officer who performed the post-mortem of the deceased on

30.09.2010 had stated that he observed 9 injuries on the deceased's body and the

death was due to the stabs on the abdomen. Two stabs were in the chest and the

upper part of the abdomen. As stated by him, the injuries would cause death in

ordinary circumstances. From the wounds, he had identified that the injuries were

caused by a thin sharp blade kind of weapon. According to him, the injuries had

caused internal bleeding to the organs of the deceased. When the prosecution

showed the weapon marked P1, he stated that the injuries would have been

incurred by such a weapon.

According to the testimony of PW6, we can come to a conclusion that there was

intention as injuries No. 1 and 3 would cause death to the deceased. Further, we

observe that both injuries were deep penetration of 9 cm to the abdomen and the

weapon used by the Accused was a thin weapon with a sharp edge. This indicates

that the Accused acted in a cruel manner.

Page 13 of 17

The evidence of the three witnesses indicates that there had been a lapse of time

between the quarrel with PW1 and the stabbing. After PW1 scolded the Accused

where the deceased was not there, the Accused had come back to the scene with a

weapon. This shows that there was premeditation.

This Court can come to the conclusion from the wounds and the place where the

stab injuries were caused that this is not a result of negligence or self-defence. A

strong presumption arises that the injuries caused were intended to cause the

death. The inference could be drawn that the Accuseds intention was to cause

death to the deceased.

The main defence taken by the Counsel for the Defence was that the incident took

place as a result of a sudden fight. They have taken the defence that PW1 and the

deceased had thrown acid at the Accused. The Accused gave evidence from the

witness box which is as follows.

According to the Accused, while he was passing by the deceaseds house, the PW1

grabbed him by the shirt and dragged him to the deceaseds uncles house. Further,

he admitted that he eloped with the deceaseds wife and stayed at a different

house.

According to him, while he was sitting on the , the PW1, PW2, and her

husband namely Weerasinghe had scolded the Accused and he had listened to

them quietly. Then the said PW2s husband had thrown the hot tea which he had

been having towards the Accused which burnt his face. This was not suggested to

the prosecution witnesses when they were cross-examined. Then, the Accused

tried to hit the said husband but the relatives of the deceased who were there had

hit the Accused. Then the PW1 had come towards the Accused saying

and had bit the left side of the Accuseds chest. This was also not suggested

to the PW1. When the Accused tried to hit the PW1, the said Weerasinghe had

come with a mamoty to hit him. Thereafter, the Accused took a long sickle which

was there and waved it. It broke then after hitting the wall. Again, the said

Page 14 of 17

Weerasinghe had tried to hit the Accused with the mamoty and then the Accused

had taken an iron rod and when he hit the mamoty with the iron rod, it had been

thrown. Then the two people called Ruwan held the Accused and some others had

also joined them and then the deceased had come with a black jug in hand. Then

he had poured what was inside the said jug on the Accused which burnt his head

and the back. Then the Accused had tried to hold the deceased and the deceased

had taken a knife from the said Weerasinghe and tried to stab the Accused. Then

both had struggled and at that time the Accused had held the deceaseds hand and

then stabbed the deceased. This Court notes that the above said facts were not

suggested to the prosecution witnesses.

Thereafter, both of them had fallen to the floor. Then when the Accused got up,

the deceased was taken to the hospital. Since his shirt was torn, the Accused had

taken a shirt from an uncle who was there. Then he had gone to the rented house

where he stayed and told the wife of the deceased as to what happened. Then she

suggested going to her house in Ampara and when they were on the way, they

were arrested by the Siyambalanduwa Police for not being able to produce their

identity. Thereafter, he was produced before the Court and remanded in the

Monaragala Prison.

We observe that the defence has not suggested anything to the prosecution

witnesses about a person called Weerasinghe or that the deceased tried to stab the

Accused.

During the cross-examination, the Counsel for the Prosecution suggested that the

story about throwing acid was a total lie which was denied by the Accused, and

that he had not produced any medical reports regarding such burns. Further, it

was suggested that the Accused stabbed the deceased intentionally which was

denied by the Accused.

The above said evidence of the Accused was rejected by the Learned High Court

Judge giving reasons for such rejection.

Page 15 of 17

On page 247 of the brief;

""

9

. ,

. 9

9 ,

.

. . 1, . 2 . 3

, 9 (

) .

,

.

.

.

.

formic acid/ acetic acid

.

.

294 2 (

)

.

Page 16 of 17

I hold that the Learned High Court Judge has correctly rejected the self-defence

pleaded by the Counsel for the Accused on the evidence placed before him.

Further, there is no evidence for us to consider Exception 4 to Section 294 of the

Penal Code, the plea of sudden fight as pleaded by the Counsel for the Defence

before this Court.

We are also mindful that the deceased was not present when the heated argument

between the PW1 and the Accused took place.

Our Courts have considered that to qualify under Exception 4 to Section 294 of the

Penal Code, the Accused has to establish that the incident was committed without

premeditation in a sudden fight in the heat of an argument.

C. Ananda Grero, Culpable Homicide, Proof and Defences, 1988 at page 69:

Gour in the Penal Law of India states: "Pre-meditation may be established

by direct or positive Evidence or by circumstantial evidence. Evidence of

pre-meditation can be furnished by former grudges or previous threats and

expressions of ill-feelings; by acts of preparation to kill, such as procuring a

deadly weapon or selecting a dangerous weapon in preference to one less

dangerous, and by the manner in which the killing was committed. For

example, repeated shots, blows or other acts of violence are sufficient

evidence of meditation."

In the instant case, the following evidence was revealed regarding premeditation.

1. On the day before the incident, the deceased, PW1, and his father had gone

to the Accuseds place regarding the deceaseds wife eloping with the

Accused.

2. After the heated argument with the PW1, the Accused went to his house

and came back after 15 minutes. Before leaving, the Accused has said that

.

3. The deceased was not there when the argument happened.

Page 17 of 17

4. Bringing the knife, a sickle and an iron rod by the Accused.

5. Inflicting two deep stab injuries on the deceased which caused the death

using the said weapon.

On the other hand, there was no evidence to show that the Accused sustained burn

injuries which were caused by acid. Further, the Accused had tried to abscond

from the scene. We observe that, if he had been wounded by such acid, he would

have gone to the hospital and a prudent man would produce the medical reports

of such wounds before this Court. According to him, the deceased had tried to

attack him and in defence, he had stabbed the deceased.

This Court is also mindful that as substantiated by the evidence, the deceased was

unarmed when the Accused stabbed him. The defence has therefore failed to prove

the elements of a sudden fight in order to avail of the exception.

Considering all the facts and the reasoning above, we see no reason to interfere

with the judgment of the Learned High Court Judge delivered on 30.11.2022.

We further hold that the prosecution has established beyond reasonable doubt

that the Accused is guilty of the murder of the deceased.

In this context, we affirm the conviction and the sentence imposed upon the

Accused.

Appeal dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Amal Ranaraja, J.

I AGREE

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL