CA BAIL 111-2022

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for

bail in terms of Section 4 of the

Amended Act No.41 of 2022 to the

Poisons, Opium and Dangerous

Drugs Act No.17 of 1929.

Court of Appeal Bail Application The Officer-in-Charge

No.CA Bail/0111/22 Police Station

Kadawatha.

COMPLAINANT

MC Mahara Ranawaka Liyanage Udayangani

Case No. B 1964/20 Pushpakumari

55/01, Ranmuthugala,

Kadawatha.

SUSPECT

AND NOW BETWEEN

Bopiti Kankanamalage Ruchini

Krishanthi

55/01, Ranmuthugala,

Kadawatha.

PETITIONER

Vs

CA BAIL 111-2022

2 | P a g e

1. The Officer-in Charge,

Police Station,

Kadawatha.

2. The Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo-12.

RESPONDENTS

Ranawaka Liyanage Udayangani

Pushpakumari

(Presently at Welikada Prison)

SUSPECT

BEFORE : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

P. Kumararatnam, J.

COUNSEL : Gayan Perera for the Petitioner.

Jayalakshi De Silva, SC for the

Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 15/05/2023.

DECIDED ON : 20/06/2023.

*****************************

CA BAIL 111-2022

3 | P a g e

ORDER

P.Kumararatnam,J.

The Petitioner filing this Application has invoked the jurisdiction of this

Court to grant bail to her mother who is the Suspect in this case upon

suitable condition as this Court considers appropriate.

The Suspect was arrested on 09.06.2020 by the officers attached to the

Gampaha Police Station. For further investigation she was handed over

to the Kadawatha Police Station. She was produced before the

Magistrate of Mahara in the case bearing No. B/1964/20 and was

placed under a detention order from 09/06/2020 to 16/06/2020.

On 09.06.2020, upon receiving information from a suspect who was

arrested for the possession of a T56 automatic gun, the suspect was

arrested at her residence by officers attached to Gampaha Police

Station and recovered a parcel from an almirah used by the Suspect.

The parcel contained some substances which reacted for Heroin

(Diacetylmorphine). The substance weighed about 441.473 grams.

The Suspect was produced and facts were reported to the Mahara

Magistrate under Section 54A (1) (a) and (c) and of the Poisons, Opium

and Dangerous Drugs Ordinance as amended by the Act No.13 of 1984.

The production had been sent to the Government Analyst Department

on 13/07/2020. After analysis, the Government Analyst had forwarded

the report to Mahara Magistrate Court on 26/11/2020. According to

the Government Analyst, 41.8 grams of pure Heroin (Diacetylmorphine)

had been detected from the substance sent for the analysis.

According to the Petitioner, the Suspects brother was killed while she

was on overseas employment. The Suspect arrived Sri Lanka on the day

of the funeral of her brother. On suspicion, the wife of the Suspects

CA BAIL 111-2022

4 | P a g e

deceased brother was arrested in connection with her brothers murder

and the wife of the deceased brother was killed when she was released

on bail. For the death of her sister-in-law, she too was arrested and

produced as a suspect. According to the Petitioner her aunts relations

had conspired and trapped the Suspect into this case due to the enmity

existing over her aunts death.

The Petitioner has pleaded following exceptional circumstances in

support of her Revision Application.

1. The Learned High Court Judge had failed to consider that the

Suspect had been incarcerated more than 30 months.

2. The Suspect was introduced to this case maliciously and this

allegation against the Suspect is a false allegation.

3. As all the witnesses are official witnesses (Police Officers) the

witnesses cannot be interfered with.

4. The Learned High Court Judge had failed to consider that it

would take a long time to serve an indictment.

5. The Suspect should be given fullest opportunity to fight for her

case as the presumption of innocence operates in favour of the

Suspect.

6. The Suspect has no previous convictions.

7. The Suspect has no propensity towards this nature of the offence.

8. The Suspect is a married woman at the age of 43, a mother of two

children and sole breadwinner of the family.

The Learned State Counsel submitted that the delay is not an

exceptional circumstance to be considered to enlarge the suspect on

bail. Further, the time spent for preparing the indictment does not

constitute an exceptional circumstance. According to the State, all

steps has been taken to send out indictment against the Suspect once

the investigation notes are received by the Hon. Attorney General.

CA BAIL 111-2022

5 | P a g e

The suspect is in remand almost three years. According to Government

Analyst Report the pure quantity of Heroin detected is 41.8 grams.

Exceptional circumstances are not defined in the statute. Hence, what

is exceptional circumstances must be considered on its own facts and

circumstances on a case-by-case basis.

In Ramu Thamodarampillai v. The Attorney General [2004] 3 SLR

180 the court held that:

the decision must in each case depend on its own peculiar facts and

circumstances.

In CA(PHC)APN 107/2018 decided on 19.03.2019 the court held that

remanding for a period of one year and five months without being

served with the in indictment was considered inter alia in releasing the

suspect on bail. According to the Petitioner, at present her family is

going through untold hardship without proper income and care.

The Section 83 of the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs Act

which was amended by Act No. 41 of 2022 states:

83. (1) Subject to the provisions of sections 84, 85 and subsection (2) of

this section, a person suspected or accused of an offence under

sections 54A and 54B of this Ordinance, shall not be released on bail

by the High Court except in exceptional circumstances.

(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 84 and 85, a person

suspected or accused of an offence under subsection (1) of section 54A

and section 54B-

(a) of which the pure quantity of the dangerous drug, trafficked,

imported, exported, or possessed is ten grammes or above in terms

CA BAIL 111-2022

6 | P a g e

of the report issued by the Government Analyst under section 77A;

and

(b) which is punishable with death or life imprisonment, shall not

be released on bail except by the Court of Appeal in exceptional

circumstances.

shall not be released on bail except by the Court of Appeal in

exceptional circumstances.

In this case the pure quantity of Heroin detected in the production by

the Government Analyst is 41.8 grams. Hence, this court has

jurisdiction to consider granting of bail as per the new amendment.

The Counsel for the Petitioner urged this Court to consider that

detaining a suspect without any legal action for an extended period of

time amounts to a violation of his fundamental rights which can be

considered as an exceptional ground.

The Learned State Counsel has submitted that the investigation dossier

has not been received so far from the Police Narcotics Bureau.

The Government Analyst Report pertaining to this case has been

received by the Magistrate Court of Mahara on 26.11.2020. Although

more than two and half years have passed since the receipt of the

Government Analyst Report by the Court, the investigation agency has

failed to submit the relevant investigation dossier to Hon. Attorney

General to consider charges against the Suspect.

Due to inordinate delay in submitting the investigation notes pertaining

to this case to Hon. Attorney General, justice has been denied to the

Suspect. The legal maxim portrait that justice delayed is justice denied.

Although all the steps are important in criminal cases, sending

investigation notes to prosecuting authority is more important among

others. Hence, in a case of this nature or in all cases where the

investigation is over the prosecuting authority should use their power in

the interest of public, to get down all necessary information to decide

CA BAIL 111-2022

7 | P a g e

whether a prima facie case could be made out against a suspect who

has been in remand for a considerable period of time. Further, I

consider it is appropriate to call for explanation from the law

enforcement agencies for unreasonable delay in forwarding

investigation notes to the prosecuting authority. Otherwise, the people

will lose trust on the system.

In Nasher v. Director of Public Prosecution [2020] VSCA 144 the

court held that:

a combination of delay, onerous custodial conditions, and the

relative weakness of the prosecution case may, when considered

with all relevant circumstances, compel the conclusion that

exceptional circumstances have been established. [Emphasis added]

The right to trial without undue delay is found in numerous

international and regional human rights instruments; for example, the

International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Article 14(3)(c), the

American Convention on Human Rights (Article 8(1), the African

Charter on Human and Peoples Rights (Article 7(1)(d), and the

European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and

Fundamental Freedoms (Article 6(1).

When a person is kept in remand without filing charges for a

considerable period of time, he or she should be released on bail

pending indictment. Otherwise, this will lead not only to prison

overcrowding but also violates his or her fundamental rights which

have been guaranteed under the Constitution.

Hence, I consider the delay tittle shorter of three years in remand falls

into the category of excessive and oppressive delay considering the

circumstances of this case. Hence, considering all the circumstances of

this case, the suspect has very good exceptional circumstances to

CA BAIL 111-2022

8 | P a g e

consider this application in his favour. Further, remanding a suspect

without filing any charge will prejudice his rights and his family as well.

Offences under Section 54A(a) and 54A(c) of the Poisons Opium and

Dangerous Drugs Ordinance as amended by the Act No.13 of 1984 is no

doubt serious offences but seriousness of the offence alone cannot form

a ground to refuse bail. In considering these matters, the court must

bear in mind the presumption of innocence.

Further, bail should never be withheld as punishment. Granting of bail

is primarily at the discretion of the Courts. The discretion should be

exercised with due care and caution taking into account the facts and

circumstances of each case.

Considering all these factors into account, especially the pure quantity

of Heroin detected and the circumstances of the case, I consider this an

appropriate case to grant bail to the suspect. Hence, I order the suspect

be granted bail with following strict conditions.

1. Cash bail of Rs.100,000/=.

2. To provide 02 sureties. They must sign a bond of two million

each.

3. The suspect and the sureties must reside in the address given

until conclusion of her case.

4. Not to approach any prosecution witnesses directly or indirectly

or to interfere with.

5. To surrender her passport if any, to court and not to apply for a

travel document. The Controller of the Immigration and

Emigration is informed of the travel ban on the suspect.

6. To report to the Kadawatha Police Station on the last Sunday of

every month between 9am to 1pm.

7. Any breach of these conditions is likely to result in the

cancellation of her bail.

CA BAIL 111-2022

9 | P a g e

The Bail Application is allowed and the Learned Magistrate of Mahara is

hereby directed to enlarge the suspect on bail on the above bail

conditions.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send a copy of this order to the

Magistrate Court of Mahara and Officer-in-Charge of the Police Station

Kadawatha.

The Application is allowed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

SAMPATH B. ABAYAKOON, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL