CA/HCC/0046/2020

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal Case No. Desakara Mudiyanselage Dissanayake

CA/HCC/ 0046/2020 alias Gamini alias Podde

High Court of Ratnapura

Case No. HCR/235/2017

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

P.Kumararatnam,J.

COUNSEL : Sanjaya Senevirathne for the Appellant.

Jayalakshi De Silva, SSC for the

Respondent.

CA/HCC/0046/2020

2 | P a g e

ARGUED ON : 15/02/2024

DECIDED ON : 20/06/2024

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Appellant was indicted by the Attorney General under

Section 365 B (2) (b) of the Penal Code as amended by Act No. 22 of 1995 for

committing the offence of Grave Sexual Abuse on Kankanam Thotapalle

Palihawadana Ralalage Prarthana Sithumini on 03/03/2009.

The trial commenced on 07/01/2019. After leading all necessary witnesses

and marking productions, the prosecution had closed the case. The learned

High Court Judge had called for the defence and the Appellant had made

statement from the dock, called his brother as a defence witness, and closed

his case.

The learned High Court Judge after considering the evidence presented by

both parties before him, convicted the Appellant as charged, and sentenced

the Appellant to 14 years of rigorous imprisonment and imposed a fine of

Rs.25000/- subject to a default sentence of 06 months simple imprisonment.

In addition, a compensation of Rs.200000/- was ordered with a default

sentence of 01-year rigorous imprisonment.

During the argument the Appellant was connected via Zoom platform from

prison.

CA/HCC/0046/2020

3 | P a g e

The Facts of this case albeit briefly are as follows.

According to PW1 - the victim of this case, she had been about 07 years old

when she faced this bitter ordeal. When she gave evidence, she was 16 years

old and was schooling. The victim was staying at her house under the

guardianship her mother as her farther was employed in Colombo.

On the day of the incident, when she was playing with another girl, the

Appellant had called the victim, shown a childs picture in his mobile and

had taken the victim to nearby abandoned house. He made her lie on the

floor, removed her undergarment, positioned his genitalia between her legs

near her vagina, and committed severe sexual abuse against her.

Although she resisted, she could not escape from the captivity of the

Appellant. At that time the Appellant had close her mouth preventing cry for

help. After committing the sexual act, the Appellant had left the place leaving

the child. She had felt pain around her vagina as a result. Immediately after

the incident she had informed the incident to her mother and her mother

informed the same to her father over the phone. Her father had assaulted

the Appellant with pole and lodged a complaint in the police on 04.03.2009

on the very next day of the incident. The prosecutrix had given evidence after

about 10 years of the incident.

PW2, Karunatilake, her father and PW3 Nilanthi her mother also gave

evidence.

The JMO who had examined the victim had opined that the examination

findings of genital area exclude rape. But he had not excluded sexual abuse.

After the closure of the prosecutions case, the defence was called, and the

Appellant had given statement from the dock, called his brother as a defence

witness and closed his case.

CA/HCC/0046/2020

4 | P a g e

The following Grounds of Appeal were raised on behalf of the Appellant:

1. Creditworthiness and trustworthiness of the prosecution witnesses are

questionable

2. The evidence of the victim has not been corroborated with other

evidence.

3. Contradictions, omissions, and inconsistencies on the evidence of

medical officer is not considered by the Learned High Court Judge.

4. The prosecution has failed to prove the case beyond reasonable

doubts.

In a case of this nature, the testimonial trustworthiness and credibility of

PW1, mainly the probability should be assessed with utmost care and

caution by the trial judge. The learned Trial Judge must satisfy and accept

the evidence of a child witness after assessing her competence and credibility

as a witness. Hence, before analysing the grounds of appeal advanced in this

case, I consider it of utmost importance that the following authorities from

other jurisdictions on the topic be appraised.

It was recognized in England as early as 1778 that children could be

competent witnesses in criminal trials.

In R v. Brasier168 Eng. Rep.202 [1779] the court held:

.that an infant, though underage of seven years, may be sworn in

a criminal prosecution, provided such infant appears, on strict

examination by the Court, to possess a sufficient knowledge of the

nature and consequences of an oath for there is no precise or fixed

rule as to the time within which infants are excluded from giving

evidence; but their admissibility depends upon the sense and reason

they entertain of the danger and impiety of falsehood, which is to be

collected from their answers to questions propounded to them by the

Court; but if they are found incompetent to take oath, their testimony

cannot be received ..

CA/HCC/0046/2020

5 | P a g e

In Ratansinh Dalsukhbhai Nayak v. State of Gujarat [2004] 1 SCC 64 the

court held that:

The decision on the question whether the child witness has sufficient

intelligence primarily rests with the trial Judge who notices his manners,

his apparent possession or lack of intelligence, and said Judge may

resort to any examination which will tend to disclose his capacity and

intelligence as well as his understanding of the obligation of an oath.

The decision of the trial court may, however, be disturbed by the higher

Court if from what is preserved in the records, it is clear his conclusion

was erroneous. This precaution is necessary because child witnesses

are amenable to tutoring and often live in a world of make beliefs.

Though it is an established principle that child witnesses are dangerous

witnesses as they are pliable and liable to be influenced easily, shaked

and moulded, but it is also an accepted norm that if after careful scrutiny

of their evidence the Court comes to the conclusion that there is an

impress of truth in it, there is no obstacle in the way of accepting the

evidence of a child witness.

In Ranjeet Kumar Ram v. State of Bihar [2015] SCC Online SC 500 the

court held that:

Evidence of the child witness and its credibility would depend upon the

circumstances of each case. Only precaution which the court has to bear

in mind while assessing the evidence of a child witness is that the

witness must be a reliable one.

CA/HCC/0046/2020

6 | P a g e

In R v. Baker EWCA Crim 4 [2010] Lord Chief Justice (England and Wales

of Court of Appeal) held that:

(At para 40) .. We emphasise that in our collective experience the age

of a witness is not determinative on his or her ability to give truthful and

accurate evidence. Like adults some children will provide truthful and

accurate testimony, and some will not. However, children are not

miniature adults, but children, and to be treated and judged for what

they are, not what they will, in years ahead, grow to be. Therefore,

although due allowance must be made in the trial process for the fact

that they are children with, for example, a shorter attention span than

most adults, none of the characteristic of childhood, and none of the

special measures which apply to the evidence of children carry with

them the implicit stigma that children should be deemed in advance to

be somehow less reliable than adults. The purpose of the trial process

is to identify evidence which is reliable and that which is not, whether

it comes from an adult or a child. If competent, as defined by the

statutory criteria, in the context of credibility in the forensic process, the

child witness starts off on the basis of equality with every other witness.

In trial by jury, his or her credibility is to be assessed by the jury, taking

into account every specific personal characteristic which may bear on

the issue of credibility, along with the rest of the available evidence.

In R v. B. (G),1990 CanLII 7308 (SCC); [1990] 2 S.C.R. 30, at pp.54-55

the Court held that:

...it seems to me that he was simply suggesting that the judiciary

should take a common-sense approach when dealing with the

testimony of young children and not impose the same exacting

standard on them as it does on adults. However, this is not to say

that the courts should not carefully assess the credibility of child

CA/HCC/0046/2020

7 | P a g e

witnesses and I do not read his reasons as suggesting that the

standard of proof must be lowered when dealing with children as

the appellants submit. Rather, he was expressing concern that a

flaw, such as a contradiction, in a child's testimony should not be

given the same effect as a similar flaw in the testimony of an adult. I

think his concern is well founded and his comments entirely

appropriate. While children may not be able to recount precise

details and communicate the when and where of an event with

exactitude, this does not mean that they have misconceived what

happened to them and who did it. In recent years we have adopted

a much more benign attitude to children's evidence, lessening the

strict standards of oath taking and corroboration, and I believe that

this is a desirable development. The credibility of every witness

who testifies before the courts must, of course, be carefully assessed

but the standard of the "reasonable adult" is not necessarily

appropriate in assessing the credibility of young children.

E.R.S.R Coomaraswamy in his Law of Evidence Volume 2 Book 2 at page

658 has stated referring to child witness;

There is no requirement in English law, that the sworn evidence of a

child witness needs to be corroborated as a matter of law. But the jury

should be warned, not to look for corroboration, but of the risks involved

in acting on the sole evidence of young girls and boys, though they may

do so if convinced of the truth of such evidence.This requirement is

based on the susceptibility of children to the influence of others and to

the surrender to their imaginations.

At page 659 it states, As regards the sworn testimony of children, there

is no requirement as in England to warn of the risk involved in acting on

CA/HCC/0046/2020

8 | P a g e

their sole testimony, though it may desirable to issue such a warning,

though the failure to do so will generally not affect the conviction.

Barry Nurcombe, M.D., F.R.A.C.P. in his article The Child as Witnesses:

Competency and Credibility states:

Before the trial, the child is expected to recount the details of the

alleged offense, again and again, to strangers. Repeated court

appearance may be required. In court, the child will eventually be

confronted by the accused who is exercising his or her constitutional

rights. In contrast to the accused, the child has no advocate. His or

her testimony is open to direct challenge on the grounds of

incompetence, confabulation, or fabrication. These considerations

deter victims from reporting offenses, lead to false restrictions, and

erode the apparent credibility of honest witnesses.

Considering the above cited judicial decisions and the writings, as the

credibility of the evidence of a child witness would predominantly depend on

the circumstances of each case, it is the duty of the Learned Trial Judge to

assess and decide on the evidence given by the child witness.

As the grounds of appeal raised are interconnected, all grounds will be

considered cumulatively hereinafter.

The Counsel for the Appellant contend that the victim child had no memory

about the incident when she came to give evidence on 07.01.2019. Even

when she was questioned, she remained silent without giving answers. As

such the Learned High Court Judge had adjourned the trial for another day.

The Counsel further argued that the victim gave evidence on 05.02.2019

after she was couched by her parents. Denying this proposition, in the re-

examination the victim clarified that she was frightened on the first day of

the trial. But she determined to give evidence on the next day.

CA/HCC/0046/2020

9 | P a g e

Although the Counsel for the Appellant contended that the victim had given

contradictory evidence, the defence was not able to mark a single

contradiction on her evidence. Although the defence highlighted three

omissions on evidence, considering that she was 7 years of age at the time

of incident and gave evidence after 10 years in court, the Learned High Court

Judge had very correctly disregarded the same considering the dictum

expressed in several cases that a witness is not expected to give evidence

with a photographic memory and with mathematical accuracy.

The Learned Deputy Solicitor General rightly submitted that the omissions

highlighted are not forceful enough to shake the credibility of the victim or

the core issues of the case against the Appellant.

The Learned High Court Judge after a careful consideration of the evidence

of the victim stated that he did not observe any exaggeration in the testimony

of the victim.

It is undisputed that the victim informed her mother, PW3, about what had

happened to her. PW3 then communicated this to her husband, PW2, who

was working in Colombo. The next day, PW2 returned home, sought out the

appellant, and assaulted him. Afterward, PW2 went to the Balangoda Police

Station with his daughter and PW3 to file a complaint about the incident.

Next, the Counsel for the Appellant contended that the evidence of the victim

was not corroborated with the evidence given by PW2 and PW3.

In her testimony, PW3 stated unequivocally that, as a mother, she took all

the necessary actions required of her.

Although the Learned Counsel made an attempt to show that PW2 gave

contradictory evidence with regard to his arrival to his house after receiving

information about the incident from PW3. PW5, Sgt 21325 Samaraweera

confirmed that the first complaint was lodged by PW2 on 04.03.2009, which

was the very next day of the incident. Further, in the dock statement, the

Appellant had admitted that he was assaulted by PW2 on 04.03.2009 which

CA/HCC/0046/2020

10 | P a g e

was admitted by PW2 in his evidence. Further, the defence witness brother

of the Appellant too confirmed that his brother was assaulted by the

Appellant on 04.03.2009. Hence, it was proved that PW2 was present in his

village on the very next day of the incident.

Corroboration is not the sine-quo-non for a conviction in a rape case. In the

Indian setting, refusal to act on the testimony of a victim of sexual assault

in the absence of corroboration as a rule, is adding insult to injury. Viewing

the evidence of the girl or the women who complains of rape or sexual

molestation with the aid of spectacles fitted with lenses tinged with doubt,

disbelief, or suspicion, is to justify the charge of male chauvinism in a male

dominated society. [287 F. 288 C-D] Rameshwar v. The State of

Rajasthan, [1952] S.C.R. 377 @ 386 followed.

Likewise, in this case too, the victims evidence, event though it does not

require corroboration, it is very well corroborated on the material points of

the evidence of PW2 and PW3. The Learned High Court considered this

aspect very clearly in his well-written judgment and not caused any prejudice

to the Appellant.

The Learned Counsel based on his argument of the medical evidence,

contended that omissions and inconsistencies in the short history given by

the patient escaped the proper assessment of the Learned High Court Judge.

The admissibility of the recorded history in the Medico-Legal Report as

evidence in criminal trials has been discussed in several decided cases.

In Gamini Dolawatte V. Attorney General [1988] 1 Sri. L. R 221 held that:

While a Medico-Legal Report is admissible in evidence under Section

414(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, hearsay evidence by way

of the case history embodied in such a report is not admissible as such

history is information is not ascertained by the Doctor from his own

examination of the injured.

CA/HCC/0046/2020

11 | P a g e

In Bhargavan v.State of Kerala AIR 2004 SC 1058 (Supreme Court of

India)

At para 20: So far as non-disclosure of names to the doctor, same is

really of no consequence. As rightly noted by the Courts below, his

primary duty is to treat the patient and not find out by whom the injury

was caused.

Although the victim had not revealed to the doctor about the sexual abuse

committed on her in her history, the doctor had not excluded the alleged

sexual abuse involving the genital area.

The Learned High Court Judge, while accepting the Medico-Legal Report and

Medico-Legal Examination Form marked as P1 and P2 respectively, stated in

the judgement that even though there are certain mistakes made in the

report, such errors can be called as practical errors, which can be

disregarded.

As the finding of the doctor is immensely consistent with the evidence given

by the victim in court, there is no justification for undervaluing the victims

testimony in this case.

Finally, the Counsel for the Appellant submits that the prosecution had not

proven their case beyond reasonable doubt.

In this case, the creditworthiness of the evidence given by the victim did not

suffer at any stage of the trial. No contradictions were highlighted in her

evidence. Three minor omissions were highlighted are not capable of

attacking the core of the case. The learned High Court Judge had considered

the evidence given by PW1 with caution and care and correctly held that her

evidence is convincing and cogent and sufficient on its own to prove the case

against the Appellant.

The victims evidence is further supported by the evidence given by her father

P2 and her mother PW3.

CA/HCC/0046/2020

12 | P a g e

Hence, the argument put forward by the Learned Counsel under the grounds

of appeal cannot be accepted. Further, as stated above, in this case the

prosecution had adduced all necessary witnesses to prove their case.

In sexual offence cases, corroboration is not a sine qua non to secure a

conviction. As long as the victims evidence does not suffer from ambiguity

or infirmity in a manner which affects the root of the case, there is no bar for

the court to act and rely on the said evidence to decide the case.

Considering the evidence led in this case and guided by the judgements

mentioned above, I conclude that this is not an appropriate case in which

the judgement delivered by the learned High Court Judge of Ratnapura on

22/05/2020 against the Appellant can be interfered upon. I therefore,

dismiss the appeal.

Considering all the circumstances of the case, we order the sentence be

effective from the date judgment, i.e.; on 22/05/2020.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgement to the High

Court of Ratnapura along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

SAMPATH B. ABAYAKOON, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL