==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/ 0246/2018

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made

under Section 331 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of

1979 read with Article 138 of the

Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Court of Appeal Case No. Wijesinghe Arachchige Jayasena

CA/HCC/ 246/2018

High Court of Colombo

Case No. HC/ 7524/2014 Accused-Appellant

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

Complainant-Respondent

BEFORE ; P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

COUNSEL : Reienzie Arsecularatne, PC with

Chamindri Arsecularatne, and Dilini de

Silva for the Appellant.

Wasantha Perera, DSG for the Respondent.

CA/HCC/ 0246/2018

2 | P a g e

ARGUED ON : 03/02/2026

DECIDED ON : 23/03/2026

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter after referred to as the

Appellant) was indicted by the Attorney General under Sections 54(A) (b) and

54(A) (d) of the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs Ordinance as amended

by Act No. 13 of 1984 for Trafficking and Possession respectively of 37.76

grams of Heroin on 10th April 2013 in the High Court of Colombo.

After trial, the Appellant was found guilty on both counts, and the Learned

High Court Judge of Colombo has imposed death sentence on both counts

on 28.11.2018.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the Appellant

has given consent to argue this matter in his absence. During the argument

he was connected via the Zoom platform from prison.

CA/HCC/ 0246/2018

3 | P a g e

On behalf of the Appellant the following Grounds of Appeal have been

raised:

1. The Learned High Court Judge failed to consider the

improbabilities/weaknesses of the prosecution’s case in favour of the

Appellant.

2. The learned High Court Judge has failed to consider that the

prosecution has not proved the chain of production.

3. The learned High Court Judge has concluded that the evidence of PW1

and PW2 has established the case before considering the defence case.

4. Dock statement of the Appellant viewed against the prosecution case.

5. The learned High Court Judge considered the extraneous matters over

the prosecution case.

6. The judgement was delayed for 2 years in violation of Section 203 of

the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of 1979.

Background of the case.

PW1, PS 18307 Nandasena was attached to the Modara Police Station in the

year 2013. On the day of the incident, he with PW2, PC 49466 Nimalsiri had

been assigned duties at a checkpoint located on the left side of the bridge

that connects Mattakkuliya and Elakanda, known as the Kadirana Bridge.

When he left the police station at 13.45 hours, he had taken his pocket note

book and a travel hand book along with him. Routinely, the said checkpoint

was manned by two police officers and two officers attached to the Special

Task Force. While on duty, he had noticed a person who was walking on the

opposite side of the road in a suspicious manner. Having brought the said

person to the checkpoint, a body search was done by PW1 and PW2, where

a small parcel was found concealed inside his underwear. As the parcel

contained some substance that was suspected to be Heroin, PW1 had

arrested him, handcuffed and brought him to the Modara Police Station in a

CA/HCC/ 0246/2018

4 | P a g e

three-wheeler. He had kept the parcel inside his trouser pocket until it was

taken to the Police Narcotics Bureau, Colombo 01 for weighing.

On the first day, when he gave evidence, the court had noticed that he was

not stable as he had a difficulty in giving evidence, and the case was

postponed for 09.06.2016.

When the evidence resumed, PW1 had said that he commenced making notes

prior to coming to the police station. The production weighed about 83.420

grams. After weighing it was sealed and handed over to the Reserve police

officer under PR No. 171/2013.

PW2 was called to corroborate the evidence given by PW1. After leading all

the police officers who handled the production when they were on reserve

duty, the prosecution had closed their case. The defence was called, and the

Appellant had made a dock statement and closed his case. The Appellant

admitted the arrest but denied the recovery of any illegal substance from his

possession on that date.

In every criminal case, the burden is on the prosecution to prove the case

beyond reasonable doubt against the accused person. In a case of this

nature, the prosecution will not only need to prove the case beyond

reasonable doubt but must also ensure, with cogent evidence that the inward

journey of the production has not been disturbed at all-material points.

In the case of Mohamed Nimnaz V. Attorney General CA/95/94 held:

“A criminal case has to be proved beyond reasonable doubt. Although we

take serious view in regard to offences relation to drugs, we are of the view

that the prosecutor should not be given a second chance to fill the gaps of

badly handled prosecutions where the identity of the good analysis for

examination has to be proved beyond reasonable doubt. A prosecutor

should take pains to ensure that the chain of events pertaining to the

productions that had been taken charge from the Appellant from the time

CA/HCC/ 0246/2018

5 | P a g e

it was taken into custody to the time it reaches the Government Analyst

and comes back to the court should be established”.

Further in the case of Mahasarukkalige Chandani v. Attorney General

CA/213/2009 decided on 30/06/2016, His Lordship Justice Malalgoda

held that:

“As observed above, that Government Analyst Report which is the principal

evidence in a drug offence entirely depends on the inward journey of the

production chain and therefore, there is a duty cast on the prosecution to

establish the inward journey of the production with reliable evidence”.

In the first ground of Appeal, the Appellant contended that the Learned High

Court Judge failed to consider the improbabilities/weaknesses of the case of

prosecution case in favour of the Appellant.

In the assessment of the reliability of police records, the “test of probability”

has to be applied. This is so, especially in situations where notes have been

altered or there are discrepancies regarding the timeline of an arrest. It is of

utmost importance to protect the rights of the accused as “uninformed

legitimization of trivialities would make a mockery of administration of

criminal justice”.

In CA/HCC/0039/2023 [Decided on 29.04.2025] this Court already held that:

“…Police officers’ notes are frequently regarded as critical forms of

evidence, particularly in criminal proceedings. Even minor alterations to

these records can raise concerns regarding the credibility of the

documentation and the intent. As a result, most law enforcement

institutions implement stringent policies that regulate how and when

officers may amend their notes. In absence of any plausible explanation,

an alteration, if highlighted, definitely affects the integrity of the

investigation conducted by the police. Therefore, disregarding the

CA/HCC/ 0246/2018

6 | P a g e

highlighted time alteration has caused great prejudice to the

Appellant…”

“…The burden of proof is usually on the person who brings a claim in a

dispute. It is often associated with the Latin maxim semper necessitas

probandi incumbit ei qui agit, a translation of which is: “the necessity of

proof always lies with the person who lays charges.” The learned

defence Counsel brought to the notice of this Court that the officers

engaged in the raid were later taken into custody on allegation of

carrying Heroin. Hence, the allegation that there is a possibility that they

had only produced a small quantity of Heroin and had concealed the

rest. Law enforcement institutions are entrusted with a diverse set of

rules and regulations that must be followed in order to maintain a high

degree of integrity within police departments and to prevent oversights.

Where this does not function well, law enforcement officers may become

prone to careless behaviour and unlawful activities (Handbook on Police

Accountability, Oversight and Integrity- Criminal Justice Handbook

Series)”

Bradford Smith, Law Commission, WWW.smithlitigation.com 2014

states that:

“Good police note taking is important for two reasons. First, it invariably

bolsters the credibility of the police officer giving evidence. Second, it

promotes the proper administration of criminal justice by facilitating the

proof of facts”.

In the case of Manu Sharma Manu Sharma v. State (NCT of Delhi), (2010)

6 SCC 1 it was held:

“What is the significance of requiring an investigating officer/officer in

charge of a police station to maintain a diary? The purpose and the object

seems to be quite clear that there should be fairness in investigation,

CA/HCC/ 0246/2018

7 | P a g e

transparency and a record should be maintained to ensure a proper

investigation.”

PW1 in his evidence stated that he left the Modara Police Station at 13.45

hours to go to the roadblock which is situated 2000 meters away from the

police station. But he had come to the roadblock at 15.00 hours. The Learned

President’s Counsel contested that the time consumed, 01 hour and 15

minutes to reach the roadblock is not probable considering the distance in

question.

According to PW1, he had not taken handcuffs when he went to the

roadblock. But in his evidence, he had stated that he brought the Appellant

to the Modara Police Station after handcuffing him.

Further, the Learned President’s Counsel contended that PW1, although he

claimed to have taken his pocket notebook and made notes in that book, he

had made his notes in a half sheet and had made lots of corrections which

had not been countersigned by the witness. Further, the notes made on the

half sheet does not contain the time on which he entered his notes. He had

failed to enter his notes in the police Information Book. Although, PW1 stated

that he had started making notes at the roadblock itself, contradicting this

position later, he had said that he made his notes at 20.10 hours at the

police station.

According to PW1, he had left the Police Narcotics Bureau at 18.00 hours

after weighing the production and had reached the Modara Police Station at

20.10 hours. Considering the distance between the Modara Police Station

and the Police Narcotics Bureau, the learned President’s Counsel argued that

the time consumed to reach the Modara Police Station is unusual. This

further aggravated that PW1 had failed to enter the Odometer meter reading

of the vehicle in his notes.

The learned High Court Judge too had noticed discrepancies in the notes

made by PW1. Further, the learned High Court had failed to mention that

CA/HCC/ 0246/2018

8 | P a g e

PW1 had not made his notes in the Information Book, but in a blank sheet.

The relevant portion is re-produced below:

Page 487 of the brief.

isÿ jQ ish,a, oïje,l mqrela fuka ms<sfj,g igyka lr ;nkakg me'id' 01 ks<Odrshdg

bvla fkd,enqKq nj fmkS hk kuq;a ú;a;slref.a ika;lfha ;sî fyfrdhska fidhd .ekSu

wi;H isoaêhla fkdjk nj idlaIsj,g ijkafok wjia:dfõ oS ud yg ye.=Ks' tfukau flá

igyfka iy oS¾> igyfka iq¨ wvqmdvqlï ksrSlaIKh lsrSug yels jQj;a we;a; jYfhkau

tajd fuu jeg,Su fmd,sish úiska f.d;k ,o kvqjl iajNdjhlg m;a fkdlrk nj

meyeos,sju fmkS hhs'

In the second ground of appeal, the Learned President’s Counsel for the

Appellant argued that the prosecution has failed to establish the chain of

production beyond reasonable doubt in this case.

In Perera V. Attorney General [1998] 1 Sri.L.R 378 it was held:

“the most important journey is the inward journey because the final

analyst report will depend on that”.

In Witharana Doli Nona v.The Republic of Sri Lanka CA/19/99 His

Lordship Justice Abrew remarked thus;

“It is a recognized principle that in drug related cases the prosecution

must prove the chain relating to the inward journey. The purpose of this

principle is to establish that the productions have not been tampered

with. Prosecution must prove that the productions taken from the

accused Appellant was examined by the Government Analyst”

Therefore, proving the chain of custody is a very important task for the

prosecution. If investigating officers do not do their duty properly, the chain

of custody can be successfully challenged at the trial. This is because the

prosecution always relies on the evidence gathered by police officers in cases

of this nature. The law enforcement merely finding drugs on an accused does

not mean the accused can be convicted.

CA/HCC/ 0246/2018

9 | P a g e

Under this ground, the President’s Counsel strenuously argued that this is

a fabricated case. Although, PW1 had handed over the Appellant to the

reserve police officer at the Modara Police Station, PW1 had not taken any

endeavour either to seal the production temporarily or to hand over the same

to the reserve. Instead, he had kept the production in his custody until it

was weighed at the Police Narcotics Bureau. I consider sealing or handing it

over to the reserve to be very important, as the Appellant had taken the

position that it was an introduction.

After the weighing of the production, it was handed over to the reserve police

officer under PR No. 171/13. The prosecution had called PW5, PW6, PW7,

PW8, PW9, PW10, PW11, PW12, and PW13 to prove the production chain.

According to PW1, after returning from the Police Narcotics Bureau, he had

handed over to PW6 Lakmal under PR No. 171/13 on 10.04.2013 at 20.35

hours. On the same day he had handed over all productions including PR

171/13 to PW7 at 20.45 hours. Thereafter, on 11.04.2013, he had again

assumed reserve at 5.22 hours from PW7. On the same day at 17.25 hours,

he had handed over the reserve duty to PW7. Again on 12.04.2013 at 6.50

hours although he took back the reserve duty, he had not taken over

PR.No.171/13. The relevant portion of the proceedings are re-produced

below:

Pages 321-323 of the brief.

m% ( ? 8.45 Ndr .;a; ldf.ao iukafka Ndr .;af;a @

W ( Tõ'

m% ( iukaf.a igyka fmkajkak Ndr .;a; @ keye fkao @

W ( keye @

oeka fõ,dj ( fmrjre 11.40 hs'

CA/HCC/ 0246/2018

10 | P a g e

Under cross examination of PW7 Saman, it was confirmed that when he took

over the reserve duty at 20.45 hours on 10.04.2013 there was no reference

PR No.171/13 and when he handed over the reserve duty on 11.04.2013 to

PW8 Dissanayake, he had not made a note in respect of PR No.171/13. The

relevant portion of the proceeding are re-produced below:

Pages 334-335 of the brief.

m% ( osidkdhlg ;uka oSmq igyk flda @

W ( uu igyklska Ndr oSula isÿ lr,d keye'

m% ( biafi,a,d yeu wjia:djlu Ndr fokfldg ;uka ug fmkakqjd Ndr fok ks<Odrshd

Ndr .;a ks<Odrshd nvq ,ehsia;=j ,sõjg miafia igykla odkjd wyj,dg uu Ndr

ÿkakd lsh,d' Tnf.ka uu m%Yak l,du Tn lsõjd meh 1/2 lg jvd l,a .sfha

fudlo wrh Ndr wr.kak meh 1/2 la ú;r hkjd ta wkqj ;uhs uf.a igyka meh

1/2 la mrlal= jqfka lsh,d Tn lsõjd fkao @

W ( tfyuhs'

m% ( oeka ta wdldrhg meh 1/2 la yrs" mehla yrs" folla yrs mrlal= fj,d ;uqka odmq

igykla keye fkao Ndr ÿkakd lsh,d @

W ( tfyuhs'

m% ( osidkdhl Ndr .;a; fj,dj lSho @

W ( 20.30 g'

m% ( tfia osidkdhlg ;uka Ndr ÿkakd lsh,d ;ukaf.a igykla keye fkao @

W ( keye'

The above re-produced portions of the evidence of PW6 and PW7 clearly

shows a missing link after the Heroin was handed over to the reserve under

PR No.171/13 by PW1.

CA/HCC/ 0246/2018

11 | P a g e

Although, the Learned High Court Judge in judgment at pages 491-492

discussed the production chain at length, he had failed to address the

missing link in the evidence of PW6 and PW7.

The chain of custody is the most important part of evidence in a drug related

trial. The prosecution has the paramount duty to prove that it is the same

production recovered at the time of detection. The main reason is to establish

that the evidence, which is related to the alleged crime, was collected from

the accused and was in its original condition, and that it was not tampered

with or planted deceitfully to make someone else guilty. Handling of

production evidence is a lengthy process, but the court necessitates it for the

adjudication of the case. This proves the integrity of production which had

been recovered, until it reaches the Government Analyst Department.

The defence can challenge the chain of custody evidence by questioning

whether the evidence presented at trial is the same evidence as what was

collected from an accused person. If there is any discrepancy in the chain of

custody of a production and the prosecution is unable to prove who had the

custody of production until it reached the analyst, the chain of custody

stands broken.

The Appellant takes up the position that the amount of Heroin which had

been mentioned in the indictment was not recovered from him. But he admits

that he was arrested on the date mentioned in the indictment.

Considering the evidence highlighted above of PW6, and PW7, there is a

missing link from the very inception of handing over the production to the

reserve police officer, which had not been explained by the prosecution.

Without a proper chain of custody, drugs do not come in as evidence. The

discrepancies highlighted above cannot be ignored lightly, as the entire case

rests on cogent and unambiguous evidence pertaining to the chain of

production.

CA/HCC/ 0246/2018

12 | P a g e

Although there is a missing link in the production from the very inception of

the investigation, the Learned High Court Judge in his judgment stated that

the production chain was not broken until it reached the Government

Analyst Department. The relevant portion is re-produced below:

Page 490 of the brief.

ta wkqj kvqNdKav oduh wvqmdvqjla fkdue;sj iïmQ¾K lr we;s nj ud ksrSlaIKh lrñ'

In this case, the prosecution has failed to establish the custody of the

production chain beyond reasonable doubt. As this is a substantial fact, this

ground alone is sufficient to vitiate the conviction in this case.

Even though this case is sent for re-trial, the prosecution will not be able to

rectify the breaking of the chain of custody.

In Asrappulige Neel Rohan Gomes v. The Attorney General

CA/276/2007 decided on 03/04/2013, the court held that:

“…. But the court cannot use its discretion in the interest of justice in

this case. In the event this case is sent back for fresh trial, the court is

encouraging slackness on the part of the investigation and the

prosecution. The court is not only allowing the prosecution to fill gaps in

the prosecution case it is also encouraging the investigators to do now

and what he should have done at the time of the investigation. It is a

bad precedent, and unfair by the accused”.

In the case of Rathnayake v Attorney General (2004) 2 Sri L.R. 193 it was

held:

“Ordering a re-trial against the accused-appellant who had been under the

strain of a criminal charge poised over his head for such a long period of

time -1 5 years - would be resulting in causing irremediably detrimental

consequences and disorganisation to his family”

CA/HCC/ 0246/2018

13 | P a g e

As the appeal grounds 3,4 and 5 are interconnected, all will be considered

together hereinafter.

Considering the above-mentioned appeal grounds, the Learned High Court

Judge had considered both the prosecution and the defence evidence to come

to his conclusion. Further, the Learned High Court had considered the dock

evidence in his judgment. Hence, I conclude that these three grounds have

no merit.

However, the Learned High Court Judge had misdirected himself on the facts

of the case by holding that there was a war in the country on 10.04.2013,

without any such evidence. Further, it was held that there was a bomb scare

with a fear of terrorist attacks, and considering such a background, that

such shortcomings of the prosecution’s case in relating to the maintenance

of the investigation books/notes can be overlooked.

In the final ground of appeal, the learned President’s Counsel contended that

the judgment was pronounced after two years of the closure of the case. No

reasons were adduced by the learned High Court Judge.

Section 203 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 in Sri

Lanka, as amended in 2024, requires a High Court judge to record a verdict

of acquittal or conviction within ten days of concluding a trial. If convicted,

the judge passes the sentence, taking into account the time already spent in

custody.

Whether the provision referred to above would be mandatory or not was

considered in the case of

Anura Shantha V. Attorney General 1999 (1) Sri LR 299 and held that:

"the provisions of section 203 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act are

directory and not mandatory. This is a procedural objection that has

been imposed upon court and its non-compliance would not affect the

individual rights unless such non-compliance occasions a failure of

justice."

CA/HCC/ 0246/2018

14 | P a g e

A delay in judgment would not automatically result in the convicting being

void. Rather, it must be ascertained whether the delay caused a failure of

justice or whether it prejudiced the substantial rights of the accused.

In this situation, a two-year delay is significant. If it can be demonstrated

that the judge had failed to properly evaluate the evidence presented due to

lapse of memory over that time period, or if it can be shown that the verdict

was not actually prepared within such stipulated time, it can be treated as a

serious illegality and a violation of the right to a fair trial.

Considering the 1st ,2nd and 3rd appeal grounds and due to the aforesaid

reasons, I set aside the conviction and the sentence dated 28/11/2018

imposed on the Appellant by the Learned High Court Judge of Colombo.

Therefore, I acquit him from both charges.

Accordingly, the appeal is allowed.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgment to the High

Court of Colombo along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL