==== BLOCKS ==== 

WRT/0146/22

Page 1 of 18

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Orders in

the nature of Writs of Certiorari and

Mandamus under and in terms of Article 140

of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

I. M. D. Illangasinghe alias I. M. Dhammika,

Temple Road, Thibbatuwewa,

Kekirawa.

PETITIONER

C.A. Case No. WRT/0146/22

Vs.

1. Hon. Chief Justice Jayantha Jayasuriya, PC,

Chairman,

2. Hon. Justice Buwaneka Aluwihare, PC,

Member,

3. Hon. Justice Sisira de Abrew,

Former Member,

4. Hon. Justice L.T.B. Dehideniya,

Member,

5. H. Sanjeewa Somarathna,

Secretary,

1st to 5th Respondents of;

The Judicial Service Commission,

Judicial Service Commission Secretariat,

No. 573, Hulftsdorp, Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

WRT/0146/22

Page 2 of 18

BEFORE : K. M. G. H. KULATUNGA, J.

COUNSEL : Faisz Musthapha, PC, with Bishran Iqbal, instructed by

Sanjeewa Kaluarachchi, for the Petitioner.

Kanishka De Silva DSG, for the Respondents.

ARGUED ON : 28.08.2025

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS ON : 18.09.2025 and 16.10.2025

DECIDED ON : 03.12.2025

JUDGEMENT

K. M. G. H. KULATUNGA, J.

1. The petitioner was a Judicial Officer who was terminated upon an

inquiry, for disciplinary reasons, by the Judicial Service Commission

(“JSC”). The said dismissal and termination were communicated to the

petitioner by P-13 dated 10.07.2020. The petitioner, by this application

filed on 08.04.2022, is seeking a writ of certiorari to quash P-13, by

prayer (c). The petitioner has also, by prayer (d), sought a writ of

mandamus, but at the commencement of the argument, Mr. Faisz

Musthapha, P.C., informed Court that the petitioner is not pursuing

with the relief as prayed for by prayer (d) and would limit this

application to the relief prayed for by prayer (d).

Facts.

2. The petitioner was served with two separate charge sheets, and two

inquiries were conducted against her. The charge sheet P-8(b) is in

respect of certain alleged acts of misconduct based on the disposal of

confiscated sand in a manner contrary to the applicable Circular issued

by the JSC. The second charge sheet, marked P-9(a), with 4 charges,

was in respect of an incident in which the petitioner is alleged to have

WRT/0146/22

Page 3 of 18

ordered the continuous remand of a suspect, notwithstanding the

receipt of a psychiatrist’s report, which was called for. All these

allegations pertain to the period the petitioner served as the Magistrate

of the Magistrate’s Court of Minuwangoda. According to the petitioner,

these two inquiries were conducted by two separate inquiring officers,

and the respective reports have been submitted to the JSC upon the

inquiry according to the relevant rules of procedure. The said inquiry

reports are not annexed nor made available during the course of the

hearing of this application. However, according to P-13, it is apparent

that the petitioner has been found guilty in respect of 14 charges,

preferred by the charge sheet dated 16.05.2018, under JSC Reference

No. JB/10/I/05/J10. Upon considering the said report, the JSC has

also found the petitioner guilty of the said charges. Then, the petitioner

has also been found guilty of charges 1 and 2 but not guilty in respect

of counts 3 and 4 of the charges preferred by the charge sheet dated

31.05.2017 under JSC Reference No. JB/10/I/05/J10. The JSC has,

upon considering the said report, found the petitioner guilty of the said

counts 1 and 2. Thereafter, the JSC, upon considering especially count

no. 3 of the charge sheet dated 31.05.2017, in view of the said acts of

misconduct, determined that the petitioner is not a fit and proper

person to hold judicial office, and accordingly decided to dismiss and

terminate the services of the petitioner.

3. The petitioner had been a Judicial Officer since 2010, for 10 years, until

the termination on 10.07.2020. At the time of her interdiction in 2016,

she was the Magistrate of the Polgahawela Magistrate’s Court. All 14

charges in P-8(b) were in relation to the handing over of forfeited sand

to the Urban Council of Minuwangoda, in violation of JSC Circular 288,

dated 24.09.2004. It is submitted that the second charge sheet was in

respect of remanding a suspect named Jayawardena, in Case No.

B/658/16, notwithstanding the receipt of a favourable psychiatrist’s

report.

WRT/0146/22

Page 4 of 18

The arguments advanced.

4. The relevant findings, as well as the JSC determination and decision to

terminate the petitioner, are based on the two reports. The said reports

have not been made available to this Court. The learned President’s

Counsel submitted that the charges based on the disposal of sand and

the remand of a suspect are described on the face of the two charge

sheets, and on the said charges, the disciplinary sanction was imposed

by P-13. Hence, P-13 is a speaking order, and the petitioner could rely

on the matters stated therein and requires no other material or reports,

so to say. In support of this submission, the petitioner relied on the

decision of Manickam vs. The Permanent Secretary, Ministry of

Defence and External Affairs 62 NLR 204, at page 208.

5. Then, it was argued that the acts on which the disciplinary action is

based are judicial decisions, and even if they be erroneous, the remedy

is not disciplinary but appellate. As such judicial decisions cannot be

the subject matter of discipline, the taking into consideration of such

decisions amounts to taking into account irrelevant considerations, and

such decision is thus illegal.

6. Finally, it was argued that the termination of services is grossly

excessive and disproportionate to the alleged offences. In these

circumstances, the petitioner submits that these are errors on the face

of the record, which can be determined without the reports of the

inquiring officers.

7. As opposed to this, the learned Deputy Solicitor General appearing for

the respondents raised the following grounds of objections:

a. laches;

b. failure to name necessary parties;

c. that the petition is filed in violation of the provisions of Article

111K of the Constitution; and

d. that relief sought by the petitioner is futile.

WRT/0146/22

Page 5 of 18

Laches.

8. It is common ground that this application was filed approximately two

years after the receipt of P-13. The petitioner puts forward certain

reasons to explain the delay. They are that the said Order was made

during the height of the Covid-19 lockdown, and during that period and

also the period following thereafter (during 2020 and 2021), the country

was in lockdown and government offices were not functioning as usual.

Further, after the receipt of the letter of termination, the petitioner

made several attempts to obtain the said reports from the JSC, and

despite several requests, up until 19.04.2021, the JSC refused to issue

the said reports.

9. It is trite law that unexplained delay is reason for a Court to reject

granting of the discretionary relief of writs. In Bisomenike vs. C. R. de

Alwis (1982) 1 SLR 368, Sharvananda, J. (as His Lordship then was),

observed as follows:

“A Writ of Certiorari is issued at the discretion of the Court. It cannot be held to be a Writ of right or one issued as a matter of course. The exercise of this discretion by Court is governed by certain well-accepted principles. The Court is bound to issue it at the instance of a party aggrieved by the order of an inferior tribunal except in cases where he has disentitled himself to the discretionary relief by reason of his own conduct, submitting to jurisdiction, laches, undue delay or waiver. The proposition that the Application for Writ must be sought as soon as the injury is caused is merely an Application of the equitable doctrine that delay defeats equity and the longer the injured person sleeps over his rights without any reasonable excuse the chance of his success in Writ Application dwindles and the Court may reject a Writ Application on the ground of unexplained delay. An Application for a Writ of Certiorari should be filled within a reasonable time.”

In Jayaweera vs. Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Services

Ratnapura and Another (1996) 2 SLR 70, it was held as follows:

“A Petitioner who is seeking relief in an application for the issue of a Writ of Certiorari is not entitled to relief as a matter of course, as

WRT/0146/22

Page 6 of 18

a matter of right or as a matter of routine. Even if he is entitled to relief, still the Court has a discretion to deny him relief having regard to his conduct, delay, laches, waiver, submission to jurisdiction - are all valid impediments which stand against the grant of relief.”

10. The learned President’s Counsel submitted that as the delay is

explained and also as the impugned decision is demonstrably and

manifestly erroneous and without jurisdiction, delay would not defeat

the remedy by way of writ, as P-13 is a nullity. It has been held time and

again by this Court that delay by itself does not prevent the exercise of

the Court’s writ jurisdiction in judicial review. In Biso Menika vs. Cyril

de Alwis and Others [1982 (1) SLR 368], Sharvananda J., held as

follows:

“When the Court has examined the record and is satisfied the order complained of, is manifestly erroneous or without jurisdiction the Court would be loathed to allow the mischief of the order to continue and reject the application simply on the ground of delay, unless there are very extraordinary reasons to justify such rejection. Where the authority concerned has been acting altogether without basic jurisdiction, the Court may grant relief in spite of the delay unless the conduct of the party shows that he has approbated the usurpation of jurisdiction. In any such event, the explanation of the delay should be considered sympathetically.” 11. The above was followed and cited with approval in Paudgalika The

Kamhal Himiyange Sangamaya also known as The Private Tea

Factory Owners Association vs. H. D. Hemaratna, Tea

Commissioner and Others (SC/Appeal/47/2011, decided on

09.03.2015), where K. Sripavan, C.J., held,

“The Court may therefore in its discretion entertain an application in spite of the fact that a petitioner comes to Court late, especially where the order challenged is a nullity. The conduct of the petitioner cannot be branded as unreasonable to disentitle it to a Writ especially when the decisions contained in the letters marked P12 and P13 are ultra vires the powers of the Tea Commissioner.”

WRT/0146/22

Page 7 of 18

“There has undoubtedly been great delay in challenging the validity or legality of the said circulars. However, the rule of laches or delay is not a rigid rule which can be cast in a straightjacket formula, for there may be cases where despite delay and creation of third-party rights, the Court may still in the exercise of its discretion interfere and grant relief to the petitioner.”

12. As I see, P-13, the decision to terminate the services made upon the

consideration of two inquiry reports, may be voidable but is certainly not

a nullity. The JSC did have the authority and the power to determine

the sanction upon considering the said inquiry reports. The fact that the

disciplinary action was based on what the petitioner referred to as

judicial orders does not make the process or the finding a nullity. In

certain circumstances, a judicial order, though amenable to review or

appeal, can also be the subject matter of discipline. There is no absolute

legal or other bar preventing or prohibiting judicial decisions from being

the subject of discipline.

Are judicial orders amenable to discipline?

13. In the normal course of events, certainly, judicial decisions will be

amenable and can be corrected by appeal, review, or revision. However,

if a particular kind of erroneous decision is continued, it can be the

subject matter of discipline on the basis of egregious conduct. Further,

if the judicial decision is patently wrong and demonstrably made in

extreme ignorance or innocence of the basic law or legal provisions,

which will demonstrate a total lack of basic competence and knowledge,

that by itself will make such person unfit to hold judicial office due to

incompetence. Similarly, if a person holding judicial office is seen to have

made a decision or order contrary to an obvious or basic legal provision,

either he is innocent and ignorant of the law or he has acted dishonestly

and maliciously; in whichever event, such person becomes unfit to hold

judicial office. In these circumstances, though the order is a judicial

order, it may be the subject of discipline. Therefore, the mere fact that

WRT/0146/22

Page 8 of 18

the disciplinary action is based on a judicial order does not make such

inquiry or order illegal or ultra vires.

14. Mr. Mustapha submitted that these orders, if at all, are erroneous

orders which are amenable to the appellate jurisdiction of a higher

forum. It was his submission that such errors cannot be the basis or the

subject matter of a disciplinary inquiry. There is the view that where a

judge wrongly exercised his/her discretion and erred, such an act

cannot be the subject matter of misconduct. Dr. A. R. B. Amerasinghe,

in ‘Judicial Conduct, Ethics, and Responsibilities’, at page 69, refers to

the following dicta with approval:

“It is where the judge has wrongly exercised his/her discretion or was guilty of a mere error of law, there can be no question of misconduct.”

15. That being so, similarly, there is now the acceptance and development

of the concept of “egregious conduct”. This concept is now accepted in

the United States, where, in re Fuselier [837 So. 2d 1257 (La. 2003)],

the Supreme Court of Louisiana held that judicial misconduct can be

established by a pattern of repeated legal errors even if the errors are

not necessarily the same. The pattern in that case involved three distinct

types of legal errors: abuse of the contempt power, conducting

arraignments and accepting guilty pleas with no prosecutor present, and

establishing a worthless cheques programme that did not meet statutory

requirements. The court stated that the errors separately were not

egregious or made in bad faith but that together, they were part of the

same pattern or practice of failing to follow and apply the law. Even

though it noted there was no evidence that the judge had an improper

motive, the commission concluded that “even the most broad

assessment of respondent's failure to observe basic due process in

conducting the hearing causes us to conclude his conduct undermined

confidence in the integrity and impartiality of the judiciary.” The

commission also stated that “while the conduct was confined to a single

hearing in a single case,” it “was egregious and deserving of discipline.”

WRT/0146/22

Page 9 of 18

16. “Egregious” legal errors have been identified as a type of error that

justifies both disciplinary as well as appellate review. “Egregious” implies

something different than bad faith or a pattern of error, as those are

listed as separate grounds for departing from the mere legal error rule.

“Egregious” is a subjective term. The Supreme Court of Louisiana in the

above matter adopted egregious legal error as one of the exceptions to

its general rule that legal error is not sanctionable, and the court also

opined that even a single instance of serious legal error, particularly one

involving the denial to individuals of their basic or fundamental rights,

may amount to judicial misconduct [Judicial conduct and ethics, § 2.02

(3rd Ed., 1995)].

17. In a similar vein, Indian and Canadian authorities also recognise that

whilst an isolated judicial error may be corrected on appeal, a pattern of

persistent or repeated errors may attract and justify disciplinary

sanction on the basis of recklessness, bias, or incapacity. In Krishna

Prasad Verma vs. State of Bihar (AIR 2019 Supreme Court 4852), the

Supreme Court of India explained that although wrong orders by

themselves cannot form the basis of initiating disciplinary proceedings,

nevertheless “…in case there is a continuous flow of wrong or illegal

orders then the proper action would be to compulsorily retire the judicial

officer, in accordance with the Rules.” In Ramesh Chander Singh vs.

High Court Of Allahabad and Another (2007 AIR SCW 2251), the

Supreme Court of India, while acknowledging that a mere wrong exercise

of jurisdiction or mistake of law or wrong interpretation of law cannot be

the basis for initiating disciplinary proceedings, however held that:

“Of course, if the judicial officer conducted in a manner as would reflect on his reputation or integrity or good faith or there is [a] prima facie material to show recklessness or misconduct in discharge of his duties or he had acted in a manner to unduly favour a party or had passed an order actuated by corrupt motive, the High Court by virtue of its power under Article 235 of the Constitution may exercise its supervisory jurisdiction.”

WRT/0146/22

Page 10 of 18

This approach was also followed in the decision of Union of India vs.

K. K. Dhawan (1993 AIR 1478), where, at para 1.03, the Court held

that disciplinary proceedings are justified if –

“[T]he officer who exercises judicial or quasi-judicial powers acts negligently or recklessly or in order to confer undue favour on a person, is not acting as a judge.”

18. The Canadian Judicial Council has applied a similar threshold in

inquiries. In the Justice Robin Camp Inquiry, the Council concluded

that while individual misapplications of law could normally be corrected

on appeal, Justice Camp’s repeated statements and rulings in a

sexual-assault trial demonstrated a “profound lack of understanding of

the law” and held as follows:

“In this instance, the Judge’s misconduct was evidenced over a continued period during the trial. Some of the Judge’s most egregious comments were repeated in his reasons for decision, issued much later. The reasonable person’s confidence in the Judge’s ability to discharge the duties of office is seriously undermined. Considering all the circumstances of this case, we reject the notion that removal is a disproportionate sanction.”

(Canadian Judicial Council, Report to the Minister of Justice in

the Matter of Justice Robin Camp, 8 March 2017, para 50-51).

Likewise, in the Justice Paul Cosgrove Inquiry, the Council

emphasised that it was not a single erroneous ruling but a sustained

pattern of improper use of judicial powers that justified a

recommendation for removal, and –

“…constitute a failure in the due exercise of his office by abusing his powers as a judge.”

(Canadian Judicial Council, Report to the Minister of Justice in the

Matter of Justice Paul Cosgrove, 2009, para. 189).

Consideration of the merits.

19. Disciplinary action was taken against the petitioner upon two separate

inquiries and reports. The said inquiry reports have not been made

available to this Court; however, from the documents filed by both

WRT/0146/22

Page 11 of 18

parties, I am able to ascertain the nature of the allegations made. In the

first instance, 14 charges were preferred, as reflected in P-8(b). Charges

1–13 are in respect of 13 orders by which confiscated sand had been

handed over to the Minuwangoda Municipal Council. The allegations are

that the petitioner has caused the productions in certain cases being

sand, had been handed over to the Minuwangoda Municipal Council in

violation of the JSC Circular No. අධිස ේස ො /විවිධ/2010, dated

10.06.2010. The said Circular was produced by the respondent with

their objections marked X-2, which reads as follows:

“අධි රණයන් විසින් රොජ න්ත රන ලද වැලි ම්බන්ධසයන් පහත ඳහන් ඕනෑම ක්‍රියොමොර්ගයක් අනුගමනය ළ හැකි බව ඔබට දන්වන සමන් අධි රණ ස ේවො ස ොමිෂන් භොව මට නියම ර ඇත.

01. අධි රණ ස ේවො ස ොමිෂන් භො චක්‍රසේඛ අං 288 හි ඳහන් ආ ොරයට රොජය ඉංජිසන්රු ං ේථොවට භොරදීම. 02. සවන්සේසි කිරීම. සමහිදී අවම මිල ගණන් තීරණය කිරීම අදොල විනිශේචය ොරවරයො විසින් සිදු ල හැ .” 20. According to which, the Secretary of the JSC has informed the Judicial

Officers as to how they should dispose of confiscated sand. Two options

are provided: (1) it may be handed over to the State Engineering

Corporation; or (2) it may be auctioned by the respective judicial officer.

As opposed to this, the petitioner is alleged to have handed over the same

to the aforesaid Municipal Council. The petitioner admits making the

said Order. The position of the petitioner is that since her predecessor

had done so, she herself had followed the same procedure. The petitioner

admits that there may have been such a directive or a circular. However,

it was argued that the JSC cannot give or issue directives as to the

exercise of the judicial power. Alternatively, it was argued that this

circular was not an Order, but merely informing and intimating the two

options. What is relevant and important is that upon the conclusion of

certain trials and matters, the subject matter of such offence may be

confiscated. The quantities of sand in these 13 instances have been so

confiscated. The issue is the disposal of the said productions thereafter.

WRT/0146/22

Page 12 of 18

21. According to the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, a

Judicial Officer is empowered under Section 425 to hold production

inquiries upon the conclusion of the trial for the disposal of productions.

However, as in the present instance, the disposal of such productions

upon confiscation is not governed by the said provision. Once a

confiscation order is made, such property becomes the property of the

state, and the respective judge is required to sell it by public auction and

credit the proceeds to the State. This is the practice and function that

all Judges of the Courts of First Instance are required to attend to in the

course of their functions qua Judicial Officer. Until the confiscation of

such thing, the function is no doubt strictly judicial. Upon such

confiscation, the sale by auction of such thing and the depositing of the

proceeds to the State, are of an administrative nature. It is a

consequential act upon confiscation. Though it be administrative in

nature, such functions are required to be performed by the respective

Judicial Officer of such Court.

22. The duties of a judicial officer include judicial as well as administrative

functions. Dealing with confiscated property and the sale and crediting

of such proceeds thereof are some such administrative functions. It is

correct that the JSC may not have the authority to give directives to

judicial officers as to the exercise of judicial functions. The JSC consists

of the Chief Justice of the day and generally the two seniormost Judges

of the Supreme Court. However, when they function qua members of the

JSC, they perform a function of an administrative nature. In that

context, the submission of the learned President’s Counsel that the JSC

does not have the power to give directives as to the specific nature and

mode of making and performing judicial orders is correct. However, as

dealing with confiscated property, sale by auction and connected

matters are of an administrative nature, the JSC may issue directives.

To that extent, the instructions or advice given by the said circular are

lawful. In the normal course of events, judicial officers are required to

WRT/0146/22

Page 13 of 18

comply and carry out such instructions or directives, as judicial officers

come within the administrative and other controls of the JSC.

23. The petitioner has clearly admitted that she had acted in violation of

circular X-2. Her position is that she was not personally aware of X-2,

as well as Circular No. 288 (marked X-1). These Circulars have been in

operation since 2004 and 2010. She had been in service for almost 9 to

10 years. As observed above, the disposal of confiscated items is

somewhat of a routine function, and the petitioner claiming ignorance,

by itself, demonstrates a lackadaisical, nonchalant and cavalier attitude

in performing her duties. Sale and dealing with confiscated property is

an extremely important and serious function, even though it is

administrative. Such auction, sale, and matters connected with

confiscated property are required to be done under the direct

supervision of the relevant judicial officer. In any event, it is a plain and

obvious fact that once productions are confiscated, the property in goods

vests with the State, and proceeds should go to the State, unless there

be some specific arrangement of a legal basis made to enable the

handing over of such property so confiscated to any other agency of the

State. In the normal course of events, such arrangements may require

being made through the Secretary of the Ministry of Justice. In this

backdrop, what is apparent from the material placed before this Court

is that the petitioner has been absolutely ignorant of the serious

administrative function she was required to perform qua judicial officer.

The only explanation for so acting is her assertion that her predecessor

did so. To my mind, a responsible judicial officer should be mindful of

the basic principles in dealing with confiscated property. Even if the

predecessor did so, it is not justifiable to follow a practice which is not

lawful or not permitted and sanctioned.

24. This conduct of the petitioner clearly demonstrates the extreme

ignorance and innocence which makes such an officer incompetent to

hold judicial office, or that she had acted with a callous disregard to

WRT/0146/22

Page 14 of 18

basic principles and directives she was required to follow. This conduct

certainly brings the judicial office to disrepute, on one hand, and also

makes such individual totally unfit to hold such responsible office. This

had been repeated at least on 13 occasions. These directives given to so

handover the sand to the Municipal Council are not amenable to appeal

or revision as judicial orders, but, if at all, administrative orders

amenable to discipline.

25. The second disciplinary inquiry was in respect of remanding a person

for almost a month, from 22.06.2016 until 20.07.2016. The alleged

suspect had been produced before the petitioner for alleged drunken and

disorderly behaviour at a public place. Initially, a remand order has been

made, and on 22.06.2016, when the matter was mentioned, an Order

was made to call for a psychiatrist’s report. Once again, when this was

mentioned on 18.07.2016, a report was called for. Finally, on

20.07.2016, the said suspect had been enlarged on bail upon the receipt

of the said psychiatrist’s report. No doubt, these are all judicial acts and

orders.

26. Remanding of a person is one of the most serious acts, with serious

consequences to such person so remanded. As held time and again, a

judicial officer who makes an Order of remand on an application by the

Police, should not act as a mere rubber stamp and is required to

consciously consider the facts and make the order if necessary. This

suspect has been remanded, and the remand has been extended. In the

periodical reports filed, there has been no fresh material provided as

regards the progress of the investigation or as to a particular complaint.

In these circumstances, continuous remanding for a mere alleged

misbehaviour cannot be justified by any standard. The petitioner has

not called for a psychiatrist’s report at the outset, but it was only

subsequently that a report was called for. On the third occasion, the

petitioner claims such report was not available. The suspect has been

represented by a counsel. The petitioner has routinely remanded the

WRT/0146/22

Page 15 of 18

suspect. This conduct, certainly, causes grave prejudice and brings the

judiciary into disrepute, as it unjustly impacts upon the general public.

Considering the attitude of the petitioner, as evident from the previous

13 charges, and continuing to remand a person for merely acting in a

disorderly manner shows the extreme callous disregard and the failure

to appreciate the seriousness of the functions of a judicial officer.

27. The sum total of the orders made by the petitioner in respect of the

release of sand is that the petitioner has continuously released property

that was confiscated and forfeited to the State. It may be to a local

authority; however, once the property is so confiscated, the property in

goods becomes State property. The petitioner has claimed ignorance of

the circular which contains specific directions as to the manner of

dealing with such confiscated sand. By the arbitrary release of the sand,

the petitioner exhibited an alarming degree of ignorance as to the legal

effect and import of such confiscation. The continuous and repeated

orders so made confirm the degree of ignorance. This conduct will

undermine the confidence, integrity, and impartiality and bring

disrepute to the judiciary. This conduct is thus necessarily egregious

and most certainly deserves and warrants disciplinary action.

28. The charges based on remanding the suspect appear to be a series of

acts. Even with no credible report, information, or material that was

forthcoming from the Police, except the belief of the Police Officer, the

petitioner has continued to remand the suspect. When the psychiatric

report was called for, and if such report was not brought to the notice of

the petitioner, the judicial officer ought to have made a much more

diligent inquiry to ascertain if in fact such report had been received. In

fact, there are two reports in the record. The psychiatric report is dated

27.06.2016, which is a date preceding the date on which it was

mentioned in Court. It is found in the certified copy of the record. A

conscious inquiry would have certainly revealed its existence or the fact

that it was sent to the Magistrate’s Court by the psychiatrist. The

WRT/0146/22

Page 16 of 18

petitioner, without any such conscious act, has remanded the suspect

for 14 days once again, notwithstanding an application being made

seeking bail.

29. This conduct, even if it is considered a single instance, I would consider

it to be a serious legal error, which, in particular, has led to the denial

of the suspect’s basic fundamental rights of freedom. It is universally

accepted that conduct by a Judicial Officer, negligently or recklessly, or

with a total disregard and without being conscious of the onerous duty,

will certainly fall far short of such person acting as a judicial officer. This

conduct certainly attracts and warrants discipline.

Is the sanction disproportionate?

30. The petitioner also urged that the extreme and ultimate sanction of

termination of services and dismissal is disproportionate vis-à-vis the

crude allegations. Of course, in the context of employment and

discipline, termination and dismissal is the ultimate sanction. However,

in the context of the nature and function of a judicial officer, it cannot

be evaluated or considered in the same plane as any other service or

profession when it comes to issues of misconduct and discipline. This

was clearly articulated in R. C. Chandel vs. High Court of Madhya

Pradesh AIR 2012 Supreme Court 2962, where the Supreme Court of

India opined that the standard of conduct expected of a judge was much

higher than an ordinary man. R.M. Lodha, J., held that:

“Judicial service is not an ordinary government service and the Judges are not employees as such. Judges hold the public office; their function is one of the essential functions of the State. In discharge of their functions and duties, the Judges represent the State. The office that a Judge holds is an office of public trust. A Judge must be a person of impeccable integrity and unimpeachable independence. He must be honest to the core with high moral values. When a litigant enters the courtroom, he must feel secured that the Judge before whom his matter has come, would deliver justice impartially and uninfluenced by any consideration. The standard of conduct expected of a Judge is

WRT/0146/22

Page 17 of 18

much higher than an ordinary man. This is no excuse that since the standards in the society have fallen, the Judges who are drawn from the society cannot be expected to have high standards and ethical firmness required of a Judge. A Judge, like Caesar’s wife, must be above suspicion. The credibility of the judicial system is dependent upon the Judges who man it. For a democracy to thrive and rule of law to survive, justice system and the judicial process have to be strong and every Judge must discharge his judicial functions with integrity, impartiality and intellectual honesty.”

31. The efficacy of the judiciary primarily depends on the public confidence

in the judiciary and the judicial system. The conduct of the petitioner as

alleged will directly affect the public confidence, especially the

remanding and depriving a person of his liberty in gross violation of the

basic fundamental rights of such person. In this context, I once again

would refer to the Justice Robin Camp Inquiry, where it was held that,

when the conduct alleged leads to a loss of confidence in the system and

seriously undermines the judicial office, such officer who so conducts

deprives him/herself of the legitimacy to hold such office. Similarly, even

a single allegation involving the denial of an individual’s basic or

fundamental right is also such misconduct. In these circumstances, I

am of the view that it is the duty of the regulatory authority to remove

such persons from judicial office.

Conclusion.

32. In the above circumstances, I find that the petitioner is guilty of laches,

and upon considering this application on its merits, I also see no basis

in law or otherwise that warrants the interference with P-13.

Accordingly, I find that the petitioner is not entitled to the relief as

prayed for. As such, I find that the consideration of the objections (b),

(c), and (d) raised by the learned Deputy Solicitor General, and referred

to at paragraph 7 above is now not necessary.

WRT/0146/22

Page 18 of 18

33. Accordingly, the application is dismissed. However, I make no order as

to costs.

Application dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL