-IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

c.A. (Writ) Application No.33120B

In the matter of an Application for Orders in the nature of a Writ of Certiorari under and in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution.

1. Pilippu Arachchige Abeysekara,

Chariman,

"Mahasen Govi Sanvidhanaya",

Bambaragalayaya, Halmillawewa,

Pansiyagama.

2. Bogahagedara Kularatne,

Chairman,

"Vimukthi Govi Sanvidhanaya",

Walagambapura,

Makulpotha.

3. Manik Devage LesliJayasooriya,

Chairman,

"Samagi Govi Sanvidhanaya",

Irudeniyaya, Mahapitiya,

Polpithigama.

4. Walimuni Devage Illangaratne,

Chairman,

"Iruderuyaya Govi Sanvidhanaya",

lruderuyaya, Mahapitiya,

Polpithigama. s. Rathupuncha Devayalage Ajith Chaminda Kumara,

1

Chairman,

"Samagi Govi Sanvidhanaya",

Tholombu Ela, Pothuwila,

Polpithigama.

6. Hathurusinghe Devage Nimal J a yathissa,

Chairman,

"Madahapolayaya Eksath Govi Sanvidhanaya",

lrudeniyaya, Polpithigama.

PETITIONERS

-Vs-

1. Minister of Land and Land Development,

No. 1200/6, "Mihikatha Madura",

Land Secretariat,

Rajamalwatta Road, Battaramulla.

2. Han. Minister of Environment

and Natural Resources,

No.B2, Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

2A. Mr. Garnini Vijith Vijayamuni

Zoysa,

Minister of Wildlife Resources Conservation,

Ministry of Wildlife Resources Conservation,

Govijana Mandiraya,

No.BO/5, Rajamalwatta Avenue,

Battaramulla.

3. Secretary,

2

Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources,

No.B2, Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

3A. Mr. B.K.U.A. Wickremasinghe,

Secretary,

Ministry of Wildlife Resources Conservation,

Govijana Manruraya,

No.SO/S, Rajamalwatta Avenue,

Battaramulla.

4. Commissioner General,

Department of Fauna and Flora,

Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources,

No.S2, Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

4A. Mr. H.D. Ratnayake,

Director General,

Deparrment Conservation, of Wildlife

Ministry of Wildlife Resources Conservation,

No.SllA,Jayantrupura,

Battaramulla.

5. The Chief Minister,

Chief Ministers' Office,

Provincial Council (NWP),

Kurunegala.

6. The Secretary,

3

North Western Provincial Council Secretariat,

North Western province,

Kurunegala.

RESPONDENTS

BEFORE

COUNSEL

Decided on

A.H.M.D.Nawaz., I

The factual matrix

A.H.M.D. Nawaz,j.

Chula Bandara with Gayathri Kodagoda

for the Petitioners

Arjuna Obeyesekere Senior DSG

with Suranga Wimalasena SSC for the Respondents

30.07.2019

The Petitioners in this case seek a writ of Certiorari to quash the Gazette

(Extraordinary) notification no. 566/05 dated ll!07/1989 made under

section 2 of the Fauna and Flora Protection Ordinance issued by the 1"

Respondent's predecessor marked as 'P6'. The Petitioners are the

Chairman of the respective Govi Sanvidanayas of Bambaragalayaya,

Walagambapura, Mahapitiya, Irudeniya, Tholambuela, Pothuvila,

Madahapolayaya, which were established under lrudeniyaya Highland

Development project, situated in the Divisional Secretariat of Polpitigama

in the district of Kurunegala. The story is told in the petition before this

Court as to how, in the early years of 1970's, a few farmers had begun to

encroach into state lands in the area and started cultivating and

developing the said lands. Upon the said encroachment taking place, the

Provincial Council of North-Western province and other government

authorities took steps to provide the villages with such public utilities as

public roads, co-operative stores, maternity homes and primary schools.

These villages were also provided with electricity.

4

In 1992, while these development works were underway, the North

Western Provincial Council initiated a Highland Development project

called "Irudeniyaya Highland Development Project" or as "lrudeniyaya

farmers colonization project" to regularize the occupation of these

farmers namely, the villagers of the state land. The Provincial Council also

inaugurated the development project on 22/03/1994 and the Petitioners

plead in this application that they were made to understand that they

would be allocated with lands and permits under the Land Development

Ordinance. The Petitioners plead that accordingly a plan was made to

block out lands in the project area with a view to distributing it among

the farmers.

The Petitioners further state that since the process of regularization was

delayed, they had continuously made representations to the provincial

authorities to regularize their occupation on this land. No steps had been

taken to issue permits or any grant and the Petitioners state that in the

latter part of the year 2012, the Petitioners were made to understand that

the Department of Wildlife took steps to create an elephant corridor

across these lands so that the wild elephants could move through the

villages. The Petitioners further plead that when they made further

inquiries, they learnt that the Minister of Land, irrigation, and Mahaveli

Development acting under s.2(2) of the Fauna and Flora Protection

Ordinance by Gazette (Extraordinary) notification no. 566/05 dated

1lI07/1989 had declared the land described in the schedule to the Gazette

containing in extent approximately 21690 hectares as the "Kahalle-

Pallekale" sanctuary.

It has been submitted before this Court that the Minister of Lands,

Irrigation and Mahaweli Development prior to publishing this order in the

said Gazette failed to consult the North Western Provincial Council.

Accordingly it was argued that the said Gazette (Extraordinary) is

5

violative of the 13th Amendment to the Constitution and therefore it is null

and void, illegal and is of no force or avail. In the circumstances, the

Petitioners have sought a mandate in the nature of a Writ of Certiorari to

quash the Gazette (Extraordinary) notification bearing no. 566/05 and

datedlll07/1989-P6. Moreover it was the contention of the Petitioners

that the Declaration in the Gazette notification was not approved by

Parliament.

It has also been submitted that the legitimate expectation engendered in

them gives rise to their locus standi to secure this remedy.

Position of the Respondents

The learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General sought to counter the

arguments of the Petitioners on the basis that their contention is

untenable. The 2 grounds that he put forward were:

1. there was no requirement that an order under s.2(2) of the Fauna

and Flora Protection Ordinance be approved in Parliament at the

time the said order was made in 1989.

2. The 1st Respondent did not require the prior approval of the

provincial council to make an order under s.2(2) of the Fauna and

Flora Protection Ordinance.

The Respondents also raised 3 preliminary objections to the

maintainability of this application for Judicial Review:

1. There has been such an inordinate delay on the part of the

Petitioners in invoking the jurisdiction of this Court that they are

guilty of laches and on this ground alone the Petition must be

dismissed.

2. In attempting to explain the delay, the Petitioners have

misrepresented or suppressed material facts.

3. The application of the Petitioners is futile in that their grievances

will not be addressed through the grant of the relief prayed for 111

6

this application and therefore the Petitioners lack the locus standi to

maintain this application.

Let me deal with the preliminary objections raised on behali of the

Respondents.

Laches

I t is axiomatic that an unexplained delay will defeat the grant of a

discretionary remedy.

The following cases expound the defense of laches in Writ applications:

PresMent of Malalgodapitiya Co-operative Society v

Arbitrator of Co-operative Societies, Galle (1949) 51 NLR

167;

Dissanayake v Fernando (1968) 71 NLR 356;

Gunasekara v Weerakoon (1970) 73 NLR 262; and

Sarath HuJangamuwa v Siriwardena, Principal, Visaka

VidyaJaya (1986) 1 SLR 275.

If one looks at the order 'P6' under impugnment, this order had been

published in the Gazette (Extraordinary) as far back as July 1989. But this

application for Judicial Review has been filed only in 2013- almost 24 years

later.

This is an inordinate and substantial delay on the part of the Petitioners.

The Petitioners cannot be heard to argue that they were unaware of the

said notification and the document submitted by the Petitioners and the

Respondents show conclUSively that the Petitioners were aware of the

declaration of the area as a sanctuary and thus estoppel will operate

against them from denying the existence of the impugned order 'P6'.

a) The Extraordinary Gazette notification marked 'P6' and a

declaration of the area under consideration as a sanctuary was

common knowledge amongst persons living in that area.

7

b) Document marked 'PI', produced by the Petitioners. This is a copy

of the project report for the Irudeniyaya Highland Development

project attached by the Petitioners, which had been issued in 1994

at the time the project was inaugurated. In page 1 of 'PI', the fact

that the said area had been declared a sanctuary has been

specifically stated and there is an express reference to the fact that

the area is a sancruary. 'PI' is clearly a 1994 document as the

Petitioners themselves admit that the project was inaugurated in

1994 and that the Petitioners who were privy to this document had

knowledge that the "Kahalle- Pallekale" sancruary had been

declared. In addition to PI, documents marked P5, R9, and RIO all

establish that the Petitioners could not have been unaware of the

declaration of the area as a sancruary. Therefore, the objection raised

by the Respondents on the ground of laches has been rightly taken

and on this ground alone, this application should suffer the fate of a

dismissal in limine.

Suppressionl misrepresentation of material facts

This was another objection raised by the learned Senior Depury Solicitor

General. I t was contended that by claiming that the Petitioners were

unaware of the said notification until the latter part of 2012, the

Petitioners have sought to suppress and/or misrepresent material facts. If

it emerges that material facts have been suppressed, that ground alone is

sufficient to dispose of the application without having to go into an

adjudication of merits-See- Alphonso Appuhamy v Hettiarachchi (1973)

77 NLR 131, 135; Dahanayake v Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation Ltd

(2005) 1 SLR 67, 78-79; Namunukula Plantations v the Minister of

Lands and Others SC Appeal no. 46/2008

8

In Namunukula Plantations limited v. The Minister of Lands and

Others SC Appeal No 46/2008; decided on 13.03.2012, His Lordship

Saleem Marsoof J held as follows:

"If any party invoking the discretionary jllrisdiction of a court of law is found

wanting in the discharge of its duty to disclose all material facts, or is shown

to have attempted to pollute the pure stream ofjustice, the court not only

has the right, but a duty to deny relief to such person. It is

therefore my considered opinion that this court need not, and should not,

answer any of the questions on which special leave to appeal was granted, as the

letter dated 30'! November 2000 (A), which is reproduced in full in this

judgment, clearly demol1strates that the Appellant has been gUilty of deceptive

conduct, and has not only suppressed, but also misrepresented

material facts before the Court of Appeal as well as this Court. ... " (At page 9-

Italics added).

In the following cases laches was foremost in the dismissal of an application

for a writ of certiorari- Moosajees Ltd v Eksath Engineru Saha Samanya

Kamkaru Samithiya (1976) 79 (1) NLR 285, Sarath Hulangamuwa v

Siriwardena, Principal, Visaka Vidyalaya (1986) 1 Sri LR 275 and Fa/eel

v Susil Moonesinghe(1994) 2 Sri LR 301, 313.

So it is quite clear that in a bid to explain the delay for making this

application the Petitioners have fallen far short of displaying clean hands

and suppression of material facts is quite rife in the application. One tends

to agree that the Petitioners have not come with clean hands.

9

Plea of Futility

The Petitioners in this case have alleged that they entertain a legitimate

expectation to obtain a permit or a grant. In the same breath, they have

prayed that the order made by the Minister P6 be quashed. The quashing

of the order P6 is less likely to result in the grant of a permit or the grant

under the Land Development Ordinance and thus, there is no rational

nexus between the remedy sought in the application for Judicial review

and the grant of a permit for which the Petitioners aver there has been a

holding out of a promise or assurance.

Times without number, the plea of futility has been decisive in the

dismissals of applications-see P S Bus Company Ltd v Members and the

Secretary of the Ceylon Transport Board (1958) 61 NLR 491, 496 where

Sinnatamby J. held that 'a writ... will not issue where it would be vexatious or futile'.

In the case of Ratnasiri and Others v EUawala (2004) 2 Sri LR 180 at 208

Marsoof, Pc. J cited what Soza, J. had stated In Siddeek v Jacolyn

Scneviratne and Other (1984) 1 Sri LR 83 at 90:

'The Court will have regard to the special circumstances of the case before it

issues a writ of certiorari. The writ of certiorari clearly will not issue where the

end result will be futility,frustration, injustice and illegality."

In the case of P S Bus Company cited above, it was also recognized that

when it would create grave public or administrative inconvenience a writ

of certiorari would not be granted. The same view was articulated with

regard to a writ of mandamus in the case of Inasitamby v Government

Agent, Northern Province(1932) 34 NLR 33, 37.

10

So the grant of a writ of certiorari to quash the declaration of a sanctuary

is bound to lead to futility as far as the Petitioners are concerned. The

annulment or extinguishment of sanctuary will cause an imbalance in the

environment and that raises severe environmental issues. This case thus

brings to the fore the topic of sustainable development as the learned

Senior Deputy Solicitor General expatiated in his written submissions and

[ will set forth my views on that aspect of the matter later, before 1 part

with this judgment.

It would thus be manifest that the Respondents should succeed on their

pleas of bars to jurisdiction that they have raised. Non obstante I would go

into the grounds that have been advanced to impugn P6-the Gazette

notification declaring a sanctuary.

The first ground urged by the Petitioner - The Order made by the

Minister requires the approval of Parliament

Quintessentially the Petitioner's case is that the Order marked as P6

should have received the imprimatur of Parliament for the Order to

become effective and failure to obtain such approval means that there is

no valid Order. The Petitioners relied on Section 2(5) of the Fauna and

Flora Protection Ordinance in support of this argument.

Section 2(5) of the legislation deals with the amendment of the

boundaries of a Sanctuary already declared under Section 2(2). The

Respondents' argument was that Section 2(5) applies only where an

amendment is made to an Order already made under Section 2(2).

However, since the Order P6 is not an amendment to an existing Order

but a declaration of an area of land as a sanctuary for the first time, the

provisions of Section 2(5) do not apply.

11

The Section 2(2) of the Act - as it stood in 1989 - did not require the Order

to be approved by Parliament. The requirement of approval of Parliament

was brought in only by an amendment in 2009 to Section 2(2). The

approval introduced in 2009 is not retrospective so as to embrace a

situation where there was no approval required as it stood in 1989.

Accordingly the validity of the Order P6 must be considered in light of

pre-2009 amendment stage.

The progression of Section 2 of the Act, in so far as it relates to this case,

goes as follows:

(a) Section 2(2) of the Fauna and Flora Protection Ordinance,

as it stood in 1956, reads as follows:

"The Minister may by Order published in the Gazette

declare that any specified area of land within Ceylon (other

than land declared to be a National Reserve) shall be a

sanctuary for the purposes of this Ordinance."

It has to be noted that the Principal Act did not contain any

prOvision for the amendment of an Order made under

Section 2(2).

(b) Even though the Ordinance was amended by Act No. 44 of

1964, Section 2(2) was not amended.

(c) Though the Ordinance was amended by Act No.1 of 1970,

Section 2(2) was not amended but the Amendment Act

introduced Section 2(5), which empowered the Minister to

12

amend or vary the limits of a Sanctuary. However, an Order

amending the boundaries had to be approved by Parliament.

(d) Section 2(2) that was in existence in 1989 is found in the

1980 Legislative Enactments.

(e) After 1970, the Act was amended only in 1993 by Act No. 49

of 1993. However, Section 2(2) was not amended.

(f) The requirement to obtain the apptoval of Parliament for an

Order made under Section 2 was first introduced by the

Fauna and Flora Ptotection (Amendment) Act No. 22 of

2009, with the addition of Section 2A.

I t is thus clear that for the Order P6 to be valid, the Minister was not

required to get the approval of Parliament. The only instance in which the

approval of Parliament was required [in 1989] was under Section 2(5) of

the Act when the limits of a Natural Reserve or Sanctuary were being

altered or varied.

The introduction of Section 2A in 2009 makes it clear that prior to this

date no such requirement to obtain approval of Parliament for an Order

made under Section 2(2) was in place.

So the Minister did not act ultra vi,-es when he published P6 in 1989. There

is no illegality that taints the declaration of a sanctuary.

The Amendment Act No. 22 of 2009 that made the following significant

amendment to Section 2(5) repays attention.

13

"I n the case of any change of boundaries or the disestablishment of a National

Reserve or Sanctuary or Managed Elepharlt Reserve, a study shall be conducted

and such study shall include an investigation of the ecological consequences of

the proposed change.

Thus, no changes to the existing boundaries demarcated in the Order

published in Gazette Notification No. 566/05 marked P6 can be made

without an investigation of the ecological consequences of the proposed

change.

The second ground urged by the Petitioner - The Minister has to

consult the Provincial Council prior to making an order of this nature.

The Petitioners contended that in terms of the provisions of the 13th

Amendment to the Constitution regarding the alienation of State Lands,

the 1st or 2nd Respondent should have consulted the North Western

Provincial Council prior to making the Order

A look at the 13th Amendment repays attention.

1. Item I of Appendix II of List I of the 9th Schedule Constitution reads

as follows:

"1. State land-

l:l State land required for the purposes of the Government in a

Province, in respect of a reserved or concurrent subject may be

utilized by the Government in accordance with the laws governing

the matter. The Government shall consult the relevant Provincial

14

Council with regard to the utilization of such land in respect of such

subject."

As per this [tern, the Government is duty bound to consult the relevant

Provincial Council when land is required for the purpose of the

Government in a Province, when the land is to be utilized by the

Government.

The demarcation of a particular area as a Sanctuary under the Fauna and

Flora Protection Ordinance can, by no stretch of imagination amount to

a land being utilized for the purpose of the Government.

In terms of Section 2 (3) of the Fauna and Flora Protection Ordinance 'an

area declared to be a Sanctuary or a Managed Elephant Reserve may

include both State land and land other than State land'.

In light of this provision it is incorrect to state that demarcation of an area

as a sanctuary will result in the use of land coming within the said

Sanctuary for the purposes of the Government.

So law does not impose a requirement that the relevant Provincial Council

be consulted prior to making such an order.

The Senior Deputy Solicitor General drew the attention of the judgment

of the Supreme Court in The Superintendent, Stafford Estate vs

Solaimuthu Rasu [SC Appeal 21/2013 - SC Minutes of 26.09.2013], where

the Supreme Court made an evaluation of the provisions of the

Constitution and concluded as follows:

15

(a) State Land is referred to in the Reserved List and it is only

from this germinal origin that the Republic could assign to a

Provincial Council land for limited purposes;

(b) When interpreting the provisions of the Constirution with

regard to land vis-ii-vis Provincial Councils, the sequence

would be to start from List II, then go to [tern 18 of List [and

to Appendix II. Thus, the powers of the Provincial Council

with regard to land as set out in Appendix II are limited by

I tern 18 of List I.

(c) [tern 18 of List I has only given the following rights over land

- "Land, that is to say, rights in or over land, land tenure

transfer and alienation of land, land use, land settlement and

land improvement, to the extent set out in Appendix II." This,

of course is subject to the overarching principle that State

Land shall continue to vest in the Republic.

In the circumstances the demarcation of a sancruary does not fall within

Item 18 of List I since there are no rights being created over land, there is

no alienation or transfer of land or land improvement. Thus, the Provincial

Councils have no role to play when a Sancruary is declared and thus, the

necessity to obtain the consent of the Provincial Council, as set out in

Appendix II, does not arise.

Thus even on the two grounds that were urged on the merit, this

application for judiCial review must fail.

16

Sustainable Development

Before I conclude, let me advert to an argument that was brought forth by

the Senior Deputy Solicitor General. As he correctly pointed out in his

written submissions, this case raises a very important issue - i.e. the

balancing of interests between development and the needs of man on the

one hand as opposed to the protection of the narural resources of the

country and its environment on the other, which is now commonly

referred to as "Sustainable Development".

The Fauna and Flora Protection Ordinance was introduced in 1937 in order

to protect the fauna and flora of our great nation, to permit the declaration

of certain areas of land as National Reserves, National Parks and

Sancruaries. It defies imagination that the need for such an Act was felt at

a time when we were under the colonial yoke. The introduction of the Act

demonstrates the importance that was attached, as far back as 1937, to

sustainable development and the need to protect the environment and the

narural resources of this country for the furure generations.

As evidenced by documents marked as Rl - R5 annexed to the Objections

filed by the state, the said sanctuary, known as the Kahalla - Pallekale

Sanctuary, is situated within the districts of Kurunegala and

Anuradhapura and is 21690 hectares in extent. This is the only sanctuary

situated within the Kurunegala District with a forest cover of

approximately 3.5%.

This sanctuary is home to several flora which is unique to the dry zone.

The land area covered by the sanctuary has also been the traditional home

of elephants for a very long period of time.

17

The Hakwatuna Oya and the Hakwatuna Reservoir are siruated at the

southern boundary of the said Sancruary and adjacent to the said

Development Project. W ater from this reservoir is used for agriculture by

farmers. The land on which the said Project has been established is part of

the catchment area of the said reservoir.

A catchment area is essential for the maintainability of a reservoir for the

reason, inter alia, that the rainwater that is absorbed by the trees and the

soil siruated within the catchment area is released gradually to the

Reservoir, thus ensuring a continuous supply of water to the reservoir.

As a result of the trees situated within the catchment area being cleared

for the setting up of the said Project, there has been a rapid erosion of the

top soil which has resulted in the soil being washed into the said reservoir,

together with the agro-chemicals that are used by those carrying out

agricultural activity within the said Project. Consequently, the siltation

level in the Reservoir has increased resulting in the capaCity of the said

Reservoir decreasing. The establishment of the said Project .vithin the said

catchment area has thus caused a grave environmental crisis.

In those circumstances it was contended by the Respondents that a

quashing of the Order (P6) would result in deforestation, the destruction

of habitat in the area, soil erosion, agro-chemicals Llsed by those carrying

out agricultural activities in the area being washed into the Hakwatuna

Reservoir and reducing its capacity. There would be as a direct

consequence environmental pollution and degradation.

As demonstrated by the documents marked as R7 and R8 tendered with

the Objections, the land area covered by the Sancruary has been the

traditional home to elephants for a very long period of time and was one of

the factors that was taken into consideration at the time the said area was

18

declared as a sanctuary. The Hakwatuna Oya and the reservoir are the only

water resources available in the southern area of the sanctuary for wild

pachyderms. The area covered by the said Project has been part of the

corridor used by the elephants to access the said Reservoir and it was

stated that wild elephants have frequently used the said area as its

traditional migratory path for getting water from Hakwatuna tank. The

establishment of the said Project and the development of infrastructure

therein have led to the obstruction of the said corridor resulting in the

human elephant conflict. Any further development of the area that may

arise from the cancellation of the Order P6 would severely affect, inter alia,

the elephants, which is a protected species. This was the sum total of the

arguments placed before Court by the learned Senior Deputy Solicitor

General which was aimed as an additional contention.

I would hold the view that development cannot subsist upon a

deteriorating environment. Sustainable development recognises the value

of both development and environment. Sustainable development denotes

economy growth without destroying the resource base of a nation and

engages a new approach of integration of production with resource

conservation and enhancement, providing for adequate livelihood and

equitable access to resources. The World Commission on Environment

and Development, in its Our Common Future (1987) reiterates the balanCing

of these competing interests and our Courts have been quite alive to issues

pertaining to environment-see A.R.B Amerasinghe J. in BuJankuJama v

Minister of Industrial Development (Eppawala case) SC application no.

884/99 FIR; Prasanna Jayawardena, PC.] in Ravindra Gunawardena

Kariyawasam v Central Environmental Authority and Others SC FR

Application No. 14112015 decided on 04.04.2019.

19

In his separate opinion delivered in the IC] in the Gabcikovo -

Nagymaros Project (between Hungary and Slovakia) case (1997) ] udge

Weeramantry brought out the meaning, scope and implications of the

principle of sustainable development, Using an interdisciplinary

approach, judge Weeramantry examined diverse historical materials from

different civilizations and went onto identify certain perspectives and

principles that can be productively incorporated into modern

Environmental Law,

"Amorlg those which may be extracted from the systems already referred to are

such far reachingprinciples as the prinCiple ofTl1lSteeship of earth reSOLIrCCS, the

principle of intergenerational rights and prinCiples that devdopment and

environmental conservations mustgo hand in hand,"

justice Weeramantry rejected a fragmented approach to International

Environmental Law, in particular to the principle of Sustainable

Development, To begin with, he emphasized the urgent need for

"harmonization" and "reconciliation" of the modern prmciples of

development and environmental protection to avoid 'a state of normative

anarchy:

judge Weeramantry stressed the need to go beyond individual rights and

self interest to achieve environmental protection, Courts too must pursue

this goal for the common good of alL

"International environmental law will need to proceed beyond weighing the

rights and obligations of parties within a closed compartment of individual

state self-interest, Lim-dated to the global concerns of humanity as a whole,,"

Subjects having a nexus with the principle of sustainable development

have to be interpreted with a view to advanCing environmental protection

20

,

since Juclicial Review involves an interpretation of laws. It is incumbent

upon this Court to interpret Fauna and Flora Protection Legislation with

a view to averting environmental degradation.

In the circumstances upon a total consideration of all the issues immanent

in the case, I proceed to refuse this application for Juclicial Review.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

21