i I

i j j

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

mandates in the nature of Writs of

Certiorari and Mandamus in terms of

Article 140 of the constitution

C A (Writ) Application No. 112/2014

Liyanage Jayatissa

Katuwana Gedara,

Gegawa,

Kudagoda-East,

Kariyamadiththa.

Petitioner

Vs.

1. Provincial Commissioner of Lands,

Department of Provincial Commissioner

of Land

Southern Province,

Town Hall Building,

1st floor,

I

i

2

Galle.

4. Liyanage Danapala

Katuwana Gedara,

Gegawa, 1

Kudagoda,

Kariyamadiththa.

J5. Liyanage Amaradasa,

t iKatuwana Gedara, IGegawa,

Kudagoda,

Kariyamadiththa. .

r6. Liyanage Siripala,

Katuwana Gedara, IfGegawa, iII{: , Iftt

4

11. Liyanage Thilakahami,

No. 194,

Mallagahadeniya,

Ihala Walpala,

Imaduwa.

RESPONDENTS

Before: Vijith K. Malalgoda PC 1 (PICA)

P. Padman Surasena 1

Counsel: Asthika Devendra with Ulan Warusavithana for the Petitioner

Waruna de Saram for the 4th and 8th Respondents

Sureka Ahamed, SC for the 1st and 2nd Respondents

Argued on: 2016-06-28

Written submissions for the Petitioner on 2016-07-05

Written submissions for the 1st and 2nd Respondents on: 2016-07-07

Decided on: 2016-08-03

JUDGMENT

5

P Padman Surasena J

A permit under section 19 of the Land Development Ordinance was issued

to Liyanage Janis who is the father of the Petitioner. This permit has been

marked and produced as POl A. It is dated 1987-11-27.

Said Janis (father of the Petitioner) had died on 2001-11-18 without

nominating a successor to the said land. The death certificate of said Janis

has been marked and produced as P 2.

Life interest of the said land was thereafter transferred to the mother of

the Petitioner namely Weraharage Palagasin Pathiranage Podihami in terms

of section 48 B of the Land Development Ordinance. The 2nd Respondent

has made an endorsement to that effect on the said permit on 2006-10-03.

The mother of the Petitioner had passed away on 2010-02-21. Her death

certificate has been marked and produced as P 3.

Petitioner's elder brother (father of the 3rd Respondent) had died on 2005-

07-07. The Petitioner had thereafter made a request to the 2nd Respondent

to issue him a permit for the said land.

6

At an inquiry held by the 2nd Respondent, elder brothers of the Petitioner

namely 4th, 6th, ih and 8th Respondents had submitted affidavits to state

that they are not inclined to succeed to the said land and had consented

for the transfer of the said land to the Petitioner. That affidavit has been

marked and produced as P 6.

The Ordinance defines who a successor is. It is as follows.

Section 48

''In this chapter "Successor" when used with reference to any land

alienated on a permit or a holding/ means a person who is entitled under

this chapter to succeed to that land or holding upon the death of the

permit holder or owner thereof, if that permit-holder or owner died

without leaving behind his or her spouse/ or / if that permit-holder or

owner died leaving behind his or her spouse/ upon the failure of that

spouse to succeed to that land or holding or upon the death of that

spouse. "

Section 72 which deals with the Succession under the Third Schedule of

the Land Development Ordinance is as follows.

IIiI

!

. I I i I 1 ! i i 1 1 J i i

~ i I I

7

Section 72.

'Tf no successor has been nominatett or if the nominated successor fails

to succeett or if the nomination of a successor contravenes the provisions

of this Ordinance/ the title to the land alienated on a permit to a permit-

holder who at the time of his or her death was paying an annual

installment by virtue of the provisions of section 19 or to the holding of an

owner shall, upon the death of such permit-holder or owner without

leaving behind his or her spouse/ o~ where such permit-holder or owner

died leaving behind his or her spouse/ upon the failure of such spouse to

succeed to that land or holding/ or upon the death of such spouse/ devolve

as prescribed in Rule 1 of the Third Schedule. "

Section 73 sets out the date of such succession. That section is as follows.

Section 73.

"Title to a land alienated on a permit or to a holding shall be deemed to

have devolved on any person entitled to succeed to the land or holding

under the provisions of section 72 as from the date of the death of the

permit-holder or owner of the holding if such permit-holder or owner died

without leaving behind his or her spouse/ o~ if such permit-holder or

owner died leaving behind his or her spouse/ upon the failure of such

8

spouse to succeed or from the date of the death of such spouse, as the

case may be. /I

Section 72 of the Ordinance comes in to operation if the permit holder or

owner dies without leaving behind his or her spouse, or if such permit

holder or owner dies leaving behind his or her spouse and such spouse

fails to succeed to the land or upon the death of such spouse. Since there

is no nominated person and that the original Permit-holder's spouse also

has died, person entitled to succeed must be decided according to section

72 of the Ordinance.

1 st and 2nd Respondents have stated in their statement of objections that

the death certificate of the eldest son of the original permit holder was

submitted to them. The 3rd Respondent is the son of Liyanage David who is

the elder brother of the Petitioner. However said Liyanage David has

predeceased his mother. That death certificate has been marked and

'produced as 1 R 2. The 1st and 2nd Respondents do not set out any

acceptable legal basis to justify their decision that the Petitioner is not

entitled to be the successor of this land.

ItI

9

Upon the advice given by the 1st Respondent, having held an inquiry, 2nd

Respondent has sent the letter marked P 13 dated 2013-08-07.

The 3rd Respondent has not participated in the proceedings before this

Court and hence has not taken up any position. There is no evidence

before this Court that the 3rd Respondent's father was in possession of

this land at any time. In any case, as has been mentioned before, father of

the 3rd Respondent had died on 2005-07-07.

Thus in this instance it is clear from the above material, that the title to this

land shall devolve on the Petitioner in terms of Section 72 of the

Ordinance. Therefore the 2nd Respondent's decision that the Petitioner is

not entitled to be the successor of this land is illegal. That decision is

therefore ultra vires the powers vested in 1st and 2nd Respondents by the

Land Development Ordinance.

In these circumstances we issue:

a) a mandate in the nature of writ of Certiorari to quash the decisions

of the 1st and 2nd Respondents embodied in the letter dated 2013-

I

10

08-05 (marked P 12) and in the letter dated 2013-08-07 (marked P

13)

b) a mandate in the nature of writ of Mandamus to compel the 1st and

2nd Respondents to name the Petitioner as the successor to the said

land

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC 1

I agree,

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

~ 1

~ , \ f !

~ ! ! tItI I

tI

~

! t I

ffII Itt f

f