IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

CA (PHC) APN No: 42/2014 HC Case No: HCR 147/2013

In the matter application for under Article 154P (3) (b)

of an Revision 138 and of the Constitution and Sections 9 and 10 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act, No: 19 of

1990.

Range Forest Officer,

Forest Office, Puttalam.

Complainant

Vs.

1. Ratweera Patabadige Sandaruwan, 9 th Mile Post, Anuradhapura Road, Karuwalagaswewa. 2. Pinidiya Arachchige Asanka, Tabbowa, Puttalam.

Accused

Pathirage Ann Rani Perera, Kolinjadiya, Wennappuwa.

Vehicle owner

ANDBERWEEN

1

Pathirage Ann Rani Perera, Kolinjadiya, Wennappuwa.

Vehicle - Owner-Petitioner

Vs.

1. Forest Officer, Forest Office, Puttalam. 2. Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

Complainant -Respondent

And Now Between

Pathirage Ann Rani Perera, Kolinjadiya, Wennappuwa.

Vehicle Owner -Petitioner - Petitioner

Vs.

1. Forest Officer, Forest Office, Puttalam. 2. Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

2

Before : P.R. Walgama, J : L. T .B. Dehideniya, J

Complainant -Respondents -Respondents

Council : Nalin Ladduwahetti P.C. with Shantha Jayawardhana for the Petitioner - Petitioner.

: Varunika Hettige SSC for the Respondent.

Argued on

Decided on

: 17.03.2016

: 15.07.2016

CASE- NO- CA (PHC)- APN- 42/2014- JUDGMENT- 15.07.2016

P.R. Walgama, J

This appeal is directed against the order of the

Learned High Court Judge dated 19.12.2013 and the

order of the Learned Magistrate dated 20.03.2013, by

which orders the lorry that was involved 1n the

transportation of timber without a valid permit was

confiscated.

The facts of the case need mention 1n brief to

appreciate the 1ssue involved 1n this appeal are as

follows;

The Petitioner 1S the registered owner of the Motor

Lorry bearing No. 226-4220. The said lorry was

engaged by two accused to transport timber without

3

a valid permit, and there by had committed an

offence In terms of Section 40 read with

(1) of the Forest Ordinance.

The two accused pleaded guilty to the

was imposed a fine of Rs. 10,000/ .

There after the Learned Magistrate held an

to the release of the vehicle and after

Section 25

charge and

. . InquIry as

the InquIry

the Learned Magistrate by his order dated 20.03.2013

has confiscated the vehicle.

Being aggrieved by the said order the Petitioner

invoked the reVisIOnary jurisdiction of the Provincial

High Court holden at Puttalam. The Learned High

Court Judge

the Petitioner

after the . . InquIry

had affirmed the

In to application of

order of the Learned

Magistrate, by the order dated 19. 12.2013.

It is against the said order the Petitioner had come

by way or Revision to this Court to have the said

impugned orders vacate or set aside.

It IS submitted by the Counsel for the Petitioner

that on the day In Issue the Petitioner's son drove

the vehicle taken from the custody of the petitioner's

brother whom the petitioner has for

transportation, of bricks and sand.

The Petitioner's son was the 1 st Accused In the

action filed by the Respondent In the Magistrate

Court. It is the contention of the Petitioner that the

4

vehicle

taken

brother.

was

the

gIVen

vehicle

to her brother,

without the

and her

knowledge

son

of

had

her

It has been observed by the Learned Magistrate that

the petitioner has concealed the fact that the 1 st

Accused was her son. It IS seen from the testimony

of the brother of the petitioner who testified to the

fact that the said vehicle was given to him for the

purpose of transporting the bricks and sand, and on

this day In question the Petitioner's son had taken

the vehicle without his knowledge.

The Learned Magistrate having considered the law

pertaining to the current Issue had observed that

fact that the Petitioner has not established the fact

that she had taken all necessary precautions to

prevent the said cnme committed under Forest

Ordinance No.65 of 2009. Thus the Learned Magistrate

proceeded to confiscate the said vehicle.

Being aggrieved by

sought to invoke the

High Court. After the

Judge was of the

the said order the Petitioner

has arrived at the

revISIOnary

inquiry the

view that the

correct decision

the said impugned order.

jurisdiction of

Learned High

the

Court

Learned Magistrate

and had up held

The counsel for

above application

the 2nd Respondent in opposing the

had raised a preliminary objection

5

as to the maintainability of the present application of

the petitioner.

Primary bone of contention IS that the failure on the

part of the petitioner to aver the existence of the

exceptional circumstances, for this court to exerCIse

the Revisionary jurisdiction In terms of the

Constitution.

Further it IS contended by the counsel for the

Respondent that the petitioner has failed to

established the fact that the said impugned orders of

the Learned High Court Judge and the Learned

Magistrate, are erroneous and fundamentally wrong.

It IS evident from the testimony of the petitioner

that she has gIven the lorry to her brother for two

years. Therefore within the said period the petitioner

would have not had any control over the vehicle

and there by had failed to take all precautions to

prevent any commission of an offence of this nature.

The judgment of his Lordship In the case of

DHARMARATNE .VS. PALM PARADISE CABANAS LTD

(2003) volume 3 page 24 has observed thus;

" existence of exceptional circumstances is the process

by which the Court selects the cases In respect of

which the extraordinary method of rectification should

be adopted, if such a selection process IS not there

revlslOnary jurisdiction of this court will become a

6

gate way of every litigant to make a second appeal

in the garb of a reVISIOn application or to make an

appeal In situations where the legislature has not

gIven a right of appeal".

It IS seen from the submissions tendered by the

counsel for the Respondent- Petitioner, has completely

ignored or overlooked to answer the said vital issue

raised by the Respondent, as such the Issue should

be resolved In favour of the Respondent.

Hence ill the above context this court IS of the

vIew that there IS no exceptional circumstances been

averred by the petitioner for this court to exerCIse

its revISIOnary jurisdiction to resolve the matter In

Issue.

Application IS dismissed accordingly. Subject to costs

fIxed at Rs.SOOO /-.

L.T.B. Dehideniya, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

7