1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

CNWRIT/419/2014

OF SRI LANKA

Vs,

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

In the matter of an Application for a mandate in

the nature of Writ of Certiorari and Mandamus

under article 140 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Habaragamuralalage Sunil Premasiri Peiris,

"Mihira" ,

No. 241, Temple Road,

Maharagama.

Urban Development Authority,

6th and i h Floors,

Sethsiripaya, Battaramulla.

Chairman,

Urban Development Authority,

6th and i h Floors,

Sethsiripaya, Battaramulla.

Director General,

Urban Development Authority,

6th and i h Floors,

Sethsiripaya, Battaramulla.

Homagama Pradeshiya Sabha,

Pradeshiya Sabha Office,

Homagama.

Chairman,

Homagama Pradeshiya Sabha,

Pradeshiya Sabha Office,

Homagama.

PETITIONER

, I 1 }

6. Secretary,

Homagama Pradeshiya Sabha,

Pradeshiya Sabha Office,

Homagama.

Before:

Counsel:

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J (PICA) &

S. Thurairaja PC J

Chandana Premathilake for the Petitioner

Chaya Sri Nammuni SC for the Respondents

Argued on: 25.07.2016, 11.10.2016

Written Submissions on: 09.12.2016

Judgment on: 24.03.2017

Order

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC

RESPONDENTS

2

Petitioner to the present application Habaragamuralalage Sunil Premasiri Peiris had come before this

court seeking inter alia,

b) A mandate in the nature of writ of Certiorari to quash the circular dated 07.12.2009 marked

P-11

c) A mandate in the nature of writ of Certiorari to quash the decision set out in P-lO by

Homagama Pradeshiya Sabha and P-13 by the Urban Development Authority, respectively,

that any residential premises on lot D1 in sub- division plan No 2358 dated 19.08.2011 (P-1)

1 1 ! I i I

I I I I !

3

should be limited to a single story building or a building of 4 meters in high and that PI would

be approved subject to such condition

d) A mandate in the nature of writ of Certiorari to quash the decision set out in P-14C by the

Urban Development Authority that it had decided to approve the sub-division plan No 2359

dated 19.08.2011 marked PI for residential development subject to the construction of a

building consisting of the ground floor and another on lot Dl

e) A mandate in the nature of writ of Mandamlls directing anyone, several or all of the Olst to

06th Respondents to approve the sub-divided lot Dl in sub-division plan No 2358 -PI for

residential purpose only subject to the restrictions set out in Regulation 18(2) of Urban

Development Authority Planning and Building Regulations published in the Gazette

Extraordinary No 392/9 dated 10th March

One Galagedarage Eugine Nona was the owner of a land called Kongahawatte to the extent of 1 rood

and 12.4 perches. The said land was sub-divided in to two lots called 3Cl and 3C2 by plan 261 dated

1987 and the said lot 3Cl was again sub-divided in to 4 lots namely C, D, E and F by plan 24/95

dated 26th February 1995 (P-3). The Petitioner had become the owner of the lot D referred to above to

the extent of 9 perches with the right of way over lot F in the year 1995. The said block out plan

bearing No 24/95 was approved by the Homagama Pradeshiya Sabha (4th Respondent) on or about

23rd December 1996.

The Government acquired a strip of land from the said divided and defined lots marked C, D and E in

its East boundary for the construction of the Southern Express Way and a resurvey of the remaining

portions of lots C, D and E was carried out by Senaka Fernando LS and prepared a fresh plan 1956

dated 3rd May 2009 (P-8) re-naming the said lots as Cl, Dl and El to the extent of 8.50 perches, 8.25

perches and 8.28 perches respectively.

4

The said plan too was approved by the Homagama Pradeshiya Sabha subject to certain conditions.

The Petitioner who caused a fresh plan, only with regard to lot D1, (P-1) was subsequently tendered

to the 4th Respondent on 15t September 2011 to obtain a building approval.

When the present application was made by the Petitioner to the 4th Respondent, he was informed by

the 4th Respondent that according to the law prevailed at that time with regard to the lands bordering

Southern Express Way, the application for building approval could only be granted subject to the

condition that it should be limited to the construction of residential premises only and any residential

premises should be limited to one story building or a building of 4 meters in height.

Being dissatisfied with the said decision of the 4th Respondent, the Petitioner had protested to the 4th

Respondent and the said 4th Respondent had sought advice from the 15t Respondent by letter dated

29.09.2011 (P-lO). The 15t Respondent by its letter dated 30th December 2011 communicated its

decision to the 4th Respondent with a copy to the Petitioner, that they cannot consider any deviation

with regard to the lands coming under the development zones identified under Southern Express Way

and therefore the decision already communicated to the Petitioner cannot be changed.

In this regard our attention was drawn to the Regulations published under section 21 of the Urban

Development Authority Law 41 of 1978 in Government Gazette Extraordinary 392/09 dated 10th

March 1986 (P-4A and B) and a circular issued by the Director General Urban Development

Authority to Heads of all Local Authorities comes within the Southern Express Way Area, dated i h

December 2009 (P-11).

As observed by us the contention of the Petitioner before this court was to challenge the validity of

P-ll and in fact in prayer (b) the Petitioner had sought a writ of Certiorari to quash the said circular

and to implement the provisions in P-4A or 4B as far as it is applicable to the Petitioners Land.

As referred to above, P-4A and B are Regulations made under section 21 of the Urban Development

Authority Law No 41 of 1978 and the Petitioner's relied on Regulation 18 made under the said

5

regulation which deals with the height of a building. The relevant provisions of the Regulation 18 of

the said regulations read thus;

18 (1) The maximum height of a building on an "existing lot" which is six meters of less in

width and or has less than one hundred and fifty square meters in extent shall not

exceed seven and a half (7.5) meters or two floors unless the authority direct

otherwise.

(2) The maximum height of a building in other cases not being a high-rise building shall

not exceed 15 meters or twice the distance between any storey of a building and the

further edge of the abutting street whichever is less (emphasis added)

When considering the above provisions, it is important to consider the applicability of the said

provision to the land in question and as observed by us the above provisions are applicable to existing

lots as referred to in Regulation 18 (1) above.

Regulation 70 of the said Regulations refers to definitions and "existing lot" had been defined as;

"a lot which is in existence before the coming into operation of the law"

and the "Law" has been defined as,

"the Urban Development Authority Law No.41 of 1978"

and when considering the above interpretation, the existing lot referred to in Regulation 18 will have

to be defined as a lot in existence as at the date on which the Urban Development Law came into

operation in the year 1978.

In this regard the Petitioner's argument before this court is that the subdivision, the Petitioner relied

upon was made in 1995 and not in 2011 and therefore what is applicable to him is the regulations

referred to above (P-4A and 4B) and not the circular dated i h December 2009 which will not have

6

any retrospective effect. The Petitioner had further argued that the plan prepared in 2011 (P-1) was

made as a result of the acquisitions of a portion of his land for the construction of the Southern

Express Way and therefore the said plan cannot be considered as a fresh subdivision but the

subdivision relevant to the present application was done in the year 1995 by P-3.

However when considering the interpretation gIven to the applicability of Regulation 18, it has

already being identified by us that the said regulation will only applicable to an existing lot as at the

date the Urban Development Law came into operation i.e. in the year 1978 and not thereafter, unless

the Authority direct otherwise.

As further observed by us the circular produced marked P-11 was issued by the Director General of

the said Urban Development Authority and P-11 refers to specific guidelines which will applicable

subject to the provisions of the Regulation made under the Urban Development authority Law No 41

of 1978.

The said circular has specific reference to the areas covered under the Southern Express Way, and in

the schedule to the said circular three specific areas had been identified for development as against

the Express Way. The said three areas had been identified as,

a) Within 10 meters

b) 10 meters to 250 meters

c) 250 meters to 1200 meters

When giving any interpretation to the said circular with regard to its applicability, the purpose under

which it was introduced and the extent to which it can be made use, this court will have to be mindful

of the fact that the said circular is not applicable to any other parts of this country, but limited only to

the areas bordering the Southern Express Way and the said circular was promulgated having

considered the purpose to which it is being issued. This fact is further clarified when the Respondents

produced before us the guidelines issued by the Urban Development Authority to all the Local

~ 1 J

~ I I , I I

~ I ! , I I

~ !

1 ! I ! I

1

7

Authorities bordering Colombo-Katunayake Express Way on 30th May 2013. According to the said

guidelines in the 10 meters zone no construction was permitted and the remaining houses were

permitted until a resettlement plan was implemented. The next zone identified in the said circular is

10 meters-60 meters zone where construction was permitted only up to 6 meters or two floors and for

the existing blocks the permission was granted for two floors only.

During the argument before us the Learned State Counsel who represented the 15t to 3rd Respondent

whilst referring to amendments introduced to the Urban Development Authority Law by Act No 4 of

1982 and No 44 of 1984 submitted that the new section 26A introduced by the amending Act had

permitted the delegation of powers with regard to the development plans and the height of a building

is a part of the development plan and therefore the directions referred to in P-11 are intravires and not

ultra vires.

Our courts have repeatedly declared that such guidelines, directions issued by the Authorities should

be given a purposive interpretation when it is issued for a valid purpose where such guidelines are

compulsory. This court is mindful of several decisions by the Supreme Court where the Secretary,

Ministry of Education had issued guidelines with regard to the school admissions and in this regard

this court is guided by the decision of their Lordship of the Supreme Court in the case of T.G. Sumali

Sudarshani Ferdinando and another Vs. S.S.K Aviruppola Principal Visaka Vidyalaya and three

others SC FR 117/2011 SC minute dated 25.06.2012 when the Supreme Court upheld the binding

effect of the guideline circular issued by the Secretary to the Ministry of Education with regard to

school admissions.

However when considering the guidelines produced as P-ll we observe that there is minimum extent

of 20 perches is required to construct a dwelling house in the 10 meters zone but with regard to an

existing lot development is permitted subject to the regulations published under the Urban

Development Authority Law referred to as P4A. As observed above, the land referred to the present

8

application was in existence at the time P-ll was issued and therefore the Petitioner is entitled to

come under the exception given by the said guideline for existing lots within the 10 meters zone.

As reveled before us the Petitioner who was dissatisfied with the decision in P-13 had gone before the

Human Rights Commission and lodged a complaint. When the said inquiry was in progress before the

Human Rights Commission, on a request made by the Human Rights Commission the 1st Respondent

Authority agreed to grant permission to construct a two storied houses (G+ 1) subject to maintaining

green belt of 3 meters at the edge of the land bordering the Southern Express Way, (P-14C) but the

Petitioner was not agreeable for the said proposal by the 1st Respondent and proceeded with the

inquiry before the Human Rights Commission.

The said inquiry before the Human Rights Commission was ended up with a recommendation by the

Human Rights Commission to grant permission under regulation 18 (2) but the 1st Respondent who

was not agreeable for the said recommendation, did not implement the recommendation by the

Human Rights Commission.

As observed above the purpose of issuing the guidelines at P-l1 was to regularize the use of the land

area bordering the Southern Express Way and the subsequent guidelines issued with regard to

Katunayake Express Way confirms the necessasity of regulating the land area bordering Express

Ways. Lot Dl referred to the present application is a block of land to the extent of 8.25 perches

within the 10 meters zone and at the time P-ll was issued it was an existing block but was not

utilized to construct a dwelling house. Even though the said guidelines does not permit the

construction of dwelling houses in blocks less than 20 perch in extent, with regard to the existing

blocks, the said guidelines permitted the construction of dwelling houses subject to the provisions of

the regulations but, the extent to which the said regulation should apply, will have to be determine by

giving a purposive interpretation to the said guidelines.

9

In other words, any new house coming up in a block of land within the 10 meters zone whether it is

coming up in a 20 perch new block or in an existing block less than 20 perches, it should follow the

same guideline, since the said guidelines are issued to regularize the use of land area adjourning the

Express Way.

In the said circumstance the only interpretation this court can offer with regard to P-ll is a purposive

interpretation.

In the said circumstances this court is not in agreement with the recommendation of Human Rights

Commission and of the view that the construction of dwelling house within a block of land in the 10

meters zone, whether it is new or existing should limit to the ground floor and not beyond.

As further observed by this court, on a request made by the Human Rights Commission the lSI

Respondent had agreed to permit the Petitioner to construct a two storied houses (G+ 1) but the

Petitioner was not agreeable for the said the proposal. Since the said proposal was not endorsed by

the parties, this court is not inclined to consider P-14 as a document which carries any binding effect.

For the forgoing reasons this court is not inclined to grant any relief to the Petitioner. This application

is therefore stand dismissed, but we make no order with regard to costs.

Application dismissed.

President of the Court of Appeal

s. Thurairaja PC J

Judge of the Court of Appeal