==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0157/2023

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal in terms of

Section 331 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No 15 of 1979 (as

amended)

The Democratic Socialist Republic of

Sri Lanka.

Complainant Vs

Mohamed Asmeer Mohamed Asmeen

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Mohamed Asmeer Mohamed Asmeen

Accused – Appellant

Vs

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12

Complainant – Respondent.

Before : P. Kumararatnam, J.

Pradeep Hettiarachchi, J.

Counsel : Sarath Jayamanne, PC with Prashan Wickramaratne, Sanjeewa

Meegahawaththe and Dinindu Rathnayake instructed by Wasantha

Pitigala for the Accused- Appellant.

Azard Navavi, DSG for the Respondent.

Argued on : 22.10.2025

Decided on : 02.12.2025

Court of Appeal Case No:

CA/HCC/0157/2023

High Court of Colombo Case No:

HC/7560/2014

CA/HCC/0157/2023

2 | P a g e

Pradeep Hettiarachchi, J

Judgment

1. This appeal arises from the Judgment dated 28.02.2023 of the Learned High Court

Judge of Colombo where he convicted the Accused –Appellant (hereinafter referred

to as the Appellant) of possession and trafficking of 170 grams of Heroin.

2. Accordingly, the Appellant was imposed a life sentence by the Learned High Court

Judge.

3. The grounds of appeal urged by the Appellant are as follows,

a. The Learned High Court Judge has failed to consider the improbability of the

prosecution version.

b. The Learned High Court Judge erred in Law by failing to consider inter se

contradiction of PW 1 and PW 11.

c. The Learned High Court Judge has unjustly shifted the burden of proof to the

Appellant.

4. The facts of the case, in brief, are as follows;

5. On information received by Police Constable Mahinda of the Police Narcotic Bureau

this raid was organized.

6. After receiving the information, PW 11 informed the same to PW 1 Rangajeewa and

it was Rangajeewa who arranged a team of officers for the raid. The raiding party

consisted of 8 officers including a WPC named Chandani. On 05.03.2003, around

9.50 a.m. while they were on their way to the David Pieris Company Maligawaththa,

the informant joined them at Technical Junction and got into the car in which some of

the officers were travelling.

CA/HCC/0157/2023

3 | P a g e

7. Around 10.10 a.m. they approached the David Pieris Company and parked the car 15

m before the entrance. Thereafter, PW 1, PW 11 and the informant got down from

the vehicle and walked up to the gate of the David Pieris Company.

8. Two officers, namely PC Jayasinghe PW 5 and PC Wakishta PW 4, came on a

motorcycle and were positioned in front of Dambulu furniture, which was situated

right opposite the David Pieris Company. PC Susantha and WPC Chandani who

traveled in the other motor bike were waiting at the beginning of the road running

towards Khettarama Cricket stadium.

9. In the meantime, the informant noticed a three-wheeler about 20 m away and

identified it by the registration number and after informing the officers that it was the

Appellant who had come in the three-wheeler, entered the David Pieris Company

premises.

10. The three-wheeler arrived and stopped directly in front of PW 1 and PW 11. The

person who came in the three-wheeler got out from the vehicle with a parcel and

walked about 2-5 m forward when PW 1 and PW 11 arrested him. Subsequently, the

said parcel was examined by PW 1 and PW 11 and was found to be heroin.

Thereafter, the Accused was handcuffed and was taken to his house at Wellampitiya

around 11.05 a.m. and his house was also searched by the officers of the Police

Narcotic Bureau for around 45 minutes.

11. After that the PNB officers along with the Appellant left his house around 11.15 a.m.

and went to the printing shop in Wellawatta named “Maximum Printers” around

1.00p.m. Around 2.00p.m. the PNB officers along with the Accused left Maximum

Printers and reached PNB at 2.45 p.m.

12. On behalf of the prosecution PW 1, PW 11 testified. Thereafter, since it was

informed by the counsel that the Appellant could not be present in court due to death

threats, steps were taken under section 241 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act

and thereafter conducted the trial in absentia. PW 9 the Senior Assistant Government

Analyst and PW 8 K.M.N.P.Rajakaruna also testified. At the conclusion of the

CA/HCC/0157/2023

4 | P a g e

prosecution case the defense did not call any witnesses and accordingly the trial was

concluded.

13. I will first consider the ground of improbability. It was argued on behalf of the

Appellant that the evidence of prosecution witnesses, in particular PW 1, PW 11

when considered in its entirety, demonstrates the improbability of the events as

alleged by the witnesses.

14. According to PW 1 the raid was conducted on information received by him from one

of his private informants. Needless to say, that even being a police informant is a very

risky job, in particular when the information is linked to drug trafficking. Moreover it

is a life and death situation given the extensively spread drug network operating

within the country. Therefore, Police always takes every endeavor to conceal the

identity of the informant as far as they can.

15. As can be observed from the testimony of PW 1, he along with PW 2 and the

informant got down from the vehicle and walked along the road about 15 m and were

standing near the entrance of the David Pieris Company. This was also during broad

daylight. The other significant but unbelievable part of the evidence is that the

informant was there until the three-wheeler driven by the Appellant was seen by

them. According to the information received by PW 1 he knew the registration

number of the three-wheeler in which the Appellant was supposed to bring heroin.

Prior to the raid PW 1 knew the registration number of the three-wheeler as WPQI

6363. If that was the case, what was the necessity to have the informant in their

company until the three-wheeler was seen by them? It would definitely give anybody

a chance to identify the informant which would put him at a grave risk. Had they

known the registration number of the three-wheeler as per the information they

received, they could have easily stopped the three-wheeler without the informant

being present.

16. Hence, the fact that the informant walked along the road with PW 1 and waited at the

entrance of the David Pieris Company until the Appellant reached there is difficult to

believe.

CA/HCC/0157/2023

5 | P a g e

17. It is also significant to note that according to the notes entered by PW 1 regarding the

information, it was revealed that a person was coming near David Pieris Company to

distribute heroin. During cross examination PW 1testified as follows :

ප්රt : හරි මං දැන් අහන්නන් ඔබතුමා කියපු එක අනුව ඔය සටහනන් තිනයන්නන්

නේවිේ පීරීස් සමාගම අසලට නහන ොයින් නබදාහැරීමට එනවා කියලා එනහම

නන්ද ලියලා තිනයන්නන් ?

උ : එනහමයි උතුමාණනි.

18. Thus, a person of PW 1’s caliber should have reasonably anticipated that someone

who was supposed to take the parcel form the Appellant would have been roaming in

the vicinity. If that was the case, allowing the informant to be there with PW 1 and

PW 11 until the Appellant came by three-wheeler would certainly enable any

interested party to know who the informant is. This again questioned the credibility of

the PW 1’s evidence.

19. Furthermore, according to PW 1 when the three-wheeler was stopped, the Appellant

was found carrying the heroin parcel on his lap in a bag. When the bag was checked

four parcels were found inside. It is interesting to note that although the Appellant

was arrested there he was not searched, nor was the three-wheeler. Having received

information that the Appellant was coming to distribute heroin to the persons in the

David Pieris Company it was strange that the raiding party did not search even the

David Pieris Building to see whether there were some people who are linked to this

distribution network.

20. Another critical piece of evidence that the court should not overlook is that the

informant was said to have gone inside the David Pieris Company, despite the

information that some people who were waiting to receive heroin from the Appellant

were inside the David Pieris Building. In such a situation, it is highly improbable that

the informant would have gone inside the David Pieris Company.

21. It is noteworthy that PW 1 himself has admitted during cross examination that they

could not make notes pertaining to the information that they received from the

CA/HCC/0157/2023

6 | P a g e

informant, as there would be a grave risk to the informant’s life given the nature of

his role. That is the very reason that it would be difficult if not impossible to believe

that the informant would have walked accompanied by PW 1 and PW 11 in broad

daylight for 50 m until they reach the entrance of the David Pieris Company.

22. As stated earlier, if they had known the registration number of the three-wheeler and

given the grave threat to the life of the informant, they could have easily made the

informant stay in a vehicle without exposing himself to anyone. These facts directly

and largely shake the credibility of the evidence of the prosecution.

23. When PW 11 Mahinda Ranasinghe was being cross examined, he very clearly stated

the nature of the information he had received from the informant. He testified page

219/220 as follows:

ප්රt : නේ න ො තු මුන්ට ලැබුනහම මන් න ො තුරු කරුනගන් ප්රtශ්න

ක න්න ඇතිනන් නේ ජාවා ම නවන්නන් නකොනහේද, නමොකක්ද එ න

නවන්නන්, කී නදනනක් එනවාද නේ බඩු ගන්න කියලා,

උ : එනහමයි උතුමාණනි. න ො තු සේබන්ධනයන් සාර්ථක භාවයක් සූදානේ

ක නගන මයි වැටලීමක් සංවිධානය කිරීමට න ෝ.න ො. ංගජීව මහ ාට

දැනුවත් කිරීමක් කනේ.

ප්රt : මුන් ඔක ඇහුවාම මුන්ට දැනගන්න ලැබුනද, කී නදනනක් එනවාද කියලා,

ඒ බඩු ගන්න. දැන් මිනිහා එන්නන් විකුණන්න කියලා කිව්වානේ කී

නදනනක් එනවාද බඩු ගන්න කියලා න ො තුරුකරු කිව්වාද ?

උ : උතුමාණනි මත්ද්රිවක රැනගන එන පුද්ගලයා අත් අඩංගුවට ගැනීමට මයි

අපි නමනහයුම ක්රිමයාත්මක කනර්. මත්ද්රිවක ගන්න එන පුද්ගලයා

සේබන්ධනයන් අපි අවධානය නයොමු කිරීමක් කනේ නැහැ.

ප්රt : නබොනහොම නහොඳ උත් යක් මත්ද්රිවක ගන්න එන පුද්ගලයා ඔන නවන්

නැහැ. නේන නකනා වි යි ඔන. ඒ කියන්නන් මුන්නහන්නසේට කවුරුහරි

ආනවොත් මත්ද්රිවක ගන්න එයාව අේලන්න උවමනාවක් තිබුනන් නැහැ, අ න්

එන නකනාව අේලන්න වි යි උවමනාව තිබුනේ.

CA/HCC/0157/2023

7 | P a g e

උ : මට න ො තුරු ලැබුනන් ගරු උතුමාණනි මත්ද්රිවක රැනගන අස්මත් යන

පුද්ගලයා න ේවිේ පීරීස් ආය නය තුළට එනවා ඒවා නබදාහැරීමට කියලා.

එනහමයි න ො තු ලැබුනන්. ඒ අනුවයි උතුමාණනි නේ පුද්ගලයා අත්

අඩංගුවට ගැනීමට සිදු කනේ.

24. The above evidence very clearly shows that the Appellant was coming to distribute

drugs inside the David Pieris Company and therefore, any prudent person can

reasonably expect that the Appellant’s agents or recipients are inside the David Pieris

Company. If that was the case, can a reasonable and prudent person expect that the

informant knowing that some people waiting to receive heroin from the Appellant

were inside the building still went inside the same building?

25. Unarguably, PW 1 is a well experienced officer who has been engaged in anti-

Narcotic operations for a considerable period and hence it is difficult to believe that a

person of his experience would have allowed the informant to go inside the

David Pieris building where some people were waiting to receive heroin from the

Appellant.

26. This evidence would certainly make the prosecution’s version improbable and

difficult to believe. Unfortunately, the aforementioned improbabilities have escaped

the attention of the Learned High Court Judge.

27. It is desirable to emphasize that official witnesses of a case of this nature have the

privilege of referring to their field notes and refreshing their memory while testifying,

an opportunity which is not available to lay witnesses in a typical criminal trial.

Therefore it is not unfair or unrealistic to expect more accurate evidence from the

official witnesses in a trial of this nature.

28. At the same time, it is important to note that in a criminal trial, court has a sacred duty

to evaluate and assess the credibility and probability of the evidence of official

witnesses irrespective of their accuracy and consistency. If two official witnesses

make notes at the same time regarding a particular raid conducted by them,

inconsistencies or contradictions in their testimonies are going to be hardly present.

Nevertheless, it is incumbent on the trial Judge to examine and evaluate their

CA/HCC/0157/2023

8 | P a g e

evidence, especially the probability of the events that they had explained in their

notes in the context of the entire incident.

29. The aforementioned improbabilities certainly cast doubt on the truthfulness of the

prosecution evidence. It is also noteworthy that the drugs alleged to have been

recovered from the appellant were not sealed until the police team returned to the

Police Narcotics Bureau. As admitted by PW1 during cross-examination, their notes

contained no reference to taking any equipment for sealing purposes, which further

calls into question the credibility of their evidence.

30. When PW1 was questioned as to why the substance was not subjected to a field test

soon after the arrest, he stated that it was difficult to conduct a field test at the

location. However, the evidence reveals that the appellant was taken to his residence

and thereafter to a printing press at Wellawatta. If that is so, the raiding party had

ample opportunity to carry out a field test and to seal the substance before reaching

the Police Narcotics Bureau.

31. This Court has also not lost sight of the questionable circumstances discernible in the

chain of production. It is evident that PW1 kept the productions in his custody for two

days before handing them over to the reserve. The explanation provided by PW1 to

justify his failure to hand over the productions on the same day is far from

satisfactory.

32. According to the prosecution, the raid was conducted pursuant to information

received by PW1. In those circumstances, there is no reasonable explanation for the

failure to bring sealing equipment, particularly given PW1’s seniority and experience.

These deficiencies inevitably weaken the prosecution case and widen the doubt

regarding the credibility and reliability of the prosecution evidence.

33. Upon a perusal of the impugned judgment, it is evident that the learned trial Judge

failed to address the improbabilities in the prosecution version and, more importantly,

the failure of the raiding party to seal the substance until it reached the PNB. It is also

noteworthy that the learned trial Judge erred in law by effectively shifting the burden

of proof onto the appellant, as he stated that the appellant had failed to adduce

CA/HCC/0157/2023

9 | P a g e

evidence to establish the suggestions made during the cross-examination of the

prosecution witnesses.

34. It must be emphasized that the defence is under no obligation to offer any explanation

until the prosecution has first established its case against the accused beyond

reasonable doubt. A weak or deficient prosecution case cannot be strengthened

merely because the defence has chosen not to provide an explanation. The following

authorities provide guidance on this principle.

35. In Narendra Kumar Vs. State (NCT of Delhi), AIR 2012 SC 2281, the Indian

Supreme Court held:

“Prosecution case has to stand on its own legs and cannot take support from the

weaknesses of the case of defence. However great the suspicion against the

accused and however strong the moral belief and conviction of the Court, unless

the offence of the accused is established beyond reasonable doubt on the basis of

legal evidence and material on the record, he cannot be convicted for an offence.

There is an initial presumption of innocence of the accused and the prosecution

has to bring home the offence against the accused by reliable evidence. The

accused is entitled to the benefit of every reasonable doubt.”

36. In Kalinga Premathilake Vs. The Director General of the Commission to

Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption, SC Appeal No. 99/2007 decided

on 30-07-2009, it was held:

“What needs consideration now is when the evidence led for the prosecution in

this case is closely scrutinized, whether it would be satisfied that prosecution

had discharged the burden of proving the case beyond reasonable doubt. If

not, the appellant is liable to be acquitted of the charges. The prosecution

must stand or fall on its own legs and it cannot derive any strength from the

weaknesses in the defence, and when the guilt of the accused is not

established beyond reasonable doubt, he is liable to be acquitted as a matter

of right and not as a matter of grace or favour.”

CA/HCC/0157/2023

10 | P a g e

37. In Dilum Iroshana Panditharathne vs A.G. CA/HCC/267/19 decided on 06.06.2023,

it was held:

It is a well understood principle of criminal law that the party making the allegation

must prove the same beyond reasonable doubt, but if there arises a doubt with regard

to the prosecution story, the benefit of the doubt must be given to the accused. But in

the instant matter the trial Judge had failed to analyze the improbability of the

situation.

38. For the reasons stated above, this appeal succeeds. Accordingly, I set aside the

judgment of the High Court. Thus, the conviction and sentence also stand set aside.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P. Kumararatnam, J.

I agree,

Judge of the Court of Appeal