I ! 1 I I I I

I

1 I I I

\

..

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

C.A.No.825/97 (F)

D.C.Kurunegala No.4099/L.

1 Malamie Janthi Mahakumara

2Chamela Prasadini Vandabona

3Akila Sushan Vandabona

All of 372/2, Kandy Road,

Kurunegala

Substituted-Defendant-Appellant

Vs.

1.Gonagala Withanage Roshana Ajith

2.Gongala Withanage Sanjeewa Vithana

3. Gongala Withanage Nirosha Vithana

All of Gamagewatta, Gonagalpura

Bentota.

Plaintiff-Respondents.

1

Before M.M.A.gaffoor,J. &

S.Devika de L.Theekoon,J.

Counsel Vidura Gunarathne for the Substituted-

Defendant- Appellant.

S.N.Withisingh for the Plaintiff-Respondent.

Argued on 07.02.2017

Decided on 07.06.2017

M.M.A.Gaffoor,J.

This is an appeal against the order of the Learned Additional District Judge

dated 29.09.1997. This case is being a rei-vindication action. The plaintiff-

Respondents are entitled to the property morefullly described in the schedule

Number 1 of the Plaint by virtue of a deed of gift bearing No.5739 dated 25.07.1979

and by virtue of deed of transfer bearing No.1 56 dated 31.05.1989. The said deed of

gift was subject to the life interest of Gunawathi who has leased out the property to

the 1 st Defendant by deed bearing No.426 dated 24.08.1988. After the demise of the

said Gunawathi on 22.08.1991 the lease has come to end. In the aforesaid

2

, .

circumstances the plaintiff -respondents prayed for a declaration of title and

ejectment of the defendant as well as damages.

The Counsel for the Respondents respectfully submitted that the appellant

prayed for in his plaint for an entitlement of the property in suit and once the title is

proved the burden shifts to appellant to establish that he is possessing the property

on his own or any rights. In this case the appellant failed to prove his rights to

possess the said property on a right accrued to him after the death of life interest

holder and the lessor and he further submitted the title of the respondents and

thereafter appellant is stopped from disputing title of respondent. In view of the

Section 116 of the Evidence Ordinance, the learned District Judge correctly held in

his judgment that the lease agreement has come to an end after the death of life

interest holder.

According to the case of Yapa Vs. Dissanayake Sedara 1981 SLR 361, it is

not essential that acceptance of donation on a deed of Gift should appear on the face

of the instrument. Such acceptance may be inferred one in circumstances. Where

there is no acceptance on the fact of the deed and there was no evidence of delivery

of the deed nor of possession of the property acceptance cannot be inferred.

3

I

f! ! i! II,i,

J[f

{,,t

~,

ff

In the case of the Counsel for the Plaintiff- Respondent submitted that the

appellant did not raise any issues in relation to the minority of the respondent but

raised an issue, Issue No 12 whether the deed Number 5739 is null and void and

invalid. And the 1 st respondent in relation to his age and it was revealed that at the

time of execution of the deed, the 1 st respondent has reached the age of seventeen.

Thus there is a valid acceptance. Acceptation could be effected by other means as

well.

In the case of Sri Lanka Ports Authority and another V.Jugolinjia -Boaf

East 1981 (1) SLR 18 in which it was decreed that;

"If no objection is taken, when at the close of a case document are read in evidence,

they are evidence for all purposes of the Law. This is the curses curiae of the

original Civil Courts."

Similarly in the recent case of Samarakoon V. Gunasekera and another

2011 (1) SLR 149 in which Amaratunga J. held inter alia that:

" When a document is admitted subject to proof, the party tendering it in evidence is

obliged to formally prove it by calling the evidence necessary to prove the document

according to law. If such evidence is not called and if no objection is taken to the

document it is read in evidence at the time of closing the case of the party who

tendered the document it becomes evidence in the case.

4

I ,! I

I,

On the other hand if the document is objected to at the time when it is

read in evidence before closing the case of the party who tendered the document

in evidence, the document cannot be used as evidence for the party tendering it.

Considering above findings it is clear there is no objection was made by

defendant-appellant regarding the acceptance of the deed of gift by the

respondent.

And also, in the case of Yapa Vs. Dissanayake Sedara 19811 SLR 361.

It is not essential that acceptance of donation on a deed of gift should appear on

the face of the instrument. Such acceptance may be inferred one in

circumstances. Where there is no acceptance on the face of the deed and there

was no evidence of delivery of the deed nor of possession of the property

acceptance cannot be inferred.

The position of the appellant is that the appellants were minor at the time

the gift were made and therefore they could not have accepted the deed of gift.

In effect the appellants are challenging the title of the Respondents.

In the case of Siriwardena V. Wiramanathan SLR 2001 2page No.228 it

was held by lordship Justice Weerasuriya that:

s

II

l t

\

tI

.

1. The plaintiff respondent was 12 years of age at the time of the execution of

the deed of gift, the Notary in attestation clause made explicit reference to

the fact that he had duly read over and explained

2. The proposition that acceptance by a minor, does not contribute valid

acceptance cannot affect, the validity of deed of Gift. It is competent for a

minor to accept a donation in his favour inasmusch as he is benefitted

thereby.

In Coudert Vs. Don Elias 17 NLR 134 it was held when the property gifted

was already in the possession of the respondent and who would not allow the

plaintiff to take possession of it. How were the plaintiff to accept the gift except by

means ay an attempt to take possession of the property? This action is such an

attempt and I am inclined to agree with the respondent's Counsel that in the

circumstances of this case an action to gain possession of the property donated

would be tantamount to a manifestation of the acceptance by the donee of the Gift.

In these circumstances of this case the 1 st appellant was staying in the property

until 1982 and the life interest of the property was in the name of Gunawathi and

when Gunawathi had passed away, the respondent filed this case to take possession

of the property in their control which was tantamount of a manifestation of

acceptance by the Respondents.

6

frfi

~ (( Ii I

J

~ i

I !

, . "

~ . ! The learned District Judge summarized that at the page 214 and had come

to the conclusion that after the deed of Gift bearing No.5739 has been

registered and it was handed over to the respondent's father therefore

respondents are entitled to the property described in the schedule of the plaint.

In these circumstances, i am of the view that the learned District Judge

has very carefully and correctly arrived his determination with correct

perspective and analysed the entire verbal and documentary evidence place

before him to come his conclusion.

Therefore the appeal is dismissed with cost fixed at Rs. 25,0001=.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

S.Devika de L.Tennekoon,J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

7

f

f f

i

\ I

I f IIl I

t I