. .----------------------------------------------------------------------,

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

C.A. No. 111/2012

H.C. Gampaha No.120/2010

***********

In the matter of an Appeal in terms

of Section 331(1) of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act No.15/1979

read with Article 138(1) of the

Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka and

High Court of the Provinces (Special

Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990.

Wanasinghe Arachchilage

Samantha TI1ilakasiri alias Sud a

Accused-Appellant

Vs.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Genera l's Department,

Colombo 12

Complainant-Respondent

.r---------------------------------~----------------------------------_,

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

DECIDED ON

DEEP ALI WlJESUNDERA, J.

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

Amila Palliyage with Nihara Randeniya for the Accused -Appellant.

Parinda Ranasighe Gr.) P.C, A.s.G. for the respondent

15th March, 2019, 18th March, 2019,

02nd May, 2019, 09th May, 2019 &

10th May, 2019

20th September, 2019

****************

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, T.

The accused-appellant (hereinafter referred to as the "appellant")

was indicted before the High Court of Gampaha for committing rape on

Stephen Koralalage Don Nishani Buddhika on or about 3rd November 2006

and, in the same course of transaction, committing robbery and of

committing her murder. The appellant elected a trial without a jury. At

the conclusion of his trial, the appellant was convicted on all three counts.

He was then sentenced to serve a fifteen-year term of imprisonment each

on account of his conviction to the charges of rape and robbery, in addition

to a fine of Rs.7,500.00 with a default term of six month imprisonment.

2

" ~r-------------------------~-------------------------'

Sentence of death was pronounced upon his conviction for the offence of

murder.

Being aggrieved by the said conviction and sentence, the appellant

sought to challenge them upon the following grounds of appeal;

a. the trial Court had failed to evaluate the items of

circumstantial evidence in its correct perspective in finding

the appellant guilty,

b. the trial Court erroneously convicted the appellant on mere

speculation and pure conjectural surmises, which are not

supported by the evidence led before it,

c. the failure of the trial Court to reject the" unsafe" evidence

that had been led under Section 27 of the Evidence

Ordinance through the Police which is in conflict with the

evidence of the medical expert,

d. the failure of the trial Court to consider that the verdict of

guilty is not the irresistible inference when considered the

evidence in its totality specially when it failed to exclude

the involvement of a 3rd party in the murder,

e. the trial Court had failed to consider that there was no

evidence in support of the charge of rape,

f. the trial Court had erroneously rejected the appellant's

evidence which was corroborated by the evidence of the

medical expert.

3

. '

These grounds of appeal that had been raised by the appellant could

be considered conveniently by this Court under the following four broad

areas. The appellant relied on grounds of appeal concerning the principles

governing prosecutions based on circumstantial evidence, consideration of

admissibility of evidence relating to discovery of fact, the evaluation of the

defence case by the trial Court and sufficiency of evidence in relation to the

hnrBc of rape.

It is evident from some of the grounds of appeal that they concern

the correctness of the evaluation of the items of circumstantial evidence

undertaken by the trial Court in arriving at the conclusion that the

appellant is guilty to the three counts he was charged with. Therefore, it is

helpful if this Court refers to these several items of circumstantial evidence

that had been presented before the trial Court by the prosecution in a

sequential order albeit briefly, before this Court makes an attempt to

consider the question of validity of the conviction in the light of the

abovementioned grounds of appeal.

It was revealed before the trial Court that the deceased was a

resident of Meerigama and used to commute daily in train to her workplace

in Colombo. She used to walk along a foot path which ran along a canal,

abutting a threshing floor, to reach Wilwatte Railway Station where she

boarded the 6.20 a.m. Colombo bound commuter train. In the evening she

would return home after alighting from the train from the same station

and walking along the same footpath in order to reach her home by about

6.30 p.m. with her mother who would wait for her at the Station. The

deceased was 26 years of age at the time of her death and was about to get

marry to her fiance, Kasun Udawatta.

4

.

~--------------------~----------------------,

On 03.11.2006 too, she left home in the morning as usual and when

her mother Sumitra went to the Station to accompany the deceased in the

evening, she learnt that the deceased had left her workplace earlier than

the usual on that particular day. Sumitra was anxious since the foot path

was already under water due to the heavy downpour to the area during

the day and decided to wait for her, in spite of the fact that the deceased

had left her office early that afternoon. She thought the deceased would

arrive in the train which followed to the one, the deceased used to take

r '8ulorly and therefore took shelter in a nearby boutique. She waited

there lill 8.30 p.m. Whilst waiting in anticipation, she was told by

will1ess Sujatha that she saw the deceased, who had arrived at Wi/walta

Station in the evening. Hearing this, the witness became highly agitated

and the thought crossed her mind whether her daughter had aCCidently

fallen into the canal, which was overflowing with rain water.

The witness then alerted her son Buddhika about the deceased's

disappearance. He in turn contacted her fiance Kasun. They have gone to

Police to inform about the disappearance of the deceased. Thereafter they

have looked for the deceased in the surrounding areas along her usual

route. Buddhika had then seen the body of the deceased lying naked in the

temporary shed on the threshing floor at about 9.30 or 10.00 p.m. in the

same evening. He also noted a plastic cone that had been inserted into her

vagina. He had covered her body with his T shirt. Sunitha, who lived close

to the place where the body was found had provided a bed sheet to the

Police who arrived there subsequently to cover the body of the deceased.

Ariyaratne, who plucks coconuts in the area, stated in his evidence

that the appellant had took him to that particular threshing floor near the 5

. ',----------------------------------------------------,

Wilwatta Station in one evening and made an attempt to stab him over a

past dispute. He noted a bullock cart on the said threshing floor. He

escaped the attempt of the appellant on his life by running away from him.

He was arrested by Police in connection with this murder and was

subsequently discharged by Court when the appellant was arrested by the

Police.

In his evidence, Wijeratne Silva stated that he learnt about the death

of the deceased from others and had met the appellant quite by chance at

the Minuwangoda bus stand where the latter had told him that he was

released on bail on that day. When the witness met the appellant again

after few days after their earlier meeting, he asked the appellant as to the

reason why the appellant was not seen around. In replying to this query

the appellant had told wibless that he was accused of murder of a girl who

was r -turning home after work. He had run away from the Police who

arne to arrest him by giving them the slip. He further described an

incident to the witness in following terms:

G: (l)l~ eC) cClc E}z0l qzB<BJ <!l~~ (SeOO mc) C\~Cl).

m&ll qB>.!lI q~~~ <!lC) ~@lCl.!ll (l)zI;!lCl) C\~Cl).

q)@lCl 1:!@l=e:S CDzI;!lCl) C\~Cl). 00 ogCl q)ec

O)OtD (l)G:J<BJ B>e~C)) C\~Cl). 00 ogCl <!lC)

c:>z5(S) e:tl)0 qO.!ll &&.!lI B>eoullCl) C\~Cl). <!l=

e:OtDtl)CtD B>f)I))) C\~El). e:OtDtl)ec <!l@(S(S) t,!l@

ee:f.!ll <!leG:J B>f)IJ) C\~El).

6

"

~---------------------------------------------------.

The appellant also told the witness that U -:!l@ ~jlD <;~ ~C)31

c5Q')@o31c qlCJ(gO cO(g" and there was a drizzle at the time of her murder.

After listening to the description of the circumstances that surrounded

the murder, as provided by the appellant, the witness became suspicious

as to how the appellant, who is from a different locality, knew that it had

rained in Wilwatta that very evening the girl was murdered. The witness

later conveyed his suspicion to one of his friends, who then had apparently

alerted the local Police about the appellant.

PS 25842 Serasinghe of Meerigama Police received information about

the discovery of a dead body and had left the station to investigate at 12.20

a.m. on 04.11.2006. The initial observations made by the witness revealed

that a naked body of a woman was lying on the threshing floor in between

two bullock carts. Her body was covered with two T shirts. The officer had

noted one cloth bag and another black bag in the canal during

investigations he conducted in the following morning. He also noted a

broken umbrella with a bended main shaft. A handbag containing

identification papers of the deceased, a rose coloured T shirt, some shirt

buttons, a brown skirt, a tight short, a brassier, a leather bag were among

the items that were found in a pile in the immediate vicinity of the dead

body.

IP Kosala arrived there with a team of officers and had taken charge

of the items that were found at the scene. He also made observations of the

body. It was lying in supine position and the witness noted significant

bleeding from her vagina. He took steps to photograph the scene and had

recovered three white buttons and one purplish button embedded in the

muddy threshing floor. He also noted that the canal that ran along the foot

7

path and the surrounding paddy fields were still under water after the

heavy rains in the previous evening.

The Judicial Medical Officer Dr. Ananda Wijewickrama of Gampaha

Hospital had arrived at the scene and made his observations. He had

performed a post mortem examination on the body of the deceased after

its removal to the hospital. He noted down the following observations at

the scene;

"Body was seen naked, in a threshing floor of a paddy field

lIear a cadjan hut. It was lying upwards with both legs bent

upward and stretched out at knees. Both hands were

stretched away from the body and the left hand was bent

upwards at elbow joint. Blood stains were seen on the floor

near the buttock. A brassier, pant, blouse and a skirt were

seen near the left side of the body. It was a well built, fair

skinned female. There were mud stains and sand all over the

body, but mainly on back aspect. Bloodstained, uniform, fine

froth was seen flown out from both nostrils. A cone shaped,

plastic case of thread roll was seen forced into the vagina.

There were blood stains on inner and back aspects of both

upper thighs and on buttocks. A variety of plant leaves were

seen entangled in hair."

During examination in chief of the witness Sumitra, the prosecution

had clarified that the deceased wore several items of jewellery regularly to

office. The jewellery items and the clothing worn by the deceased and her

personal items were shown to the witness and were identified. She also

stated that she was shown these items by the Police at some pOint of time

8

after its recovery during investigations and again during the inquiry

before the Magistrate's Court. This fact was not challenged by the

appellant.

Witness Dharmasena had assisted the police officers in their further

investigations. He accompanied some police officers to the place where the

body of the deceased was seen lying. They saw several broken branches of

a Kottan tree on the bank of the canal about 50 feet away from the

threshing floor and have decided to conduct a search in the canal. At that

time the flood water level had receded and was at knee high. The witness

felt something in the muddy bed of the canal and located a pair of rubber

slippers worn by the deceased. He then recovered another rubber slipper

whi h was bigger in size to the pair he already recovered. A statement was

rc ordcd off the wihless by the Police about these recoveries.

IP Premasundern of Meerigama Police confirmed the said recovery

was made under his supervision.

In his evidence, IP Jayakody stated that he was attached to the

unresolved crimes unit under the direct supervision of Senior SP of the

area. The appellant was arrested upon an information received by an

Assistant SP. He was arrested near Meerigama bus stand at about 10.00

p.m on 27.11.2006. His statement was recorded at 11.20 p.m. Then the

Police team had left for his house at about 2.00 a.m. to conduct further

investigations. The witness had recovered several items of jewellery

wrapped in a polythene bag, which had been placed under a pot of aloe

bushes. The place where these items were recovered was pointed out by

9

.'

the appellant. A shirt with a missing button and a trouser too was

recovered by the Police. They returned to the station at 8.15 a.m.

The appellant had also pointed out a place in a shrub jungle along

the railway in Kosetadeniya where a rubber slipper was found on

28.11.2006. The appellant was examined by a Judicial Medical Officer

prior to his production before Court.

The main thrust of the appellant's challenge on the recovery of

jewellery items was pivoted on the three fresh injuries that were noted by

the JMO who estimated that they could have been caused to him within

three to four days prior to his medical examination which could be due to

an assault. This factor, the appellant contended, would render the evidence

relating to the discovery of a fact, which had been utilised by the trial

Court to infer the appellant's guilt, unsafe.

Learned Counsel for the appellant took great pains to impress upon

this Court that the appellant had sustained these injuries during his

extended period of illegal detention at the hands of his investigators and

the only significant item of evidence against the appellant i.e. the recovery

of the items of jewellery is therefore a result of information extracted from

him under those circumstances. His contention is that the recovery was

made under duress and it rendered that evidence inadmissible and

unreliable as per the judgments of Poulier v Abeygunawardene41 N.L.R.

347 and The Queen v Appuhamy 60 N.L.R. 313.

Learned Additional Solicitor General sought to counter this

submission on the basis that the appellant never suggested that the

jewellery items, said to have been recovered upon his pointing out the

10

"

:

place where they were concealed, were in fact introduced into the case by

the investigators during a subsequent stage of the investigations after

obtaining them from the deceased's family to any of the relevant lay

witnesses, although he stated so only in the defence case. Therefore,

learned A5G submitted that the appellant had mounted this factual

challenge inconsistently and that too only at a later stage of the trial. That

is a clear indication that it was raised only as an afterthought, and

accordingly the trial Court's decision to reject the appellant's evidence on

this basis is amply justified when considered in the light of the totality of

the attendant circumstances.

The prosecution evidence is that the appellant was arrested on

29.11.2006 at 2.20 a.m. in Kosetadeniyawa of Kitulwala after 26 days since the

death of the deceased. At the time of his arrest, the appellant had fresh

injuries on his heels. He was examined by Dr. Wijewickrama also on

29.11.2006 at 11.30 a.m. upon being produced by 51 Jayakodi.

The appellant, during his cross examination of 51 Jayakodi did

suggest that he was arrested on 22.11.2006 at Gampaha but was denied by

the witness. The appellant however did not suggest to any Police officer

that he was assaulted by them during his period of detention at the police

station.

In his evidence, the appellant claimed that he was arrested on

22.11.2006 by 51 Jayakodi and was kept in detention for "28 days". The

appellant also claimed that he was "inhumanely" tortured by six

policemen. He was made to sign on five blank loose sheets of paper.

When he refused to place his signature on blank papers, the policemen

11

.

made him sign on them by crushing his fingers (CD(\\lClJ) by placing them

upon a table and striking on them with a club.

It was submitted by the learned Counsel for the appellant that the

appellant's claim of torture is amply supported by the medical witness's

observation of injuries.

Understandably the appellant seeks to challenge the most damning

item of circumstantial evidence presented against him by the prosecution.

It is therefore incumbent upon this Court to consider this claim of the

appellant very seriously since it will certainly have a bearing on his

conviction on these counts.

The appellant relied on the three fresh injuries that were noted by

the medical witness on his person to substantiate his position that he was

kept in detention for well over legally permissible 24-hour period and the

admissibility of the evidence relating to the discovery of a fact by the trial

Court was therefore tainted due to the fact that his statement was obtained

during this continued detention and under compulsion upon torturous

acts performed on him by the Police.

Perusal of the oral evidence as well as the medico legal report of Dr.

Wijewickrama revealed that the three fresh injuries that utilised to support

the appellant's claim of torture, are described as follows:

Injury No. 8: A fresh, grazed abrasion measuring 1.5 cm long,

placed obliquely on front aspect of left shoulder,

12

.'

Injury No.9:

Injury No. 10:

A fresh, grazed abrasion of U -shaped,

measuring 0.5 cm + 1 cm + 0.5 cm placed on the

front aspect of left shoulder,

A fresh grazed abrasion measuring 2.5 cm long,

placed transversely on outer aspect of left

forearm, 4 cm above the wrist.

The appellant in his evidence did not make any reference to any of

these three injuries. He instead alleged in more general terms that he was

"inhumanely tortured" ( qJ.:!liel> ClG) ~o(";1J Cl@lCl @lei el>@Il.). He also asserted

that he was "burnt" and his fingers were "crushed" after placing them on

a table top. He repeated his assertion of "crushing" his fingers when he

referred to the circumstances under which his statement was recorded.

Learned Additional Solicitor General, in his submissions invited

attention of Court that the appellant, although he alleged torture, did not

make even a passing reference about it to the medical officer when he was

produced before him. He also did not complain about it to the Magistrate's

Court. He also did not make an application to the Prison Authorities to

have him medically examined for the physical injuries that he claims to

have sustained due to the acts of torture, during his period of detention.

In explaining the failure of the appellant to make a complaint to the

examining medical officer, learned Counsel for the appellant highlighted

that in view of the facts that the appellant was produced before the

medical officer by SI Jayakody, his immediate presence during examination

13

.'

and the fact of returning of the appellant back to Police custody after the

examination, his silence could be understood and justified.

The trial Court, in its judgment had considered the appellant's

evidence in quite detail. It is clear that the evidence of the appellant was

not accepted by the trial Court upon its determination on credibility issues.

The trial Court, having noted that the appellant's claim of obtaining his

signature on five blank loose sheets is clearly a false claim when it

considered the evidence that the relevant Information Book contained his

statement in bound pages or not on paper which had later been affixed on

it. The trial Court also considered the appellant's claim that the items of

jewellery were introduced on him after the deceased's parents have

supplied them to the police after his arrest, also as not creditworthy.

Having considered the evidence of the appellant, this Court concurs

with the conclusion reached by the trial Court that his evidence is not at all

creditworthy. In addition to the reasons adduced by the trial Court, as

stated in its judgment, this Court also has considered the following aspects

of his evidence especially in relation to his allegation of torture.

The prosecution admits that the appellant was kept in detention for

more than 24 hours, but with the sanction of Court. An application was

made to the relevant Magistrate's Court that the appellant be kept in police

custody for 48 hours and it was allowed. Other than his bare assertion that

he was kept in detention for 8 days (mistakenly stated as "28" days) there

was no material even to suspect the validity of this claim.

In relation to the allegation of torture, the appellant relies on his

assertion that he was "burnt" and had his fingers" crushed". The medical

14

-

,

examination in fact revealed that the appellant has had a single burn scar

on his body as the medical officer noted a shiny irregular shaped scar

measuring 2 cm x 3 cm placed on front aspect of right forearm (Injury No.

7). But this burn scar does not support his assertion that it was due to

torture by Police since he himself admitted that it is an old scar.

It could also be observed that the appellant had 6 healed abrasions

on his limbs (Injury Nos. 1 to 6) which are older in age and hence could not

be connected to the alleged acts of torture.

Thus, if at all, the alleged acts of torture are confined to the three

fresh injuries which could have been a result of an "assault" during the

period of detention. It could also be the outside of the 48 hour long

detention since the age of the injuries were estimated as 3 - 4 days. The

appellant, although clarified from the medical witness that these injuries

could be due to an assault, however did not elicit any evidence as to the

weapon which may have used by the officers to inflict such injuries on

him. Learned prosecutor had merely clarified that there was no complaint

by the appellant of any assault to the medical witness and had thereby left

the issue frozen in the position that had been elicited by the appellant

during his cross examination of the medical witness. The appellant

therefore claims that these injuries are sufficient proof of the fact that he

was subject to torture.

It is correct that the prosecution, for the reasons best known to them,

opted not to clarify from the medical witness as to the basis of his opinion

that those three injuries are due to an act of "assault". At the same time,

these injuries should then match with the description given by the

15

'.

:

appellant when he described as to the manner by which he was tortured.

He made no reference to any of these injuries or to the manner in which

they had been inflicted. In short, he did not assert these three injuries were

a result of an act of assault. His allegation of burning and crushing his

fingers are clearly made out versions of events. The appellant himself

speaks about a failed attempt by the Police to apprehend where he had

escaped from their custody until he was re-arrested at a subsequent point

of time.

In addition, the position advanced by the appellant creates another

difficulty in the conceptual level. When the appellant claimed that his

statement, which resulted in the recovery of certain articles, was recorded

upon torture, he tacitly admits that in fact there was a recovery made by

the Police upon information provided by him. As such, the appellant seeks

to extend the prohibition imposed by Section 25 of the Evidence Ordinance

extended to the exception created by Section 27.

However, when the appellant, in the same breath, claimed that these

items were introduced to him by the police after obtaining them from the

deceased's parents, he contradicts the very basis of his previous challenge

to the recovery of articles on the ground of torture, since this claim totally

excludes his knowledge to the articles recovered upon his pointing out the

place. Clearly, if the Police were to introd uce these articles on to the

appellant, after obtaining them from the deceased's parents at a

subsequent stage of the investigations, they need not labour themselves in

torturing the appellant, risking their professional careers, to find a place of

concealment where the appellant's knowledge to it is imputable. The

appellant admitted that the Police had visited his house after his arrest and

16

,

:

that had provided an opportunity for the Police to find a suitable place of

concealment and make notes about it, if they so wished, that such items

were recovered from a place within the compound where the appellant

resided. For that kind of introduction, the Police need not have undertaken

any coercive action with the appellant by subjecting him to torture.

The The Queen v Appuhamy (supra), is a case where a confession

made by an appellant was ruled out as inadmissible due to its involuntary

nature in view of clear evidence of acts of torture inflicted by the Police.

The appellants have called five witnesses in support of their claim of

torture including a medical officer. The appellate Court had concurred

with the conclusion reached by the lower Court that the allegations of

assault of stripping the appellant naked, pressing the appellant's penis into

a drawer, suspending him by his legs in a cross beam, forcing to inhale

burning chili powder on red hot charcoal, dug in his ribs by coconut stalk,

applying chili powder on his genitalia are credible allegations. The

appellants have complained to the Magistrate about the atrocities they had

endured during Police custody through their Counsel on the first available

opportunity. The Magistrate also observed that the appellant was "tired

and exhausted and felt he was going to faint" . The Court also noted that

the appellants are "persons of good character and men of means and good

standing in the society to which they belonged".

The Court expressed its serious concern over the credible allegation

of acts of torture as their Lordships observed that "... the police

administration has degraded itself by crude methods". Having ruled the

confession is thus inadmissible, in these circumstances, the Court of

Criminal Appeal had indicated its view on the question" whether 17

' .

'.

information forced out of an accused person by the use of violence is the 'kind of

information contemplated in section 27? " clearly in the negative.

Both these authorities relied upon by the appellant and many other

judgments pronounced by the superior Courts have clearly have reiterated

its condemnation in employing such methods by the investigators to

discover incriminating evidence against a suspect who is in their custody.

There is no question that such deplorable practices, that are sometimes

employed by the Police, had been strongly condemned by our judiciary

consistently and more vociferously whenever such instances are brought

to its attention.

The judgment of the Supreme Court in Rupasinghe v Attorney

General (1986) 2 Sri L.R. 329, where a bench consisting of five Justices have

considered the all-important right to silence of an accused and had dealt

with this particular aspect in the following manner:

"The origins of the doctrine against self-incrimination

in the English Common Law are discernible in the

pronouncement of the later Stuart Judges which echoed

the revulsion of the community against the practice of

the Court of Star Chambers of compelling persons

brought before it to testify against themselves on oath.

The use of the rack and other forms of torture to extort

confessions or other incriminating statements from

persons accused of crime contributed to this reaction."

18

..

.'

But the nature of injuries and the appellant's conspicuous absence of

making any reference to them even though he made an attempt to make up

a case of torture and the trivial nature of the three injuries as seen from the

medical evidence, coupled with the fact that it was only during the trial

before the High Court the appellant first complained about his rough

treatment by the Police, would certainly leads to the justifiable conclusion

that it is only made out at a subsequent stage in order to challenge the

admissibility of the evidence relating to recovery of items.

The trial Court, which has had the distinct advantage of observing

the demeanour of the appellant at the witness box, correctly concluded that

his evidence lacks credibility and therefore no reasonable doubt arose in its

mind in respect of the strong inference of guilt that had been drawn upon

the prosecution case against him.

In view of above considerations this Court is of the considered view

that the grounds of appeal, based on the contention that the trial Court had

erroneously relied on the evidence of recovery of jewellery items and also

had erroneously rejected the appellant's evidence as not creditworthy,

have no merit.

That leaves the consideration of the other substantial ground urged

by the appellant that the trial Court acted contrary to the principles of law

governing cases presented on items of circumstantial evidence.

19

It was the contention of the appellant that the trial Court had failed

to consider the fact that the prosecution had failed to establish a nexus

between the body of the deceased and the appellant. He also submitted

that the trial Court had failed to note that the appellant was seen at

Wilwatta threshing floor at some point of time has no relevance to this

incident as there was no specific time period mentioned in that evidence.

Another complaint highlighted by the appellant is that the trial Court had

failed to note that the prosecution did not exclude involvement of a third

party in the murder and strong suspicion that might exist against the

appellant does not suffice to impute criminal liability on him.

The appellant relied on the reasoning contained in the unreported

judgment of Deehagawatura v Attorney General ( CA No. 61/2001 -

decided on 02.08.2005) where the applicable principles in relation to

circumstantial evidence had been extensively considered.

Learned Additional Solicitor General, in his reply, has invited

attention of Court that the main items of circumstantial evidence that had

been presented against the appellant are as follows:

a. the appellant had knowledge of the crime scene, as per the

evidence of Ariyaratne

b. the appellant had detailed knowledge of the incident including

the weather conditions that existed in the area as per the

evidence of Wijeratne Silva,

20

. .

c. the appellant had exclusive knowledge of the place where

jewellery items of the deceased were kept concealed and, in the

absence of any acceptable explanation, it could therefore be

presumed that it was the appellant who had placed them at the

place from where it was eventually recovered.

The trial Court, having considered the several items of

circumstantial evidence presented before it, concluded that the prosecution

had proved beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant is not "an

innocent person". The appellant's contention that the trial Court had failed

to apply the legal principles in imputing criminal liability on the basis of a

circumstantial evidence case sterns from the wording of this conclusion.

In Deehagawatura v Attorney General (supra) Sisira de Abrew J,

having considered the principles laid down in several judicial precedents

which dealt with the cases based on circumstantial evidence, crystallised

the applicable principles as follows:

"Having regard to the principles laid down in the

above judicial decisions 1 hold that in a case of

circumstantial evidence in order to base a conviction

on circumstantial evidence the jury or the trial judge

as the case may be must be satisfied on following

grounds. (a) Proved facts must be consistent only with

the guilt of the accused (b) Proved facts must point

the finger of guilt only to the accused (c) Proved facts

21

. .

must be incompatible and inconsistent with the

innocence of the accused. (d) Proved facts must be

incapable of any other reasonable explanation than

that of his guilt. In a case of circumstantial evidence,

if two decisions are possible from the proved facts,

then the decision which is favourable to the accused

must be taken. In a case of circumstantial evidence, if

an inference of guilt is to drawn from the proved facts

such inference must be the necessary, irresistible and

inescapable inference and it shou ld be the one and

only inference. In a case of circumstantial evidence, if

the circumstances found to be as consistent with the

innocence as with the guilt of the accused; or if an

innocent explanation is found from the evidence of the

prosecution, no inference of guilt should be drawn.

Therefore if the prosecution seeks to prove a case

purely on circumstantial evidence, the prosecution

must exclude the possibility that the proved facts are

consistent with the innocence of accused."

Having considered the conclusions reached by the trial Court after

evaluating each primary fact that had been proved before it through

circumstantial evidence, this Court is not inclined to accept the

submissions of the appellant that the trial Court reached an erroneous

conclusion. It may be that the trial Court had not referred to these

principles by referring to them in more explicit terms, when it reached the

conclusion on the evidence. However, it is clear from the wording used in

22

the judgment that it was mindful of those principles when it had evaluated

the evidence that had been presented before it as a whole and applied

them in reaching a valid conclusion against the appellant.

In Premaratne v Republic of Sri Lanka (2008) 1 Sri L.R. 44, this

Court considered a similar argument that had been advanced by the

appellant. Having considered the submissions on the point, Sisira de

Abrew J stated thus:

"Learned Counsel contended that the conviction of the 2nd

accused appellant could not be sustained as the learned trial

judge had failed to consider the principles governing cases of

circumstantial evidence. It is true that the learned trial judge

failed to observe the principles governing cases of

circumstantial evidence. Should the trial judge always state

the said principles in his judgment? In considering this

question, I must not forget the fact this was a trial by a judge

and not by a jury. In a trial by a jury, at the commencement

of the trial, the judge has to inform the members of the jury

of their duties. At that stage the judge also directs them

briefly on the presumption of innocence, the burden of proof

and other principles of law as may be relevant to the case.

Vide section 217 of the Criminal Procedure Code (CPC).

This is because jurors are ordinary laymen. It is noteworthy

to mention here that Attorney-at-law cannot serve as jurors.

Vide Section 245 of the CPe. Thus the law presumes that

jurors do not possess knowledge in law. This appears to be

the reason that the judge is expected to direct the jurors on

23

.. ,----------------------------------------------------------------------,

the relevant principles of law in both his opening address and

in summing up. The judge who has a trained legal mind

cannot be equated to a juror. In this connection I would like

to quote a passage from the judgment of Justice Kulathilake

in the case of Dayan and a Lokugalappathy v The State

(2003) 3 Sri L.R. 362 at 392:

"In a trial by a Judge of the High Court without a jury it

is significant that there are no such provisions similar to

section 217 of the Act, for example to set forth the basic

principles of criminal law, i.e. the presumption of

innocence, the burden of proof etc. We do not see any

requirement similar to section 229 that he should lay

down the law which he is to be guided. The reason being

that the law takes for gran ted that a Judge wi th a trained

legal mind is well possessed of the principles of law, he

would apply. "

Considering all these matters I hold the view that in a trial by a

judge without a jury, judge cannot be expected to lay down all

the principles of law in his judgment. But this does not mean

that the trial judge can ignore the legal principles relevant to

the case in deciding the issue before him. If the appellate court

is of the opinion that the case had been proved beyond

reasonable doubt, the appellate court will not set aside the

conviction on the ground that the judge had failed to lay down

the principles of law in his judgmen t. If a conviction is set aside

24

0r---______________________________________________________________________ -,

on the said ground such a course would lead to deterioration of

administration of justice. "

The appellant also complained that the trial Court had narrated a

sequence of events that had not been proved by the circumstances. This

compliant in fact was made in reference to certain inferences that had been

reached by the trial Court, upon the evidence presented before it. The trial

Court is entitled to draw inferences upon proved facts as per Section 114 of

the Evidence Ordinance and this Court had already considered the scope

of the Section.

In Ariyasinghe and Others v Attorney General (2004) 2 Sri L.R. 357,

Amaratunga J had held thus:

"When section 114 of the Evidence Ordinance is closely

examined, a very significant feature, which is highly relevant

to the exercise of the discretion available to Court, becomes

apparent. In deciding to presume the existence of any facts,

the Court can take into account the common course of

natural events, human conduct and public and private

business in their relation to the facts of the particular case.

Those highlighted words indicate the guiding factor. Those

words clearly indicate that the reasonableness and the

correctness of the Court's decision to presume the existence

of any fact would depend on the particular facts of that case.

The question of drawing a presumption of fact is a matter to

be considered on a case by case basis. Thus the use of the

25

'. ~-------------------------------------------------------------------------,

words 'in their relation to the facts of the case' prevents the

Courts from laying down any general guidelines regarding

the situations in which a Court may be justified on drawing

a presumption under section 114 of the Evidence Ordinance.

V'Vhen a trial judge has presumed a fact under section 114 of

the Evidence Ordinance, it is the unenviable task of an

appellate Court to examine the validity of the trial judge's

conclusion in the light of particular facts of the case."

(emphasis original)

As already indicated, this Court had examined the validity of the

inferences drawn against the appellant by the trial Court in the light of

the available evidence before it. The references made by the trial Court to

the effect that the deceased who was returning home was forcibly put to

under water and thereby made her unconscious by the appellant are

inferences that could be drawn from the established facts. The deceased

had died clearly due to drowning. But her body was laid out on the

threshing floor in supine position. Her clothing had been removed and

was found kept in a pile besides her body. The jewellery items worn by the

deceased also had been removed and was later recovered upon the

information provided by the appellant. The appellant pointed out to one

rubber slipper while another similar slipper for the other foot with same

colour and size had been recovered embedded in the mud along with the

foot-wear worn by the deceased. Her broken umbrella was also found

along with her clothing. The appellant, although a resident of a different

area, was strangely familiar with the place on which the deceased body

26

, -0r--------------------------------------------------------------------------,

was recovered and knew the details as to how and under what

circumstances the death of the deceased had occurred.

The recovery of jewellery items of the deceased upon information

provided by the appellant gave rise to the reasonable inference that he had

exclusive knowledge of the place where it was kept as per the three

positions articulated by the judgment of Ariyasinghe and Others v

Attorne1J General (supra). In the course of the said judgment Amaratunga J

imputed the knowledge, attributed to an appellant on whose information

certain recoveries were made, to the following three ways:

1. The accused himself concealed the items.

ii. The accused saw another person concealing the items.

lll. A person who had seen another concealing the items in that

place told the accused about it.

The evidence of the appellant does not reveal that he relied on the

second and third propositions mentioned above, leaving the only inference

that it was he who concealed those items of jewellery. This exclusive

knowledge possessed by the appellant required him to offer an acceptable

explanation as to how he came to possess those items.

It is clear from the evidence the deceased was alive when she got off

the train at Wilwatta Station that evening. Her lifeless body was recovered

few hours later lying naked on the threshing floor. By then only her

jewellery had been removed. Her clothing was found kept aside near her

27

\., , .. ~-------------------------------------------------------------------------,

body in a pile. Whoever who removed her jewellery only had a window of

opportunity of that few hours between her arrival and discovery of body

to complete his task without being seen. If the person who removed those

items is the appellant himself then he brings himself to the crime scene

since he had the exclusive possession of the items without an acceptable

explanation. The explanation offered by the appellant, that these items of

jewellery are an introduction on him had been rightly rejected by the trial

Court. The resultant position is that the appellant had no valid explanation

to offer. The involvement of a 3rd person does not arise in these

circumstances.

It is in consideration of these circumstances, the trial Court had

reached the inference that was challenged by the appellant. This Court

concurs with the conclusions reached by the trial Court, as the

circumstances have led to the irresistible and inescapable inference of his

guilt and is of the view that this ground of appeal too is without any

merit.

The complaint by the appellant that he had been convicted for the

commission of the offence of rape on the deceased without any evidence

needed to be considered at this concluding stage of the judgment.

It was submitted by the appellant that there was no proof that the

appellant ever had penile penetration, a vital element that had to be

established beyond reasonable doubt by the prosecution in proving an

28

(

, r-------------------------------------------------------------------~

allegation of rape. Having considered the medical evidence, this Court

finds that there is merit in this submissions made by the appellant.

It was clear from the medical evidence, that the death of the

deceased was due to "drowning". Her naked body was found in supine

position with a plastic cone inserted into her vagina. The medical officer,

who visited the scene and performed the post mortem examination on the

body of the deceased, expressed his opinion that the lacerations he had

observed in the hymen and the vaginal wall of the deceased could be due

to insertion of a "very hard object" into her vagina. He excluded the

possibility of sustaining such injuries due to sexual intercourse. He also

admitted that there was no medical evidence to establish that she was

"raped". The medical witness also expressed opinion that the insertion of

plastic cone could have happened simultaneously with the death of the

deceased or just after her death had occurred. The vaginal swabs taken for

further analysis revealed that there were no sperms found in the vaginal

fluids.

Thus, it appears that although there was clear evidence as to vaginal

penetration by some "very hard object", the prosecution had no clear

evidence which could have supported a reasonable inference that there

was penile penetration by the appellant in order to sustain the charge of

rape. This Court is of the view that there exists reasonable doubt as to

whether there was penile penetration and even if there was such

penetration, whether the deceased was alive at the time of such

penetration. Therefore, the appellant is entitled to be acquitted of the said

charge of rape and to have the sentence, which was imposed on him on

that account, set aside.

29

:

'" ~ ~------------------------------------------------------------~

In conclusion,

(a) The conviction and sentence imposed on the accused-

appellant on the 1 st Count are set aside.

(b) The conviction and sentence imposed on the accused-

appellant on the 2nd Count are affirmed.

(c) The conviction and sentence imposed on the accused-

appellant on the 3rd Count are affirmed.

Therefore, the appeal of the appellant is partly allowed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

DEEP ALI WITESUNDERA, T.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

30