==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/305/2024

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979.

Court of Appeal No: Mahesh Indika Kulasekara

CA/HCC/0305/2024

High Court of Anuradhapura

Case No: HC/124/2008

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

COUNSEL : U.R. De Silva, PC with Pradeepa

Kaluarachchi, Thilini Atapattu, Chathura

Weeramantry and Hansani Pathirana for

the Appellant.

Yuhan Abeywickrama, DSG for the

Respondent.

CA/HCC/305/2024

2 | P a g e

ARGUED ON : 11/12/2025

DECIDED ON : 24/02/2026

************************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) was indicted in the High Court of Anuradhapura under Section

296 read with Section 32 of the Penal Code for committing the murder of

Senanayake Mudiyanselage Ranhamige Gunaratna on or about 29th March

1998 with some others unknown to the prosecution.

The trial commenced before the High Court Judge as the Appellant had opted

for a non-jury trial. After the conclusion of the prosecution case, the Learned

High Court Judge had called for the defence and the Appellant had given

evidence from the witness box and closed his case. After considering the

evidence presented by both parties, the learned High Court Judge had

convicted the Appellant under section 296 of the Penal code by his judgment

dated 18/07/2024 and sentenced him to death.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the Appellant

has given consent to argue this matter in his absence. Also, at the time of

argument the Appellant was connected via the Zoom platform from prison.

CA/HCC/305/2024

3 | P a g e

The Appellant had raised the following grounds of appeal:

1. The learned High Court Judge has not considered the vital evidence of

PW19 and PW20 when evaluating the evidence of prosecution.

2. The learned High Court Judge has failed to consider the circumstantial

evidence according to the legal principles.

3. The burden of proof has shifted to the defence.

4. Defence evidence has been rejected without giving reasons.

Background of the Case albeit briefly is as follows

According to PW1 Sunil Jayaweera, he was a home guard attached to the

Habarana Police Station when the incident had happened. He was on night

duty along with the deceased PC 14058 Gunaratna. The incident had

happened at about 6.10 am on 29.03.1998. Before he could end his duty,

they had received a message from PC Sarathchandra of the Habarana Police

Station that a white coloured van defying the police order to halt, made at

the Sigiriya junction police barrier, was proceeding towards Habarana and

was then requested to stop the same. The deceased who was armed with a

T56 gun had gone towards the road. At that time PW1 was positioned

between the entrance of the Habarana Police Station and the deceased. The

distance between him and the deceased was about 29 feet. At that time a

white coloured van had come from the direction of Minneriya towards

Habarana. At that time the deceased was about 4 feet from the edge of the

road. When the deceased shouted ‘Halt’, the van slowed but picked up again,

knocked the deceased and fled away. He had witnessed some people were in

the van. As his gun was not loaded and due to him being in shock, he could

not open fire at the van.

PW7 PC Sarathchandra confirmed about receiving a message from the

Sigiriya junction police barrier and passing the message to PW1. After

hearing a loud noise when he came out of Habarana Police, he had seen the

deceased lying down with bleeding injuries.

CA/HCC/305/2024

4 | P a g e

PW2, PC Janapala was on duty at the road block set up at Sigiriya junction.

In the early hours, a white coloured van had come from the direction of

Polonnaruwa. When the officers manning vehicles signed the van to stop it

had proceeded towards Habarana, defying the order of the police. Hence,

PW7 had informed the Habarana Police to stop the van. As the van passed

quickly, PW2 could not write down the number of the van.

PW4 Home Guard Karunaratna was on duty at the Sigiriya junction on the

date of the incident. He signalled a white van which came from the direction

of Polonnaruwa to stop, although it stopped it had then proceeded,

disobeying the order of PW4. PW4 had seen that some passengers were in

the van. When he ordered to stop the engine, the van sped away towards

Habarana. He did not open fire, as a bus and another vehicle had come from

the Habarana direction.

PW10, Sgt/8707 Jayawardena had conducted the investigation and upon

receiving information from a private informant, four persons were arrested

at Mirisgoniyawa junction and later the Appellant was arrested at Dambulla

at about 8.30am at a hotel. His statement was recorded and upon his

statement a van bearing the number No.251-1359 was taken into custody at

the premises of Dambulla Wickrama Auto Electricals which is situated 1 Km

from the place of incident. At the trial the identification of the van was

admitted by the defence.

PW9, CI/Wickramasinghe who was on duty at the time of the incident had

rushed to the place after hearing a loud noise. He had seen the deceased

lying fallen with bleeding injuries. He had taken prompt action to send the

deceased to the hospital and recovered the gun of the deceased at the same

place. After returning from the hospital, PW9 had inspected the place of

incident and recovered 51 pieces of orange coloured plastic and 5 pieces of

white coloured plastic from the scene. No brake marks were seen on the road.

CA/HCC/305/2024

5 | P a g e

PW19 CI/Dissanayake was the Officer-in-Charge of the Habarana Police

Station at the time of the incident. He had inspected the place of incident at

about 8.50am. He too when inspecting the place of incident, had noted

orange and white coloured plastic pieces from a vehicle lamp scattered on

the road. No brake marks were seen on the road. A Non summary inquiry

was initiated against the Appellant and four others in the Magistrate Court

of Kekirawa.

PW20, the JMO who held the postmortem examination, stated that the death

was caused due to shock caused by contusions inflicted on the brain and

internal brain haemorrhage. The injuries were compatible with a van hitting

from the front since one injury was on front of the head that could have been

caused by the internal impact and the other injury was at the back of the

head that could have been caused by the fall backward. The abrasions on

front of the knees could have occurred due to movement after the fall.

PW14, the Deputy Government Analyst gave evidence after marking his work

noted as P12 (1-7). The work sheet contained the full observation done by

the Government Analyst before issuing the Government Analyst Report,

which was marked as P10. The damages had been noted on the driver’s side

of the windscreen and the signal lamp. The damages were in line with a

standing person’s impact with the van.

At the lower side of the front windscreen a crack was visible with a few black

fibres embodied 135 cm above the ground. These black fibres were identified

as human hairs. But the fibres were not enough to do a comparison with the

hair of the deceased.

There was a 2.5cm X 1.4cm hole on the metal frame below the right side of

the windscreen at a height of about 114cm from the ground level. That hole

is equal in dimensions to that of the mouth of the barrel of the gun. The gun

was marked as PW1 in the trial. White coloured paint was observed on two

locations at the edge of the mouth of the barrel of the gun which is similar

CA/HCC/305/2024

6 | P a g e

to the colour of the van. The Government Analysed opined that this is

indicative that the gun had come into contact with the van since the hole

and dent in the van could have been caused by the impact of the mouth of

the barrel of the gun. The paint recovered on the gun had matched the paint

of the van.

The orange-coloured plastic pieces and white coloured plastic pieces were

determined to have been derived from the cover of the right signal lamp.

Further, the broken orange-coloured and white colour pieces formed two

contiguous parts that fitted the edges of the remaining plastic parts of the

lamp and the edges of the lamp in the orange and white sections respectively.

Hence, the Government Analyst opined that a human had definitely

impacted on this van.

PW21, Wickramarachchi, the owner of the garage confirmed that the vehicle

in question was parked in his garage by the Appellant. The place where the

vehicle parked was open to the road. He had not inspected the vehicle when

it was parked. Hence, he is not in a position to claim about the damages on

the vehicle.

The prosecution had closed the case after leading all the necessary witnesses

and marking the Post Mortem Report and the Government Analyst Report.

When the defence was called, the Appellant gave evidence from the witness

box.

In his evidence the Appellant had denied that he committed the accident. His

position was that he parked the vehicle in question on 28.03.1998 at the

Wickramarachchi Garage and went to Elpitiya to attend a function. Upon his

return to Dambulla on the following day, in the morning when he was having

a cup of tea, the police officers had arrested him and brought to the

Dambulla Police Station initially. After recovering his vehicle from the garage,

he was taken to the Habarana Police Station and the investigation was

CA/HCC/305/2024

7 | P a g e

conducted. At the police station, he was severely assaulted and a statement

was forcibly obtained.

Under cross examination, the prosecution had marked 19 contradictions and

highlighted one omission from the Appellant’s evidence.

In the first ground of appeal, the learned President’s Counsel strenuously

argued that the learned High Court Judge had not considered the vital

evidence of PW19 and PW20 when evaluating the evidence of prosecution.

PW19 was the Officer-in-Charge of the Dambulla Police Station. At the time

of the incident, he had gone out for another investigation. Hence, all initial

investigation was done by PW9, who was the acting Officer-in-Charge on that

date. The learned High Court Judge in his judgment had considered the

evidence given by PW9 and PW19 in his judgment. PW19 had corroborated

the evidence given by PW9.

PW20, is the JMO who held the post mortem examination. The learned High

Court Judge had considered the evidence of the injuries sustained by the

deceased in his judgement. Therefore, it is incorrect to say that the learned

High Court Judge had not considered the evidence given by PW19 and PW20.

Hence, this ground sans any merit.

In the second ground the learned President’s Counsel contended that the

learned High Court Judge has failed to consider the circumstantial evidence

according to the legal principles.

It is well settled law that when the conviction is solely based on

circumstantial evidence, the prosecution must prove that no one else but the

Appellant had committed the crime. The learned High Court Judge, in his

judgment had very extensively considered the circumstantial evidence. From

pages 383-389 of the brief, the learned High Court Judge, adhering to legal

principles and citing decided cases pertaining to circumstantial evidence,

correctly had come to the conclusion in this case. As such, this ground also

has no merit.

CA/HCC/305/2024

8 | P a g e

In the third ground of appeal, the Appellant contended that the learned High

Court Judge has shifted the burden of proof to the defence.

In this case the Appellant took up the position that after parking the van, he

had gone to Elpitiya to attend a function. The learned High Court judge in

his judgement stated that the Appellant had failed to call witnesses to prove

his stance. Although this is a clear misdirection, the evidence given by

prosecution witnesses were not contradicted by the defense at any material

point. This misdirection does not affect the root of the case as the prosecution

had led cogent and incriminating evidence against the Appellant that he is

the person who committed the murder of the deceased. Hence, this ground

also has no merit.

In the final ground of appeal, the learned President’s Counsel contended that

the Defence evidence has been rejected without giving reasons.

Courts are required to clearly provide reasons for rejecting the evidence

presented by the defence. Merely rejecting such evidence without a clear

explanation can amount to a violation of the right to a fair trial and could be

a potential ground for appeal.

In this case the learned High Court Judge, from pages 389 -391 had

considered the defence evidence and given plausible reasons as to why he

rejects the defence evidence and accepts the evidence of the prosecution.

Hence, this ground also has no merit.

In this case the Appellant, while defying the police orders to stop his vehicle,

had fled towards Habarana. When the deceased had tried to stop the van,

the Appellant without stopping had knocked the deceased and fled away

from the scene. The evidence led by the prosecution had clearly established

the mens rea of the Appellant, as the second time he fled the scene without

stopping his vehicle. Hence, this incident cannot be considered as an

accident as contended by the learned High Court Judge.

CA/HCC/305/2024

9 | P a g e

Knocking down a police officer when being signalled to stop, would amount

to a very serious offence. The murder of a law enforcement official who was

in the line of duty is an extremely serious crime which calls for maximum

punishment, especially when it is evident that the perpetrator had known or

had reason to know the victim was a police officer. In this case, the Appellant

clearly knew that he was knocking down a police officer as he had previously

defied the lawful order of the police to stop his vehicle as well.

Hence, relying on prosecution evidence has not caused any prejudice to the

Appellant as the prosecution had led strongly incriminating circumstantial

evidence against the Appellant and the circumstances established were

consistent with the Appellant’s guilt and inconsistent with his innocence.

Hence, I proceed to dismiss his appeal.

The Registrar is directed to send this judgment to the High Court of

Anuradhapura along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL