Page 1 of 7

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal under Section

331 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act

No. 15 of 1979.

CA Case No: CA/PHC/167/2020

HC of Kandy Case No: REV/66/16

OIC

Prevention of Vice Division

Kandy Police

Kandy

Complainant

V.

Chandrapathi Mudiyanselage Lionel

No.85

Thoppinnagala, Thedaththaawa

Sorabora Janapadaya

Mahiyanganaya.

Accused

AND

Wijekoon Mudiyanselage Sudu

Banda

No.150/80, Sorabora Janapadaya

Page 2 of 7

Mahiyanganaya

Claimant

Wijekoon Mudiyanselage Sudu

Banda

No.150/80, Sorabora Janapadaya

Mahiyanganaya

Claimant-Petitioner

Vs.

1. OIC

Prevention of Vice Division

Kandy Police

Kandy

2. Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department

Colombo 12

3. The Central Finance

Kandy

Respondents

Presently

Wijekoon Mudiyanselage Sudu

Banda

No.150/80, Sorabora Janapadaya

Page 3 of 7

Mahiyanganaya

Claimant-Petitioner-Appellant

1. OIC

Prevention of Vice Division

Kandy Police

Kandy

2. Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department

Colombo 12

3. The Central Finance

Kandy

Respondents-Respondents

Before: B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

Amal Ranaraja, J.

Counsels: S.L.Bulathsinhalage with D. Rathnayake for the Petitioner

Anoopa de Silva, DSG for Respondent

Written

Submissions: 05.09.2024 (by the Appellant)

On

Argued On: 11.06.2025

Judgment On: 18.07.2025

Page 4 of 7

JUDGMENT

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

The Claimant-Petitioner-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Appellant)

instituted this appeal against the order of the Learned High Court Judge of the

Provincial High Court of Central Province holding in Kandy in case No. 66/2016

where the Learned High Court Judge affirmed the order of the Learned

Magistrate of Kandy bearing No. 87998 where the Learned Magistrate has

confiscated a tipper bearing No. UP LJ 7266 consequent to an inquiry.

The accused, Lionel Kumara, on his unqualified admission, was found guilty of the

offence committed under the Forest Ordinance. Thereafter, the Learned

Magistrate has decided to conduct an inquiry concerning the vehicle which was

seized due to being involved in transporting timber in violation of the Forest

Ordinance.

Upon reviewing the order delivered by the Learned Magistrate on 22 June 2016,

it is clear that the absolute ownership of the vehicle was vested in Central Finance.

Document X3 evidences the existence of a lease agreement between the Petitioner

and the said owner. Thereafter, the vehicle was transferred to Weeresinghe

Mudiyanselage Danushka Sampath under a sales agreement. As revealed in

document X1, the ownership of the vehicle ultimately vested in Danushka

Sampath. Consequently, at the time the vehicle was seized by the police, it was

not in the Petitioners possession. The Learned Magistrate accordingly opined that

the Petitioner did not hold ownership of the vehicle at the time of the incident, and

further determined that the Petitioners evidence was neither credible nor

acceptable.

According to the order of the Learned Magistrate, it was his considered opinion

that, since the vehicle was not owned by the Petitioner, he could not have exercised

control over it. It is further noted that the Petitioner did not possess the vehicle at

the time of the incident; possession lay with Weeresinghe Mudiyanselage

Page 5 of 7

Danushka Sampath. Accordingly, the Petitioner could not have had control of the

said vehicle.

page 223

. ,

,

.

.

,

.. .

This issue was considered by Justice Dep (as he then was) in the case of Range

Forest Officer Ampara Vs. Orient Finance Services Corporation Ltd. Sc Appeal

120/2011- Supreme Court Minutes of 10.12.2013, and his Lordship held

When it comes to showing cause as to why the vehicle should not be

confiscated, only the person who is in possession and control of the vehicle

could give evidence to the effect that the offence was committed without his

knowledge and he had taken necessary steps to prevent the commission of

the offence of transportation (emphasis added).

In an inquiry of this nature, it is incumbent upon the owner of the vehicle to

demonstrate to the Court that all reasonable precautions were taken to prevent

the vehicle's use in the commission of the offence. The amendment to Section 40

of the Forest Ordinance by Act No. 65 of 2009 provides that,

Where any person is convicted of a forest offence.

(A) All timber or forest produce which is not the property of the State in

respect of which the offence has been committed, and

Page 6 of 7

(B) All tools, vehicles, implements, cattle and machines used in committing

such offence

Shall, in addition to any other punishment specified for such offence, be

confiscated by order of the convicting magistrate.

Provided that where the owner of the vehicle is a third party, no order of

confiscation shall be made if such owner proves to the satisfaction shall be made

if such owner proves to the satisfaction of the court that she had taken all

precautions to prevent the use of such tools, vehicles, implements, cattle and

machines, as the case may be, for the commission of the offence.

The above section was considered in the following judgment.

In the case of Orient Financial Service Corporation Ltd. v. Range Forest Officer

and One Other, CA (PHC) APN 26/2011, decided on 28.04.2011, Sisira De Abrew

J held that:

It is therefore seen under the existing law a vehicle transporting timber cannot

be confiscated if the owner of the vehicle on a balance of probability, establishes

one of the following things.

1. That he has taken all precautions to prevent the use of the vehicle for the

commission of the offence.

2. That the vehicle has been used for the commission of the offence without

his knowledge.

Upon examination of the order issued by the Learned High Court Judge on 27

November 2020, it is apparent that he concluded that, at the time of the incident,

namely 07 December 2013, the vehicle was in the possession of Weeresinghe

Mudiyanselage Danushka Sampath. Furthermore, the Appellant has failed to

establish that Sampath had taken all reasonable precautions to prevent the

commission of the alleged offence with the said vehicle.

Page 7 of 7

Page 93

X1 X2

.

.

. .

( 43/2012) 40

.

We hold that the evidence placed before the Learned Magistrate is not satisfactory

to discharge the burden placed on the owner that he has taken all precautionary

measures the prevent the use of the vehicle for the commission of the offence.

Accordingly, we dismiss the appeal with a cost of Rs. 50,000/-.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to communicate the judgment to the

Magistrate Court of Kandy for further compliance.

Appeal is Dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Amal Ranaraja, J.

I AGREE

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL