==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

Orders in the nature of Writs of

Certiorari, Prohibition and Mandamus

under Article 140 of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Galle Pathirannehalage Ranjith

Anuradha Pathirana,

No.52, New Peradeniya,

Godapala, Gelioya.

CA (Writ) App. No. 729/2023

PETITIONER

Vs.

1. Commissioner of Title Settlement,

Land Title Settlement Department, 1200/6, Mihikatha Medura, Rajamalwatta Road, Battaramulla.

2. Deputy Commissioner of Title

Settlement, Land Title Settlement Department, Gampola. 3. The Surveyor-General,

Survey-General's Department, Colombo 05. 4. Somawathie Ratnayake,

Daradegedara,

2

Kotagaloluwa Hondiyadeniya. 5. Kande Gedera Swarna Ariyawansha,

No.242/1, Kaluwahalkada, Weligalla, Gampola.

RESPONDENTS

Before: Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Counsel:

Dr. Sunil Abeyrathna instructed by Buddika Alagiyawanna for the Petitioner.

Pulina Jayasuriya, S.C. for the 1st to 3rd Respondents.

Argued on: 17.12.2025

Delivered on: 12.02.2026

3

Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Judgement

Introduction

The Petitioner claims that he is entitled to have a certificate of title issued under the Title

Registration Act, No. 21 of 1998, and that the 1st to 3rd Respondents have failed to issue the said

certificate. Therefore, he has instituted the above-styled application seeking the intervention of this

Court.

After the issuance of notice, the 1st to 4th Respondents have filed their respective Objections and

denied that the Petitioner has established any right to the land claimed by him. They state that the

land claimed by the Petitioner is different from that claimed by the 5th Respondent, and that the

rights have already been established by the 5th Respondent; therefore, seek a dismissal of this

Application.

Thereafter, this matter was argued before me on 17.12.2025, and the following arguments were

advanced by the counsel; hence, this judgement.

Arguments

The first argument of Dr. Abeyaratne is that the Respondents failed to hold an inquiry after

receiving P13, P14, and P15. Therefore, he argued that since there was no inquiry, the Petitioner

was not given a hearing; as such, the rules of natural justice have been violated.

The next contention of the Dr. Abeyrathna is that the evidence placed by the Petitioner was not

considered by the Respondents; therefore, a Writ of Mandamus lies.

4

On the other hand, Mr. Jayasuriya argued that there is no nexus or proof to establish P5 and P5(a).

In addition to that, no nexus between P5 and P8 has ever been established.

Further, he argued that there is a delay from 2012 to 2016 in what the Petitioner sought to pursue,

and therefore, the Petitioner has not established or explained the undue delay.

He further argued that Section 59 of the Title Registration Act does not apply to the situation, and

the Court cannot go into that.

Finally, he argued that the relief sought by the Petitioner cannot be granted since they are not

certain.

Further countering the arguments advanced on behalf of the Petitioner, Mr. Jayasuriya contended

that 1R5 establishes that there had been an inquiry; therefore, the Petitioner cannot be heard

claiming that there was no inquiry.

In this case, I will first advert to the facts as presented in the Petition.

Factual matrix

The Petitioner claims that he became the owner of the land in suit by virtue of the Deed marked as

P1, dated 24.12.2014 and attested by one Mr. A.M.L.W. Attanayake, Notary Public. The Petitioner

further claims that his predecessors-in-title had title and possessed the land undisputedly and

uninterruptedly for more than a hundred years, and therefore, they had acquired the prescriptive

title for the same as well, (as stated in paragraphs 6 and 7 of the Petition).

Thereafter, the Petitioner avers that the Kandy-Gampola Road was the southern boundary of the

land claimed by him, which had been there for more than 150 years. However, the 5th Respondent

and her husband had encroached upon the land situated between the Kandy-Gampola Road and

5

the land claimed by the Petitioner; thus, disputed his rights. Therefore, he has made a complaint to

the Gampola Police Station, which is marked as P3 annexed to the Petition. Thereafter, the

Petitioner has made several complaints to various authorities, including the Road Development

Authority and the Deputy Agricultural Development Commissioner.

Subsequently, according to the Petitioner, the 3rd Respondent had surveyed the land and sub-

divided the same; the said sub-divisions and the land claimed by the Petitioner is depicted in P5

and P5(a) annexed to the Petition. Further, he alleges (in paragraph 13 of the Petition) that the said

land was proposed to be acquired by the government, and only Somawathie’s name has been

published in the Gazette marked as P6 annexed to the Petition. In the meantime, since the title

registration had commenced in the Gampola District, under the Title Registration Act, the

Petitioner had requested the Commissioner of Land and Title Settlement Department, not to

register title registration of any outsider, including the 5th Respondent, for the said land since he

is the owner and claims the same; the said letter is marked and annexed to the Petition as P7.

Thereafter, he alleges that the 3rd Respondent had prepared the cadastral plan marked as P8 and

part of that is P9 annexed to the Petition, and under the influence of one A.S. Jayawiratne. The

Petitioner alleges that several plots of lands have been depicted in the said plan P8, and the names

of other claimants have been mentioned except the Petitioner’s name, which is contrary to the

Petitioner’s rights. Therefore, the Petitioner alleges that his rights have been denied by not

registering his title under the Title Registration Act by the 1st Respondent, and in addition to that,

he alleges that the 3rd Respondent has not identified him as a claimant. Nevertheless, he also alleges

that the 1st Respondent has issued a Certificate of Title to the 5th Respondent’s husband to the land

identified, and the said list is marked as P10 annexed to the Petition.

6

In those circumstances, the Petitioner assert that he has instituted an action bearing No. 4089/16/L

against the 5th Respondent in the District Court of Gampola since the 5th Respondent and her

husband had encroached the said land and fraudulently obtained the title registration certificate for

the same against his rights. The Petitioner still had informed the Commissioner of Land Title

Settlement not to accept or issue any certificate to any other person other than the Petitioner, by

letter dated 29.10.2016, marked and annexed to the Petition as P12. Thereafter, several other letters

have been sent by the Petitioner to several other authorities including the Agrarian Department

and the Assistant Commissioner of Land Title Settlement, marked and annexed to the Petition as

P13, P14, and P15.

Since the said certificate is issued, he has sought, inter alia, the following reliefs:

“(b) Issue a writ of certiorari quashing the said Title certificate issued to the 5th

Respondent's husband.

(c) Issue a Writ of Mandamus against the Is Respondent directing to hold an inquiry

upon. the complaints made upon P. 10 and P. 11 by the Petitioner and decide the

entitlement of a Title Certificate for Lot No.92 of plan No. No.320224 of the Surveyor-

General...”

However, according to the Objections filed for and on behalf of the 1st to 3rd Respondents, that

they have denied any rights have been accrued to the Petitioner to sue or make this Application in

respect of the same land depicted in P8, and further alleged that no superimposition has been done

by the Petitioner to establish the nexus to the land depicted in P5 and P8.

Now I will consider whether the Petitioner has established his title in relation to the land claimed

by him.

7

The Petitioner failed to establish title

The Petitioner claims that his predecessors had the title as well as possession of the said land

claimed by him. However, when the land was acquired by the Government according to the

document marked as P6, no claim was preferred by any of his so-called predecessors in titled who

were at the time said to be the owners.

The Petitioner claims that the acquired parcel of land is identified as Lot No. 92 in the Cadastral

Plan P8. Nevertheless, the Petitioner has failed to establish that the land claimed by him is the

same land depicted as Lot No. 92 in P8. In fact, when P8 was prepared as way back as in 2003 for

the purpose of acquisition, the Petitioner was not the owner, though the Petitioner claims that his

predecessors had been the owner, none of those predecessors had preferred any claim before the

Divisional Secretary or any other officer, including the surveyor who had prepared the said plan

P8, at the time the survey was carried out.

In addition to that, even when P5 was prepared in 2003, none of the Petitioner’s predecessors, even

on the Petitioner’s own, who is said to have been the owners of the said land (though the Petitioner

has not clearly said so), had ever made any claim to the Lot identified and published in the Gazette

Notification proposed to be acquired which is marked as P6 annexed to the Petition. Therefore,

the nexus between the Petitioner’s title deeds or the title to the acquired land has not been

established by the Petitioner.

Furthermore, the Petitioner claims that the certificate had been issued by the Registrar of Title

Registration in respect of a certain portion of land, which the Petitioner claims. However, the

Petitioner has failed to identify such a parcel of land on a plan proposed to be prepared by him or

his predecessors-in-title. In fact, according to the Petitioner’s own showing, he had become the

8

owner of the so-called plot of land, only in 2014 by virtue of the Deed marked as P1; but by that

time, the acquisition process had already commenced in 2003 and the land abutting the road which

runs from Peradeniya to Gampola had been acquired, and P5, P6, and P8 had been published in

respect of the same.

Therefore, the Petitioner has not identified how he became the owner of the said land or the land

adjacent to the acquired land, though the Petitioner claims title to the same land, no title has been

acquired by or devolved on the Petitioner by virtue of any document. Thus, the Petitioner has

apparently made a bogus claim to a land which has already been acquired by the Government, and

which had belonged to some other claimants whose names appear in the said cadastral plan and

list annexed to the Petition, marked as P8 and P9.

In addition to that, when P5 was prepared in 2003, none of the Petitioner’s predecessors, who

claimed to have been the owners, clearly objected to it or made any claim in respect of the said lot

identified in the Gazette notification proposed to be acquired, which Gazette notification is marked

as P6 and annexed thereto. Therefore, the nexus between the Petitioner’s title deed and the title to

the acquired land has not been established by the Petitioner.

In addition to that, the Petitioner has made various allegations against the Respondents who have

nothing to do with the so-called land claimed by the Petitioner. Therefore, this is a bogus

application made by the Petitioner to claim compensation against somebody’s land and is thus, a

clear case of abuse of judicial process with ulterior motives.

9

Conclusion

Accordingly, this Application is dismissed, subject to the cost of Rs. 52,500/- (Fifty-Two

Thousand Five Hundred Rupees) payable by the Petitioner to the State.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL