j I I

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

C.A. Writ Application No:

CA 383/2017

In the matter of Application under article

140 of the Constitution for Orders in the nature of writs of certiorari and prohibition against the Municipal Commissioner of the Municipal Council of Negombo and others.

1. H.D.P. Antony,

President of the Negombo Businessman Association, No. 53/1, Grand Street, Negombo.

2. Mohan De Silva,

Secretary of the Negombo Businessmen Association, Appollo Colour Lab, Near Railway Station, Negombo.

3. Negombo Business Man Association, Appollo Colour Lab, Near Railway Station, Negombo.

4. Nimal Abeysinghe,

President of the Negombo Municipal Shopping Complex Trade Association, No. 511107, Finco State, Dalupatha, Negombo.

5. Nilan Fernando, Secretary Negombo Municipal Shopping Complex Trade Association, Archbishop Nicholas Marcos Fernando

I ) ! I I f l !

II

t,

f II

iI

~

I

~

t

Mawatha, Kadolkale, 2nd Stage, Negombo.

and others.

Petitioners

Vs.

1. Municipal Council of Negombo, Office of the Municipal Council, Negombo.

2. K.S.C. Sugath Kumara, Municipal Commissioner, Negombo Municipal Council, Negombo.

3. B.N.V. Fernando, Deputy Municipal Commissioner, Negombo Municipal Council, Negombo.

4. Secretary, Negombo Municipal Council, Office of the Municipal Council, Negombo.

5. Lal Fernando, Alas Road, Negombo.

and others.

Respondents

2

it! r

fiI

f{

! 1

l I I I 1 J

3

Before L.T.B. Dehideniya J, (P/CA)

&

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

Counsel Dr. Sunil Coorey for the Petitioner.

Supported on : 24/1112017

Decided on : 2911112017

Order

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

Heard Counsel for the Petitioner in support of paragraph (e) and (f) to the

Petition, ex parte, on the ground of grave urgency;

(e) for interim relief by way of an order on the 2nd and/or 3rd and/or 4th

Respondent's to stay the decision to lease out the payments to sell

goods along the streets within the authority of the 1 st Respondent

(Municipal Council of Negombo) for the period 15t to 31 5t December

2017,

(f) for interim relief by way of an order on the 5th Respondent (Lal

Fernando), restraining him of selling goods or causing or permitting

others to sell goods of any payment aforesaid.

1

I-I tf, Ii I

I. t

~. I! ,i

~ f

Il i

II

I I

1

l ,

4

The Negombo Municipal Council by tender notice dated 25/1 0/17, marked

X2, has called for tenders to lease out the payments for selling of goods during the

15t to 31 5t of December 2017.

The Petitioner submits that due to the leasing out the said payments for the

selling of goods during the said period within the municipal limits in Negombo,

inter alia, would cause sever conjunction on the streets resulting in the

inconvenience to the general public and the loss of business to the Petitioners and

further submits that the said leasing out of the payments is ultra vires the powers

exercised by the 15t to 4th Respondents.

Under rule 2 (1) (a) of the Court of Appeal (Appellate Procedure) Rules-

1990

Interim relief may be granted although such notice has not been given to

some or all of the Respondents if the court is satisfied ----------------- that the

matter is of such urgency that the applicant could not reasonably have given such

notice; ---------

In a fit case, the power to grant interim relief, after an ex parte hearing has

been recognized by court on the ground of grave urgency. However, a matter of

such urgency should be recognized on reasonable cause, in favour of the

Petitioner, to support such application without notice to the Respondents.

I

Jr I ! I

5

The Petition was filed on 21111117 and supported on 24111117. The interim

reliefs prayed for are to restrain the 2nd and lor 4th and lor 5th Respondents leasing

out the payments to the 5th Respondent or to some other party. The Petitioners and

the said Respondents are all resident within the city limits of Neg ambo. The rule is

that an application for interim relief shall be made with notice to the Respondents.

In the exception, the Petitioners have failed to address court as to the reason the

Petitioners could not have given such notice to at least one or more Respondents,

where the Petitioners were resident within close proximity to the Respondent's

and with reasonable time to do so.

Therefore, we are of the view that the application for interim relief on the

ground of grave urgency does not favour the Petitioners.

In the circumstances the application for interim relief is refused.

Issue notice on the Respondents.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

L.T.B. Dehideniya J, (PICA)

I agree.

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL