IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A.(PHC) 161/2009

In the matter of an appeal from

the Judgment of a Provincial

High Court exercising writ

jurisdiction, in terms of Article

154(P) of the ConstltutlOn as

amended by the 13th

Amendment, and the High

Court of the Provinces (Special

Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990.

Lanka Salt Limited,

(formerly of)

Nirmana Mawatha,

Nawala,

Nugegoda.

High Court of the Southern Province

Holden in Hambanthota

H.C.A. 117/2005

(Presently of)

Mahalewaya, Hambanthota.

Petitioner - Appellant.

Indrani Seneviratne,

Provincial Commissioner of

1

Before

Revenue,

Provincial Revenue

Deportment,

30, Wakwella Road,

Galle.

And another.

Respondents -Respondents.

: W.M.M.Malinie Gunarathne, J

: P.R.Walgama, J

Counsel : Dulindra Weerasooriya PC for the Petitioner-Appellant.

: Manohara de Silva, PC for the 2 nd Respondent -Respondent.

: Manohara Jayasinghe, SC for 1st Respondent.

Argued on : 12.10.2015

Decided on: 29.01.2016

CASE-NO-CA(PHC)- 161/2009- JUDGMENT- 29.01.2016

P.R.Walgama, J

The instant appeal directs against the order of the

Learned High Court Judge dated 27th of October

2

2009, In the Provincial High Court holden at

Hambantota.

By the aforementioned order the Learned High Court

Judge has dismissed the application of the Petitioner-

Appellant, for a mandate In the nature of Certiorari

to quash the orders marked P5 to PI 0 made by the

1 st Respondent and for the Issuance a writ In the

nature of Prohibition preventing the 1st Respondent

from making any further orders In the direction of

levying a Mineral Tax in respect of salt manufacture

of the Petitioner -Appellant.

The Petitioner- Appellant by his application to the

High Court had stated the following;

That the Petitioner- Appellant was In the business of

manufacturing salt and the process of manufacturing

salt does not fall In to the category of mInIng.

The 1 st Responden t by his letter dated 15th

November 2000 has informed the Petitioner - Appellant

that mineral tax of Rs.200 per metric ton will be

Imposed, on the manufacture of salt by the

Petitioner - Appellant.

N everth eless the Petitioner- Appellant has refused to

pay the same. The said letter IS marked as PI.

Further it said that the 1st Respondent by the

gazette notification of 7th June 2002 amended the

said rate and sought recover 5% of the gross turn

3

i I

f t ii IiI! I!

over value of the production of the Petitioner-

Appellant.

But it IS salient to note that the Petitioner-

Appellant has paid few payments as mineral tax,

but nevertheless had refused to pay the same, and

informed the 1st Respondent by the letter marked P2

denying its liability to pay the said mineral tax.

The pith and substance of the case of the Petitioner

-Appellant IS that, its not liable to pay the said

tax as he IS not In the business of mInIng

operation In terms of Section 67 of the Mines and

Minerals Act.

It IS further stated that no legal action has been

instituted by the Respondents against the Petitioner-

Appellant to recover the above tax.

The Learned High Court In the said impugned

judgment has also dealt with issues raised by the

Respondents. It IS contended by the Respondents,

that the Petitioner -Appellant has not made certain

parties as Respondents in this action.

In that it IS stated that above stated dO~l]ments

were not signed by one party. In addition to the

afore said the Learned High Court Judge has In

his order specifically referred to the Documents

marked IV3,lV4 and IVS and had mentioned the

fact that the Petitioner- Appellant has not disclosed

4

the existence of the said documents al'J.d thc;-c by

had suppressed the material facts relevant to this

case. By the afore said Letters the Petitioner-

Appellant has agreed by 1 V3 to pay the afore said

tax 1n the due course, and by the letter marked

as 1 V4 the Petitioner- Appellant had undertaken to

pay a sum of Rs.200,OOOj as the above tax. To

cap it up all by the letter marked 1 VS the

Petitioner - Appellant has moved for scheme of

payment by instalments. The Respondents alleged that

the said request is a clear admission of liability on

the part of the Petitioner - Appellant to pay the said

tax imposed by the Respondents.

When encapsulating the contents contained therein

is abundantly clear that the Petitioner - Appellant has

admitted the liability to pay the above tax. In the

above circumstances the Petitioner- Appellant 1S

estopped from denying the liability to pay the afore

said tax.

Further the Learned High Court Judge has also

stated the fact that the Petitioner's application for

the above relief has not been made with an undue

delay. Therefore the Learned High Court Judge was

of the V1ew that on said basis alone the

Petitioner's application should be dismissed.

In essence it is worthy to note that the 1ssu1ng of

the writ is a discretionary remedy and same could

5

be obtained only if the court IS satisfied that a

senous miscarriage of justice has been caused by a

public body. Therefore it is salient to note that the

Petitioner - Appellant cannot claim for a writ as a

right.

The bone of contention of the Petitioner- Appellant is

that the tax In terms of the Mines and Minerals

Act only in respect of Minerals and not in respect

of salt as the same do not fall in to the category

of 'MINERALS'.

The term 'MINERALS' IS defined In Section 70 of

the above Act, thus;

" a naturally occurnng substance that caLl b.:;

whether In solid, liquid or gaseous form, In or

below the surface of the soil, any ores containing

such mineral and any product of such minerals

derived by Processing and include peat and salt but

does not include hydro - carbons"

It IS contended by the Counsel for the Respondent

that the salt is a naturally occurnng substance and

it IS not been produced through a mechanical

process.

This Court IS mindful, at this juncture that no

scientitlc pronouncement should be made regarding

how 'SALT' come to being. It IS to be noted that

the Southern Provincial Council has decided that the

6

I I I

I I

\

! I j i I I

I I ! I I I

I , I

substance of salt IS a mineral. Therefore this Court

cannot gIve any other interpretation contrary to the

afore said interpretation.

It is the categorical position of the Respondent that:

Salt is a mineral in terms of Section 70 Act (as it

IS a naturally occurnng substance which can be

mined)

Section 28(1) of the Mines and Minerals Act

provides thus;

"No person shall explore for, mIne, transport, process,

trade In or export any minerals except under the

authority of, or otherwise than In accordance with,

a licence issued In that behalf under the provISIOns

of this Act and the regulations made there under.

It is the position of the Petitioner - Appellant that

the Southern Provincial Council has not issued a

licence to carry out the said manufacturing of salt

as the same does not come under the said category

as stated above.

further as per Section 67 of the above Act a tax

can be imposed by a Provincial Council on the

right to mine for minerals within the Province.

Therefore it IS abundantly clear that the substance

SALT is categorised as a mineral and the Petitioner-

}\ppellant will be liable to pay the purported t2...X.

7

Ii,f

~ II

t

\ i 1 I 1 1 I I i

~ I 1 j

j ,

1

f \ ,

I

In the wake of the determination made herein

above, I am of the unhesitant opInIOn that the

challenge laid in the instant appeal lacks in merit.

Thus the appeal therefore cannot succeed.

Accordingly the appeal IS dismissed subject to a

cost of Rs. 10,000/

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

W.M.M.Malinie Gunarathne, J I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

8

II

~ Ii I ! I[iI

ffI