Page 1 of 19

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for Mandates

in the nature of Writs of Prohibition and

Mandamus under Article 140 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

Case No. CA/WRIT/ 81/20

Suriyapperuma Arachchilage Amarasiri

Suriyapperuma of Alkegama, Makehelwala

Petitioner

Vs.

1. N.C. Withanage,

Registrar General,

Registrar Generals Office,

23/A3, Denzil Kobbekaduwa, Mawatha,

Battaramulla.

2. District Secretary,

Kegalle District, Kegalle.

3. Hon. Janaka Bandara Tennakoon,

Minister of Internal and Home Affairs and

Provincial Councils and Local

Government,

563, Elvitigala Mawatha,

Colombo 05.

4. Hon. Attorney-General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondents

Page 2 of 19

Before: D.N. Samarakoon, J.

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

Counsel: Dr. Sunil Abeyratne with M. Kudakolawa for the Petitioner

Medhaka Fernando, SC for the 1st,2nd and 4th Respondents

Written 22.09.2022 (by the Petitioner)

Submissions: 22.09.2022 (by the 1st,2nd, and 4th Respondents)

On

Decided On : 21.10.2022

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

The Petitioner, by Petition dated 06th March 2020, instituted this application

under Article 140 of the Constitution seeking a Writ of Certiorari to quash the decision of

the Registrar General (the 1st Respondent) to remove the Petitioner from the post of

Registrar of Births and Deaths of Galbada Pattuwa Division and Marriages (Kandyan/

General) of Galbada Koralaya Division and a Writ of Mandamus to be reinstated.

It should be noted that, on 21st July 2022, when the matter was fixed for argument,

Counsel for both parties agreed that the parties would abide by the judgment delivered

by this Court on the written submissions.

The Petitioner was appointed by the Registrar General to the post of Registrar of

Births and Deaths of Galbada Pattuwa Division and Marriages (Kandyan/ General) of

Galbada Koralaya Division with effect from 01st January 2020, by letter dated 12th

December 2019 (P6). This follows a lengthy process that commenced with him

submitting his application (pursuant to the notice in Gazette No. 2104 dated 28th

December 2018), an inquiry held on 10th April 2019 to inquire into matters such as the

place he proposes to situate his office and the suitability of it (per document marked P2),

and an interview on 5th July 2019 at the Kegalle District Secretariat (per document

marked P3). The Petitioner then commenced setting up his office, after he received his

letter of employment. On 15th January 2020 (P7), a mere two weeks after his

appointment, he received from the Kegalle District Secretary, stating that his

appointment had been cancelled due to an ongoing court case he was involved in. The

relevant part of the letter reads:

Page 3 of 19

(02) 2020.01.06 RG/MBD/7/2/9 2019.12.12

RG/MBD/7/2/9 2020.01.09

.

This was challenged by the Petitioner by way of a letter of demand (dated 17th

January 2020- marked P9) for the reason that there was no case against him.

Thereafter, the Registrar General by letter dated 27th January 2020 (P11), responding

to this claimed that it had been reported to him that a case (bearing No. 22974 at the

Mawanella District/Magistrate Court) concerning the Petitioner had been ongoing and

then concluded. Further, the Petitioner had been and was continuing to engage in active

politics, as a member of a major political party. The post is an honorary one to serve the

public and his engagement in politics would compromise the independence and

impartiality required in the dispensing of his services. The relevant parts of the said letter

read:

03

jd;d /

22974 jd;d .

04

jd;d .

05 ,

.

jd;d .

ksmdlaIsl .

It was based on these reasons that the Registrar General acting under Section 6(1)

of the Marriage Registration Ordinance No. 19 of 1907, as amended, cancelled the

Petitioners appointment. The letter dated 10th February 2020 (P12) issued by the

Kegalle District Secretary, also in response to the letter of demand, reiterates the reasons

of the Registrar General. The letter reads:

(02) . . 2020.01.17

03 fofha jd;d

, ,

RG/MBD/7/2/9 2020.01.16

.

Page 4 of 19

The Respondents contention is that in terms of Section 6(1) of the Marriage

Registration Ordinance, a Registrar holds office at the pleasure of the appointing

authority (in this case the Registrar General). It reads as follows:

The Registrar General may appoint one or more persons to each such division, who shall be called

Registrars of Marriage, and any such registrar at pleasure he may remove and appoint some other

person in his place [emphasis added]

When removal can be done at pleasure it is claimed that the Registrar General

exercised unfettered discretion and is thereby not duty-bound to disclose reasons for his

decision to remove. Reliance is placed on the case of Thenabandu v. Samarasekera 70

NLR 472 to substantiate the position of the Respondents.

Further, the Respondents claim that the Petitioner was aware of this because of

his letter of appointment (P6) which provides that the Petitioner was to be on probation

for a period of 11 months, from the date of appointment. Upon completion of that period

and other conditions such as passing a written exam, if his work is satisfactory, the

appointing authority would consider making him permanent. The fifth condition in the

letter stipulated that his services could be terminated at any time, without notice or

reason.

We will now determine the correctness of this assertion.

In Thenabandu (supra) his Lordship Abeyesundere J. held that since the

Petitioner, in that case, a Registrar of Births and Deaths and a Registrar of Marriages,

had been appointed under Section 6 of the Marriage Registration Ordinance the Registrar

General, as the appointing authority, was empowered by that Section to remove the

Petitioner at his pleasure. His Lordship held:

As the petitioner held the office of Registrar of Marriages at the pleasure of the appointing

authority, he had no right in law to be heard before he was dismissed. No writ of certiorari therefore

lies in respect of the petitioners dismissal from the office of Registrar of Marriages.

Further his Lordship held:

.. the Registrar General, as the authority empowered to appoint a Registrar of Births

and Deaths, has the unfettered power to dismiss such a Registrar appointed by him. There is no

statutory provision in the Births and Deaths Registration Ordinance or any other statute

specifying the grounds of dismissal of a Registrar of Births and Deaths nor is there any statutory

procedure laid down which is to be observed before the dismissal of such a Registrar.

Page 5 of 19

His Lordship then cited the cases of Kulatunga v. The Board of Directors of the Co-

operative Wholesale Establishment (66 NLR 169) and Ridge v. Baldwin (1963 2 A.E.R.

66) as authority for the proposition that the principle of audi alteram partem does not

apply in the case of dismissal from an office where the grounds of dismissal are not

specified or where there is no procedure prescribed which should be followed before

dismissal.

We are of the view that the case of Thenabandu will not be applicable to the facts

of the instant case. Firstly, in Thenabandu the Registrar had been asked to show cause

prior to his dismissal. What the Registrar pleaded but the Court refused to grant was an

inquiry and an opportunity to appear and lead evidence to vindicate his innocence.

Whereas, in the instant case, no opportunity had been granted to the Petitioner to show

cause. Secondly, the reasons proffered by the Respondents are arbitrary. Thirdly, whether

the pleasure principle can be accepted as conferring unfettered authority, even in cases

where there appear to be mala fides, is doubtful.

The pleasure principle as expounded in Sunil F.A. Cooreys, Principles of

Administrative Law in Sri Lanka Fourth Edition (Volume 1 at page 493) entails:

Where statute provides that an office is held at pleasure or that the holder of an office is

removable at pleasure, it has been held that the statutory implication is that the audi alteram

partem rule is excluded from a disciplinary proceeding that maybe held against the holder of such

office.

The rule originated from the Latin phrase durante bene placito (during good

pleasure) or durante bene placito regis (during the good pleasure of the King).

Lord Hobhouse in Shenton v. Smith [1895] AC 229 affirmed the rule:

It is pointed out to be the general rule in Crown Colonies that offices are holden during

Her Majesty's pleasure. The difficulty of dismissing servants whose continuance in office is

detrimental to the State would, if it were necessary to prove some offence to the satisfaction of a

jury, be such as seriously to impede the working of the public service.

In Dunn v. the Queen [1895-99] All ER Rep 907 Lord Herschell observed:

Persons employed in the public service of the Crown are, unless there is some statutory

provision for a higher tenure, ordinarily engaged to hold office during the pleasure of the

Crown. It has been pointed out in the cases that the appointments are made for the public

good, and that it is essential for the public good to be able to determine the appointments at

Page 6 of 19

pleasure, except in cases where, for the public good, it has been determined that Some other tenure

is better.

The rationale of this principle of Common Law is explained in Wade and Forsyths,

Administrative Law 11th Edition (on page 49) thus:

The basis of the rule that Crown servants are dismissible at pleasure, therefore, is the

principle that the public interest requires that the government should be able to disembarrass

itself of any employee at any moment. All the emphasis was on public policy.

As Lord Diplock explained in the Council of Civil Service Unions v. Minister for

the Civil Service [1985] AC 374:

. The theory that those by whom the administration of the realm is carried on do so as personal

servants of the monarch who can dismiss them at will, because the King can do no wrong.

Lord Reid in the landmark judgment of Ridge v. Baldwin (supra) propounded a

threefold classification of employment relationships. The first class is the master-servant

relationship. The master is at liberty to terminate the services of the servant at any time,

even without reason. The remedy of the servant is for damages for breach of contract. The

second deals with persons who hold office at pleasure. The third category deals with

officeholders whose dismissal cannot take place without cause and where the rules of

natural justice must be adhered to.

Expanding on the second category, Lord Reid stated as follows:

Then there are many cases where a man holds an office at pleasure. Apart from judges

and others whose tenure of office is governed by statute, all servants and officers of the Crown hold

office at pleasure It has always been held, I think rightly, that such an officer has no right to

be heard before he is dismissed, and the reason is clear. As the person having the power of dismissal

need not have anything against the officer, he need not give any reason I fully accept that

where an office is simply held at pleasure the person having power of dismissal cannot be bound

to disclose his reasons. No doubt he would in many cases tell the officer and hear his explanation

before deciding to dismiss him. But if he is not bound to disclose his reason and does not do so,

then, if the Court cannot require him to do so, it cannot determine whether it would be fair to hear

the officer's case before taking action. [emphasis added]

This passage was cited with approval in the cases such as Kulatunge v. The Board

of Directors of the Co-operative Wholesale Establishment (supra), Yakkaduwe Sri

Pragnarama Thero v. The Minister of Education 71 NLR 506, Fernando v. Jayaratne 78

Page 7 of 19

NLR 123, Perera v. Attorney General [1985] 1 SLR 156, and Air Vice Marshall Elmo

Perera v. Liyanage [2003] 1 SLR 331.

However, the unbridled application and acceptance of this principle, in a modern

democratic society underpinned by the rule of law, must be re-considered.

Wade and Forsyth commenting on the passage from Ridge, quoted above, states

the following (on page 468):

He [Lord Reid] stated that since no reasons need be given for the removal, the court could

not determine whether it would be fair to hear the officers case. But this is circular reasoning, and

it is unsatisfying on grounds of justice as well as of logic. Natural justice does not require the

giving of reasons for decisions, but nevertheless it does require fair notice of the case to be met,

and this requirement of notice is quite different from a duty to give reasons for the decision when

taken. If the officer is subject to some accusation, justice requires that he should be allowed a fair

opportunity to defend himself, whatever the term of his tenure. To deny it to him is to confuse the

substance of the decision, which is maybe based on any reason at all, with the procedure which

ought first to be followed. [emphasis added]

Paul Craig in his text, Administrative Law (Ninth Edition on page 312)

commenting on the principle notes that,

This rule was applied by analogy with the dismissibility of military servants, the policy

being the necessity for the Crown to be able to rid itself of a servant who might act detrimentally

to the state. There are obvious flaws in this reasoning. While some Crown servants in senior

positions might represent such a danger, it is difficult to envisage this being so for the majority.

Lord Wilberforce commenting on this principle in Malloch v. Aberdeen Corp. [1971]

2 All ER 1278 observed:

The rigour of the [pleasure] principle is often, in modern practice, mitigated for it has

come to be perceived that the very possibility of dismissal without reason being givenaction

which may vitally affect a man's career or his pensionmakes it all the more important for him,

in suitable circumstances, to be able to state his case and, if denied the right to do so, to be able to

have his dismissal declared void.

The following observation of Lord Reid in Malloch is also noteworthy:

Acting at pleasure means that there is no obligation to formulate reasons. Formal reasons

might lead to legal difficulties. But it seems to me perfectly sensible for Parliament to say to a

Page 8 of 19

public body, 'you need not give formal reasons but you must hear the man before you dismiss him.

[emphasis added]

Chief Justice Laskin delivering the judgment of the Canadian Supreme Court in

Nicholson v. Haldimand-Norfolk Regional Police Commissioners [1979] 1 SCR 311

observed:

the old common law rule, deriving much of its force from Crown law, that a person engaged

as an office holder at pleasure may be put out without reason or prior notice ought itself to be re-

examined. It has an anachronistic flavour in the light of collective agreements, which are pervasive

in both public and private employment, and which offer broad protection against arbitrary

dismissal in the case of employees who cannot claim the status of office holders. As de Smith has

pointed out in his book Judicial Review of Administrative Action (3rd ed. 1973), at p. 200, public

policy does not dictate that tenure of an office held at pleasure should be terminable without

allowing its occupant any right to make prior representations on his own behalf; indeed, the

unreviewability of the substantive grounds for removal indicates that procedural protection may

be all the more necessary.

Citing this passage, the majority in the Canadian Supreme Court in Knight v.

Indian Head School Division No. 19 [1990] 1 SCR 653 held:

The argument to the effect that, since the employer can dismiss his employee for

unreasonable or capricious reasons, the giving of an opportunity to participate in the decision-making

would be meaningless, is unconvincing. In both the situation of an office held at pleasure and an office

from which one can be dismissed only for cause, one of the purposes of the imposition on the

administrative body of a duty to act fairly is the same, i.e., enabling the employee to try to change the

employer's mind about the dismissal. The value of such an opportunity should not be dependant on

the grounds triggering the dismissal.

There is also a wider public policy argument militating in favour of the imposition of a duty

to act fairly on administrative bodies making decisions similar to the one impugned in the case at

bar. The powers exercised by the appellant Board are delegated statutory powers which, as much as

the statutory powers exercised directly by the government, should be put only to legitimate use. As

opposed to the employment cases dealing with "pure master and servant" relationships, where no

delegated statutory powers are involved, the public has an interest in the proper use of delegated

power by administrative bodies... As pointed out by Wade in the above-quoted passage (at p. 500),

dismissal for displeasure should be all the more the object of scrutiny as it is a power of a wider

discretionary nature.

Page 9 of 19

In Dunsmuir v. New Brunswick [2008] 1 SCR 190 the Canadian Supreme Court

reversing this decision held the following:

In our view, what matters is the nature of the employment relationship between the public

employee and the public employer. Where a public employee is employed under a contract of

employment, regardless of his or her status as a public office holder, the applicable law governing

his or her dismissal is the law of contract, not general principles arising out of public

law. What Knight truly stands for is the principle that there is always a recourse available where

the employee is an office holder and the applicable law leaves him or her without any protection

whatsoever when dismissed.

The principles expressed in Knight in relation to the general duty of fairness owed by

public authorities when making decisions that affect the rights, privileges or interests of

individuals are valid and important. However, to the extent that the majority decision

in Knight ignored the important effect of a contract of employment, it should not be followed.

Where a public employee is protected from wrongful dismissal by contract, his or her remedy

should be in private law, not in public law.

The dismissal of a public employee should therefore generally be viewed as a typical

employment law dispute. However, there may be occasions where a public law duty of fairness will

still apply. We can envision two such situations at present. The first occurs where a public

employee is not, in fact, protected by a contract of employment. This will be the case with judges,

ministers of the Crown and others who fulfill constitutionally defined state roles (Wells, at para.

31). It may also be that the terms of appointment of some public office holders expressly provide

for summary dismissal or, at the very least, are silent on the matter, in which case the office

holders may be deemed to hold office at pleasure Because an employee in this situation is

truly subject to the will of the Crown, procedural fairness is required to ensure that public power

is not exercised capriciously. [emphasis added]

The Australian jurisprudence has created inroads in the pleasure principle if a

legislative intent to displace the right to dismiss at pleasure could be ascertained. (Gould

v. Stuart [1896] AC 575, Jarratt v. Commissioner of Police [2005] HCA 50)

An observation of the Indian Supreme Court in B.P. Singhal v. Union of India

[2010] 6 SCC 331, is worth quoting:

There is a distinction between the doctrine of pleasure as it existed in a feudal set-up and

the doctrine of pleasure in a democracy governed by rule of law. In a nineteenth century feudal

set-up unfettered power and discretion of the Crown was not an alien concept. However, in a

Page 10 of 19

democracy governed by Rule of Law, where arbitrariness in any form is eschewed, no Government

or Authority has the right to do what it pleases. The doctrine of pleasure does not mean a licence

to act arbitrarily, capriciously or whimsically. It is presumed that discretionary powers conferred

in absolute and unfettered terms on any public authority will necessarily and obviously be

exercised reasonably and for public good.

This re-consideration is all the more important in light of the introduction of the

Seventeenth Amendment to the Constitution and the abolition of the pleasure principle

for appointments and dismissals of public officers. His Lordship Marsoof P.C. J. in

Ratnasiri v. Ellawala [2004] 2 SLR 180 emphatically pronounced:

..it is pertinent to observe that the Seventeenth Amendment to the Constitution has

brought about several fundamental changes in relation to the public service, the most important

of which was the abolition of the pleasure principle which was recognized by our law as a

fundamental norm inherent in the prerogative of the British Crown, and was expressly embodied

in every Constitution of this country since 1946. It is indeed surprising that this principle was

accommodated in Constitution which claimed to be independent, republican and even democratic

and socialist, and the removal of this concept by the Seventeenth Amendment of the Constitution

will no doubt contribute to the independent of the public service. [emphasis added]

Although Ratnasiri dealt with the appointment and dismissal of public officers

(officers who hold any paid office under the Republic, minus the exempted categories- vide

Article 170 of the Constitution) which is Constitutionally regulated, it did not state that

the pleasure principle was abolished in general. The post of Registrars are not public

officers within the meaning of the Constitution, they are only deemed to be public

officers within the meaning of the Penal Code (Vide Section 7 of the Births and Deaths

Registration Act No. 17 of 1951, as amended). They are honorary posts. The pleasure

principle thus remains applicable in the instant case.

However, the change in the Constitutional ethos with the abolition of the pleasure

principle for public officers, and the limitations the principle were subject to while it

existed, in relation to appointments and dismissal of public officers, as evident in the case

law examples below, justify a legislative reconsideration of the suitability of this principle

in a modern constitutional framework fortified by the Rule of Law. If not, in the absence

of legislative intent to indicate the abrogation of this principle such as in cases concerning

the legislation of the type we are dealing with which provides for dismissal at pleasure,

this principle would be read to confer unfettered, unimpeachable discretion on the

Registrar General to act arbitrarily in violation of the basic tenets of administrative law.

Page 11 of 19

This is untenable. To quote the words of his Lordship Fernando J. in Bandara v.

Premchandra [1994] 1 SLR 301:

It may well be that in the United Kingdom the prerogative in regard to office held at

pleasure was very wide. However, any such prerogative recognised or conferred under a written

Constitution such as ours, with a separation of functions, must necessarily be subject to

limitations. [emphasis added]

The Indian Supreme Court in B.P. Singhal (supra) also observed:

As a result when the Constitution of India provides that some offices will be held during

the pleasure of the President, without any express limitations or restrictions, it should however

necessarily be read as being subject to the "fundamentals of constitutionalism". Therefore in a

constitutional set up, when an office is held during the pleasure of any Authority, and if no

limitations or restrictions are placed on the "at pleasure" doctrine, it means that the holder of the

office can be removed by the authority at whose pleasure he holds office, at any time, without notice

and without assigning any cause. The doctrine of pleasure does not dispense with the need for

a cause for withdrawal of the pleasure. In other words, "at pleasure" doctrine enables the removal

of a person holding office at the pleasure of an Authority, summarily, without any obligation to

give any notice or hearing to the person removed, and without any obligation to assign any reasons

or disclose any cause for the removal, or withdrawal of pleasure. The withdrawal of pleasure cannot

be at the sweet will, whim and fancy of the Authority, but can only be for valid reasons. [emphasis

added]

The following passage from Wade and Forsyths, Administrative Law (on page 27)

is apposite to quote:

It is a cardinal axiom that every power has legal limits. If the Court finds that the power

has been exercised oppressively or unreasonably, or if there has been some procedural failing

the act may be condemned as unlawful. Although lawyers appearing for government departments

have often argued that some Act confers unfettered discretion on a minister, they are guilty of

constitutional blasphemy. Unfettered discretion cannot exist where the rule of law reigns. The

same truth can be expressed by saying that all power is capable of abuse, and that the power to

prevent abuse is the acid test of effective judicial review.

When the pleasure principle was in operation, prior to its abolition by the

Seventeenth Amendment, there were significant limitations.

In the case of Bandara (supra) it was held that:

Article 55(5) makes the "pleasure principle subject to the fundamental rights and the

language rights; Article 55(1) makes it subject to the provisions of the Constitution, so that other

Page 12 of 19

limitations may be found elsewhere in the Constitution. The concept of holding office at pleasure

suggests, prima facie, that dismissal may be for a reason - good, bad, or indifferent - or without

any reason. However, since Article 55(1) is subject, inter alia, to Article 12, dismissal, even by the

Cabinet of Ministers, cannot be for a reason which involves a denial of equal protection, violative

of Article 12(1), or an infringement of Article 12(2). Even if the reasons for dismissal are not stated,

upon a challenge under Article 12, a consideration of those reasons becomes almost inevitable; an

assertion that there were no reasons would amount to an admission that it was arbitrary; and a

refusal to disclose reasons would tend to confirm a prima facie case of discrimination made out by

the Petitioners. Thus the pleasure principle" contained in Article 55(1) is necessarily subject to

significant limitations.

This was reaffirmed in the cases of Migultenne v. The Attorney General [1996] 1

SLR 408 and Jayawardena v. Dharani Wijayatilake [2001] 1 SLR 132. In Migultenne, his

Lordship Fernando J. held:

However, the "pleasure principle" in Article 55(1) is "subject to the provisions of the

Constitution", and not only to express contrary provisions; accordingly, it may be diluted by

implications arising from other provisions of the Constitution such as Chapter III (and possibly

even Article 55(4)). Thus the pleasure principle" would not sanction dismissal contrary to the

fundamental rights and may also be subject to other limitations found elsewhere in the

Constitution.

Her Ladyship Shirani Bandaranayake J. (as she then was) in Trinita Perera v.

Jayaratne [1998] 1 SLR 372 held:

It is the contention of the learned Counsel for the petitioner that the equal protection

of the law guaranteed in terms of Article 12 (1) of the Constitution cannot be violated by

the Cabinet of Ministers. He relied on the ruling in Bandara where it was held that the

'pleasure principle' in Article 55 (1) of the Constitution is subject to the equality provision

of Article 12 and mandates fairness and excludes arbitrariness. The learned Counsel's

submission is that the petitioner and the 3rd respondent are equally situated and therefore

the appointment of the 3rd respondent violates the petitioner's right the equal protection

the law. With this submission, I agree.

In Maithripala Senanayake v. Gamage Don Mahindasoma [1998] 2 SLR 333, his

Lordship Amerasinghe J commented:

Article 55 (1) of the Constitution provides that the appointment, transfer, dismissal and

disciplinary control of public officers is vested in the Cabinet of Ministers, and that all public

officers shall hold office at pleasure. In the UK, public servants hold office during the pleasure of

the Crown unless otherwise provided. The rule, even in England, is not based on connection with

Page 13 of 19

the royal prerogative, except, perhaps in a loose sense, but rather on the ground that 'the

government should be able to disembarrass itself of any employee at any moment': Paradoxically,

both in the UK and in Sri Lanka, there are legal restrictions on the exercise of the 'pleasure'

principle. [emphasis added]

The limitations which the principle was subject to were reiterated in the case of

Karavita & Others v. Inspector General of Police [2002] 2 SLR 287 by his Lordship

Amaratunga J.:

The respondents cannot also invoke the pleasure principle embodied in Article 55 (1) of

the Constitution as an answer to the petitioners plea for a Writ of Mandamus. As was pointed out

by his Lordship Justice Fernando in Migultenne v. The Attorney-General, the pleasure principle

does not give an absolute discretion to the executive. It is subject to the other provisions of the

Constitution such as the fundamental rights and the Writ jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal under

Article 140 of the Constitution. It cannot be used to shield an act which has no basis in - law or in

fact. [emphasis added]

These decisions serve to illustrate that the pleasure principle was subject to

significant limitations and was not intended to confer unfettered discretion on the

appointing authority to dismiss an officer arbitrarily. However, these limitations, whether

explicit or implicit, were found in the provisions of the Constitution itself.

In Acts of Parliament that do not limit the application of the principle, such as in

the present case, in which a Registrar is dismissible at pleasure, the old rule appears to

be alive. It is not for this Court, acting in its supervisory jurisdiction to legislate and read

in the requirement of fairness when the statute is explicit that the pleasure principle has

not been abrogated. We would be transgressing Constitutional boundaries and usurping

the power of the Legislature. This must be distinguished from cases where an Act is silent

on whether the rules of natural justice or the requirement of fairness apply. In such cases,

to use the words of Byles J. in Cooper v. Wandsworth Board of Works [1863] 143 ER 414,

the justice of the common law will supply the omission of the legislature.

Notwithstanding this proposition, the facts of the instant case, for reasons

explained below, warrant this Courts intervention. In doing so, we bear in mind that the

Marriage Registration Ordinance embodies the pleasure principle and that the position

concerned is an honorary post in which impartiality is imperative in the dispensing of

public service.

Page 14 of 19

The Respondents themselves, of their own volition, have decided to tender an

explanation. The excerpts from the documents quoted above, sufficiently demonstrate,

that this discretion to remove at pleasure was exercised arbitrarily and at a whim; it was

not bona fide. The initial reason (as per document P7) was due to an ongoing Court case.

The Petitioner denies that there was such a case. There is no material provided by the

Respondents to indicate to this Court that their initial reason to remove the Petitioner

was in fact true. Although the Registrar General states in the letter P11 that the

existence of such a case was reported to him, there is no material to substantiate such

a report. There is no explanation of the subject matter of the supposed case either or how

that case was relevant to impugn the credibility of his appointment.

Subsequent to the Petitioners challenge to this decision, the Respondents provide

an entirely new reason; that the Petitioner was actively involved in politics. This reversal

is quite candidly admitted in the document P12 thus:

(02) . . 2020.01.17

03 fofha jd;d

, ......

[emphasis added]

This is problematic for two reasons. Firstly, if the Petitioner had not acted through

his lawyer and pressed for more information on his removal, especially for more

information or details of the case supposedly involving him, the real reason for his removal

would have never seen the light of day. It thus raises the question of whether the

Respondents would have ever revealed the real reason for the removal if the Petitioner

had not acted.

Secondly, a doubt is created whether the Respondents had to invent a reason to

justify removal after their first reason flopped. The absence of a clear, distinct reason for

the removal is a failure of good administration. As his Lordship Fernando J. in

Jayawardena (supra) held:

Respect for the Rule of Law requires the observance of minimum standards of openness,

fairness, and accountability in administration; and this means - in relation to appointments to,

and removal from, offices involving powers, functions and duties which are public in nature - that

the process of making a decision should not be shrouded in secrecy, and that there should be no

obscurity as to what the decision is and who is responsible for making it.

Page 15 of 19

We are mindful that under this Act which embodies the pleasure principle, there

is no requirement to give notice or disclose reasons. However, as in this case, when the

appointing authority has disclosed a reason, an apparently manufactured reason, they

have taken it upon themselves to so disclose. It would only be natural for an officer to

respond requiring clarification when the reason proffered is baseless. When that happens,

one cannot try to fall back on the pleasure principle, conveniently stating that there is no

necessity to provide a reason.

This points to the fact that there the decision to cancel the appointment was

arbitrary or an abuse of power.

We must also examine the accuracy of the subsequent reason, in the light of the

Petitioners protest that it is untrue.

It is claimed that the Petitioner was actively engaging in politics by campaigning

for a particular party in the 2019 Presidential Election and that he had served as the

Opposition leader/ member of the Mawanella Pradeshiya Sabha. To substantiate this,

photographs of the Petitioner campaigning for that party (1R1) and a letter from the

Minister of Highways, Road Development, and Petroleum Resources Development at the

time requesting the then Minister of Internal and Home Affairs to take steps to appoint

the Petitioner to the post attached as 1R2 was tendered.

The Respondents cite Section 6(5) of the Births and Deaths Registration Act No.

17 of 1951, as amended, incorporated by the Amendment Act No. 37 of 2006. The Section

provides:

(a) A person shall be disqualified from being appointed or continuing as a Registrar, or Deputy

Registrar, if he :

(i) becomes a Member of Parliament ; or

(ii) becomes a Member of a Provincial Council ; or

(iii) becomes a Member of a local authority ;

(iv) is holding any paid officer under the Republic ; or

(v) is engaged in a profession that would prejudicially affect the duties of a Registrar.

As stated in their Statement of Objections (at para.11(h) and (i)):

Page 16 of 19

h) circumstances are such that the petitioner engaging/ engaged in active politics and with

the allegiance and conduct of the same would prejudicially affect the duties of a registrar and set

an unhealthy precedent from performing the functions in the said honorary post in an independent

manner for the pure purpose of serving the general public.

i) Therefore, as a former politician it cannot be presumed that the conduct and affiliations

attributed to the Petitioner will not be prejudicial to the duties of a Registrar of births and deaths

in the future.

Regarding this contention, firstly, it must be observed that the reason for his

removal is based on conjecture. The Respondents have not demonstrated a single instance

in which a complaint has been made against the conduct of the Petitioner, or any instance

that he had acted in a partisan manner during that period of his appointment. It is only

on an assumption that his political involvement might affect his duties that he had been

removed. Even if one tries to justify it on the basis that, as mentioned above, these

positions must be both actually and visibly impartial, and thus an appearance or

possibility of partisan acts should result in removal a question arises then if this was a

concern, why was the Petitioner found to be suitable and thus appointed to the post in the

first place? What changed in the brief period between handing over of his letter of

appointment and notifying him of his removal? The documents that were submitted to

this Court by the Respondents alleging political involvement and his partiality were in

their possession. The fact that he was engaged in politics was known to them. Yet, this

was not considered a disqualification when he was appointed.

This should not be read to mean that when such a title holder is found to be in

active politics that he cannot be removed. Here the matter is, when they knew that the

Petitioner used to be involved in politics, they nonetheless appointed him and then tried

to cancel that appointment on the basis that he is engaged in politics. It seems

disingenuous and arbitrary. This is even more so because the Respondents first reason

had no suggestion that the Petitioners appointment was cancelled due to his politics.

Further, the statute disqualifies a Registrar if he is engaged in a profession that

would prejudicially affect the duties of a Registrar. The Petitioner states that he was a

member of the Pradeshiya Sabha until the last local government elections. He has made

an undertaking to this Court that he does not engage in politics. If he was a member prior

to submitting his application for this post, he would not be disqualified. The Section

envisages situations in which persons who are engaged in a profession that affects their

duties simultaneously hold the office of Registrar.

Page 17 of 19

The Respondents do not provide any material to the satisfaction of this Court

indicating that he was actively engaged in politics in the capacity of a member of the

Pradeshiya Sabha or any other profession that would prejudicially affect his work as a

Registrar, from the time he was considered eligible for the post and thereafter since he

was appointed.

Additionally, unlike in Thenabandu (supra), there was no opportunity for the

Petitioner to show cause. This is the least the Registrar General could have afforded the

Petitioner in order to ensure that he does not offend the principles of natural justice. Such

an opportunity would have enabled the Petitioner to contradict the allegations made.

Even in the case of Ridge, Lord Reid observed that in practice officers held at pleasure

are informed of the reasons for the same.

It is trite that the content of the audi alteram partem rule varies according to the

context. It will not apply with its full rigour in the present case. Instead, in the instant

case, while the pleasure principle enables dismissal without notice and reason, according

to a reading in consonance with the protection of the rule of law, this Section cannot be

read to dispense with the minimum requirement of an obligation to act fairly by providing

an opportunity for the Petitioner to show cause why he should not be removed, especially

since the reasons for removal appear to be arbitrary. The Petitioner claims to have been

taken by surprise when he was suddenly informed of his removal from the post for a case

that he denies.

Lord Steyn in the case of R (Anufrijeva) v. Secretary of State for the Home

Department [2004] 1 AC 604 remarked, In our system of law surprise is regarded as the enemy

of justice. Fairness is the guiding principle of our public law.

For those reasons, the 1st Respondent acted unfairly when deciding to cancel the

appointment of the Petitioner.

Further, it appears that the Registrar General has acted on extraneous

considerations: the fact that the Petitioner was in the past a member of a Pradeshiya

Sabha and that he was engaging in active politics. These are irrelevant, extraneous

considerations that were considered in removing the Petitioner. It would have been

relevant or material if the Petitioner was found to be continuing his role as a Pradeshiya

Sabha member as that is a reason for his disqualification or was still found to be engaging

in active politics since his appointment.

Page 18 of 19

In Gunasekera v W P L De Mel, Commissioner of Labour 79 NLR 409 his Lordship

Tittawella J. held:

A lack of jurisdiction may arise in different ways. While engaged on a proper inquiry the

tribunal may depart from the rules of natural justice or it may ask itself the wrong questions or

may take into account matters which it was not directed to take into account. Thereby it would

step outside its jurisdiction. A tribunal which has made findings of fact wholly unsupported by

evidence or which it has drawn inferences wholly unsupported by any of the facts found by it will

be held to have erred in point of law. The concept of error of law includes the giving of reasons that

are bad in law or inconsistent, unintelligible or it would seem substantially inadequate. It includes

also the application of a wrong legal test to the facts found taking irrelevant considerations into

account and arriving at a conclusion without any supporting evidence. If reasons are given and

these disclose that an erroneous legal approach has been followed the superior Court can set the

decision aside by certiorari for error of law. If the grounds or reasons stated disclose a clearly

erroneous legal approach the decision will be quashed. An error of law may also be held to be

apparent if the inferences and decisions reached by the tribunal in any given case are such as no

reasonable body of persons properly instructed in the law applicable to the case could have made.

The above is a summary of some of the grounds for awarding certiorari as set down in S. A. de

Smith's work-Judicial Review of Administrative Action [emphasis added]

In Collettes v. Bank of Ceylon [1984] 2 SLR 253 his Lordship Sharvananda J. (as

he then was) held:

This Court undoubtedly has the jurisdiction to revise the concurrent findings of fact

reached by the lower court in appropriate cases. However, ordinarily, it will not interfere with

findings of fact based upon relevant evidence except in special circumstances, such as, for instance,

where the judgment of the lower court shows that the relevant evidence bearing on a fact has not

been considered or irrelevant matters have been given undue importance or that the conclusion

rests mainly on erroneous considerations or is not supported by sufficient evidence. When the

judgment of the lower court exhibits such shortcomings, this court not only may, but is under a

duty to examine the supporting evidence and reverse the findings. [emphasis added]

The five-judge bench of the Supreme Court held in the same case that the question

of whether the Tribunal has failed to take into account the relevant considerations is a

question of law. This was also referred to in Fonseka v. Candappa [1988] 2 SLR 11 and

Sithamparanathan v. Peoples Bank [1989] 1 SLR 124.

In Padfield v. Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food [1968] 2 WLR 924, Lord

Upjohn held, He may have good policy reasons for refusing an investigation, though that policy

Page 19 of 19

must not be based on political considerations which as Farwell LJ said in R v Board of Education

are pre-eminently extraneous.

It must be noted that despite an assurance given to this Court on 12th February

2021 by the Counsel of the 1st and 2nd Respondents that no steps would be taken to call

for applications to fill the purported vacancy, it is appalling, if it is true, that a person has

allegedly been appointed to that post. The document marked P13 annexed to the

Counter Affidavit of the Petitioner, is a letter issued by the Divisional Secretariat of

Mawanella stating that a person concerned has received an appointment for the same

post. What is more shocking is the document marked P14, dated 10th June 2022, issued

by the Mawanella Pradeshiya Sabha stating that the same person is purportedly a

member of the Mawanella Pradeshiya Sabha. Given that the person concerned is not a

party to this application and the Respondents, although their written submissions dated

22nd September 2022 are silent on the matter, have not had an opportunity to controvert

the veracity of the contents of these documents the questions of whether a person has

been appointed to the post of Registrar and further whether that person is simultaneously

holding a political office must be inquired into and addressed by the Respondents.

For the reasons that the Respondents have acted arbitrarily and made an error of

law by taking into account irrelevant, extraneous considerations, and thereby acted

illegally, we quash the decision of the Respondents to cancel the appointment of the

Petitioner. We issue a Writ of Mandamus to reinstate the Petitioner, subject to an inquiry

on his eligibility to continue in the position considering the allegations made against him

and the satisfactory completion of his probation. We order costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. N. SAMARAKOON, J. I AGREE JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL