IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A. Case No.l289/2000 (F)

D.C. Galle Case No.llS60/P

l.

lAo

2.

3.

4.

5.

Pubudusena Senanayake,

of Vidyachandra Mawatha, Ahangama.

PLAINTIFF

~Vs~

Jane Senanayake,

C/o. Mallika Kariyawasam,

Anangoda, Galle.

Mallika Kariyawasam,

of Udugama Road, Anangoda,

Akmeemana.

Kamala Senanayake,

of "Sampath", Godawatta,

Akmeemana.

Dayaratne Senanayake,

of "Senani", Vidyachandra Mawatha,

Ahangama.

Leelaratne Senanayake,

of Kandamuduna, Dikkumbura.

Kusuma Lakshmi Senanayake,

Kandamuduna, Dikkumbura.

DEFENDANTS

ANDBE1WEEN

1

Dayaratne Senanayake,

of "Senani", Vidyachandra Mawatha,

Ahangama.

3rd DEFENDANT ~ APPELLANT

~Vs~

Pubudusena Senanayake,

of Vidyachandra Mawatha, Ahangama.

PLAINTIFF ~ RESPONDENT

1. Jane Senanayake,

C/o. Mallika Kariyawasam,

Anangoda, Galle.

IA.Mallika Kariyawasam,

of Udugama Road, Anangoda,

Akmeemana.

2. Kamala Senanayake,

of "Sampath", Godawatta,

Akmeemana.

4. Leelaratne Senanayake,

of Kandamuduna, Dikkumbura.

4A. Sheela Kodagoda Delapalage

4B. Menik Sanjeewani Kodagoda Senanayake

Both of Kandamuduna,

Malalgodapitiya, Dikkumbura,

Ahangama.

5. Kusuma Lakshmi Senanayake,

Kandamuduna, Dikkumbura.

DEFENDANT ~ RESPONDENTS

2

BEFORE

COUNSEL

Decided on

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J.

A.H.M.D. Nawaz,j.

W. Dayaratne, P.e. with R. Jayawardena and S. de

Zoysa for the 3rd Defendant, Appellant.

Lasitha Chaminda for the Plaintiff, Respondent.

29.04.2019

T

he quintessential question that has arisen in this appeal of the 3rd Defendant,

Appellant is whether premises No.8 that has been depicted in the preliminary plan

of this case but which has been decreed to the allotted in common to all the parties in

the case should be exclusively allotted to the 3rd Defendant,Appellant, in view of the

axiomatic principle of law in partition law, namely a co,owner who has made

improvements should be allotted the portion which contains the improvements,

provided it does not cause substantial injustice to the other co,owners,see J.D. liyanage

v. L.H. Thegiris 56 N.LR 546.

Let me indulge in a conspectus of facts so as to comprehend the issue engulfed in this

appeal.

The Plaintiff, Respondent (hereinafter sometimes referred to as "the Plaintiff")

Pubudusena Senanayake instituted this partition action against the 3rd Defendant,

Appellant (hereinafter sometimes referred to as "the 3rd Defendant") and 5 others to

partition a land more fully described in the plaint dated 14th January 1992.

The parties admitted the identity of the corpus as depicted as Lots A, B, C and D in the

preliminary plan and there is also no dispute as to how the property has devolved on the

parties. According to paragraph 3 of the plaint, Philip de Silva Senanayake had been in

possession of this property and by a deed of gift NO.2204 dated 29th March 1949, he had

transferred an undivided shares of 6/7 to his six children namely; Edwin, David, Martin,

Peter, Gunaseeli and Jane,lst Defendant. In other words these six children of Philip de

3

Silva Senanayake got 1/7 each of this property. The father Philip de Silva Senanayake

retained the balance portion of 1/7. In other words co~ownership was created among the

six children and the donor (Philip de Silva) to the extent of 1/7 shares each.

The said son Edwin married Sandaseeli Dias Edirisinghe Kodithuwakku and on his death

there were his intestate heirs namely his widow Sandaseeli, the Plaintiff Pubudusena and

the 2nd Defendant~Kamala. This 1949 deed has been marked as P5. The schedule of the

deed refers to 3 lots and it would appear that the subject matter is an amalgamation of

these lots.

Since the main contest between the Plaintiff and 3rd Defendant~Appellant revolved

around the main house in the subject~matter which is depicted as premises No.8 in the

preliminary plan, the natural question to pose is whether the original owner Philip de

Silva Senanayake ever referred to this house in his deed of transfer of 1949. There is no

reference to a house built on this land but there are references to buildings. Therefore,

when the Grandfather Philip de Silva donated 1/7 each to his six children and retained 1/7

for himself it would appear that this co~owned land didn't have a dwelling house. In fact

if there had been a dwelling house, the deed would have been a reference to a house in

the deed.

It would appear that it is through Peter Senanayake the father of 3rd Defendant~

Appellant that the 3rd Defendant~ Appellant inherited his shares in the corpus and it is

not disputed that the 3rd Defendant's share became 1/14. Thereafter Gunaseeli who was

an aunt of the 3rd Defendant also transferred her 1/7 share to the Defendant and the 3rd

Defendant got 36/84 shares.

By devolution the Plaintiff admittedly got 20/84 shares in the corpus and the learned

Additional District Judge of Galle did eventually allot the aforesaid proportionate shares

to the parties respectively~see page 314 of the Appeal Brief for the final allotment of shares

in the judgment dated 24.11.2000.

It has to be noted that none of the above transactions referred to above refers to the bone

of contention in this appeal namely the house depicted as premises No.8 in the

4

preliminary plan. The contest between the 3rd Defendant-Appellant and the Plaintiff-

Respondent is over the main house. Should it go to the soil in the proportionate shares of

the parties as held by the learned Additional District Judge? Or should the soil rights of

the 3rd Defendant-Appellant (36/84 shares) must include this as an improvement effected

by his privies?

Reference to the house

A reference to the house is found only in Deed No.263-see page 391 of the brief. This

transfer deed is marked as 3VI. By this deed dated 11th December 1988, the 3rd Defendant's

mother and sister Eslin Senanayake along with Gunaseeli Senanayke (an aunt of

transferred certain shares to the 3rd Defendant and the 2nd paragraph of the deed refers to

the house-see the page 391 of the brief as a donation to the 3rd Defendant-Appellant. So

there is documentary evidence that 3rd Defendant-Appellant became the donee of this

main house. It is on the strength of this evidence and other items of evidence that the 3rd

Defendant claimed the house as an entitlement to be engulfed in his 36/84th share.

I have already referred to the judgment of Sansoni, J. in liyanage v. Thegiris (supra)

which laid down the proposition that a co-owner could be allotted the portion which

contains his improvements, though it is not an inflexible rule. Sansoni, J. went on to hold

(with Alan Rose C.J agreeing) that the rule may not be followed if it involves substantial

injustice to the other co-owners.

The same proposition was articulated thus by Lascelles C.J in Moldrich v. La BroDy

(1911) 14 N.L.R 331:

"Where improvements have been effected with the assent of the co-owner, that portion of the land

on which the improvements stand should, if pOSSible, be allotted, on a partition of the land, under

Ordinance No.lO of 1863, to the co-owner who has made the improvements; he should not be

reqUired to pay compensation to the other co-owner for these improvements. If the land on which

the improvements are made is superior in point of fertility to the rest of the land, a different

consideration arises".

5

This principle is also mirrored in Section 33 of the Partition Law No.21 of 1977 and in the

circumstances, it becomes relevant to pose the question as to who built the premises

No.8 which is depicted in the preliminary plan bearing No.l80. Was the house an

improvement by the Plaintiff's privies?

The contesting parties namely the Plaintiff/Respondent and the 3cd Defendant/Appellant

who are sons of two brothers put forward two rival positions at the trial. Whilst the

Plaintiff/Respondent took the stance that it was their grandfather/Philip de Silva

Senanayake (the original owner) who had put up the house, it was the consistent

position of the 3cd Defendant/Appellant that it was his father along with her aunt

Gunaseeli who had constructed the house.

So it is a question of fact as to who built this house that would be finally determinative of

the claim to the house. The learned Additional District Judge of Galle by his judgment

dated 24.11.2000 held that the house was common to all and it must devolve on all

children and their heirs. The tenor of the judgment of the learned Additional District

Judge is that the exclusive claim made by the 3cd Defendant/Appellant is fraudulent.

Moreover, the learned Additional District Judge went on to hold that the original

owner's widow (the grandmother of the contesting parties) had sufficient assets to put

up this house but I hasten to point out that the record does not bear any evidence of her

contribution towards the building of the house.

One has to collate the items of evidence in the case to ascertain the veracity of the

different versions proffered by the respective parties.

The Plaintiff's argument was that the grandfather Philip de Siva Senanayake renovated

the existing house or built another in 1952. The consistent position of the Plaintiff right

throughout the trial from its inception was that the house that the grandfather/Philip de

Silva Senanayake constructed had an extent of 21 cubic feet, but the surveyor who visited

the corpus and surveyed the land in August 1992 stated that the extent of the house was

14 cubit feet. In other words, the position of the Plaintiff was contradicted by the

surveyor in regard to the extent of the house. To put this in an evaluative context, there

is an inconsistency inter se in the position of the Plaintiff at the trial. The surveyor

6

asserted at p 285 of the Appeal Brief that the house was of 14 cubit feet. This would

indicate that the old house of 21 cubit feet, which the Plaintiff had alleged his

grandfather had built, had ceased to exist and in its place the house which was in an

extent of 14 cubit feet had come into existence. This important item of evidence that

emerged from the surveyor shows that the house which was alleged to have been

renovated or built by the grandfather was no longer on the ground and this would cast

the finding of the learned Additional District Judge into doubt, because it was his

holding that the house was constructed by the original owner~Philip de Silva Senanayake

and therefore the house must go to the soil for all to co ~own and share. This finding is

contrary to the evidence that emerged at the trial.

The version that the house was built by the original owner namely the grandfather of the

both the Plaintiff and the 3rd Defendant~Appellant does not ring probable for several

other reasons.

One of the witnesses for the Plaintiff one Handy stated that it was him who supplied

timber for the construction of the house and it was Gunaseeli (the Aunt of the 3rd

Defendant~Appellant) who paid the money for the timber. It was Gunaseeli who had

managed and supervised the construction. This testimony given on behalf of the Plaintiff

proves the case of the 3rd Defendant that it was his father~Peter Senenayake and

Gunaseeli who had constructed the house.

A strong item of evidence in support of this testimony of the 3rd Defendant is that

Gunaseeli along with others in fact gifted this house to the 3rd Defendant by way of a

deed of gift bearing No.263 and dated nth December 1988.

As I have said before, it is only this deed that refers to a house and the recital in the deed

refers to the construction of the house and the house in the following terms: ~

"The 3rd and 4 th named vendor (Eslin Senanayake alias Eslin Amaradasa and Gunasedi

Senanayake) under and by virtue of inheritance from our deceased brother (David Senanayake)

the said David Senanayake and by me the fourth named vendor also by right of construction

and under and by virtue of Deed NO.2204 dated 29.03.1949 ...

7

Even the 1st schedule is specific in its reference to the house ... " .... about 14 cubic house standing

thereon built by Peter Senanayake and the Fourth Donor named hereof Gunasedi Senanayake .... " (sic).

This gift was made to the 3rd Defendant,Appellant on 11th December 1988 and the

evidence is that the 3rd Defendant has been in possession of the house.

This deed marked as 3VI is indeed ante litem motam. As I said in Jayasinghage

Ahesysuriya and two others v. Jayasinghage PremarathnaJayasingheand others(CA

100S/1997(F),decided on 30.07.2018), the expression "ante litem motam" would mean

"before an action has been raised". i.e., at a time when the declarant had no motive to lie.

This phrase is generally used in reference to the evidentiary requirement that the acts

upon which an action is based occur before the action is brought,see Black's Law

Dictionary (loth Edition, p 112).

The fact that the house was constructed by Gunaseeli appears as such in the deed. This

cannot be a lie because this assertion is corroborated by one Handy who despite having

been summoned to give evidence for the Plaintiff asserted that the expenses for the

construction of the house were borne by Gunaseeli. The money had apparently been

dispatched by the 3rd Defendant's father' Peter Senanayake and this fact is referred to in

the deed 3VI bearing No.263.

All these items of evidence show that the probabilities tilt more in favour of Gunaseeli

(the Aunt of the 3rd Defendant and donor of the house) having constructed the house,

with the financial disbursement given by her brother' Peter Senanayake,the father of the

3cd Defendant' Appellant. The deed which was ante litem motam is supported by evidence

aliunde and the learned Additional District Judge of Galle was in error, when he

concluded that the deed was fraudulent. The deed quite categorically describes that the

improvement in the form of the house was made by Gunaseeli who later made a gift of

that improvement to the 3rd Defendant'Appellant. It is also to be noted that when this

deed was marked, no objection was raised by the Plaintiff and Section 68 of Partition

Law No.44 of 1973 provides that it shall not be necessary in any proceedings under the

law to adduce formal proof of the execution of any deed which, on the face of it, purports

8

to have been duly executed, unless the genuineness of that deed is impeached by a party

claiming adversely to the party producing the deed, or unless the Court requires such

proof. The Plaintiff did not seek to impeach 3V2 nor did the Court require proof thereof.

There is not sufficient evidence to support the version of the Plaintiff that the house had

been constructed by the old paterfamilias-Philip de Silva Senanayake.

Special means of knowledge spoken to by the executants in the deed and the fact that

these statements were made ante litem motam render the recitals relevant and admissible

and they are indeed corroborated by evidence-see Cooray v. Wijesooriya (1958) 62 N.LR

158 wherein Sinnetamby,J. used statements in the recitals to infer a pedigree.

From the foregoing it is quite manifest that the Plaintiff failed to establish that the house

that had been allegedly built by the grandfather remained intact. The evidence is that the

improvement was made by Gunaseeli-one of the co-owners who was funded by the

father of the 3rd Defendant-Appellant. This improvement was donated in the end to the

3rd Defendant-Appellant. Therefore it was preposterous for the learned Additional

District Judge to have allotted this house in common. As the learned District Judge

found, the 3rd Defendant-Appellant was allotted 36/84 of the corpus-the largest share

among the parties and it is consistent with case law and Section 33 of Partition Law to

have held that the soil rights of the 3rd Defendant-Appellant would include the house-the

premises No.8 as depicted in the preliminary plan.

The learned Additional District Judge misdirected himself on an important question of

fact, that amounts to a non-direction as well. As a result, I proceed to set aside the

judgment of the learned Additional District Judge dated 24th November 2000 and allow

the appeal of the 3rd Defendant-Appellant. The learned District Judge of Galle is directed

to enter judgment and decree by allotting premises No.8 to be included in the 30/84th

share that the 3rd Defendant-Appellant has been awarded. All other allotment will

remain so awarded as in the judgment.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

9