==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 13

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal under in the

High Court of Balapitiya in CRI-1412/11 in

terms of section 331 of the Criminal

Procedure Code No. 15 of 1979.

CA CASE No: HCC 204/2024

HC of Balapitya Case No: CRI-1412/11

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Complainant

-Vs-

1. Jayaratne Sumanaratne alias Kapila

2. Karuna Pedige Asoka Priyantha

Kumara

Accused

AND NOW

Jayaratne Sumanaratne alias Kapila

80 A, Parassagoda

Uragasmanhandiya

1st Accused-Appellant

Page 2 of 13

v.

The Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo 12

Respondent

Before: B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

Amal Ranaraja, J

Counsel : Mohan Senevirathne with Nandana Malkumara and Selina Pathirana

for the 1st Accused- Appellant

Hiranjan Peiris, PC, ASG for the State

Written 30.10.2025 ( by the Accused-Appellant)

Submissions: 25.02.2026 .(by the Respondent)

On

Argued On: 03.03.2026

Judgment On: 15.05.2026

JUDGEMENT

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

The Accused- Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Appellant), along with the

2nd Accused, Karuna Pedige Asoka Priyantha Kumara, were indicted before the

High Court of Balapitiya on the charge of committing the offence of murder of one

Pathirana Rajapakse Mudiyanselage Mallika on 30.08.2007, punishable under

Section 296 read with Section 32 of the Penal Code.

Page 3 of 13

Upon conclusion of the trial, the Learned High Court Judge, by judgment dated

18.01.2024, found the Appellant not guilty of the charge of murder under Section

296 of the Penal Code but convicted the Appellant of a lesser offence punishable

under Section 317 of the Penal Code. The Appellant was sentenced to 7 years of

rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 20,000/- and 6 months of rigorous

imprisonment in default.

Being aggrieved by the said conviction and the sentences, Appellant sought to

challenge the validity on the following grounds,

1. Whether the Learned Judge of the High Court erred himself by finding the

accused guilty for an offence punishable under S.317 of the Penal Code on

a dying deposition made by the deceased of this case (Inadmissible evidence)

2. ⁠Whether the Learned Judge of the High Court had erred in law by

considering the statements made by the deceased on 6th September 2007 to

PW 9 at the Government Hospital Elpitiya, as a legally admissible dying

deposition.

Based on the evidence presented before the Learned Judge of the High Court, the

prosecution primarily relied upon circumstantial evidence, particularly the dying

declarations made to PW 9 and PW 2. Before undertaking an analysis of the

evidence concerning these declarations, it is essential to first examine the manner

in which our Courts have treated and accepted dying declarations as admissible

evidence.

It is pertinent to reproduce the sentiments expressed by His Lordship H.N.G.

Fernando J in Queen v. Anthony Pillai 68 CLW 57 with regard to how the Court

could act on such dying declarations.

“The failure on the part of the Learned Trial Judge to caution the jury as to

the risk of acting upon a dying declaration, being the statement of a person

who is not a witness at the trial, and as to the need to consider with special

care the question whether the statement could be accepted as true and

accurate had resulted in a miscarriage of justice.”

Page 4 of 13

This dictum was considered by Hos Lordship Sisira de Abrew J in Gamini

Mahaarachchi vs. The Attorney General, CA 106/2002, Decided On 22.08.2007,

held that:

“When a dying declaration is sought to be produced as an item of evidence

against an accused person in a criminal trial. the Trial Judge or the jury as

a case may be, must bear in mind on the following weakness;

1. Statement of the deceased person was not made under oath.

2. Statement of the deceased person has not been tested by cross-

examination vide King vs. Asirivadan Nadar 51 NLR 322 and Justin

Pala vs. Queen 66 NLR409

3. That the person who made the dying declaration is not a witness

at the trial.

As there are inherent weaknesses in a dying declaration which I have stated

above, the trial Judge or the jury as a case may be, must be satisfied beyond

reasonable doubt on the following matters;

a. Whether the deceased in fact made such a statement

b. Whether the statement made by the deceased was true and

accurate

c. Whether the statement made by the deceased person could be

accepted beyond reasonable doubt.

d. Whether the evidence of the witness who testifies about the dying

declaration can be accepted beyond reasonable doubt.

e. Whether the witness is telling the truth.

f. Whether the deceased was able to speak at the time the alleged

declaration was made.

Page 5 of 13

g. Whether the deceased was able to identify the assailant.”

(Similar legal principles related to dying declarations were considered by His

Lordship Sisira De Abrew in Ranasinghe v Attorney-General [2007], 1 S.L.R 218)

This was followed by His Lordship Achala Wengappuli J in Korinvige Anura

Lakshman Silva alias Pechchei alias Chooti vs. The Attorney General, CA No.

288/2013 decided on 04.05.2018 and held that:

“It is the contention of the accused-appellant that the dying deposition on

which he was convicted fails to satisfy these stringent tests, in view of the

inconsistencies referred to above and therefore the prosecution has failed to

prove its case against him.”

With these authorities in mind, it is pertinent to delve into the facts as revealed

at the trial Court in terms of the two dying declarations made by the deceased.

PW2, Maddumage Nyanasena, the husband of the deceased, testified that on the

day before the alleged incident, an argument had taken place between the witness

and his sister, who is the Appellant’s wife. On the same day at around 11.00 p.m.

that night, two police officers came to the witness’s house, struck him on the back

with a pole, questioned him regarding the dispute, and instructed him to come to

the police station the following morning.

The following morning, before going to the police station, the witness was asleep

while the deceased had gone to a nearby shop at around 6.30 a.m. to buy bread.

Shortly afterwards, the witness heard the deceased screaming that someone had

thrown acid at her. According to the witness, while the deceased was running

towards him, she stated that the bass who worked in Appellant’s house had

attacked her with a pole and that the appellant had thrown acid on her.

When the witness awoke, he observed the deceased running towards him after

having been attacked with acid, requesting him to pour water on her body.

Thereafter the deceased was taken to the hospital by her uncle. Thereafter, after

being discharged from Alpitiya Hospital, the deceased was taken by her daughter

Page 6 of 13

to Makandura Hospital for further treatment. While at Makandura Hospital, the

deceased requested to take a bath. With the permission of a nurse, the witness

transported the deceased by three-wheeler to her daughter’s nearby house for that

purpose. After assisting her to bathe, the witness returned her to the hospital,

where she succumbed to her injuries approximately half an hour later.

PW 9, PC Nandana Kumara Weerawardana, acting under the orders of the OIC,

went to Alpitiya Hospital on 6 September 2007 at 16.10 hours to record a

statement from the deceased. Before obtaining the statement, the witness

inquired into the deceased’s mental and physical condition to ensure that she was

capable of giving a statement. At that time, the deceased was preparing to leave

the hospital with her daughter. According to the statement given by the deceased,

the appellant and his wife, Somalatha, who was also her sister-in-law, lived in a

neighbouring house. On 28 August, an argument had taken place with them, and

thereafter, the Appellant’s wife went to the police station and lodged a complaint.

On the following morning, before going to the police station, she went to a nearby

shop to buy bread. While returning home from the shop, the accused approached

her carrying a pole and attacked her from behind. Upon being attacked, she

attempted to run towards her house. At that moment, the appellant brought a

light green coloured mug containing acid and threw it at her.

ප්‍ර :- මහත්මයා ඔබට පසුව මියගිය අය ප්‍රකාශ කළ කාරණය ඇයි විසින් අත්සන් කර ඔබ වවත

ලබා දී තිවබන ප්‍රකාශවේ වකාවහාම ද සටහන් වවලා තිවබන්වන් ඇයවේ වචන වලින් ?

උ :- පසුගිය මාවසේ අව ෝසේු මාවසේ 28 වවනිදා මවේ පුරුෂයයි, එයාවේ නංගි වන වසෝමලතා

යන අය සමඟ රණ්ඩු වුණා. ඉතිං ඒ අවසේථාවේ මවේ මහත්තයා එයාවේ නංගිට අතින් පහරවල්

වදකක් ැහුවා. මම ඒ රණ්ඩුව වේරුවා. ඉතිං එදා ඇය වපාලිසියට ගිහින් තිබුණා. එම

පැමිණිල්ලට වපාලිසිවයන් අපිට එන්න කියා තිබුණා. ඉතිං එදා සවස මම වපාලිසියට ගිවේ

නැහැ. නමුත් ඊට පසුව දා උවේ මම වපාලිසියට යන්න ලැසේති වුවණ්ඩ. ඉතිං මම එදා රැ මවේ

මහත්තයක් එක්ක අවේ ව දර සිටිවේ. අවේ ව දර ළඟ සුමනරත්න කියන අයවේ ව දර ඉදන්

රතිඥේඥයක් පත්ු කරලා දැම්මා. ඒවත් අහව න අපි ව දර ඇුළට වවලා සිටියා. නිදා ව න

අවදි වවලා උවදන් න්ම වපාලිසි යන්න ලැසේති වුණා. උවේ 6.00 ට විතර වපාලිසි යන්න

ලැසේති වුවණ්ඩ. උවදන් ම ලැහැසේති වවලා මම පාන් ව න්න ගියා. කමලා වේ කවෙන් පාන්

Page 7 of 13

ව ඩියක් අරව න ව දරට එන්න එනවකාට කපිලවේ වේ හදන ව දර ළඟ ඉදලා බාසේ

වපාල්ලක් අරව න ආවා. පාරට ඇවිත් මට වපාල්වලන් ැහුවා. මම පල්ලමට බහින වකාට

තමයි වපාල්වලන් ැහුවේ. ැහුවේ පිටිපසේවසන් ඇවිත් ැහුවේ. මම ටේ ලා හැරිලා බලන

වකාට කපිලවේ ව දර සිටින බාසේ තමයි ැහුවේ. හන වකාට වතාට පුළුවන් ද චණ්ඩඩිකම්

කරන්න කියලා අහලා තමයි වපාල්වලන් ැහුවේ. ඒ වපාලු පාර මවේ වම්පස උකුල් ඇවේ ට

වැදුනා. ුවාල වුවණ්ඩ නැහැ. ඒ එක්ක ම මම මවේ ව දර යන්න දුවන්න හදන වකාටම මවේ

මහත්තයාවේ නංගිවේ පුරුෂයා වන කපිල එක පාරටම ලා වකාළ පාට ව ෝගුවකින් ව නවිත්

ැහුවා ඒ ව ෝගුවවන් ව නත් ඇසිඩ් ැහුවා. මම ඉඳව න ඉන්න වකාට තමයි කපිල ැහුවේ.

එයා හපු ඇසිඩ් වලට මවේ මුළු ඇඟම පිච්වචනවා වවේ දැණුනා. මම ඒ වේලාවේ කෑ

හව න ව දරට ගියා. ඒ ප්‍රහාරය වැදුවන් මවේ ඇවේ දකුණු පසට. දකුණු පස මුහුණට, ඇඟට

වම්අතට, හැම තැනට ම වැදුණා

After the statement was recorded, the deceased was discharged from Alpitiya

Hospital and remained at home for approximately two weeks. During this period,

the wounds on her body became infected. Consequently, she was taken to

Makandura, where her daughter resides, and was admitted to the Sada Lanka

General Hospital for further treatment.

The main argument put forward by the counsel for the appellant was whether both

statements made by the deceased fall under the dying declaration under Section

32(1) of the Evidence Ordinance.

It is pertinent to refer to Section 32 (1)of the Evidence Ordinance.

32.⁠ ⁠Statements, written or verbal, of relevant facts made by a person who is

dead, or who cannot be found, or who has become incapable of giving

evidence, or whose attendance cannot be procured without an amount of

delay or expense which, under the circumstances of the case, appears to the

court unreasonable, are themselves relevant facts in the following cases:-

(1) When the statement is made by a person as to the cause of his

death, or as to any of the circumstances of the transaction which

resulted in his death, in cases in which the cause of that person's

Page 8 of 13

death comes into question. Such statements are relevant whether the

person who made them was or was not, at the time when they were

made, under expectation of death, and whatever may be the nature

of the proceedings in which the cause of his death comes into question.

It is true that when she made a statement to PW 9, she was expecting to leave the

hospital, which means she was not expecting death. The question is whether the

statement made by the person is only applicable when that person is under the

expectation of death. This was considered by E.R.S. Coomaraswamy in The Law

of Evidence, Volume 1, page 464.

Differences between English Law and Our Law

The subsection differs from the English Law on this matter in the following

respects:

(1) Under English Law, the declarant should have been in imminent danger

of death and should himself have abandoned all hope of recovery. This

question is immaterial in our law, for Section 32(1) expressly states that the

statements are relevant whether the person who made them was or was not,

at the time when they were made, under expectation of death.

(2) In English Law, such statements are admissible only in cases of

homicide, that is, murder or manslaughter. They are not admissible in cases

other than homicide.

They would not be admissible, for example, in cases of robbery, or procuring

abortion.

But in Sri Lanka, Section 32(1) expressly makes such statements relevant,

whatever may be the nature of the proceedings in which the cause of death

comes into question. The admissibility is not confined to cases of homicide.

Thus, it would apply in a case of robbery, or rape, or even actionable wrong.

Page 9 of 13

According to section 32(1) of the Evidence Ordinance, it is clear that the

‘statements are relevant whether the person who made them was or was not, at

the time when they were made, under expectation of death”. In the present case,

the deceased sustained acid burns covering approximately 40–50% of her body as

a result of the attack. She was subsequently admitted for medical treatment;

however, due to the extensive nature of the burns and the resulting complications,

her condition deteriorated, ultimately leading to her death.

The statement made by the deceased to both PW9 and PW2 directly related to the

acid attack perpetrated upon her, which constituted the very transaction

cumulating in her death, which was done by the Appellant.

The following judgments have examined the admissibility of statements made

without anticipating death, which may fall within section 32(1) of the Evidence

Ordinance.

In the case of The King v. Asirvadan Nadar NLR 51, 322 at page 324, Gratiaen J,

held that;

“It is important to remember that in this country, unlike in England,

statements, untested by cross-examination, which are made by a deceased

person as to the cause of his death or as to the circumstances which resulted

in it are admissible in evidence whether or not they were made in

expectation of death- i.e., at a time when every motive to falsehood is

silenced and the mind is induced by the most powerful considerations to

speak the truth "-R. v. Woodcock [168 E. R. 352.]. Under our Evidence

Ordinance the sense of impending death which is believed to provide " a

situation so solemn as to create a special guarantee of veracity " is not

insisted upon.”

Page 10 of 13

In the case of Ummukulathumma v Uthumalebbe, 47 NLR, 139 at page 141,

Wijeyewardena J held that,

“In the local case, similar evidence was rejected on the ground that section

32(1) of the Evidence Ordinance is limited to statements made by a person

after the event, which resulted in his death.

The Privy Council has dissented from this view. Lord Atkin in delivering

judgment, said: —

……………………

that he was setting to the place where the accused lived, and to meet

a person, the wife of the accused, who lived in the accused's house

appears clearly to be a statement as to some of the circumstances of

the transaction which resulted in his death. The statement was

rightly admitted. "

The King v. Marshall Appuhamy, 51 NLR 272 at page 274, Jayetileke S.P.J held

that;

“The transaction in this case is the one in which the deceased was murdered

on September 19, 1949. The transaction cannot be restricted to the physical

cause of death. If the events prior to the death can be taken into account, as

indeed they can be, according to the judgment of Lord Atkin, the transaction

would include the connected events which culminated in death. Whether

there is a proximate relation between the commencement of the transaction

and the ending thereof is a matter to be determined on the facts of each case.

Here there is a clear connection between the complaint made by the

deceased, the warning given by Ana Maria to the appellant, and the actual

stabbing. The majority of us are of opinion that the statement made by the

deceased was a statement as to some of the circumstances of the transaction

which resulted in her death within the meaning of section 82 (1) and was

rightly admitted in evidence. We would accordingly dismiss the appeal.”

Page 11 of 13

Pakala Narayan swami v King-Emperor (1939) 1 AER 396, page number 401

“The first question with which their Lordships propose to deal is whether

the statement of the widow—that on Mar. 20 the deceased had told her that

he was going to Berhampur, as the accused' s wife had written and told him

to go and receive payment of his dues—was admissible under C the Indian

Evidence Act, 1872, s. 32(1). That section provides as follows:

Statements written or verbal of relevant facts made by a

person who is dead ... are themselves relevant facts in the

following cases (1) when the statement is made by a person as

to the cause of his death or as to any of the circumstances of

the transaction which resulted in his death, in cases in which

the cause of that person's death comes into question.

Such statements are relevant whether the person who made

them was or was not at the time when they were made under

expectation of death and whatever may be the nature of the

proceeding in which the cause of his death comes into question.

A variety of questions as to the effect of this section has been mooted in the

Indian courts. It has been suggested that the statement must be made after

the transaction has taken place, that the person making it must be at any

rate near death, and that the “circumstances” can only include the acts done

when and where the death was caused. Their lordships are of opinion that

the natural meaning of the words used does not convey any of these

limitations. The statement may be made before the cause of death has

arisen, or before the deceased has any reason to expect to be killed. The

circumstances must be circumstances of the transaction. General

expressions indicating fear or suspicion, whether of a particular individual

or otherwise, and not directly related to the occasion of the death, will not

be admissible. However, statements made by the deceased that he was

proceeding to the spot where he was in fact killed, or as to his reasons for

Page 12 of 13

so proceeding, or what he was going to meet him, would each of them be

circumstances of the transaction, and would he so weather the person was

unknown, or was not the person accused. Such statement might indeed be

exculpatory of the person accused. “Circumstances of the transaction” is a

phrase, no doubt, that conveys some limitations. It is not as broad as the

analogous use in “circumstantial evidence,” which includes evidence of all

relevant facts. It is, on the other hand, narrower than res gestae.

Circumstances must have some proximate relation to the actual occurrence,

though as, for instance, in a case of prolonged poisoning they may be related

to dates at a considerable distance from the date of the actual fatal dose.

It will be observed that " the circumstances " are those of the transaction

which resulted in the death of the declarant. It is not necessary that there

should be a known transaction other than that the death of A the declarant

has ultimately been caused, for the condition of the admissibility of the

evidence is that " the cause of [the declarant's] death comes into question."

In the present case, the cause of the deceased's death comes into question.

The transaction is one in which the deceased was murdered on Mar. 21 or

Mar. 22, and his body was found in a trunk proved to be bought on behalf

of the accused. The statement made by the deceased on Mar. 20 or Mar.

21—that he was setting out to the place where the accused lived, and to

meet a person, the wife of the accused, who lived in the accused's house—-

appears clearly to be a statement as to some of the circumstances of the

transaction which resulted in his death.”

In light of the above judgments, I am of the view that the Learned High Court

Judge did not err in law in admitting both statements made by the deceased to

PW 2 and PW 9 as admissible evidence under section 32(1) of the Evidence

Ordinance.

Page 13 of 13

For the above-mentioned reasons, I am disinclined to interfere with the judgment

of the learned High Court dated 18.01.2024 and uphold the sentence and the

conviction against the Appellant.

Appeal dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Amal Ranaraja J,

I AGREE

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL