==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC 117/25

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with Article

138 of the Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka

COMPLAINANT

Vs.

Court of Appeal Case No. 1. Herath Mudiyanselage Wijeyawardena

CA/HCC/0117/2025 alias Kalu Malli alias Hemachandra

High Court of Ampara 2. Ranbanda Dewayalage Lakshmi

Case No. HC-AMP/2252/22 Chandralatha

3. Kadathalawe Madushika Kumari

ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

Herath Mudiyanselage Wijeyawardena

alias Kalu Malli alias Hemachandra

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

CA/HCC 117/25

2 | P a g e

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

COUNSEL : Isuru Somadasa for the Appellant.

Yuhan Abeywickrama, DSG, for the

Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 06/11/2025

DECIDED ON : 19/01/2026

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) with the second and the third Accused were indicted by the

Attorney General in the High Court of Ampara on the following charges:

CA/HCC 117/25

3 | P a g e

1. That between 2012 January 1st and December 31st the 2A procured

Rambanda Dewayalage Samanthika Kumari, who was under the age

of 16 years, to have sexual intercourse with the 1A, and is guilty of

committing an offence punishable under section 360A (1) of the Penal

Code as amended by Act No. 22 of 1995.

2. That the 1A committed the rape of Rambanda Dewayalage Samanthika

Kumari, and is guilty of committing an offence punishable under

section 364 (2) of the Penal Code as amended by Act No. 22 of 1995.

3. That the 2A abetted the 1A to commit the offence mentioned in count

2, and is guilty of committing an offence punishable under section 364

(2) of the Penal Code as amended by Act No. 22 of 1995 read with

S.102.

4. That the 3A abetted the 1A to commit the above-mentioned count 2,

and is guilty of committing an offence punishable under section 364

(2) of the Penal Code as amended by Act No. 22 of 1995 read with

S.102.

5. That between 2012 January 1st and December 31st, on an instance

other than count 2, the 1A committed the rape of Rambanda

Dewayalage Samanthika Kumari at Dehiattakandiya, and is guilty of

committing an offence punishable under section 364(2) of the Penal

Code as amended by Act No. 22 of 1995.

6. That between 2012 January 1st and December 31st, on an instance

other than count 2 & 5, the 1A committed the rape of Rambanda

Dewayalage Samanthika Kumari at Dehiattakandiya, and is guilty of

committing an offence punishable under section 364(2) of the Penal

Code as amended by Act No. 22 of 1995.

After the trial, the Appellant was convicted for count number five and six.

For count number five the Appellant was sentenced to 10 years Rigorous

Imprisonment. Additionally, a fine of Rs.25,000/ was imposed with a default

sentence of 06 months rigorous imprisonment.

CA/HCC 117/25

4 | P a g e

For the sixth count the Appellant was sentenced to 10 years Rigorous

Imprisonment. Additionally, a fine of Rs.25,000/ was imposed with a default

sentence of 06 months rigorous imprisonment.

Further, a sum of Rs.500,000/- was ordered as compensation with a default

term of 24 months simple imprisonment.

The learned High Court Judge had ordered the sentence imposed on count

number five and six to run concurrently with each other.

The Appellant was acquitted from counts 1 to 4 and the 2nd and 3rd Accused

had been acquitted from their respective charges.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

The learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the Appellant

has given consent to argue this matter in his absence. Also, at the time of

argument the Appellant was connected via the Zoom platform from prison.

The Counsel for the Appellant advanced the following grounds of appeal:

1. The prosecution has failed to establish specific date and time of the

offence and thereby has failed to prove their case beyond reasonable

doubt.

2. The story of the prosecutrix is highly improbable.

3. The prosecution has failed to give reasons for the inordinate delay in

making the first complaint to the police and thereby raises a serious

doubt on the prosecutrix’s story.

Background of the case

In this case until the prosecutrix was 11 years old, she had lived with her

father and her siblings at Siyambalangamuwa, as her mother who is the

second Accused in this case, had lived separately at Dehiaththakandiya. In

CA/HCC 117/25

5 | P a g e

the year 2011, her mother, the 2nd Accused, had removed her and her sister

from her father and taken them to Dehiaththakandiya, to the house of a

person called ‘Mahatun Bappa’. Five people had been living in Mahatun

Bappa’s house including the daughter of Mahatun namely, ‘Madhu.’ She was

married to a person called ‘Kalu Aiya’ who also lived in the house. Madhu

was named as the 3rd Accused in the indictment. According to the victim,

one day she was taken to the house of the mother of Kalu Aiya by her mother

who was named the 2nd Accused in the indictment.

At Kalu Aiya’s house, the brother of Kalu Aiya namely, Kalu Malli alias

Hemachandra, who is the Appellant in this case, had raped the victim who

was only 11 years old at that time. According to the victim, the 3rd Accused

had insisted the victim to start a love affair with the Appellant. Her mother

2nd Accused was also associated with the 3rd Accused in this regard.

Thereafter, the victim was taken to the house of the Appellant where she had

sexual intercourse multiple times on the promise that the Appellant would

marry her. As the time passed, the Appellant started to ignore her and the

victim had left the Appellant’s house and returned to Mahatun Bappa’s

house. Upon her return, Mahatun also raped the victim. Further, using this

opportunity, the husband of the 3rd Accused also had sexual intercourse with

her. Although, the Appellant and Mahatun were called with similar names,

she identified the Appellant as the perpetrator in the court.

The victim had lodged her complaint about three years after the incident.

Giving reasons for the delay, the victim had said that she was not believed

by anybody and that she was scared to make a complaint to the police.

Further, the Appellant had also threatened her not to divulge this incident

to anybody. According to her, the incident had occurred either in the year

2011 or 2012. After living with the Appellant for four months, the 3rd Accused

had accompanied the victim to get a pill, which was a mode of birth control.

CA/HCC 117/25

6 | P a g e

Further, she revealed that her brother had raped her when she was 8 years

old. Due to this incident, she had gone to Dehiaththakandiya to live with her

mother.

PW9, the JMO who examined the victim, stated that the victim was subjected

to repeated vaginal penetration. The victim had given a consistent history to

the JMO.

After the closing of the prosecution case, the defence was called and the

Appellant had made a dock statement and closed his case. He admits that

he had visited the house of his aunt.

Under the first ground of appeal, the Appellant contended that the

prosecution has failed to establish the specific date and time of the offence

and thereby has failed to prove their case beyond reasonable doubt.

The learned Counsel for the Appellant, highlighting a certain portion of the

evidence given by the victim, submitted that the victim had failed to mention

the date of the offence correctly.

It is not disputed that the complaint to the police was made about three years

after the incident. The reasons for the delay were that she was not believed

by anybody initially. Therefore, she was scared to lodge a complaint to the

police. Secondly, she was threatened by the Appellant. Due to her tender age

and the education standard, she could not remember the date of the offence

clearly. But she gave evidence regarding the incident without hesitation.

In Bhoginbhai Hirjibhai v. State of Gujarat (1983) the court held further:

“In regard to exact time of an incident, or the time duration of an

occurrence, usually, people make their estimates by guess work on the

spur of the moment at the time of interrogation. And one cannot expect

people to make very precise or reliable estimates in such matters.”

“It is unrealistic to expect a witness to be a human tape recorder.”

CA/HCC 117/25

7 | P a g e

In R. v. Dossi 13 Cr. App. R. 158 the court held that:

“A date specified in an indictment is not a material matter unless it is

an essential part of the alleged offence; the defendant may be convicted

although the jury finds that the offence was committed on a date other

than that specified in the indictment. Amendment of the indictment is

unnecessary, although it will be good practice to do so (provided that

there is no prejudice below) where it is clear on the evidence that if the

offence was committed at all, it was committed on the day other than

that specified.”

In the case of CA/HCC/0431/2019 decided on 02.12.2022, it was held by

his Lordship Justice Priyantha Fernando that:

“Child victims in sexual crimes of this nature, are often reluctant to

inform their parents or guardians about the abuse immediately unless

they are compelled to do so. Most importantly, one cannot expect a child

of tender age to keep a record of the exact date on which he/she was

abused or raped, unless there is some special significance on the date

in which the abuse took place.”

As the Appellant had been given sufficient notice regarding the date of offence

and since plausible evidence was led through witnesses regarding the date,

I conclude that no prejudice or failure of justice was caused to the Appellant.

Hence, this ground of appeal has no merit.

As the 2nd and 3rd grounds of appeal are interconnected, both grounds will

be considered together hereinafter.

In a criminal case, the prosecution is responsible for proving the defendant's

guilt to the jury and demonstrating that a conviction is justified. The phrase

"beyond a reasonable doubt" means that the evidence and arguments

presented by the prosecution must be so strong and convincing that any

rational person would accept the defendant’s guilt as fact. This standard

ensures that no reasonable uncertainty remains before a conviction is made.

CA/HCC 117/25

8 | P a g e

In the case of State of Andra Pradesh v. Garigula Satya Vani Murthy AIR

1997 SC 1588, it was held that:

“…the courts are expected to show great responsibility while trying an

accused on a charge of rape. They must deal with such cases with

utmost sensitivity.”

The victim was only 12-14 years old when she was raped. She had given

evidence about the incident accurately without any contradictions or

omissions.

It is well settled law that if an accused person is engaging a defence or taking

up a certain position, that that position must be put to the witnesses and

when they are giving evidence.

In Sarwan Singh v. State of Punjab [2002] AIR Supreme Court iii 3652 at

36755,3656, it was observed;

“It is a rule of essential justice that whenever the opponent has declined to

avail himself of the opportunity to put his case in cross examination it must

follow that the evidence tendered on that issue ought to be accepted.”

This case was cited with approval in the case of Boby Mathew v. State of

Karnataka [2004] 3 Cri.L.J. 3003.

In the case of Himachal Pradesh v Thakur Dass at 1983 V.D. Misra CJ

held:

"Whenever a statement of fact made by a witness is not challenged in cross

examination, it has to be concluded that the fact in question is not

disputed."

Further, in the case of Vide Motilal v State of Madya Pradesh, it was held

that:

"Absence of cross examination of prosecution witnesses of certain facts

leads to the inference of admission of that fact."

CA/HCC 117/25

9 | P a g e

The prosecutrix in her evidence admitted and clearly stated how she was

raped by the Appellant. Once she was taken to a family planning clinic and

a pill was inserted in to her hand. This was done four months after the rape.

Although the Counsel for the Appellant contended that this led to the victim

to implicate the Appellant in this case, the victim had never mentioned that

she had any animosity with the Appellant over this incident.

In State of Punjab v. Gurmit Singh [1996] 2 SCC 384 it was held that:

“The courts must, while evaluating evidence, remain alive to the fact that

in a case of rape, no self-respecting woman would come forward in a

court just to make a humiliating statement against her honour….”

In Sarath Menikpura v. Attorney General, CA/HCC/61/20, Decided On

27.06.2024, Wickum A. Kalurachchi, J held that;

“Delay in making a complaint about an offence committed against a child

is different. In the case at hand, the victim girl kept silent without informing

anybody about the rape or sexual harassment committed by her father for

three and a half years. A child’s reason for silence has been explained in

the Crown Court Compendium Part I (published in May 2016 - page 10-

22), as follows:

“Experience has shown that children may not speak out about something

that has happened to them for a number of reasons. A child may

• be confused about what has happened or about whether or not to speak

out; blame him/ herself for what has happened or be afraid that he/ she

will be blamed for it and punished;

• be afraid of the consequences of speaking about it, either for him/herself

and/ or for another member of the family;

• may feel that s/ he may not be believed;

CA/HCC 117/25

10 | P a g e

•may have been told to say nothing and threatened with the consequences

of doing so;

• may be embarrassed because s/he did not appreciate at the time that

what was happening was wrong, or because s/he enjoyed some of the

aspects of the attention they were getting;

• simply blank what happened out and get on with their lives until the

point comes when they feel ready or the need to speak out {e.g. for the

sake of a younger child who s/ he feels may be at risk};

• may feel conflicted: loving the abuser but hating the abuse."

In addition, in, The Crown Court Bench Book (published in March 2010

- at page 367) it is stated as follows:

"Children do not have the same life experience as adults. They do not have

the same standards of logic and consistency, and their understanding may

be severely limited for a number of reasons, such as their age and

immaturity. Life viewed through the eyes and mind of a child may seem

very different from life viewed by an adult. Children may not fully

understand what it is that they are describing, and they may not have the

words to describe it. They may, however, have come to realise that what

they are describing is, by adult standards, bad or, in their perception,

naughty.”

Further, in the case of Daradagamage Chandraratne Jayawardane alias

Shantha v. The Attorney General - Court of Appeal case No. CA/85/2013,

decided on 25.05.2018, it was observed:

“Time and again courts have discussed the acceptance of evidence of

children of tender ages. Our judges are not there to test the memory of the

witness, they are expected to find actual fact and the truth. Witnesses are

human beings; they are not memory machines nor robots to repeat the

CA/HCC 117/25

11 | P a g e

incident as it was. Further, the natural behaviour of human beings is to

forget incidents, especially sad memories. No one wants to re-visit painful

moments and keep detailed memories with them. We are also mindful most

of our courts with due respect, are not child friendly.”

In this case the victim had given plausible reasons as to why she lodged her

complaint after about three years of the incident. Her evidence did not

contain a single contradiction or omission. She had vividly given evidence

regarding the ordeal she encountered in the hands of the Appellant.

When an accused is facing a serious criminal charge it is essential that every

point in favour of the accused, though it may seem trivial, is placed before

the Judge. It may well be that all such matters, if so, placed before the judge

may create a reasonable doubt, the benefit of which should accrue to the

accused.

In this case the learned High Court Judge had considered the evidence given

by the prosecutrix and the defence and had arrived at the conclusion that

the evidence given by the prosecutrix is convincing and reliable and

therefore, the prosecution had proved the case beyond a reasonable doubt.

After careful perusal of the evidence presented during the trial, I am of the

view that the evidence presented by the prosecution is not tainted with any

serious shortcomings or ambiguity. Therefore, it is safe to act on such

evidence of the prosecution against the Appellant.

As discussed under the grounds of appeal advanced by the Appellant, the

prosecution had adduced strong and incriminating evidence against the

Appellant. The learned High Court Judge had accurately analyzed all the

evidence presented by both parties to arrive at the conclusion that the

prosecution has indeed proved the case beyond a reasonable doubt.

CA/HCC 117/25

12 | P a g e

As the learned High Court Judge had rightly convicted the Appellant for the

charge levelled against him in the indictment, I affirm the conviction and

dismiss the Appeal of the Appellant.

The Registrar is directed to send this judgment to High Court of Polonnaruwa

along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL