Page 1 of 9

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Orders in the nature of Writs of Mandamus, Certiorari and Prohibition in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

1. Professional Surveyors Association,

49/116, 1st Lane, Ramanayake Mawatha, Hokandara South, Hokandara. 2. Malavige Don Eranda,

382/6/2A, Meda Mawatha, Habarakada, Homagama. 3. Pulasthi Sanjaya Dissanayaka,

49/116, 1st Lane, Ramanayake Mawatha, Hokandara South, Hokandara. 4. Trimadura Anjana Satharanga De

Silva, No. 277/B, Bolatha, Ganemulla. 5. Kariyawasam Siththarage Dilan Rangana, No. 391/5, Rubber Estate, Thissamaharamaya.

PETITIONERS Vs.

CA/WRIT/108/2021

Page 2 of 9

Land Survey Council, Kirula Road, Colombo 5.

RESPONDENT

Before: Sobhitha Rajakaruna J.

Counsel: Uditha Egalahewa, PC with Chathura Chamupathi for the Petitioners.

Nayomi Kahawita, SSC for the Respondent.

Argued on: 22.07.2024

Written Submissions: Petitioners - 05.08.2024

Respondent - -

Decided on: 16.10.2024

Sobhitha Rajakaruna J.

The 1st Petitioner- Professional Surveyors Association (Association) is a body registered

under the Companies Act No. 7 of 2007 and its membership consists of persons qualified as

surveyors. The Petitioners contend that the members of the said Association are graduates

from the Faculty of Geomatics of the University of Sabaragamuwa who have specialized in

Survey Sciences. A copy of the list of members of the Association is marked as P10.

The Respondent- Land Survey Council (Council) has been established in terms of Section

26 of the Survey Act No. 17 of 2002. Among the other functions, it is the duty of the Council

a) to recognize academic and professional qualifications in land surveying; b) establish

practical experience requirements and c) conduct qualifying examinations and professional

interviews, for candidates for registration surveyors and for the issue of annual practicing

licenses.

Page 3 of 9

The alleged grievance of the Petitioners is that they were not registered as surveyors by the

Council although they have achieved their degree certificates and other qualifications. The

Petitioners further contend that it is a breach of duty by the Respondent which eventually

amounts to a breach of legitimate expectation of the Association and its members.

The scheme formulated for the purpose of recognizing the registration criterion which was

published in Gazette 15.09.2016, was revoked on 11.11.2016. As such, the Petitioners assert

that since 11.11.2016, the Council has failed to implement a fresh scheme. The Defense taken

up by the Council to not register the Members of the Association has been limited to an excuse

that the necessary requirements were not fulfilled as per the said Act (Vide- P15). Amidst

several requests made by the Petitioners, the failure of the Council to process the applications

of the members of the Association is viewed by the Petitioners as arbitrary, illegal, unlawful

and ultra vires.

Section 39 of the said Act empowers the Council to register the Surveyors with such Council.

The said section reads;

(1) From or after the date of commencement of this Act no person, other than a person

who possesses the qualification specified in the Schedule hereto and has obtained

registration with the Council and has been issued with a certificate of registration

which is for the time being in force may engage in land surveying.

(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1) a person who possesses the

academic qualifications specified in the Schedule hereto and working under the

supervision of a person issued with a certificate of registration under subsection (1),

may engage in land surveying for the purpose of acquiring the practical qualification

specified in the Schedule hereto, but shall not be eligible to be registered under this

Act.

(3) An application for registration as a surveyor shall he in the prescribed form and

shall be accompanied by the prescribed fee.

(4) The Council may, on an application received in that behalf by a person engaged in

or proposing to engage in land surveying and on production of evidence of good

character and payment of the prescribed fee, register such person where the Council is

Page 4 of 9

satisfied that such person has the qualifications and experience and skills to engage in

land surveying.

The schedule referred to in the above Section 39 is as follows;

Qualifications that entitles a person to be registered

(a) Academic qualifications:

(i) Post Graduate Diploma in surveying or a higher qualification in surveying from a

University or an Institute recognised by the Council; or

(ii) Bachelors' Degree in Surveying from a University or an Institute recognised by the

Council; or

(iii) Diploma of Survey Technician (Advanced Level) from the Institute of Surveying

and Mapping, Diyatalawa; and

(b) Practical experience:

(i) For category (a) (i), Minimum of two years practical experience to the satisfaction

of the Council.

(ii) For category (a) (ii), Minimum of three years practical experience to the satisfaction

of the Council.

(iii) For category (a) (iii) Minimum of ten years practical experience to the satisfaction

of the Council and a pass in the Junior Professional Examination conducted by the

Survey Department, or Minimum of fifteen years practical experience to the

satisfaction of the Council and a recommendation of the Surveyor- General that he is

professionally competent to be registered under this Act.

The impact of the provisions of Section 40 of the Act is also vital. The said Section 40 reads;

(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of section 39, every surveyor entitled to be issued

with an annual licence under section 4 or section 6 of the Surveyors Ordinance on the

date of commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to be registered under this Act.

Page 5 of 9

(2) Every surveyor deemed to be registered under this Act, shall as soon as convenient

submit to the Council the following particulars: -

(a) name and address of the Surveyor;

(b) the criteria or qualification, the possession of which entitled him to be issued

with an annual licence under the Surveyors Ordinance.

(3) Every surveyor registered with the Council under subsection (3) or (4) of section 39

or deemed to be registered under subsection (1), shall be issued with a certificate of

registration and shall be referred to in this Act as a "registered surveyor".

The above Section 39 grants the Council the authority to register surveyors. It stipulates that

after the commencement of the Act, only individuals with the required qualifications and

registration, subject to the other provisions, can practice land surveying. The schedule referred

to in that section outlines the academic qualifications (such as a Post Graduate Diploma,

Bachelors Degree or Diploma of Survey Technician- Advanced Level) and practical

experience required, ranging from two to fifteen years depending on the qualification level.

Section 40 of the Act ensures that surveyors holding an annual license under the previous

Surveyors Ordinance, at the time the Act was enacted, are automatically considered registered

under the new Act. Anyhow, such surveyors must submit their personal details and

qualifications to the Council. All registered or deemed-to-be-registered surveyors will be

issued a certificate of registration and referred to as "registered surveyors" under this Act. In

the circumstances, the above statutory provisions have made it crystal clear that the Council

ought to register the surveyors subject to the criteria specified in the said Act.

A close examination of the Respondents Statement of Objections and the Affidavit affirmed

by the Councils Acting Secretary reveals that the Petitioners have not provided detailed

reasons for refusing to register the members of the Association. Instead, they emphasize that

the Council is only obligated to register individuals who meet the necessary academic

qualifications and practical experience required for the surveying profession. Therefore, I

have no reason to disagree with the argument of the Petitioner that the Respondent has not

divulged a legitimate reason to refuse to register the members of the Association.

Page 6 of 9

Now I must advert to the claim of the Petitioners upon legitimate expectation. In Harshani S.

Siriwardana v. Malsiri J. Seneviratne, Secretary, Ministry of Health, Indigenous Medicine, Social

Welfare and Womens Affairs, Probation and Child Care and Council Affairs- Western Province-

SC (FR) Application No. 589/2009 decided on 10.03.2011 Dr. Shirani Bandaranaykae J. (as she

was then) has observed that;

A careful consideration of the doctrine of legitimate expectation, clearly shows that, whether an

expectation is legitimate or not is a question of fact. This has to be decided not only on the basis

of the application made by the aggrieved party before Court, but also taking into consideration

whether there had been any arbitrary exercise of power by the administrative authority in

question.

Accordingly, the question that would have to be looked into would be as to whether there was a

promise given to the petitioner or a regular procedure that future vacancies would be filled on the

basis of a previously held examination on which there had been selections made on the results of

the said examination.

Dr. Shirani Bandaranaykae J. (as she was then) in the same judgement has even referred to

the following paragraph of Brennan, J., in Attorney General for New South Wales v Quinn

((1990) 64 Australian L.J.R. 327);

The Court must stop short of compelling fulfillment of the promise or practice unless the

statute so requires or the statute permits the repository of the power to bind itself as to the

manner of the future exercise of the power. It follows that the notion of legitimate

expectation is not the key which unlocks the treasury of natural justice and it ought not

unlock the gate which shuts the Court out of review on the merits.

It is important to note that the Petitioners in the instant Application primarily base their claim

on the doctrine of legitimate expectation as embodied in the provisions of the said Act. A

person who has met the basic qualifications such as obtaining the degree of Bachelor of

Science (Surveying Licenses), naturally develops an expectation within him to engage in land

surveying in this Country upon receiving a certificate of Registration. Under Sections 37 and

39 of the Act, the Council is obligated to register the Surveyors with the Council according to

the provisions of the Act enabling them to engage in land surveying. Moreover, the provisions

Page 7 of 9

of Section 40(1) also, in my view, reinforce this expectation as every surveyor who was

entitled to be issued with an annual license under Section 4 or 6 of the Surveyors Ordinance

on the date of commencement of the present Act, shall be deemed to be registered under the

new Act.

As a result, the Petitioners' claim can be understood as asserting that their legitimate

expectation was impacted by the Council's arbitrary use of power or its failure to implement

the law properly.

I must now examine whether an authority's failure to implement statutory provisions directly

impacts a person's legitimate expectations or particularly their rights. The said Act has been

enacted under the legislative power prescribed in Article 75 of the Constitution by the

Parliament. The Directive Principles of State Policy contained in Article 27 shall guide

Parliament, the President and the Cabinet of Ministers in the enactment of laws and the

governance of Sri Lanka for the establishment of a just and free society. It is stipulated in

Article 28 that the exercise and enjoyment of rights and freedoms are inseparable from the

performance of duties and obligations and accordingly, it is the duty of every person in Sri

Lanka to uphold and defend the Constitution and the law. Section 4 of the Interpretation

Ordinance No. 21 of 1901 provides that where any enactment or written law, whether passed

or made before or after the commencement of the said Ordinance, confers a power or imposes

a duty, then, unless a contrary intention appears, the power may be exercised and the duty

shall be performed from time to time as occasion requires. Laws are rules that apply to

everyone in a community. They safeguard overall safety and protect the rights of a citizen

from being violated by others, bodies, or even the government.

Considering the above, I am of the opinion that when an Administrative Authority arbitrarily

exercises its power to prevent or circumvent the implementation of a valid law passed by

Parliament or fails to exercise its duty, it affects a person's rights more significantly than their

legitimate expectation. If the law imposes or authorizes a person or a body to make

appointments; register or enrol someone; or issue permits/licenses etc., subject to the law,

and fails to fulfil such duties would certainly amount to an abuse of power and can negatively

impact the rights of another individual.

Page 8 of 9

The development of judicial review has been closely tied to traditional remedies, but

contemporary judicial practices have expanded beyond these conventional methods, with

judges adopting new grounds for review. In Sri Lanka, the Constitution grants the Supreme

Court the sole authority to hear and resolve issues related to the violation of Fundamental or

Language Rights. However, this Court has, on several occasions, recognized that issuing writs

when a person's rights are affected by a public authority's decision can be seen as judicial

activism in the Review Court. This suggests that the Court of Appeal is gradually establishing

a distinct jurisdiction with the power to provide remedies to those whose rights have been

violated. Despite this progress, I am aware that there remains uncertainty about whether the

Supreme Court or the Court of Appeal has explicitly acknowledged the public trust doctrine

or violations of Fundamental Rights under the Constitution as a direct basis for review in writ

jurisdiction.

Moreover, when authorities fail to give effect to written laws and their duties imposed by such

laws, it undermines the Rule of Law and disrupts the stability of the legal system. Similarly,

such actions can lead to several negative consequences such as erosion of public trust. When

authorities do not enforce the laws fairly or arbitrarily, ignoring them would even lead to a

perception of injustice and bias in governance leaving room for arbitrary use of power. This

opens the door to abuse, favouritism and corruption further weakening governance. In

addition to the above, the inconsistency in enforcing written laws and executing duties affects

predictability and legal uncertainty making it difficult for people and institutions to plan and

act with confidence.

A critical question arises: how long does a professional who has become qualified under the

law need to stagnate until his or her appointment is made or their qualifications are duly

recognized / registered? The Respondent has failed to show a genuine purpose or

demonstrable effect of the provisions of the said Act for not exercising their duty to register

the qualified surveyors. In the circumstances, the surveyors who achieved the necessary

qualifications under the law have been affected by their rights being infringed due to the

inaction of the Council. Additionally, their legitimate expectations have also been breached.

However, this Court is not competent to assess whether the Petitioners have fulfilled all

requirements to get them registered under Section 39 of the Act. Nevertheless, I hold that the

Page 9 of 9

said Council has infringed the rights as well as breached the legitimate expectation of the

individuals including one or more members of the Association, who have qualified under the

said Act to engage in surveying in the country and who have not been registered under the

law to date by the Council.

In light of the reasons given above a writ of Mandamus is issued compelling the Respondent-

Land Survey Council to process the applications for the registration of surveyors of the

members of the 1st Petitioner- Professional Surveyors Association and the other Petitioners in

terms of Sections 37 and 39. Furthermore, a writ of Certiorari quashing the decisions reflected

in the letter marked P15 is also issued.

It is noted that the Council is entitled, if they wish, to formulate a criterion for the purpose of

registering surveyors. The said Association has expressed its willingness, in letter marked

P22 to extend their cooperation in formulating a criterion to register surveyors who have

met the qualifications required under the said Act. Several proposals made in that regard by

the Association are reflected in the said P22. In this backdrop, Court makes an observation

that the Council may adopt a process to prolong formulating such criteria and that prolonging

the same may affect the Petitioners in turn. Therefore, considering the special circumstances

of this case and on careful consideration of the whole matter, I should exercise my discretion

to make an order, allowing the Council, if the occasion reasonably requires, to delay the

execution of the writ issued by this Court for a period not later than four months from the

date of judgement.

Judge of the Court of Appeal