IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal under

Section 331 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of

1979

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Court of Appeal Case No. Colombo 12.

HCC/151/19 Complainant

High Court of Panadura

Case No. 3013/13 Vs.

Devarahandi Asiri Kankanamge

Sudath Rohana Jayasiri

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Devarahandi Asiri Kankanamge

Sudath Rohana Jayasiri

Accused-Appellant

Vs.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Complainant-Respondent

2

BEFORE : K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J (P/CA)

WICKUM A. KALUARACHCHI, J

COUNSEL : Accused-Appellant is unrepresented.

Dilan Rathnayake, Senior Deputy

Solicitor General for the Respondent.

WRITTEN SUBMISSION

TENDERED ON : 01.02.2022 (Only on behalf of the Respondent)

ARGUED ON : 28.02.2022

DECIDED ON : 28.03.2022

WICKUM A. KALUARACHCHI, J. The accused-appellant was indicted in the High Court of Panadura for

committing the death of Kapuruge Sunil Jayantha by a rash or

negligent act, an offence punishable under Section 298 of the Penal

Code. After the trial, the learned High Court Judge convicted the

appellant by his judgment dated 26.04.2019. It is against the said

conviction and sentence, the accused-appellant preferred this appeal.

Although dates were fixed by the court to file written submissions prior

to the hearing, several dates were moved by the learned counsel for the

appellant to file written submissions. The learned junior counsel for the

appellant was informed by the court on 07.07.2021, that the appeal

would be taken up for argument the next date whether written

submissions are filed or not. However, upon the requests made on

26.10.2021, further dates were given to file written submissions on

behalf of both parties and the matter was fixed for arguments on

3

28.02.2022. Even then, the written submissions were not filed on behalf

of the appellant and only on behalf of the respondent, it was filed.

When this appeal was taken up for hearing on 28.02.2022, the

respondent was represented by the learned Senior Deputy Solicitor

General. The accused-appellant who was on bail was not present in

court and he was not represented by an Attorney at Law. Hence, there

was no other alternative for the courts but to take up the appeal for

hearing. Accordingly, the learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General made

oral submissions.

Although the appellant was not present and not represented, this court

has perused his grounds of appeal stated in the petition of appeal. Six

grounds have been set out in the petition of appeal but basically, the

appellants grounds are as follows;

I. The learned High Court Judge has failed to appreciate

the infirmities in the evidence of the eye witness and

failed to consider contradictions between the eye

witness and PW 5.

II. The learned High Court Judge has failed to duly analyze

the testimony of PW 5.

III. Failure to analyze the defence evidence.

IV. The judgment is contrary to the evidence led at the trial.

In this case, the death of the deceased was caused as a result of this

motor traffic accident. The appellant has given evidence and taken up

the position of contributory negligence on the part of the deceased.

Therefore, the appellant admits that he was the driver of the bus that

collided with the deceased. There is only a single eye witness to this

case. He was a passenger of the bus and he was right behind the driver

at the time of the accident being occurred.

4

As correctly observed by the learned High Court Judge, the said eye

witness is an independent witness. It is apparent that he had no reason

to give false evidence against the driver of the bus or in favour of him.

According to the said witness, the appellant drew the bus at excessive

speed and collided with the deceased. The eye witness stated that the

driver did not apply breaks before the accident and has applied breaks

only after the accident.

After making a complaint to the police, Police Sergeant Bandara had

gone to this place and made his observations. The sketch marked P3

was prepared by him. He is the 5th witness of the prosecution. The

learned High Court Judge has observed that PW 5s evidence is

improbable and decided not to consider his evidence. The learned

Senior State Counsel submitted that the learned Judges decision not

to accept his evidence is correct because his evidence is improbable on

certain vital matters. I agree that the evidence of PW 5 is vague and

uncertain. It should also be noted that although there is a ground of

appeal that the learned High Court Judge has failed to duly analyze the

testimony of prosecution witness 5, in fact, the learned Judge has

analyzed his evidence and found that he is not a credible witness to rely

upon.

However, the eye witness, PW 1 is a credible independent witness. In

the aforesaid circumstances, any discrepancies that arise from the

vague evidence of PW 5 have no impact on the credibility of the

testimony of PW 1.

Anyhow, the sketch prepared by PW 5 could be used to get an idea of

how this accident happened because PW 5 was the Police officer who

made observations at the scene of the incident. It is true that at times

PW 5s testimony is confusing. But when he explains the place of the

accident, it appears that the learned State Counsel who led the evidence

in the High Court has confused him. In his sketch marked P3, the place

5

of the accident has been marked as X and correctly, the same was

stated in his evidence as well. However, the learned State Counsel

asked; X or, is it correct to say that 'I' is that place? Then he answered

yes (page 142 of the appeal brief). But, I is not the place of the accident

and X is the place of the accident according to the sketch prepared by

the PW 5. On page 144 of the appeal brief, he has explained the starting

point of the break marks as I. Again, in cross-examination, he

confirmed that the place of the accident has been marked as X and the

starting point of break marks has been marked as I (Page 158 of the

appeal brief). Therefore, according to PW 5 also, break marks appear on

the road after passing the place of the accident.

Hence, it is apparent even according to the sketch prepared by PW 5,

the appellant applied breaks after the accident. The eyewitness also

says that the appellant did not apply breaks before the accident and he

applied breaks only after the accident. Although the appellant testified

that he saw the deceased crossing the road and applied the brakes and

turned the bus towards the middle island of the road, the eyewitness

as well as the sketch prepared by the police officer who observed the

scene after the accident confirms that the appellant applied the brakes

only after the accident. If the appellant applied breaks before the

accident, brake marks should be visible on the road from a location

before the place where the bus and the deceased collided. Therefore,

the appellants version that he applied breaks prior to the accident

could not be accepted.

The accused-appellant attempted to show the contributory negligence

of the deceased by showing that the deceased crossed the road halfway,

turned back and sat on the road. Even the eye-witness has admitted

the said facts. The contention of the learned Senior State Counsel was

that there was no negligence on the part of the deceased and the

accident happened due to the appellants negligent highspeed driving.

6

It is true that turning back and sitting on the road is an unusual

behavior of a pedestrian who crosses the road. In the instant action, it

appears from the evidence that the deceased was in dilemma what to

do in the situation that he faced. There were two lanes on the road for

the vehicles to run towards Colombo. The deceased wanted to cross the

road from the middle island of the road to the seaside. The deceased

saw the bus driven by the appellant coming at excessive speed. Also,

the deceased saw another bus coming in the same direction with a

terrific speed to overtake this bus. That is why PW 1 stated by

answering a question posed by the court,

(Page 111 of the appeal brief). PW 1 has also said that the

appellant had also once overtaken the other bus. (Page 112 of the

appeal brief). In this situation, the deceased was frightened, shocked

and was unable to decide what to do. This helpless person sat on the

road, unable to do anything. All these facts were emanated from the

evidence of the eye-witness and not in dispute.

In the aforesaid circumstances, one cannot say that it is the

contributory negligence of the deceased. Contributory negligence could

be established only if the deceased fails to take care of himself. It was

held in Lewis V. Denye (1939) 1 K.B. 540 that the defendant has to

prove that the plaintiff failed to take care of himself, as a reasonable

man would do in the circumstances and that such failure constituted

negligence which contributed to the accident. In addition, Lord Denning

in Froom V. Butcher (1975) 3 all. E.R. 520 C.A., distinguished

negligence and contributory negligence as follows; negligence depends

on a breach of duty, whereas contributory negligence does not.

Negligence is a mans carelessness in breach of duty to others.

Contributory negligence is a mans carelessness in looking after his own

safety.

7

In the instant action, the deceased did everything possible for his own

safety. When two buses were speeding past each other, he had nothing

to do. The deceased could not go in front of two buses coming at terrific

speeds. The helpless man turned back and sat on the road, unable to

understand what he could do. Considering these circumstances with

the aforesaid legal position, I hold that there is no contributory

negligence on the part of the deceased.

The appellant attempted to advance the position that this accident

would not have happened, if the deceased had continued to cross the

road. The appellant stated in his evidence, he thought that the deceased

would cross to the left side of the road and thus he applied break and

turned the bus towards the right side of the road. His explanation

appears on page 191 of the brief as follows:

: ?

:

.

The said item of evidence clearly shows that the appellant could not

stop the bus due to the excessive speed, therefore he turned the bus to

the right side of the road to prevent the accident. In perusing the sketch

and the report prepared by the PW 5, which was not challenged by the

appellant, there was no difficulty for the learned High Court Judge to

decide that the bus driven by the appellant came at excessive speed

because rightly observed by him, the length of the break mark

according to the sketch is 28 meters and 20 centimeters. That is more

than 80 feet. Therefore, the appellants version that he did not drive the

bus at an excessive speed is also unacceptable. Hence, for the reasons

stated above, the learned High Court Judge is correct in accepting the

eye witnesss evidence and not accepting the defence version.

Next, this court has to consider the degree of negligence required to

prove the charge under Section 298 of the Penal Code. It was decided

8

in the case of Karunadasa V. OIC Motor Traffic, Nittambuwa Police

(1987) 1 Sri L.R. 155 that a very high degree of negligence is required

to be proved in order to establish a charge under Section 298 of the

Penal Code.

It was also decided in Premasiri V. Officer-in-Charge, Police Station,

Matara (1993) 2 Sri L.R. 23 that To establish liability for negligence

in a criminal case, a very high degree of negligence should be

established. In other words, the accident should have been due either

to the recklessness of the accused or due to the reckless driving of the

accused, where the accident is attributable to an error of judgement, it

is not sufficient to establish criminal liability by negligence or by a rash

act.

Now, it has to be considered whether the negligence of the appellant

has been proved to the aforesaid high degree. According to the eye-

witness, there was a distance of 40/50 meters between the bus and the

deceased, when he first saw the deceased crossing the road. Obviously,

the appellant also should have seen the deceased within the said

distance because he was the driver of the bus. The appellant says that

he turned the bus to the right side thinking that the deceased would go

to the left side of the road. That means when the appellant saw the

deceased from the 40/50 meters distance, the appellant could not stop

the bus for him to cross the road and thus he turned the bus towards

the right side. In other words, he had driven the bus at an excessive

speed where he could not stop the bus even at a distance of 40/50

meters. Thereafter, the bus was run over the deceased and it was

stopped about 28 meters and 20 centimeters away. In these

circumstances, it is evident that the accident occurred due to the

reckless driving of the accused-appellant. Because of his negligent act,

the death of the deceased was caused.

9

In the case of Palansuriya V. Johoran 48 NLR 400, it was found on

the circumstances of that case, that the accused must have driven his

lorry at an inordinately excessive speed, and it was held that he was

guilty of the very high degree of negligence in the means adopted by him

to avoid the risk consequent on the speed of the lorry. In the said case,

the lorry went across the grass verge of the road, a distance of nearly

50 feet. In the action before us, although the bus has not gone across

the grass verge, it has come in inordinately excessive speed where the

appellant could not stop the bus in a distance more than 80 feet even

after applying break. It was held further in the said case that there was

prima facie evidence of negligence casting upon the accused the onus

of proving that there was no negligence.

For the foregoing reasons, the aforesaid grounds of appeal would not

succeed and I hold that the high degree of negligence required to prove

the charge of this case has been proved. Accordingly, I hold that the

learned High Court Judge has correctly convicted the appellant. The

sentence passed by the learned High Court Judge is also lawful and

correct in principle. Therefore, the conviction and the sentence are

affirmed and the appeal is dismissed.

Appeal dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K. Priyantha Fernando, J (P/CA)

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL