==== BLOCKS ==== 

PHC/0101/2019

Page 1 of 11

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal under and in terms of

the Article 154P(6) of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka as

enacted by the 13th Amendment thereto, read

together with Article 138 of the Constitution

thereof.

Urban Development Authority,

"Sethsiripaya",

Sri Jayawardanapura Kotte,

Battaramulla.

Petitioner

Vs

Samarasena Arachchige Sumeda Sampath,

No.53 A, Main Street,

Ambalanthota.

Respondent

AND

Samarasena Arachchige Sumeda Sampath,

No.53 A, Main Street,

Ambalanthota.

Respondent-Petitioner

Vs

Urban Development Authority,

"Sethsiripaya",

Sri Jayawardanapura Kotte,

Battaramulla.

Petitioner-Respondent

CA Appeal No: CA(PHC)101/2019

Hambantota Provincial High Court Case No: HCRA 23/2016

Hambantota Magistrate Court Case No: 25466

PHC/0101/2019

Page 2 of 11

AND

Samarasena Arachchige Sumeda,

No.53 A, Main Street,

Ambalanthota.

Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant

Vs

Urban Development Authority,

"Sethsiripaya",

Sri Jayawardanapura Kotte,

Battaramulla.

Petitioner-Respondent-Respondent

Before : D. THOTAWATTA, J.

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Counsel : Harshana Ananda for the Respondent

Petitioner-Appellant.

Pulina Jayasooriya S.C. for the Petitioner-

Respondent-Respondent.

Argued on : 10.02.2026

Written Submissions

of the Respondent

Petitioner-Appellant

tendered on : 20.05.2024

Written Submissions

of the Petitioner-Respondent

-Respondent tendered on : Not tendered

PHC/0101/2019

Page 3 of 11

Decided on : 26.06.2026

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

The instant appeal arises from an order of the learned High Court Judge of the

Southern Province holden at Hambantota dated 31.05.2019 (hereinafter called

and referred to as ‘the HC Order’) made in case bearing No. HCRA 23/2016, in

the exercise of the revisionary jurisdiction vested in it by Article 154P(3)(b) of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka (hereinafter called

and referred to as ‘the Constitution’) wherein, the learned High Court Judge of

the Southern Province holden at Hambantota (hereinafter called and referred to

as ‘the High Court Judge of the Province’) had dismissed the application in

revision preferred thereto by the Respondent-Petitioner thereto, who is now, the

Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant to the instant appeal (hereinafter called and

referred to as ‘the Appellant’) against the order of the learned Magistrate of

Hambantota dated 08.11.2016 (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the MC

Order’), made in case bearing No. 25466, instituted thereat, by the Petitioner

thereto, who is now, the Petitioner-Respondent-Respondent to the instant appeal

(hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the Respondent’) by way of an application

under and in terms of section 28A(3) of the Urban Development Authority Act

No. 41 of 1978 as amended (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the

application’), wherein the learned Magistrate of Hambantota had acting under

the powers vested in him by section 28A(3) of the Urban Development Authority

Act No. 41 of 1978 as amended (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the Act),

made order authorizing the Respondent to demolish the unauthorized

construction erected by the Appellant on the land and premises as morefully,

described in the petition preferred thereto by the Respondent, namely; No.53A,

Main Street, Ambalanthota, situated within the limits of Ambalanthota

Pradeshiya Sabha (hereinafter called and referred to as “the subject matter of

the action”).

PHC/0101/2019

Page 4 of 11

Being aggrieved by the order, the Appellant has now, preferred to this Court the

instant appeal on the grounds of appeal as morefully, set out in paragraph 7 (i)

to (vii) of the petition of appeal among any other grounds of appeal that may be

urged by Counsel at the hearing of this appeal.

The facts material and relevant to the instant appeal as can be deducible from

the petition of appeal, may be briefly, set out as follows;

The application dated 28.09.2015, had been made by the Respondent to

the Magistrate Court of Hambantota under and in terms of section 28A(3) of the

Act praying for a demolition order of the subject matter erected by the Appellant;

that the Appellant who appeared before the Magistrate Court of Hambantota in

response to the notices served on him, had shown cause in writing on

12.07.2016 setting out the reasons as to why the application should not be

granted; that the learned Magistrate of Hambantota had having considered both

the application of the Respondent as well as the showing cause of the Appellant,

proceeded to grant the application of the Respondent directing the subject matter

to be demolished thereby totally, rejecting the showing cause of the Appellant

thereto; that being aggrieved by the MC order, the Appellant had preferred an

application in revision therefrom to the High Court of the Province which was

dismissed by it, hence, the instant appeal.

It is in this context, let me now, deal with the appeal.

The application made to the Magistrate Court of Hambantota by the Respondent-

the Urban Development Authority, is based on the premise that the area in which

the unauthorized construction-the subject matter, namely; No. 53A, Main Street,

Ambalanthota, is situated in a urban development area as declared by the

Honourable Minister of Urban Development, Housing and Construction in the

Notification published in the Government Gazette-Extra-Ordinary bearing No.

1090/5, and dated 22.07.1999; and that the Appellant had erected an

unauthorized construction thereat as shown in the sketch annexed to the

application marked as ‘පෙ1’ in contravention of section 8J(1) of the Act.

PHC/0101/2019

Page 5 of 11

On the other hand, the defence raised by the Appellant in the Magistrate Court

of Hambantota to the application is that a date or a month as to when the

unauthorized construction was erected on the subject matter had not been

specified in the application; and that the father of the Appellant who had been

in occupation on the subject matter over 60 years, had been granted an annual

permit about 1979 as manifest from the document annexed to his showing cause

marked as ‘ව1’; and that the Father of the Appellant who had since, been in

occupation, erected all the constructions in question standing on the land and

premises bearing assessment No. 53, Main Street Ambalantota, as shown in

photographs annexed to his showing cause marked as ‘ව2’ and ‘ව3’, and hence,

the application cannot be maintainable and as such it should be rejected.

It may now, be examined.

Upon a careful scrutiny of the Gazette Notification which was referred to in the

averments in the paragraph 3 of the petition of the Respondent furnished to the

Magistrate Court of Hambantota, a copy of which was annexed to his petition

furnished to the High Court of the Province by the Appellant marked as ‘X2’ ,

and a copy of which was also, annexed to the statement of objections of the

Respondent furnished to the High Court of the Province marked as ‘V2’, it

becomes manifest, without any doubt and/or without any ambiguity that the

area in which the subject matter bearing assessment No. 53A is situated, is

coming within the Urban development area as declared by the Hon. Minister in-

charge of the subject of Urban Development, to be an urban development area

by virtue of powers vested in him by section 23(5) of the Act as amended.

Besides, upon a careful consideration of both the showing cause of the Appellant

filed in the Magistrate Court of Hambantota as well as the Petition furnished by

him to the High Court of the province along with his application in revision, in

its totality, it becomes manifestly, clear that the Appellant too, had clearly, and

unequivocally, admitted that it was so.

PHC/0101/2019

Page 6 of 11

It is therefore, common ground that the area in which unauthorized

construction-the subject matter, is erected, is coming within the ambit of the

area so declared by the Hon. Minister in-charge of the subject of Urban

Development, to be an urban development area by virtue of powers vested in him

by section 23(5) of the Act as amended.

Hence, the Respondent had established without an iota of doubt before the

Magistrate Court of Hambantota that unauthorized construction-the subject

matter is situated in an area coming within the ambit of an area so declared by

the Hon. Minister in-charge of the subject of Urban Development, to be an urban

development area by virtue of powers vested in him by section 23(5) of the Act

as amended as manifest from ‘Y2’ as well as from ‘X2’- the Appellant’s own

document as rightly, held by both the learned Magistrate of Hambantota and the

learned High Court Judge of the Province.

The principal defence so raised to the application by the Appellant as

enumerated above, being such that a date or a month as to when the

unauthorized construction was erected on the subject matter, had not been

specified in the application; and that the father of the Appellant who had been

in occupation on the subject matter over 60 years, had been granted an annual

permit about 1979 as manifest from the document annexed to his showing cause

marked as ‘ව1’; and that the Father of the Appellant who had since, been in

occupation, erected all the constructions in question standing on the land and

premises bearing assessment No. 53, Main Street Ambalantota, as shown in

photographs annexed to his showing cause marked as ‘ව2’ and ‘ව3’, and hence,

the application cannot be maintainable and as such it should be dismissed in-

limine.

In view of the nature of the defence as enumerated above, the pertinent question

that would then, arise for our consideration is whether a defence as such, would

be available to a person noticed under the provisions of the Act to an application

preferred to it by an applicant under and in terms of section 28A(3) of the Act.

PHC/0101/2019

Page 7 of 11

Sections 8J(1) and 8K(1) of the Act would be relevant and important in this

regard and they enact thus;

Section 8J

“(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law, no Government

agency or any other person shall carry out or engage in any development

activity in any development area or part thereof, except under the

authority, and in accordance with the terms and conditions, of a permit

issued in that behalf by the Authority.”

Section 8K

“(1) No development activity shall be carried out or engaged in, in

contravention of, or in variance with, the permit issued in that behalf.”

A careful analysis of section 8J(1) of the Act in conjunction with section 8K(1)

thereof, clearly, and unequivocally, shows that the only, defence that would be

available to a person noticed under the provisions of the Act to an application

preferred to it by an applicant under and in terms of section 28A(3) of the Act, is

that construction alleged to be unauthorized has been erected by virtue of

a valid permit issued to a person noticed by the applicant-UDA under and

in terms of the provisions of section 8J and 8K of the Act. [Emphasis is

mine]

Hence, in a situation where an application under section 28A(3) of the Act, has

been made, the pertinent question that would arise for consideration by the

learned Magistrate is whether the construction alleged to be unauthorized has

been erected by virtue of a valid permit issued to a person noticed by the

applicant-UDA under and in terms of the provisions of section 8J and 8K of the

Act. The existence of a valid permit is the only valid defence to the application

under section 28A(3) of the Act, and hence, the burden of proving that the

construction had been effected on a valid permit is solely, on the person noticed.

PHC/0101/2019

Page 8 of 11

However, a careful scrutiny of the record clearly, shows that not an iota of

evidence had been adduced before Court by the Appellant to show that the

constructions in question had been effected on a valid permit issued for that

purpose by the Respondent-UDA under and in terms of the provisions of section

8J and 8K of the Act, except for the mere assertion that the father of the

Appellant had erected all the constructions in question standing on the land and

premises bearing assessment No. 53, Main Street Ambalantota, as shown in

photographs annexed to his showing cause marked as ‘ව2’ and ‘ව3’.

Hence, the Appellant had not in any manner, discharged the burden of proof

solely, rested in him that the constructions in question, namely; constructions

bearing No. 53A, Main Street, Ambalantota, had been effected on a valid permit

issued for that purpose by the Respondent-UDA under and in terms of the

provisions of section 8J and 8K of the Act, except for mere assertion that the

father of the Appellant had erected all the constructions in question standing on

the land and premises bearing assessment No. 53, Main Street Ambalantota,

as shown in photographs annexed to his showing cause marked as ‘ව2’ and ‘ව3’,

which is not at all, the subject matter of the application presented by the

Respondent to the Magistrate Court of Hambantota, as rightly, held by both the

learned Magistrate of Hambantota and the learned High Court Judge of the

Province.[Emphasis is mine]

In the circumstances, the learned Magistrate of Hambantota was entirely, right

in finding that the constructions in question situated at No. 53A, Main Street,

Ambalantota are unauthorized constructions erected without a valid permit

issued therefor, by the Respondent-the UDA under and in terms of the provisions

of section 8J and 8K of the Act. [Emphasis is mine]

Hence, I would see no error whatsoever in the HC order too, which had rightly,

affirmed, the order of the learned Magistrate of Hambantota.

I would, therefore, see no error whatsoever in any of those two orders made by

the learned Magistrate of Hambantota as well as the learned High Court Judge

PHC/0101/2019

Page 9 of 11

of the Province warranting either of them or both of them to be set aside in

appeal.

Besides, the defence so raised by the Appellant in the Magistrate Court of

Hambantota to the application made thereto, by the Respondent as enumerated

above, cannot in my view, sustain at least for two reasons, and they may now,

be examined.

Firstly, in terms of his own statement of showing cause of the Appellant

furnished to the Magistrate Court of Hambantota in defence to the application

made to it by the Respondent as enumerated above, the constructions as shown

and depicted in photographs ‘ව2’ and ‘ව3’, are not one and the same

constructions as situated at No. 53A, Main Street Ambalantota, but some other

constructions unrelated to the constructions in question and situated

somewhere else at No. 53, Main Street Ambalantota. [Emphasis is mine]

Hence, the defence so raised by the Appellant cannot in any manner, sustain

both in fact and law and as such it ought to fail on this ground alone.

Secondly, even, if, it is to be assumed for the sake of the argument for a moment,

but not conceding that the constructions erected at No. 53, Main Street

Ambalantota are one and the same constructions as erected at No. 53A, Main

Street Ambalantota, yet the defence of the Appellant as enumerated above, is

not entitled to succeed both in fact and law for; it had not in any manner, been

established by the Appellant that the so called constructions had even, been

effected on a valid permit issued for that purpose by the Respondent-the UDA

under and in terms of the provisions of section 8J and 8K of the Act. [Emphasis

is mine]

There is a further reason why the defence of the Appellant is not entitled to

succeed and it may now, be examined.

The contents in the application made to the Magistrate Court of Hambantota by

the Respondent under and in terms of section 28A(3) of the Act, had been duly,

PHC/0101/2019

Page 10 of 11

supported by the Respondent in his affidavit filed thereat, along with his

application and therefore, the facts stated therein, had been prima facie, proved

by the Respondent and in such circumstances and in any case, if, the Appellant

endeavours to uncontrovert and/or refute and/or challenge any of the fact stated

therein, the burden of proof will solely, lie on him to disprove it by proof on the

contrary, as required by section 3 of the Evidence Ordinance to be read with

sections 101 of 102 thereof.

However, it is significant to observe that the statement of showing cause had not

in any manner, been supported by the Appellant by way of an affidavit filed

thereat, along with his showing cause and hence, the facts stated in the

application made to the Magistrate Court of Hambantota by the Respondent

remain, unchallenged and/or uncontroverted and/or unrefuted by the

Appellant.

In the circumstances, the Court is bound to act on the evidence so adduced by

the Respondent in its affidavit which is unchallenged and/or uncontroverted

and/or unrefuted by the Appellant for; contrary had not been proved by the

Appellant in his mere statement of showing cause unsupported by an affidavit

as observed by me elsewhere in this judgement.

Hence, the mere absence of a date or a month as to when the unauthorized

construction was erected on the subject matter in the application, by itself, does

not in any manner, vitiate the application made to the Magistrate Court of

Hambantota by reason of the fact that the constructions in question had been

proved by the Respondent to have been unauthorised constructions as

enumerated above, which was not challenged and/or controverted and/or

refuted by the Appellant by proof on the contrary.

In the circumstances, I would hold that the defence so raised by the Appellant

to the application, is not in any manner, entitled to succeed both in fact and law

and as such it ought to have been rejected as rightly, done firstly, by the learned

Magistrate of Hambantota and secondly, by the learned High Court Judge of the

PHC/0101/2019

Page 11 of 11

Province by affirming the same in the application in revision filed before him by

the Appellant.

Hence, I would see no error in either or both of those two orders made by the

learned Magistrate of Hambantota and the learned High Court Judge of the

Province as well.

In the circumstances, the application in revision preferred to the High Court of

the Province does not in any manner, show exceptional circumstances of any

kind warranting it to exercise its extra-ordinary revisionary jurisdiction vested

in it in revision of the MC order as rightly, held by the High Court Judge of the

Province.

Hence, I would see no reason whatsoever, to interfere with either or both of those

two orders made by the learned Magistrate of Hambantota and the learned High

Court Judge of the Province as well.

I would thus, affirm both of those two orders made by the learned Magistrate of

Hambantota and the learned High Court Judge of the Province as well.

In the result, I would dismiss the appeal with costs fixed at Rs. 50,000/-.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL