CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 1 of 47

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for mandates

in the nature of Writs of Certiorari,

Mandamus and Prohibition under and in

terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Court of Appeal Case No.

CA/WRT/0114/2025

EXPRESS ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES

(PRIVATE) LIMITED,

No. 402,

George R De Silva Mawatha,

Colombo 13.

Petitioner

Vs.

1. K. T. A. R. C. K. KASTURIRATNE,

CHAIRMAN,

Departmental Procurement Committee 01

Airport And Aviation Services (Sri Lanka)

(Private) Limited,

Bandaranaike International Airport,

Katunayake.

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 2 of 47

2. T. A. B. BADDAWALA,

MEMBER,

3. R. M. S. R. RATHNAYAKE,

MEMBER,

4. BANDULA,

MEMBER,

2nd to 4th Respondents being Members

of the Departmental Procurement

Committee 01

Airport And Aviation Services (Sri

Lanka) (Private) Limited

All of:

Departmental Procurement Committee

01

Airport And Aviation Services (Sri

Lanka) (Private) Limited,

Bandaranaike International Airport,

Katunayake.

5. AIRPORT & AVIATION SERVICES

(SRI LANKA) (PRIVATE) LIMITED,

Bandaranaike International Airport,

Katunayake.

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 3 of 47

6. AIR CHIEF MARSHAL (RTD) HARSHA

ABEYWICKREMA,

CHAIRMAN,

Airport And Aviation Services (Sri

Lanka) (Private) Limited,

Bandaranaike International Airport,

Katunayake.

7. SAFE CARE FACILITIES

MANAGEMENT (PVT) LTD,

No. 23/B, Lady Evelyn De Soysa Road,

Idama,

Moratuwa.

8. CLEAN TECH (PVT) LTD,

No. 141.

Kirula Road,

Colombo 05.

9. AMIL JANITOR SERVICES

(PRIVATE) LIMITED,

Lily Avenue,

Battaramulla.

10. CARE CLEAN (PVT) LTD,

No. 125,

Jawatte Road,

Colombo 05.

Respondents

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 4 of 47

Before: D. THOTAWATTA, J.

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Counsel: M.U.M. Ali Sabry, P.C. with Naamiq Nafath AAL, instructed by

Ramzi Bacha Associates for the Petitioner.

Manohara Jaysinghe, DSG for the 1st to 6th Respondents.

Lasitha Kanuwanaarachchi AAL with Vipuni Peiris AAL,

Tharushi Amarasinghe AAL and Charith Widanapathirana AAL

for the 7th Respondent instructed by Sanath Wijewardena AAL.

J. Sajuni Senavirathne AAL for the 10th Respondent.

8th and 9th Respondents are absent and unrepresented.

Argued on : 13.06.2025 and 23.06.2025

Written Submissions of

the Petitioner

tendered on : 01.07.2025

Written Submissions

of the 1st to 6th Respondents : 30.06.2025

tendered on

Written Submissions : 01.07.2025

of the 7th Respondent

tendered on

Decided on : 09.07.2025

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 5 of 47

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

The Petitioner seeks in the instant application to challenge the legality of the

decision of the 1st to 6th Respondents to reject the bid submitted by the

Petitioner who admittedly, being the substantially responsive lowest bidder

for the provision of Janitorial and Cleaning Services for Ancillary buildings

and their precincts at the Bandaranaike International Airport, Katunayaka

bearing bid No. 094/T/2023 for a period of two years and award it to the 7th

Respondent who admittedly, being the substantially responsive second

lowest bidder which decision was admittedly, based on the findings arrived

at by the Technical Evaluation Committee (hereinafter called and referred to

as the TEC) appointed for the said purpose by the 5th Respondent who

being the Procuring Entity (hereinafter called and referred to as the PE)

pursuant to its on site visit of the offices of all five substantially responsive

bidders and contained in its report (R3).

As can clearly, be deducible from the pleadings and the submissions both

oral and written of the Petitioner, the pivotal basis for the challenge being

that TEC had acted in excess of the powers vested in it by the National

Procuring Guidelines (X11) and or by the corresponding Procuring Manual

(X12) and or by the Bidding document (X6) when it had conducted an on

site visit of the offices of all five substantially responsive bidders as such in

evaluating the said bids and determining the substantially responsive lowest

evaluated bidder from among all five substantially responsive bidders when

the National Procuring Guidelines (X11) and or corresponding Procuring

Manual (X12) and or Bidding document (X6) does not in any manner,

prescribe and or permit such a course as adopted by the TEC in this

instance, to be adopted by the TEC, namely; to conduct an on site visit of

the offices of all five substantially responsive bidders as such, in evaluating

the said bids and determining the substantially responsive lowest evaluated

bid by reason of the fact that the National Procuring Guidelines (X11) and

or corresponding Procuring Manual (X12) and or Bidding Document (X6)

expressly, and explicitly, prescribes and or stipulates the manner in which

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 6 of 47

the bids should be evaluated with a view to determining the substantially

responsive lowest evaluated bidder in that bids should be first, evaluated

strictly, according to the criteria and methodology specified in the bidding

document; and that the evaluation of bids shall be consistent with the

method, terms, and conditions disclosed in the bidding documents as

stipulated in the National Procurement Guidelines (X11), and therefore, the

decision of the 1st to 6th Respondents to reject the bid submitted by the

Petitioner who admittedly, being the substantially responsive lowest bidder

for the provision of Janitorial and cleaning services for Ancillary buildings

and their precincts at the Bandaranaike International Airport, Katunayaka

bearing bid No. 094/T/2023 for a period of two years and award it to the 7th

Respondent who admittedly, being the substantially responsive second

lowest bidder, which was based on the findings arrived at by TEC in

pursuant to its on-site visit as enumerated above, and contained in its

report (R3), was totally illegal, ultra vires, unlawful, wrongful, arbitrary,

unreasonable, unfair, discriminatory, irrational, misconceived, erroneous, in

breach of the principles of natural justice and or based on ulterior motives

and or totally irrelevant and or extraneous, collateral considerations and

actuated by palpable mala fides and in frustration of the legitimate

expectations entertained by the Petitioner and in violation of the principles

of proportionality and as such, it should be quashed by a mandate in the

nature of a writ of certiorari.

The 1st to 6th Respondents had while, totally, denying and refuting the

contention and or the assertion so adverted to by the Petitioner as such and

raising a number of preliminary objections as to the maintainability of the

instant application based on the want of necessary parties, the doctrine of

futility and on the misrepresentation of material facts etc.., sought to

counter and resist it by contending that, in view of clause 2.13 of the

Bidding document (X6), for a bidder to be qualified, he must be capable of

providing janitorial and cleaning services morefully specified and it is in this

context, that the report of the TEC (R3) and observations contained therein

based upon an on site visit by the TEC, of the offices of all five

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 7 of 47

substantially responsive bidders should be considered; and that there is

absolutely, no prohibition in doing an on site visits of offices of all five

substantially responsive bidders as such, so long as it would be necessary to

verify critical and crucial information; and that, if this is done in a uniform

and non-discriminatory manner; and that in this instance, it is absolutely

not a case where the Petitioner was subject to extra scrutiny in furtherance

of a malice designed to deprive it of the award.

It appears that, the 7th Respondent too, had associated with the 1st to 6th

Respondents to some degree and extent in countering the case for the

Petitioner.

The 10th Respondent on the other hand, moves that it be discharged from

these proceedings for; it was not a necessary party thereto.

Hence, the pivotal basis of the challenge to the decision of the 1st to 6th

Respondents to reject the bid submitted by the Petitioner who admittedly,

being the substantially responsive lowest bidder for the provision of

Janitorial and cleaning services for Ancillary buildings and their precincts at

the Bandaranaike International Airport, Katunayaka bearing bid No.

094/T/2023 for a period of two years and award it to the 7th Respondent

who admittedly, being the substantially responsive second lowest bidder, is

founded upon the premise that it was based on the findings of the TEC

arrived at upon an on site visit as such and contained in its report (R3)

which is ultra vires of the powers or the authority conferred upon TEC in

evaluating and determining the substantive responsive lowest evaluated

bidder from and among the substantially responsive five bidders upon an

on site visit of all offices of all substantially responsive five bidders for;

such a procedure or methodology has not in any manner, been envisaged by

the provisions of the Bidding document (X6), and therefore, the said

decision based upon the findings arrived at by TEC upon on site visit of all

offices of all substantially responsive five bidders which is ultra vires of the

authority or the power of TEC, was a nullity and hence, it is null and void ab

initio and as such it should be liable to be quashed by an order in the nature

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 8 of 47

of a writ of certiorari, for; it was tainted with illegality and was also ultra

vires, unlawful, wrongful, arbitrary, unreasonable, unfair, discriminatory,

irrational, misconceived, erroneous, in breach of the principles of natural

justice and or based on ulterior motives and or totally irrelevant and or

extraneous, collateral considerations and actuated by palpable mala fides

and in frustration of the legitimate expectations entertained by the Petitioner

and in violation of the principles of proportionality.

Simply, the pivotal position of the Petitioner is that, the TEC cannot go

beyond the criteria that is already stipulated in the Bidding Document (X6)

in evaluating the substantially responsive five bids and in determining the

substantially responsive lowest evaluated bid from among them for; the

criteria stipulated in the Bidding Document (X6) is the only criteria that

ought to be adopted in evaluating the bids and determining the

substantially responsive lowest evaluated bid which does not permit an on-

site visit as adopted by the TEC in this instance and therefore, TEC had

gone beyond its authority and hence, the findings arrived at by it, as

contained in its report (R3) were ultra vires and the said decision based

thereon is thus, a nullity and would therefore, derive no legal consequence

therefrom and hence, liable to be quashed by way of a writ of certiorari.

In the light of the above, the pivotal question that would now, arise for our

consideration and determination in the instant application is whether or

not, the methodology adopted by the TEC by way of an on-site visit of the

office premises of the substantially responsive all 5 bidders as enumerated

in its report by it (R3) by means of evaluating the Substantially Responsive

bids and determining the Substantially Responsive Lowest Evaluated

Bidder, was ultra vires of the evaluation criteria stipulated in the bidding

document (X6); and if so whether or not the rejection of the bid submitted

by the Petitioner being the Substantially Responsive Lowest Bidder and

award it to the 7th Respondent being the substantially responsive second

lowest bidder based on the said recommendation of the TEC made by it

based on an on-site visit of the office premises of the substantially

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 9 of 47

responsive all 5 bidders as enumerated in its report by it (R3) is of no force

or avail and therefore, a nullity?

It is in this context, I would think it most appropriate at this juncture to

examine the evaluation criteria to be adopted in evaluating the substantially

responsive bids and determining the substantially responsive lowest

evaluated bid from and among them. Before, I venture to examine it, let me

first, briefly, set out the facts relevant to the instant application as recited in

its petition by the Petitioner.

The Petitioner in paragraph 3 of the petition describes the Respondents to

the instant application in the following manner;

a) The 1st Respondent being the Chairman of the Departmental

Procurement Committee 01 of the 5th Respondent;

b) The 2nd to 4th Respondents being the members of the

Departmental Procurement Committee 01 of the 5th Respondent;

c) The 5th Respondent being the Airport And Aviation Services (Sri

Lanka) (Private) Limited;

d) The 6th Respondent being the Chairman of the 5th Respondent;

e) 7th Respondent being the party to whom the impugned bid is

purported to have been awarded; and

f) 8th to 10th Respondents being the bidders who participated in the

said bid;

In terms of paragraph 4 of the petition, the subject matter of the instant

being an invitation to bid for the provision of janitorial and cleaning services

for Ancillary buildings and their precincts at the Bandaranaike International

Airport, Katunayaka bearing bid No. 094/T/2023 for a period of two years.

In the rest of the averments in the petition, the Petitioner states that, the 2nd

Respondent had by a newspaper publication (X4) called on or around

21.10.2024 for bids for the provision of Janitorial and Cleaning Services for

Ancillary buildings and their precincts at the Bandaranaike International

Airport, Katunayaka bearing bid No. 094/T/2023 for a period of two years;

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 10 of 47

that, the said advertisement (X4) had inter-alia, stipulated the following

bidding conditions, namely; a) the prospective bidder shall have

satisfactorily carried out a similar service to the value of Rs. Six Million or

above per month for the immediate past two years up to the date of closing

of bids; and b) that the prospective bidder should have a minimum number

of 150 experienced staff employed continuously in janitorial work

throughout the past two years up to the date of closing bids; that, pre-bid

meeting was held on 01.11.2024 true copy of the minutes of which was

annexed to the petition marked as X5; that, the petitioner in terms of the

aforesaid advertisement/ invitation for bid paid a sum of Rs. 55,000/- being

the non-refundable bidding document fee and purchased the bidding

document (X6); that the Petitioner had submitted a duly completed bid

along with the supporting documents (X8(i)) to (X8(xxxi)) and furnished a

bid security of Rs. Six Million satisfying the requirements stipulated in the

invitation to bid (X4) and the bidding document (X6); that subsequently, the

bid was opened on 13.11.2024 at 2.00pm and the results were as follows;

The Petitioner further states in the averments in the petition that, in view of

the above, the Petitioners bid was the lowest responsive bid; that when

matters remained as such, there had been no response whatsoever from the

1st to 6th Respondents and/ or any one or more of the Respondents in

Bidder's Name Amount per 02

years (Rs.)

1Express Environmental

Services (Private) Limited

256,044,660.00 Petitioner

2Safe Care Facilities

Management (Pvt) Ltd

270,731,632.16 7th Respondent

3Clean Tech (Pvt) Ltd 273,672,861.54 8th Respondent

4Amil Janitor Services

(Private) Limited.

343,727,393.89 9th Respondent

5Care Clean (Pvt) Ltd 355,458,226.48 10th Respondent

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 11 of 47

respect of the said tender or the awarding of the tender; that, the Petitioner

was made to be aware that the said bid had by the letter dated 30.01.2025,

been awarded to the 7th Respondent for a total contract value of Rs.

270,731,632.05/- whereas, the contract value of the bid submitted by the

Petitioner was for Rs. 256,044,660.00/- which was lower than the bid of the

7th Respondent by Rs. 14,686,972.05/- ;that the Petitioner had not been

informed of the outcome of the said bid; that, the 6th Respondent had by the

Letter of Award dated, 30.01.2025 (X10), awarded the said bid to the 7th

Respondent which was not the lowest responsive bid thus, contrary to the

purpose of the bidding process, namely; the least cost principle; that the

failure of the 1st to 6th Respondents to award the bid to the Petitioner being

the lowest responsive bidder, is contrary to the provisions of the

Procurement Guidelines; that, the 1st to 6th Respondents had by failing to

inform the outcome of the said bid to the bidders, acted in contravention of

the Procurement Guidelines thereby violating the procedure set out therein;

that, the Petitioner had then by the letter dated 09.02.2025 (X14 and

X14(i)), informed the Minister of Transport, Highways and Ports and Civil

Aviation and the 6th Respondent about the abuse of the bidding process and

the unlawful, arbitrary, unreasonable acts and or conduct of any one or

more of the Respondents; that, the Petitioner through its Attorney-At-law

had demanded (X15 and X15(i)) the 1st and or 2nd and or 3rd and or 4th and

or 5th and or 6th Respondents to reverse the decision to award the bid to the

7th Respondent and to award the bid to the Petitioner being the lowest

responsive bidder; that in the circumstances, the decision and or

determination and or conduct of the 1st to 6th Respondents and or any one

or more of the Respondents in rejecting petitioners bid being the lowest

responsive bid and awarding the same to the 7th Respondent was unlawful,

illegal, arbitrary, unreasonable and contrary to the Procurement Guidelines

2006 (Goods and Works) and therefore, a) the purported decision of the 1st

to 6th Respondents and/or any one or more of the Respondents to award the

tender to the 7th Respondent; b) the purported decision of the 1st to 6th

Respondents and/ or any one or more of the Respondents to reject the bid of

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 12 of 47

the Petitioner which is the lowest responsive bid; c) Letter of Award dated

30th January 2025 issued in favour of the 7th Respondent and/or the

underlying decision contained therein; d) All consequential decisions and/

or determinations and/or steps taken pursuant to the Letter of Award dated

30th January 2025; and e) Failure of the 1st to 6th Respondents and/or any

one or more of the Respondents to adhere to the Procurement Guidelines

2006(Goods and Works) and the corresponding Procurement Manual, were

totally illegal, ultra vires, unlawful, wrongful, arbitrary, unreasonable,

unfair, discriminatory, irrational, misconceived, erroneous, in breach of the

principles of natural justice and or based on ulterior motives and or totally

irrelevant and or extraneous, collateral considerations and actuated by

palpable mala fides and in frustration of the legitimate expectations

entertained by the Petitioner and in violation of the principles of

proportionality.

Hence, the Petitioner now, seeks in the instant application before us to

impugn; a) the purported decision of the 1st to 6th Respondents and/or any

one or more of the Respondents to award the tender to the 7th Respondent;

b) the purported decision of the 1st to 6th Respondents and/ or any one or

more of the Respondents to reject the bid of the Petitioner which is the

lowest responsive bid; c) the purported issuance of the Letter of Award dated

30th January 2025 issued in favour of the 7th Respondent and/or the

underlying decision contained therein; d) All consequential decisions and/

or determinations and/or steps taken pursuant to the Letter of Award dated

30th January 2025; and e) Failure of the 1st to 6th Respondents and/or any

one or more of the Respondents to adhere to the Procurement Guidelines

2006 (Goods and Works) and the corresponding Procurement Manual.

It was on that basis, the Petitioner seeks in the instant application the

following relief;

B) a mandate in the nature of a Writ of Certiorari, calling for and

quashing the purported decision of the 1st to 6th Respondents and/or

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 13 of 47

any one or more of the Respondents to reject bid of the Petitioner

which is the lowest responsive bid and to award the tender/bid to the

7th Respondent;

C) a mandate in the nature of a Writ of Certiorari quashing the Letter

of Award dated 30th January 2025 issued to the 7th Respondent

marked as X10 and the underlying decisions contained therein;

D) a mandate in the nature of a Writ of Certiorari, calling for and

quashing all consequential decisions and/or determinations and/or

steps taken by the 1st to 6th Respondents and/or any one or more of

the Respondents pursuant to the Letter of Award dated 30th January

2025 marked as X10;

E) a mandate in the nature of Writ of Mandamus directing the 1st to

6th Respondents and/or any one or more of the Respondents and/or

their servants and/or agents to award the tender to the lowest

responsive bidder namely the Petitioner;

F) a mandate in the nature of a Writ of Prohibition preventing the 1st

to 6th Respondents and/or any one or more of the Respondents and/or

their servants and/or agents thereof, from awarding the bid to anyone

other than the lowest responsive bidder namely the Petitioner and /or

taking any further steps consequent to the Letter of Award dated 30th

January 2025 marked as X10;

G) an Interim Order, staying the Letter of Award dated 30th January

2025 marked as X10 and the underlying decision(s) contained

therein;

H) an Interim Order, staying the purported decision to award the Bid

No. 094/T/2023 to the 7th Respondent and/or the purported decision

to reject the bid of the Petitioner and/or any consequential decisions

and/or determinations and/or steps taken by the 1st to 6th

Respondents and/or any one or more of the Respondents pursuant to

the Letter of Award dated 30th January 2025 marked as X10;

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 14 of 47

I) an Interim Order, preventing the 1st to 6th Respondents and/or any

one or more of the Respondents from acting in terms of the Letter of

Award dated 30th January 2025 marked as X10 and/or taking any

further steps in respect of Bid No 094/T/2023 other than awarding

the same to the lowest responsive bidder namely the Petitioner;

It is in this backdrop of the instant application, let me now, deal with and

examine the evaluation criteria set out in the Government Procurement

Guidelines (Works and Goods) (X11), its corresponding manual (X12) and

the Bidding Document (X6).

It is Government Procurement Guidelines 2006-Goods and Works (X11)

(hereinafter called and referred to as the Government Procurement

Guidelines) that governs the procedure that should be adhered to by the

Procuring Entity (PE) in carrying out any Procurement Action financed in

whole or in part by Government of Sri Lanka or a Foreign Funding Agency

as spelt out in clause 1.1.1 of chapter 1 thereof.

In the preface to that Government Procurement Guidelines (X11), the

following observations are made by President of Sri Lanka;

THE Government of Sri Lanka has placed the highest priority to

ensure that development efforts across all sectors are evenly balanced

and distributed to all cross sectors of the society, in order to meet

the overall national development and enhance the quality of life

of its citizens.

To achieve the desired results it is imperative to ensure speed,

transparency and integrity in all the development spheres and in

regard to which the procurement function of goods, works and

services plays a critical role.

The development programmes which are instituted and other in the

pipe line include those which are financed by public funds as well as

by external funding. Within this context the availability of a set of

guidelines on procurement which harmonizes the processes to be

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 15 of 47

followed under the different funding agency procedures has been

identified and acknowledged by all providers of development funding

as a vital factor.

It is in this context that the National Procurement Agency has been

established under Presidential directive. The institution which

functions directly under my purview is mandated to study, revise and

adopt the procedures and processes in order to govern this vital

aspect. The efforts taken by the National Procurement Agency, within

a period of one year from its inception, to study the several procedural

documents which prevail in the sphere of public procurement and to

formulate a single harmonized procurement guideline applicable over

the different funding agency procedure is a significant and

commendable achievement.

I trust that this publication on procurement guidelines in the areas of

goods and works would be made use of by all stakeholders of national

development in order that the overall national development goals

as well as the individual organization development objectives are

realized on a timely and cost effective manner. [Emphasis is

mine]

The word Procurement is defined in the Government Procurement

Guidelines (X11) to mean the obtaining by Procuring Entities of Goods,

Services or Works by most appropriate means with public funds or funds

from any other source whether local or foreign received by way of loans,

grants, gifts, donations, contributions and similar receipts [Emphasis is

mine]

The objectives thereof as spelt out in 1.2.1 (a) to (g) of chapter 1 being that

the Procurement process should ensure; a) maximizing economy, timeliness

and quality in Procurement resulting in least cost together with the high

quality; b) adhering to prescribed standards, specifications, rules,

regulations and good governance; c) providing fair, equal and maximum

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 16 of 47

opportunity for eligible interested parties to participate in Procurement; d)

expeditious execution of Works and delivery of Goods and Services; e)

compliance with local laws and regulations and international obligations; f)

ensuring transparency and consistency in the evaluation and selection

procedure; and g) retaining confidentiality of information provided by

bidders.

In terms of clause 2.7 of the Procurement Guideline, Procuring Committee

(PC) is mainly, three-fold, namely;

a) Cabinet Appointed Procuring Committee (CAPC) which shall be

appointed by the National Procurement Agency (NPA) under delegated

authority by the Cabinet of Ministers (Vide 2.7.1 thereof);

b) Ministry Procuring Committee (MPC) which shall be appointed by the

Secretary to the Line Ministry(Vide 2.7.4 thereof);

c) Department Procuring Committee (DPC) which shall be appointed by

the Secretary to the Line Ministry(Vide 2.7.5 thereof);

In terms of clause 2.8.1 (a) of the Government Procurement Guidelines

(X11), there shall be TECs for all Procurements falling under the purview of

CAPC, MPC and DPC and the TEC for Department Procurement Committee

(DPC) is inter-alia, appointed by Head of the Department/Project Director

(Vide 2.8.4. thereof).

Clause 2.4 of the Government Procurement Guidelines (X11) spells out the

joint responsibilities of Procurement Committees (PCs) and Technical

Evaluation Committees (TECs) and clause 2.4.1 (a) thereof, stipulates that

The relevant PC and the TEC as described in these Guidelines shall carry

out the entire Procurement Process. And clause 2.8.1 (e) of the

Government Procurement Guidelines (X11) spells out that A TEC is

however, solely responsible for the technical evaluation. [Emphasis is

mine]

Clause 3.12.1 (a) of the Government Procurement Guidelines (X11) spells

out that, Pre-qualification is generally required in circumstances where the

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 17 of 47

high cost of preparing detailed bids by potential bidders could discourage

competition, such as Procurements involving, large or complex works

contracts, i.e. turnkey, design and build or management contracts; or

custom designed equipment, industrial plants Specialized Services,

whereas, 3.12.1(b) thereof stipulate that, This method ensures that,

invitations to bid are extended only to those who have adequate

capabilities and resources[Emphasis is mine].

Clause 5.2.1 (a) of the Government Procurement Guidelines (X11) stipulates

that, The bidding documents shall contain all relevant information

necessary for a prospective bidder to prepare a bid for the Goods or

Services or Works to be offered in response to the invitation to bid (or

quote). The contents of the bidding documents should be

unambiguous[Emphasis is mine].

Clause 5.3.2 of the Government Procurement Guidelines (X11) stipulates

that, The invitation to bid shall contain appropriate and relevant basic

information required by prospective bidders to prepare the Bid or Quotation,

including main eligibility criteria and the qualification requirements of

the successful bidder. [Emphasis is mine].

Clause 5.3.19(a) of the Government Procurement Guidelines (X11)

stipulates the evaluation criteria applicable to an evaluation of a bid

wherein, it spells out that, The bidding documents shall also specify the

relevant factors in addition to price, to be considered in bid evaluation

and the manner in which they will be applied for the purpose of

determining the lowest evaluated bid [Emphasis is mine].

Clause 5.3.20(b) of the Government Procurement Guidelines (X11) spells out

that, The disclosed criteria shall not be modified or additional criteria

shall not be introduced during evaluation. [Emphasis is mine].

Chapter 7 of the Government Procurement Guidelines (X11) makes

provisions for bid evaluation. Clause 7.2 thereof stipulates that, After bid

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 18 of 47

opening, information relating to substance, clarification, examination and

evaluation of Bids and recommendations concerning awards shall not be

communicated to bidders nor to any other person (unless they are

formally involved in the process) until after the date on which the award

of contract is formally notified to the successful Bidder [Emphasis is

mine].

With regard to the purpose and stages of Bid evaluation, Clause 7.7.1 (a)

and (b) (i),(ii),(iii) of the Government Procurement Guidelines (X11)

stipulates as follows;

a) The purpose of bid evaluation is to determine the lowest evaluated

substantially responsive bid out of the Bids received;

b) Therefore, bid evaluation process could be divided into three broad

stages:

i) Bid examination: To determine the eligibility of bidders, legal validity

of bid and substantial responsiveness of Bids received.

ii) Detailed Bid evaluation: To determine the lowest evaluated Bid,

from among the substantially responsive Bids received.

iii) Post qualification: to determine the qualification and experience of

the lowest evaluated bidder. [Emphasis is mine]

Clause 7.8 of the Government Procurement Guidelines (X11) sets out the

general principles applicable to bid examination wherein, it states that, bid

examination may be carried out in two stages:

a) Stage 1;

To ascertain whether the;

bidder is eligible,

if the bid is signed,

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 19 of 47

Bid is legally valid, and

Bid accompanied by the required bid security.

If the answer is negative to any of the above, the Bid is rejected and

excluded from further consideration.

b) Stage 2;

To ascertain the deviations from the provisions of bidding documents

and categorize such deviations into major or minor deviations. Also, to

identify deviations (debatable deviations) which may be categorized as

either minor or major deviations depending upon the requirements of

the specific provisions of the bidding document, the criticality of the

deviation, the value of the contract in comparison to the value of the

deviation and the judgment of the TEC. The purpose is to identify

substantially responsive Bids with a view to subjecting such Bids

for detailed bid evaluation [Emphasis is mine]

Clause 7.8.6 of the Government Procurement Guidelines (X11) makes

provisions for the determination of substantially responsive bids.

7.8.6. A substantially responsive bid should be one which conforms to

all the terms, conditions and specifications of the bidding

documents, without material deviation or reservation.

Clause 7.8.7 of the Government Procurement Guidelines (X11) stipulates

that, All Bids that are considered as substantial responsive shall be

subjected to detailed evaluation..

Clause 7.9 of the Government Procurement Guidelines (X11) stipulates the

procedure to be adopted in Detailed Bid Evaluation and it reads thus;

General Principles

7.9.1 (a) The manner in which the bids are to be evaluated, including the

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 20 of 47

criteria for selection of the lowest evaluated bid must be stipulated

in the bidding document.

(b) The evaluation of bids shall be consistent with the method,

terms, and conditions disclosed in the bidding documents.

(c) A systematic and logical sequence should be followed and such a

procedure is enumerated below.

7.9.2 Step-by-step procedure to be followed:

correction of arithmetical errors;

discounts, if any;

evaluation of acceptable omissions (line items or parts of work);

conversion to a common currency;

delivery periods or completion times;

adjustments for various minor deviations;

operational costs or life cycle costing (if applicable);

the availability of after sales service and spare parts;

the acceptable departures of warranties;

discounts, if any;

domestic preference;

assessment of monetary implications on deviations and other

matters;

adjustments for various minor deviations.

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 21 of 47

The corresponding manual to the Government Procurement Guidelines

(X12) lays down the general principles of detailed bid evaluation and

comparison of Bids as follows;

Procurement Guideline Reference: 7.9.1

General Principles of detailed bid evaluation and comparison of Bids;

The main objective of detailed bid evaluation is to determine the cost that

PE will incur if the contract is awarded to each of the bid which was

determined as a substantial responsive bid. Therefore only the bids that

have been determined to be substantially responsive to the bidding

documents, i.e. do not contain material deviation, should be

considered for detailed evaluation. Out of the three stages of bid

evaluation described in this manual only during this stage the bids are

compared with each other. The purpose of comparison is to determine

the lowest evaluated cost that will be incurred by the PE from the

substantially responsive bids received. The lowest evaluated bid may or

may not necessarily be the lowest quoted bid. In order to determine the

lowest evaluated bid the PE should only use the evaluation criteria

disclosed in the bidding document. No additional evaluation criteria

other than that were disclosed should be used during the evaluation. A

systematic and logical sequence as described in this manual should be

followed during the detailed evaluation and comparison of bids. [Emphasis

is mine]

Clause 7.9.10 of the Government Procurement Guidelines (X11) provides for

the general principles applicable to evaluation of the Lowest Evaluated

Substantial Responsive Bid and it reads thus;

Bids shall be first evaluated strictly according to the criteria and

methodology specified in the bidding documents and such evaluated

Bids shall be compared to determine the lowest evaluated substantially

responsive Bid. [Emphasis is mine]

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 22 of 47

The Bidding Document (X6) in its clause 10.7 stipulates the evaluation

criteria applicable to determining the Lowest Evaluated Substantial

Responsive Bid as follows;

10.7 Evaluation Criteria

1. Eligibility Requirements (Refer Section 2 Clause 11 of Bid)

2. Accuracy of Details given in the Supporting Documents

3. Realistic Data

4. Realistic Bid Value

5. Adequacy of Resources to be used to execute the Contract

a. Manpower

b. Equipment

c. Materials

d. Financial Capability

e. History

f. Bid Value

In the light of the Preface contained in the Government Procurement

Guidelines (X11) and provisions contained therein as enumerated above and

also the provisions contained in the corresponding manual to it (X12), the

purpose of those guidelines is to set forth the procedures that should be

adhered to by the Procuring Entity (PE) in carrying out any Procurement

Action financed in whole or in part by Government of Sri Lanka or a Foreign

Funding Agency and its objectives being inter-alia, to ensure maximizing

economy, timeliness and quality in Procurement resulting in least cost

together with the high quality while, ensuring transparency and consistency

in the evaluation and selection procedure.

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 23 of 47

In this instance, offers were invited by the Chairman, Departmental

Procurement Committee 01, Airport and Aviation Services (Sri Lanka)

(Private) Limited from reputed organizations by way of national competitive

bidding for provision of Janitorial and Cleaning Services for Ancillary

buildings and their precincts at the Bandaranaike International Airport,

Katunayaka bearing bid No. 094/T/2023 for a period of two years by the

newspaper advertisement (X4) and based on the documents submitted along

with the bid, all the five bidders enumerated above were initially evaluated,

to be substantially responsive bidders and the TEC had thereupon,

proceeded to the detailed bid evaluation as enumerated above, by adopting a

kind of methodology by means of an on-site visit of the office premises of

all five Substantially Responsive Bidders with a view to determining the

substantially responsive lowest evaluated bidder from among the all five

substantially responsive bidders, and in pursuant to the detailed bid

evaluation as such, conducted by it, the TEC had determined the 7th

Respondent to be the Substantially Responsive Lowest Evaluated Bidder,

and recommended it to be awarded the tender in question. It is the legality

of the decision of the 1st and or 2nd and or 3rd and or 4th and or 5th and or 6th

Respondents to reject the bid of the Petitioner and award the tender to the

7th Respondent based on the recommendations made by the TEC upon the

findings arrived at by it in pursuant to an on-site visit of the office

premises of all five Substantially Responsive Bidders adopted by it as being

a methodology to determine the substantially responsive lowest evaluated

bidder from among the all five substantially responsive bidders that the

Petitioner now, seeks to challenge before us by way of a writ of certiorari in

the instant application.

It is in this context, let me examine the provisions relating to evaluation

criteria as embodied in the Government Procurement Guidelines (X11) and

its corresponding manual (X12) and the bidding documents itself (X6) as re-

produced above.

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 24 of 47

Clause 5.3.19(a) of the Government Procurement Guidelines (X11)

stipulates the evaluation criteria applicable to an evaluation of a bid

wherein, it spells out that, The bidding documents shall also specify the

relevant factors in addition to price, to be considered in bid evaluation

and the manner in which they will be applied for the purpose of

determining the lowest evaluated bid [Emphasis is mine].

Clause 5.3.20(b) of the Government Procurement Guidelines (X11) spells out

that, The disclosed criteria shall not be modified or additional criteria

shall not be introduced during evaluation. [Emphasis is mine].

Procurement manual at its page 93 stipulates the bid evaluation criteria

with reference to clause 5.3.19 of the Government Procurement Guidelines

(X11) and it may be re-produced as follows;

Bid Evaluation Criteria

Other than the substantial responsive and price of the bid there may be

other factors, depending on the case, that are relevant for the evaluation.

'The PE shall identify such factors and include in the bidding

documents. The evaluation should be done only using such criteria and

methodology disclosed. No advantage should be given to any bid proposing

the requirements than specified. Some of the criteria generally used for

procurement of goods/works are:

Arithmetical errors;

Omissions;

Delivery schedule or time for completion;

Efficiency of the equipment;

Capacity:

Spare parts;

After sale services;

Payment schedule;

Operating costs;

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 25 of 47

Life cycle costing;

Currency conversion;

Domestic Preferences;

Discounts offered for combination of lots in multiple contract awards

(cross discounts);

Experience and qualifications of the lowest evaluated and

substantially responsive bidder;

Alternate Bid. [Emphasis is mine]

In the light of the evaluation criteria as embodied in the Government

Procurement Guidelines (X11) and its corresponding manual (X12), the

manner in which the bids are to be evaluated, including the criteria for

selection of the lowest evaluated bid must be stipulated in the bidding

document and the evaluation of bids shall be consistent with the

method, terms and conditions disclosed in the bidding documents; and

that the bidding document shall also specify the relevant factors in

addition to price, to be considered in bid evaluation and the manner in

which they will be applied for the purpose of determining the lowest

evaluated bid; and that, the disclosed criteria shall not be modified or

additional criteria shall not be introduced during evaluation. [Emphasis

is mine].

The Court in the decisions in Smithkline Beecham Biologicals S.A. and

Another V. State Pharmaceutical Corporation of Sri Lanka and Others

[1997] 3 SLR 20, Noble Resources International Private Limited Vs.

Hon. Ranjith Siyamabalapitiya and Others SCFR NO. 394/2015-Decided

on 24.01.2016 and Pamkaya (M) SND BHD Vs. Liyanaarachchi [2001] 1

SLR 118, too, laid emphasis on the strict compliance of the procedure set

out in the Government Procurement Guidelines and the bidding documents.

The manner in which the bids are to be evaluated, is stipulated in clause

10.7 of the Bidding documents (X6) and it may be reproduced as follows;

Evaluation Criteria

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 26 of 47

1. Eligibility Requirements (Refer Section 2 Clause 11 of Bid)

2. Accuracy of Details given in the Supporting Documents

3. Realistic Data

4. Realistic Bid Value

5. Adequacy of Resources to be used to execute the Contract

a. Manpower

b. Equipment

c. Materials;

d. financial Capability;

e. History;

f. Bid Value.

It is in this backdrop, let me now, examine the report of the TEC (R3) and its

findings and recommendations contained therein, the part of which is most

relevant to the issue at hand before us may be re-produced verbatim the

same as follows;

Table I Details of the Bidders

S/NName of the Bidder Amount for two years without VAT

Amount for two years with VAT

1 M/s Express Environmental Services

216,987,000.00 256,044,660.00

2 M/s Safe Care Facilities Management (Private) Limited

229,433,586.58 270,731,632.16

3 Clean Tec (Pvt) Ltd 231,926,153.85 273,672,861.54

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 27 of 47

4 M/s Amil Janitor Services 291,294,401.60 343,727,393.89

5 M/s Carekleen (Pvt) Ltd. 301,235,785.15 355,458,226.48

Observations

TEC observed that the offers listed in the Table-II are eligible for the

evaluation and hence, the below mentioned five bids were evaluated based

on the criteria outlined in the Tender Document, The compliance sheet of

the bidders is attached herewith as the Annex-II. Technical Evaluation

Committee observed that all the five bidders have submitted all required

documents that has been requested in the tender document. It was noted

that all offers quoted by the bidders are lower than the cost estimation

(Annex-II) by the TEC. However, every bidder was able to prove their

financial capabilities and experiences in the- field and-no major deviation

were observed. Accordingly based on the documents submitted along with

the bid, it was observed that all above five bidders are substantially

responsive.

Table II Bidders Taken for Evaluation

S/N Name of the Bidder Amount for two years with VAT

Rank

1 M/s Express Environmental Services

256,044,660.00 Lowest

2 M/s Safe Care Facilities Management (Private) Limited

270,731,632.16 2nd Lowest

3 Clean Tec (Pvt) Ltd 273,672,861.54 3rd Lowest

4 M/s Amil Janitor Services 343,727,393.89 4th Lowest

5 M/s Carekleen (Pvt) Ltd. 355,458,226.48 5th Lowest

However, the Technical Evaluation Committee made arrangements to visit

the office premises of all the bidders on 7th January 2025 in an uninformed

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 28 of 47

way to further clarify certain areas and Table III depicts a summary of the

visit.

Table III Summary of the Inspection

S/N Name of the Bidder Inspected documents / areas

Special Remarks

1 M/s Express Environmental services

Original certificate of the Business registration. Annual audited accounts. Original copies EPF & ETF Payment proofs Bank statements to see the transactions Original award letters of the contracts, earned more than 6 Mn per month Details of the permanent employees of the company Office Premises

Failure to Provide Required Documents M/s Express Environmental Services failed to produce the majority of the original documents requested by the TEC during the site visit. Instead, they requested additional time to provide these documents, stating they would produce them on January 10, 2025, which reflects a lack of readiness and professionalism. Incomplete Office Setup It was observed that both M/s Target Environmental Services (Pvt) Ltd and M/s Express Environmental Services were operating from a location still under construction. Due to this, the

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 29 of 47

companies failed to demonstrate a fully functional office setup. TEC was informed by the remaining staff that many employees were working from home, which raised concerns about the companys operational stability. General Managers Employment Status and Knowledge Gaps The General Manager was unable to provide proof of permanent employment with the company. When asked to provide his EPF number, he admitted that no EPF number was available for him, which is unacceptable for such a key position. The General Manager demonstrated inadequate knowledge of the companys business operations. He stated that different sections were handled by

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 30 of 47

separate teams and admitted he was unaware of certain critical details; Notably, he was unable to provide the approximate annual turnover of the company, which raised serious doubts about his competency and the companys leadership. Interlinked Operations with Target Environmental Services (Pvt) Ltd Both M/s Express Environmental Services and M/s Target Environmental Services (Pvt) Ltd are owned by siblings from the same family. Although the companies claimed to operate independently, TEC discovered instances where correspondence was conducted by one company on behalf of the other, and vice versa. This overlap indicated that the two companies are

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 31 of 47

effectively managed by the same team, which violates the tender documents requirement for independent operations. Office Premises and Staff Limitations During the visit, the officers from Express Environmental Services failed to demonstrate the operational capacity expected for the scope of the tender. The incomplete office premises and the lack of on-site staff further amplified concerns about their ability to manage the required janitorial and cleaning services effectively. 2 M/s Safe Care Facilities Management (Private) Limited

M/s Safe Care Facilities Management (Private) Limited successfully presented themselves during the evaluation process and provided all the documents and information requested by the

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 32 of 47

TEC in a timely and organized manner. 3 Cleantec (Pvt) Ltd Cleantec (Pvt) Ltd was a subsidiary company of Abanse group and their scope as per the business registration was, collection and processing of recyclable waste and not the janitorial services. However, Cleantec (Pvt) Ltd they were able to produce everything requested by the TEC. 4. M/s Amil Janitor services

M/s Amil Janitor services successfully presented themselves during the evaluation process and provided all the documents and information requested by the TEC in a timely and organized manner." 5. M/s Carekleen (Pvt) Ltd. M/s Carekleen (Pvt) Ltd. successfully presented themselves during the evaluation process and provided all the documents and information requested by the

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 33 of 47

TEC in a timely and organized manner."

Recommendations

Considering the above facts the Tender Evaluation Committee recommends

to award Tender for Janitorial & Cleaning Services for Ancillary buildings &

their Precincts Bandaranaike International Airport (BIA), Katunayake for the

period of 2024/2026 to substantially responsive, 2nd lowest bidder, M/s

Safe Care Facilities Management (Private) Limited for the total cost of, Two

Hundred Twenty-Nine Million Four Hundred Thirty-Three Thousand Five

Hundred Eighty-Six Sri Lankan Rupees and Fifty-Eight Cents

(229,433,586.58) + VAT. Moreover, the total cost inclusive of 18% VAT

would be, Two Hundred Seventy Million Seven Hundred Thirty-One

Thousand Six Hundred Thirty-Two Sri Lankan Rupees and Sixteen Cents.

(Rs. 270,731,632.16) for the period of 2 years under terms and conditions

stipulated in the tender document.

In the light of the observations made in the report by the TEC(R3), all five

bidders are substantially responsive; and that the Petitioner being the

substantially responsive lowest bidder while, the 7th Respondent being the

substantially responsive second lowest bidder.

At this juncture, it is pertinent to examine the clause 10 of the Bidding

document (X6) which is dedicated to the Qualification Questionnaire

wherein, it stipulates that, it is important that, the prospective bidder

should complete the qualification questionnaire providing all information in

full as this will be considered in evaluation of bid. Hence, it becomes clear,

that whatever the information that is provided in the qualification

questionnaire will be considered in evaluation of bid.

Clause 10.7 of the Bidding document (X6) refers to the evaluation criteria

and Clauses 10.7.1, 10.7.2, 10.7.3, 10.7.4 and 10.7.5 (a),(b),(c), (d), (e) and

(f) of the Bidding document (X6) expressly, and explicitly, list out in detail,

an array of grounds as amenable for evaluation criteria to be adopted by the

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 34 of 47

TEC in evaluation of a bid and they may be re-produced verbatim the same

as follows;

10.7 Evaluation Criteria

1. Eligibility Requirements (Refer Section 2 Clause 11 of Bid)

2. Accuracy of Details given in the Supporting Documents

3. Realistic Data

4. Realistic Bid Value

5. Adequacy of Resources to be used to execute the Contract

a. Manpower

b. Equipment

c. Materials

d. Financial Capability

e. History

f. Bid Value; [Emphasis is mine]

Hence, the grounds morefully, enumerated in the Clauses 10.7.1, 10.7.2,

10.7.3, 10.7.4 and 10.7.5 (a),(b),(c), (d), (e) and (f) of the Bidding document

(X6), as being the grounds amenable for evaluation criteria, are the grounds

that should be adopted by the TEC in evaluation of a bid with a view to

determining the Substantially Responsive Lowest Evaluated Bidder.

In the circumstances, it is beyond any doubt, that the TEC has all the

powers and the authority to carry out the evaluation process as authorized

by the aforesaid Clauses of the Bidding document (X6) on the grounds

morefully, enumerated in the Clauses 10.7.1, 10.7.2, 10.7.3, 10.7.4 and

10.7.5 (a),(b),(c), (d), (e) and (f) thereof and therefore, it is incumbent upon

the TEC in the first place, to satisfy itself as to the accuracy and or the

genuiness and or the truthfulness of the information so furnished by a

bidder in the qualification questionnaire in the Bidding document (X6) so as

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 35 of 47

to enable it to make a determination as to the Substantially Responsive

Lowest Evaluated Bidder.

Now, the pertinent question is whether the TEC had in this instance, acted

ultra vires of the powers or authority conferred upon it by the aforesaid

Clauses for evaluation of a bid and for determination of the Substantially

Responsive Lowest Evaluated Bidder from and among all five substantially

responsive bidders when it had gone on an on-site visit of the office

premises of all five substantially responsive bidders, as contended by the

Petitioner.

It may now, be examined.

The report of the TEC (R3) inter-alia, reveals that the TEC had made

arrangements to visit the office premises of all five substantially responsive

bidders on 07.01.2025 in an uninformed way to further clarify certain areas

and table III depicts a summary of that visit.

Table III thereof sets out the summary of inspection which outlines the

inspected documents at the on site office visit by the TEC with special

remarks made by it in relation thereto and the inspected documents being

Original certificate of the Business Registration, Annual audited

accounts, Original copies of EPF and ETF payments proofs, Bank

Statements to see the transactions, Original award letters of the

Contracts earned more than 6Mn per month and details of the

permanent employees of the company. [Emphasis is mine].

It was remarked by the TEC that the Petitioner had failed to produce the

majority of the original documents requested by the TEC during the site

visit. Instead they requested additional time to provide those documents

stating they would produce them on January 10th, 2025, which according to

the TEC, reflects a lack of readiness and professionalism.

Upon a careful scrutiny of the evaluation criteria set out in the clause 10.7.2

of the Bidding document (X6), it becomes abundantly, clear that one of the

most significant and crucial grounds upon which its task for evaluation of a

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 36 of 47

bid is to be implemented and executed by the TEC, is the accuracy of

details given in the supporting documents. Hence, the fundamental duty

cast upon the TEC in evaluating a bid is to evaluate a bid based on the

accuracy of details given in the supporting documents by a bidder.

In the light of the evaluation criteria set out in the clause 10.7.2 of the

Bidding document (X6), it is within exclusive power and or authority of the

TEC to evaluate a bid on the accuracy of details given in the supporting

documents by a bidder as being one of the significant and crucial aspects of

bid evaluation as set out therein. And to accomplish this task so entrusted

with the TEC, it has all the powers or authority vested in it under the clause

10.7.2 of the Bidding document (X6) to ask for and or call for documents

necessary for the verification and or clarification of the accuracy of details

given in the supporting documents by a bidder to its satisfaction so as to

enable it to determine the Substantially Responsive Lowest Evaluated

Bidder from and among all five substantially responsive bidders.

Even in this instance too, the TEC has all the powers and or the authority to

ask for and or call for a kind of documents that had been asked for by it not

only from the Petitioner but also from all the other Substantially Responsive

bidders namely; Original certificate of the Business Registration,

Annual audited accounts, Original copies of EPF and ETF payments

proofs, Bank Statements to see the transactions, Original award

letters of the Contracts earned more than 6Mn per month and details

of the permanent employees of the company, by way of further

clarification or verification of the accuracy of the supporting documents

stated in the bidding document by all of them being substantially responsive

bidders, in order to ascertain the genuiness and or accuracy and or

truthfulness of the supporting documents so as to enable TEC to come to a

right determination as to the Substantially Responsive Lowest Evaluated

Bidder from and among all five substantially responsive bidders. [Emphasis

is mine]

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 37 of 47

And in the circumstances, it is immaterial and it does not make any

difference whatsoever, as to the mode that the TEC sought to adopt in this

instance for clarification or verification of the accuracy of those supporting

documents, namely; by way of an on-site visit of office premises of all

substantially responsive bidders or otherwise for; it is exclusively, within its

power and authority conferred upon it by Clause 10.7.2 of the bidding

document and hence, the alleged act of the TEC is intra-vires and not ultra

vires as contended by the Petitioner.

Furthermore, in terms of the grounds morefully, enumerated in the Clause

10.7.3, 10.7.5 (a), (d) and (e) of the Bidding Document (X6) as amenable for

evaluation criteria in evaluation of a bid, it is within the exclusive power of

the TEC to ask for and or call for any such document that had been called

for by the TEC on the on site visit of the office premises of all five

substantially responsive bidders, namely; Original certificate of the

Business Registration, Annual audited accounts, Original copies of

EPF and ETF payments proofs, Bank Statements to see the

transactions, Original award letters of the Contracts earned more

than 6Mn per month and details of the permanent employees of the

company for; they are absolutely, necessary for the TEC to evaluate the bid

based on the realistic data as set out in Clause 10.7.3 of the bidding

document in order to satisfy itself as to the real situation of the bidder so as

to enable it to make a right determination as to the Substantially Responsive

Lowest Evaluated Bidder. [Emphasis is mine]

Moreover, such documents namely; Original certificate of the Business

Registration, Annual audited accounts, Original copies of EPF and

ETF payments proofs, Bank Statements to see the transactions,

Original award letters of the Contracts earned more than 6Mn per

month and details of the permanent employees of the company that

the TEC sought to inspect at its on site visit of the office premises of all five

substantially responsive bidders, are absolutely, necessary for it to properly

evaluate a bid on the ground set out in the evaluation criteria by its Clause

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 38 of 47

10.7.5, namely; Adequacy of resources to be used to execute the contract.

[Emphasis is mine]

Even, under the Clause 10.7.5 (a) of the Bidding Document (X6), it was

within the exclusive power of the TEC to ask for such documents namely;

Original certificate of the Business Registration, Annual audited

accounts, Original copies of EPF and ETF payments proofs, Bank

Statements to see the transactions, Original award letters of the

Contracts earned more than 6Mn per month and details of the

permanent employees of the company that the TEC sought to inspect at

its on site visit of the office premises of all five substantially responsive

bidders, for; they are absolutely, necessary for it to properly evaluate a bid

on the ground set out in the evaluation criteria by its Clause 10.7.5 and

10.7.5 (a) of the Bidding Document (X6), namely; Adequacy of resources to

be used to execute the contract and under the sub ground set out

thereunder by Clause 10.7.5 (a) of the Bidding Document (X6), namely;

Manpower. [Emphasis is mine]

Furthermore, in order to evaluate the bid under the sub ground set out in

Clause 10.7.5 (d) of the Bidding Document (X6), namely; Financial capacity,

it was within the exclusive power of the TEC to ask for such documents

namely; Original certificate of the Business Registration, Annual

audited accounts, Original copies of EPF and ETF payments proofs,

Bank Statements to see the transactions, Original award letters of

the Contracts earned more than 6Mn per month and details of the

permanent employees of the company that the TEC sought to inspect at

its on site visit of the office premises of all five substantially responsive

bidders, for; they are absolutely, necessary for it to properly evaluate a bid

on the ground set out in the evaluation criteria by its Clause 10.7.5 and

10.7.5 (d) of the Bidding Document (X6), namely; Adequacy of resources to

be used to execute the contract and under the sub ground set out

thereunder by Clause 10.7.5 (d) of the Bidding Document (X6), namely;

Financial capacity. [Emphasis is mine]

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 39 of 47

Moreover, in order to evaluate the bid under the sub ground set out in

Clause 10.7.5 (e) of the Bidding Document (X6), namely; History of the

bidder, it was within the exclusive power of the TEC to ask for such

documents namely; Original certificate of the Business Registration,

Annual audited accounts, Original copies of EPF and ETF payments

proofs, Bank Statements to see the transactions, Original award

letters of the Contracts earned more than 6Mn per month and details

of the permanent employees of the company that the TEC sought to

inspect at its on site visit of the office premises of all five substantially

responsive bidders, for; they are absolutely, necessary for it to properly

evaluate a bid on the ground set out in the evaluation criteria by its Clause

10.7.5 and 10.7.5 (e) of the Bidding Document (X6), namely; Adequacy of

resources to be used to execute the contract and under the sub ground set

out thereunder by Clause 10.7.5 (d) of the Bidding Document (X6), namely;

History of the bidder. [Emphasis is mine]

In view of the foregoing, I am of the view that, it cannot in any manner, be

said that, the TEC had acted ultra vires in holding an on-site visit of the

office premises of all five substantially responsive bidders in an uninformed

way with a view to getting further clarifications on certain areas of the

information furnished by the substantially responsive five bidders in their

respective bidding documents, more particularly in the qualification

questionnaire in the bidding document for; it is within the exclusive power

of the TEC to ask for such documents namely; Original certificate of the

Business Registration, Annual audited accounts, Original copies of

EPF and ETF payments proofs, Bank Statements to see the

transactions, Original award letters of the Contracts earned more

than 6Mn per month and details of the permanent employees of the

company that the TEC sought to inspect at its on site visit of the office

premises of all five substantially responsive bidders, for; they are absolutely,

necessary for it to properly evaluate a bid on the grounds set out in the

evaluation criteria by its Clauses 10.7.2, 10.7.3, 10.7.5 (a),(d) and (e) the

Bidding Document (X6).

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 40 of 47

Besides, an on-site visit of office premises of all five substantially

responsive bidders, would in my opinion, probably, be the best method in

evaluating a bid for; it would certainly, demonstrate the real situation of the

capabilities and abilities of a bidder to execute the contract if awarded for;

like in this instance, the TEC had found upon its on-site visit of office

premises of all five substantially responsive bidders, that the Petitioner, had

failed to demonstrate a fully functional office set up necessary for the proper

and timely, execution of the contract if awarded to it for; the Petitioner

company was operating from a location still, under construction and that

that, the TEC was informed by the remaining staff of the Petitioner that

many employees were working from home, which findings of facts and or

observations of the TEC would still remain, unchallenged and

uncontroverted by the Petitioner for; neither in the Petition of the Petitioner

nor in the counter affidavit nor in the comprehensive written submission of

the Petitioner, had the Petitioner ever, sought to refute it and or controvert it

and or challenge it by proof on the contrary which would no doubt, raise

serious concerns about the Petitioners Operational Stability as rightly,

observed by the TEC on its on-site visit. This alone, clearly, and

unequivocally shows that, although it being the Substantially Responsive

Lowest Bidder, the Petitioner is not in any manner, a responsible and

trustworthy bidder to be awarded the tender in question as rightly,

determined by the TEC and the Procuring Entity.

Hence, I would hold that, the bids of all five substantially responsive bidders

had been evaluated by the TEC strictly, in accordance with the manner

stipulated in the Clause 10.7 of the Bidding Document (X6) and therefore,

the evaluation of the bids of all five substantially responsive bidders are

entirely, consistent with the method, terms and conditions disclosed in the

Clauses 10.7.2, 10.7.3, 10.7.5 (a),(d) and (e) the Bidding Document (X6) and

as required by Clauses 7.9.1 (a) and (b) of the Government Procurement

Guidelines (X11) and as such the fact that, the evaluation process was

conducted by the TEC by way of an on-site visit of office premises of all five

substantially responsive bidders, does not in any manner, make the

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 41 of 47

evaluation process a nullity for; the evaluation process was conducted by

the TEC in accordance with the method, terms and conditions disclosed in

the Clauses 10.7.2, 10.7.3, 10.7.5 (a),(d) and (e) the Bidding Document (X6)

and as required by Clauses 7.9.1 (a) and (b) of the Government Procurement

Guidelines (X11).

In view of all the circumstances, I would hold that, the decision sought to be

quashed by the Petitioner by way of a writ of certiorari in the instant

application is totally, legal, intra-vires, lawful, reasonable, fair, non-

discriminatory, rational and based on the principles of natural justice and in

accordance with the provisions of the Government Procurement Guidelines

(X11) its corresponding Manual(X12) and the evaluation criteria set out in

the bidding document (X6) as morefully, enumerated above.

Hence, I would hold that, the instant application is not entitled to succeed

both in fact and law.

Let me now, deal with the preliminary objections raised by the 1st to 6th

Respondents as to the maintainability of the instant application.

For want of parties.

It is admitted by the Petitioner that, the whole of the members of the

Procuring Committee had not been made parties to the instant application.

Hence, it is an admitted fact.

In the light of the preliminary objection so raised by the 1st to 6th

Respondents as to the maintainability of the instant application, the pivotal

question that would arise for our consideration would be, who should be a

necessary party to applications for writs?[Emphasis is mine]

It may now, be examined.

It was held in Hatton National Bank PLC Vs Commissioner General of

Labour and Others. [CA (Writ) Application No. 457/2011; CA Minutes of

31st January 2020; that, It is trite law that any person whose rights are

affected by an order that a petitioner is inviting a Court of law to make in his

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 42 of 47

favour is entitled to be named as a party and is entitled to be heard, before

Court makes any order adverse to such person. The rule is that all those

who would be affected by the outcome of an application should be made

respondents to such application. [Emphasis is mine]

It was held in Gnanasambanthan v Rear Admiral Perera and others

[1998] 3 SLR 167 at 172 that "it is both the law and practice in Sri Lanka

to cite necessary parties to applications for Writs of Certiorari and

Mandamus.

In the decision in Wijeratne (Commissioner of Motor traffic) Vs. Ven, Dr.

Paragoda Wimalasena Thero and 4 others, [2011] (2) SLR 258 at page

267, the following two rules were laid down by Court with regard to naming

of necessary parties;

1. The first rule regarding the necessary parties to an application for

a writ of certiorari is that the person or authority whose decision

or exercise of power is sought to be quashed should be made a

respondent to the application. If the act sought to be impugned had

been done by one party on a direction given by another party who has

power granted by law to give such direction, the party who had given

the direction is also a necessary party and the failure to make such

party a respondent is fatal to the validity of the application.

[Emphasis is mine]

2. The second rule is that those who would be affected by the outcome of

the writ application should be made respondents to the application.

It was held in Dominic V. Minister of_Lands and Others, (2010) 2 SLR

398, that, "In the context of writ applications, a necessary party is one

without whom no order can be effectively made. A proper party is one in

whose absence an effective order can be made but whose presence is

necessary to a complete and final decision on the question involved in the

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 43 of 47

proceedings..Persons vitally affected by the writ petition are all necessary

parties. If their number is very large, some of them could be made

respondents in a representative capacity (vide Prabodh Derma v. State of

Uttara Pradesh also see Encyclopedia of Writ Law By P.M. Bakshi )In view of

the above authorities it is clear that the failure to name the necessary

parties.as parties in this application is fatal.

In the case of Abeywardane and 162 others vs. Stanley, Wijesundara,

Vice Chancellor,University of Colombo and Another [1983] 2 Sri LR 267

at 291 at it was held that, The whole petition is directed against the 115

students of the North Colombo Medical College. Both the final relief and the

Interim order asked for by petitioners are intended to achieve one object,

namely, the exclusion of the 115 students from the 2nd MBBS examination.

According to the affidavit of Dr. Ratnavale, who is the Director of the North

Colombo Medical College, the 115 students have followed the approved

courses of study, have applied to the University of Colombo to sit the

2ndMBBS examination, have paid the requisite examination fees, and have

received their admission cards from the University of Colombo for the said

examination. There is no doubt then, that if this Court were to issue a

Mandamus as prayed for by the petitioners, the 115 students would be

adversely affected. If as contended by learned Counsel for the petitioners,

the 115 students have no legal right to sit the 2nd MBBS examination, this is

all the more reason we should have them before us and hear them, before

we make an order against them. To use the words of Cayley, C. J. in effect

we are asked by the petitioners to pronounce an opinion upon a disputed

examination, without large section of the students, who propose to sit the

examination, being parties to the proceedings or having had any notice on

them. This we cannot do."We hold that the 115 students of the North

Colombo Medical College are necessary parties and the failure to make them

respondents is fatal to the petitioners' application.

It was held in Rawaya Publishers and Others v. Wijedasa Rajapaksha and

Others, [2001] (3) SLR 213, at page 216, that, "In the context of writ

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 44 of 47

applications, a necessary party is one without whom no order can be

effectively made. A proper party is one in whose absence an effective order

can be made but whose presence is necessary to a complete and final

decision on the question involved in the proceedings. In the case of Udit

Narayan Singh v. Board of Revenue it has been held that where a writ

application is filed in respect of an order of the Board of Revenue not only

the Board itself is necessary party but also the parties in whose favour the

Board has pronounced the impugned decision because without them no

effective decision can be made. If they are not made parties then the petition

can be dismissed in limine. It has also been held that persons vitally affected

by the writ petition are all necessary parties. If their number is very large,

some of them could be made respondents in a representative capacity (vide

Prabodh Derma v. State of UttaraPradesh also see Encyclopedia of Writ

Law By P. M. Bakshi)" (Emphasis is mine).

See also; Jayawardena_and Another Vs. Pegasus Hotels Of Ceylon Ltd.

And Others [2004] 2 Sri. LR 39.

It is trite law that, in the context of writ applications, a necessary party is

one without whom no order can be effectively made; and that, a proper party

is one in whose absence an effective order can be made but whose presence

is necessary to a complete and final decision on the question involved in the

proceedings and hence, persons vitally affected by the writ petition are all

necessary parties; and that, if their number is very large, some of them

could be made respondents in a representative capacity.

It is trite law as can be deducible from the case laws (Supra) that, the rule

regarding the necessary parties to an application for a writ of certiorari is

that the person or authority whose decision or exercise of power is sought to

be quashed should be made a respondent to the application and the failure

to make such party a respondent is fatal to the validity of the application.

In the instant application, the Petitioner seeks to quash by way of a writ of

certiorari the decision of the 1st and or 2nd and or 3rd and or 4th and or 5th

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 45 of 47

and or 6th Respondents to reject its bid and award it to the 7th Respondent

notwithstanding the Petitioner being the Substantially Responsive Lowest

Bidder.

The Petitioner has in its petition, described the 1st Respondent as the

Chairman of the Departmental Procuring Committee of the 5th Respondent

and admitted without any reservation that whole of the members of the

Departmental Procuring Committee of the 5th Respondent had not been

named as the Respondents to the instant application although, the

Petitioner seeks by way of a writ of certiorari, to quash the decision of the

Departmental Procuring Committee of the 5th Respondent in the instant

application and also it becomes manifest when the Petitioner asks that, the

decision of the 1st and or 2nd and or 3rd and or 4th and or 5th and or 6th

Respondents to be quashed by way of a writ of certiorari.

However, it is an admitted fact that the whole of the members of the

Departmental Procuring Committee of the 5th Respondent whose decision or

exercise of power is sought to be quashed by the Petitioner in the instant

writ application, had not been named as parties to the instant writ

application, nor, had there been any application made to this Court by the

Petitioner right up to now, to add all members of the Departmental

Procuring Committee of the 5th Respondent even after, the preliminary

objection was raised by the 1st to 6th Respondents at the very outset of the

proceedings of the instant application.

The Petitioner seeks to rely on the decision in Anurashantha Kumara Vs. T.

A. C. N. Thalangama and 36 Others, CA Writ Application No. 238/2020-

Decided on 21.05.2021 to contend that, the Petitioner has made all

necessary parties to adjudicate the present application before this Court for;

the Chairman of the Departmental Procuring Committee of the 5th

Respondent had been named as the 1st Respondent to the instant

application.

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 46 of 47

However, it is significant to observe that, the Petitioner himself conceded

unequivocally, that some of the members of the Departmental Procuring

Committee of the 5th Respondent whose decision or the exercise of power is

sought to be quashed by the Petitioner in the instant application, had not

been made parties to the instant application notwithstanding the

preliminary objection raised by the 1st to 6th Respondents for want of parties

nor had there been any application made to this Court by the Petitioner

right up to now, seeking permission of this Court to add them as parties

thereto nor had there been any material furnished to this Court by the

Petitioner in order to satisfy this Court that there exists reasonable grounds

for this Court to exercise its discretion to condone the failure on the part of

the Petitioner to add the other members of the departmental procurement

committee of the 5th Respondent as parties to the instant application.

In the circumstances, I would hold that, the preliminary objection raised by

the 1st to 6th Respondents for want of parties, is entitled to succeed.

I would therefore, hold that, the failure on part of the Petitioner to name the

other members of the Departmental Procuring Committee of the 5th

Respondent as parties to the instant application whose decision or the

exercise of power is sought to be quashed by the Petitioner in the instant

application, is fatal to the maintainability of the instant application.

I would therefore, hold that the instant application ought to be dismissed on

this ground too.

In view of the my aforesaid findings on the facts and law, I would think it

not necessary to consider any further, the rest of the preliminary objections

raised by the 1st to 6th Respondents on the doctrine of futility and on the

misrepresentation of material facts.

In view of the foregoing, I would proceed to reject the instant application.

CA/WRT/0114/2025 Page 47 of 47

In the result, I would dismiss the instant application with costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL