IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Case No: CA 726/98 (F)

DC Colombo Case No: 158732/L

Madduma Achariyage Dayaratna alis Paulis, No: 6, Mihiri Pedesa, Asiri Uyana, Katubedda.

Presently at: No: 945, Aluth Mawatha Road, Colombo 15.

Plaintiff

Vs.

Henrita Hettiarchchi, No: 852/1, Aluth Mawatha Road, Colombo 15.

Defendant

AND NOW BERWEEN

Madduma Achariyage Dayaratna alis Paulis, No: 6, Mihiri Pedesa, Asiri Uyana, Katubedda.

Presently at No: 945, Aluth Mawatha Road, Colombo 15.

Plaintiff - Appellant

Vs.

1

L I

/ / i

i /

J j i

Henrita Hettiarchchi, No: 852/1, Aluth Mawatha Road, Colombo 15.

Defendant - Respondent

Before : P.R. Walgama, J

: L.T.B. Dehideniya, J

Council : A. K. S. Sumanasuriya with P.C. llapperuma Arachchi for Plaintiff - Appellant.

: Hussain Ahamed for Defendant - Respondent.

Argued on

Decided on

: 03.03.2016

: 31.08.2016

CASE-NO- CA-726/98 (F)- ORDER- 31.08.2016

P.R. Walgama, J

The instant appeal lies

Learned District Judge against the judgment of the

dated 11 th August 1998, by which jupgment the

dismissed.

Being aggrieved by the

Appellant appealed to

Plaintiff - Appellant's case was

said judgment the Plaintiff -

this Court to have the said order set aside or vacate.

The Plaintiff -Appellant instituted action against the

Defendant -Respondent bearing Case No. 15873/L in

2

I

the District Court of Colombo, for the following

relief inter alia;

For a declaration of title and ejectment of the

Defendant from the premIses morefully described In

the schedule to the plaint thereto.

By filing the afore said action the Plaintiff- Appellant

has averred thus;

That he became the owner of the premIses In suit

by virtue of Deed No. 849 dated 10.07.1981 attested

by R.A.D. Iidrasiri, Notary Public.

That the Defendant without any right or title to the

said premIses bearing No. 852/ IS In unlawful

occupation of the said premises.

That the Plaintiff- Appellant has suffered a sum of

Rs. 500/ per day due to the unauthorised

occupation of the Defendant, in the subject premises.

The stance

uninterrupted

of the

and

Defendant was that she was In

undisturbed

subject premIses from or

acquired prescriptive title

moved for a declaration

about

to the

that

posseSSIOn of the

1978 and she has

said premIses, and

she has acquired

prescriptive title to the premIses in suit.

The Learned District Judge after

evidence placed before her, arrived at

that the Plaintiff- Appellant has not

evaluating the

the conclusion

proved her title

3

to the disputed land and had dismissed the plaintiff

action accordingly.

Being aggrieved by the said judgment the Plain tiff-

Appellant appealed to this Court.

At the very out set the Defendant -Respondent

raised a preliminary objection as to the

maintainability of this appeal, viz a viz

That the signature appears In the notice

differs from the signatures of the

documen ts purported to have been signed

Registered Attorney for the Plaintiff- Appellant.

of appeal

following

by the

That the signature found In the plaint, 1st witness

to the Power of Attorney bearing No. 1358, list of

witnesses of the Plaintiff, motion dated 1.06.1995

and the Petition of Appeal dated 07.September 1998.

Therefore it IS alleged by the Counsel for the

Defendant -Respondent that the notice of appeal has

not been signed and flIed by the Registered Attorney

and thus the notice of Appeal dated 19th August

1998 is not a valid notice in law.

At the very out set this Court observed the above

difference of the signatures of the Registered -Attorney

of the Plaintiff- Appellant.

It is trite law that when a proxy IS glVen to an

Attorney at- Law is in operation and no other person

is entitle in law to flle or sign a Notice of Appeal

4

--------J ----

I

1 j

on behalf of that person. A cursory glance at the

afore said signatures display a difference, of the

same.

The applicable Section In the Civil Procedure Code

In dealing with the afore said Issue IS Section 27(2)

which states thus ,

" when so filed, it shall be In force until revocked

with the leave of the Court and after notice to the

Registered Attorney by a writing signed by the

client and filed In court or until the client dies or

until the registered attorney dies, IS removed, or

suspended or otherwise becomes incapable to act, or

until all proceedings ill the action are ended

judgment satisfied so far as regards the client".

Therefore it abundantly clear that the proxy which

has been filed by the Registered Attorney will be ill

force till it IS revoked of the afore said

circumstances had occurred.

The Section 755 of the Civil Procedure Code

recognIses and had gIven validity to the documents

filed therein which are signed by the applicant or

his Registered Attorney.

Therefore ill the matter In hand it IS ostensible

that the signature In the notice of appeal varies in

comparmg with the signatures of the other

documents tendered by the Registered Attorney for the

5

I

IIII II

I ! I

Plaintiff- Appellant, for which the Plaintiff did not

proffer an explanation as to the said discrepancy.

Nevertheless it is contended by the Plaintiff- Appellant

that by the afore said error no material prejudice

has been caused to the Defendant -Respondent and

as such technical error sheuld not over ride the

rights of the parties.

The Counsel for the Plain tiff-Appellant thrust on

many judicial pronouncement which has mainly dealt

with the technicalities and the effect thereto.

When considering the legal matrix in relation to the

core Issue to be resolved as a preliminary Issue

this Court IS of the VIew that the said objection

should be upheld and appeal should be dismissed

in limine.

Accordingly objection IS upheld, and appeal IS

dismissed, without costs.

L.T.B. Dehideniya, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

6