IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

CA (Writ Application) No. 425/2017

I n the matter of a n Application for mandates in the nature of Writs of Certiorari and Mandamus under and in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

S.K.Osman Pathamasiri Rest House of Weligama, Weligama.

Petitioner

Vs.

1. Lanka Rest Houses Limited.

2. Mrs. S Bogahawatte, Chairman, Lanka Rest Houses Ltd.

3. S.S.P Ratnayake, Director, Lanka Rest Houses Ltd.

4. S. Sri Chandran

Director, Lanka Rest Houses Ltd.

5. Pujitha Dilusha Hewawasam Director, Lanka Rest Houses Ltd.

6. D Venkateshwaran, Director, Lanka Rest Houses Ltd.

7. BKR Balasooriya Director, Lanka Rest Houses Ltd.

1

Before:

Counsel:

All of Ministry of Megapolis and Western Development, Ground Floor, IISethsiripaya", Sri Jayawardenapura, Kotte, Battaramulla.

8. Urban Development Authority, Ground Floor, tSethsiripaya', Sri Jayawardenapura, Kotte, Battaramulla.

9. Chairman, Urban Development Authority, Ground Floor, tSethsiripaya', Sri Jayawardenapura, Kotte, Battaramulla.

10. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Hulftsdorp, Colombo 12.

Respondents

P. Padman Surasena, J/ President, Court of Appeal

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J

Dr. Sunil Cooray with Ms. Sudharshinie Cooray for the

Petitioners

Ms. Nayomi Kahawita, State Counsel for the Respondents

Supported on: 15th May 2018

Decided on: 24th May 2018

2

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J

The Petitioner filed this application on 11th December 2017. The

Petitioner has subsequently filed an amended petition dated osth

February 2018 and a further amended petition dated 18th March 2018,

seeking, inter alia, the following relief:

(a) A Writ of Certiorari quashing the letter dated 06th November 2017,

marked as tp16' -,

(b) A Writ of Certiorari quashing the letter dated 12th March 2018,

marked as tp16(i)';

(c) A Writ of Mandamus on the 1st - 9th Respondents to issue the

Petitioner a fresh management agreement in respect of the

Weligama Rest House or in the alternative to grant the Petitioner a

long term permit to manage the said Rest House;

(d) A stay order staying the operation of the documents marked tp16'

and tp16(i)' until the final determination of this application.

When this application was taken up for support on lsth May 2018, the

learned Counsel for the Petitioner submitted that he would restrict his

relief to the two Writs of Certiorari and the interim relief.

The Petitioner had entered into an agreement with the 8th Respondent,

the Urban Development Authority (UDA) to manage and operate the

Weligama Rest House for a period of S years from 01st June 1998 to 31st

3

I I

If , ! ! , I

(

t

May 2003. The parties had entered into a further agreement on 25th

February 2004 by which the Petitioner was appointed to manage and

operate the said rest house from 01st January 2004 to 01st February

2009. The above agreements have been produced with the petition,

marked 'Pib' and 'Pic', respectively.

By letter dated 21st September 2009 produced with the petition marked

'P4a', the Petitioner had expressed his willingness to continue the

management of the said rest house and sought an extension of the

management agreement. In the said letter 'P4a', the Petitioner had set

out his development proposal for the said rest house for the period 02nd

January 2010 to 03rd January 2013. This included the construction of six

new rooms at a cost of Rs. 2 million and other improvements totaling a

sum of Rs. 5 million. By letter dated 14th October 2009 produced with

the petition marked as 'P4b', the Chairman of UDA Rest Houses Ltd had

conveyed to the Petitioner its consent to extend the management

period by 8 years, on the condition, inter alia, that the repair works

mentioned in 'P4a' shall be completed within 4 years from the date of

the agreement.

Accordingly, the Petitioner had entered into an agreement with the

Urban Development Authority Rest Houses Limited on 1ih November

2009, produced with the petition marked 'P3', to manage and operate

the said rest house for a period of 8 years from 1ih November 2009

until 11th November 2017. The Petitioner had also been granted Permit

No. 0018 dated 1ih November 2009 to occupy and maintain the said

rest house for the aforementioned period. This permit forms part of the

documents tendered to this Court marked 'P3'.

4

Clauses 7 and 8 of the agreement tP3' required the Petitioner to invest a

sum not less than Rs. 5 million to re-develop and re-furbish the rest

house and to conclude the construction works within four years of the

date of execution of the agreement tP3'. In the event of early

termination of the agreement 'P3', the Petitioner was entitled to the

payment of compensation for the improvements carried out, in

proportion to the un-expired term. Clause 25 of the agreement tP3'

specified that, it after the expiration of 8 years management period,

consideration will be given to extend the further management period of

8-10 years".

By .Ietter dated 06th November 2017 produced with the petition marked

tpI6', the 1st Respondent (earlier known as Urban Development

Authority Rest Houses Limited) had informed the Petitioner that the

agreement tP3' would expire on 11th November 2017 and to handover

the rest house premises by 12th November 2017. Aggrieved by this

letter, the Petitioner filed this application seeking a Writ of Certiorari to

quash tpI6'. Subsequent to the filing of this application, the 1st

Respondent, by letter dated 1ih March 2018 produced with the second

amended petition marked tpl6i' requested the Petitioner to handover

the rest house premises by 26th March 2018. The Petitioner is seeking a

Writ of Certiorari to quash this letter, as well.

The Petitioner's first contention was that he had expended large sums of

money for the development of the rest house premises and that he had

a legitimate expectation that the management period would be

extended, thus enabling him to recover his investment.

5

The Petitioner relied on letter dated 25th April 2017 produced with the

petition marked 'P13a' sent to him by the 1st Respondent as having

created a legitimate expectation in his mind that if he carried out the

repairs referred to in the said letter 'P13a', he would be entitled for an

extension of the period of management. The letter 'P13a,l has been

issued pursuant to a site inspection carried out by the officials of the 1st

Respondent at a time when the agreement 'P3' was still valid. By 'P13a',

the Petitioner has been requested, inter alia, to repair the roof of the

four existing rooms and to expedite the construction of the six new

rooms.

The six new rooms referred to in 'P13a' are the six rooms that the

Petitioner has undertaken to construct in his development proposal set

out in 'P4a' and which the Petitioner was required to complete within

four years from the date of execution of the agreement 'P3'. The 1st

Respondent has not held out to the Petitioner by 'P13a' that the

management period would be extended if he completed the works

referred to therein. By 'P13a', the 1st Respondent was only giving the

Petitioner a second reminder that he ought to complete the works

referred to in 'P13a'. Therefore, 'P13a' could not have created an

expectation in the mind of the Petitioner that if he completes the

construction of the six new rooms, he would be considered for an

extension, as that was a requirement that he ought to have completed

by 11th November 2013. 2

1 'P13a' is referred to as a 'second reminder'

2 Vide Clauses 7 and 8 of Agreement 'P3'

6

The Petitioner has produced with the petition six photographs of a

partially constructed building, marked as 'P11a' to 'P11t'. During the

course of the hearing, the learned Counsel for the Petitioner, having

obtained instructions from the Petitioner, confirmed that these

photographs had been taken in November 2017. The fact that the

building containing the six rooms is still under construction

demonstrates that the Petitioner had not acted upon 'P13a', in respect

of the said six rooms. The Petitioner has also not adduced any proof that

he had attended to any of the other matters set out in 'P13a', although

the Petitioner has undertaken to do so by an undated letter produced

with the petition marked 'P13b'.

It has to be noted that by letter dated 06th November 2015 produced

with the petition marked 'P7b', the 1st Respondent had requested the

Petitioner to repair the roof, which appears not to have been complied

with. The letter marked 'P13a' served as a reminder with regard to the

roof of the four rooms. It is further noted that by a letter dated 2ih

August 2015 produced with the petition marked 'P7a', the 1st

Respondent had sought confirmation from the Petitioner on the value of

the renovations carried out, in terms of the Agreement 'p3'. A

reasonable prudent man would think that the Petitioner under the

above circumstances would have entertained the thought that the 1st

Respondent at the expiration of the time period of the agreement 'P3'

would take steps to terminate the agreement and would not consider

any extension being given to the Petitioner.

The Petitioner also relied on a letter dated 26th April 2017 produced with

the petition marked 'P1S' by which he claims that the officials of the 8th

7

Respondent had promised to extend the agreement. 'P15' does not refer

to 'P13a' or to any particular official and has not been addressed to the

1st Respondent. The Petitioner has not adduced any material to prove

that the letter 'P15' was in fact sent to the 1st Respondent. Without that

fact being proved, the contents of the letter 'P15', in the opinion of this

Court, becomes redundant.

In these circumstances, this Court is of the view that 'P13a' does not

create any legitimate expectation that the management period would

have been extended, had the Petitioner carried out the matters set out

in 'P13a'. Hence, this Court rejects the first contention of the Petitioner.

The second contention of the Petitioner is that in terms of Clause 25 of

the agreement 'P3', the Petitioner is entitled to a hearing prior to the

termination of the said agreement.

It is common ground that the complaint of the Petitioner is based on the

terms of the agreement 'P3'. In terms of Clause 1 thereof, the Petitioner

had been appointed as rest house manager for the period 1ih

November 2009 to 11th November 2017. Thus, from 1ih November

2017, the Petitioner is not entitled in terms of the agreement 'P3' to

continue to manage the said rest house.

Clause 25 of the agreement 'P3' only specifies that after the expiration

of the 8 year management period, consideration will be given to extend

the management period by a further 8-10 years. This clause only

requires the 1st Respondent to consider an extension of the period. The

said clause does not require the 1st Respondent to afford the Petitioner a

8

hearing, either before the expiration of the 8 year period or after the

expiration of the said period or when it considers an extension of the

time period. Therefore, this Court is of the view that (P16' and 'p16(i)'

are within the provisions of the Agreement 'P31 and that there has not

been any procedural impropriety when issuing (P16' and (P16(i),.

In order to support his contention that the 1st Respondent ought to have

afforded the Petitioner a hearing prior to issuing 'p161, the learned

Counsel for the Petitioner relied on the judgment of this Court in

Multinational Property Development Limited v Urban Development

Authority.3 In this case, the UDA having decided to grant the petitioner a

lease of a land for a period of 99 years and having accepted part of the

premium payable and the legal fees and prepared the final draft of the

lease agreement for signature, decided not to allocate the land to the

Petitioner. The complaint of the petitioner in that case was that it should

have been afforded a hearing prior to taking the said decision.

Ranaraja J, held that It individuals who have legitimate expectations

based on promises made by public bodies that they will be granted

certain benefits, have a right to be heard before those benefits are taken

away from them .... ".

Given the facts of this application, the reasoning in Multinational

Property Development limited v Urban Development Authority would

not apply as the 1st Respondent has not held out to the Petitioner, either

by Clause 25 of the agreement 'P31 or by any other provision thereof or

through any correspondence between the parties that the management

3 1996(2) Sri LR 51

9

period would be extended at the end of the management period set out

in the agreement 'P3'. In these circumstances, the necessity of affording

the Petitioner in this application a hearing at the end of the

management period set out in the agreement 'P3' does not arise.

The next case relied on by the learned Counsel for the Petitioner was the

judgment of the Supreme Court in Sundarkaran v Bharathi and others4,

where the appellant, who had been granted a liquor license for 1985 and

1986 had applied for an extension of the license for the year 1987.

Having been asked to pay the license fee for 1987, the appellant called

over at the office of the Government Agent, Kandy only to be informed

that the license cannot be issued to him. One of the grounds urged by

the Appellant was that he "had a legitimate expectation that a license

would be issued to him and that therefore he had a right to be heard

before the Government Agent made any decision on the application for

the renewal of the licenses."s

On the basis of the facts of that case, Amerasinghe J held that the

appellant had "a legitimate expectation of success and therefore a right

to a full and fair opportunity of being heard."6 In the instant case, the 1st

Respondent has not held out that the management period would be

extended and thus, the dicta laid down in Sundarkaran's case would not

apply.

A purported failure to consider an extension does not make the decision

in 'P16' or 'P16i' illegal, as the 1st Respondent was acting well within the

4 1989 1 Sri LR 46

5 Ibid. page 53

6 Ibid. page 60

10

terms of the agreement 'P3' when it requested the Petitioner to hand

over the rest house premises. Considering the fact that the undertakings

given by the Petitioner as set out in Clauses 7 and 8 of the agreement

'P3' had not been complied with by the Petitioner, the 1st Respondent

cannot be faulted for not giving consideration to extend the agreement

'P3'. In the above circumstances, this Court is of the view that the

contention of the Petitioner that in terms of Clause 25 of the agreement

'P3', he is entitled to a hearing either prior to or after the termination of

the agreement 'P3' or during the consideration of an extension, is

misconceived. Therefore, this Court rejects the second contention of the

Petitioner.

The learned State Counsel took up the position that the purported

grievance of the Petitioner arises out of a contract and is therefore

outside the writ jurisdiction of this Court. As discussed above, this Court

is of the view that the decisions contained in the documents marked

'PiG' and 'PiGi' are not illegal and that there has not been any

procedural impropriety when issuing 'PiG' and 'PiGi'. On this basis

alone, this Court is entitled to reject this application. However, for

purposes of completeness, this Court would proceed to consider the

position of the learned State Counsel.

The 8th Respondene has executed the first two management

agreements 'Pib' and 'Pic'. The impugned agreement 'P3' has however

been executed by Urban Development Authority Resthouses Limited,

which the Petitioner claims is now known as Lanka Rest Houses Limited.

No material has been placed before this Court as to the ownership of the

7 Urban Development Authority

11

1st Respondent and therefore, this Court has assumed that the 1st

Respondent is 100% owned by the 8th Respondent.

The relationship of the parties vis-a-vis the management of the said rest

house arises from the agreement 'P3' and therefore the rights and

obligations of the parties are governed by the agreement 'P3'. The

Petitioners complaint arises out of the agreement 'P3' and the decisions

set out in 'P16' and 'P16i' arises from 'P3'. The jurisdiction of this Court

to issue writs of Certiorari, conferred under Article 140 of the

Constitution, is limited, inter alia to an examination of the legality of a

decision of a public body exercising a public or statutory function. This

jurisdiction cannot be extended to examine rights and obligations arising

from a private contract, even though one party may be a public

authority.

In Galle Flour Milling (Pvt) Limited vs. Board of Investment of Sri Lanka

and another8 a Writ of Certiorari was sought to quash the termination of

an agreement between the Petitioner and the Board of Investment. The

Respondents raised a preliminary objection that the Petitioner was

seeking relief based on a breach of a contractual right and therefore the

Petitioner cannot maintain the said application.

Having considered the underlying facts, this Court had held as follows:

"An analysis of the relationship that existed between the parties reveals

that as it was purely a contractual one of commercial nature, neither

certiorari nor mandamus will lie to remedy the dispute over the rights of

8 (2002) BLR 10

12

the parties. The purported breach of such rights (and) the grievances

between the parties~ arise entirely from a breach of contract~ even if one

of the parties was a statutory or public authoriti~9

Tillekewardena J then went onto consider if the fact of the 1st

Respondent being a statutory authority would lend to the commercial

arrangement between the parties, a statutory flavour, thus enabling the

petitioner in that case to invoke the writ jurisdiction of this Court. The

Court, having taken into consideration the fact that even though the

power to enter into a contract arises from the statute, the terms and

conditions between the parties were entirely contractual and that the

decision that was sought to be quashed was purely contractual, held as

follows:

"Therefore the exercise of powers by parties in terms of the agreement~

exclusively arises through the contract and though one of the parties is a

public authority~ rights of the parties are not amenable to writ

jurisdiction. 1110

A similar view has been expressed by this Court in De Alwis v Sri Lanka

Telecom11 where a writ of Certiorari had been sought to quash the

decision to disconnect the telephone connection of the petitioner on the

basis of non-payment of charges. The Court, while refusing the writ held

as follows:

9 Ibid. page 11

10 Ibid. page 12

11 1995(2) Sri LR 38

13

I! II I !

I ! I ! ,

! I! !

1I

liThe decision sought to be quashed is a decision founded purely on

contract. The telephone was disconnected for failure to settle the

outstanding bills as provided for in the agreement. This was a decision

taken wholly within the context of the contractual relationship between

the parties and not in the exercise of the powers of a public authority.

Neither Certiorari or Mandamus will lie to remedy the grievances arising

from an alleged breach of con tract." 12

In Gawaramanna Vs Tea Research Board and others13 Sripavan J (as he

then was) cited with approval the following passage of Thambiah J in

Chandradasa v Wiieratne14

"No doubt the competent authority was established by statute and is a

statutory body. But the question is, when the respondent as competent

authority dismissed the petitioner, did he do so in the exercise of any

statutory power? The Act does not deal with the question of dismissal of

employees at all. It does not specify when and how an employee can be

dismissed from service - the grounds of dismissal or the procedure for

dismissal. So that, when the respondent made his order of dismissal, he

did so in the exercise of his contractual power of dismissal and not by

virtue of any statutory power If the petitioner's dismissal was in breach

of the terms of the employment contract, the proper remedy is an action

for declaration or damages. The Court will not quash the decision on the

ground that natural justice has not been observed. II

12 Ibid. page 41

13 2003(3) Sri LR 120

14 1982 (1) Sri LR 412 at 415

14

, t I i i I

! 1, f r ! t

Ii I , I \ I! !f

I I

! t I!

!

Sripavan J thereafter held as follows:

NThe powers derived from contract are matters of private law. The fact

that one of the parties to the contract is a public authority is not relevant

since the decision sought to be quashed by way of Certiorari is itself was

not made in the exercise of any statutory power. n15

In the above circumstances, this Court agrees with the learned State

Counsel that the purported complaints of the Petitioner arises out of the

agreement {P3', is entirely contractual and that the Petitioner therefore

cannot invoke the writ jurisdiction of this Court. Hence, it would not be

possible for this Court to entertain the application of the Petitioner,

irrespective of the strength of the factual arguments.

For the reasons set out in this Order, this Court is of the view that a Writ

of Certiorari will not lie to quash either {P16' or (P16i' and therefore

refuses to issue notices on the Respondents. Accordingly, this

application is dismissed, subject to the payment of costs to the 1st

Respondent, fixed at Rs. 10,500.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P. Padman Surasena, J

I agree.

President of the Court of Appeal

15 2003(3) Sri LR 120 at page 124

15