Page 1 of 11

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for Revision

in terms of Article 138 of The Constitution

from the Order for Cancellation of Bail

delivered by the learned High Court Judge

of Kandy as dated 05th October 2023, in

High Court of Kandy Case No. HC

141/2020.

Court of Appeal Case No. Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

CPA/132/2023 COMPLAINANT

Vs.

High Court Kandy

Case No. HC 141/2020 Rajapakse Gedara Ravindu Ratnayake

ACCUSED

AND NOW

H. H. Rupika Sanjeewani Dharmadasa

No. 16, Kiwlwkada,

Getalawa, Kokawewa.

PETITIONER

Vs.

Page 2 of 11

The Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

Rajapakse Gedara Ravindu Ratnayake

(Presently in prison)

ACCUSED-RESPONDENT

Before : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

: P. Kumararatnam, J.

Counsel : Mohan Weerakoon, P.C. with Sandamal Senal

Mathugama for the Petitioner

: Janaka Bandara, D.S.G. with Jayalakshi de Silva,

S.S.C. for the Respondents

Argued on : 15-12-2023

Decided on : 31-01-2024

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

This is an application by the petitioner acting on behalf of the accused-

respondent, who is the accused in High Court of Kandy Case Number

HC/141/2020, invoking the revisionary jurisdiction granted to this Court in

terms of Article 138 of The Constitution.

Page 3 of 11

The petitioner is seeking to challenge the order made by the learned High Court

Judge of Kandy on 5th October 2023, where the accused-respondent (hereinafter

referred to as the accused) was ordered to be remanded pending further trial.

When this matter was supported before this Court for notice, after having

considered the relevant facts and circumstances, this Court decided to issue

notice to the complainant-respondent, namely the Hon. Attorney General.

At the hearing of this application, this Court heard the submissions of the

learned Presidents Counsel, as well as that of the learned Deputy Solicitor

General (DSG) on behalf of the Hon. Attorney General in order to determine the

application before the Court.

At the conclusion of the arguments on this matter, the learned DSG agreed that

ordering the release of the accused pending the final determination of the

application would be justifiable given the relevant facts, the circumstances and

the law. Accordingly, this Court ordered the immediate release of the accused

from remand custody on the earlier bail conditions the accused had previously

complied.

This is an action where the accused had been indicted before the High Court of

Kandy for committing the offence of grave sexual abuse of a minor, which is an

offence punishable in terms of section 365B (2) (b) of the Penal Code as amended

by Penal Code (Amendment) Act No. 2 of 1995 and 16 of 2006.

The accused has appeared before the High Court on notice on 16-09-2020, and

after serving the indictment and other relevant documents on the accused, the

learned High Court Judge of Kandy has released the accused on bail.

Thereafter, the trial against the accused has commenced on 21-07-2022 as he

has pleaded not guilty to the charge. At the conclusion of the evidence of the

victim, namely PW-01 and her mother (PW-02) on 05-10-2023, the prosecuting

State Counsel has urged the learned High Court Judge to issue summons on

PW-03, 04, 06 and 08.

Page 4 of 11

When the above application was made, the learned High Court Judge has made

the impugned order sought to be challenged before this Court on behalf of the

accused.

For matters of clarity, I will now reproduce the order in its entirety.

: -

1

2

2 63 ( 2)

1 2

263

(2)

. .

2024 04.

It appears that although an application for summons had been made by the

learned prosecuting State Counsel, no order has been made in the proceedings

for the day with regard to the summons for the other witnesses, other than the

above order, remanding the accused.

Accordingly, the accused has been remanded. It appears from the documents

tendered to this Court, that on 31-10-2023, the Attorney-at -Law for the accused

has filed a motion seeking to make an application for bail for the accused before

the High Court on 01-11-2023. However, the learned High Court Judge has

refused to mention the matter in open Court on the basis that since the

remanding order had been made in terms of section 263 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act, there is no reason to consider bail for the accused.

Page 5 of 11

I would now reproduce the relevant section under which the learned High Court

Judge has decided to remand the accused after hearing the prosecution witness

number 1 and 2.

263. (1) If from the absence of a witness or any other reasonable cause

it becomes necessary or advisable to postpone the commencement of

or adjourn any inquiry or trial, the Court may from time to time order

a postponement or adjournment on such terms as it thinks fit for

such time as it considers reasonable and may remand the accused if

in custody or may commit him to custody or take bail in his own

recognizance or with sureties for his appearance:

Provided however that every trial in the High Court, with a jury or

without a jury, shall as far as practicable, be held day to day.

(2) Where the accused has attended the Court on summons he shall

be enlarged on his own recognizance or on his simple undertaking to

appear, unless for reasons to be recorded Court orders otherwise.

Explanation - If sufficient evidence has been obtained to raise a

reasonable suspicion that the accused may have committed an

offence and it is likely that further evidence will be obtained by a

remand, this is a reasonable cause for a remand.

(3) An inquiry or trial in a Magistrate's Court shall not be postponed

or adjourned on the ground of the absence of a witness unless the

Magistrate has first satisfied himself that the evidence of such

witness is material to the inquiry or trial and that reasonable efforts

have been made to secure his attendance, and has recorded the name

of such witness and the nature of the evidence which he is expected

to give.

(4) Every person remanded or committed to custody under this

section shall be so remanded or committed by warrant addressed to

Page 6 of 11

the superintendent of a prison and the provisions of section 264 shall

apply to every such warrant.

It appears that the learned High Court Judge has relied on the explanation that

appears after subsection (2), which has interpreted the reasonable cause for a

remand under the section.

However, it needs to be noted that although the learned High Court Judge has

relied on the explanation of section 263 to remand the accused pending further

trial, he has not followed the mandatory provision of section 263 (1) where the

trial shall, as far as practicable, should be held day to day.

Not only that, the summons to the other witnesses the prosecution intended to

call on the next date of the trial has not been ordered, as I have observed

previously. As a result, the case will have to be invariably postponed to a further

date, which will result in further incarceration of the accused.

I find that the learned High Court Judge has failed to give a reason as to why the

further trial cannot be held day to day in his order of remand.

Under the circumstances, the only assumption that can be made is that the

remanding of the accused for a period of 3 months had been done as a punitive

measure.

I am of the view that the learned High Court Judge was misdirected as to the

relevant law applicable for granting or remanding of an accused or a suspect

person as provided for by statutory provisions in relation to bail, enacted by the

legislature in its wisdom.

I find that the learned High Court Judge has failed to consider the relevant

provisions of the Bail Act No. 30 of 1997, which has been enacted by the

legislature to provide for release on bail of persons suspected or accused of being

concerned in committing or of having committed an offence; to provide for the

granting of anticipatory bail, and for matters connected therewith or incidental

thereto.

Page 7 of 11

The section 2 of the Bail Act provides that grant of bail to be the guiding principle,

subject to the exceptions as provided for in the Act, and refusal to grant bail

should be the exception.

Section 27 of the Bail Act provides that the provisions of the Act should prevail

in case of conflict or inconsistency.

The relevant section 27 reads as follows.

27. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding

anything to the contrary in the Criminal Procedure Code Act, No. 15

of 1979 and in any other written law, other than the Release of

Remand Prisoners Act, No. 8 of 1991 and accordingly, in the event of

any conflict or inconsistency between the provisions of this Act and

such other written law, other than the Release of Remand Prisoners

Act, No. 8 of 1991, the provisions of this Act shall prevail.

Therefore, it is quite obvious that although section 263 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act provides for the remanding of a person pending further trial, the

provisions of the Bail Act shall prevail over the said provision when it comes to

the question of bail or cancellation of bail for that matter.

I find that the learned High Court Judge has failed to draw his attention to the

section 14 of the Bail Act before the impugned order was made.

Section 14 of the Bail Act reads as follows;

14. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the preceding

provisions of this Act, whenever a person suspected or accused of

being concerned in committing or having committed a bailable or

non-bailable offence, appears, is brought before or surrenders to the

Court having jurisdiction, the Court may refuse to release such

person on bail or upon application being made in that behalf by a

police officer, and after issuing notice on the person concerned and

hearing him personally or through his attorney-at-law, cancel a

Page 8 of 11

subsisting order releasing such person on bail if the Court has reason

to believe:

(a) that such person would

(i) not appear to stand his inquiry or trial;

(ii) interfere with the witnesses or the evidence against

him; or

otherwise obstruct the course of justice; or

(iii) commit an offence while on bail; or

(b) that the particular gravity of, and public reaction to, the

alleged offence may give rise to public disquiet.

(2) Where under subsection (1), a Court refuses to release on bail any

person suspected or accused of being concerned in or having

committed an offence or cancels a subsisting order releasing such

person on bail, the Court may order such suspect or accused to be

committed to custody.

(3) The Court may at any time, where it is satisfied that there has

been a change in the circumstances pertaining to the case, rescind or

vary any order made by it under subsection (1).

The above-mentioned provision clearly stipulates that a cancellation of an

existing bail order can be made only under limited circumstances as mentioned

in paragraphs (a) and (b) of section 14 of the Bail Act.

In the case of Anuruddha Ratwatte Vs. The Attorney General (2003) 2 SLR

39 it was held:

In terms of the mandatory requirements of section 14(1) such cancellation

could have been done only on:-

Page 9 of 11

(i) An application being made by a police officer;

(ii) Hearing the accused appellant personally or through his

attorney-at-law;

(iii) It the court had reasons to believe that any one of the grounds

as specified in paragraph (a)(i) to (iii) or paragraph (b) have been

made out.

I find that the reasons given by the learned High Court Judge to cancel bail of

the accused does not fall within the ambit of section 14 of the Bail Act to justify

cancellation of bail. I am of the view that any cancellation of bail given to an

accused shall be under limited circumstances as provided for in section 14 of

the Bail Act, whatever the section 263 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Code

says to the contrary.

Another matter where I cannot agree as to the events that have taken place is

the learned High Court Judge's decision to refuse to entertain an application for

bail after the accused was remanded.

In terms of section 14(3) of the Bail Act, even after remanding a person in terms

of the Bail Act, such a person has a right to be heard in relation to the rescinding

or variation of an earlier made order under section 14(1) of the Bail Act.

In the case of Rupathunga Vs. Attorney General and another (2009) 1 SLR

170, Silva, J. observed that;

these are orders which could be founded as capricious, arbitrary, and

unjust what shocks the conscience of this Court is that the High Court

Judge has not even cared to provide an opportunity to the accused, at least

to show cause as to why bail should not be cancelled, instead has

considered some extraneous matters which are not even covered by section

14 and has rushed to the conclusion that bail should be cancelled which I

say is indecent.

Page 10 of 11

It was held in the case of Hotel Galaxy (Pvt) Ltd. Vs. Mercantile Hotels

Management Ltd. (1987) 1 SLR 05 that;

It is settled law that the exercise of the revisionary powers of the

appellate Court is confined to cases in which exceptional circumstances

exist warranting its intervention.

In the case of Wijesinghe Vs. Thamaratnam, (Srikantha Law Reports Vol-IV

page 47) it was held that;

Revision is a discretionary remedy and will not be available unless the

application discloses circumstances which shocks the conscience of the

Court.

In the case of Vanik Incorporation Ltd. Vs. Jayasekare (1997) 2 SLR 365, it

was held thus;

Revisionary powers should be exercised where a miscarriage of justice

has occurred due to a fundamental rule of procedure being violated, but

only when a strong case is made out amounting to a positive miscarriage

of justice.

For the reasons as stated above, I am of the view that the petitioner has

established, sufficient exceptional circumstances before this Court for this Court

to interfere into the impugned order made by the learned High Court Judge as

the said order has been made without giving due consideration to the relevant

law in that regard.

Another matter that needs to be stated is that although, maybe inadvertently,

by applying this procedure of remanding the accused without having a basis as

stipulated in terms of section 14 of the Bail Act, the learned High Court Judge

may have given several grounds of appeal that can be canvassed by the accused

in case of a conviction against him for the charge, if the accused decides to

challenge such a conviction in the appropriate forum.

Page 11 of 11

It must be emphasized that trial Judges should be mindful of such an eventuality

when making orders of this nature.

Accordingly, the order made on 05-10-2023 by the learned High Court Judge of

Kandy which ordered the remanding of the accused is hereby set aside as it

cannot be allowed to stand.

The order made by this Court previously on 15-12-2023, to release the accused

pending the conclusion of the trial against him is affirmed.

The Registrar of the Court is directed to communicate this order to the High

Court of Kandy for necessary compliance.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P. Kumararatnam, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal