..

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

CA (Writ) Application No. 690/2010

In the matter of an application under

and in terms of Article 140 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka for Mandates in the

nature of Writs of Certiorari and

Mandamus

l. Dissanayake Mudiyanselage Amila

Prasad,

271/3, Amila Niwasa,

Karandagolla, Melsiripura.

2. Agampodi Harsha De Soyza,

No. 10 A, Maha Udalu Mawatha,

Dadalla, Galle.

3. Pathiranage Dhananjaya Bandara,

Abeyrathne Stores, Ihalagama,

Alahenegama, Kobeygane.

4. Gamage Rangana Praneeth

Subhasinghe,

6/6/1/16 Jayanthi Road,

Athurugiriya.

5. Naleen Tharuka Pelenwatta,

174/1, Horana Road,

Kiriwattuduwa, Homagama.

6. Pathiranage Viranga Rukshan,

Temple Junction, Aandawala,

Meegama.

1

7. Sisira Gajadeerage Dinesh Roshan

De Perera,

No. 1001 Deke Ela Road,

Kaduruwela, Polonnaruwa.

8. Dewage Don Ayantha Aravinda

Dewage,

"Ravi Sewana" l Galahitiyawa,

Madampe.

9. Kalu Arachchi Buddhika,

280/2 AI Dharmashoka Mawatha,

Kahanthota Road, Malabe.

10. Madawala Maddumage Anushka

Wijayasiri,

No. 386/A, Horawala Junction,

Welipenna.

1l. Uda Gedara Anuranga Mahesh

Jayaweera,

"Polwatta" l G.P.S. Road,

Yaya 081 Rajanganaya,

Angamuwa.

12. G. M. Janaka Pradeep Kumara

Tennakoon,

No. 62 1 Uyanwatta,

Menikhinna.

13. Dewagiri Hewayalage Ruwan

Sampath Weerakoon,

No. 65 1 Heepitiya Menikhinne,

Kandy.

2

14. Polinguwa Dewayalage Nalaka

Prasad Pathirana,

Udattapala Pahala,

Dodamgaslanda.

PETITIONERS

Vs.

1. Lieutenant General A.W.J.C De Silva,

Commander of the Army,

Army Headquarters, Colombo 01.

2. Brigadier lR. Kulatunga,

The Commandant,

Army Training School, Diyatalawa.

3. Lieutenant Colonel, M.D.V.V.

Gunatilaka,

The Commanding Officer,

Army Training School, Diyatalawa.

4. Lieutenant Colonel J.P. Salwathura

Arachchi,

Commanding Officer,

21, SLSR, Army Camp,

Helambewewa, Welioya.

5. Major Ratnayake,

Army Training School,

Diyatalawa.

6. Major Hewatotawatta,

Army Training School,

Diyatalawa.

3

Before: Arjuna Obeyesekere, J

7. Captain Asangka,

Army Training School, Diyatalawa.

8. Major Weligepola,

Army Training School,

Diyatalawa.

9. Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

Counsel: lM.Wijebandara with Shalani Chandrasena for the Petitioners

Milinda Gunatillake, Senior Deputy Solicitor General for the

Respondents

Argued on: 11th June 2018

Written Submissions of the

Petitioner tendered on: 03rd September 2018

Written Submissions of the

Respondents tendered on: osth September2018

Decided on: 14thSeptember 2018

4

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J

The Petitioners have filed this application seeking inter alia the following relief:

a) A Writ of Certiorari to quash the decision of the Respondents to discharge

the Petitioners from the Sri Lanka Army on the basis that their 'services

are no longer required';

b) A Writ of Mandamus compelling the Respondents to reinstate the

Petitioners as Officer Cadets and allow them to complete the remaining

period of their training as Officer Cadets;

c) A declaration that the Petitioners are not in breach of the Surety Bonds

signed by their respective parents.

When this matter was taken up for argument on 11th June 2018, the learned

Counsel for the Petitioners informed Court that he would not be proceeding

with the Writ of Mandamus and would limit his relief to the aforementioned

Writ of Certiorari and the declaration.

The facts of this case very briefly are as follows.

The Petitioners, having successfully completed their advanced level

examinations, had been enlisted to the Sri Lanka Army as Officer Cadets in

December 2007. The enlistment procedure required the parent of the ~adet

and the Cadet to enter into a Surety Bond with the Republic of Sri Lanka, and

for the Cadet to enter into an agreement with the Republic of Sri Lanka.

5

The Petitioners formed part of Intake 67 of the Sri Lanka Military Academy at

Diyatalawa and had commenced their two year period of training on 3rd

January 200g. During the period that the Petitioners were undergoing their

training in Diyatalawa, there were two other junior intakes that were also

undergoing training, namely Intake 47, which was an intake of Office Cadets

attached to the Volunteer Force of the Sri Lanka Army and Intake 69.

The Petitioners claim that during the training period, the gth Respondent, who

was in charge of Intake 47 had developed an animosity towards the Officer

Cadets of Intake 67, and as a result of this alleged animosity, the gth

Respondent had subjected some of the Officer Cadets of Intake 67 to cruel and

inhuman treatment. The Petitioners claim further that in the morning of 29th

September 2009, the gth Respondent had assaulted some of the Officer Cadets

of Intake 67. The Petitioners further claim that on the night of September 29th

2009, the gth Respondent had arrived with Officer Cadets of Intake 47 and

assaulted the Officer Cadets of Intake 67, including the Petitioners.

A Court of Inquiry, comprising of the 4th - ih Respondents had been appointed

on 1ih January 2010 to inquire into the incidents that took place on 29th

September 2009. The Respondents have submitted a copy of the Order by

which the Court of Inquiry had been appointed marked 'R7'. This Court has

examined 'R7' and notes that the scope of the Court of Inquiry extended to

inquiring into two incidents involving Officer Cadets of Intake 67 - namely the

aforementioned incident on 29th September 2009 with Intake 47 and a further

incident between the Officer Cadets of Intakes 67 and 69 that took place on

24th October 2009. This Court observes that the Petitioners have not adverted

6

to the latter incident in their petition. In terms of 'R7', the Court of Inquiry was

required to give its specific attention to the following matters:

~@Im oa~rm ~>E)Q ~ omtl) ~de (ft6) tmOz;fJl ee~e> ~ ~>eoco

eQ~ @Q)I'il)@ ~~:

(f. 8M (5)l;~ ~~ ~ ~.

(f). 8M ~ (ft~ 8~ed ~ ~.

(ft. 8M (5)l;ga ~~Im ~ ~ed ~~ Q(5) ~ ~~ (5)tD ~~ ~e

@Q>~~~~.

(ft. Sa ~ 8e)un (5)l;glmlO rnoS~ oz;e>~ ~ eD8 ~ ~~) 8(00)

(ft6) @Q>>d~ ~ ~.

Il 8~ (5)l;g 8ed ~~ (ft6) (6)~ (5)rn ~~ @Q>>dCS> tme)(ldf;, ~.

O. ~@Im oB~rm ~>E)Qa ~~ 8&noS ImQtfJl.

Provisions with regard to Courts of Inquiry and the manner in which they

should be conducted have been set out in the 'Army Courts of Inquiry

Regulations, 1952'.1 Regulation 2 thereof reads as follows:

"A Court of Inquiry means an assembly of officers, or, of one or more

officers together with one or more warrant or non-commissioned officers,

directed to collect and record evidence and, if so required, to report or

make a declaration with regard to any matter or thing which may be

referred to them for inquiry under these regulations."

The scope of a Court of Inquiry has been set out in Regulation 16 of the said

Regulations marked 'R7', and reads as follows:

1 The said Regulations have been annexed to the Statement of Objections of the Respondents, marked'R6'

7

"Every Court of Inquiry shall record the evidence given before it, and at the

end of the proceedings it shall record its findings in respect of the matter or

matters into which it was assembled to inquire as required by the

convening authority."

Thus, the primary task of a Court of Inquiry is to record the evidence in relation

to the said incident and submit a report at the end of its hearing. The said

Regulations contain many provisions, which will be adverted to later2, with

regard to the manner in which the proceedings of the Court of Inquiry should

be conducted. In Hulangamuwa vs Balthazar3, this Court, having examined the

provisions of the Court of Inquiry Regulations has stated as follows:

itA consideration of these regulations, in particular the procedure

prescribed therein and the duties and functions of the Court of Inquiry,

reveals that it possesses all the attributes of a judicial tribunal. It bears a

judicial character. In my view, a Court of Inquiry is a tribunal that is

sanctioned and recognised by law and is clothed with all the attributes and

incidents of a court of justice. It is one which exercises jurisdiction over

persons subject to the military law."

The proceedings of the Court of Inquiry had been held from 14th January 2010

to 24th January 2010. While the evidence given by the Petitioners to the Court

of Inquiry have been submitted by the Respondents marked 'RSa' - 'RSn', the

Respondents have also submitted to this Court, together with a motion dated

2 Regulations 9 and 15.

3 1984 (2) SLR 29 at page 37.

8

31 stJanuary 20144, a complete record of the proceedings before the Court of

Inquiry.

Consequent to the conclusion of its proceedings, the Court of Inquiry had

submitted its report to the appointing authority. This Court has examined the

observations and the conclusion of the Court of Inquiry,S and notes that the

conclusions reached by the Court of Inquiry with regard to the Petitioners are

based on its analysis of the evidence against each of the Petitioners. The

appointing authority in turn had submitted the said record of proceedings, the

report of the Court of Inquiry and his recommendations to the 1st Respondent,

Commander of the Sri Lanka Army. The 1st Respondent, having carefully

examined the aforementioned documents, had taken the following decisions

with regard to the Petitioners, as reflected in the document submitted to this

Court by the Respondents, marked 'R2':

a) The 3rd, 8th, 9th, 11th, lih and 13th Petitioners have been involved in the

assault of Officer Cadets of Intake 47, with regard to the incident that

took place on 29th September 2009;

b) The 1st, 2nd, 5th, 6th, ih, 10th and 14th Petitioners have been involved in the

assault of Officer Cadets of Intake 69, with regard to the incident that

took place on 24th October 2009;

4 A copy of this motion and the record of the proceedings have been served on the Petitioners.

5 The conclusion of the Court of Inquiry has been submitted by the Respondents marked R10. The observations of the Court of Inquiry form part of the record of the proceedings of the Court of Inquiry.

9

c) The 4th Petitioner, who had been entrusted with administrative duties

relating to Officer Cadets had attacked an Officer of the Sri Lanka Army

with stones, had failed to prevent the aforementioned incidents and had

failed to comply with orders of the superior officers and therefore, is in

dereliction of his duties, which necessitates disciplinary action against the

4th Petitioner;

d) The Petitioners should be dismissed from the Sri Lanka Army on

disciplinary grounds.

The Petitioners had thereafter been informed by letters dated 3rd August 2010

produced with the petition marked 'P21' - 'P34' that the 1st Respondent had

approved their dismissal from the Sri Lanka Army on the basis that their

'services are no longer required'.

Being dissatisfied with the said decision of the 1st Respondent, the Petitioners

have invoked the Writ jurisdiction of this Court, seeking a Writ of Certiorari to

quash the said decision.

In considering the application for a Writ of Certiorari, it would be appropriate

for this Court to bear in mind the following statement of Lord Diplock in the

case of Council of Civil Service Unions vs Minister for the Civil Service6:

"Judicial review has, I think developed to a stage today when without

reiterating any analysis of the steps by which the development has .come

about, one can conveniently classify under three heads the grounds upon

61985 AC 374

10

which administrative action is subject to control by judicial review. The first

ground I would call "illegality", the second "irrationality" and the third

"procedural impropriety."

"By 'illegality' as a ground for judicial review I mean that the decision-

maker must understand correctly the law that regulates his decision-making

power and must give effect to it. Whether he has or not is par excellence a

justiciable question to be decided in the event of dispute, by those persons,

the judges, by whom the judicial power of the state is exercisable.

By 'irrationality' I mean what can by now be succinctly referred to as

'Wednesbury unreasonableness' (Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd.

v. Wednesbury Corporation [1948] 1 KB 223). It applies to a decision so

outrageous in its defiance of logic or of accepted moral standards that no

sensible person who had applied his mind to the question to be decided

could have arrived at it.

I have described the third head as 'procedural impropriety' rather than

failure to observe basic rules of natural justice or failure to act with

procedural fairness towards the person who will be affected by the

decision. This is because susceptibility to judicial review under this head

covers also failure by an administrative tribunal to observe procedural rules

that are expressly laid down in the legislative instrument by which its

jurisdiction is conferred, even where such failure does not involve any

denial of natural justice.,,7

7 H.W.R. Wade & C.F. Forsyth, Administrative Law (11th Edition, Page 827 - Oxford University Press 2014).

11

During the course of the argument, the learned Counsel for the Petitioners

submitted to this Court that he is challenging the said decision of the 1st

Respondent marked 'R2' on the following three grounds:

1) The evidence led at the Court of Inquiry does not implicate the

Petitioners.

2) The Court of Inquiry had failed to follow the mandatory procedure laid

down in Rule 15 of the Court of Inquiry Regulations;

3) The Court of Inquiry had not served the Petitioners with a charge sheet.

The grounds urged before this Court by the learned Counsel for the

Petitioners, falls within the grounds of irrationality and procedural impropriety

as described by Lord Diplock.

This Court must note that in terms of Item XIII(a) of Table A of the Soldiers

Service Regulations No.1 of 19948, which applies to Officer Cadets during their

period of training and prior to being Commissioned, the 1st Respondent has the

power to discharge soldiers on the basis that their services are no longer

required. In these proceedings, the Petitioners are not challenging this power

of the 1st Respondent to discharge them under the said provision but as set out

above, is limiting their challenge to the said decision on the basis of

irregularities in the Court of Inquiry proceedings and its recommenda.tions.

8 The Soldier Service Regulations No.1 of 1994 has been produced with the petition marked 'PiS'. The said Regulations have been made by the President under Section iSS of the Army Act read with Article 44(2) of the Constitution.

12

Hence, the necessity for this Court to examine the vires of the decision of the

1 st Respondent does not arise.

The learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General submitted that the relationship

between the Petitioners and the State during the period of training of the

Petitioners is governed by the provisions of the agreements that the

Petitioners have entered ~nto with the Republic of Sri lanka at the time of their

enlistment.9 Paragraph 9(a)(iii) of the said agreements reads as follows:

'The Republic of Sri Lanka is hereby vested with the absolute right to

rescind this agreement at any time on account of any insubordination or

misconduct on the part of the Cadet during his period of training.'

A rescission of the agreement would result in the termination of the training

period of the Petitioners and their dismissal from the Sri Lanka Army. He

submitted that the decision of the 1st Respondent to dismiss the Petitioners

from the Sri Lanka Army falls within the said paragraph and is therefore

outside the purview of the Writ jurisdiction of this Court. While this submission

of the learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General has much merit, the necessity

for this Court to consider the said submission does not arise as the Petitioners

have not challenged the right of the 1st Respondent to dismiss them from the

Sri Lanka Army.

This Court would now consider each of the three grounds urged by the learned

Counsel for the Petitioners before this Court.

9 Copies of the said Agreements have been submitted by the Respondents, marked 'R3a' - 'R3n'.

13

The Petitioners first complaint to this Court is that the evidence led at the

Court of Inquiry does not implicate the Petitioners with regard to the incident

that took place on 29th September 2009 with the Officer Cadets of Intake 47.

According to the evidence led at the Court of Inquiry, there had been several

previous altercations between the Officer Cadets of Intakes 67 and 47,

including on the 28th September 2009. 10

While this Court does not wish to go into the specific reason for these

I altercations, it appears that the Cadets attached to Intake 47, which comprised

of Volunteer Force Cadets and who had joined subsequent to Intake 67, being

assigned administrative tasks over the senior Cadets of Intake 67 may have

been a reason.ll The evidence of the several witnesses is to the effect that on

the night of 29th September 2009, the Officer Cadets of Intake 67 had started a

brawl with the Officer Cadets of Intake 47, with several of the Petitioners

assaulting some of the Cadets of Intake 47. The record of the proceedings

before the Court of Inquiry does not support the Petitioners position that the

8th Respondent together with the Cadets of Intake 47 assaulted the Petitioners

and other members of their intake.

In this regard, this Court observes that 2ndLieutenant K.A.C.P.Kamalawarne has

identified the 3rd, 6th, 8th, 9th and 1ih Petitioners as being among the Cadets of

Intake 67 involved in the altercation. 2nd Lieutenant D.G.U. Nanayakkara who

was an Officer Cadet of Intake 47 has identified the 3rd, 1ih and 13th

10 This is borne out by the evidence given by 2nd Lieutenant K.A.S.P.Kamalawarne on 21st January

2010 to the Court of Inquiry. He says that the 3rd, 6th, 8th, 12th and 13th Petitioners were involved in assaulting the Cadets of Intake 47 on 28th September 2009. His evidence of previous incidents of assault on the part of Cadet Officers of Intake 67 is corroborated by the evidence of 2nd

Lieutenant W.A.N.D.Wijewardena.

11 This is borne out by the evidence given by Major G.M.S.Karunaratne on 21st January 2010 to the

Court of Inquiry.

14

Petitioners as being some of the persons who were involved in the assault of

the cadets of Intake 47. 2nd Lieutenant S.M.L.Prasad who was also an Officer

Cadet of Intake 47 has identified the 1ih Petitioner as being the person who

assaulted him. He claims further that the 3rd and 13th Petitioners were also

present. 2nd Lieutenant W.A.N.D.Wijewardena, also an Officer Cadet of Intake

47 has identified the 3rd Petitioner as being the person who assaulted him. He

claims further that the 1ih and 13th Petitioners were also present. While 2nd

Lieutenant H.K.S.Pradeep who was also an Officer Cadet of Intake 47 has

identified the 3rd and 6th Petitioners as being the persons who assaulted him, in

answer to a question by the members of the Court of Inquiry, he has stated

that the 3rd, 6th, 9th and 13th Petitioners were involved in assaulting the other

cadets. Evidence with regard to the involvement of the 11th Petitioner has

been given by 2nd Lieutenant D.S.L.N.Wijesekara and 2nd Lieutenant

H.K.S.Pradeep. In his evidence to the Court of Inquiry, the 3rd Respondent,

Lieutenant Colonel M.D.V.V.Gunatiiake, who was the Commanding Officer of

the Officer Cadets at Diyathalawa has explained in detail the lack of discipline

that prevailed among the Officer Cadets of Intake 67. He has specifically

identified the 4th Petitioner as being the person who stoned Captain Ranawaka

on the night of 29th September 2009.

This Court has examined the record of the proceedings before the Court of

Inquiry and observes that each of the above-mentioned Petitioners were

afforded the opportunity of cross examining a witness who spoke of their

involvement soon after the evidence of that witness was recorded. This fact

confirms that the Petitioners implicated with the incident of 29th September

2009 were present when the evidence of the witnesses was recorded.

15

The second incident had occurred on 24th October 2009, with the allegation

again being that the Officer Cadets of Intake 67 had assaulted the Officer

Cadets of Intake 69. The assault had been so severe that some of the victims

had to seek in-house medical treatment at the Army Hospital. This Court has

examined the record of the proceedings before the Court of Inquiry and find

that the following witnesses speak of the involvement of the following

Petitioners in the said assault:

./ Cadet Officer G.B.Weliangiriya - 1st, 2nd, 5th, 6th, ih, 10th and 14th

Petitioners

./ Cadet Officer A.A.R.M.Fernando - 2nd, ih, 10th and 14th Petitioners

./ Cadet Officer B.S.Seneviratne - 2nd, 5th, 6th, ih, 10th and 14th Petitioners

./ Cadet Officer G.L.K.M.Jayakody - 1st, 2nd, 6th, 10th and 14th Petitioners

This Court also observes that each of the above mentioned Petitioners were

afforded the opportunity of cross examining a witness who spoke of their

involvement, soon after the evidence of that witness was recorded. This fact

confirms that the 1st, 2nd, 5th, 6th, ih, 10th and 14th Petitioners were present

when the evidence of the witnesses was recorded.

In the above circumstances, this Court is of the view that there was sufficient

evidence before the Court of Inquiry with regard to the involvement of the

Petitioners in the incidents that took place on 29th September 2009 and 24th

October 2009. The argument of the Petitioners that there is no evidence

against them is therefore incorrect. It is this evidence that was relied upon by

the members of the Court of Inquiry when it recommended that the

Petitioners should be removed from the Sri Lanka Army in order to uphold the

16

good name and reputation of the Sri Lanka Army. The decision of the 1st

Respondent is also based on this evidence. In these circumstances, it cannot be

claimed that the recommendations of the Court of Inquiry and the subsequent

decision of the 1st Respondent is irrational. Therefore, the first ground urged

on behalf of the Petitioners must fail.

The second ground urged on behalf of the Petitioners is that the Court of

Inquiry had failed to follow the mandatory procedure laid down in Rule 15 (i)

of the Court of Inquiry Regulations, which reads as follows:

"Whenever an inquiry affects the character or the military reputation of

an officer or soldier, the officer or soldier concerned shall be afforded

the opportunity of being present throughout the inquiry. He shall also be

allowed to make a statement, to adduce evidence in his own behalf and

to cross-examine any witnesses whose evidence is likely to affect his

character or military reputation."

The Respondents have submitted that each of the above requirements have

been complied with. This Court has examined the record of the proceedings of

the Court of Inquiry and observe that each of the Petitioners have in fact made

a statement before the Court of Inquiry.12 This Court must note that the Court

of Inquiry has afforded the Petitioners an opportunity to cross examine a

witness each time they were implicated by that witness. It is also clear that the

Petitioners were present right throughout the inquiry, when one considers the

fact that the Court of Inquiry afforded a petitioner the right to cross examine a

12The Statements made by each of the Petitioners have been produced by the Respondents, marked 'R8a' - 'R8m'.

17

witness who spoke of that Petitioner's involvement soon after the evidence of

that witness was concluded.

Hence, this Court is of the view that the requirements of Regulation 15' have

been complied with by the Court of Inquiry. The argument of the Petitioners

that the Court of Inquiry was conducted in violation of the Regulations is not

supported by the documentary evidence presented to this Court. In these

circumstances, this Court is of the view that there has not been any procedural

impropriety with regard to the manner in which the proceedings of the Court

of Inquiry were conducted. Accordingly, this Court rejects the second ground

urged on behalf of the Petitioners.

The third and final ground urged on behalf of the Petitioners was that a charge

sheet had not been served on them. This demonstrates a clear lack of

understanding on the part of the Petitioners with regard to the scope and

nature of a Court of Inquiry. As set out in Regulation 2 of the Court of Inquiry

Regulations, the function of a Court of Inquiry is to lito collect and record

evidence and, if so required, to report or make a declaration with regard to any

matter or thing which may be referred to them for inquiry under these

regu lations".

The following observation of this Court in Harischandra vs. Commander of the

Army13 explains the reason as to why the Court of Inquiry does not involve the

issuing of a charge sheet:

13CA (Writ) Application No. 895/2007. CA Minutes of 28th July 2009

18

itA Court of Inquiry is different from a disciplinary inquiry. In a

disciplinary inquiry, a charge sheet will be served and the person

accused will have an opportunity to answer the charges and defend

himself. In a Court of Inquiry, there is no accused or charge sheet (.) All

those who appear before the Court of Inquiry are witnesses as it is a

fact-finding inquiry. Only in instances where the inquiry affects the

character or military reputation of an officer or a soldier the officer or

soldier was afforded an opportunity of being present throughout the

inquiry and allowed to cross-examine any witness, make statements and

adduce evidence on his own behalf."

The necessity for the Court of Inquiry to issue a charge sheet on the Petitioners

therefore does not arise. In these circumstances, this Court finds no merit in

the final ground urged on behalf of the Petitioners.

The allegation that the incident of 29th September 2009 was instigated by the

8th Respondent due to the animosity that he bore towards the Officer Cadets of

Intake 67 is a very serious allegation which ought to have been supported with

cogent material. This Court notes that the Petitioners have not explained as to

why the 8th Respondent bore a grudge towards them nor has this issue been

raised when some of the Petitioners cross examined the 8th Respondent during

the proceedings of the Court of Inquiry. Thus, the only reasonable inference

that this Court can draw is that the alleged animosity on the part of the 8th

Respondent was devised by the Petitioners in order to support their version

that they were the victims when in fact, the evidence before this Court is to

the contrary.

19

The Petitioners were being trained as Officer Cadets in order to be

commissioned as Officers of the Sri Lanka Army. Thus, it is paramount that the

highest standards of discipline are maintained by the Petitioners at all times.

The evidence presented to this Court by the Respondents is to the contrary. In

terms of Regulation 2 of the Army Discipline Regulations, 1950, the

Commander of the Sri Lanka Army is vested with the general responsibility for

discipline in the Sri Lanka Army and this Court shall not interfere with that

duty, unless the circumstances warrant such interference, which is not the case

in this application.

In this regard, it would be well to remember the following passage of Justice

Sripavan (as he then was) in Wikramaratne vs Commander of the Army and

others14, where he stated as follows:

"in service matters, the 1st Respondent should be left with a free hand to

make decisions with regard to the internal administration of the Army in

the interest of efficiency, discipline, exigencies of service etc. The Court

cannot interfere with the appointment or promotion unless the first

respondent has acted unlawfully, arbitrarily, or guided by ulterior

considerations which are discriminatory or unfair."

In the totality of the facts and circumstances of this case, this Court is of the

view that the decision of the 1st Respondent set out in 'R2' and the subsequent

letters marked 'p21' - 'p34' is in terms of the law and is not liable to be

quashed by a Writ of Certiorari.

14 CA (Writ) Application No. 800/2006 CA Minutes of Oih January 2008. Although the said observations were made in the context of a promotion, this Court is of the view that it would be equally applicable to disciplinary action taken by the Commander of the Sri Lanka Army.

20

As set out at the beginning of this judgment, each Petitioner and his parents

have entered into a Surety Bond15 in terms of which the Cadet and the parent

was required to reimburse all sums of money expended by the Government on

the Cadet in the event the Cadet failed to successfully complete the training or

failed to serve the Sri Lanka Army for a period of 10 years, upon completion of

the training. The Petitioners have sought a declaration that the Petitioners are

not in breach of the obligations imposed on them by the Surety Bonds signed

by them and their respective parents, which requires this Court to make a

determination on a contractual matter. This Court has consistently held that

matters arising out of contract are outside the Writ jurisdiction of this Court,

unless there is a statutory flavour to the said decision16, which is not the case

in this application. In these circumstances, this Court is of the view that it does

not have the jurisdiction to consider the said relief sought by the Petitioners.

The application of the Petitioners for a Writ of Certiorari is therefore refused

and this application is accordingly dismissed, without costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

15 Copies of the Surety Bonds have been submitted with the petition, marked 'P3a' - 'P3n'.

16 See CA (Writ) Application No. 425/2017 CA Minutes of 24th May 2018

21