==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0093/2024

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979.

Court of Appeal Case No. Vilgamu Lekamlage Buddhika

CA/HCC/ 0093/2024 Hemakumara alias Alawala

High Court of Colombo Dewalage Ajith Pushpakumara

Case No. HC/2008/2020

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R.P. Hettiarachchi, J

COUNSEL : Indica Mallawaratchy for the Appellant.

Dishna Warnakula, DSG for the

Respondent.

CA/HCC/0093/2024

2 | P a g e

ARGUED ON : 16/01/2026

DECIDED ON : 13/03/2026

***********************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) was indicted in the High Court of Colombo under Section 435 of

the Penal Code for unlawfully entering into the house of one Lilion Ranjani

Kumara at night on or about 24.01.2018.

Secondly, the Accused-Appellant was indicted for committing the murder of

Lilion Ranjani Kumara in the course of the same transaction, which is an

offence punishable under Section 296 of the Penal Code.

After a non-jury trial, the Learned High Court Judge found the Appellant

guilty of the charges and sentenced him to 20 years rigorous imprisonment

for the first count with a fine of 10,000/-. In default, he was ordered to serve

03 months simple imprisonment. For the second count he was sentenced to

death on 22/11/2023.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the Appellant

had given consent for the matter to be argued in his absence. Also, at the

CA/HCC/0093/2024

3 | P a g e

time of argument the Appellant was connected via the Zoom platform from

prison.

Background of the Case

PW1, who is a neighbour and a relation of the deceased, had told the court

that on the date of the incident, between 8.30 pm and 9.00pm, another

neighbour namely Kumari had alerted him about a strange sound coming

from the deceased’s house. As the deceased was staying alone, PW1 along

with Kumari, had immediately rushed to the deceased’s house and knocked

on the door. At that time there was no light working outside. Nobody opened

the door, but the witness could hear someone shouting in distress inside the

deceased’s house. As he had continued to bang on the door for about 5-10

minutes, a stranger had opened the door and had tried to flee from the scene.

At that point, PW1 had apprehended the stranger and had tied him to a

lamppost nearby with the assistance of neighbours who had gathered there.

At that time the victim had come out and mentioned that the stranger, who

had been named as the Accused in this case had assaulted her. She had

uttered the words “me miniha mata geheuwa”.

PW1 had immediately called the sister of the deceased, and the deceased’s

sister, who has been named as the 2nd witness, had arrived and called an

ambulance and had then taken the deceased to the hospital. In the

meantime, a police jeep had passed by, at which time the witness had

handed over the Appellant to the police, and he too had accompanied him to

the police station in the said police jeep.

PW1 had not noted any injury on the deceased at that time. However, on

admission the deceased was transferred to the Intensive Care Unit and had

succumbed to her injuries a week later.

PW2, Mallika is the sister of the deceased. She had provided dinner to her

sister on that day and had left her at about 10.00pm. Upon receiving the

CA/HCC/0093/2024

4 | P a g e

telephone call, she had immediately rushed to the place and found her sister

in the ambulance, vomiting blood. At that time, the deceased had told her

that a man had been hiding under her bed and when she had tried to switch

the light on, she accidently trod on his hand, at which point he had inflicted

an injury on her throat with a screwdriver. The Witness had seen the

Appellant being tied to a lamppost. The deceased had died a week after being

admitted to the ICU.

According to the medical evidence, the deceased had sustained 7 external

injuries. Out of which, Injury No. 2 is a 0.3cm laceration on the soft pallet.

The rest of the injuries are categorized as non-grievous injuries. According

to the JMO, the cause of death is the Haemo-aspiration due to injury No. 2.

The Appellant in his dock statement took up the position that he was

apprehended when he ran to the place of the incident after hearing the

commotion.

The following grounds of appeal have been raised by the Appellant:

1. Prosecution has woefully failed to prove that the injuries inflicted were

sufficient to cause death in the ordinary course of nature with a high

antecedent probability of death resulting as opposed to a mere

likelihood.

2. Following closely on the heels of ground number one, the learned Trial

Judge has woefully failed to address his judicial mind to the

aforementioned factor which incidentally draws a distinction between

Section 293(2) and Section 294(3) of the Penal Code.

In support of appeal ground one, the learned Counsel for the Appellant

submits that it is trite law that to bring home a charge of murder within the

purview of limb 3 of Section 294 of the Penal Code, the ingredients that the

prosecution must prove beyond reasonable doubt are two-fold, to wit;

Firstly, the prosecution must prove that the Accused had the intention to

inflict the injury.

CA/HCC/0093/2024

5 | P a g e

Secondly, the prosecution must show that the injury inflicted was sufficient

to cause death in the ordinary course of nature with a high degree of

probability of death resulting from the injury inflicted, as opposed to a mere

likelihood.

In order to substantiate her argument, the learned Counsel for the Appellant

had cited the following judgments which I have reproduced as follows.

In Mendis v Queen 54 NLR 177 the court held that:

“There remains for consideration, however, the more difficult question

whether the convictions for murder were justified upon the evidence. In

the facts of the present case, this depends on whether there was

evidence upon which the jury, properly directed, could reasonably hold

that the act of the appellants which caused the death of Vincent Silva

was also from its very nature " sufficient in the ordinary course of nature

to cause death ". These words in clause 3 of the definition of " murder "

contained in section 294 of the Penal Code require that the probability

of death ensuing from the injury inflicted was not merely likely but " very

great, though not necessarily inevitable".

In re Singaram Padayachi and others [A. I. R: (1944) Mad. 223.] the court

held that;

“If, on the other hand, the evidence establishes that there was

probability in a lesser degree of death ensuing from the act committed,

the finding should be that the accused intended to cause an injury likely

to cause death and the conviction should be culpable homicide not

amounting to murder.”

CA/HCC/0093/2024

6 | P a g e

In the case of Vithana and Another v The Republic of Sri Lanka

(2007) 1 SLR 169, it was held:

“The intention that is contemplated in the 1st limb of S294 is the

intention to cause death which is commonly known as murderous

intention, but the intention that is contemplated in the 3rd limb of S294

is the intention to cause bodily injury. This injury should be sufficient,

in the ordinary course of nature to cause death. The emphasis here is

on the sufficiency of the injury to cause death in the ordinary course of

nature and not the intention.”

Hence, it very important to discuss whether the injuries caused to deceased

by the Appellant were sufficient to cause death in the ordinary cause of

nature as opposed to a mere likelihood.

The existence of a murderous intention generally has to be inferred from the

circumstances.

In Bastian Silva v Appuhamy 4 NLR 47 the Court held that:

“It is not the nature of the wound, but the intention of the accused, which

is decisive as to the nature of the crime committed.”

In the case of R. G. Somapala v The Queen (1969) 72 NLR 121 it was held

that:

“There was misdirection in that there was a lack of appreciation of

important points of difference between a. 293 and s. 294 of the Penal

Code. While the act of causing death with knowledge that the act is

likely to cause death is culpable homicide, such an act is not murder,

unless either (a) the offender intends to cause bodily injury and has the

special knowledge that the intended injury is likely to cause the death

of the person injured, or (b) the offender knows that, because the act is

CA/HCC/0093/2024

7 | P a g e

so imminently dangerous, there is the high probability of causing death

or an injury likely to cause death.”

The nature of the weapon used and the part of the body at which the blows

were intended to alight, are among the factors to be taken into consideration

in determining whether a murderous intention is imputable to the Accused.

In Fernando (1945) 30 CLW 22 Keuneman J, held that;

“As regards (the second accused’s) own offence, regarded as an

independent offence, we know that the majority of the jury held that he

intended to kill. The injury he inflicted was with a dangerous weapon in

a part of the body where danger to life was evident-namely the back of

the abdomen, and the blade had penetrated 1 ½ inches”.

In this appeal, the Appellant had not contested whether the incident had

happened during the argument but had only contested that the injury

caused to the deceased was not sufficient in the course of nature to commit

murder. Therefore, he should have been convicted for culpable homicide not

amounting to murder.

The prosecution had presented medical evidence to demonstrate that seven

external injuries were inflicted on the deceased. It has been determined that

the cause of death was the aspiration of blood (referred to as Haemo-

aspiration) which was caused as a result of the 2nd injury. When considering

this 2nd injury in isolation, such an injury has been classified as a non-

grievous injury, located in an extensively vascular region, which has resulted

in bleeding. As such, it has directly caused this condition of Haemo-

aspiration, therefore being directly attributable to the Appellant’s criminal

act.

Therefore, the learned Deputy Solicitor General strenuously argued that the

medical testimony establishes that Haemo-aspiration entails a very high

CA/HCC/0093/2024

8 | P a g e

probability of causing death as it can cause instant death or death in the

ordinary course of nature within a few days. The possibility of death resulting

from consequences of such an injury is thus not a mere likelihood, but a

high probability.

According to the evidence led by the prosecution, the Appellant had used a

screwdriver to attack a vital part of the deceased’s body. The deceased had

sustained a laceration of the upper soft palette of the deceased.

PW15, the JMO who held the postmortem examination stated as follows in

his evidence.

Pages 159-160 of the brief.

m% ( fï ish¨u ffjoH;=udf.a ksrSlaIK u; mokï fj,d fuu ;eke;a;shf.a

urKhg wdikak;u fya;=j yeáhg úfYaI× u;hla m%ldY lrkafka

fudlla o@

W ( .re iajdóks' reêrh Yajik ud¾.hg tfyu ke;akï fmky¨j,g hk" Th

wms lshmq ysfuda weiamsf¾Ika ;;a;ajh ksid laIKsl ta lshkafka b;du;au

flá ld,hlska ukqIHfhla ñh hkak;a mq¨jka' ta jf.au taflka we;s fjk

ixl+,;d ksid ál ojila cSj;a fj,d ñh hkak;a mq¨jka' fï mqoa.,hska

iuyr wh m%:sldr ,nd iqjh ,n,d f.or hkak;a mq¨jka' b;sx fï ;;a;ajh

ixl+,;djh ksid lsh,d uu lshkak fya;=j fï mqoa.,hd fufia reêrh

fmky¨j,g .sys,a,d ál ld,hla cSj;a fj,;a ;sfhkjd' ojia lSmhla' ta

jf.au fmky¨j, reêrhg wu;rj fmky¨;a meiùug ,la fjk" ta

lshkafka reêrh fmky¨jg hdug wu;rj tal wdidOkh ùu lrk fldg

we;s jQ ixl+,;d ksid ;uhs urKh isoaO jkafka' ta reêrh fmky¨j,g

hkafka uqLhg we;s fjÉp wekqï ;=jd,hla ksid' midre lr f.k .sh

;=jd,hla ksid' Wvq ;,a,g'

m% ( ta wkqj ffjoH;=ud Th lshmq wxl 02 ;=jd,h ffjoH úoHd;aulj

j¾.SlrKh lrkafka ljr >kfha iajNdjfha ;=jd,hla yeáhgo@

W ( iuia:hla f,i .re iajdóks ud fï lshmq ish¨u foa iuia:hla f,i

.;a;yu ta lshkafka midre lrf.k ;,a,g hk ;=jd,h" reêr jykh" tafla

fmky¨j,g hEu fï ish,a,u .;a;yu fïl iajNdúl ;;a;aj hgf;a

urKh f.k fok ;=jd,hla' talg fya;=j ;,a,g isÿjk ;e¨ï ;=jd,hla

muKla .;af;d;a tal iq¨ ;=jd,hla .re iajdóks' kuq;a fïfla isÿjk reêr

CA/HCC/0093/2024

9 | P a g e

jykh iy ta reêr jykh fmky¨j,g isÿùu ksid fuu ;;a;ajh

iajdNdúl ;;a;ajh hgf;a urKh f.k fok ;=jd,hla fjkjd' ta lshkafka

ksIaÉ; m%:sldr ksid wjia:dfõ ,enqfka ke;akï urKh f.k fokak mq¨jka'

As per PW 02’s testimony, the deceased was in great pain when she had

spoken to her. Although she had spoken to the witness, the deceased had

experienced breathing difficulties. PW2 had noticed that the deceased was

finding it increasingly difficult to breathe while being taken to the hospital.

This is solely due to the injury she had sustained and also as an immediate

consequence of extensive Haemo-aspiration. This medical condition had

then led to an infection of the lungs. It is noteworthy to mention that the

deceased was a person of good health and that she has had no previous

illness.

The medical evidence confirms that although the injury sustained by the

deceased was categorised as a non-grievous injury, it had developed into a

condition of Haemo-aspiration, which is sufficient in the ordinary cause of

nature to cause death, of which the causation would be the said injury. As

explained by the pathologist, the death has been so caused as a direct

consequence of the 2nd injury, which is the 0.3cm laceration on the soft

pallet, affecting the function of the lung due to the aspiration of blood.

Therefore, even if there was any medical intervention, it is established

without any doubt that the nature of the injury was such that it was

sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause the death. Accordingly,

the evidence has clearly established that the Appellant had acted with the

intention of causing bodily injury and the injury so inflicted was sufficient in

the ordinary course of nature to cause the death of the deceased.

Although, the deceased had died seven days after the stabbing, this cannot

be considered to mitigate the sentence under Section 297 of the Penal Code

considering the nature of the injury which caused the death of the deceased.

CA/HCC/0093/2024

10 | P a g e

Due to the aforesaid reasons, I find the first ground of appeal has no merit.

In the second ground of appeal, the learned Counsel for the Appellant

contended that the Learned Trial Judge has woefully failed to address his

judicial mind to the aforementioned factor which incidentally draws a

distinction between Section 293(2) and Section 294(3) of the Penal Code.

Murder has been defined and clearly laid out in Sections 293 and 294 of the

Penal Code. Murder refers to the acceleration of death where an act causing

death is done along with the intention to cause such death or with the

intention to cause bodily injury, where the injury inflicted would be very

likely to cause death in the ordinary course of nature or with an overall

knowledge of the possible danger being caused in all such instances.

In the case of Farook v Attorney General (2006) 3 SLR 174 it was held that:

“As regards the attempt to bring the case to one of culpable homicide not

amounting to murder mainly on the basis that there is no intention to

cause death, the intention that is required is to cause the injury in fact

inflicted. If the intended injury is sufficient to cause death in the

ordinary course of nature, the offence is murder;

The injury which caused the death was the one inflicted by the accused.

The sufficiency of the injury was objectively established. The sufficiency

is the high probability of death in the ordinary way of nature and when

this exists and death ensues, and if the causing of the injury is intended,

the offence is murder;

The determinant factor is the intentional injury which must be sufficient

to cause death in the ordinary course of nature, that is to say, if the

probability of death is not so high, the offence does not fall within

CA/HCC/0093/2024

11 | P a g e

murder but within culpable homicide not amounting to murder or

something less”

The learned High Court Judge in his judgment at pages 198-200 stated as

follows;

Pages 198-200 of the brief.

fuu kvqjg wod< wjia:dfõ oS pQos; wod, myr t,a, lr we;af;a ;shqkq wdhqOhla

jk kshkla ùuo tfia" tu wdhqOfhka tu ;=jd,h lr we;af;a YrSrfha jeo.;a fldgila

jQ uqLh ;=< tys uDÿ ;,a,g ùuo wod< isoaêh isÿ jQ rd;%S ld,fha tu ksjfia jQ úÿ,s n,anh

.,jd ksjfia jy,h u; ;nd tu ksjig we;=,a ùfuka wk;=rej fõ' tu wjia:dfõ oS

urKldrshf.a weo hg ie`.ù isg urKldrsh ksod .ekSug we`ou;g hdfï oS wehf.a

ll=f,ka pQos; weo hg isáfhoS pQos;f.a w; wehg mE.=kq miqj urKldrsh ìh ù lE

.eiSfuka wk;=rej pQos; wehg tu udrdka;sl myr t,a, lsrSu isÿ lr we;s nj ish¨ idlaIs

i<ld n,d ;SrKh lr yel'

me'id' 02 yria m%Yakj,g oS we;s ms<s;=re wkqj ta wjia:dfõ urKldrsh ;udg

“u,a,sld wlafla ug ñksfyla W.=rg bial=remamq kshfkka wekakd” hkqfjka m%ldY l< nj;a

jeäÿrg;a ta ms<sn`oj m%Yak l< úg urKldrsh “uu we`o hg ioao wefyk yskaod ,hsÜ tl

od,d ke.sÜgd" ta ñksydf.a w; mE.=kd ug” hkqfjka m%ldY l< njg;a idlaIs oS we;' tho

urKldrshf.a urKdikak m%ldYhla f,i i<ld ne,sh yels fõ'

tu isoaê oduh wkqj ldurh ;=< w`ÿf¾ isáfhoS pQos; úiska ñh .sh whf.a cSú;h

flfrys lsisu ;elSula fkdlr tu urKSh myr t,a, lr we;s nj ;yjqre fõ' tfia pQos;

ksjig we;=,a jQfha l=uk wruqKla iïnkaOfhka o hkak ;yjqre jk idlaIshla fkdue;s

kuq;a pQos; weo hg ie`.ù isg we;s nj bka ;yjqre fõ' tfiau pQos;f.a wruqK l=ula jQjo

;ks ldurhla jQ tu ksjfia jQ fodfrka ñh .sh ldka;dj lE .eiSu w;r;=r mek hd yelsj

;sìfhoS wehg kshklska myr foñka iy fjk;a whqrska o myr foñka ksjfia isg we;s nj

wehg isÿù we;s wfkl=;a ;=jd, j,ska o ;yjqre fõ' ffjoHjrhdf.a idlaIs wkqjo tu

kvqfõ ñh.sh whg kshklska isÿjQ ;=jd, idudkH ;;a;ajh hgf;a urKh f.k oSug

m%udKj;a njg ;yjqre lr o we;' me'id' 01 g wkqj urKldrsh flosrs .dñka ksji ;=<

isáhoS" me'id' 01g o iEfyk fõ,djla cfka,h iy fodr wer.; fkdyelsj tys /`oS

isáhoS pQos; úiskau tu ksjfia fodr werf.k t,shg meñKs nj ;yjqre fõ' ta wkqj pQos;

urKldrshf.ka ñoS mek hdug wjia:dj ;sìfhoS ;jÿrg;a idmrdë fÉ;kdfjka tu ksjfia

CA/HCC/0093/2024

12 | P a g e

/`oS isáñka wehf.a ysi b,lal lr wod< urKSh myroSu lr we;s nj fyd`oska ;yjqre

fõ' ta wkqj pQos; fj; jQfha urKsh fÉ;kdj nj fyd`oska ;yjqre fõ'

The learned High Court Judge has correctly taken into consideration the

testimony of the medical expert and accepted that the nature of the injury,

its location, the weapon which was used and the haemo-aspiration had

collectively caused the injury, which was sufficient to cause death in the

ordinary course of nature. The Learned High Court judge has not specifically

mentioned the elements of the offence of murder in specific terms or which

limb he considered it to be murder under; however, the analysis would be

sufficient to conclude that the offence of murder was in fact committed. As

such, the findings clearly satisfy the statutory requirements to constitute

murder and that the injury caused was sufficient to cause death in the

ordinary course of nature.

The proviso to Article 138(1) of the Constitution reads thus:

The Court of Appeal shall have and exercise subject to the provisions

of the Constitution or of any law, an appellate jurisdiction for the

correction of all errors in fact or in law which shall be committed by

the High Court, in the exercise of its appellate or original jurisdiction

or by any Court of First Instance, tribunal or other institution and sole

and exclusive cognizance, by way of appeal, revision and restitutio in

integrum, of all causes , suits, actions, prosecutions, matters and

things of which such High Court, Court of First Instance, tribunal or

other institution may have taken cognizance:

Provided that no judgment, decree or order of any court shall be

reversed or varied on account of any error, defect or irregularity, which

has not prejudiced the substantial rights of the parties or occasioned

a failure of justice.

CA/HCC/0093/2024

13 | P a g e

Considering the evidence presented and the findings of the learned High

Court Judge, no substantial miscarriage of justice has actually occurred and

the substantial rights of the appellant has not been prejudiced nor has a

failure of justice occurred in this case.

Considering the above circumstances, the appeal is accordingly dismissed.

The conviction and the sentence are affirmed.

The Registrar is directed to send this judgment to the High Court of Colombo

along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R.P. Hettiarachchi, J.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL