IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

1. J. K. Anura Banda Piyarathna,

No. 498, New Anura Cafe,

Matale Road,

Dambulla.

2. J. K. Sumanawathie,

No. 496, Kurunegala Junction,

Dambulla.

Petitioners

CASE NO: CA/WRIT/344/2012

Vs.

1. Minister of Lands and Land

Development,

Ministry of Lands and Land

Development, Mihikatha Medura,

Land Secretariat,

Rajamalwatta Avenue,

Battaramulla.

1A. Hon. Gayantha Karunathilaka,

Minister of Lands and Parliamentary

Reforms,

Ministry of Lands and Parliamentary

Reforms, Mihikatha Medura,

Land Secretariat,

2

Rajamalwatta Avenue,

Battaramulla.

2. Secretary,

Ministry of Defense and Urban

Development,

Colombo 1.

2A. Dr. I. H. K. Mahanama,

Secretary,

Ministry of Lands and Parliamentary

Reforms, Mihikatha Medura,

Land Secretariat,

Rajamalwatta Avenue,

Battaramulla.

3. Urban Development Authority,

Sethsiripaya, Battaramulla.

4. Chairman,

Urban Development Authority,

Sethsiripaya, Battaramulla.

5. Director General,

Urban Development Authority,

Sethsiripaya, Battaramulla.

6. Director (Central Province),

Urban Development Authority,

Sethsiripaya, Battaramulla.

7. Director (Land Development and

Management),

Urban Development Authority,

Sethsiripaya, Battaramulla.

8. Project Director,

3

Greater Dambulla Development Plan,

Urban Development Plan,

Urban Development Authority,

Dambulla.

9. Municipal Council,

Dambulla.

10. Chairman,

Municipal Council,

Dambulla.

11. Municipal Commissioner,

Municipal Council,

Dambulla.

12. Divisional Secretary,

Divisional Secretariat,

Dambulla.

13. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondents

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: M. U. M. Ali Sabry, P.C., with Samhan Munzir

and Shehani Alwis for the Petitioners.

Manohara Jayasinghe, S.S.C., for the

Respondents.

Argued on: 22.01.2020

Decided on: 20.02.2020

4

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

This application came before this Court for argument along with two

other cases pertaining to similar matters with similar parties named

as Respondents, relating to the divestiture of land described in item

No.5 in the Extraordinary Gazette bearing No.300/14 dated

08.06.1984, acquired by the 1st Respondent Minister of Lands under

proviso (a) to section 38 of the Land Acquisition Act, No. 9 of 1950.

The statements of objections and written submissions tendered by

learned Senior State Counsel for the Respondents are almost

identical in all three matters. Among the documents, in the instant

case, the Respondents have tendered only a Plan for the layout of

the ground floor and first floor of the proposed shopping complex,

for the construction of which the land claimed by the Petitioners has

been identified. However, the (undated) Project Report for the said

complex, which is relied on by the Respondents in the two related

matters, has not been tendered in this case.

The two Petitioners filed this application naming 13 parties as

Respondents seeking (a) a mandate in the nature of a writ of

certiorari to quash the decision taken by the 1st Respondent

Minister of Lands under proviso (a) to section 38 of the Land

Acquisition Act, No. 9 of 1950, as amended, to take possession of

the land described in item No.5 in the Extraordinary Gazette bearing

No.300/14 dated 08.06.1984 marked P2; (b) a mandate in the

nature of a writ of mandamus compelling the 1st Respondent

Minister of Lands to revoke the said decision of acquisition or to

divest the said land.

5

At the time of the argument, learned Presidents Counsel for the

Petitioners submitted that the land he seeks divestment of is part of

Lot 50 in the Surveyor Generals Plan No. 842 marked P5. This has

been accepted by paragraphs 8(d), 7(d), and 10(d) of the respective

statements of objections of the 1st Respondent, 3rd-8th Respondents,

and 12th Respondent.

During the course of the argument, learned Presidents Counsel for

the Petitioners informed Court that he would only seek a writ of

mandamus directing the 1st Respondent Minister of Lands to divest

the land.

The 1st, 3rd-8th and 12th Respondents have filed objections to this

application.

The order of the 1st Respondent Minister of Lands, made under

proviso (a) to section 38 of the Land Acquisition Act, to take

possession of the said land together with some other allotments was

published in the Gazette as far back as in 1984.

I might mention that in terms of this section, such an order can be

made where it becomes necessary to take immediate possession of

any land on the ground of any urgency.

By paragraph 8 of the statement of objections of the 1st Respondent,

paragraph 9 of the statement of objections of the 3rd-8th

Respondents and paragraph 11 of the statement of objections of the

12th Respondent, the position taken by the Respondents is that

possession of the land was taken and thereafter handed over to the

3rd Respondent Urban Development Authority on 20 or 21.06.1996

6

for the purpose of implementing the Dambulla New Town

Development Plan.

However, the Petitioners state that since 1984 when acquisition took

place, up to now more than 35 years later, the land remains

undeveloped and not utilised for any public purpose.

The Petitioners further state that despite the Respondents claim

that possession of the land was taken, the Petitioners continue to be

in de facto possession of the land.

As seen from P6 and P7, at a meeting at the Urban Development

Authority in Colombo in 2011, with the participation of the relevant

authorities and former landowners, the authorities accepted that

some lands acquired in 1984 for the Dambulla Development Plan

remain undeveloped.

As seen from P8-P17, some acquired Lots had been later divested.

This fact has been expressly accepted by the 3rd-8th Respondents in

paragraph 10(l) of the statement of objections, which reads as

follows:

The total extent of land acquired for the said Project had been

13.5 hectares approximately. Having identified an area of 7.7

hectares as being required for the implementation of the said

project, the balance area of approximately 5.86 hectares, which

consisted mostly of lands situated off the main roads, and

including properties belonging to the Petitioners, had been

divested to the original owners of the said lands.

This means the Minister had not taken a considered decision when

he decided to acquire lands for the Dambulla Development Plan.

7

In short, by this application the Petitioner seeks to compel the 1st

Respondent Minister to make a divesting order under section 39A(1)

of the Land Acquisition Act, as the public purpose, if at all there was

one, has faded away over a period of more than 36 years from the

time of acquisition.

Section 39A of the Land Acquisition Act reads as follows:

39A. (1) Notwithstanding that by virtue of an Order under

section 38 (hereafter in this section referred to as a vesting

Order) any land has vested absolutely in the State and actual

possession of such land has been taken for or on behalf of the

State under the provisions of paragraph (a) of section 40, the

Minister may, subject to subsection (2), by subsequent Order

published in the Gazette (hereafter in this section referred to as

a divesting Order) divest the State of the land so vested by

the aforesaid vesting Order.

(2) The Minister shall prior to making a divesting Order under

subsection (1) satisfy himself that

(a) no compensation has been paid under this Act to any

person or persons interested in the land in relation to

which the said divesting Order is to be made;

(b) the said land has not been used for a public purpose

after possession of such land has been taken by the

State under the provisions of paragraph (a) of section 40;

(c) no improvements to the said land have been effected

after the Order for possession under paragraph (a) of

section 40 had been made; and

8

(d) the person or persons interested in the said land have

consented in writing to take possession of such land

immediately after the divesting Order is published in the

Gazette.

The threshold argument of learned Senior State Counsel for the

Respondents is that, according to the pleadings of the Petitioners, as

possession of the land had not been taken by the State, a section

39A application shall necessarily fail, because it is a prerequisite to

have possession taken by the State in order to invoke the provisions

of the said section.

This argument cannot succeed in view of the position taken by the

Respondents themselves in their pleadings, i.e. that possession was

in fact taken. Vide paragraph 8 of the statement of objections of the

1st Respondent, paragraph 9 of the statement of objections of the

3rd-8th Respondents, and paragraph 11 of the statement of

objections of the 12th Respondent. In my view, if there is a doubt

the benefit of it shall be given to the citizenry whose lands have been

acquired by the State.

In terms of section 39A(2) quoted above, the Minister shall satisfy

himself on four matters, i.e. (a)-(d), before making a divesting order.

Learned Senior State Counsel for the Respondents has no issue on

(a) and (d). But he states that conditions (b) and (c) have not been

satisfied. These conditions relate to the land not being used for a

public purpose and no improvements being effected to the land.

Learned Senior State Counsel does not state that Lot 50 has been

used for a public purpose and improvements have been effected to

9

that Lot. His argument is that Lot 50 is part of the larger land

acquired for the development project, and a large part of the project

has been completed but the remaining part is still in progress, and

piecemeal divesting is not possible.

The contention of learned Senior State Counsel that piecemeal

divesting is not possible is belied by paragraph 10(l) of the statement

of objections of the 3rd-8th Respondents, which reads as follows:

The total extent of land acquired for the said Project had been

13.5 hectares approximately. Having identified an area of 7.7

hectares as being required for the implementation of the said

project, the balance area of approximately 5.86 hectares, which

consisted mostly of lands situated off the main roads, and

including properties belonging to the Petitioners, had been

divested to the original owners of the said lands.

Admittedly, several Lots have been divested after acquisition.

The position of the Respondents is that the land claimed by the

Petitioners has been identified for the construction of a shopping

complex. In this regard, the 3rd-8th Respondents in paragraphs

10(m)-(p) of the statement of objections state as follows:

(m) The land claimed by the Petitioners in this application,

which is situated at a strategic location on the Matale-

Trincomalee main road, has been identified for the

construction of the commercial and shopping complex.

(n) The said complex would have two floors with an area of

65000 sq feet and have provision, inter alia, for 94 shops

and parking spaces for vehicles.

10

A true copy of the project report of the proposed

Commercial and Shopping Complex is annexed hereto

marked R4 and is pleaded as part and parcel hereof.

(o) The total estimate for the construction of the said

Commercial and Shopping Complex, which is considered

as a mega development, is Rs. 250 million and a sum of

Rs. 50 million has already been allocated from the 2014

budget of the 3rd Respondent for the said Commercial

and Shopping Complex. Balance funds will be generated

by the sale of the shopping space.

(p) In the above circumstances, the establishment of the

Commercial and Shopping Complex is essential for the

development of the Dambulla Town and the Greater

Dambulla areas and thus, the Respondents are not in a

position to divest the said lands to the Petitioners.

Similarly, paragraphs 9(c)-(d) of the statement of objections of the 1st

Respondent and 12(c)-(d) of the statement of objections of the 12th

Respondent state as follows:

(c) The Respondent is informed that the land claimed by the

Petitioners in this application, which is situated at a

strategic location on the Matale-Trincomalee main road,

has been identified for the construction of a commercial

and shopping complex;

(d) In the above circumstances, the Respondent is informed

that the establishment of the Commercial and Shopping

Complex is essential for the development of the Dambulla

11

Town and Greater Dambulla areas and thus, the

Respondent is not in a position to divest the said lands to

the Petitioner.

If the position of the Respondents is that the Petitioners land has

been identified for the construction of a shopping complex, when

have they identified so? Acquisition had taken place in 1984 and

this application was filed in 2012 and we are now in 2020. Nearly

thirty long years had gone by between the acquisition and filing of

this application. The public purpose, if there was one, has

evaporated.

The layout of the proposed shopping complex marked R4 is

revealing. It is dated 21.12.2012. This means the layout was

prepared after the filing of this application.

This goes to show that even by 2012 nothing had been done to

implement the alleged project. There was no urgency.

In Horana Plantations Ltd., v. Hon. Minister of Agriculture [2012] 1 Sri

LR 327 the Supreme Court held:

The proviso to Section 38 of the Land Acquisition Act is based

on the urgency regarding a proposed acquisition and therefore

the burden of establishing urgency is on the acquiring

authority. In the circumstances of the case, the requirement of

urgency has not been established by the acquiring authority

and placing the burden of showing that there was no urgency

on the Appellant would amount to a misdirection in law. The

facts and circumstances of this case do not warrant an order

12

under proviso (a) to Section 38 of the Land Acquisition Act on

the ground of urgency.

Since the final authority regarding the decision to acquire land

under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, especially in

terms of Clause (a) of the proviso to Section 38 is on the

Minister, the Minister has a duty to act with care in arriving at

such decisions as the discretion conferred on him is not one

which is unfettered. Exercise of unfettered discretion could be

the subject of challenge. The Minister must endeavour to make

proper inquiries and only pursue such acquisitions if no

alternative is available as otherwise such actions would

jeopardize the interests of the Public.

In the instant case, the land acquired has not been used for a public

purpose nor have any improvements been effected after possession

was taken 36 years ago. Hence requirements (b) and (c) of 39A(2) of

the Land Acquisition Act have been satisfied.

As per the Project Report for the proposed shopping complex

submitted by the Respondents with their statements of objections in

the two related matters argued alongside this

caseCA/WRIT/302/2014 and CA/WRIT/306/2014, the estimated

cost of the proposed shopping complex had exceeded Rs.385 million

by the year 2015. The authorities have no funds to undertake such

a massive project. Therefore the proposed shopping complex

appears to be only wishful thinking. The public purpose shall be

real, not fanciful.

After acquisition, if the Minister realises that the desired objective

cannot be practically achieved due to some reason including lack of

13

funds, and that the public purpose might become a reality only in

the distant future, he ought to revert ownership of the acquired land

to the former owner. He can, if he wants, seriously consider

reacquiring the land when the necessity for a public purpose

actually arises.

When the Minister acquires private lands under proviso (a) of

section 38 of the Land Acquisition Act on the basis of urgent public

purpose, he shall have a clear plan to implement at the time of

taking that decision. He cannot acquire lands in a great hurry and

then take his own time to think of plans after acquisition. That is a

betrayal of the public trust doctrine.

In the Supreme Court case of Sugathapala Mendis v. Chandrika

Kumaratunga [2008] 2 Sri LR 339, commonly known as The Waters

Edge case, the land acquired for a public purpose was sold to a

private entrepreneur to set up a golf resort. Quashing the latter

transaction and declaring that the Petitioners fundamental right to

equality before the law guaranteed under Article 12(1) of the

Constitution had been violated, Thilakawardane J. with the

agreement of S.N. Silva C.J. and Ratnayake J. at page 352 observed:

The principle that those charged with upholding the

Constitution - be it a police officer of the lowest rank or the

President - are to do so in a way that does not violate the

Doctrine of Public Trust by state action/inaction is a basic tenet

of the Constitution which upholds the legitimacy of Government

and the Sovereignty of the People. The Public Trust Doctrine is

based on the concept that the powers held by organs of

government are, in fact, powers that originate with the People,

14

and are entrusted to the Legislature, the Executive and the

Judiciary only as a means of exercising governance and with

the sole objective that such powers will be exercised in good

faith for the benefit of the People of Sri Lanka. Public power is

not for personal gain or favour, but always to be used to

optimize the benefit of the People. To do otherwise would be to

betray the trust reposed by the People within whom, in terms of

the Constitution, the Sovereignty reposes. Power exercised

contrary to the Public Trust Doctrine would be an abuse of such

power and in contravention of the Rule of Law. This Court has

long recognized and applied the Public Trust Doctrine,

establishing that the exercise of such powers is subject to

judicial review. (Vide De Silva v. Atukorale [1993] 1 Sri LR 283

at 296-297; Jayawardene v. Wijayatilake [2001] 1 Sri LR 132

at 149, 159)

The case of De Silva v. Atukorale [1993] 1 Sri LR 283 referred to in

the above quotation is another Supreme Court Judgment which

considered the question of divesting under section 39A of the Land

Acquisition Act. In the said case, a larger land belonging to the

Appellant and other members of his family had been acquired for

the Bibile Town Development Project. Several years later, a decision

was taken to construct a shopping complex on the land. The

application of the Appellant to issue a writ of mandamus compelling

the Minister to divest the land on the basis that the whole process

was politically motivated was dismissed by the Court of Appeal. On

appeal, the Supreme Court did issue mandamus to divest the

portion of land not required to construct the shopping complex.

The Supreme Court held:

15

(1) The purpose of the Land Acquisition Act was to enable the

State to take private land, in the exercise of its right of eminent

domain, to be used for a public purpose, for the common good;

not to enable the State or State functionaries to take over

private land for personal benefit or private revenge. Where the

element of public benefit faded away at some stage of the

acquisition proceedings, the policy of the Act was that the

proceedings should terminate and the title of the former owner

restored; Section 39 and section 50.

(2) (a) Where the public purpose was so urgent as to require

immediate possession, necessitating a section 38 proviso (a)

order, the land could not be restored if the public purpose was

found to have evaporated after possession was taken. An

improper acquisition could not be put right by executive action.

So it was that the amending Act No. 8 of 1979 was enacted to

enable relief to be granted even where possession was taken.

The Act contemplates a continuing state of things and does not

refer only to the time of initial acquisition. It is sufficient if the

lack of justification appears at any subsequent point of time.

(b) The Minister shall make a divesting order after satisfying

himself of four conditions:

(i) no compensation has been paid;

(ii) the land has not been used for a public purpose after

possession was taken under Section 40(a) of the Land

Acquisition Act;

16

(iii) no improvements have been effected after the Order for

possession under section 40(a);

(iv) the person or persons interested in the land have consented

in writing to take possession of the land after the divesting

order is published in the Gazette.

(c) The purpose and the policy of the amendment (Act No. 8 of

1979) is to enable the justification for the original acquisition,

as well as for the continued retention of acquired lands, to be

reviewed. If the four conditions are satisfied the Minister is

empowered to divest. Even in such a case it would be legitimate

for the Minister to decline to divest if there is some good reason

- for instance, that there is now a new public purpose for which

the land is required.

(3) The executive discretion vested in the Minister is not

unfettered or absolute. He must in the exercise of his discretion

do not what he likes but what he ought.

(4) The true intent and meaning of the amending Act was to

empower the Minister to restore to the original owner land for

the acquisition (or retention) of which there was originally (or

subsequently) no adequate justification, upon the fulfilment of

the stipulated conditions. It is a power conferred solely to be

used for the public good, and not for his personal benefit; it is

held in trust for the public; to be exercised reasonably and in

good faith, and upon lawful and relevant grounds of public

interest.

17

(5) The Minister in the instant case, has exercised his discretion

very curiously. First he agreed to divest one lot, but did not do

so. He then divested the first lot. Thereafter his reply to a direct

request to divest the remaining land, was in effect, that it was

not his business, but a matter for his colleague, who was not

the statutory authority. This was a clear refusal to exercise his

discretion for a wrong reason, and also an abdication of

discretion. In the Court of Appeal he sought to justify his

inaction on the different, but patently erroneous basis that the

land was required for a shopping complex - ignorant or forgetful

of the fact that the land was over 19 acres in extent while the

shopping complex required only about 3% of that extent; a

manifestly erroneous basis for his refusal to exercise his

discretion.

(6) The affidavits and documents produced show beyond doubt

that had the matter been considered properly, the Minister (1st

Respondent) had no option but to make a divesting order,

retaining only the land actually required for the shopping

complex, subject to compliance with section 39A(2)(d).

In the course of the Judgement, Mark Fernando J. with Dheeraratne

J. and Wadugodapitiya J. concurring stated at 292 thus:

The Act [after the amendment by Act No. 8 of 1979]

contemplates a continuing state of things; it is sufficient if the

lack of justification appears at any subsequent point of time;

this is clear from paragraph (b) of section 39A(2): if the land has

not been used for a public purpose after possession has been

taken, there is then an insufficiency of justification; and the

18

greater the lapse of time, the less the justification for the

acquisition.

With regard to public purpose, Mark Fernando J. at page 293 of

the abovementioned Judgement opined that acquisition for public

purpose shall be on justifiable grounds and this justification shall

be present not only at the time of acquisition but throughout the

proceedings, although it may be possible to later change the original

public purpose to another. Nevertheless, he emphasised:

Such a public purpose must be a real and present purpose, not

a fancied purpose or one which may become a reality only in

the distant future.

Once possession is taken, the land shall be used for the public

purpose within a reasonable time. What is reasonable time shall

depend on the facts and circumstances of each individual case. The

greater the lapse of time, the less the justification for the

acquisition, particularly when possession has been obtained as a

matter of urgency in terms of proviso (a) to section 38 of the Act.

In the instant case, as I stated earlier, the allotment of land which is

the subject matter of this application has not been used for a public

purpose for the past 36 years.

The Judgment of Mark Fernando J. in De Silvas case was quoted

with approval by Somawansa J. with S.N. Silva C.J. and

Amaratunga J. agreeing in the Supreme Court case of Mahinda

Katugaha v. Minister of Lands and Land Development [2008] 1 Sri LR

285. In this case, the Appellant sought to compel the Minister of

Lands by way of a writ of mandamus to make a divesting order

19

under Section 39A(1) of the Land Acquisition Act in respect of land

belonging to the Appellant, which had been vested in the State by an

order of acquisition. In the Section 2 Notice issued under the said

Act, the public purpose for which land was to be acquired had not

been specified.

The Appellants main contention was that the land had not been

used for any public purpose although possession of the same was

taken by the Divisional Secretary in 1990 on the ground of urgency,

and, in or about January 2002, the Appellant discovered that the

Urban Development Authority had placed possession of about three

acres in extent of the land, including the portion belonging to the

Appellant, with a private party in order to construct a private

hospital and resort thereon.

The Court of Appeal by its judgment dismissed the application for

mandamus on the following grounds:

(1) Undue delay on the part of the Petitioner.

(2) The Ministers decision that land required for a public purpose

cannot be questioned in a Court.

(3) As the land had been handed over to the Urban Development

Authority under Section 44 of the Land Acquisition Act, and the said

Authority had drawn plans and developed the land, the Petitioner

cannot claim that the land acquired was not for a public purpose.

On appeal, the Supreme Court inter alia following the Judgment of

Mark Fernando J. in De Silvas case set aside the Judgment of the

Court of Appeal and held:

20

(a) The Appellant realised that the land acquired from him was

not used for a public purpose only in 2002, when the 4th

Respondent put up its name board on the said land, and

therefore the Appellant adequately explained his delay in

instituting the application in the Court of Appeal.

(b) The Ministers decision to acquire land can be challenged in a

Court of Law. A Minister does not have the unfettered right to

acquire land without specifying a public purpose. Nor does a

Minister have a right to acquire land and utilise it for

purposes other than a public purpose.

(c) No improvements had taken place on the land and the filling

up of the land by the 4th Respondent for a purpose other than

a public purpose cannot be described as improvements for the

purpose of section 39A(2)(C).

In the instant case, learned Senior State Counsel for the

Respondents did not vigorously submit at the argument that under

section 39A the Minister has the discretion to make a divesting

order and therefore such exercise of discretion is not amenable to

judicial review.

Nevertheless, for completeness, I must state that in modern

administrative law there is no unfettered and unreviewable

discretion. Discretion shall be exercised rationally and reasonably,

not arbitrarily and capriciously. In the exercise of discretion, the

person in authority shall do not what he likes but what he ought.

I need only quote Mark Fernando J. at pages 293-297 in De Silvas

case in this regard.

21

The argument that an executive discretion of this nature is

unfettered or absolute, that the repository of such a discretion

can do what he pleases, is not a new one. But it is one which

has been unequivocally rejected. The discretion conferred in

1979 must also be considered in the background of the

constitutional guarantees which sought to make the Rule of

Law a reality, and in particular Article 12. An example was

suggested to the learned Deputy Solicitor General: where after

an acquisition of one hundred contiguous allotments of land, for

an irrigation project, or for a road, the project had to be

abandoned, for technical, financial or political reasons, the

Minister then exercised his discretion under section 39A, to

divest some allotments, while retaining others (in circumstances

in which no rational distinction could be made between the two

categories), perhaps influenced by personal or political

considerations. It was readily conceded that such a decision

could be challenged in an application under Article 126. That

alone is enough to establish that the discretion under section

39A is not unfettered; and here, out of seven lands acquired in

one acquisition proceeding, the first lot has been divested, but

not other lots which are equally unaffected by the proposed

shopping complex, and no grounds have been urged to justify

that discrimination. The Respondents did not contend that the

time limit prescribed by Article 126(2) applied in respect of this

allegation of the violation of fundamental rights by executive

action, and in any event that time limit has not been made

applicable where such a question arises in the course of

hearing a writ application (cf. Article 126 (3)). However, leaving

aside constitutional considerations, according to the general

22

principles of administrative law governing statutory discretions,

the Ministers discretion is neither unfettered nor absolute.

As Justice Douglas of the United States Supreme Court

observed, dissenting, in United States v. Wunderlich (1951) 342

US 98, 101:

Law has reached its finest moments when it has freed man

from the unlimited discretion of some ruler, some civil or

military official, some bureaucrat. Where discretion is absolute,

man has always suffered. At times it has been his property

that has been invaded; at times, his privacy; at times, his

liberty of movement; at times, his freedom of thought; at times,

his life. Absolute discretion is a ruthless master. It is more

destructive of freedom than any of mans other inventions. [The

decision of the majority] makes a tyrant out of every contracting

officer. He is granted the power of a tyrant even though he is

stubborn, perverse or captious. He is allowed the power of a

tyrant though he is incompetent or negligent. He has the power

of life and death over a private business even though his

decision is grossly erroneous. Power granted is seldom

neglected.

These principles have been explained and elaborated in a

series of English decisions over a long period of time:

......and notwithstanding the words of the commission give

authority to the commissioners to do according to their

discretions, yet their proceedings ought to be limited and bound

with the rule of reason and law. For discretion is a science or

23

understanding to discern between falsity and truth, between

wrong and right, between shadows and substance, between

equity and colourable glosses and pretences, and not to do

according to their wills and private affections; for as one saith,

talis discretio discretionem confundit. (Lord Hailsbury, citing

Coke, in Rookes case (1598) 5 Co. Rep. 99b)

Wheresoever a commissioner or other person hath power given

to do a thing at his discretion, it is to be understood of sound

discretion, and according to law, and that this court hath power

to redress things otherwise done by them. (Estwick v. City of

London (1647) Style 42)

A person in whom is vested a discretion must exercise his

discretion upon reasonable grounds. A discretion does not

empower a man to do what he likes merely because he is

minded to do sohe must in the exercise of his discretion do

not what he likes but what he ought. In other words, he must,

by the use of his reason, ascertain and follow the course which

reason directs. He must act reasonably. (Lord Wrenbury in

Roberts v. Hopwood (1925) AC 578, 613)

Parliament must have conferred the discretion with the

intention that it should be used to promote the policy and

objects of the Act; the policy and objects of the Act must be

determined by construing the Act as a whole and construction

is always a matter of law for the court. In a matter of this kind

it is not possible to draw a hard and fast line, but if the

Minister, by reason of his having misconstrued the Act or for

any other reason, so uses his discretion as to thwart or run

24

counter to the policy and objects of the Act, then our law would

be very defective if persons aggrieved were not entitled to the

protection of the court. (Lord Reid in Padfield v. Minister of

Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (1968) AC 997)

First, the adjective [unfettered] nowhere appears in section 19

and is an unauthorised gloss by the Minister. Secondly, even if

the section did contain that adjective I doubt if it would make

any difference in law to his powers, save to emphasise what he

has already, namely that acting lawfully he has a power of

decision which cannot be controlled by the courts; it is

unfettered. But the use of that adjective, even in an Act of

Parliament, can do nothing to unfetter the control which the

judiciary have over the executive, namely that in exercising

their powers the latter must act lawfully and that is a matter to

be determined by looking at the Act and its scope and objects in

conferring a discretion upon the Minister rather than by the use

of adjectives. (Lord Upjohn in Padfield v Minister of Agriculture,

Fisheries and Food (1968) AC 997)

The discretion of a statutory body is never unfettered. It is a

discretion which is to be exercised according to law. That

means at least this: the statutory body must be guided by

relevant considerations and not by irrelevant. If its decision is

influenced by extraneous considerations which it ought not to

have taken into account, then the decision cannot stand. No

matter that the statutory body may have acted in good faith;

nevertheless the decision will be set aside. That is established

by Padfield v. Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food which

is a landmark in modem administrative law. (Lord Denning,

25

M.R., in Breen v Amalgamated Engineering Union (1971) 2 QB

175, 190)

Discretion necessarily implies good faith in discharging public

duty; there is always a perspective within which a statute is

intended to operate; and any clear departure from its lines or

objects is just as objectionable as fraud or corruption. Could an

applicant be refused a permit because he had been born in

another Province or because of the colour of his hair? The

ordinary language of the Legislature cannot be so distorted.

(Rand, J., in Roncarelli v. Duplessis (1959) 16 DLR 2nd 689,

705)

Wade observes (Administrative Law, 5th ed., pp. 353-354)

The common theme of all the passages quoted is that the

notion of absolute or unfettered discretion is rejected. Statutory

power conferred for public purposes is conferred as it were

upon trust, not absolutelythat is to say, it can validly be used

only in the right and proper way which Parliament when

conferring it is presumed to have intended. Although the

Crowns lawyers have argued in numerous cases that

unrestricted permissive language confers unfettered discretion,

the truth is that, in a system based on the rule of law,

unfettered governmental discretion is a contradiction in terms.

The real question is whether the discretion is wide or narrow,

and where the legal line is to be drawn. For this purpose

everything depends upon the true intent and meaning of the

empowering Act.

26

The powers of public authorities are therefore essentially

different from those of private persons. A man making his will

may, subject to any rights of his dependents, dispose of his

property just as he may wish. He may act out of malice or a

spirit of revenge, but in law this does not affect his exercise of

his power. In the same way a private person has an absolute

power to release a debtor, or, where the law permits, to evict a

tenant, regardless of his motives. This is unfettered discretion.

But a public authority may do neither unless it acts reasonably

and in good faith and upon the lawful and relevant grounds of

public interest. Unfettered discretion is wholly inappropriate to

a public authority, which possesses powers solely in order that

it may use them for the public good.

There is nothing paradoxical in the imposition of such legal

limits. It would indeed be paradoxical if they were not imposed.

Nor is this principle an oddity of British or American law; it is

equally prominent in French law. Nor is it a special restriction

which fetters only local authorities; it applies no less to

Ministers of the Crown. Nor is it confined to the sphere of

administration: it operates wherever discretion is given for

some public purpose, for example where a judge has a

discretion to order jury trial. It is only where powers are given

for the personal benefit of the person empowered that the

discretion is absolute. Plainly this can have no application in

public law.

I hold that the true intent and meaning of the amending Act

was to empower the Minister to restore to the original owner

land for the acquisition (or retention) of which there was

27

originally (or subsequently) no adequate justification, upon the

fulfilment of the stipulated conditions. It was a power conferred

solely to be used for the public good, and not for his personal

benefit; it was held in trust for the public; to be exercised

reasonably and in good faith, and upon lawful and relevant

grounds of public interest.

This dictum of Mark Fernando J. in De Silvas case, i.e. that the

Minister has no unfettered discretion under section 39A of the Land

Acquisition Act, has been quoted with approval in several cases

including the abovementioned two Supreme Court Judgments, viz.

The Waters Edge case and Mahinda Katugaha case.

For the aforesaid reasons, I issue a writ of mandamus directing the

1st Respondent Minister of Lands to divest Lot 50 in Plan No. 842

marked P5 in terms of section 39A(1) of the Land Acquisition Act.

This order however will not preclude any future bona fide

acquisition of the aforesaid Lot.

I make no order as to costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal