I [ I I I i

I

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRAIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

In the matter of an application for Revision in

terms of Article 145 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Court of Appeal case no. CAlPC/APN 1150/2016

H.C. Kalmunai case no. EP IHCKlWRIT 1168/2016

Abdul Carim Mohamed Rizvi

54/1A, U.K. Valavvu

Samanthutri.

Petitioner

Vs.

1. The Learned Magistrate,

Magistrate Court,

Samanthurai.

2. Magistrate Court,

Samanthurai

3. The Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondents

Substituted Petitioner Petitioner

Respondent.

AND NOW

Before

Counsel

Abdul Carim Mohamed Rizvi

5411A, U.K. Valavvu

Samanthutri.

Petitioner Petitioner

Vs.

1. The Learned Magistrate,

Magistrate Court,

Samanthurai.

2. Magistrate Court,

Samanthurai

3. The Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondents Respondents

: H.C.J. Madawala J.

: L.T.B. Dehideniya J.

: A. Mohamed for the Petitioner Petitioner.

Supported on : 21.02.2017

Decided on 18.05.2017

L.T.B. Dehideniya J.

This is a revision application from the High Court of Kalmunai.

2

The facts of this case are briefly as follows. The Petitioner

Petitioner (hereinafter sometimes called and referred to as the Petitioner)

states that the private plaint he has submitted to the Samanthurai

3

Magistrate Court has been refused to accept by the learned Magistrate.

Thereafter he filed an application for a mandate in the nature of a writ of

mandamus in the Provincial High Court of Eastern Province holden at

Kamunai against the learned Magistrate of Samanthurai to compel him to

accept the private plaint. The learned High Court Judge refused notice

and dismissed the application. Being aggrieved by the said order, the

petitioner presented this revision application to this Court to revise the

said order.

With the 13th Amendment of the Constitution, the Provincial High

Courts were established and certain powers exercised by the Court of

Appeal prior to the amendment were vested with the said High Courts.

One of such powers vested with the Provincial High Court is the writ

jurisdiction under Article 154(P)( 4) of the Constitution. The Article reads

thus;

154P (1) There shall be a High Court for each Province with effect

from the date on which this Chapter comes into force. Each

such High Court shall be designated as the High Court of the

relevant Province.

(2) The Chief Justice shall nominate, from among Judges of

the High Court of Sri Lanka, such number of Judges as may

be necessary to each such High Court. Every such Judge

shall be transferable by the Chief Justice.

(3) Every such High Court shall

(a) exercise according to law, the original criminal

jurisdiction of the High Court of Sri Lanka in respect of

offences committed within the Province;

4

(b) notwithstanding anything in Article 138 and subject to

any law, exercise, appellate and revisionary jurisdiction

in respect of convictions, sentences and orders entered or

imposed by Magistrates Courts and Primary Courts

within the Province;

(c) exercise such other jurisdiction and powers as

Parliament may, by law, provide.

(4) Every such High Court shall have jurisdiction to issue,

according to law

(a) orders in the nature of habeas corpus, in respect of

per sons illegally detained within the Province; and

(b) order in the nature of writs of certiorari, prohibition,

procedendo, mandamus and quo warranto against any

person exercising, within the Province, any power under

(i) any law; or

(ii) any statutes made by the Provincial Council

establishedfor that Province,

in respect of any matter set out in the Provincial Council List.

(5) The Judicial Service Commission may delegate to such

High Court, the power to inspect and report on, the

administration of any Court of First Instance within the

Province.

(6) Subject to the provisions of the Constitution and any law,

any person aggrieved by a final order, judgment or sentence

of any such Court, in the exercise of its jurisdiction under

paragraphs (3)(b) or (3)(c) or (4), may appeal therefrom to

5

the Court of Appeal in accordance with Article 138.

Functions, powers, elections amp;c of Provincial Councils.

The writ jurisdiction conferred on the Provincial High Court is not

without a limit. The limitations are clearly expressed in the Article. It

says that "Every such High Court shall have jurisdiction to issue,

according to law ........... in respect of any matter set out in the Provincial

Council List. " The basic limitation is that the High Court can issue writs

in respect of any matter set out in the Provincial Council List.

In the instant case the Petitioner is seeking a writ of mandamus

against the Magistrate of Samanthurai to compel him to accept a privet

plaint. The judiciary is not a subject set out in the Provincial Council list.

It is listed in the second list of the ninth schedule which is the reserved

list. Therefore the Provincial High Court has no Jurisdiction to issue writ

against a judicial officer.

The Petitioner is seeking a writ of mandamus against a nomine

officii. A writ of mandamus cannot be issued against a nomine officii. It

can be issued only against a natural or juristic person.

In the unreported case of Mohideen and others v. Director General

of Customs (CA 78411998, CA minutes of 12.12.2011) where Goonaratne

J. held that an order cannot be enforced unless it is directed to a natural

or juristic person and further held that no Court should make orders

which cannot be enforced. In Haniffa v. Chairman Urban Council

Nawalapitiya 66 NLR 48, Thambiah J. held that a mandamus can only

issue against a natural person, who holds a public office. In

Samarasinghe v. De Mel and another [1982] 1 Sri LR 123 at 128 it was

held that a mandamus can only issue against a natural person who holds

a public office. If such person fails to perform the duty after he has been

ordered by Court, he can be punished for contempt of Court. In

( f I f, i II

,

I

I I I I 1 I !

I I i

6

Dayarathne v. Rajitha Senarathne [2006] 1 Sri LR 11 at 17 Marsoof J.

held that this being an application for mandamus, relief can only be

obtained against a natural person who holds a public office as was

decided by the Supreme Court in HanifJa v. Chairman Urban Council,

Nawalapitiya.

The application for a writ of mandamus against a nomine officii

cannot be maintained.

Under these circumstances, I refuse notice and dismiss the

application.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

H.C.J. Madawala J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

tIIIIIl t I , t t I !