Page 1 of 16

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of

Section 331 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No 15 of 1979.

Court of Appeal No: Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

CA/HCC/0226/20 COMPLAINANT

Vs.

High Court of Gampaha Thanthrige Don Shantha Alwis

Case No: HC/171/07 ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

Thanthrige Don Shantha Alwis

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

Page 2 of 16

Before : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

: P. Kumararatnam, J.

Counsel : Suhada Gamlath, P.C. with Sumudu Hewage for the

Appellant

: Hiranjan Peiris, S.D.S.G. for the State

Argued on : 07-11-2023

Written Submissions : 06-11-2023 (By the Accused-Appellant)

: 24-08-2022 (By the Respondent)

Decided on : 21-02-2024

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

The accused-appellant (hereinafter referred to as the appellant) was indicted

before the High Court of Gampaha for committing the following offence.

1. That he committed the offence of rape on or about 3rd July 2003, at a

place called Yatawaka within the jurisdiction of the High Court of

Gampaha, on the female victim mentioned in the charge, and thereby,

committed an offence punishable in terms of section 364(1) of the Penal

Code as amended by Penal Code Amendment Act No. 22 of 1995.

After trial without a jury, the appellant was convicted by the learned High Court

Judge of Gampaha of the judgement dated 02-09-2020, and after having

considered the mitigatory and aggravating circumstances, sentenced the

appellant for a period of 10 years rigorous imprisonment and to a fine of Rs.

10,000/-. In default of paying the fine, he has been sentenced to 3 months simple

imprisonment.

In addition to the fine, he has been ordered to pay compensation of Rs.100,000/-

to the victim of the crime, and in default, to serve a 1-year simple imprisonment.

Page 3 of 16

It is against this conviction and the sentence; the appellant has preferred this

appeal. .

Evidence in Brief

Before considering the grounds of appeal, I will now briefly summarize the

evidence led at the trial.

The victim of this incident who has given evidence before the High Court as PW-

01 was married, and a mother of a child during the time relevant to this incident.

On the day of the incident, her husband had been away, and she has gone to the

Gramasewakas office of the area to obtain a letter from him. She has left the

Gramasewakas office around 12 noon in order to get back to her house. Without

taking the normal route, she has taken a shortcut footpath through a rubber

plantation in the area.

While she was walking through the plantation, she has seen two persons

standing on the footpath, one of them being the appellant. He was holding a rock

in his hand and both of them were unknown to her.

When she was passing them, the appellant has called her and had come

and grabbed her. He has dragged her while covering her mouth with his hand.

She has been dragged towards a ditch on the land. Although she has attempted

to escape, her attempts had failed.

The other person who was with the appellant has done nothing, but had covered

himself behind rubber trees. After dragging the victim towards the ditch, the

appellant has lifted her clothes, removed her panty, and has forcibly committed

sexual intercourse on her. She has stated further, that the perpetrator only

removed her panty up to her knee, and committed rape on her.

Although she has shouted seeking help, no one has come. However, her evidence

has been that there were no houses nearby and there was nobody in the houses

situated some distance away at the time of the incident.

Page 4 of 16

After having sexual intercourse with her, the appellant has left, and PW-01 has

returned to her house and informed her husband and the mother-in-law. They

have immediately gone to the police station and had lodged a complaint of the

incident of rape. She has testified that the clothes she was wearing at the time

of the incident was later handed over to the police and had identified them in the

Court. The said clothes had been marked as P-01, P-02, and P-03. After the

police complaint, she has been admitted to the hospital and on a subsequent

day, she has identified the appellant as the person who committed rape on her

at the identification parade held in the Magistrates Court.

Under cross-examination, she has stated that she knows the appellant now as

Shantha Alwis, but at the time of the incident, she did not know him and had

never seen him before, but now knows that he is a person living in the

neighbouring village.

It is noteworthy to mention that she has referred to the appellant as in

her evidence. Under cross-examination, it has been suggested to her that the

appellant was a 17-year-old at the time of the incident, which may explain as to

why the victim has referred to him as a younger brother.

In her statement to the police, she has stated that the person who raped her was

a person of about 25 years, dark and appears to have a squint eye and was a

person who has eaten betel.

Since she has denied making a statement to the police in that manner, the said

contradictions had been marked as V-01 to V-04.

She has been very specific that she did not see the appellant until she identified

him at the identification parade.

It appears that PW-03 mentioned in the indictment had not been in a position to

give evidence before the Court due to a medical condition, and PW-02, the

mother-in-law of the victim was deceased at the time the matter came up for

trial.

Page 5 of 16

The prosecution has called PW-11, the Officer in Charge (OIC) of Crimes Division

of Nittambuwa Police during the time relevant to this incident.

According to his evidence, PW-01 had come to the police station on 03-07-2003

at 16.10 hours in a highly shocked state, and had informed that she was raped.

The OIC has directed a female sub-inspector to record her statement and had

immediately proceeded with the victim to inquire into the matter. The victim has

shown him the place of the incident and he has observed a disturbance in the

grass in the place shown by the victim. He has observed that the place was a

rubber plantation. The house of the victim had been about 500 meters away from

the place of the incident.

After the inspection, he has gone with the victim to her house, and had taken

over the garments she was wearing as productions. Thereafter, the victim had

been admitted to the hospital. He has identified the productions marked P-01,

P-02, and P-03 as the clothes the victim was wearing when she came and

complained to the police about the rape.

During his investigations, he has come to know about the suspect involved in

the incident, namely the appellant, but had been unable to arrest him. According

to him, the appellant has been arrested some days later during the night.

He has denied the suggestion by the defence that after the arrest, the appellant

was kept at the police station in a manner others can see him. It had been the

evidence of the OIC that since the appellant was due to be produced for an

identification parade, he was kept properly concealed and produced before the

Magistrates Court for that purpose under similar care.

The police officer who arrested the appellant, namely PW-14 has testified that

the appellant was arrested at 02.15 a.m. in the morning of 04-07-2003.

The defence has admitted that after the arrest, the appellants statement was

recorded at 9.40 am on 04-07-2003.

Page 6 of 16

The police witnesses have denied the defence suggestion that the appellant was

assaulted while in police custody.

The female Sub-Inspector of Police, namely PW-12, who recorded the statement

of the victim has also given evidence and had confirmed that when the victim

was making the statement, she was in a highly disturbed state and crying.

Since the medical officer who examined the victim after the incident was not

available to give evidence before the Court, the prosecution has called the Acting

Judicial Medical Officer (JMO) of Gampaha general hospital as PW-15 to produce

and give evidence as to the medical examination of the victim.

The said Medico-Legal Report (MLR) has been marked as P-04. According to the

MLR, the victim had been a 30-year-old female, and she had been admitted to

the hospital on 03-07-2003 at 9.53 p.m. She has been discharged from the

hospital on 05-07-2003.

The doctor has observed 3 nail marks on the victim. The 1st one had been to the

left index finger and 2nd nail mark was on the left side of her nose. The 3rd injury

had been referred to as multiple nail marks found on either side of the face. The

JMO has explained the reasons as to why the said injury marks were identified

as nail marks. On the examination of the vagina of the victim, the doctor has

found no visible injuries or marks, but has opined that the victim being a married

woman who has given birth to a child, an incident of this nature can happen

without leaving any visible marks due to that reason. However, he has opined

that nail marks observed on the face and the finger can be a result of the struggle

with the attacker or an attempt to prevent her from shouting.

At the trial, the identification parade report has been admitted in terms of section

420 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.

At the conclusion of the prosecution case, the learned High Court Judge has

decided to call for the defence of the appellant. Making a statement from the

dock, he has denied any connection to the offence. He has stated that he was 16

Page 7 of 16

years of age when the police arrested him for this offence, and was sleeping at

his home he has claimed that he had no opportunity of raping the victim. He has

also claimed that the police officers assaulted him and forced him to sign a

statement.

The Grounds of Appeal

At the hearing of this appeal, the learned Presidents Counsel who represented

the appellant formulated 2 grounds of appeal for the consideration of the Court.

1. The evidence led in the case was solely based on leading questions put

to the witness and the weight that could be attached to such evidence

is highly questionable.

2. The identification of the accused was based on totally unsatisfactory

evidence and the learned High Court Judge has failed to evaluate the

evidence in its correct perspective.

Consideration of The Grounds of Appeal

As the learned Presidents Counsel has taken up two grounds of appeal which

are distinct from each other, I will now proceed to consider the said grounds of

appeal separately.

The 1st Ground of Appeal:-

The submission of the learned Presidents Counsel was that the prosecution has

extracted evidence from the victim in a manner unacceptable in a criminal trial.

It was his submission that this amounts to a denial of a fair trial towards the

appellant.

However, I am in no position to agree that the manner in which the prosecution

led the victims evidence had caused any prejudice towards the appellant.

In her evidence, after describing the manner she was dragged towards a ditch in

the rubber plantation, when she was asked what happened to her, she has stated

that it was him, meaning the appellant and no one else.

Page 8 of 16

When probing further of what did he do, she has stated that he lifted her frock

and the underskirt and did the thing ( ).

When probed further in order to clarify what she was attempting to say before

the Court, she has stated that the appellant inserted his male organ into her.

She has explained that she was forced to lie on the ground face-up, and he

inserted his male organ to her female organ. She has explained further that what

was done by the appellant was similar to when she was having sex with her

husband as a married person.

The evidence of the victim when taken as a whole, clearly shows that she was a

person who has had no proper education, and a housewife with little contact

outside of her family circle. She was not a person who could properly explain an

incident of rape explaining the necessary ingredients of the offence as expected

of a witness who has some knowledge of the offence of rape.

When taken as a whole, it is clear that the evidence of PW-01 has been to the

effect that the appellant forcibly dragged her into a ditch and performed sexual

intercourse on her without her consent. I do not find a reason to believe that the

prosecuting State Counsel has put unwarranted questions with a view boosting

the case, causing prejudice towards the appellant. It is abundantly clear that the

questions put to the witness had been to get clear clarifications of the evidence

narrated by her using terms familiar to her.

I find it relevant to mention the Indian Supreme Court decision in the case of

State of Punjab Vs. Gurmeet Singh and others (1996) 2 SCC 384, where it

was held that;

The Court must, whilst evaluating evidence, remain alive to the fact that in

a case of rape, no self-respecting woman would come forward in a court just

to make a humiliating statement against her honour such as it involved in

the commission of rape on her.

Page 9 of 16

I am of the view that the evidence of the victim needs to be looked at along with

the other evidence led at the trial.

Soon after the incident, she has gone to the police station and complained as to

what happened to her. The OIC of the Crimes Division of Nittambuwa Police as

well as the female Sub-Inspector who recorded her statement has clearly

observed the highly disturbed and emotional state of the victim when she came

to the police station. This clearly shows that she was not trying to concoct a story

that she was raped.

Her evidence had been that when she attempted to cry out, the appellant forced

her mouth shut by using his hand while dragging her away. The medical

evidence clearly establishes the nail marks on her face which corroborate the

evidence of the victim.

Since the victim was a married female with a child, the JMO being unable to

observe any visible injuries on her vagina has been clearly explained.

For the reasons as consider above, I find no merit in the 1st ground of appeal.

The 2nd Ground of Appeal:-

The contention of the learned Presidents Counsel was that the identity of the

appellant as the person who committed rape on the victim had not been

established beyond reasonable doubt.

He submitted that the prosecution has failed to lead evidence from PW-01 to

establish the physical features of the person who committed the offence on her,

when she was giving evidence.

It was his view that this was an encounter occurred within a short span of time

and there was hardly any opportunity for the victim to have a clear memory of

the person who committed the crime.

Page 10 of 16

Citing from Turnbull Guidelines as to the way the Court should look at

questionable identity, it was his submission that the learned High Court Judge

has failed to consider the evidence in the proper perspective.

Citing the contradictions marked P-01 to P-04, it was his submission that the

description given by the victim in her police statement as to the assailant, does

not fit the appellant, although he was identified at the identification parade.

It was submitted that; therefore, the trial Court should not have relied on the

identification parade notes as to the identity of the appellant. It was submitted

further that the learned High Court Judge has failed to consider the dock

statement made by the appellant in the judgement.

The evidence of the victim is clear that the incident happened when she was

walking past the appellant and the other person who was with him. By referring

to the appellant as a younger brother ( ), she has identified him as a young

person. She has been dragged for some distance. There had been a struggle

between the victim and the assailant. The victim has been forced to the floor in

a face-up position and had been raped. I find that this is not a situation where

the victim has only had a fleeting glance of the assailant, but had a clear

opportunity to have in her memory the person who raped her.

Since this is a matter where the identity of the appellant had come into question,

I find it relevant to mention the guidelines set in the case of Regina Vs. Turnbull

(1977) Q.B. 224, which held that where a case against an accused depends

wholly on the correctness of the identity of that person, the Judge should warn

the jury of the special need for caution before relying on the correctness of the

identification by the witness.

Page 11 of 16

The said Turnbull guidelines require a trial Judge to be mindful that;

Caution is required to avoid the risk of injustice.

A witness who is honest may be wrong even if they are convinced,

they are right.

A witness who is convincing may still be wrong.

More than one witness may be wrong.

A witness who recognizes the defendant even when the witness

knows the defendant well may be wrong.

Some of the circumstances a Judge should direct the jury to examine in order to

find out whether a correct identification has been made include;

The length of time the accused was observed by the witnesses.

The distance the witness was from the accused.

The state of the light.

The length of time elapsed between the original observation

and the subsequent identification.

The case of Sigera Vs. The Attorney General (2011) 1 SLR 201 was a case the

question of the identity of the accused had been discussed. It was held:

The identification was not in a difficult circumstance or in a multitude of

persons in a crowd or in a fleeting moment. To apply the Turnbull principles,

the identification had to be made under difficult circumstances. In this case,

although the incident took place during night, there was ample light shed by

the bulb of the lamppost that was burning. There was no congregation of

multitude of persons in a crowd but only the accused appellant and the

deceased. In order to inflict the injuries on the deceased, the assailant had

to come very close to the deceased.

Page 12 of 16

Similarly, in the given situation only the assailant and the victim have been

present, and this was an incident happened in broad daylight. The victim had

struggled with the assailant and the victim had a clear opportunity to see the

assailant. Hence, I am of the view that this was no a situation where Turnbull

guidelines have a strict applicability.

In this matter, although the defence has marked four contradictions as to the

features of the person mentioned by the victim when she made her statement to

the police, I find that those contradictions are immaterial in the context that the

appellant has been positively identified at the subsequent identification parade

and the relevant facts and the circumstances taken as a whole.

The contradiction marked V-01 relates to the possible age of the person. She has

stated in her statement to police that the person who committed rape on her was

about 25 years of age, which clearly depends on the physical appearance of the

person. Even a young person may look like much older. That does not mean that

the victim had failed to identify the appellant correctly.

The contradiction marked V-02 is about the skin colour of the person where she

has mentioned that the assailant was dark in complexion which also may be

subjective to the persons observation of that fact.

The contradiction V-03 is about a squint in the eye, however it is clear that she

has not made a definite statement on that. What she has stated was, that the

person appeared to be a squint-eyed person.

The 4th contradiction relates to what the victim has stated to police that the

assailant was a person appeared to be one who chewed betel nuts. That is also

a thing that the victim may have observed as to the state of the person who

sexually assaulted her at that time.

When PW-01 was giving evidence, although the Counsel who represented the

appellant has cross-examined PW-01 on these contradictions, if the

Page 13 of 16

contradictions were material contradictions, he could have confronted the

witness in a manner that establishes the appellant was not a person with such

physical features. Although the probable age observed by the victim in 2003

cannot be materially challenged when the victim gave evidence in 2017, some 15

years after the incident, at least two of the features, namely, if the appellant was

not a dark-skinned person or a squint-eyed person, should have been put to the

witness to challenge the credibility of her evidence. I find that no such suggestion

has been put to the witness, other than saying that the witness has identified a

wrong person.

Although she has been questioned on the basis that she identified a person who

had no squint eye at the parade, no direct question has been put to the witness

in this regard.

In the case of The Attorney General Vs. Sanadnam Pitchi Theresa (2011) 2

SLR 292 at page 303, Shirani Tilakawardane,J. stated:

that whilst internal contradictions or discrepancies would ordinarily

affect the trustworthiness of the witness statement, it is well established

that the Court must exercise its judgment on the nature and tenor of the

inconsistency or contradiction and whether they are material to the facts in

issue. Discrepancies, which do not go to the root of the matter and assail the

basic version of the witness, cannot be given too much importance. (Vide-

Bogm Bhai Hirji Bhai Vs. State of Gujarat, AIR (1983) SC 753)

Another matter that needs the attention of the Court is whether there was any

possibility for PW-01 to see the appellant before she identified him at the

identification parade.

Other than stating that when the appellant was arrested, he was kept at the

police station in a manner that others can see him, there has been no allegation

that an opportunity was provided to PW-01 by the police to look at the appellant

before he was remanded. The victim has given clear evidence to show that she

Page 14 of 16

was able to see the appellant only at the identification parade after the incident.

The evidence led at this action clearly establishes that fact.

According to the evidence led in this case, after the incident of rape happened on

03-07-2003, the victim had been admitted to the hospital on the same day at 9.

53 in the night. She has been discharged on 05-07-2003. The appellant has been

arrested in the early hours of 04-07-2003 at 2.15 am, which means that he had

been in remand custody when the victim was released from the hospital.

This sheds no doubt as to the identification of the appellant at the identification

parade.

It was submitted by the learned Presidents Counsel that the learned High Court

Judge has failed to consider the dock statement made by the appellant in the

judgement.

It is settled law that even a dock statement can be considered as evidence subject

to the infirmities it carries, not being subjected to an oath or the test of cross-

examination. In this matter, the appellant has made a short dock statement

which amounts to a denial of the charge against him, claiming that he was a

person of young age at that time and innocent of any wrongdoing.

A dock statement becomes relevant if it creates any reasonable doubt as to the

evidence of the prosecution or if it can be considered as a reasonable explanation

as to the evidence against the appellant. I do not find any basis to consider as

such, when considering the dock statement of the appellant.

Although there may be infirmities in the judgement of the learned High Court

Judge, such infirmities become relevant only if it has occasioned a failure of

justice and caused a prejudice to the substantial rights of the appellant.

The Article 138 of the Constitution is the provision which confers jurisdiction to

the Court of Appeal to hear and determine appeals of this nature. The proviso of

Article 138 reads as follows;

Page 15 of 16

Provided that no judgment decree or order of any court shall be

reveres or varied on account of any error, defect or irregularity, which

has not prejudiced the substantial rights of the parties or occasioned

a failure of justice.

The similar statutory provision in section 436 of the Code of Criminal Procedure

Act reads as follows;

436. Subject to the provisions hereinbefore, contained in any

judgement passed by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be

reversed or altered on appeal or revision on account-

(a) Of any error, omission, or irregularity in the complaint,

summons, warrant, charge, judgment, summing up, or other

proceedings before or during trial or in any inquiry or other

proceedings under this court; or

(b) Of the want of any sanction required by section 135,

Unless such error, omission, irregularity or want has occasioned a

failure of justice.

The following test was formulated by Viscount Simon L.C. in the case of Stirland

Vs. D. P. P.- (1944) A.C. 315 at 321, which reads;

A perverse jury might conceivably announce a verdict of acquittal in the

teeth of all the evidence, but the provision that the Court of Criminal Appeal

may dismiss the appeal if they consider that no substantial miscarriage of

justice has actually occurred in convicting the accused assumes a situation

where a reasonable jury, after being properly directed, would, on the

evidence properly admissible, without doubt convict.

Page 16 of 16

I find that even if there are infirmities in the judgment, if properly considered, it

would not have altered the final verdict.

For the above reasons considered, I do not find merit in the 2nd ground of appeal

urged by the learned Presidents Counsel either.

Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed for want of merit.

However, having considered the fact that the appellant had been in incarceration

from the date of his conviction on 02-09-2020, it is ordered that the sentence of

10 years of rigorous imprisonment shall deem to have commenced from 02-09-

2020.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P. Kumararatnam, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal