II

..

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI lANKA

CA (Writ Application) No. 53/2018

In the matter of an application for mandates in the nature of Writs of Certiorari, Prohibition and Mandamus under and in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

1) Jayawarna Patabandige Gunapala, (Dilini' , Jansagama, Maamadala.

2) Jayawarna Patabandige Tharanga Sanjeevani,

3) Jayawarna Patabandige Indika

Suresh Kumara,

Both of No. 2/221, Jansagama, Maamadala.

Petitioners

1.

Vs.

Duminda Dissanayake, MP, Hon. Minister of Agriculture, Ministry of Agriculture, No. 288, Sri Jayawardenapura Mawatha, Rajagiriya.

2. M.A.S.Weerasinghe, Commissioner General, Department of Agrarian Development, No. 42, Sir Marcus Fernando Mawatha, Colombo 7.

1

/

\

3. Chaminda Ekanayake, Assistant Commissioner, Department of Agrarian Development, District Office, Hambantota.

4. District Land Registrar, District Land Registrar's Office, Hambantota.

S. Officer-in-Charge, Sri Lanka Police, Ambalantota.

6. J.L.P.Lalitha Ranjanee, D2 Canal, Nugawela, Maamadala North, Maamadala.

7. Hondaarachchi Patabendige Wijesiri Jayatilake, No. 236/S, Pragathi Mawatha, Katuwana Road, Homagama.

Respondents

Before: P. Padman Surasena J/ President, Court of Appeal Arjuna Obeyesekere J

Counsel: Clifford Fernando with Jayantha Wickramasuriya for the Petitioners

Ms. Chaya Sri Nammuni, State Counsel for the 2nd and 3rd

Respondents

Ms. Thushani Machado for the 6th Respondent

Supported on: Ogth May 2018

Decided on: 08th June 2018

2

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J

When this matter was taken up for support on 9th May 2018, all Counsel

agreed that the Order that would be made in this application would

apply to Writ Application No. 54/2018, filed by the 1st Petitioner.

This application pertains to two complaints made by the 6th Respondent

to the 3rd Respondent Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Development,

Hambantota. The first complaint is set out in the letter dated 1st August

2013, produced with the petition, marked 'P8a'. The second complaint is

set out in the letter dated 15th August 2013, produced with the petition

marked 'pg'. The 3rd Respondent has conducted two separate inquiries

in respect of the two complaints 'PSa' and 'pg'.

After concluding the inquiry into the first complaint!, the 3rd Respondent

has conveyed his decision to all parties by letter dated 20th December

2017, marked 'PIOa'. The outcome of the inquiry into the second

complaine has been conveyed to the 1st Petitioner by letter dated 20th

December 2017 marked 'PIOb'.

In order to give effect to the decision arrived at in 'PIOa', the 3rd

Respondent, acting in terms of Section 2(6) and Section 2(5) of the

Agrarian Development Act No. 46 of 2000, as amended (the Act), has

made two consequential orders, set out in the letters dated 8th January

2018 marked 'PI la' and 'Pllb', respectively.

1 Inquiry No. HA/04/lnquiry/2013/19 Zinquiry No. HA/04/lnquiry/2013/27

3

In this application, the principle reliefs sought by the Petitioners are

Writs of Certiorari to quash the determinations of the 3rd Respondent

contained in the aforementioned documents 'P10a', 'P10b', 'Plla' and

'Pllb'.

As the principle reliefs prayed for are Writs of Certiorari, it would be

opportune to bear in mind the following passage of Lord Diplock in

Council of Civil Service Unions vs Minister for the Civil Service3, when

considering this application:

"Judicial review has I think developed to a stage today when without

reiterating any analysis of the steps by which the development has

come about, one can conveniently classify under three heads the

grounds upon which administrative action is subject to control by

judicial review. The first ground I would call 'illegality', the second

'irrationality' and the third 'procedural impropriety'.

"By 'illegality' as a ground for judicial review I mean that the decision

maker must understand correctly the law that regulates his decision

making power and must give effect to it. Whether he has or not is par

excellence a justiciable question to be decided in the event of

dispute, by those persons, the judges, by whom the judicial power of

the state is exercisable."

31985 AC 374 4

"By 'irrationality' I mean what can now be succinctly referred to as

'Wednesbury unreasonableness,4. It applies to a decision which is so

outrageous in its defiance of logic or of accepted moral standards

that no sensible person who had applied his mind to the question to

be decided could have arrived at it."

I have described the third head as 'procedural impropriety' rather

than failure to observe basic rules of natural justice or failure to act

with procedural fairness towards the person who will be affected by

the decision. This is because susceptibility to judicial review under

this head covers also failure by an administrative tribunal to observe

procedural rules that are expressly laid down in the legislative

instrument by which its jurisdiction is conferred, even where such

failure does not involve any denial of natural justice."

The facts of this case are briefly as follows. The 1st Petitioner claims that

he is the tenant cultivator of an agricultural land in extent of 5 acres 3

roods 38 perches.5 The tenant cultivator details sheet prepared in 1992

from data available in the Agricultural Land Register has been produced

with the petition marked 'p3b'. According to 'p3b', the 1st Petitioner is

the tenant cultivator of two lots of lands, in extent of 3 acres and 2 acres

and registered in the Agricultural Register under Serial Nos. 179 and 180,

respectively.

4 Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd v Wednesbury Corporation 1948(1)KB 223

5 This land has been demarcated as Lot 3 in drawing bearing No. 22Z~QOS-,J)T<:ld~~~d~~ __ -- .. ---~ ~withthe petition, marked 'PS'.

5

These two lands are identical to the lands referred to in the extracts of

the Agricultural Register, produced with the petition, marked 'P4a' and

'p4b'. Thus, the total extent of land over which the 1st Petitioner is the

tenant cultivator is 5 acres.6

The 6th Respondent is the tenant cultivator of a land in extent of 2 acres.

The owner of this land is Hondaarachchi Patabendige Padmalatha

Jayatilleke. The name of the 6th Respondent had been registered as the

tenant cultivator in the Agricultural Register, as borne out by 'P3b',

under Serial No. 182. An extract of the Agricultural Register pertaining

to Serial No. 182 has been produced with the limited Statement of

Objections of the 6th Respondent, marked '6R4'.

The 2nd and the 3rd Petitioners are the children of the 1st Petitioner. The

ownership of the land set out in '6R4' in respect of which the 6th

Respondent is the tenant cultivator had been transferred by

Hondaarachchi Patabendige Padmalatha Jayatilleke to the 2nd and 3rd

Petitioners by Deeds of Transfer Nos. 226 and 227 dated 1st March 2008,

produced with the petition, marked 'P7a' and 'p7b,.7

In her first complaint marked 'PSa', the 6th Respondent has stated that

she is the tenant cultivator of the agricultural land registered in the

agricultural register under Serial No. 182, marked "6R4'. She has stated

further that the said land has been sold by its owner Hondaarachchi

Patabendige Padmalatha Jayatilake to the 2nd and 3rd Petitioners,

without informing her.

6 The maximum extent of paddy land that can be cultivated by a tenant cultivator in __ .. __ ~~r"-,,~_(}f Section 5(1} ofthe Act is 5 acres.

7 'P7a' and 'P7b' have been attested by K. Ediriweera, Attorney-at-Law 6

Provisions relating to the sale of an agricultural land where there is a

tenant cultivator have been set out in Section 2(1) of the Act, which

reads as follows:

liThe owner of an extent of paddy land in respect of which there is a

tenant cultivator, who intends to sell such extent, shall in the first

instance make an offer to sell such extent to the tenant cultivator.

Such offer shall be made to the tenant Cultivator by communication

in writing, and sent by registered post, stating the price at which he

offers to sell such extent. The owner shall cause a copy of such

communication to be sent by registered post to the Agrarian

Development Council within whose area of authority such paddy land

is situated."

This complaint of the 6th Respondent was inquired into by the 3rd

Respondent.8 The Petitioners and the 6th Respondent have been

afforded an opportunity of presenting their respective cases before the

3rd Respondent and there is no complaint from the Petitioners with

regard to the manner in which the said Inquiry was conducted.

The inquiry proceedings have been produced with the petition marked

as 'PS'. The first issue that was required to be resolved by the 3rd

Respondent was whether the 6th Respondent was the Tenant Cultivator

of the land set out in '6R4'.

8 Inquiry No. HA/04/lnquiry/2013/19

7

Ie

The aforementioned extract of the agricultural register '6R4' had been

produced by the 6th Respondent at the Inquiry. It establishes that the 6th

Respondent is the Tenant Cultivator of the land set out therein, since

1992. The 6th Respondent had also stated that her late grandmother,

Missynona Warnakulasuriya was the tenant cultivator of this land before

her.9

The legal effect of the contents of the agriculture register has been set

out in Section 53(6) of the Act, which reads as follows:

"An entry in the register of agricultural lands prepared in terms of

Section 53(1) of the Act is admissible in evidence and shall be prima

facie proof of the facts stated therein."

A provision similar to Section 53(6) of the Act is found in the Agrarian

Services ActIO and the Paddy Lands Actll. The Supreme Court, in

Wiiendra v The Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian ServicesI2 which

was a case under the Paddy Lands Act, has held as follows:

'It must be remembered in this connection that under the Act, a

register of paddy lands is maintained and under Section 35 it is a

requirement that the names of the landlord, the tenant cultivator

and such other particulars should be recorded therein. These

registers are revised each year and the entries in the register are

prima facie evidence of the particulars contained therein."

9 Vide the letter dated 6th February 1987 produced at the inquiry

10 Section 45(3) of the Agrarian Services Act No. 58 of 1979. This Act has been repealed by the Agrarian Development Act No. 46 of 2000

11 Section 35 of the Paddy Lands Act No.1 of 1958 -Ti77NLR 372 at 37-4 ---

8

In' the light of the above facts, the 3rd Respondent has accepted the

evidence given by the 6th Respondent that she was the tenant cultivator

in respect of the land referred to in '6R4' since 1992. The learned

Counsel for the Petitioners did not refer this Court to any material led at

the inquiry by which the evidence contained in the agriculture register

'6R4' had been rebutted. Thus, it would be safe to act on the findings of

the 3rd Respondent that the 6th Respondent is the tenant cultivator of

the land referred to in '6R4'.

The 6th Respondent had stated in her complaint 'PSa' that she was not

aware of the sale of the land referred to in '6R4' by its owner to the 2nd

and 3rd Petitioners. She had stated further that had she been offered the

said land, she would have purchased the same. The evidence of the 6th

Respondent that the paddy land in respect of which she was the tenant

cultivator (vide '6R4') had been sold by its owner without informing her

has been accepted by the 3rd Respondent. It is in these circumstances

that the 3rd Respondent had determined in 'PIOa' that the said sale is in

violation of the provisions of Section 2(1) of the Act. The Petitioners

have not drawn the attention of this Court to any material led at the

inquiry that rebuts the basis of the finding of the 3rd Respondent.

The next issue that required to be addressed by the 3rd Respondent was

the consequences of a violation of Section 2(1) of the Act. This is dealt

with in Section 2(5) of the Act which provides that "any transfer by the

owner of any extent of paddy land in contravention of the provisions of

this section shall after inquiry be declared null and void and shall render

the person in occupation of such extent under such transfer, liable to be

. ~.'{iC::1~gin~~~ordance with th~ provisi.Qns~Qf Se.ctio_rLB ... " __

9

Acting under the powers conferred on him by Section 2(5) of the Act, the

3rd Respondent had proceeded under Section 2{5} of the Act and

declared that the Deeds of Transfer 'P7a' and 'P7b' are null and void.

The aforementioned decision of the 3rd Respondent has been conveyed

to all three Petitioners by 'P10a'.

The evidence of the 6th Respondent that she is the tenant cultivator of

the land in '6R4' and that its owner had sold the said land without

informing her has not been rebutted by the Petitioners and remains

uncontradicted. In these circumstances, this Court is of the view that the

3rd Respondent had arrived at the decision set out in 'Pl0a' based on the

material led before him at the Inquiry. The said decision is within the

powers conferred on the 3rd Respondent by the Act. Thus, the said

decision embodied in 'P10a' is neither illegal nor irrational. Therefore

this Court is of the view that 'P10a' is not liable to be quashed by a Writ

of Certiorari.

In terms of Section 2(6) of the Act, "where a transfer of any extent of

paddy land is declared null and void by the Commissioner General a

copy of such declaration shall be transmitted under Section 5 to the

Registrar of lands of the District in which such extent of paddy land is

situated."

The 3rd Respondent, by a letter dated 08th January 2018 marked 'Plla'

has informed the District Land Registrar of the determination made by

him at the Inquiry and that the Deeds of Transfer 'P7a' and 'P7b' have

beenc!ec:l~r~~;t~nu1Land-void. This-is a CBfl-SE1uential step that the 3rd

10

R~spondent is required to take in terms of the law. In doing so, the 3rd

Respondent has acted within the powers conferred on him under

Section 2{6} of the Act. As no illegality has been committed by the 3rd

Respondent in issuing 'Plla', this Court is of the view that 'Plla' is not

liable to be quashed by a Writ of Certiorari.

Once an order has been made declaring a transfer of land as null and

void, the Commissioner General is entitled in terms of Section 2{S} of the

Act to take steps to evict the person in occupation of such land, in

accordance with the provisions of Section 8 of the Act.

The first step in this regard is to issue a notice to the party sought to be

evicted. Accordingly, by a notice dated 8th January 2018 marked 'Pllb',

the 3rd Respondent has directed the Petitioners to hand over possession

of the land referred to in 'P10a', to the 6th Respondent, on or before 8th

February 2018. The 3rd Respondent has further informed the Petitioners

by 'Pllb' that action would be taken in terms of Section 8 of the Act, if

the Petitioners failed to comply with the said directive.

In sending out 'Pllb', the 3rd Respondent has only exercised the power

conferred on him by Section 2{S) of the Act. Therefore the action of the

3rd Respondent cannot be termed as ultra vires his powers conferred

under the Act. In the said circumstances, this Court is of the view that

'Pllb' is not liable to be quashed by a Writ of Certiorari.

It is significant to note that none of the said determinations 'P10a',

'Plla' and 'Pllb' relate to the land set out in serial Nos. 179 and 180 of

the Agriculture--Register Act--ma+ke4-'-P4a' --a-r1G-'P4b' -but relate only to

11

the land set out in Serial No. 182 in the agricultural register marked

'6R4'. Thus, the determinations set out in 'P10a', 'Plla' and 'Pllb' does

not affect the rights of the 1st Petitioner in relation to the lands set out

in 'P4a' and 'P4b'.

The 6th Respondent by her second complaint marked 'pg' alleged that

the 1st Petitioner is interfering with her cultivation rights in respect of

the land registered in the agricultural register under Serial No. 182,

marked '6R4'. It is noted that the said complaint does not relate to the

lands of the 1st Petitioner set out in tP4a' and tp4b'.

Provisions relating to the interference of cultivation rights is found in

Section 90(1) of the Act, which reads as follows:

"Where a complaint is made to the Commissioner General by any

owner cultivator or occupier of agricultural land that any person is

interfering with or attempting to interfere with the cultivation rights,

threshing rights, rights of using a threshing floor, the right of

removing agricultural produce or the right to the use of an

agricultural road of such owner cultivator or occupier, the

Commissioner General after inquiry may if he is satisfied that such

interference or attempted interference will result in damage or loss

of crop or livestock, issue an order on such person cultivator or

occupier requiring him to comply with such directions as may be

specified in such order necessa ry for the protection of such rights;

Provided that an order under this section shall not be made for the

eviction ofan person from such ag!-i-cu!turallaneJ..."

12

This complaint of the 6th Respondent was also inquired into by the 3rd

Respondent. 13 The inquiry proceedings have been produced with the

petition, marked as 'pg'. Both the 1st Petitioner and the 6th Respondent

have been afforded an opportunity of presenting their respective cases

before the 3rd Respondent and there is no complaint to this Court with

regard to the manner in which the said Inquiry was conducted.

The decision of the 3rd Respondent relating to the second complaint of

the 6th Respondent had been conveyed to the 1st Petitioner by letter

dated 20th December 2017 marked 'Pl0b'. On the material presented to

him during the inquiry, the 3rd Respondent had concluded that the 1st

Petitioner is interfering with the cultivation rights of the 6th Respondent.

Accordingly, the 3rd Respondent has made an order under Section 90(1)

of the Act that the 1st Petitioner should not interfere with the cultivation

rights of the 6th Respondent and that the 6th Respondent should be

permitted to possess the said land without any interference. The

Petitioners have not referred this Court to any material that would

contradict this position. It is noted that the 3rd Respondent has not made

any order in this Inquiry for the eviction of any person, as alleged by the

Petitioners.

It is the considered view of this Cou rt that it is within the powers of the

3rd Respondent conferred under Section 90(1) of the Act to make the

said order 'Pl0b'. This Court does not see any illegality in the said

decision 'Pl0b' and therefore, this Court is of the view that 'Pl0b' is not

liable to be quashed by a Writ of Certiorari. .

13 Inquiry No. HA/04/lnquiry/2013/27

13

r

The Petitioners have complained to this Court that the eviction of the

Petitioners from the agricultural land based on the second complaint

marked tpg' is illegal, as such an Order cannot be made in terms of

Section 90. When one considers the four determinations that are sought

to be quashed in this application, namely tPl0a', tpl0b', 'Plla' and

tPllb' and in particular tpllb', it is clear that the eviction of the

Petitioners from the land referred to in Serial No. 182 marked t6R4' has

been done under the provisions of Section 2(5) of the Act and not under

the provisions of Section 90(1) of the Act. Thus, this complaint of the

Petitioners is misconceived, both in fact and in law.

The Petitioners have also complained to this Court that there has been a

failure to identify the corpus from which the eviction is to take place.

The Petitioners complain further that there has been no proper

demarcation or identification of the agricultural land claimed by the 6th

Respondent in any of the decisions sought to be quashed in this

application, namely tPl0a', tpl0b', tPlla' and tPllb'.

When one considers the boundaries of the land registered in the

agricultural register under Serial No. 182 marked '6R4' and compares

them with the boundaries of the land referred to in tPl0a', 'Pl0b' and

tPllb', it is evident that the boundaries are identical. Thus, this Court is

of the view that there has been a proper demarcation of the boundaries

of the land claimed by the 6th Respondent.

In this regard, this Court would advert to the Limited Statement of

Objections of the 6th Respondent and specifically to the document

14

annexed thereto marked '6R7,.14 According to '6R7', the two acres of

land referred to in Serial No. 182, where the 6th Respondent is the

tenant cultivator had been cultivated by the 1st Petitioner. The 1st

Petitioner has admitted that he had cultivated a total extent of seven

acres - i.e. the five acres of land set out in 'P4a' and 'P4b' and the two

acres of land set out in '6R4'. The land in respect of which the 1st

Petitioner is the tenant cultivator can be identified by reference to the

boundaries set out in 'P4a' and 'P4b'. Similarly, the land in respect of

which the 6th Respondent is the tenant cultivator can be identified by

reference to the boundaries set out in '6R4'. Therefore, this Court is of

the view that this complaint of the Petitioners is also misconceived.

It was brought to our notice that proceedings had been instituted by the

3rd Respondent in the Magistrate's Court of Hambantota15, under the

provisions of Section 8(1) of the Act seeking to evict the Petitioners from

the land referred to in '6R4'. According to the Order tendered to this

Court by the learned Counsel for the 6th Respondent, the learned

Magistrate has made an Order that possession of the said land be

handed over to the 6th Respondent.

For the reasons set out in this Order, this Court is of the view that this is

not a fit case in which notices should be issued as Writs of Certiorari will

not lie to quash the determinations set out in 'PlOa', 'P10b', 'Pl1a' and

'Pllb'. Therefore, the necessity to consider the other relief prayed for

14 The document marked as '6R7' are the findings of the Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Development at an inquiry conducted in 2010. The 6th Respondent and the 1st Petitioner had given evidence at this inquiry.

15 Case No. 41529 15

by the Petitioners does not arise. This application is dismissed, without

costs.

As has been agreed upon by all the learned Counsel, this Order must

apply to CA (Writ) Application No. 54/2018 also. Hence, the said CA

(Writ) Application No. 54/2018 must also stand dismissed without costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P. Pad man Surasena J/ President, Court of Appeal

I agree.

President, Court of Appeal

16