1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of application for appeal under section 331 of the Criminal Procedure ACT No.15 of 1979 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

CA Case No: Wanniarachchi Kankanamge Jinawansa CA 126/15

HC Matara Accused-Appellant Case No. HC 31/12 The Attorney General Attorney Generals Department Colombo 12

Respondent

Before : Devika Abeyratne,J

P.Kumararatnam,J

Counsel : Sharon Serasinghe for the Accused Appellant Shaminda Wickrama, SC for the Respondent Written Submissions On : 12.02.2018 (by the Accused-Appellant) 10.09.2018(by the Respondent) Argued On : 16.02.2021 Decided On : 31.03.2021 ********************

2

Devika Abeyratne,J

The accused appellant in this case Wanni Arachchi Kankanamge Jinawansha

was convicted of the murder of one Wanni Arachchi Kankanamge Somasiri and

sentenced to death by the High Court of Matara in case No 31/12. The appeal is against

the said conviction and the sentence.

The case for the prosecution relied mainly on the only eyewitness Wanni

Arachchi Kankanamge Nimosha Budhdhika, the nine year old son of the deceased who

was with his father at the time of the incident.

PW 2 Nimosha was 12 years old when he gave evidence at the trial. At the

hearing of the appeal it was strongly contended by the Counsel for the appellant that

Nimosha is not a credible witness and was lying. It was further contended that when

such an event takes place, specially a young child would not remember what really

happened and hence, his evidence creates a doubt.

According to Nimosha the appellant is his uncle, (Peeris Bappa) who lives in

close proximity to their house. Appellants house is at the end of the disputed land

where the incident had taken place. It transpired in the evidence that there was an on

going dispute about the ownership of the land which Nimosha referred to as the Maha

Idama, to where he had gone on the day of the incident with the deceased father. He

had been about 7 feet behind the father who had cut three banana trees with the curved

knife he had with him. The appellant who came with a knife and a pole had stated

either you or me ( , ) and had assaulted his father with the pole.

The first strike had been to the back of his fathers shoulder and then father had fallen.

As the appellant was continuing with his assault, PW 2 had run and informed PW 3

Janaka that his father was being assaulted by Peeris. PW 3 who had come in the three

wheeler, after seeing the injured had got frightened. He, together with Nimosha and

3

another woman had gone to inform the wife of the deceased who was at work.

Thereafter, he has taken them to the Police Station where both the wife of the deceased

and PW 2 have given their statements.

When PW 2 was being cross examined, the trial had to be postponed twice as

he had vomited and fainted on one occasion and on the other occasion he had

complained of dizziness. It is obvious that the child who must be traumatized after

witnessing his father being attacked in such a brutal manner, having to recall the

incident again.

Nonetheless, when the evidence of PW 2 is considered, it appears that he has

been very consistent and clear in his evidence and whenever a lapse on the part of his

evidence was brought to his attention by the defence Counsel, he has given clear

intelligent answers without any hesitation. Two contradictions and an omissions were

highlighted from the evidence of PW 2 which the learned trial judge very correctly has

held that it did not affect the root of the case and that the credibility of the witness was

not affected by them.

A sword and a knife had been recovered by the Police from the locked house of

the appellant subsequent to a section 27 statement.

According to the JMO Dr Kithsiri Wijeweera who performed the post mortem,

12 injuries inflicted by a blunt weapon have been identified and injuries No 7 and 8 on

the head of the deceased were said to be necessarily fatal.

The evidence of the appellant under oath was to the effect that he and the

deceased are not related, who he has known all his life and that they are from the same

4

village. It transpired that there was an animosity and ill will existing between them

stemming from the ownership of the land where the incident had occurred. It appeared

that the appellant was claiming the entirety of the land which was the cause for the

dispute. In page 226 of the brief the appellant had stated that there were 18 complaints

to the police regarding the disputed land and they were not in good terms for at least the

last 10 years. In page 237 he has stated that the deceased was in the habit of assaulting

him and had once set fire to his bicycle. This evidence was unchallenged.

The sequence of events according to the appellant is that, on the day of the

incident, the deceased followed him home with a curved knife and a pole, blocked the

doorway of the house and when he inquired why the deceased came inside the house,

the deceased is alleged to have said that he too has a right to it and after an argument

assaulted him with the knife which got entangled with his hair, and as a result he fell in

a sitting position. The deceased had continued to assault him with a knife at which point

the accused had taken the pole from the hand of the deceased and tried to fend him off

defending himself with the help of the pole. Thereafter, both of them had fallen on some

wooden planks which fell on their heads and legs, at which point, the deceased who was

after liquor, had run away and was sighted fallen near the jak tree.

The appellant thereafter, had locked the house and gone to the town and after

returning, he had spent the night on a hill. He had watched a police officer knocking on

his door on three occasions and later forcing it open. Around midnight he had gone to

the temple to spend the night and then has left to Weligama to check about some work

and was arrested by the Weligama Police and handed over to the Akuressa Police. His

estranged wife and child, were said to be in Weligama and according to his evidence

before he could find their place, he has been arrested by the police. It transpired in his

evidence that the wife and the child have been living in Weligama for over four years

and he has never visited them.

5

The suggestion by the prosecution that the deceased was his uncles son (bappas

son) was denied by him (page 249). However, it is noted that both have the same

surname. On a closer reading of the evidence of the appellant there are obvious

contradictory evidence which the appellant has not been able to explain. He has been

constantly changing his stance.

It is noted that the learned trial judge while the accused was being cross

examined in page 267 of the brief, had observed the strange behaviour of the appellant

and had referred him to obtain a psychiatric report from the Angoda Hospital. The report

from the consultant psychiatrist Dr Neil Fernando has recommended that he is fit to

plead and stand trial and that the appellant is not suffering from any mental disorder.

Some unusual and strange steps have been taken thereafter. After the report was

filed in court on 30.01.2015, an application has been made by the assigned counsel to

conclude the matter adopting a short cut and to plead for a lesser offence of culpable

homicide not amounting to murder on exception 4 to section 294 of the Penal Code.

On the following trial day being on 26.02.2015, the assigned Counsel Mr. Thilak

Amaratunga had moved Court to discharge him from being the assigned Counsel on

personal grounds. The learned trial judge in page 273 of the brief had made a comment

that it was unusual for a Counsel to make such a request at the tail end of a case but

nonetheless, as it was on personal grounds, his application had been considered and he

had been discharged from being the assigned counsel for the appellant.

On the request of the appellant and with his consent, attorney at law, Mr A.G

Amerasinghe has been appointed as the new assigned counsel for the appellant.

6

Subsequently, the evidence of JMO of the Kalutara Hospital Dr. Maximus

Fernando has been led on behalf of the appellant. This doctor was also of the same

opinion as Dr Kithsiri Wijeweera PW 6, who in his evidence said that the injuries to

the head of the deceased could not have been caused by knocking his head on the Jak

tree when running downhill. The expert witness had stated that the deceased would have

had to run at such a high speed like Ussain Bolt to suffer the injuries to his head if it

was to be from knocking against the Jak tree as suggested by the Counsel for the accused

appellant.

PW 6 also had testified that the deceased would have had to run like a horse to

get those injuries and has opined that they were from severe blows to the head. Further,

no blood stains have been visible on the tree according to Police observations.

The only eyewitness PW 2 had testified he witnessed his father being attacked

by his uncle the appellant. The Counsel for the Appellant was consistent in her argument

that the son of the deceased was not present at the scene of the incident and anyhow he

is not a credible witness.

It is important to note that the defence had not challenged the competency of PW

2 to give evidence at any stage of the trial. It is also observed that the learned State

Counsel before leading evidence has endevoured to elicit from the child whether he was

competent to give evidence by asking various general questions as to parents, siblings

and school. It appears that only after establishing the competency of PW 2 to testify,

the Counsel has commenced questioning about the incident.

7

E.R.S.R. Coomaraswami in his treatise Law of Evidence Vol 2 book 2 at page

658 has stated as follows referring to child witnesses:

There is no requirement in English law, that the sworn evidence of a child

witness needs to be corroborated as a matter of law. But the jury should be warned, not

to look for corroboration, but of the risks involved in acting on the sole evidence of

young girls or boys, though they may do so if convinced of the truth of such evidence

This requirement is based on the susceptibility of children to the influence of others and

to the surrender to their imaginations.

At page 659 it states, As regards the sworn testimony of children, there is no

requirement as in England to warn of the risks involved in acting on their sole

testimony, though it may be desirable to issue such a warning, though the failure to do

so will generally not affect the conviction.

It was stated in Panchchi vs the State of U.P (1998) 7 SCC 177, that evidence of

a child witness must be evaluated more carefully and with greater circumspection

because a child can be easily swayed by what others tell him and thus a child witness is

an easy prey to tutoring.

M.Ajith Kumara alias Ajith Vs. Attorney General in CA No 2018/2012, decided

on 26.09.2014 is a case where a small child when he was about 5/6 years old at the time

of the incident had witnessed his own mother, grandmother and the grandfather, being

murdered. His evidence had been led when he was about 15 years of age and the trial

judge who observed the demeanor and deportment of the child witness had considered

him to be a truthful witness. Gooneratne J, had held that there was no basis to intervene

and interfere in the reasoning of the trial judge and further went on to state that the

defence had not succeeded in making any breakthrough in the evidence of the child

witness to favour the defence case.

8

Likewise, in the instant case, the testimonial trustworthiness of the evidence of

PW 2 was not affected by the cross examination. It appears that he had been cross

examined as if he were an adult which was unfair which had made the learned trial

judge to comment in page 15 of the judgment (page 302 of the brief)as follows:

.

It is established that while the assault was in progress PW 2 has run to get

assistance and had informed PW 3 and had come back almost immediately with PW3

and thereafter, had made a statement to the police with his mother . Further, on a

perusal of the evidence of Nimosha PW 2 as stated earlier, his evidence has been

intelligent, consistent and credible and therefore, believable. PW 3 has corroborated the

evidence of PW2 that he was informed by PW 2 that his father was being assaulted by

Peeris Bappa and immediately when he went to the scene and had witnessed the

deceased fallen and injured. The evidence of PW 3 was unchallenged. Therefore, the

appellants position that PW 2 was not present when the incident took place cannot be

sustained.

On consideration of the totality of the evidence it is obvious that the version of

the prosecution witnesses is more probable and anyhow, that the evidence of PW 2 is

credible evidence who has witnessed the assault to his father which led to his demise.

The prosecution has established beyond reasonable doubt that it is the act of the

appellant that has caused the death of the deceased.

I will now turn to consider the submission of the Counsel for the defence to

consider lesser culpability of the appellant under exception 4 of section 294 of the Penal

Code and that there was no intention to commit murder on the part of the appellant. The

judicial decisions in Murugesu Vs The King (1951) 52 NLR at page 471-472, The King

9

Vs Jinasekere 46 NLR in page 246, have been referred to by the Counsel for the

appellant to justify his proposition.

It is unfortunate that the position of the defence regarding the continuous land

disputes between the deceased and the enmity of the appellant was not put to the

prosecution witnesses.

However, we are of the opinion that the following facts ought to be considered

from the evidence that was elicited; the appellant bringing a sword and a knife to the

place of incident; the utterance either you or me; the previous complaints to the police

and the admitted enmity between the parties; the deceased cutting or more aptly

destroying the banana bushes for no apparent reason in the backdrop of existing disputes

regarding the ownership of the land; the deceased having in possession a half empty,

quarter bottle of liquor and the medical evidence that the deceased was under the

influence of liquor to some mild degree; the amount of injuries on the body of the

deceased.

The bone of contention seems to be the ownership of the land. Thus, the deceased

felling the banana bushes would have definitely angered and upset the appellant.

Although the appellant has stated that the act of the deceased cutting the banana bushes

did not make him angry, it is hard to believe that to a prudent person, considering the

past behaviour of the appellant where the land matters were concerned.

In such circumstances any prudent man could accept that the appellant has acted

on cumulative provocation.

10

The learned Counsel for the Respondent has submitted that the evidence of the

accused appellant, to the effect that the deceased encountered the injuries by running in

to the Jak tree does not support his defence of cumulative provocation. Further, that

the murderous intention was established by the injuries to the skull and face area. It was

also submitted that the fact that the appellant leaving the area and being apprehended

two days later does not help him with the plea of cumulative provocation.

It is important to consider the circumstances under which the alleged offence

had taken place. It transpired that at least for a period of ten years there was an enmity

existing between the deceased and the appellant based on the ownership of the Maha

Idama. The appellant refuses to acknowledge a relationship to the accused who bear

the same surname. It is understood that merely on the surname a relationship cannot be

established. However, from the evidence of PW 2 and the deceased claiming rights from

the Maha Idama, it is a fair assumption that the parties could be relations. In that

background the deceased felling the banana plants would have definitely angered the

appellant.

In King VS Bellana Vithanage Eddin 41 NLR page 345 Court of Criminal

Appeal observed thus;

In a charge of murder it is the duty of the Judge to put to

the jury the alternative of finding. The accused guilty of culpable

homicide not amounting to murder when there is any basis for such a

finding in the evidence an record, although such defence was not

raised nor relied upon by the accused.

11

Therefore, it is our considered view that on the evidence that transpired in this

case, it is the duty of the Court to consider whether the appellant is entitled to have the

benefit of the lesser culpability.

It is on record that even at a late stage while the evidence of the accused appellant

was in progress the Counsel has made such an application to Court to consider lesser

culpability. It is obvious that the learned trial judge has either not given his mind or

considered the application in the background of the afore stated evidence.

In consideration of the totality of the evidence in this case, that the appellant is

guilty of the offence of culpable homicide not amounting to murder on the basis of

sudden fight on cumulative provocation.

We therefore, set aside the finding and conviction for the offence of murder

imposed by the trial judge and we find the appellant guilty of the offence of culpable

homicide not amounting to murder an offence punishable under section 297 of the Penal

Code. We set aside the sentence of death imposed by the trial judge.

We impose a sentence of 10 years rigorous imprisonment on the accused and a

fine of Rs 5000/= and in default of which we order a further term of one year simple

imprisonment.

Having regard to the fact that the accused appellant is incarcerated from the date

of conviction, we further make order that the 10 year rigorous imprisonment should

operate from 10.07.2015, namely the date of conviction.

12

The registrar is directed to send a copy of this judgment together with the original

case record to the High Court of Matara.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

P.Kumararatnam,J

I Agree

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL