==== BLOCKS ==== 

WRT/904/25

Page 1 of 19

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Orders in

the nature of Writs of Certiorari and

Mandamus under and in terms of Article 140

of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

Welgamage Don Shevan Menusha Welgama,

41A, Fathima Road,

Kandana.

PETITIONER

C.A. Case No. WRT/904/25

Vs.

1. Rev. Brother Janaka Fonseka,

Principal,

De Mazenod College,

Kandana.

2. Hon. Dr. Harini Amarasuriya,

Minister of Education,

Ministry of Education,

Isurupaya, Battaramulla.

3. K. M. G. S. Nalaka Kaluwewa,

Secretary to the Ministry of Education,

Isurupaya, Battaramulla.

4. Anura Abeywickrama,

Director of Education,

Physical Education and Sports,

Ministry of Education.

Isurupaya, Battaramulla.

WRT/904/25

Page 2 of 19

5. P. A. Leelananda Kumarasiri,

Secretary - Sri Lanka Schools Cricket

Association,

Therapuththa National School,

Ambalanthota.

6. J. A. Kamal S. Indrajith,

Sri Lanka Schools Cricket Association,

Kegalu Vidyalaya, Kegalle.

7. Kanishka Perera,

Under 19 Tournament Secretary - Sri

Lanka Schools Cricket Association,

St. Sebastian's College, Moratuwa.

RESPONDENTS

BEFORE : K. M. G. H. KULATUNGA, J.

COUNSEL : Sumedha Mahawanniarachchi with Amila Vithana and Nishan

Balasooriya for the Petitioner.

Pasan Weerasinghe, instructed by M.K.M. Farzan for the 1st

Respondent.

Rajika Aluwihare, SC for the 2nd to 4th Respondents.

Hiran de Alwis with Prathap Perera instructed by Darsha

Lekamwasam for the 5th, 6th and 7th Respondents.

ARGUED ON : 15.10.2025

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS ON : 17.10.2025

DECIDED ON : 21.10.2025

WRT/904/25

Page 3 of 19

JUDGEMENT

K. M. G. H. KULATUNGA, J.

1. The petitioner is presently a Grade 12 student at D. S. Senanayake

College, Colombo. The petitioner, from Grade 01 up to the G.C.E.

Ordinary Level Examinations, had been a student of De Mazenod

College, Kandana. The petitioner claims to have left De Mazenod College

on or about 31.05.2024 and then joined Grade 12 of D. S. Senanayake

College. Whilst at De Mazenod College, the petitioner was the Captain

of the First XI Cricket Team and was a top-order batsman and the

wicket-keeper. The fact that the petitioner was a talented cricketer and

a member of the First XI Team is common ground. Upon shifting to D.

S. Senanayake College, as the petitioner was desirous of joining and

playing cricket for D. S. Senanayake College, he had requested the letter

of ‘No Objection’ as required by Rule 1.1.9 of Circular No. 03 of 2022 of

the Ministry of Education, dated 11.03.2022, as amended by Circular

No. 03 of 2022 (ii), dated 25.08.2024 (P-5 and P-6 respectively).

2. The 1st respondent principal had not issued the said letter of ‘No

Objection’ notwithstanding several requests being made. The written

request made by the petitioner is annexed and marked P-10, according

to which the petitioner informed the 1st respondent, Principal, that he

intends to play cricket for D. S. Senanayake College under the Division

I Category. As such, he has requested the said ‘No Objection’ letter. It

is the petitioner’s position that he was not issued with a letter and his

request was not considered favourably. Mr. Mahawanniarachchi for the

petitioner submitted that he is entitled, in the first instance, to be

registered under D. S. Senanayake College to participate in the

upcoming schools cricket tournament 2025/26 on the basis that a

period of one year has lapsed since leaving the first-mentioned school,

De Mazenod College. The petitioner relies on the date of leaving De

Mazenod College as reflected in the leaving certificate issued by the 1st

respondent, marked P-4. Secondly, the petitioner claims that he is

entitled to a letter of ‘No Objection’ as there is no valid ground or basis

WRT/904/25

Page 4 of 19

assigned for the refusal, and the said refusal is illegal and invalid. It is

also the position of the petitioner that in the circumstances made

available, the petitioner is lawfully entitled to obtain the said letter.

3. It was submitted on behalf of the 1st respondent that there is a

typographical error in stating the date of leaving the school, on the

leaving certificate P-4. The 1st respondent admits that on the face of the

said leaving certificate, the date of leaving school is mentioned as

31.05.2024. It is his position that the petitioner had registered for the

A-Level classes at De Mazenod College as evident by R-1(a) and R-1(b).

In these circumstances, the date on the leaving certificate P-4 is

erroneous as regards the date of leaving school.

4. It is the position of the 1st respondent that the request for the said letter

was refused by him verbally. The petitioner has also complained to the

Human Rights Commission (hereinafter referred to as “HRC”) (vide P-

17). It is specifically alleged therein that the said letter of ‘No Objection’

was requested, and the Principal of De Mazenod College had refused to

issue the same. The initial complaint had been made by letter P-18,

dated 23.07.2025, according to which he alleges that his request for the

said letter was refused. Then, it is averred by the petitioner that the 1st

and the 2nd respondents had not participated at the HRC Inquiry

initially, but on 02.09.2025, the 1st respondent Principal had

participated. According to P-24, the HRC Inquiry had proceeded on that

day; however, there is no intimation as to the decision, determination,

or the finding arrived at by the HRC upon inquiry.

5. The Principal of D. S. Senanayake College had tendered the names of

the players for registration at the Under 19 Tournament Secretary of

the Sri Lanka Schools’ Cricket Association (vide P-25). The petitioner’s

name, which appears at No. 24, has been struck off. The principal of D.

S. Senanayake College has then, by letter P-26, written to the Secretary

of the Sri Lanka Schools’ Cricket Association and requested that the

WRT/904/25

Page 5 of 19

petitioner be registered for the tournament, as he had left the last

school one year prior to the application for registration. The said letter

has also intimated that with the lapse of one year of leaving the previous

school, the letter of ‘No Objection’ would not be required. The 5th and

6th respondents have not heeded to this request. In view of the refusal

to issue the said letter of ‘No Objection’ by the 1st respondent and the

refusal to register by the 5th – 7th respondents, the petitioner has filed

this application and sought relief by way of writs of mandamus directing

the 1st respondent to issue a letter of ‘No Objection’ and for the 5th – 7th

respondents to include the names in the list of players registered for D.

S. Senanayake College.

6. The main issue of contention is the refusal or the non-issuance of the

letter of ‘No Objection.’ Prior to considering this, it is necessary to advert

to the relevant provisions of the Circular bearing No. 03 of 2022 of the

Ministry of Education, as amended. The relevant provisions (as

amended) are as follows:

“1.1.9

ශිෂ්‍යයකු / ශිෂ්‍යාවක වවනත් පාසලකට ඇතුළත් වීවෙන් පසු එෙ ඇතුළත් වූ දිනවේ

සිට වසරක කාලයක් ඇතුළත නව පාසල යටවත් ක්‍රීඩා තරගවලට ලියාපදිිංචි වන්වන්

නම් ඔහු / ඇය දැනට ඉවගනුෙ ලබන පාසල යටවත් ක්‍රීඩා වලට ඉදිරිපත්වීෙට

විරුද්ධත්වයක් වනාෙැති බවට පසුගිය වසර තුළ ඉවගන ගත් සියලුෙ පාසල් වල

විදුහල්පතිවරුන්වගන් ලිඛිත අවසරයක් ලබා වගන අධයාපන අොතයාිංශවේ අධයාපන

අධයක්ෂ්‍, ශාරීරික අධයාපන හා ක්‍රීඩා වවත ඉදිරිපත් කර අනුෙැතිය ලබා ගත යුතුය. 6

වරේණිය හා 12 වරේණිය සදහා පළමුවරට ඇතුළත් වූ සිසුන්ට පාසල නිවයෝජනය

කිරීෙට ද ක්‍රීඩා පාසල් සඳහා ඇතුළත් වන ක්‍රීඩා ශිෂ්‍යත්වලාභින්ටද තෙ ක්‍රීඩා පාසල

නිවයෝජනය කිරීෙට ද ඉහත 1.1.8 ට යටත්ව වෙෙ නිතිය බලවනාපැවැත්වේ.”

(vide Circular No. 03 of 2022, dated 11.03.2022)

“1.1.9.1

ඉහත 1.1.9 අනුව යම් ක්‍රීඩකයකු/ ක්‍රීඩිකාවක වපර සිටි පාසවල් විදුහල්පතිවරයාවේ

ලිඛිත අනුෙැතියක් වනාෙැති නම් වසරක කාලයක් සඳහා නව පාසවලන් ක්‍රීඩා කිරීෙට

අවසර වනාලැවේ. ඒ අනුව 1.1.8 හා 1.1.10 වගන්ීන්ට යටත්ව එෙ ක්‍රීඩකයාට /

WRT/904/25

Page 6 of 19

ක්‍රීඩිකාවට වසරක කාලයක් තුළ තො වපර සිටි පාසවලන් ක්‍රීඩා කිරීෙට අවසේථාව හිමි

විය යුතු අතර, එෙ වසරක කාලය තුළ එෙ පාසවල් කණ්ඩායෙට ද හානියක් වනාවන

වසේ, එෙ ඉවත්වන ක්‍රීඩකයකු/ ක්‍රීඩිකාවක වවනුවවන් නව ක්‍රීඩකයකු/ ක්‍රීඩිකාවක

පුහුණු කර ගැනීෙට ද අවසේථාව හිමි වේ.

(vide Circular No. 03 of 2022 (ii), dated 25.08.2024)

7. According to the abovementioned provisions, if a student engaging in

sports is representing the relevant school, such student, upon shifting

and being admitted to a new school, is required to obtain a letter of ‘No

Objection’ from all the Principals of the schools where such student

studied within the previous year. Upon obtaining such written

permission, the student who intends to engage in sport is then required

to tender the same to the Director of Education, Physical Education &

Sports, and obtain the approval. However, this letter would not be

required if such student was admitted to the second named school for

the first time to Grade 6 or Grade 12. Similarly, if the application for

registration to engage in school sports is made after the lapse of one

year of entering the new school, then too, no such letter is required. By

way of an amendment to the said Circular, provision was introduced,

by Rule 1.1.9.1, enabling such student to engage in such sport in the

previous school for a period of one year. The sum total of these

provisions is that in the said circumstances the written permission, by

way of a letter of ‘No Objection,’ is required to be obtained from such

previous Principal/s. To that extent, a Principal of a previous school is

conferred with the power to issue such a letter.

8. The grounds on which or the considerations to be taken into account

in determining the issuance or non-issuance of such letter are not

specifically and expressly spelt out by or under the said Rules. Broadly,

the rationale and object of Rule 1.1.9 is to prevent poaching of

sportsmen and sportswomen. Further it appears that it is also to

prevent an exodus of talented players or such players being suddenly

drawn to another school that would give an unfair advantage to one

WRT/904/25

Page 7 of 19

school and correspondingly place the first-mentioned school in a

disadvantage. Similarly, it appears to also provide some form of cooling-

off period, to prevent a player with the inside information of the first-

mentioned team from making use of such knowledge and information

against the said first-mentioned school. As I see, these are some

probable objects and purposes. There may be more. However, the

decision to grant or refuse such letter of ‘No Objection’ should

necessarily be on a rational basis which should have a bearing on the

object sought to be achieved by this Rule. I will not at this juncture

attempt to exhaustively or otherwise try to determine what such

grounds may be.

9. On an overall consideration of the provisions of Rule 1.1.9, it is

apparent that there is no blanket prohibition or prevention of talented

sportsmen and sportswomen from changing their school, and then

immediately participating in such sport, which they are so talented.

What is required is the permission by the Principal of the previous

school/s in the form of a letter of ‘No Objection’. If such letter is

obtained, then a student who shifts and is admitted to another school

is perfectly free and entitled to engage such in schools’ sports activities.

Accordingly, a principal is vested with the authority to decide on the

issuance or non-issuance of such letter. Thus, the Principal of the 1st

school is required to consider a request of each student as and when it

is submitted and to determine upon considering the relevant matters.

If there be a refusal, it should be conveyed and rules of natural justice

require reasons to be assigned. It is best that the basis of the refusal, if

it be so, be made known immediately to the relevant party.

10. In the present application, as afore-narrated, though a request has been

made, the 1st respondent has not, at any stage, formally responded and

conveyed his refusal or informed of the reasons for the said refusal.

However, it is common ground that the 1st respondent has in fact refused

to grant this letter of ‘No Objection.’ However, no reasons have been

WRT/904/25

Page 8 of 19

assigned or informed at the initial stage. I have carefully perused the

Statement of Objections of the 1st respondent. I did not observe any

reasons expressly stated therein either. In the course of the arguments,

the learned Counsel for the respondent himself was unable to draw the

attention of this Court to any such averment containing such reasons. I

have ventured into considering the various documents tendered and

annexed, according to which it appears that the 1st respondent refers to

a WhatsApp message which has been circulated marked R-3, by which,

it has been generally informed to the players and parents of the 1st

respondent school, inter alia, that:

“According to the new circular issued for 2025, no player will be

allowed to participate in any form of cricket without the

official approval of the school. Any player who does so, will

face a one-year ban from all cricketing activities.

Under the 2024 circular, this restriction did not exist, which is why

a player who left the school last year was still able to play under

a special license. However, with the new regulations, this is no

longer possible. If a player chooses to leave the school now, they

will lose the opportunity to play cricket at competitive levels

unless they have completed their O-Level Examinations.”

Accordingly, the players and parents appear to have been informed that

such player will not be allowed to participate in cricket without the

official approval of the school. This is a reference to the letter of ‘No

Objection’ and an assertion that without such a letter, the players are

not permitted to participate in cricket in their new schools.

11. Apart from this, the petitioner had complained to the HRC, and the 1st

respondent had participated at the HRC Inquiry on 02.09.2025. The said

proceedings are marked P-24, according to which, the following relevant

matters are evident:

i. that De Mazenod College, Kandana, is a private school and not a

government school;

WRT/904/25

Page 9 of 19

ii. that in accordance with the Circular No. 03 of 2022, the Principal

of the school is vested with a discretion, but the said decision was

taken by a committee;

iii. that if such students shift to new schools, such authorisation qua

letter of ‘No Objection’ will not be issued;

iv. that if the letter of ‘No Objection’ is issued to the petitioner, this

will recur in the following year, and the school will be compelled

to grant them also the same concession;

v. that school cricket is of significant importance and the school

spends a large sum of money for cricket, and as such, that the

1st respondent had informed the student that if any student was

to leave the school, the letter of ‘No Objection’ will not be issued;

vi. it is also reiterated that as a substantial amount of funds had

been incurred for the development of cricket, if such cricketers

leave, it is a matter of serious concern to the school; and

vii. that the HRC has been informed by and on behalf of the 1st

respondent that De Mazenod College has taken a policy decision

not to issue such letters of ‘No Objection’ as required by Rule

1.1.9 of the said Circular to those cricket players who leave the

school.

viii. It is also the 1st respondent’s position that in view of the clear

intimation made by the WhatsApp message the students were

made aware and they knew that the letters of ‘No Objection’ will

not be issued as a matter of policy.

The relevant extracts of the statements made at the HRC are as follows

(vide P-24):

“වගඋත්තරකරුගේ නීතීඥ: නමුත් පාසවල් සේථාවරය වම්ක වපෞද්ගලික පාසලක්.

රජවේ පාසලක් වනාවවයි.” (at page 74 of the brief)

“වගඋත්තරකරුගේ නීතීඥ: වම් වවේ අභිෙතය වදනවද නැද්ද කියලා ීරණය කිරීවම්

බලය විදුහල්පතිතුො සතු වූවත් වම්ක කමිටුවක් ගන්න ීරණයක්. වෙයා වම්

පාසවලන් යන්වන් අලුත් පාසලකට. වම් අයට වට්සේඇප් ගෲප් එකක් තිවයනවා.

WRT/904/25

Page 10 of 19

ඒවකන් පැහැදිලිවෙ දැනුම්ීල තිවයනවා ඔයවගාල්වලා වම් විදියට ගිවයාත් වෙෙ

පාසවලන් නම් අවසේථාව වදන්වන් නෑ කියලා.” (at pages 74-75 of the brief)

“වගඋත්තරකරු: පාසල් ක්‍රිකට් කියන්වන් විශාල වදයක්. වම් කියන පාසවලන් විශාල

වියදෙක් දරනවා ක්‍රිකට් ක්‍රීඩාව වවනුවවන්.” (at page 75 of the brief)

“වගඋත්තරකරුගේ නීතීඥ: එෙ කාරණය සම්බන්ධවයන් ෙෙ යෙක් කියන්න ඕනෑ. ද

ෙැසිවනෝද් විදයාලය ක්‍රිකට් ක්‍රීඩාව සිංවර්ධනය කරන්න සෑවහන මුදලක් දරලා

තිවයනවා. එවන් ආවයෝජනයක් කරල තිවයන අවසේථාවකී වම් දරුවන් ද ෙැසිවනෝද්

විදයාලය හැර යාෙ සෑවහන තත්ත්වයක්.” (at page 75 of the brief)

“වගඋත්තරකරුගේ නීතීඥ: වගඋත්තරකාර පාර්ශවය වන ද ෙැසිවනෝද් විදයාලවේ

විදුහල්පති වවනුවවන් ො වවත ලැබී ඇති උපවදසේ අනුව සහ ෙවේ හැඟීෙ අනුව ො මිත්‍ර

නීීඥ ෙහතාවේ කරුණු දැක්වීෙට ප්‍රතිචාරයක් වලස මුලින්ෙ සඳහන් කර සිටින්වන් ද

ෙැසිවනෝද් විදයාලය විසින් ප්‍රතිපත්තිෙය ීරණයක් වගන තිවයනවා වම් පැමිණිල්වල්

පැමිණිලිකරුවන් වදවදනා කඳාන ද ෙැසිවනෝද් විදයාලවේ කණ්ඩායෙට බැඳී ක්‍රීඩා

කිරීවෙන් අනතුරුව වම් වනවිට වවනත් පාසල් කණ්ඩායෙකට ක්‍රිකට් ක්‍රීඩා කිරීෙට

අවසර ඉල්ලා ඇති අවසේථාවක එකී අවසරය ලබා වනාීෙයි.” (at page 76 of the

brief).

The sum total of the aforesaid, is,

i. that the decision to refuse and not issue a letter of ‘No Objection’

has been taken by a Committee and not the Principal himself;

ii. that a blanket policy decision has been taken to not issue such

letters, for any reason; and

iii. that the reason for the said decision is primarily is the fact of the

school having incurred and expended a large amount of money

for school cricket.

12. According to Rule 1.1.9, the decision and discretion to issue the letter

is conferred and vested with the Principal of the 1st school. When the

power to decide and discretion is so vested with a person or authority,

such person or authority is required to make such decision. The said

WRT/904/25

Page 11 of 19

rules do not provide the principal to delegate this function to any other

person or body. it is clearly admitted that the decision not to issue the

letter of ‘No Objection’ and not to give consent was not made by the

Principal. It is said to be a committee of which the Principal claims to

have been a member. As specifically averred in Para 11 of the Statement

of Objections, the 1st respondent has admitted the fact that he had not

decided by himself. Para 11 reads as follows:

“Answering averments in paragraph 12, the 1st respondent states

that he, as the principal did not, and does not, act unilaterally in

such matters. The decision rested with the duly constituted Sports

Committee comprising the principal, two Vice Principals, the Sports

Coordinator, the Prefect of Games, and the Master-in-Charge of the

School. The committee unanimously decided not to issue such letter

owing to matters morefully enumerated herein below.”

The 1st respondent, in no uncertain terms, concedes that he as the

principal does not act unilaterally in such matters. The decision is with

a duly constituted sports committee, he says. He submits that the

committee so unanimously decided this above matter.

13. It is not unlawful or illegal for a person vested with a discretionary

power to obtain the views, opinions, advice, and even reports from 3rd

parties to aid and assist in making a decision. However, he cannot totally

abdicate the function of determining and making such decision by

himself. The 1st respondent has abdicated and surrendered his decision

to a committee of which he himself may have been a member. The fact

that he himself was a member makes no difference, as the decision,

though unanimous, is not the decision of the person who is empowered

to so decide. I find the following paragraph from Wade & Forsyth’s

Administrative Law (11th Ed., at page 269, ‘Power in the Wrong Hands’)

directly relevant to the above:

“Closely akin to delegation, and scarcely distinguishable from it in some cases, is any arrangement by which a power conferred upon one authority is in substance exercised by another. The proper authority may share its power with someone else, or may allow

WRT/904/25

Page 12 of 19

someone else to dictate to it by declining to act without their consent or by submitting to their wishes or instructions. The effect then is that the discretion conferred by Parliament is exercised, at least in part, by the wrong authority, and the resulting decision is ultra vires and void. So strict are the courts in applying this principle that they condemn some administrative arrangements which must seem quite natural and proper to those who make them.”

Further, ‘Principles of Administrative Law in Sri Lanka’ by Dr. Sunil F.

A. Cooray (4th Ed. Vol. I, at page 385) states as follows:

“The person or authority vested by statute with power, if he purports to exercise it himself, must in reality exercise it himself and not abdicate or surrender his functions to another, or act at the mere dictation of another; nor must he prevent himself from exercising it by arbitrary rules of policy which he has made for himself. The repository of power is taken to have failed to act at all “if it fails to decide the question before it and instead decides a different question; or if it decides under the dictation of another body; or if it decides by reference to a predetermined rule of policy without giving any genuine consideration to the individual merits of the case before it; or if it improperly delegates its power of decision to another person or body” [per Tambiah J., in Samarasinghe vs. de Mel (1982) 1 SLR 123, quoting ‘de Smith’s Judicial Review’].

14. The next relevant aspect is that the 1st respondent has clearly and

consistently taken up the position that as matter of policy, letters of ‘No

Objection’ were not issued. When the enabling circular clearly provides

that a student who moves to a new school is entitled to participate in

sports, with the permission obtained by way of a letter of ‘No Objection’,

the said rule clearly contemplates the consideration of each application

for such permission individually and separately. When the 1st

respondent has clearly decided on an absolute basis to refuse and not

issue such letters it to my mind is in conflict and contrary to the content

and spirit of Rule 1.1.9. In the context that such decision affects an

individual student’s interests, welfare, and future, each application

should necessarily be considered separately. Therefore, the apparent

WRT/904/25

Page 13 of 19

reason of the policy of a blanket non-issuance is not lawful, or rational,

and to that extent makes the refusal illegal. Le Sueur, Sunkin, and

Murkens (‘Public Law: Text, Cases and Materials,’ 4th Ed., at page 639,

‘Illegality: There Must Be An Actual Exercise of Discretion’) encapsulates

this principle as follows:

“Those given discretion cannot prevent themselves from using their discretion by, for example, adopting blanket policies that tie their hands in future situations and prevent them from making decisions in individual cases. This is often referred to as the ‘obligation not to fetter discretion.”

Lord Reid set out the key principles of the abovementioned obligation

not to fetter discretion, in British Oxygen Co. Ltd. vs. Minister of

Technology [1970] UKHL 4, as follows:

“The general rule is that anyone who has to exercise a statutory discretion must not ‘shut his ears to an application’. There may be cases where an officer or authority ought to listen to a substantial argument reasonably presented urging a change of policy. What the authority must not do is to refuse to listen at all. But a ministry or large authority may have had to deal already with a multitude of similar applications and then they will almost certainly have evolved a policy so precise that it could well be called a rule. There can be no objection to that, provided the authority is always willing to listen to anyone with something new to say.”

15. Finally, it is apparent that the reason for the policy of blanket refusal is

directly tagged on to the money spent for the development of cricket.

Spending or allocating a large amount of funds for the development and

advancement of sports activities, to my mind, cannot and should not be

a reason for the refusal to consider granting permission to Rule 1.1.9.

Expenditure of money be it by the school, old boys, well-wisher or any

other, cannot and should not create a bondage of the students engaging

in sports activities, or be a reason to prevent them from participating in

sports upon shifting to a new school. I have, in a similar matter, in

Kalubandanage Rushith Thamodya Sarath Kumara vs. Lt. Col.

WRT/904/25

Page 14 of 19

M.R.P. Mayadunne, Principal, Vidyartha Vidyalaya, Kandy (C.A.

Writ Application No. 0616/25) opined thus:

“…financial commitments made by the school and others cannot be a fetter or a valid reason to prevent a talented player in engaging in sports activities after moving to another school, even mid-stream. This will relegate talented students to the position of bonded labourers, so to say. This cannot be and is not the object of Rule 1.1.9 of the Circular.”

It is unfortunate that in the current context, as apparent from the

pleadings and documents before this court, I find that all authorities

have completely forgotten and misconceived that sports activities are

extracurricular activities of the school curriculum. The primary activity,

object, and purposes of school is education. The primary object of school

is education. Sports and other activities are thus rightfully referred to

as extra-curricular activities. Due to various interest and reasons, there

has been a disproportionate shift of attention and importance given to

sports activities. That being so, this Court is of the view that financial

engagements and costs incurred for sports is not a basis to justify

bonding students, so to say, in this manner.

16. Therefore, the only apparent consideration is an extraneous

consideration taken into account by the 1st respondent in the refusal to

grant the letter of ‘No Objection’. The following passage from Wade &

Forsyth’s ‘Administrative Law’ (11th Ed., at pg. 323) is pertinent in this

regard:

“There are many cases in which a public authority has been held to have acted from improper motives or upon irrelevant considerations, or to have failed to take account of relevant considerations, so that its action is ultra vires and void.… Regarded collectively, these cases show the great importance of strictly correct motives and purposes. They show also how fallacious it is to suppose that powers conferred in unrestricted language confer unrestricted power.”

Further, A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J. (P/CA, as his Lordship then was), with

Shiran Gooneratne, J. and Arjuna Obeyesekere, J. agreeing, in

WRT/904/25

Page 15 of 19

Tennakoon Mudiyanselage Janaka Bandara Tennakoon vs. Hon.

Attorney General and Others (CA/WRT/335/2016, decided on 15th

November 2020), held as follows:

“In administrative justice, failure to take into account relevant considerations and taking into account irrelevant considerations would taint and nullify the decision as illegality which is an aspect of Wednesbury unreasonableness.” In judicial review, this Court is not concerned with the merits of the case,

but as to whether the decision made is lawful or unlawful in the sense

of legality. The decision-maker should manifest that he had adverted to

and considered the merits and demerits of the relevant facts and there

should be no consideration of any irrelevant facts. In the above

circumstances, I am of the view that the 1st respondent’s refusal is illegal

and unlawful.

17. Now it is for this Court to consider the relief prayed for a writ of

mandamus by the petitioner. The application in request has been made

for a letter of ‘No Objection’ by the 1st respondent. It has been refused.

The 1st respondent has not directly communicated any reason to the

petitioner, nor averred in their statement of objections if there be any

other reason/s other than that which is evident from in the

representations made by and on behalf of the 1st respondent at the HRC.

The 1st respondent ought to have placed it before this Court by way of

objections. The only conclusion that this court can arrive at is that there

is no other reason. The only reasons uttered at the HRC are totally

irrelevant and extraneous as hereinabove found. In this regard, although

it may be argued that a ‘duty’ to give reasons did not exist originally in

the common law, this status quo has now changed. As S. A. de Smith in

‘de Smith’s Judicial Review’ (6th Ed., page 413) observes:

“. . . . it is certainly now the case that a decision-maker subject to the requirements of fairness should consider carefully whether, in the particular circumstances of the case, reasons should be given. Indeed, so fast is the case law on the duty to give reasons developing, that it can now be added that fairness or procedural

WRT/904/25

Page 16 of 19

fairness usually will require a decision-maker to give reasons for its decision. Overall the trend of the law has been towards an increased recognition of the duty to give reasons . . . .”

Further, Lord Pearce, in the landmark decision of R vs. Minister of

Agriculture and Fisheries ex p. Padfield [1968] UKHL 1, in agreement

with Lord Reid, Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest, Lord Hodson, and Lord

Upjohn, noted as follows:

“If all the prima facie reasons seem to point in favour of his taking a certain course to carry out the intentions of Parliament in respect of a power which it has given him in that regard, and he gives no reason whatever for taking a contrary course, the Court may infer that he has no good reason and that he is not using the power given by Parliament to carry out its intentions.” (emphasis added). 18. In considering this position on the duty to give reasons in the Sri

Lankan context, Dr. Shirani Bandaranayake, J. (as her Ladyship then

was), in Sirimasiri Hapuarachchi vs. Commissioner of Elections

(2009) 1 SLR 1, cited with approval the decision of Wijepala vs.

Jayawardene (S.C. Application No. 89/1995, SCM 30.06.1995) as

follows:

“In Wijepala v. Jayawardene (supra), considering the necessity to give reasons, at least to this Court, Fernando, J., was of the view that, ‘The petitioner insisted, throughout, that established practice unquestionably entitled him at least to his first extension and that there was no relevant reason for the refusal of an extension... Although openness in administration makes it desirable that reasons be given for decisions of this kind, in the case I do not have to decide whether the failure to do so vitiated the decision. However, when this Court is requested to review such a decision, if the petitioner succeeds in making out a prima facie case, then the failure to give reasons becomes crucial. If reasons are not disclosed, the inference may have to be drawn that this is because in fact there were no reasons - and so also, if reasons are suggested, they were in fact not the reasons, which actually influenced the decision in the first place” (emphasis added).

WRT/904/25

Page 17 of 19

More recently, Samayawardhena, J., in Sierra Construction Ltd vs.

Road Development Authority and Others (SC/FR/135/2023, SC

Minutes of 10.02.2025 at page 20) held as follows:

“A decision devoid of reasons is fundamentally flawed and amounts to no decision. The requirement to provide reasons serves as a safeguard against arbitrariness and upholds the principles of justice, fairness and transparency in decision-making.”

In these circumstances, it is apparent that the 1st respondent does not

have any relevant or lawful reason to refuse the granting of the letter of

‘No Objection’. If there be any, he ought to have specifically averred so.

19. In considering a request for such permission or letter of ‘No Objection’

the Principal should necessarily advert his mind and determine the

application. In making such determination he should always be mindful

that the applicant is, most of the time, a child or necessarily a student

of school-going age. If the applicant is a child, such decision maker

should advert to and be conscious Section 5(2) of the International

Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) Act, No. 56 of 2007, which

provides that “[I]n all matters concerning children, whether undertaken

by public or private social welfare institutions, courts, administrative

authorities or legislative bodies, the best interest of the child shall be

of paramount importance.” Similarly, the Directive Principles of State

Policy and Fundamental Duties under Chapter VI of the Constitution,

though not justiciable, are relevant. Article 27(13) provides that, “The

State shall promote with special care the interests of children and youth,

so as to ensure their full development, physical, mental, moral, religious

and social, and to protect them from exploitation and discrimination.” The

State will encompass all organs of the executive, legislative, as well as

the judiciary. The 1st respondent qua Principal will be a part of the

executive branch of the State. In that context, in embarking upon a

decision under Rule 1.1.9, the 1st respondent should promote, with

special care, the interests of children and youth, so as to ensure their

WRT/904/25

Page 18 of 19

full development. The sum total of the aforesaid provisions of law is that

when decisions are made in relation to children or youth, their best

interests and the promotion of their full development are relevant

considerations.

20. Such child or student, as the case may be, has a right to seek and

attend a school of his choice. If such new school can afford a better

quality of education, facilities, and opportunities, including sports,

moving into such a school will always be in the best interests of the

child. In the current context too, the petitioner claims that shifting to a

new school would afford him a greater opportunity in advancing his

sports career. This is a matter any Principal ought to take into

consideration. In the absence of any valid reason placed before this

Court, and in the absence of any material that there would be a serious

effect that overrides the interest of the student or the child, the

circumstances demand and require that the 1st respondent grant the

letter of No Objection and permission under Rule 1.1.9. In these

circumstances, there is a clear right in the petitioner to obtain the said

letter and a corresponding duty upon the 1st respondent to issue the

same.

21. Accordingly, I hold that the petitioner is entitled and has a right, in

these circumstances, to receive and obtain the letter of ‘No Objection’ as

per Rule 1.1.9.

22. In the above circumstances, I find that the petitioner is entitled to the

writs of mandamus as prayed for by prayers (d) and (e). Accordingly, I

hereby issue the said mandamus as prayed for, and direct the 1st

respondent to issue the letter of ‘No Objection’ to the petitioner playing

cricket for D. S. Senanayake College, Colombo. The said letter should be

issued and handed over to the petitioner by 12 noon on or before

22.10.2025.

WRT/904/25

Page 19 of 19

23. I also issue a writ of mandamus directing the 4nd to 7th respondents to

include the petitioner’s name in the list of players registered from D. S.

Senanayake College, Colombo for the upcoming cricket tournaments

during the season 2025/26. As a consequential remedy, the 4th

respondent is hereby further directed to grant approval as required by

Rule 1.1.9 of the Circular No. 03 of 2022 dated 11.03.2022, to the

petitioner. The 4nd to 7th respondents are hereby directed and required

to comply with these orders by 12 noon, on or before 24.10.2025.

24. This application is allowed to that extent. However, I make no order as

to costs.

Application allowed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL