Page 1 of 4

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

Court of Appeal Case No:

CA BAIL 29/22

Magistretes Of Kuliyapitiya Case No:

B 89968/21

In the matter of an application for Bail

under Section 10 (1) of the Assistance to

and Protection of Victim of Crime and

Witnesses Act no. 04 of 2015.

Officer in Charge

Police Station

Kuliyapitiya.

Complainant

Vs.

R.P. Ashen Charuka

C. Wishmitha Shehan Maduwantha

Suspect

AND NOW BETWEEN

R.P. Chaminda Wickramaearne

411/3, Kamburupola, Moonamaldeniya

Petitioner

On behalf of

R.P. Ashen Charuka.

(Presently Languishing in Remand)

Vs.

Page 2 of 4

1. Officer in Charge

Police Station

Kuliyapitiya.

Complainant Respondent

2. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department

Colombo 12

Respondent

Before: Menaka Wijesundera J.

Neil Iddawala J.

Counsel: Tenny Fernando with Sahan Weerasinghe appears for the petitioner.

Indika Nelumini, SC for the Respondent.

Argued on: 03.10.2022

Decided on: 11.10.2022

Page 3 of 4

MENAKA WIJESUNDERA J.

The instant application has been filed to obtain bail to the 1st suspect in the B report

according to the prayer of the petition. The complainant namely Hasitha Prasad Lakmal

has lodged a complaint against the 2 suspects named in the caption of the petition on

14/05/2020 for assaulting the victim and his dog with a sword. According to the IB

extracts filed by the Petitioner, the police have not been able to arrest the suspects

after the initial complaint but on 16-05-2021 the same suspects have come to his

residence and had threatened him to withdraw the complaint. Thereafter on

18/05/2021 the police had filed B report against the suspect under the instant act and

there after the learned Magistrate had remanded the suspects.

The state Counsel in the instant matter had undertaken to file objections on

05/09/2022 during the course of the day. But when this mater came up for inquiry

today which is 03/10/2022 the objections are not in the docket. Therefore, this Court

believes that the objections have not been filed by the Respondents. We also observe

in the case of Christopher V. Don. Paul (1990) 2 SRI LR (54(LA) it has been decided

that if objections are not filed considering the submitions of the Respondent is the

discretion of Court.

In the instant matter the State Counsel made verbal objections and vehemently

objected to the instant application. It is observed by this Court that although the State

Counsel has objected to the instant application, the State Counsel had been unable to

state as to when charges against the suspects in the instant matter would be filed if

any, in Court, furthermore the State Counsel had failed to file objections as per the

Supreme Court rules having given an undertaking to Court which we note with

disapproval.

The instant act has been enacted to safeguard the rights of victims and witnesses, but it

is also stated in the act, that matters pertaining to the instant act should be given

Page 4 of 4

precedence over others but in the instant matter although over 01 year has lapsed, any

legal action has not been filed against the suspects. As such bail can be granted under

the instant act only upon exceptional circumstances by this Court, the period in remand

without due administration of justice, we conclude as being exceptional to consider bail

for the 1st suspect in the B report as mentioned in the prayer to the petition on the

following conditions.

01. A cash bail of Rs. 200,000/- 02. Two sureties to the value of 500,000 each. 03. The suspect to report to every Sunday of the month to the relevant Police

station. 04. The suspect is hereby warned not to interfere with the victims or the family, if it

is reported the instant bail order would be cancelled. As such the instant application for bail is allowed and the Registrar of this Court is

hereby directed to inform the relevant Magistrates Court regarding the instant

order.

Judge of the Court of Appeal.

I agree.

Neil Iddawala J.

Judge of the Court of Appeal.