{ )

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Case No. CA 89/2016

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of .

Section 331 of Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No 15 of 1979.

The Hon. Attorney General

COMPLAINANT

Thuppahi Indika Namal Kumara De Silva

ACCUSED

., HC (Matara) Case No. HC 198/2007 AND NOW BETWEEN

1

Thuppahi Indika Namal Kumara De Silva

ACCUSED - APPELLANT

Vs

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo 12.

COMPLAINANT - RESPONDENT

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

DECIDED ON

Oeepali Wijesundera J.

: Oeepali Wijesundera J.

: Achala Wengappuli J.

: Oimuth Senerath Bandara with

Chamara Wannisekera and

Thusitha Ranathunga for the

Accused - Appellant

Chethiya Goonesekera D.S.G. for

Attoney - Genera I.

: 19th July, 2018

: 06th August, 2018

The appellant was indicted in the High Court of Matara for armed

robbery punishable under section 380 and 383 of the Penal Code. The

appellant has escaped from Galle prisons on the day of tsunami and was

not found thereafter. There has been no evidence to say he died at the

tsunami. Therefore the learned High Court Judge has held a section 241

inquiry and after recording the evidence of four witnesses has decided to

have a trial in absentia. After trial the appellant was convicted and

sentenced to life imprisonment. Subsequently the accused appellant was

arrested in the Homagama area and produced before the Matara High

Court. He has moved for a de-novo trial and a section 241 (3) inquiry was

2

held. After the inquiry the leamed High Court Judge has refused the

application of the appellant for trial de-novo and sentenced him. This

appeal is against the said judgment of the High Court.

The learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the learned

High Court Judge failed to conclude that the reasons given by the

appellant under section 241 (3) were bona fide. Although in

Samarasekera Mudiyanselage Priyantha Peiris vs AG CA 52/2012

delivered on 28/07/2015 it has been held that there was no;concrete and

cogent evidence before the trial Judge to justify the order made to

commence the trial and proceed in the absence of the a~cused.

Therefore the application made under section 241 (3) of the Criminal

Procedure Act should be allowed. In the instant case the facts are

different. The prisons have got damaged due to the tsunami and the

appellant had got away and later gone to court according to his evidence,

and was told that he will be noticed. But according to him no notice was

sent and he has changed the address of his identity card twice. Under

section 241 (3) the appellant has to satisfy court that his absence was

bona fide. Journal entry in page 12 of the case record shows that he has

been absconding.

3

The counsel for the appellant argued that there was no concrete or

cogent evidence to justify the learned High Court Judge's order made on

24/06/2016 refusing the appellant's application. He argued that an officer

of the Matara prison has given evidence to say that the appellant was not

found after the tsunami. On perusal of the evidence of this witnesses we

find that he has stated many prisoners escaped during the disaster and

later surrendered to the prison but the appellant has not surrendered,

after he escaped. This evidence shows that he has been deliberately

avoiding the trial.

The appellant while giving evidence has stated that he was :waiting

for summons from court. But he himself has stated that the address in his

identity card was changed twice. Why didn't he inform the police about

his new address if he had any intention of presenting himself before

court?

The learned Deputy Solicitor General has cited the judgments in

Rajapaksha vs The State 2001 (1) SLR 2 and Werangoda Nandana

Ratnasuriya vs The AG CA 8/2008 decided on 19/12/2008.

In Rajapaksha vs The State it was stated that "An application in

revision should not be entertained save in exceptional circumstances ... "

4

'/"

,".' ' ......... ' ....... ~. -" ... ~"'~~~~,~~

In Werangoda Nandana Ratnasuriya vs AG it was held;

"A discretion is vested in the court whether or not to order a

retrial in a fit case which discretion should be exercised judicially

to satisfy the ends of justice. n

After considering the submission made by both parties and the

judgment of the learned High Court Judge and the inquiry proceedings

we find that the appellant has failed to satisfy the High Court that his

application under section 241 (3) of the Criminal Procedure Act was bona

fide.

Section 241 (3) reads thus;

(3). Where in the course of or after the conclusion of the trial 0/ an

accused person under sub-paragraph (i) of paragraph (a) 0/

subsection (1) or under paragraph (b) of that subsection he

appears be/ore court and satisfies the court that his absence

from the whole or part of the trial was bona fide then.

(a). Where the trial has not been concluded, the evidence led

against the accused up to the time of his appearance

be/ore court shall be read to him and an opportunity

afforded to him to cross examine the witnesses who gave

such evidence; and

5

, .... ,"", ~:."~~', ..... .' '"' ~." ...

(b). Where the trial has been concJudedl the court shall set

aside the conviction and sentence, if any, and order that

the accused be tried de novo.

Allowing the appellant's application who intentionally absconded

and evaded facing his trial after committing a serious offence would not

satisfy the ends of justice.

For the afore stated reasons we affirm the judgment of the learned

High Court Judge dated 24/06/2016 and refuse the application of the

appellant.

Appeal dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Achala Wengappuli J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

6