==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 14

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

Revision in terms of Article 138 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka read with Section

364 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act

No. 15 of 1979 to revise the Order of the

Learned High Court Judge dated 15th

October 2024.

OIC Police Station, Bemmulla.

COMPLAINANT

Court of Appeal Vs.

CA Case No : CA/CPA/146/24 M.K.A.S.L.K. Gunawardene of No.230,

Kajugahawatta Road,

HC of Gampaha Doranagoda, Udugampola.

Case No. REV/201/2024

Gampaha MC case No: M.K.A.S.L.K. Gunawardene of No.230,

19067(B 3211/22) Kajugahawatta Road,

Doranagoda, Udugampola

ACCUSED

Page 2 of 14

AND NOW

M.K.A.S.L.K. Gunawardene of No.230,

Kajugahawatta Road,

Doranagoda, Udugampola.

ACCUSED-PETITIONER

Vs.

01. OIC Police Station, Bemmulla.

02. Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

COMPLAINANTS-RESPONDENTS

D.H.M. Malith Priyamantha Wijesinghe of

No. 271/F, Pedipola,

Udugampola.

VIRTUAL COMPLAINANT-

RESPONDENT

Page 3 of 14

AND NOW BETWEEN

M.K.A.S.L.K Gunawardene of

No. 230, Kajugahawatta Road,

Doranagoda, Udugampola.

ACCUSED-PETITIONER-PETITIONER

Vs.

01. OIC Police Station, Bemmulla.

02. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT-

RESPONDENT

D.H.M. Malith Priyamantha

Wijesinghe of

No. 271/F, Pedipola,

Udugampola.

ACCUSED-PETITIONER-

PETITIONER

Before: Hon Justice B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

Hon Justice Amal Ranaraja, J

Page 4 of 14

Counsel : Kamal Perera with Hansika Lokusatuhewa instructed by P.S.A

Fernando for the Petitioner

Amila Amarasekara for the Virtual Complainant-Respondent-

Respondent.

Malik Azeez, CS with Shezan Mahboob, SC for the State.

Written 22.10.2024(by the Respondent)

Submissions:

On

Argued On: 15.05.2026

Judgment On: 10.06.2026

JUDGEMENT

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

The Accused– Petitioner- Petitioner (hereinafter referred to as the Petitioner)

filed this revision application seeking, inter alia, to set aside the order of the

Learned Judge of the Provincial High Court of Western Province, holden at

Gampaha, dated 15.10.2024 in Case No. Rev 201/2024, together with the order of

the Learned Magistrate in Case No. 19067/23 dated 22.08.2024.

When the matter was supported, counsel for the Respondent raised jurisdictional

objections by way of a preliminary legal objection in relation to the

maintainability of this revisionary application on the basis that the Petitioner

cannot invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of this Court against the High Court of

Western Province, holden at Gampaha in the exercise of the parallel jurisdiction

which was vested under Article 154P (3) (b) of the Constitution.

Page 5 of 14

Originally, the revisionary jurisdiction was vested with the Court of Appeal

under Article 138 of the Constitution.

Article 138 of the Constitution, before the 13th Amendment, reads as follows:

“The Court of Appeal shall have and exercise subject to the provisions of

the Constitution or of any law, an appellate jurisdiction for the correction

of all errors in fact or in law which shall be committed by any Court of

First Instance, tribunal or other institution and sole and exclusive

cognizance, by way of appeal, revision and restitutio in integrum of all

causes, suits, actions, prosecutions, matters and things of which such

Court of First Instance, tribunal or other institution may have taken

cognizance.”

After the 13th Amendment, according to Section 5 of the High Court of Provinces

(Special Provinces) Act No. 19 of 1990, read with Article 154P (3) (b) of the

Constitution, enacted by the 13th Amendment, entitles any person to file a

revision application in the High Court of the Province.

According to the judgment of the 13th Amendment to the Constitution (1987) 2

SLR 310, the Supreme Court held that, on page 323;

“The Bills do not effect any change in the structure of the Courts or

judicial power of the People. The Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal

continue to exercise unimpaired the several jurisdictions vested in them

by the Constitution. There is only one Supreme Court and one Court of

Appeal for the whole Island, unlike in a Federal State. The 13th

Amendment Bill only seeks to give jurisdictions in respect of writs of

Habeas Corpus in respect of persons illegally detained within the Province

and Writs of Certiorari, Mandamus and Prohibition against any person

exercising within the Province any power under any law or statute made

by the Provincial Council in respect of any matter in the Provincial

Council list and appellate jurisdiction in respect of convictions ‘and

sentences by Magistrate’s Courts and Primary Courts within the Province

to the High Court of the Province, without prejudice to the executing

Page 6 of 14

jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal. Vesting of this additional jurisdiction

in the High Court of each Province only brings justice nearer home to the

citizen and reduces delay and cost of litigation.”

Giving life to these provisions, Article 138 of the Constitution was amended by

the 13th Amendment, which reads as follows:

“The Court of Appeal shall have and exercise subject to the provisions of

the Constitution or of any law, an appellate jurisdiction for the correction

of all errors in fact or in law which shall be committed by the High Court,

in the exercise of its appellate or original jurisdiction or by any Court of

First Instance, tribunal or other institution and sole and exclusive

cognizance, by way of appeal, revision and restitutio in integrum, of all

causes, suits, actions, prosecutions, matters and things of which such High

Court, Court of First Instance tribunal or other institution may have

taken cognizance.” (Emphasis added)

Article 154P (3)(b) and Article 154P (6) of the Constitution state as follows:

“(3) Every High Court shall –

(b) notwithstanding anything in Article 138 and subject to any law,

exercise, appellate and revisionary jurisdiction in respect of

convictions, sentences and orders entered or imposed by

Magistrates Courts and Primary Courts within the Province;

(6) Subject to the provisions of the Constitution and any law, any person

aggrieved by a final order, judgment or sentence of any such Court, in the

exercise of its jurisdiction under paragraphs (3) (b) or (3) (c) or (4) may

appeal there from to the Court of Appeal in accordance with Article 138.”

According to Section 5 of the High Court of Provinces (Special Provinces) Act No.

19 of 1990, the powers given to the Court of Appeal under Article 138 of the

Constitution were concurrently given to the Provincial High Court established

under Article 154P of the Constitution. By doing so, both Courts are equally

Page 7 of 14

ranked when exercising revisionary jurisdiction. The jurisdiction to hear

revisions and appeals is vested in the Provincial High Court by Act No. 19 of

1990 as amended.

Section 5 of the said Act provides that the High Court established under Article

154P of the Constitution for a province shall have and exercise appellate and

revisionary jurisdiction in respect of any orders delivered and made by the

Magistrates Courts, Primary Courts or Labour Tribunals within the Province

and from orders made under Sections 5 and 9 of the Agrarian Services Act.

Section 5 of the said Act is reproduced as follows for the purpose of convenience:

“5. The Provisions of written law applicable to appeals to the Court of

Appeal, from convictions, sentences or orders entered or imposed by a

Magistrate's Court, and to applications made to the Court of Appeal for

revision of any such conviction, sentence or order shall, mutatis mutandis,

apply to appeals to the High Court established by Article 154P of the

Constitution for a Province, from convictions, sentences or orders entered

or imposed by Magistrate's Courts, Primary Courts and Labour Tribunals

within that Province1 and from orders made under section 5 or section 9 of

the Agrarian Services Act, No. 58 of 1979, in respect of land situated

within that Province and to applications made to such High Court, for

revision of any such conviction, sentence or order.”

The central question that arises for consideration in this application is whether

this Court can act in revision when the order has been pronounced by a

Provincial High Court in terms of Section 5 of Act No. 19 of 1990.

The concept of concurrent jurisdiction exercised by the Provincial High Court

and the Court of Appeal is discussed in the following judicial pronouncements.

Justice Mark Fernando J in Weragama v Eksath Lanka Wathu Kamkaru

Samithiya and Others (1994) 1 SLR 293 at page 296.

“These amendments affected the appellate, revisionary and writ

jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal only in two respects. Firstly, Article

Page 8 of 14

154P (3) (b) conferred appellate and revisionary jurisdiction (but not writ

jurisdiction) in respect of Magistrate's Courts and Primary Courts (but not

Labour Tribunals, or other courts and tribunals); this was

"notwithstanding anything in Article 138" (and that Article was in any

event "subject to the provisions of the Constitution"), and so either the

jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal was pro tanto transferred to the High

Courts or the Court of Appeal and the High Courts had concurrent

jurisdiction.” [emphasis added]

Further held that

“(3) However, the jurisdiction of the court of Appeal under Article 138 is

not an entrenched jurisdiction, because Article 138provides that it is

subject to the provisions “of any law”; hence it was always constitutionally

permissible for the jurisdiction to be reduced or transferred by ordinary

law (of course, to a body entitled to exercise judicial power). That is the

reason why I held (in Swastika textile Industries Ltd v Dayarathne, that

Section 3 of the High Court of the provinces (Special Provisions) Act, No’

19 of 1990, conferred concurrent, appellate and revisionary jurisdiction on

the High Courts in respect of labour Tribunals, and that thereafter section

31D3 of the Industrial Disputes Act, as amended by Act No. 32 of 1990,

made that jurisdiction exclusive, there by taking away the jurisdiction of

the Court of Appeal in the respect.”

In G.K.D. Stephan Gunaratne v. Maddumage Thushara Indika Sampath and

Others, CA (PHC) APN 54/2013 (REV), Decided on 23.09.2013, A.W.A.Salam, J

held that;

“Appreciably, Section 5A of Act No 54 of 2006 quite specifically states that

all relevant written laws applicable to an appeal, in the Court of Appeal

are applicable to the High Court as well. This undoubtedly demonstrates

beyond any iota of doubt that the scheme provided by Act No 54 of 2006 to

facilitate an appeal being heard by the Provincial High Court is nothing

but a clear transfer of jurisdiction and in effect could be said that as far as

Page 9 of 14

appeals are concerned both the High Court and the Court of Appeal rank

equally and are placed on par with each other. Arising from this statement

of law, it must be understood that if the Court of Appeal cannot act in

revision in respect of a judgment it pronounces in a civil appeal, then it

cannot sit in revision over a judgment entered by the High Court in the

exercise of its civil appellate jurisdiction as well, for both courts are to be

equally ranked when they exercise civil appellate jurisdiction.”

In Muththusamy Balaganeshan v. The Officer in Charge and Another, SC/SP/LA

No. 79/2015, Decided on 01.04.2016, Priyasath Dep, PC, J (as he was then) held

that:

“When the Provincial High Court exercises appellate jurisdiction, it

exercises appellate jurisdiction hitherto exclusively vested in the Court of

Appeal. It exercises a parallel or concurrent jurisdiction with the Court of

Appeal. The High Court when it exercises appellate jurisdiction it is not

subordinate to the Court of Appeal. That is the basis for conferring

jurisdiction on the Supreme Court under section 9 of the High Court of

Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990 to hear appeals from the

judgments of the High Court when it exercises appellate jurisdiction.”

The question before us is whether this Court has the jurisdiction to entertain the

revision application, as the same is in respect of an order made in exercise of

revisionary jurisdiction of the High Court, in view of the fact that the Provincial

High Courts now exercise the same revisionary jurisdiction, which this Court

exercised under Article 138 of the Constitution. If this application is allowed, it

will set a bad precedent to allow a party who fails at the High Court to file an

application in this Court. In other words, our Courts have expressed that “a

party to an action cannot be given a chance to have a second bite of the same

cherry.”

Page 10 of 14

This concept was considered by His Lordship Kulatunga J in Abeygunasekera v.

Setunga and others,1997 (1) SLR 62,

“At the hearing of the appeal, a preliminary objection was raised that the

Court of Appeal has no jurisdiction to entertain the appeal as the same is

in respect of an order made in the exercise of the revisionary jurisdiction

of the High Court.

………..

In the alternative he submitted that the decision in Gunaratne v

Thambinayagam is wrong when it held that Section 9 of Act No. 19 of

1990 does not permit direct appeals to the Supreme Court from orders

made in the exercise of revisionary jurisdiction of the High Court of a

Province; and that it is the Supreme Court which has the jurisdiction to

entertain an appeal from the impugned judgment.

….

The power to review the orders of Magistrate's Courts and Primary Courts

by way of appeal and revision is conferred on High Courts by Article 154P

(3) (b). Section 3 of Act No. 19 of 1993 extended this power to orders of

Labour Tribunals and orders made under Sections 5 and 9 of the Agrarian

Services Act. Had these provisions conferred appellate jurisdiction on the

High Court to be exercised by way of appeal and revision, the questions of

interpretation of the kind which have arisen from time to time may not

have arisen. However, the use of the expression "appellate and revisionary

jurisdiction" has given rise to such questions.

…………..

In the case before us, Article 154P (3) (b) conferred "appellate and

revisionary" jurisdiction on the High Court. Article 154P (6) provides that

any person aggrieved by a decision of the High Court in the exercise of its

jurisdiction inter alia, under paragraph (3) (b) may appeal therefrom to

the Court of Appeal in accordance with Article 138. Thus Article 154(P) (6)

Page 11 of 14

itself has not limited the right of appeal given by it to orders made by the

High Court by way of appeal. However, that Article refers back to Article

138 which spells out the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal and the

manner of its exercise.”

The above-mentioned judgment was considered by His Lordship Ananda

Coomarasamy, J in Abeywardene v. Ajith de Silva 1998 (1) SLR 134 at pages 139

- 140, along with Their Lordships Amarasinghe J, Wadugodapitiya J, Wijetunga

J and Shirani Bandaranayake J agreeing and held that;

“The cumulative effect of the provisions of Articles 154P (3) (b), 154P (6)

and section 9 of Act No. 19 of 1990 is that, while there is a right of appeal

to the Supreme Court from the orders, etc., of the High Court established

by Article 154P of the Constitution in the exercise of the appellate

jurisdiction vested in it by Article 154P (3) (b) or Section 3 of Act No. 19 of

1990 or any other law, there is no right of appeal to the Supreme Court

from the orders in the exercise of the revisionary jurisdiction. An appeal

from an order of the High Court in the exercise of its revisionary

jurisdiction should be made to the Court of Appeal. An appeal to the

Supreme Court from the decision of the Court of Appeal would lie, with

leave.

……………

It will thus be seen that if a litigant invokes the revisionary jurisdiction of

the Court of Appeal, he has one chance for an appeal to the Supreme

Court, whereas if he invokes the revisionary jurisdiction of the High Court

he will have two chances of appeal, one to the Court of Appeal and then to

the Supreme Court, except when the revisionary jurisdiction of the High

Court is invoked in relation to an order of a Labour Tribunal, in which

case there is only one appeal and that too to the Supreme Court only.

It is further seen that the legislature did intend to have the right of appeal

to the Court of Appeal from a revisionary order of the High Court except

Page 12 of 14

when the revisionary jurisdiction of the High Court is invoked in relation

to an order of a Labour Tribunal. In response to the question placed before

this court, I hold that a direct appeal does not lie to the Supreme Court

from the order of the High Court in the exercise of the revisionary

jurisdiction. An appeal from the order of the High Court in the exercise of

its revisionary jurisdiction should be made to the Court of Appeal. Where

a party is dissatisfied with the order of the Court of Appeal, the party

may, with leave of the Court of Appeal or when such leave is refused by

the Court of Appeal, with leave of the Supreme Court, appeal to the

Supreme Court.” (Emphasis added)

In Welisarage Lakshman Nishantha Fernando v. The Hon. Attorney General

and Another, CA/MC/RE Application No. 04/2017, His Lordship E.A.G.R.

Amrasekara, J., along with A.H.M.D.Nawaz J held that:

“However, for the following reasons this court cannot grant reliefs as prayed

for in the petition;

a) The petitioner had filed revision applications in Gampaha High Court

seeking revision of the said orders made by the learned magistrate and

the said high court has dismissed the applications. (vide paragraph 8 of

the petition). It must be noted that high courts now exercised the same

revisionary jurisdiction once this court exercised over magistrate

courts. As he has filed revision applications on the same orders

previously in the High Court of Gampaha he has exhausted his

remedy. His position is that his lawyers have not brought to the notice

of High Court the facts averred in this petition. A party to an action

cannot be given a chance to have a second bite of the same cherry. If

this court allows this application it may create a bad precedent to allow

a party who fails to present his case properly file another application.”

Page 13 of 14

Recently, a similar question was considered by His Lordship Samayawardhena J

W.T.S. Nilantha Fernando v P.M.S. Nilanthi Perera, SC/APPEAL/65/2025,

decided on 10.10.2025, held that,

“Appeal against Judgments and orders of Provincial Criminal High Court

exercising revisionary jurisdiction

Since Section 9 of Act No. 19 of 1990 states that appeal to the Supreme

Court lies against judgments and orders made by the Provincial High

Court “in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction” in cases such as

Gunaratne v. Thambinayagam (1993) 2 Sri LR 355, Abeygunasekera V.

Setunga (1997) 1 Sri LR 62, and Abeygunawardene v Ajith De Silva (1998)

1 Sri LR 134, this Court held that a party aggrieved by a judgement or

order of a provincial high court in the exercise of its revisionary

jurisdiction, as opposed to its appellate jurisdiction, cannot directly appeal

to the Supreme court, and such a party must first invoke the appellate

jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal, and only thereafter, if unsuccessful,

may appeal to the supreme court. In Abeywardene v Ajith De Silva, at

Page 137, the Supreme Court observed: “if in consequences of these

decisions there would be an undesirable increase of litigation , that is the

matter for the legislature.”

…………….

The legislative intent in withholding a right of appeal against orders made

under Section 66 was not to prolong litigation but to ensure its expeditious

disposal. Where no right of appeal is granted by law, it would be illogical

to permit two successive appeals to lie – First to the Court of Appeal and

thereafter to the Supreme Court- whereas in situations where an appeal is

expressly provided, only one appeals lies directly to the Supreme Court.

In this backdrop, I would strongly recommended that the legislature

consider amending sections 9 and 10 of act No. 19 of 1990 interpolating

the words “or revisionary” after the phrase “in the exercise of the

appellate”, so that the provision would read: “a party aggrieved by a

Page 14 of 14

judgment or order of the High Court in the exercise of the appellate or

revisionary jurisdiction may appeal therefrom to the Supreme Court”

Thus, I hold that, in the instant application, the Petitioner has already

exhausted the remedy available by the statute. Therefore, the Petitioner cannot

invoke the same revisionary jurisdiction against the said order where the High

Court exercises a parallel or concurrent jurisdiction with this Court. The

Petitioner should have come by way of an appeal to this Court.

For the above-mentioned reasons, I dismiss the application without costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Amal Ranaraja, J.

I AGREE.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL