IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal under

and in terms of section 331 (1) of

the Code of Criminal Procedure

Act No. 15 of 1979.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Court of Appeal Case Colombo 12.

No. HCC/385/19 Complainant

High Court of Tangalle Vs.

Case No. THC/62/16

Thotamune Patabadige Chathura

Madusanka

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Thotamune Patabadige Chathura

Madusanka

Accused-Appellant

Vs.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12. Complainant-Respondent

2

BEFORE : K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J (P/CA)

WICKUM A. KALUARACHCHI, J

COUNSEL : Shavindra Fernando, PC with Umayangi

Indatissa and Natasha Wijesekara for

the Accused-Appellant

Anoopa De Silva, DSG for the

Respondent

WRITTEN SUBMISSION

TENDERED ON : 28.04.2021 (On behalf of the Accused-Appellant)

28.10.2021 (On behalf of the Respondent)

ARGUED ON : 04.05.2022 and 05.05.2022

DECIDED ON : 31.05.2022

WICKUM A. KALUARACHCHI, J.

The accused-appellant was indicted in the High Court of Tangalle on

the charge that he committed the offence of murder on or about the 16th

of January 2014, by causing the death of the infant Thinithi Sadithya

Sasathmi which is an offence punishable under Section 296 of the

Penal Code. After the trial, the learned High Court Judge convicted the

appellant and imposed the death sentence. This appeal is preferred

against the said conviction and sentence.

Written submissions on behalf of both parties have been filed prior to

the hearing. At the hearing, the learned Presidents Counsel for the

appellant and the learned Deputy Solicitor General for the respondent

made oral submissions.

The facts of this case may be briefly summarized as follows:

3

The accused-appellant and the PW1 had lived together since 2011

and subsequently got married in the year 2012. PW1 had a baby

girl namely Thinithi Sadithya Sasathmi. She was born on 26th April

2013. At the time of her birth, PW1 and the appellant had been

living in PW1s house. The charge against the accused-appellant is

the killing of this baby girl. During the time of this incident, PW1s

loku Thaththa (PW2) and her elder brother (Nuwan Sanjeewa)

occupied the house with PW1. However, at the time of the incident,

the appellant did not live in PW1s house with her because the

police asked him to stay out of the house due to the constant fights

between the PW1 and the appellant. So, the appellant stayed in his

house and PW1 remained in her house with her baby. The

appellants house had been located within a distance of 20-25

minutes, if one proceeds on foot.

During the time of living separately, the appellant used to visit the

baby at PW1s house daily. On the 15th of January 2014, the

appellant had come up to the road in front of PW1s house around

8.15 p.m. in a motorbike when PW1 was just about to put her baby

to sleep after returning from the temple. On seeing the appellant,

according to PW1, she had requested PW2, her Bappa to hand

over the baby to the appellant thinking that he would return the

baby as usual. PW1 says further in her evidence that she saw the

appellant proceed with the baby in the direction where Anula (PW3)

lived and she had thought that the appellant was taking the baby

to Anulas house. Thereafter, PW1 received an SMS from the

daughter of PW6 to the effect that the appellant had run upward

with the baby. Then, PW1 had searched for the baby all over, not

found and lodged a complaint to the Middeniya Police.

Around 12.15 12.20 in the night, the appellant had called PW1

and informed her to come to Thekkawatte to collect the baby. As it

had been very late in the night, PW1 did not go but PW2 had gone

4

in search of the baby and returned crying, saying that the baby girl

had been killed. On the following morning, PW1 had seen the dead

body of the baby with her neck had almost been severed.

The JMO who performed the post-mortem examination on the body of

the deceased baby was of the opinion that death was due to a fatal cut

injury caused to the neck. The main artery that supplies blood to the

brain has been cut and the head was almost severed from the neck. At

the time of the death, the baby girl was only nine months old.

There are no eyewitnesses to the incident. The prosecution case relied

on circumstantial evidence. Hence, the prosecution must prove that no

one else other than the accused had the opportunity of committing the

offence.

At the hearing of the appeal, the learned Presidents Counsel informed

this court, after a very fair analysis, that he does not intend to point out

defects or shortcomings in the judgment because the learned High

Court Judge had considered all relevant aspects of the case. However,

he invited this court to draw the attention to the fact, the impossibility

of committing such a brutal murder by the accused-appellant who loved

the baby girl so much. He submitted that the appellant constantly

visited the baby even after he left the PW1s house on the instructions

of the police. The learned Presidents Counsel also submitted that it was

impossible to think that the appellant killed the baby, if he was in a

proper state of mind. The learned President's Counsel further

contended that it can be inferred in these circumstances that he was

intoxicated or was not in a normal state of mind. Therefore, he urged to

give the benefit of the doubt to the appellant.

It is to be noted that the defence of intoxication and the doubt creates

on the improbability of committing the offence are two different

situations. The learned Presidents Counsel admitted that if the defence

5

of intoxication is accepted, the appellant has to be convicted for

culpable homicide not amounting to murder. However, if the argument

of the improbability of committing this offence by the appellant is

accepted, the appellant has to be acquitted.

When the accused-appellant gave evidence, he said that he consumed

liquor heavily on that day. The said defence of intoxication would not

succeed because of the contradiction marked X2, when cross-

examining the appellant. Although he said in his evidence that he

consumed liquor heavily on that day, contradiction marked X2 shows

that he had told the police, when making a statement that he did not

consume alcohol, since it was a Poya day. Due to this significant

discrepancy between his testimony and his statement to the police, his

evidence on intoxication is not credible and cannot be accepted.

Furthermore, there is no other evidence to imply or establish that the

appellant was so intoxicated that he couldn't understand what he was

doing. Therefore, the defence of intoxication fails.

In reply to the argument that the appellant would not commit this

offence, as he very much loved the baby, the learned Deputy Solicitor

General contended that the appellant had never been a loving father

because when the PW1 requested the appellant to return the baby as

she wanted to nurse the baby and she found it difficult to wait without

nursing the baby, the appellant had replied by asking PW1 to cut off

her nipples. The said item of evidence given by the PW1 has never been

challenged in cross-examination. Not only that, the unchallenged item

of evidence of the PW1 reveals that when the baby was killed in the

Thekkawatte, the appellant told PW1 to come to Thekkawatte and pick

up the baby. Therefore, I agree with the contention of the learned DSG

that the appellant does not appear to be a loving father to the baby.

Hence, I hold that no reasonable doubt would be created on the basis

that the appellant being a loving father would not commit this offence.

6

The learned Presidents Counsel also pointed out that the evidence of

PW6 and PW1 is contradictory in respect of the SMS message sent by

the daughter of the PW6. It is correct that PW6 has stated in her

evidence that she saw a person running upward towards the

Thekkawatte with a baby in his hands. She has also said that she could

not identify the person. However, the PW1 says that she received an

SMS message from the daughter of the PW6 that Chandika aiya (the

appellant) ran upward with the baby. I do not see any major

discrepancy in these two versions because what PW6 told her daughter

was that .

. . (Page 140 of the appeal brief)

She has also said that . Hence, it is apparent

that although PW6 said in her evidence that she did not see the person,

when she asked her daughter to send an SMS message to PW1, PW6

had mentioned about appellants name. Consequently, the daughter of

the PW6 conveyed the SMS to PW1 stating

.

Anyhow, this contradiction is immaterial because the accused-

appellant himself had told via mobile phone to PW1 to come to the water

tank in the Thekkawatte to collect the baby and the said item of

evidence has not been challenged. Thereafter, when PW2 went in search

of the baby on request of the PW1, it was found that the nine-month

baby has been killed. At least, there was no suggestion to the PW1 on

behalf of the appellant that the appellant did not say so. Therefore, it

clearly transpires that the appellant very well knew where the dead body

of the baby was. But he did not say that the baby was dead, instead, he

informed the PW1 to come to Thekkawatte to collect the baby. Although

the learned Presidents Counsel for the appellant contended that the

daughter of the PW6 was not called in evidence and mobile phone

details were not produced in evidence, under these circumstances,

there was no necessity to call the daughter of the PW6 in evidence or

7

submit the mobile phone details as evidence to establish the charge

against the appellant.

The learned Presidents Counsel also contended that the learned High

Court Judge has allowed to lead evidence regarding the bad character

of the appellant by allowing to disclose about a rape case filed against

the appellant in the Walasmulla Courts. (Pages 85 and 86 of the appeal

brief) In dealing with this issue, it has to be considered the reason why

PW1 had to disclose about this rape case. The question put to the PW1

in cross-examination is as follows:

, ,

?

The answer given by the PW1 was

. , .

It clearly appears that the reason for disclosing this rape case was to

explain the reason for having quarrels with the appellant. Section 54 of

the Evidence Ordinance prohibits leading evidence regarding the bad

character of the accused in Criminal Proceedings. However, Section 9

of the Evidence Ordinance states that facts necessary to explain or

introduce a fact in issue or relevant fact are relevant . in so far as

they are necessary for that purpose. This is the fact necessary to

explain a relevant fact to the case. Without disclosing about this rape

case, PW1 has no way to explain why there were quarrels between her

and the appellant.

Anyhow, the instant action is a murder case and the disclosure of the

said rape case filed against the appellant did not cause any prejudice

to the appellant in deciding this case because the learned High Court

Judge has never considered the said evidence of bad character of the

appellant in determining this action. Especially, as this is a case based

on circumstantial evidence, considering his bad character or good

character was not relevant at all in deciding the case. In addition, it is

8

to be noted that it was held in the case of Arumugam alias Podithambi

V. Range Forest Officer (1986) 2 Sri L.R. 398 that where evidence of

bad characters is given in a trial, it is not fatal to a conviction by a judge

(without a jury) if there is evidence to convict the accused and the judge

is not influenced by the evidence of bad character. In the instant

action, the learned trial judge has never been influenced by the evidence

of the bad character of the accused-appellant in any manner. Therefore,

I hold that the said evidence regarding the rape case was necessary to

answer the said question posed to the PW1 and no prejudice has been

caused to the appellant by allowing the said item of evidence to be led.

The learned Presidents Counsel for the appellant advanced another

argument that the learned High Court Judge has pre-judged the case

and remanded the appellant in the middle of the trial. (Pages 127 and

128 of the appeal brief) Apparently, the learned trial judge remanded

the appellant acting on section 263 of the Code of Criminal Procedure

Act and decided to take up the trial continuously and conclude. I am of

the view that the said order made on 26.02.2019 is lawful and in

accordance with section 263 because the explanation to the section 263

of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act states that if sufficient evidence

has been obtained to raise a reasonable suspicion that the accused may

have committed an offence and it is likely that further evidence will be

obtained by a remand, this is a reasonable cause for a remand. Also, I

am of the view that this is not a pre-determination of the case because

the said explanation states that if there is a reasonable suspicion that

the accused may have committed an offence, the accused could be

remanded. So, this is not a determination that the accused-appellant

has committed the offence but making an order in terms of a legal

provision on a reasonable suspicion raised by the evidence that led up

to that point that the accused may have committed the offence. Hence,

I regret to state that the said argument of pre-judging the case by the

order dated 26.02.2019 has no merit.

9

In the circumstances, I find no sustainable argument in respect of this

appeal to be considered by this court. Undisputedly, this is a case based

on circumstantial evidence. As decided in the cases of Junaiden

Mohamed Haaris Vs. Hon. Attorney General SC Appeal 118/17,

decided 09.11.2017, King Vs. Abyewickrama 44 NLR 254, King Vs.

Appuhamy 46 NLR 128, and Don Sunny Vs. Attorney General

(Amarapala murder case) (1998) 2 Sri L.R. 1, it was held that it was

incumbent on the prosecution to establish that the circumstances the

prosecution relied on, are consistent only with the guilt of the accused-

appellant and not with any other hypothesis.

The appellant admits the fact that he had taken the baby from the

custody of the PW1 on the day in question. After the baby had been

taken by the appellant, she was killed. Since she was a nine-month-old

baby, no one can say that she ran over or escaped from his custody. So,

if he had not handed over the baby to PW1, PW2, or any other person,

he would be responsible for the death of the baby because the baby was

in his custody. If he says that he is not responsible, at least he should

know what happened to the baby because it was entirely within his

knowledge.

In Jagath Premawardena V. Attorney General C.A. Appeal 173/2005,

decided on 19.03.2009, it was held that when considering the evidence,

there was no evidence either direct or circumstantial or no clue about an

indication of a third party. The only irresistible inference that one can be

drawn is that only the appellant and the appellant alone was involved in

commission of the crime. In the instant action also, there was no iota of

evidence about the involvement of a third party. Even the learned

Presidents Counsel for the appellant did not raise an argument

regarding a third party involvement. Undisputedly, the appellant took

the baby from the custody of the PW1 on the day in question. If he had

not handed over the baby back, the only inference that could be drawn

is that the appellant committed the murder.

10

The appellants explanation and the defence taken by the appellant was

that he handed over the baby back to the PW2 when an unknown

person had rushed out of PW1s house with a manna knife.

PW2 has given evidence in this case. It is vital to be stated that no single

question has been asked from the PW2 to the effect that the appellant

had handed over the baby to him. It must also be noted that even a

single suggestion has not been made to the PW2 to that effect on behalf

of the appellant.

An observation of the Indian judgment of Sarvan Singh V. State of

Punjab (2002 AIR SC (iii) 3652 at 3655 and 3656) has been cited in

the case of Ratnayake Mudiyanselage Premachandra V. The Hon.

Attorney General C.A. Case No. 79/2011, decided on 04.04.2017 as

follows: It is a rule of essential justice that whenever the opponent has

declined to avail himself of the opportunity to put his case in cross-

examination, it must follow that the evidence tendered on that issue

ought to be accepted. In Himachal Pradesh V. Thakur Dass (1983) 2

Cri. L. J. 1694 at 1701, Chief Justice V.D. Misra held that whenever a

statement of fact made by a witness is not challenged in cross-

examination, it has to be concluded that the fact in question is not

disputed. In addition, in the case of Motilal V. State of Madhya Pradesh

reported in (1990) Criminal Law Journal NOC 125 MP, it was held that

Absence of cross-examination of prosecution witness of certain facts

leads to an inference of admission of that fact. In view of the aforesaid

judicial authorities, the appellant who has never put his defence of

handing over the baby to the PW2 during the prosecution case,

especially when the PW2 was cross-examined, cannot formulate that

defence later at the stage of defence case.

Not only that, the following question was put to the PW2 on behalf of

the appellant in cross-examination.

: ?

11

It is apparent from this question that the fact of not handing over the

baby on that particular night by the appellant has not been disputed

by the appellant. Therefore, under any circumstances, the appellant

cannot take up the position at the end of the case that the baby was

handed over to the PW2. Therefore, necessarily the said position taken

up at the end of the case, when the accused-appellant was giving

evidence could not be believed and had to be rejected. Then the

circumstantial evidence led in this case invites to come to the only

conclusion that no one else but the appellant has committed the

murder of the baby girl.

Apart from that, the unchallenged evidence that the appellant called

PW1 and told her to come to the water tank in the Thekkawatte to

collect the baby is also a significant item of circumstantial evidence.

This is the place where the dead body of the baby was found. When the

PW2 went to take back the baby on the said request made by the

appellant, he found that the baby had been killed. The said items of

evidence have never been challenged on behalf of the appellant. So,

knowingly that the baby was killed, the appellant asked the mother,

PW1 to come to Thekkawatte and collect the baby. The learned High

Court Judge has carefully evaluated and extensively dealt with all these

relevant circumstances in his well-considered judgment and correctly

concluded that the accused-appellant has killed the baby girl.

For the foregoing reasons and the reasons stated by the learned High

Court Judge in his judgment, I hold that the proved items of

circumstantial evidence are consistent with the guilt of the appellant

and inconsistent with his innocence.

12

Therefore, I affirm the judgment dated 30.10.2019, conviction, and the

sentence imposed on the accused-appellant.

The appeal is dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K. Priyantha Fernando, J (P/CA)

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL