==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0059/2024

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka

COMPLAINANT

Vs.

Court of Appeal Case No. 1. Mohomad Kamal

CA/HCC 0059/2024 2. Raman Sivalingam

High Court of Colombo 3. Godellawaththage Chamara

Case No. HC 6824/2013 Devappriya

4. Periyathambi Mahendra Sudakar

5. Muttaiah Chandrakanth alias

Ajibu

6. Balakrishnar Ambigeswaran alias

Bahuman

7. Suppiah Ganesh Kumar alias

Kumar

8. Victor Lakmal Liyanage

9. Mohammed Fusmi

10. Mohammed Irshad

ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

CA/HCC/0059/2024

2 | P a g e

Mohomad Kamal

ACCUSED-APPELANT

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

COUNSEL : Harshana Ananda for the Appellant.

Malik Azeez, SC for the Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 26/02/2026

DECIDED ON : 08/06/2026

*******************

CA/HCC/0059/2024

3 | P a g e

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam J

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) with nine others are indicted as follows:

1. On or about 15.05.2005, in the jurisdiction of Colombo the accused

were members of an unlawful assembly with common object of

causing hurt to Fawzul Rahman alias Selvadore Janson punishable

under Section 140 of the Penal Code.

2. In the course of the same transaction the accused had committed the

murder of Fawzul Rahman alias Selvadore Janson while being

members of an unlawful assembly or with knowledge that the said

offence would be committed in the prosecution of the common object,

thereby committing an offence punishable under Section 296 read

with Section 146 of the Penal Code.

3. In the course of the same transaction the accused had committed the

murder of Fawzul Rahman alias Selvadore Janson punishable under

Section 296 read with Section 32 of the Penal Code.

Upon electing a non-jury trial, the prosecution had called all necessary

witnesses and closed their case. After the closure of the prosecution’s case,

the Learned High Court Judge acting under Section 200(1) of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979, acquitted the 2nd ,3rd ,4th ,5th ,6th,

and 7th by his order dated 19.10.2022. Defence had called on the Appellant

and the 8th Accused and both Accused had made short dock statements and

closed their case.

CA/HCC/0059/2024

4 | P a g e

Considering the evidence led at the trial, the Learned High Court Judge has

found the Appellant guilty under Section 297 of the Penal Code and had

sentenced him to 20 years rigorous imprisonment and had imposed a fine of

Rs.15000/- with a default sentence of 06 months simple imprisonment.

The 8th Accused was acquitted from the case.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the Appellant

has given consent to argue this matter in his absence. Also, at the time of

argument the Appellant was connected via the Zoom platform from prison.

On behalf of the Appellant, only one Ground of Appeal is raised. According

to the Counsel for the Appellant, evidence led at the trial does not warrant

the imposition of the maximum sentence that could be imposed under

Section 297 of the Penal Code.

Background of the Case

An incident had happened prior to the killing of the deceased. According to

PW2 and PW4, they had witnessed the Appellant and the 8th Accused

assaulting the deceased.

Hearing the primary incident, PW3, the brother of the deceased warned the

deceased not to go out and advised him to stay at home. PW3 had sought

refuge at a friend’s house. Later he had come to know about the death of the

deceased.

PW2, the wife of the deceased too had corroborated the evidence given by

PW3. Adding further, she said despite PW3’s advice to the deceased to remain

in the house, the deceased had gone out armed with a knife and had

CA/HCC/0059/2024

5 | P a g e

sustained injuries caused by the Appellant and the 8th Accused, and had

died as a result. Mother of PW2 also corroborated what PW2 had sated.

PW1, the mother of the deceased had been treated as an adverse witness by

the prosecution.

According to the JMO, the deceased had sustained 16 cut injuries and the

cause of his death was haemorrhage and shock resulting from the cut

injuries.

The Appellant in his dock statement took up the position that he was not in

the village and that his inclusion in this case was due to a personal

animosity.

The Counsel for the Appellant contends that although the Learned High

Court Judge had correctly found the Appellant guilty under Section 297 of

Penal Code on the basis of a sudden fight, he was not awarded the benefit

when he was sentenced to the maximum jail term.

According to exception 1 of Section 294 of the Penal Code “Culpable Homicide

is not murder if the offender whilst deprived of the power of self-control by

grave and sudden provocation, causes the death of the person who gave the

provocation, or causes the death of any other person by mistake or accident”

The explanation under this exception read as that “Whether the provocation

was grave and sudden enough to prevent the offence from amounting to

murder is a question of fact.”

It is very important at this stage to discuss the development of law regarding

the acceptance of provocation as a special exception to a murder charge in

our jurisdiction.

CA/HCC/0059/2024

6 | P a g e

In Premalal v Attorney General [2000] 2 SLR 403 Kulatilaka,J held that:

“Until the judgment of Chief Justice H.N.G Fernando in Samithamby v

Queen (de Krester, J- dissenting) our court followed a strict view in

applying Exception (1) set out in Section 294 of the Penal Code. Our Judges

following their counterparts in England interpreted the phrase “sudden

provocation” to mean that provocation should consist of a single act which

occurred immediately before killing so that there was no time for the anger

to cool and the act must have been such that it would have made a

reasonable man to react in the manner as the accused did. Our Courts

were reluctant to take into consideration any special circumstances which

manifested in the particular offender’s case”.

Kulatilaka, J. further held that:

“Of late we observe a development in other jurisdictions where

Courts and juries have taken a more pragmatic view of the

mitigatory plea of provocation. In a series of cases in applying the

mitigatory plea of provocation Courts took into consideration the

prior course of relationship between the accused and his victim”.

In the case of Samithamby v The Queen (1962) 64 NLR 13 it was held:

“An offender may be said to have been deprived of his power of self-control

by grave and sudden provocation within the meaning of Exception 1 to

section 294 of the Penal Code even though there was an interval of time

between the giving of the provocation and the time of the killing, if the

evidence shows the at, all the time during the interval, the accused

suffered under a loss of self-control.”

CA/HCC/0059/2024

7 | P a g e

In the case of Chuti v The Attorney General [2003] 2 SLR 272 it was held

that:

“When considering a prosecution for murder whether the accused was

deprived of self-control by grave and sudden provocation, the jury must

apply an objective test. It must be considered objectively in relation to the

class of society to which the accused belongs”.

In the case of Punchibanda v The Queen (1969) 72 NLR 529 it was held:

“Mere abuse unaccompanied by any physical act may be sufficient

provocation to reduce what would otherwise be an offence of murder to the

offence of culpable homicide not amounting to murder.

It is the duty of the Judge to direct the jury that in considering the question

of provocation they should consider whether the provocation was grave to

an average person from the same social class and background as the

accused person.”

In the case of Namaratne and Another v The State (2001) 2 Sri L.R. 27 it

was held that:

“In this country mere abuse, even if unaccompanied by physical violence

made in certain circumstances afford sufficient provocation to reduce the

offence of murder to culpable homicide not amounting to murder, and the

question whether such provocation was grave enough to mitigate

intentional killing of a man is a question of fact to determine.”

According to the witnesses, the deceased had gone out armed with a knife

even though he was severely warned to remain in the house. He had

sustained fatal injuries when he had gone out with a knife.

CA/HCC/0059/2024

8 | P a g e

Ashworth in 1975 Criminal LR 558-559 opines as follows:

“The significance of the deceased’s final act should be considered

by reference to the previous relations between the parties, taking

into account any previous incidents which add colour to the final

act” ……. The point is that the significance of the deceased’s final

act and its effect upon the accused-and indeed the relation of

the retaliation to that act-can be neither understood nor

evaluated without reference to previous dealings between the

parties”.

In this case, the evidence transferred that the deceased had gone out from

the house armed with a knife despite the advice to remain in the house. This

clearly shows the participation of the deceased in this incident.

The incident had taken place in the year 2005 and the trial had commenced

in the High Court in the year 2019. The conviction and sentence were

imposed in the year 2023. Further, the Appellant, in mitigation has brought

to the notice of the Court about his family situation.

Considering all circumstances, I consider it is not appropriate to impose a

maximum sentence of 20 years in this case. Considering all the

circumstances of the case, I set aside the 20 years rigorous imprisonment

and substitute it with 10 years rigorous imprisonment. The fine imposed by

the learned High Court Judge is to remain same.

Additionally, I order a compensation of Rs.250,000/- payable to the

deceased’s family. In default a 01-year simple sentence is imposed.

Considering all the circumstances, I order the sentence be operative from the

date of conviction i.e.; from 27.06.2023.

CA/HCC/0059/2024

9 | P a g e

Subject to the above variation of the sentence, the appeal is dismissed.

The Registrar is directed to send this judgment to High Court of Colombo

along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL