==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA(PHC)/0135/20

Page 1 of 6

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application an

appeal under Article 138 of the

Constitution.

Cooperative Deputy Commissioner

(Colombo),

No. 72, Mahamegha Watta,

Maharagama.

Applicant

Vs. Yatiyana Arachchige Sujeewa,

No. 70/, Suramya Mawatha,

Elhena Road,

Maharagama.

Respondent

AND Yatiyana Arachchige Sujeewa,

No. 70/, Suramya Mawatha,

Elhena Road, Maharagama.

Respondent- Petitioner Vs. Cooperative Deputy Commissioner

(Colombo),

No. 72, Mahamegha Watta,

Maharagama.

Court of Appeal Case No: CA(PHC) 0135/20 PHC Case No: HCRA98/19 Magistrate Court Case No: 25663

CA(PHC)/0135/20

Page 2 of 6

Applicant-Respondent

AND BETWEEN Yatiyana Arachchige Sujeewa,

No. 70/, Suramya Mawatha,

Elhena Road,

Maharagama.

Respondent- Petitioner-Appellant Vs. Cooperative Deputy Commissioner

(Colombo),

No. 72, Mahamegha Watta,

Maharagama

Applicant-Respondent-Respondent AND NOW BETWEEN Yatiyana Arachchige Sujeewa,

No. 70/, Suramya Mawatha,

Elhena Road, Maharagama.

Respondent- Petitioner-Appellant-

Petitioner Vs. Cooperative Deputy Commissioner

(Colombo),

No. 72, Mahamegha Watta,

Maharagama.

Applicant-Respondent-

Respondent-Respondent

CA(PHC)/0135/20

Page 3 of 6

Before : D. THOTAWATTA, J.

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Counsel : Thishya Weragoda with

Wasana Nalawatta instructed by Niluka

Dissanayake for the Respondent-

Petitioner-Appellant-Petitioner.

Panchali Witharana, SC for the

Applicant-Respondent-Respondent-

Respondent.

Argument concluded on : 07.07.2026

Written Submissions

of the Respondent-Petitioner

-Appellant-Petitioner

tendered on : Not tendered.

Written Submissions

of the Applicant-Respondent

-Respondent-Respondent

tendered on : Not tendered.

Decided on : 24.09.2026

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

The instant appeal arises from an order dated 20.08.2020 (hereinafter called

and referred to as “the principle order”) made by the learned High Court Judge

of the Western Province holden in Colombo (hereinafter called and referred to

as “the learned High Court Judge”) in the exercise of the revisionary

jurisdiction vested in it by Article 154P(3)(b) of the Constitution of the

CA(PHC)/0135/20

Page 4 of 6

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka (hereinafter called and referred to

as “the Constitution”).

The Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant-Petitioner (hereinafter called and

referred to as “the Petitioner”) in prayer ‘b’ of the petition filed along with the

instant application dated 22.06.2026, seeks an appropriate interim order

staying the proceedings of the Magistrate of Nugegoda in case No. 25663

and/or to maintain status quo until final determination of the instant

application on the grounds urged in paragraph 10 (a), (b) and (c) of the petition

which application was opposed by the learned State Counsel for the

Applicant-Respondent-Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter called and

referred to as “Respondent”).

The principal ground urged in paragraph 10 (a) of the petition in support of

the instant application for an appropriate interim order staying the

proceedings of the Magistrate of Nugegoda in case No. 25663 and/or to

maintain status quo until final determination of the instant application being;

If a prison sentence is imposed against the Appellant by the Magistrate

Court and in the event of the Appellant being successful in this matter

before Your Lordships' Court, the final Judgement will be rendered futile

or nugatory as the punishment would forthwith be imposed in the

Appellant. Hence, the burden of proof thereof, will solely, rest on the

Appellant. Now, the pivotal question is whether the Appellant has been

successful in discharging the burden of proof so rested in him.

It may now, be examined.

Upon a careful perusal of the averments in the petition in its totality, it

manifestly, appears that, no reason whatsoever, has been adduced by the

Petitioner in support of the principal ground so urged in paragraph 10(a) of

the petition in the first place, nor, has he shown even in the course of the

argument before us in support thereof, any such ground other than merely,

re-iterating what has been stated in his petition in the second place.

CA(PHC)/0135/20

Page 5 of 6

I would therefore, hold that, the instant application is not entitled to succeed

both in fact and law for want of proof thereof.

Besides, upon a careful perusal of the principal order sought to be impugned

by the Petitioner in the instant appeal in its totality, it prima facie, appears

that, the learned High Court Judge has rightly, and properly, taken into his

consideration in determining the application in revision filed before him by

the Petitioner the fact that, the Petitioner has obtained a loan from the

Respondent in respect of which Arbitral award has been made by the

Respondent against him which fact had never been denied and/or challenged

and/or controverted by the Petitioner even before any of the Courts, namely;

the Magistrate Court and the High Court.

Furthermore, the learned High Court Judge had clearly, observed that the

documents ‘X4’ to ‘X11’ that had been produced before him in the application

in revision for the first time, by the Petitioner, which documents were alleged

to have been forged by the Respondent which fact too, was never sought to be

challenged and/or controverted and/or refuted and/or disproved by the

Petitioner by proof on the contrary before the High Court.

Moreover, the learned High Court Judge had in the principal order, further

observed that, the learned Magistrate had acted strictly, in accordance with

the law in passing the order sought to be impugned by the Petitioner before

the learned High Court Judge in his application in revision and therefore,

there has been no illegality, nor irrationality nor procedural impropriety in the

order, all of which would prima facie, direct to the point that principal order

sought to be impugned by the Petitioner in the instant appeal has no merit.

Furthermore, the learned High Court Judge had observed that it is also an

uncontroverted fact that, the Petitioner had obtained a further loan of

Thirteen Million Rupees from the Respondent, repayment of which too, had

been defaulted by the Petitioner thereby, showing his conduct which

disentitles him for the remedy sought in his application in revision made

before him.

CA(PHC)/0135/20

Page 6 of 6

Hence, it would become abundantly, clear that it would be most unlikely, that

the Petitioner would succeed in the instant appeal at the end.

In the circumstances, it cannot be prima facie, said that, whatever the order

that may be pronounced by this Court in the principal appeal, would become

nugatory if not granted, an interim order of kind as asked for by the Petitioner

in paragraph 10 (a) of his petition at this juncture.

I would therefore, hold that the principal ground urged by the Petitioner in

paragraph 10(a) of the petition cannot sustain both in fact and law which

follows that the other two consequential and/or ancillary grounds urged by

the Petitioner in paragraph 10(b) and (c) too, would not be entitled to succeed.

In view of the foregoings, I would hold that the Petitioner has not made out a

strong prima facie case for an interim order of kind as asked for in prayer ‘b’

of his petition.

In the result, I would dismiss the instant application for an interim order of

kind as asked for in prayer ‘b’ of his petition however, without cost.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL