t I

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRAIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

Court of Appeal No. CA (PHC) 136/2006

High Court Anuradhapura No. 08/2001/Writ

Dingiribanda Ranathunga,

Alapath Wewa Road,

Palugaswewa.

Petitioner-Appellant

v.

I.Co-operative Employees Commission,

North Central Province,

No. 352, Maithreepala Senanayake

Mawatha, Anuradhapura.

2. Secretry,

Co-operative Employees Commission,

North Central Province,

No. 352, Maithreepala Senanayake

Mawatha, Anuradhapura.

3.Maradnkadawala Multi purpose

Co-operative Society Ltd,

Maradankadawala.

And others

Respondents-Respondents

Before : Malinee Gunarathne J.

L.T.B. Dehideniya J.

II,

1 i I I I I 1 1 i i ! I 1

2

Counsel : Mahinda N anayakkara for the Petitioner Appellant.

C.Paranagamage instructed by Namasena Gamage for the

3 rd 9th 11 to 16th Respondents

Argued on : 25.01.2016

Decided on : 12.05.2016

L.T.B. Dehideniya J.

This is an appeal from the judgment of the Learned High Court Judge of

Anuradhapura. The petitioner was the accountant of the 3rd Respondent

Society and his services has been terminated after an inquiry. Being

dissatisfied with the decision of the said inquiry, the Petitioner appealed

to the 1st Respondent. After several days of inquiry, the 1st Respondent

delivered the order dated 13.05.1998 acquitting the Petitioner and ordered

the 3rd Respondent to reinstate the Petitioner from 01.06.1998, but the 3rd

Respondent did not implement the order. Thereafter, the Petitioner

negotiated with the Respondents for redress but being unsuccessful,

instituted action in the High Court of Anuradhapura seeking for mandate

in the nature of writ of mandamus against the 3rd to 10th Respondents to

implement said order of the 1 st Respondent and a writ of mandamus

against 1 st and 2nd Respondents to take legal action to implement the said

order. The Learned High Court Judge dismissed the application on two

grounds i.e. on undue delay of instituting the action and on the

irregularity in the jurat of the affidavit. Being aggrieved by the said

judgment, this appeal is preferred to this Court.

The affidavit filed in the High Court is in Sinhala language. In the jurat it

says that the Petitioner has affirmed to the correctness of the facts stated

Ir

J ,

3

in the affidavit instead of stating that he affirmed to the truth of the facts

stated in it. The affidavit is a form of evidence tendered to Court. The

deponent has an obligation to make solemn and formal declaration. In the

opening part of the affidavit he declared that he "as a Buddhist, solemnly

truly and sincerely declare and affirm" has shown that he intended to tell

the truth and before the Justice of Peace he affirmed to the correctness of

the facts stated in the affidavit.

Mohamed V. Jayaratne and others [2002] 3 Sri L R 181 is a case where

the opening part of the affidavit stated that "solemnly, sincerely and truly

declare and affirm as follows." and the jurat of the affidavit read that "the

deponent having understood the contents thereof sworn to". It has been

held that;

"In the instant case the words used by the petitioner in the opening

part of his affidavit manifest his intention to make a solemn and

formal declaration. The words used show his consciousness of his

fundamental obligation to tell the truth. It was our considered view

that the use of the word affirm in the opening part of the affidavit

and the word swear in the jurat cannot militate against the

manifested intention of the petitioner to make a formal declaration

in the discharge of his fundamental obligation to tell the truth".

In the instant case also the deponent, the Petitioner, showed his

fundamental obligation to make a formal declaration and his

consciousness to tell truth. He has affirmed that the facts in the affidavit

are correct. Accordingly, I hold that the affidavit or-the Petitioner is a

valid affidavit.

The impugned order of the 1st Respondent is dated 13.05.1998 and it was

communicated on 21.05.1998. The application was filed in the High

J , 1 i f I ,

4

Court for a writ of mandamus on 20.03.2001. The Learned High Court

Judge considered this as a delay. The Counsel for the Petitioner brought

to our notice that the petitioner has negotiated with the 1 st Respondent to

get the order implemented until the last communication of the 1 st

Respondent dated 16.01.2001 marked P27, where the Petitioner was

informed that the 1 st Respondent is unable to reconsider the decision

dated 13.05.1998 and was advised to take legal action. The counsel

submits that the Petitioner instituted the action within three months and

there is no delay.

The impugned order was to reinstate the Petitioner from 01.06.1998, was

not implemented by the 3rd Respondent. The Petitioner, on 03.06.1998

informed the 3rd Respondent with a copy to the 1st Respondent by letter

marked P 14 that he was not called for duty as per the order of the 1 st

Respondent and requested to reinstate him. The 3rd Respondent by letter

dated 12.06.1998, marked P15, informed the 1st Respondent with a copy

to the Petitioner that the Board of Directors of the 3rd Respondent has

decided to suspend the implementation of the order of the 1 st Respondent.

The Petitioner knew from the date of letter P14, i.e. from 12.06.1998 that

the 3rd Respondent is not going to implement the impugned order. The

Petitioner instituted this action more than one and half years after coming

to know that the order will not be implemented by the 3 rd Respondent.

Writ is a discretionary remedy and it is well settled principle that a person

seeking for a discretionary remedy shall come to Court expeditiously. It

was held in Sarath Hulangamuwa v. Siriwardene [1 ?86] 1 Sri L R 275

that 10 months delay is unreasonable. In the case of Wijegoonewardene v. Kularatne - 51 NLR 453 held that unreasonable delay in making the

application in the absence of lawful excuse for the delay, the application

should be refused.

I I f I

5

In the instant case the Petitioner, being an accountant, knowingly that the

decision will not implemented by the 3rd Respondent, without seeking for

a remedy in Court, kept on writing to the 1 st Respondent for relief. It is an

unreasonable and unacceptable delay. My view is that it warrants the

dismissal of the application.

Accordingly I see no reason to interfere with the finding of the Learned

High Court Judge.

Appeal is dismissed without cost.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Malinee Gunarathne J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

IjII I