==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA (PHC) APN 40-2025

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

Revision in terms of Article 138,

read with Article 145 of the

Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, of

the Judgement dated 6th of October

2024 of the High Court of the

Western Province Holden in

Colombo.

Court of Appeal The Director General

Revision Application No: Commission to Investigate

CA (PHC) APN 0040/2025 Allegations of Bribery or

Corruption,

No. 36, Malalasekera Mawatha,

Colombo-07.

COMPLAINANT

High Court of Colombo No: Vs.

HCB 115/2021

1. Maldeniyage Don Upali

Gunarathne Perera

No.372, Upper Karagahamuna,

Kadawatha.

2. Hewa Rajage Wasantha

Wimalaweera

No.59, Wilabada Road,

Gampaha.

3. Upali Senarath Wickramasinghe

CA (PHC) APN 40-2025

2 | P a g e

No.300 G, Godagama Road,

Athurugiriya.

4. Sudheera Parakkrama Jinadasa

No.65, Model Town,

Rathmalana.

ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

Sudheera Parakkrama Jinadasa

No.65, Model Town,

Rathmalana.

4TH ACCUSED-PETITIONER

Vs.

1. The Director General

Commission to Investigate

Allegations of Bribery or

Corruption,

No. 36, Malalasekera Mawatha,

Colombo-07

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

2. The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo-12.

RESPONDENT

CA (PHC) APN 40-2025

3 | P a g e

3. Maldeniyage Don Upali

Gunarathne Perera

No.372, Upper Karagahamuna,

Kadawatha.

4. Hewa Rajage Wasantha

Wimalaweera

No.59, Wilabada Road,

Gampaha.

5. Upali Senarath Wickramasinghe

No.300 G, Godagama Road,

Athurugiriya.

ACCUSED-RESPONDENTS

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi,J.

COUNSEL : Maithri Gunaratne, PC with G.G.C.

Godacumbura, K. Senanayake

instructed by C. Ranatunga for the

Petitioner.

Janaka Bandara, DSG with Anusha

Sambandapperuma, A.D.L. for the

Complainant-Respondent.

WRITTEN SUBMISSION

OF THE PETITIONER : 10/10/2025

WRITTEN SUBMISSION

OF THE COMPLAINANT-

RESPONDENT : 21.10.2025

CA (PHC) APN 40-2025

4 | P a g e

DECIDED ON : 02/12/2025

*****************************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The 4th Accused-Petitioner (hereinafter referred to as the Petitioner) had

filed this Revision Application against the judgment of the Learned High

Court Judge of Colombo dated 06.10.2024.

According to the Petitioner, the Complainant-Respondent (Hereinafter

referred to as the Respondent) filed an indictment against the Petitioner

and three others under the Bribery Act in the High Court of Colombo.

After a full-blown trial, the learned High Court Judge of Colombo had

found the Petitioner and the three others guilty and had imposed a jail

sentence and fine.

Against the said judgment of the learned High Court Judge, the Petitioner

had filed an appeal in the Court of Appeal. The Appeal Court case number

and the next date of the case had not been mentioned in the Petition by

the Petitioner. While the said appeal remained pending, the Petitioner

preferred this application and invoked the revisionary jurisdiction of this

Court on the same judgment.

CA (PHC) APN 40-2025

5 | P a g e

The Petitioner had submitted the following exceptional circumstances for

the consideration of this court. The same is re-produced below, as per

the written submission filed by the Petitioner:

a. The Conduct of the learned High Court Judge.

i. Overstepping of judicial boundaries and jurisdiction: (As per

Paragraphs 32 of the Petition).

ii. Grave procedural impropriety- Denial of a Fair Hearing: (As

per Paragraphs 26,27, and 41 of the Petition).

iii. Arbitrary disregard of material and exculpatory evidence: (As

per Paragraphs 41, 43, 44 and 45 of the Petition)

iv. Procedural impropriety and violation of the presumption of

innocence: (As per Paragraphs 42, 43 and 45 of the Petition).

b. The conduct of the prosecution and chief investigator.

i. Defective indictment: (As per Paragraphs 39 and 47 of the

Petition).

ii. Shifting goalposts by the prosecution being disregarded by

the learned High Court Judge: (As per Paragraphs 40 and

42 of the Petition)

iii. Tainted the investigation and arrested the chief investigative

officer: (As per Paragraphs 42,44 and 57 of the Petition).

c. Misapplication of legal principles.

i. Judgment rendered Per Incuriam: (As per Paragraph 38 of

the Petition).

ii. Disregard for the burden of proof: (As per Paragraph 49 of

the Petition).

iii. Misapplication of the Ellenborough Dictum: (As per

Paragraph 48 of the Petitioner).

CA (PHC) APN 40-2025

6 | P a g e

At the very outset, the learned Deputy Solicitor General who appeared for

the Respondent has raised the following preliminary objections:

A. A party cannot invoke this extraordinary jurisdiction of the

Appellate Court as of right.

B. Six months and 9 days delay on the part of the Petitioner

amounting to laches barring the grant of revisionary relief.

C. The Petitioner’s failure to file a copy of the petition of appeal

submitted is fatal.

D. The delay in deciding the appeal would not amount to an

exceptional ground to invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of the

Court of Appeal.

E. The Petitioner had not averred any exceptional circumstances to

invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of this court, and no separate

averment is found in the petition referring to any special reasons

for filing this application by way of revision while an Appeal is

pending.

It is settled law that revision is a discretionary remedy, and such power

shall be invoked only upon the demonstration of exceptional

circumstances.

In Marian Beebee v. Seyed Mohamed 69 CLW 34 the court held that:

“The power of revision is an extraordinary power of the court

which is quite independent and distinct from the appellate

jurisdiction of the Supreme Court. The object of revisionary

jurisdiction is to ensure the due administration of justice and

the correction of all errors in order to avoid a miscarriage of

justice”.

CA (PHC) APN 40-2025

7 | P a g e

In the case of Rasheed Ali v. Mohamed Ali and Others [1981] 1 SLR

262, the court held that:

“ …the powers of revision vested in the Court of Appeal are

very wide and the Court can in a fit case exercise that power

whether or not an appeal lies. Where the law does not give a

right of appeal and makes the order final, the Court of Appeal

may nevertheless exercise its powers of revision, but it should

do so only in exceptional circumstances. Ordinarily the Court

will not interfere by way of review, particularly when the law

has expressly given an aggrieved party an alternative remedy

such as the right to file a separate action, except when non-

interference will cause a denial of justice or irremediable

harm”.

At paragraph 65 of the Petition, the Petitioner just mentioned that he had

filed an appeal against the judgment of the learned High Court Judge

delivered on 06.11.2024. No further detail was averred regarding the

pendency of the said appeal. Although, filing a copy of the Petition of

Appeal is mandatory as per Rule 3(1) of the Court of Appeal (Appellate

Procedure) Rules, 1990, the Petitioner has not expressly mentioned in

the Petition that a copy of the Petition of Appeal is annexed along with

the Petition.

In Elangakoon v Officer-in-Charge, Police Station, Eppawala and

another [2007] 1 SLR 398 the Court held that;

“For the following two-fold reasons this Court is inclined to decide the

issue in favour of the Respondents in that the petitioner has failed to

satisfy Court that he had pursued an alternative remedy of a legally

tenable Appeal before filing this Revision Application.

CA (PHC) APN 40-2025

8 | P a g e

(A) Firstly, the petitioner had failed to file to file a copy of this Petition of

Appeal filed in the High Court of Anuradhapura along with the

Petition and Affidavit at the time of filing this revision application,

though he had filed same marked X1 very much later along with his

written submissions filed on 11.07.2007. Rule 3(1) (a) and (b) of the

Court of Appeal (Appellate Procedure) Rules of 1990 is clear as

crystal on this matter.

All copies of documents material to the application have to be filed

along with the petition and affidavit. Where a person is unable to

tender any such document, he shall state the reason for such

inability and seek leave of Court to furnish such document later. This

Petition of Appeal filed against the impugned order is a vital

document material to the application to bolster the Petitioner’s

position that he has pursued the alternative remedy of appeal.

However, the petitioner has neither produced same at the time of

filing of the application nor sought permission to furnish it later. This

is a violation of Rule 3(1) (a) and (b) and therefore, the petitioner is

precluded from producing the document later and using it to support

his written submissions”.

On perusal of the annexed document marked ‘X’, I found a copy of the

Petition of Appeal tendered to the High Court of Colombo on 13.11.2024

by the Petitioner. The availability of the Petition of Appeal in the revision

brief is completely suppressed by the Petitioner. As such, the Respondent

submits that the Petitioner had not come before this Court with clean

hands and therefore, cannot invoke the Revisionary Jurisdiction of this

Court.

The suppression of material facts to the court means intentionally

withholding or concealing important information that is relevant to a

legal proceeding. Such actions can significantly impact the fairness of a

trial/inquiry, as they may prevent one party from having all the facts

necessary to present their case or defend themselves against allegations.

CA (PHC) APN 40-2025

9 | P a g e

In short, the suppression of material facts is a serious violation of legal

principles that can undermine the integrity of the justice system. Courts

take such actions seriously, as they would directly affect the ability to

reach fair and just outcomes in legal cases.

In Alphonso Appuhamy v Hettiarachchi 77 NLR 131 the Court held

that:

“When an application for a prerogative writ or an injunction is made,

it is the duty of the petitioner to place before the Court, before it

issues notice in the first instance, a full and truthful disclosure of all

the material facts; the petitioner must act with uberrima fides”.

In Walkers Sons & Company Ltd. v Wijesena [1997] 1 SLR 293 the

Court held that;

“It is now settled that a person who makes an ex parte application

is under an obligation to make the fullest possible disclosure of all

the material facts and that if he does not make the fullest possible

disclosure, then he cannot obtain any advantage which may have

already have been obtained by him.

"A party cannot plead that the misrepresentation was due to

inadvertence or misinformation or that the Applicants was not aware

of the importance of certain facts which he omitted to place before

court."

In the case of Collettes Ltd. v. Commissioner of Labour and Others

[1989] 2 SLR 6 it was held that:

“It is essential, that when a party invokes the writ jurisdiction- or

applies for an injunction, all facts must be clearly, fairly and fully

CA (PHC) APN 40-2025

10 | P a g e

pleaded before the court so that the court would be made aware of

all the relevant matters.”

Further, in the case of Laub v. Attorney-General (1995) 2 SLR 88 it was

held that:

“The Petitioner has not acted with uberrima fides, he has

suppressed material facts - this application could be dismissed in

limine.”

Since the Courts rely on the information provided by the parties, the duty

of full disclosure is of great importance in legal proceedings. Here the

Courts rely heavily on the information provided in order to arrive at a fair

and informed decision. Therefore, if a party withholds or misrepresents

material or relevant facts, it can lead to an incomplete or inaccurate

understanding of the case which will in turn will result in an unjust or

unfair judgment.

Courts discourage the suppression of material facts which not only

misleads the court but also undermines the integrity of the judicial

process and compromises their ability to arrive at just and equitable

decisions. It will also inevitably lead to serious consequences including a

dismissal of the petition, adverse inferences, and even potential legal

penalties.

In the instant Revision Application, the Petitioner has not disclosed the

existence of an appeal pending before the Court of Appeal and its current

status with its Court of Appeal number.

This particular jurisdiction, in respect of Revisions, is not something that

is invoked as per a statutory right. Rather, such an Application for

Revisions would be an extraordinary remedy which can be sought only

in situations where there is no alternative remedy or other exceptional

CA (PHC) APN 40-2025

11 | P a g e

circumstances, and where the interest of justice requires such remedy.

The Court has continuously stressed on the fact that revisionary

jurisdiction is not to be invoked as a substitute of the general and

ordinary appellate procedure established and brought about by law. The

Court’s discretion must, accordingly, be exercised rarely, when proper

explanations on why the Petitioner seeks such revisionary jurisdiction

during a pending appeal is provided.

His Lordship, Samayawardena, J. in Geethani Nilushika v Waruni

Harshika SC Appeal 93/2017 dated 18.06.2021 it was held that:

“Revision is a discretionary remedy. A party cannot invoke this

extraordinary jurisdiction of the Appellate Court as of right. When

the right of appeal is available against a judgment or an order, a

party seeking to come before Court by way of revision shall explain

in the petition why he did not exercise his right of appeal”.

In Ellangakoon v Officer-in-Charge, Police Station, Eppawala and

another [Supra] the Court held that;

“The revisionary powers of this Court is a discretionary power and

its exercise cannot be demanded as of right unlike the statutory

remedy of appeal. Certain pre-requisites have to be fulfilled by a

petitioner to the satisfaction of this Court in order to successfully

catalyse the exercise of such discretionary power”.

In this case the Petitioner has not only failed to explain the existence of

an appeal filed, but has also wilfully suppressed the details of existence

of an appeal with its appeal number in his petition.

Next, on perusal of the exceptional circumstances mentioned in the

written submission, I am unable to consider that those grounds come

CA (PHC) APN 40-2025

12 | P a g e

within the purview of exceptional circumstances. Those are more

applicable to be grounds of appeal as stipulated in the Petition of Appeal

filed in the High Court of Colombo. As the Petitioner has filed an appeal

which is pending in the Court of Appeal, I conclude that the Petitioner

could take up those grounds for argument at the appeal argument.

In CA(PHC) APN 170/2017 dated 07.06.2018 the Court held that:

“Since there is an appeal, pending before this Court it is open for the

parties to have their rights adjudicated by this Court in that appeal.

When there is a right of appeal provided for by law, an applicant in

a revision application must show the existence of exceptional

circumstances or any intervention by a revisionary Court. This Court

cannot accept the grounds urged in the petition as exceptional

circumstances as they are mere grounds of appeal upon which the

petition of appeal may have been lodged”.

The Petitioner in his written submission states, “The power of a

Revisionary application is not automatic. The procedural requirement to

first support the application for notices serves as a critical preliminary

filter. At this stage, the onus is entirely on the Petitioner to demonstrate,

prima facie, the existence of circumstances so exceptional that they

warrant Your Lordship’s intervention. Applications that fail to cross this

high threshold are dismissed in limine, thereby ensuring that only

alleging a grave illegality or a palpable miscarriage of justice proceed

further. [Dharmaratna v Palm Paradise Cabanas Ltd (2003) 3 SLR 24]”.

I too agree, that it is the profound duty of the Petitioner to demonstrate

the existence of exceptional circumstances which, the court needs to

have examined and considered in a revision application.

CA (PHC) APN 40-2025

13 | P a g e

Article 138 (1) of the Constitution of the Democratic Republic of Sri Lanka

states:

The Court of Appeal shall have and exercise subject to the

provisions of the Constitution or of any law, an appellate

jurisdiction for the correction of all errors in fact or in law which

shall be committed by the High Court, in the exercise of its

appellate or original jurisdiction or by any Court of First Instance,

tribunal or other institution and sole and exclusive cognizance, by

way of appeal, revision and restitutio in integrum, of all causes,

suits, actions, prosecutions, matters and things of which such

High Court, Court of First Instance, tribunal or other institution

may have taken cognizance:

Provided that no judgement, decree or order of any court shall be

reversed or varied on account of any error, defect or irregularity,

which has not prejudiced the substantial rights of the parties or

occasioned a failure of justice.

The phrase “by way of appeal, revision and restitutio in integrum” very

clearly indicates that separate, distinct, independent and mutually

exclusive powers and jurisdictions have been granted to the Court of

Appeal. As such, this would mean that each form of appeal, revision or

restitutio in integrum would function as a separate and alternative

remedy, each of which must be applied according to the nature and

procedural stance of the matter in question. It must be noted that such

remedies must not be applied cumulatively or concurrently in respect of

the same cause.

In Colombo Apothecaries Ltd. & Others v. Commissioner of Labour,

[1998] 3 Sri L.R. 320 the Court held that:

“The power of revision vested in the court is discretionary. The power

will be exercised when there is no other remedy available to a party.

It is only in very rare instances where exceptional circumstances are

CA (PHC) APN 40-2025

14 | P a g e

present that courts would exercise powers of revision in cases where

an alternative remedy has not been availed of by the appellant.

Thus, the general principle is that revision will not lie where an

appeal or other statutory remedy is available. It is only if the

aggrieved party can show exceptional circumstances, for seeking

relief by way of revision, rather than by way of appeal, when such

appeal is available to him as of right, that the court will exercise its

revisionary jurisdiction in the interests of due administration of

justice”.

In this case, the Petitioner has already invoked his statutory right of

appeal in the Court of Appeal and the case registered under No. HCB

115/2021. No further detail about this case was given in the revision

petition.

I agree with the learned Deputy Solicitor General that allowing this

revision application would open floodgates for similar applications filed

in the future.

In Dharmaratne and Another v. Palm Paradise Cabanas Ltd. [Supra]

the court further held that:

“Existence of exceptional circumstances in the process by which the

court selects the case in respect of which the extraordinary method

of rectification should be adopted. If such a selection process is not

th ere revisionary jurisdiction of this court will become a gateway of

every litigant to make a second appeal in the grab of a Revision

Application or to make an appeal in situations where the legislature

has not given a right of appeal”.

In this case, the Petitioner had simultaneously resorted to both appellate

and revisionary remedies. But the Petitioner had supressed the date of

argument of the appeal. This suppression has shown a mala fide

intention of the Petitioner. Further, the grounds raised as exceptional

CA (PHC) APN 40-2025

15 | P a g e

circumstances are appeal grounds which can be addressed at the hearing

of the appeal.

Considering all these factors, I do not see any exceptional circumstances

adduced to the satisfaction of this court. Further, the Petitioner had

already invoked his statutory right of appeal which is pending before the

Court of Appeal.

Under these circumstances, this Court is not inclined to issue notices on

the Respondent. As such, I dismiss this revision application without

ordering cost.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL