IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

Court of Appeal Case No. CA PHC 166/2016

High Court of Kandy HC Case No. Rev. 123116

Magistrate Court of Kandy Case No. 14240/16

Officer in Charge, Police Station, Kandy.

Complainant

v.

Sangakkara Mudiyanselage Salinda Sangakkara, No.54, Pilapitiya,

Kiribathkumbura.

Accused

AND BETWEEN

Sangakkara Mudiyanselage Salinda Sangakkara, No.54, Pilapitiya, Kiribathkumbura.

Accused- Petitioner

v.

1. Officer in Charge,

Police Station, Kandy.

2. Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

Complainant- Respondents

AND NOW BETWEEN

Sangakkara Mudiyanselage Salinda Sangakkara, No.54, Pilapitiya,

Kiribathkumbura.

Accused- Petitioner- Appellant

1

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS FILED ON

JUDGMENT ON

K. PRIY ANTHA FERNANDO, J.

v.

I. Officer in Charge,

Police Station, Kandy.

2. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

Respondent-Respondents

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J

K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J

Panchali Witharana SC for the Respondents.

09.06.2020

20.05.2020 by the Respondents.

30.06.2020

01. The Accused-Petitioner-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as Appellant) has preferred this

appeal against the order of the learned High Court Judge of Kandy dated 01.12.2016

dismissing the revision application filed against the order of cancellation of his driving

licence by the learned Magistrate of Kandy dated 07.11.2016.

02. After paying the relevant brief fees for the appeal, upon receiving notice by this Court, on

21.01.2020 the Appellant appeared, and learned counsel for the Appellant moved for time to

collect the brief. However, thereafter, the Appellant failed to appear or to take steps to

pursue the appeal. Thus, as the Appellant opted not to attend the Court, nor retain counsel,

2

Court decided to proceed to consider the merits of the appeal, in terms of section 349(3) of

the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.

03. I have carefully considered the proceedings in the Magistrate's Court, the order of the

learned Magistrate, the proceedings in the High Court including the judgment of the learned

High Court Judge, petition of appeal by the Appellant and the written submissions fi led by

the learned State Counsel for the Respondent.

Facts in brief

04. The Appellant was charged in the Magistrate's Court of Kandy for an offence punishable

under section 216 to be read with sections 214(l)a and 151(I)A of the Motor Traffic Act.

After conviction upon pleading guilty to the charge, the learned Magistrate imposed a fine of

Rs. 7,5001- and ordered cancellation of the Appellant's driving licence. Being aggrieved by

the above order of cancellation of the driving licence by the learned Magistrate, the

Appellant moved in revision before the High Court of Kandy. The learned High Court Judge

dismissed the revision application upon hearing the parties. The instant appeal is against the

said order of the learned High Court Judge.

05. In his petition of appeal, the Appellant had submitted that the learned High Court Judge has

failed to appreciate the necessity of applying legal principles of sentencing. It is further

submitted that the learned Magistrate has failed to take into consideration the fact that the

Appellant did not use the three-wheeler for carriage of persons for a fee, and the other

mitigatory circumstances. However, according to the prayer in the petition of appeal, the

only relief prayed for is to set aside the order of cancellation of the driving licence.

06. The applicable sections in the Motor Traffic Act as amended are as follows;

lSI (I). No person shall drive a molor vehicle on a highway ajier he has

consumed alcohol or any drug.

(lA). No person shall drive any omnibus or any other motor vehicle

intended for the carriage of persons for fee or reward on a

highway ajier he has consumed alcohol or any drug.

3

216(A). Any person who is guilty of the offence of contravening the provisions

of subsection (lA) of section 151 shall, on conviction after summary

trial before a Magistrate, be liable to a fine not less than four

thousand rupees and not exceeding seven thousand five hundred

rupees and to imprisonment of either description for a term not

exceeding six months and to the cancellation of his driving licence.

07. Hence, it is clear that the sentence imposed on the Appellant by the learned Magistrate is

well within the powers of a Magistrate.

08. Appellate Court will not interfere into a sentence passed by a lower Court unless it is illegal

or wrong in principle. It is mandatory for the Magistrate to cancel the driving licence when

an Accused is convicted for an offence in terms of section ISI(1A) as submitted above.

09. The Appellant urged that there was no document to prove that the Appellant used the three-

wheeler to convey passengers for a fee. However, the Appellant has already pleaded guilty

to the charge under section lSI (I A). Particulars of the offence as mentioned in the charge

also covers the same, so that the Appellant could have understood the charge.

10. Drunken driving has become prevalent and it further aggravates when the vehicle is used to

transport passengers. Such driver who is drunk risks the lives of the passengers as well. The

legislature has considered the seriousness of the offence, therefore, made it mandatory for

the Court to cancel the driving licence for the offence of drunken driving when the vehicle

is used for carriage of passengers for a fee.

II. Hence, the grounds urged by the Appellant are without merit and the appeal should be

dismissed.

12. It is pertinent to note that upon conviction of an Accused for an offence under section

151 (lA), it is also mandatory for the Magistrate to impose a sentence of imprisonment of

either description for a term not exceeding six months, apart from the prescribed fine and

the cancellation of the driving licence. It has escaped the mind of the learned Magistrate as

well as the learned High Court Judge who heard the revision application. Therefore, acting

in terms the powers vested in this Court by section 328 of the Code of Criminal Procedure

4

Act, in addition to the fine imposed and the cancellation of the driving licence by the

learned Magistrate, I sentence the Appellant to 6 months simple imprisonment. Taking into

consideration that there is no record of previous convictions reported, and the early guilty

plea, I order the sentence of 6 months imprisonment to be suspended for 5 years.

Subject to the above increase of the sentence, appeal is dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

5