IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRAIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

Court of appeal case no. CAlPHC246/2004

H.C. Badilla case no.

136/2002

M.C.Bandarawela case no. 14907

Ranaweera Demodaralage Somadasa,

Assistant Field Quarters,

Wewelhinna Section, Demodara

Respondent Respondent Appellant

Vs.

Abhayananda Dias,

Director,

Plantation Management and Monitoring

Division,

No. 55, Vauxhall Street, Colombo 2.

Substituted Petitioner Petitioner Respondent.

Before : P.R.Walgama J.

Counsel

: L.T.B. Dehideniya J.

: Shehan Wijegunawardhana for the Respondent Respondent

Appellant.

: Dephni Peiris for the Petitioner Petitioner Respondenst.

Argued on : 31.05.2016

Written submissions filed on 07.07.2016

Decided on : 09.09.2016

L.T.B. Dehideniya J.

}

K' ,

rt,I

l ! ,t fI

t

f1!!rf l {ttI

~ {t I, ,

1:

The Petitioner Petitioner Respondent (the Respondent) as the

competent authority under the Government Quarters (recovery of possession)

Act filed an application in the Magistrate Court of Bandarawela under section

6 of the Act seeking an order of eviction against the Respondent Respondent

Appellant (the Appellant). On notice, the Appellant appeared in Court and

sought the indulgence of Court for time to vacate the premises. The learned

Magistrate allowed the Appellant to vacate on a date after three months, on

05.03.2001. On that day the Appellant did not appear in Court and later

surrendered. Thereafter he took several days to show cause but not file any

show cause. The learned Magistrate called for the indenture of lease entered

into between the Janatha Estate Development Board (JEDB) and the

Hapugasthenna Plantation Ltd and held that the estate is leased to the

Hapugasthenna Plantation Ltd and dismissed the application. The Petitioner

moved in revision in the High Court of Badulla where the order of the learned

Magistrate was set aside and the eviction order granted. Being aggrieved by

the said order, the Appellant presented this appeal to this Court.

Under section 6 of the Government Quarters (recovery of possession)

Act the competent authority has to file in Court the application with relevant

documents which is called "the application for ejectment" in Court. The

section reads thus;

(1) In any case where the occupier of any Government quarters fails to

comply with the provisions of paragraph (b) of section 4 in respect

of any quit notice served on him relating to any Government

quarters, any competent authority (whether or not he is the

competent authority who issued such notice) may make an

application in writing in the form B set out in the Schedule to this

Act to the Magistrate's Court having jurisdiction over the area in

which such quarters are situated

(a) setting forth the following facts, namely

(i) that he is a competent authority for the purposes of this

Act,

(ii) that a quit notice (a copy of which is attached to the

application) was served on the occupier of such

quarters,

(iii) the reason for the serving of such quit notice on the

occupier, and

(iv) that such occupier has failed to comply with the

provisions of the aforesaid paragraph (b) in respect of

such notice relating to such quarters; and

(b) praying for the recovery of possession of such quarters and

for the ejectment of such occupier and his dependants, if any,

from such quarters.

(2) Every application under subsection (1) shall be supported by an

affidavit in the form C set out in the Schedule to this Act verifying

the facts set forth in such application, and shall also be

accompanied by a copy of the quit notice.

(3) Every application supported by an affidavit and accompanied by a

copy of a quit notice under the preceding provisions of this section

is in this Act referred to as an "application for ejectment ".

(4) Every application for ejectment shall be conclusive evidence of the

facts stated therein.

(5) No stamp duties shall be payable for any applicationfor ejectment.

In the present case the competent authority has filed the application for

ejectment in the Magistrate Court. Under subsection 4 of section 6

application for ejectment is conclusive evidence of the facts stated therein.

The learned Magistrate is not expected to inquire in to the veracity of the

facts stated in the application. In the present case, the learned Magistrate

called for the indenture of lease to verify the facts stated in the application.

The learned Magistrate stepped out of his authority. Section 7 of the Act

stipulates that the next step is to issue the writ of possession. If the Magistrate

is satisfied that the application is in order, not the veracity of the facts stated

in the application but whether the papers are in order, he has to proceed to

issue the writ of possession. The section 7 reads;

(1)Upon receipt of an application for ejectment in respect of any

Government quarters, a Magistrate's Court shall forthwith issue, and if

need be reissue, a writ of possession to the Fiscal requiring and

authorizing such Fiscal before a date specified in the writ, not being a

date earlier than three or later than seven clear days from the date of

the issue of such writ, to deliver possession of such quarters to the

competent authority or other authorized person specified in the quit

notice relating to such premises. Such writ shall be sufficient authority

for the said Fiscal or any police officer authorized by him in that

behalf to enter such quarters with such assistants as the Fiscal or such

officer shall deem necessary and to give possession accordingly, and to

eject the occupier and his dependants, if any, from such quarters.

(2) Notwithstanding anything in any other law, the issue or re-issue of

a writ of possession under subsection (1) shall not be stayed in any

manner, by reason of any steps taken or proposed to be taken in any

court with a view to questioning the issue or r.e-issue of such writ of

possession or the quit notice in pursuance of which such writ of

possession is issued or re-issued.

(3) Nothing in this Act shall be read and construed as precluding any

person who claims to have been unlawfully ejected from Government

quarters under this section from instituting an action for damages or

other relief

In the present case the learned Magistrate adhering to the law, went on

a voyage of discovery to determine the correctness of the facts pleaded by the

competent authority.

The learned High Court Judge has correctly decided that the learned

Magistrate's function under this Act is only a ministerial act and set aside the

order of the learned Magistrate and issued a writ of execution.

The Appellant in the present appeal has taken the stand that the proof

of the service of the quit notice is not tendered with the revision application

and it is violation of the Rule 3(1). The Rule requires only tendering the

originals or certified copies of the material documents. The proof of service

of the quit notice was not challenged in the Magistrate Court. In fact, the

Appellant appeared in Court and requested Court to grant time to vacate the

premises. When the Appellant made the application for time, he impliedly

admits that the application for ejectment is in order and the Court can issue

the writ of possession forthwith. Thereafter he cannot challenge any of the

contents of the application for ejectment. He is precluded from doing so.

Under these circumstances, I do not see any reason to interfere with the

finding of the learned High Court Judge. I affirm the order of the learned

High Court Judge.

The appeal is dismissed subject to costs fifed at Rs. 10,0001-

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P.R.Walgama J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal