Page 1 of 12

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal under section 331 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 (as amended).

The Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12.

Complainant

Court of Appeal Case No. CA HCC 0118/2024

Vs. High Court of Nuwara Eliya Case No. HCR/080/2021

Nadaraj Vijayakumar

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN Nadaraj Vijiyakumar

Accused-Appellant

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12.

Complainant-Respondent

Page 2 of 12

Before: B. Sasi Mahendran, J. Amal Ranaraja, J.

Counsel: Prashan Wickramaratne for the Accused-Appellant

Azard Navavi, A.S.G. for the Respondent. Argued on: 07.08.2025 Decided on: 22.09.2025

JUDGMENT

AMAL RANARAJA, J.

1. The accused-appellant (hereinafter referred to as the “appellant”) has

been indicted in the High Court of Nuwara Eliya in case number HCR

80/2021.

2. The amended charge in the indictment is as follows;

That on or about July, 06. 2017, at Agarapathana, within the

jurisdiction of this Court, the appellant committed the offence

of grave sexual abuse by placing his penis on the vagina of a

minor under the age of 18 years, for the purpose of sexual

gratification, an offence punishable under section 365B(2)(b) of

the Penal Code as amended by Act No.22 of 1995, Act No.29 of

1998 and Act No.16 of 2006.

Page 3 of 12

3. At the conclusion of the trial, the appellant has been convicted of the

offence in the amended charge and sentenced as follows;

A term of 10 years rigorous imprisonment, and a fine of

Rs.25,000 with a term of 06 months simple imprisonment in

default.

Further, has ordered the appellant to pay a sum of Rs.500,000

as compensation to PW01 with a term of three years simple

imprisonment in default.

4. Being aggrieved by the conviction, the disputed judgment and the

sentencing order, the appellant has preferred the instant appeal to this

Court.

Case of the prosecution

5. At the time of the incident referred to in the amended charge, PW01 has

been a 16 year old girl residing in a line room located in the upper

division of the Glasgow estate. She has lived there with her father,

maternal grandmother and siblings as her mother had gone abroad for

employment. At that time, PW01 had been attending the Glasgow Tamil

School as a year eleven student.

6. During this period, PW01 has been appointed as a class monitor for a

period of one month. In such role, she has taken the initiative to create

a chart that assigns each student in the class with specific duties

related to cleaning and arranging the classroom each morning before

the lessons began.

Page 4 of 12

7. The appellant known to the students, had been conducting extra

classes in science and mathematics during the evenings. These

additional lessons have been held in a hall referred to as “Praja Shakthi”

which was also located in the same estate. Moreover, as a teacher, the

appellant has had access to the contact details of students, including

those of PW01.

8. The day before the alleged incident, PW01 has expressed her desire to

the appellant to obtain a printed copy of the chart prepared by her. The

appellant has agreed to this request.

9. Following the appellant’s instructions, PW01 has gone to the building

where the appellant conducted extra classes, intending to print the

chart from the computer centre located within the same building. PW01

has planned to pick up the printout before heading to school that day.

When PW01 arrived at the location, the appellant has led PW01 to the

room where the computer centre was situated. Inside the room, PW01

has observed various computers and other equipment.

10. Following that, as narrated by the appellant, it is alleged that the

appellant has placed his penis on the vagina of PW01 and engaged in

the sexual act described in the amended charge.

11. PW01 has thereafter attended school as usual but she has not been her

normal self. Concerned for her well-being, PW04, a teacher at the

school, has inquired about what was troubling her, i.e. PW01. At that

moment, PW01 has simply stated that she did not want to attend the

extra classes conducted by the appellant. However, the following day,

after further questioning by PW04 and other staff members, PW01 has

revealed the details of the incident involving the appellant.

Page 5 of 12

12. PW01 has documented her account of the incident in writing and this

note has been marked as පැ. 2. The school authorities, upon learning

of PW01’s revelations, have informed the father of PW01 of the same

and advised him to file a complaint with the police.

Unfortunately, the father has not taken such a step.

13. In light of these circumstances, the school authorities have intensified

the matter by reporting the incident to the National Child Protection

Authority. The National Child Protection Authority has subsequently

filed a complaint with the Agarapathana Police. The Police have

launched an investigation, during which they have recorded statements

from PW01 and other witnesses. Additionally, they have arranged for

PW01 to undergo a medical examination conducted by a Judicial

Medicial Officer. The resulting medico-legal report has been marked

පැ.3.

Case of the appellant

14. The appellant has asserted that when he reported to work as usual,

around 8.00am on the particular date, PW01 was already present at the

location. PW01 has thereafter, requested that the appellant to take a

printout of an assignment for her. The appellant has complied with her

request, and after receiving the printout, PW01 has left the location.

Page 6 of 12

Grounds of appeal

15. When the matter was taken up for argument, the learned counsel for

the appellant urged the following grounds of appeal;

i. The learned High Court Judge has improperly evaluated the

appellant’s evidence and has shifted the burden of proof towards

the appellant.

ii. The Learned High Court Judge has misapplied the law relating to

corroboration.

iii. Failure to consider calling for the defence under section 200 (1)

of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

16. The learned counsel for the appellant has directed the Court’s attention

to pages 321 and 322 of the brief, contending that the learned High

Court Judge has misdirected himself by improperly shifting the burden

of proof onto the appellant. The learned counsel emphasises that the

appellant bears no such burden to prove his innocence, rather, the

responsibility of establishing the case beyond a reasonable doubt lies

squarely with the prosecution.

Page 7 of 12

17. To bolster his argument, the learned counsel has cited specific passages

from the disputed judgment and the observation of T.S. Fernando, J, in

Martin Singho vs. Queen 69 CLW at page 22.

[vide pages 321 and 322 of the appeal brief]

“As this Court has pointed out on many occasions in the past, where an

accused person is not relying on a general or special exception contained

in the Penal Code, there is no burden on him to establish any fact.”

[vide Martin Singho vs Queen 69 CLW 21 at page 22]

18. However, upon a close examination of these passages, it becomes

evident that the learned high court judge has not imposed a burden on

the appellant to present additional witnesses on his behalf. Instead the

learned High Court Judge has focused on the testimony already

provided by the appellant.

19. The learned High Court Judge’s conclusion has been rooted in his

assessment of the reliability of the appellant’s testimony which he has

deemed insufficiently cogent. Consequently, the learned High Court

Page 8 of 12

Judge has found the testimony of the appellant to be unreliable and

inadequate to support the appellant’s defence effectively.

20. Furthermore, the appellant’s testimony indicates that on the day in

question, he arrived at the building known as “Praja Shakthi”, around

8.00am in the morning. Upon his arrival, he has found PW01 already

present at the location. At her request, the appellant has printed a copy

of a geography related chart and subsequently handed it over to her.

Shortly thereafter, PW01 has left the location.

21. Upon, examining, PW01’s testimony, it becomes evident that none of

the facts presented by the appellant have been suggested to PW01

during cross-examination. This lack of inquiry raises significant

questions about the credibility of the appellant.

22. No satisfactory explanation has been offered for this discrepancy, which

suggests that the appellant’s version of events may be an afterthought,

created in response to the ongoing legal proceedings. In light of this

circumstance, it can be argued, that the inconsistency in the testimony

undermines the reliability of the appellant’s narrative.

23. In Thalerathnalage Wipula vs. The Republic of Sri Lanka CA No.

216/2005, decided on 01.09.2009, Sisira de Abrew, J, has stated,

“Learned Counsel contended that the rejection of the evidence

of the wife of the accused-appellant by the learned Trial Judge

was wrong. The position taken-up by the wife of the accused-

appellant is that the accused-appellant was arrested in her

presence. But, this position was not suggested to the prosecution

witnesses when they gave evidence. What is the effect of such

failure?

Page 9 of 12

In this connection, I am guided by the judgment of the Indian

Supreme Court in Sarwan Singh vs. State of Punjab AIR 2002

SC 3652. Indian Supreme Court in the said case observed thus:

“It is a rule of essential justice that whenever the opponent has

declined to avail himself of the opportunity to put his case in

cross-examination it must follow that the evidence tendered on

that issue ought to be accepted”. This judgment was cited with

approval in the case of Bobby Mathew vs. State of Karnataka

2004 3 Cri. L. J. page 3003.”

24. It has also been contended that, in light of the fact that PW01 had the

contact details of the appellant, PW01 had an intimate acquaintance

with him. This fact has been suggested to PW01 in cross-examination.

Thereby, subtly implying that even if a sexual act was committed on

PW01, it was with her consent.

25. PW01 has explained as to how she was able to get the contact details of

the appellant. PW01 together with the other students who attended the

extra classes conducted by the appellant, have been given the contact

details of the appellant, and the appellant also obtained such details

from the students. This explanation has not been challenged by the

appellant during the cross examination of the appellant.

26. On the morning, following the sexual abuse incident involving the

appellant, PW01 has attended school but noticeably not been her usual

self. Concerned about her behaviour, a teacher has approached PW01

to inquire about what was troubling her. During the conversation,

PW01 has expressed her reluctance to attend the extra classes

conducted by the appellant.

Page 10 of 12

27. The following day, the same teacher, along with additional staff

members have sought to understand PW01’s situation further. At that

point PW01 has disclosed the details of the incident involving the

appellant to the teacher. In response, the teacher, has promptly

informed the school principal and subsequently requested PW01 to

document her account of the incident in writing. This written note has

been marked as “පැ-2”.

28. Following this, the principal and the teachers involved has sought

guidance from law enforcement authorities and advised PW01’s father

to lodge a complaint with the police regarding the incident. However,

when the father has not taken the recommended action, the principal

and the teachers have intensified the matter by notifying the Child

Protection Authority.

29. Consequently, the Child Protection Authority has lodged a formal

complaint with the Agarapathana Police leading to the commencement

of an investigation.

30. Both PW02 (i.e. the Principal) and PW04 (i.e. the Teacher) has provided

testimony consistent with events outlined above. Importantly, their

testimonies did not simply reiterate the facts conveyed to them by

PW01; they offered additional context and details. In light of this, the

learned High Court Judge has not misdirected himself in determining

that the testimonies of PW02 and PW04 corroborated PW01’s narrative.

In Sana vs. Republic of Sri Lanka [2009 1 SLR 48], Sisira De Abrew, J,

has stated;

“The corroborative facts and evidence must proceed from

someone other than the witness to be corroborated. This means

Page 11 of 12

that his previous statements, even when admissible cannot be

used to corroborate him, such as proof of a complaint in a sexual

case or a previous act of identification is not corroborative of the

evidence of the witness, even though by showing consistency, it

can to some extent strengthen his credibility”.

31. Section 200(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act (No.15 of 1979)

provides as follows;

“(1). When the case for the prosecution is closed, if the Judge wholly discredits the evidence on the part of the prosecution or is of opinion that such evidence fails to establish the commission of the offence charged against the accused in the indictment or of any other offence of which he might be convicted of such indictment, he shall record verdict of acquittal; if however the Judge considers that there are grounds for proceeding with the trial he shall call upon the accused for his defence.” 32. In discussing the provisions as to section 200(1), Salaam J in Harold

Rex Jansen vs. Hon. Attorney General [CA Application No.151/13

decided on 26.02.2014] has stated;

“The expression “there are grounds for proceeding with

the trial” as used in Section 200(1) cannot certainly suggest or

convey that the High Court Judge is obliged to give elaborate

reasons for his decision to call for the defence. The grounds for

proceeding with the trial at the close of the case for the

prosecution means nothing more than the High Court Judge

CONSIDERING that there are grounds for proceeding with the

trial. The ordinary meaning of the word ‘CONSIDER’ as it occurs

in Section 200(1) would mean “to think about carefully”,

especially in order to make a decision. Quite obviously, the

Section does not make it obligatory on the part of the High Court

Judge to give reasons as to why he considers the case as

Page 12 of 12

disclosed by the prosecution merits further trial. If elaborate

reasons are required to be assigned before calling the defence,

then, every High court criminal trial (without a jury) ought to carry

two Judgments, one at the close of the case for the prosecution

and other at the close of the defence, i.e. under sections 200 and

203 respectively.”

33. According to the provisions outlined in section 200(1) of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of 1979, a High Court Judge is tasked

with appraising himself with the prosecution’s evidence to determine

whether the accused has a case to answer. Notably in conducting such

appraisal, the Judge is not required to provide written reasons for his

determination.

34. In those circumstances, I am not inclined to interfere with the

conviction, the disputed judgment together with the sentencing order

and dismiss the appeal.

Appeal dismissed.

35. The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgment to the High

Court of Nuwara Eliya for compliance.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

B. SASI MAHENDRAN, J.

I agree

Judge of the Court of Appeal