IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Kishani Industries (Pvt) Ltd.,

No. 152,

Seeduwa Road,

Udugampola.

Petitioner

CA CASE NO: CA/WRIT/359/2015

Vs.

Commissioner General of Inland

Revenue,

Department of Inland Revenue,

Colombo 2.

And 4 Others

Respondents

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Dr. Sunil Cooray for the Petitioner.

Suranga Wimalasena, S.S.C., for the

Respondents.

Decided on: 03.12.2019

Website Copy Website Copy

2

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The Petitioner filed this application against the Commissioner

General of Inland Revenue (hereinafter the Respondent) to

compel the latter by way of writ of mandamus to pay to the

Petitioner a refund of Rs.4,405,943/30, or, in the alternative,

any sum to which the Petitioner is entitled, as a refund of the

amount paid in excess, in terms of section 200 of the Inland

Revenue Act, No.10 of 2006.

The Petitioners case relates to the refunds in respect of five

years of assessments, namely, 2006/2007, 2007/2008,

2008/2009, 2009/2010 and 2010/2011.

The basis of the Petitioners claim is that the Ministry of Health

withheld 5% of all payments made to the Petitioner for supply of

surgical gauze and remitted the same to the Department of

Inland Revenue in terms of section 153 of the Inland Revenue

Act and the amounts so remitted (withholding tax) during each

such year of assessment mentioned above are in excess of the

amount of the income tax payable by the Petitioner for the

particular year of assessment, and hence the Petitioner is

entitled in law to have the excess amounts refunded by the 1st

Respondent in terms of section 200 of the Inland Revenue Act.

The Respondent filed objections to this application.

The Respondent does not dispute that withholding tax deducted

and remitted to the Department of Inland Revenue during each

of the aforesaid years of assessment is in excess of the amount

Website Copy Website Copy

3

payable as income tax by the Petitioner for the particular year of

assessmentvide inter alia P19, P20, P24.

As seen from P19, the position of the Respondent is that the

Respondent is a tax defaulter since 1997 under various

Statutes, and the tax in default by the Petitioner is much greater

than the refund the Petitioner claims, and, therefore, the

Respondent is entitled to set off the tax in default against excess

payments made by the Petitioner.

The counter submission of the Petitioner is that the income tax

is charged and payable as provided in the Inland Revenue Act

for a year of assessment, and the taxpayers income tax liability

is ascertained for a particular year of assessment without regard

to another year of assessment, and if there is an excess payment

in a particular year of assessment, the Respondent is under a

statutory duty under section 200 of the Inland Revenue Act to

refund it to the taxpayer, and the Respondent is not empowered

to recover from the said excess any amount alleged to be in

default by the taxpayer for any other year of assessment.

After brief oral submissions, both parties were allowed to file

written submissions. The written submission of the Petitioner

was filed first, followed by that of the Respondent.

At the outset I must state that (a) the system of justice which

prevails in our country is adversarial, as opposed to

inquisitorial, and therefore it is the duty of the Judge to decide

the case on how the competing parties present the dispute

Website Copy Website Copy

4

before him; (b) taxing statutes shall be strictly construed and the

subject shall not be taxed without clear words for that purpose.

With that in mind, let me consider the standpoint taken by the

learned Senior State Counsel (SSC) in his written submission.

The pivotal argument of the learned SSC is (as I have already

stated) that the Petitioner is a tax defaulter under various

statutes from 1997, and he has admitted this in correspondence

with the Respondent; and the cheques given in settlement of

taxes in default have been returned, which have not been

disclosed to Court.

I think those matters, even if true, are beside the point. The

matter put in issue in this application is not whether the

Petitioner is a tax defaulter, but whether the Respondent can set

off tax in default in a particular year of assessment against the

refund due in respect of another year of assessment.

This question has not been answered by the learned SSC, and,

therefore, the Court, in this case, has no alternative other than

to accept the version of the Petitioner.

Instead, the learned SSC, in his written submission, relies on

technical objections in defeating the application of the Petitioner.

The learned SSC states that facts are in dispute and therefore

writ does not lie. The amount to be paid as excess payments

may be in issue, and therefore granting the main relief stated in

paragraph (b)(i) of the prayer to the petition may not be possible,

Website Copy Website Copy

5

but the alternative relief stated in paragraph (b)(ii) of the prayer

to the petition can be granted.

The learned SSC has adverted to the delay on the part of the

Petitioner in coming to Court. This cannot be a good ground as

seen from P24 whereby a letter sent by the Respondent to the

Petitioner reveals the issue was still a live issue even by

09.02.2015. The last letter attached to P24, sent by the

Petitioner to the Respondent, is dated 09.07.2015. This

application has been filed on 16.09.2015.

The learned SSC emphasises that a tax defaulter cannot come

before a Court seeking a discretionary relief such as writ,

claiming a refund where the tax in default is much greater than

the refund.

As I have already stated, in construing fiscal statutes and in

determining the liability of a subject to tax, one must have

regard to the strict letter of the law. There is no equity in a

taxing provision and such provision cannot be decided on

conjectures and inferences.

In the Supreme Court case of Vallibal Lanka (Pvt) Limited v.

Director General of Customs1, Sripavan J. (later C.J.) held:

It is the established rule in the interpretation of statutes

levying taxes and duties, not to extend the provisions of the

statute by implication, beyond the clear import of the

1 [2008] 1 Sri LR 219 at 223

Website Copy Website Copy

6

language used or to enlarge their operation in order to

embrace matters not specifically pointed out. In case of

doubt, the provisions are construed most strongly against

the state and in favour of the citizen.

If the Respondent thinks that the Petitioner has defaulted

payment of taxes, he must follow the law to recover them.

If the learned SSC endorses the view of the Respondent that the

Respondent can set off default tax against the refund due,

irrespective of the year of assessment, he shall inform the Court

under which provision of the Law the Respondent is empowered

to do so. The learned SSC has not shown such a provision to

this Court.

Another argument of the learned counsel for the Petitioner is

that the alleged taxes in default are, in any event, time barred

and therefore unrecoverable.

The learned SSC does not say that they are not time barred. His

position is that, notwithstanding time bar, they are recoverable

in terms of section 2 of the Default Taxes (Special Provisions)

Act, No.16 of 2010, and he quoted the following portion of the

said section in support.

Notwithstanding anything in any other written law to the

contrary, the provisions of this Act shall apply to the

recovery, discharge or write-off of taxes charged and

levied on or before December 31, 2009 under any of the

laws specified in the Schedule to this Act and which

Website Copy Website Copy

7

continue to be in default under any such laws, for a

period of over two years or more, or where applicable,

after the appellate procedures specified in any such laws

for the recovery of any such tax (in this Act referred to as

tax in default) have been exhausted: (emphasis mine)

It is the submission of the learned counsel for the Petitioner

that section 2 of the Default Taxes (Special Provisions) Act has

not repealed section 200 of the Inland Revenue Act, and, in any

event, that section is applicable to taxes that continue to be in

default, and tax liabilities extinguished by operation of law by

being time barred are not taxes that continue to be in default,

and therefore do not fall within section 2 of the Default Taxes

(Special Provisions) Act. I am inclined to accept that argument.

Any doubt in the taxing statutes shall be resolved in favour of

the taxpayer.

For the aforesaid reasons, I grant the petitioner the alternative

relief, as prayed for in paragraph (b)(ii) of the prayer to the

petition dated 14.09.2015. No costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Website Copy Website Copy