1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

revision of an order of the Provincial

High Court in the exercise of its

revisionary jurisdiction.

C A (PHC) / 230 / 2001

Provincial High Court of

Central Province (Kandy)

Case No. HC (Rev) 301 / 2001

Primary Court Kandy

Case No. 66600

Thilak Kumara Udugama,

J

2

No. 45,

Purnawaththa Road,

Kandy.

PETITIONER - PETITIONER-

APPELLANT

Vs

1. D GRath naya ka,

Contractor,

Trinity College,

Kandy.

2. Morris Ernest Weragoda,

Trinity College,

Kandy.

3. W R Braganrich,

Trinity College,

Kandy.

3

,

4. Gunathillake,

Trinity College,

Kandy.

RESPONDENT - RESPONDENT -

RESPONDENT

Before: K K Wickremasinghe J

P. Padman Surasena J

Counsel; Upul Jayasuriya PC with P Radhakrishnan for the Petitioner-

Petitioner - Appellant.

Argued on :

4

Respondents - Respondents -Respondents are absent and

unrepresented.

Decided on:

2017-06-13

2017 - 10 - 09

JUDGMENT

P Padman Surasena J

The Petitioner - Petitioner - Appellant (hereinafter sometimes referred to

as the Appellant) had instituted this case against the Respondents-

Respondents - Respondents (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the

Respondents) in the Primary Court of Kandy under section 66 (1) (b) of

the Primary Courts Procedure Act, as a private information, seeking an

order declaring that he be entitled to have the possession of the impugned

land.

5

Learned Primary Court Judge having inquired into this complaint, had by

his order dated 2000-06-27, had concluded that the Respondents are

entitled to the possession of this land.

Being aggrieved by the said order made by the learned Primary Court

Judge, the Appellant had filed an application for revision in the Provincial

High Court of Central Province holden in Kandy seeking a revision of the

order made by the learned Primary Court Judge.

The Provincial High Court after hearing parties, refused and dismissed the

said revision application on the basis that it was not established that the

Appellant was in possession of the impugned land during the two months

period immediately prior to the filing of report in Court.

It is against that judgment that the Appellant has appealed to this Court.

The Appellant has prayed in this appeal that the said order of the learned

High Court Judge as well as the order of the learned Primary Court Judge

be set aside by this Court.

6

It would be helpful to reproduce section 68 (1) of the Primary Courts

Procedure Act No. 44 of 1979 as it would assist this Court to focus on the

task it has to undertake in this case. It is as follows;

Section. 68

(1) Where the dispute relates to the possession of any land or part

thereof it shall be the duty of the Judge of the Primary Court holding the

inquiry to determine as to who was in possession of the land or the part

on the date of the filing of the information under section 66 and make

order as to who is entitled to possession of such land or part thereof.

(2) An order under subsection (1) shall declare anyone or more persons

therein specified to be entitled to the possession of the land or the part

in the manner specified in such order until such person or persons are

evicted there- from under an order or decree of a competent court, and

prohibit all disturbance of such possession otherwise than under the

authority of such an order or decree.

(3) Where at an inquiry into a dispute relating to the right to the

possession of any land or any part of a land the Judge of the Primary

Court is satisfied that any person who had been in possession of the

I I I I I j J I j I ! I

I I

7

land or part has been forcibly dispossessed within a period of two

months immediately before the date on which the information was filed

under section 66, he may make a determination to that effect and make

an order directing that the party dispossessed be restored to possession

and prohibiting all disturbance of such possession otherwise than under

the authority of an order or decree of a competent court.

(4) An order under subsection (1) may contain in addition to the

declaration and prohibition referred to in subsection (2), a direction that

any party specified in the order shall be restored to the possession of

the land or any part thereof specified in such order.

Several steps that a Court is obliged to follow in adjudicating a dispute of

this nature, i.e. when it relates to the possession of any land or part

thereof, could be itemized in their chronological order in the following way;

1. determine as to who was in possession of the land or the part on the

date of the filing of the information under section 66 .

II. determine whether any person who had been in possession of the

land or part has been forcibly dispossessed within a period of two

8

months immediately before the date on which the information was

filed under section 66

III. if he is satisfied that a person has been dispossed as in item II

above, make a determination to that effect and make an order that

the party dispossessed be restored to possession.

In this regard the following passage from a judgment of this Court in the

case of Punchi Nona V Padumasena and others1 would be relevant.

" ... Section 68 (1) of the Act is concerned with the determination as to

who was in possession of the land on the date of the filing of the

information to Court. Section 68 (3) becomes applicable only if the Judge

can come to a definite finding that some other party had been forcibly

dispossessed within a period of 2 months next preceding the date on which

the information was fi led. . .. "

1 1994 (2) Sri. L R 117.

9

The Appellant has asserted in his affidavit filed in the Primary Court that he

has been in undisturbed possession of this land right through. It is the

position of the Respondents that this land is possessed by the Trinity

College.

1 st Respondent whose capacity remains as just a contractor of Trinity

College states in his affidavit filed in the Primary Court that he was

contracted to cultivate this land. However, such a person would not be a

proper authority to assert any possession of the institution, which claims

the possession in this proceedings.

2nd and 4th Respondents in their joint affidavit filed in the Primary Court has

stated that this land has been in the continued possession of the Trinity

College and that there had never been any breach of peace relating to that

land. Both the above affidavits had been sworn on 2003-05-03.

It has transpired that there had been a similar case, which had been

previously filed in the Primary Court of Kandy. The parties thereto and the

subject matter involved in that case too are the same as in the instant

case. The said previous case had been decided on 1998-09-11. The very

10

fact that there had been similar proceeding before the Primary Court in

respect of this land, is an indication that there had been no undisturbed

possession of this land by either party.

It is to be noted that the order dated 1998-09-11of the Primary Court in

the previous case filed, shows that the 2nd Respondent had taken up the

position in his affidavit that this land belongs to 'Church Missionary Trust

Association '.

Learned President's Counsel who appeared for the Appellant drew the

attention of this Court to the plaint dated 1998-07-23 filed by the said

'Church Missionary Trust Association' in District Court Kandy case No. L

19297. It is revealed from the said plaint that this case has been filed

against the Appellant by the said plaintiff praying that the Appellant be

ejected from the possession and that the plaintiff be restored in the

possession of this land.

Several averments in the said plaint reveals that the plaintiff has stated . .

therein;

i. that the Appellant in the instant case had claimed possession on a

deed attested on 1994-03-29,

11

ii. that the Appellant in the instant case had applied to the Municipal

Council for the registration of his name as the owner of this property,

iii. that the Appellant in the instant case had claimed to have acquired

the ownership of this land on a deed purported to have been signed

by a person said to be one of the trustees of 'Church Missionary

Trust'.

These facts, at its least, show that the averments of the pleadings of the

Respondents in the instant case that they had an undisturbed possession

of the impugned land should not be acted upon by Court.

Therefore, the conclusion arrived at by the Primary Court Judge in the

instant case that the Respondents had continued to enjoy possession of

this land since the year 1996 is clearly erroneous and lacks any factual

basis.

As has been held in the case of Punchi Nona V Padumasena and others2

the Primary Court exercising special jurisdiction under section 66 of the

Primary Courts Procedure Act, is not involved in an investigation into title

21994 (2) Sri. L R 117.

1

it ! ff Ii i' I' I

I: I: f I, I !

I: II! ! i If

~

12

or the right to possession, which is the function of a civil Court. What the

Primary Court is required to do is to take a preventive action and make a

provisional order pending final adjudication of rights of the parties in a civil

Court.

The Respondents have failed to appear despite the notices repeatedly sent

to them by this Court. Thus, this Court has to conclude that the

Respondents are not interested in this matter.

For the foregoing reasons this Court is of the opinion that it cannot justify

the impugned orders. In these circumstances this Court proceeds to set

aside the order of the learned Primary Court Judge, dated 2000-06-27 as

well as the order of the learned High Court Judge dated 2001-10-09.

It appears that this dispute is approximately about twenty years old. The

Respondents, by now, appear to have lost interest in this matter3. The

Appellant is said to be in the possession of this land at the moment.

The Parties have already gone before the District Court and as such, their

respective rights could be decided in those proceedings. Therefore, this

3 They are absent and unrepresented in this Court.

t

13

Court is of the view that it would not be necessary to make any positive

order with regard to possession.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K K Wickremasinghe J

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL