IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

Case No. 217/2000 (F)

D.C. Colombo case No. 28578/T

In the matter of estate of late Dr. Edmond Madonza Wijerama of No.87, Horton Place, Colombo 7

Adlin Agnes Anula Wijerama 87/2, Horton Place, Colombo 7 (Deceased) Petitioner

Vs. 1. Jayanthi Mendis 87/2, Horton Place, Colombo 7. (Deceased) 1st Respondent

2.0litha Somasiri Gunaratna, No. 21, 3rd Lane Midland Avenue, Kohuwala.

2nd Respondent

And Now Between

1. Jayanthi Mendis, (Deceased)

Respondent Appellant la. Ranil Mendis No. 40/2, 1st Lane, Kirulapona, Colombo 5 Substituted Respondent Appellant.

Before

Counsel

Decided on

2

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J. E.A.G.R. Amarasekara, J

vs

Olitha Somasiri Gunaratna, No. 21, 3rd Lane Midland Avenue, Kohuwala.

Petitioner - Respondent.

Chanaka Kulatunga AAL with Sagarika Dharmabandhu for the

pt Respondent Appellant.

26.10.2018.

E.A.G.R. Amarakekara, J.

The Respondent- Appellant has filed the Petition of appeal to get the Judgment

dated 20.03.2000 delivered by the learned Additional District Judge of Colombo in

the case No. D.C. Colombo 28578/T set aside on the various grounds set out in the

aforesaid petition of appeal. The Original Petitioner in the aforesaid District Court

case was one Adlin Agnus Anula Wijerama who was the wife of late Dr. Edmond

Medonza Wijerama, one of the joint makers with her ofthe last will No. 2119 which

was the subject matter of the aforesaid District Court case.

3

The Appellant was the pt Respondent and the Petitioner - Respondent was the 2nd

Respondent in the original petition filed by the said Adlin Agnus Anula Wijerama

(hereinafter sometimes referred to as Anula Wijerama). It should be noted that

the Appellant who was the 1st Respondent to the original petition in the aforesaid

District court case, though filed objections to the grant of probate to the aforesaid

Original Petitioner, Anula Wijerama,on the grounds set out there in the objections

dated 01.12.1981, did not challenge the execution of the aforesaid joint last will.

Only in her amended objections dated 02.05.1983 she had taken up the position

that the last will was not duly executed. However, in her original objections as well

as amended objections she had admitted the paragraph 1, 2 and 3 of the original

petition ofthe Original Petitioner which refers to the execution of the said joint last

will and testament bearing No. 2119 dated 28.11.1957. Thus, even by her amended

objections she had not challenged the execution of the said last will and testament

but only the due execution of it. The stance relating to the due execution is a new

stance taken up in the amended objections as in the original objections, only the

suitability of the original Petitioner to be the executrix was challenged by the

Appellant. However, before the said last will was proved, the Original Petitioner

passed away on 29.07.1983. When the death of the Original Petitioner was

reported to the District Court of Colombo on 20.09.1983, the learned District Judge

had made an order to lay by the case. Till the case was taken back to the calling

roll after certain applications filed by the Respondent - Petitioner in the latter part

of 1993, the District Court Colombo case was laid by as per the aforesaid order but

no one had moved for abatement of the action. Without moving for an abatement

of the aforesaid Testamentary action D.C. Colombo 28578/T, the Appellant had

filed a separate action No. 150/T in Marawila District Court claiming letters of

4

administration for the intestate property of late Dr. Edmond Madonza Wijerama

without disclosing the following facts to that court.

1. That there was a pending, laid by case for the same estate in the Colombo

District Court,

2. That the Petitioner- Respondent and she were parties to that Colombo

District Court case,

3. That there was a joint Last will executed by the said Dr. Wijerama and his

wife, the Original Petitioner of Colombo District Court case, and that she

admitted the execution of said will but she challenged only the due execution

of it in the said Colombo District Court Case.

Furthermore, she lied to the said Marawila District Court by stating in her Petition

that said Dr. Wijerama died without leaving a will or Testament, when she had

admitted the execution of the said last will in her objections to the Colombo District

Court case.

This Court also observes that Appellant while giving evidence during cross

examination in the lower court inquiry at many times have admitted the existence

of a last will executed by Dr. Wijera ma (vide pages 173, 179, 180, 185 of the brief).

Though on certain occasions, she had denied the existence and or validity of the

last will of Dr. Wijerama or evaded giving answers to some vital questions posed in

.3 cross examinations, especially at page 17.9', she had revealed how they found the

last will and at pages 179 and 180 she had admitted the said last will as a legally

valid last will. In such a backdrop the findings of the learned Additional District

5

Judge of Colombo that the Appellant obtained letters of administration from the

Marawila District court to administer the estate of Dr. Wijerama by concealing facts

to that court can be endorsed as correct by this court. As the said letters of

administration from Marawila District Court were obtained by fraudulently

concealing relevant facts to that Court, the Appellant should not be allowed to

benefit from the order of Marawila D.C. case since fraud vitiates the outcome of

Marawila District Court Case. The learned District Judge is correct in answering

issue No. 10 in the affirmative stating that the order and proceedings of Marawila

case are null and void. On the other hand, it is highly inappropriate, while being a

party to the Colombo District Court case, to file another action in Marawila District

Court for the same estate of Dr. Wijerama while the Colombo District Court case,

though laid by, was still pending. If her position was genuine, she could have

proceeded with her cross claim in her objections in the Colombo District Court case.

On the other hand, if she revealed the Colombo District Court case in her petition

filed in the Marawila District Court case, the learned District Judge of Marawila

could have made order to make the Petitioner - Respondent a party to that case

and inquire into the issue of maintaining a second action for the same estate while

it is sub judice in another Court.

Another argument put forward by the Appellant is that there was no substitution

made in the room of the deceased Original Petitioner and, therefore, all the

proceedings of the District Court Colombo are ab initio void. In this regard the

counsel for the Appellant has referred to the decisions in Karunawathie Vs

Godayalage Piyasena SC Appeal 09A/2010J Mariam Beebee Vs Seyed Mohamed 68

6

NLR 36. However, this Court observes that the Petitioner- Respondent had made

applications to the District Court of Colombo to substitute him in the room of the

deceased Original Petitioner (vide petitions dated 14.10.1993, 29/04.1994, and

affidavits dated 07.06.1993 and 25.03.1994 at pages 106, 108, 112, and 115 of the

brief).

It is true that there is no specific order naming the Petitioner- Respondent as the

Substituted Petitioner in the room of the Original Petitioner but the learned District

Judge after the filing of above applications took the laid by case to the roll and

allowed the Petitioner Respondent to proceed with the case and to take steps to

publish notices in the newspapers as the petitioner. As per the proceedings dated

12.02.1996 the Petitioner- Respondent was allowed to frame the issues of the

inquiry as the Petitioner. The above shows without doubt that the learned District

Judge accepted the Respondent- Petitioner as the Petitioner of the case. Thus,

though there is no specific order appointing the Petitioner- Respondent as the

Substituted Petitioner, the learned district judge by conduct had accepted him as

the Substituted Petitioner. This court does not observe any objection taken by the

Appellant in the original court with regard to the Petitioner-Respondent being

treated as the Petitioner of the case or prosecuting the case as the Petitioner. Not

only the district court, even the Appellant has named the Petitioner-Respondent as

the Petitioner or Petitioner- Respondent in his notice of appeal as well as in the

petition of appeal. Therefore, the status of the Petitioner Respondent was not

challenged in the original court and I do not see any reason to accept such

argument in favour of the Appellant during the appeal. As the Respondent

7

Petitioner was granted the probate in the case No. 32966/T which was filed with

regard to the estate of the deceased Original Petitioner, he is a suitable person to

represent the deceased Original Petitioner, Anula Wijerama in the testamentary

case filed by her with regard to the estate of late Dr. Wijerama. If the Petitioner-

Respondent got the probate in 32966/T by a fraudulent representation it will be

recalled after an inquiry on the application made by the Appellant. If such a thing

happens, the Appellant will be able to file necessary papers to recall the probate

issued to the Petitioner - Respondent with regard to Dr. Wijerama's estate in case

No. 28578/T, but till that I do not see any bar for him to hold and act according to

the probate issued to him as his actions are subject to the supervision of the District

Court. On the other hand, if the last will of the original Petitioner Anula Wijerama

is not proved in the action filed by the Petitioner- Respondent, he may not able to

claim under the last will of late Dr. Wijerama. In such a situation the Appellant has

the opportunity to raise objections at the time of distribution of assets of Dr.

Wijerama's estate. Furthermore, this court observes that Appellant is not a suitable

person to be substituted for or represent Original Petitioner in case No. 28578/T

due to conflict of interests. She was opposing the probate being granted to the

Original Petitioner and was challenging the joint last will stating that it was not duly

executed. The grant of probate was only to administer the estate pending action

and to take necessary steps in that regard. Such appointment cannot prejudice

the rights of the Appellant as one who holds the probate can be brought under the

supervision of the Court.

8

The Counsel for the Appellant in his written submission argues that, even if it is

presumed that the Will No. 2316 made by the Original Petitioner relevant to case

No. 32699/T is genuine, it revokes the previous Will, the subject matter in case No.

28578/T. However, as far as the estate of late Dr. Wijerama is concerned, this

argument has no relevance as the Will in case No. 28578/T is a joint will.

The Counsel argues stating that the learned District Judge had applied different

standards to similar situations which form the backgrounds to the Marawila District

Court case 150/T and Colombo District Court case No.32699/T. As per the evidence

led before the learned District Judge, there was sufficient material to show that the

letters of administration were obtained from Marawila District Courts by

representations of facts which are false, while knowing the falsehood of the facts

represented through the Petition. The evidence was that the application to recall

the probate in 32699/T is yet pending. Whether the last will tendered in that case

is a genuine one has to be decided in that case. The delay in filing that action with

regard to the purported last will has to be evaluated by the Judge hearing that case.

Though there are suspicious circumstances, it is not yet established that there is

fraud in filing 32699/T. Therefore, the learned District Judge has correctly held

that if the Petitioner-Respondent had obtained the probate in 32699/T

fraudulently, necessary steps should be taken in that action to recall the probate.

The case No. 32699/T is not an action filed while another action is pending for the

same estate and representing falsehood with regard to the other action. Though

there are suspicious circumstances and allegations, no fraud is established on the

face of the documents but with regard to Marawila District Court case there was

9

clear evidence to establish the fraudulent nature of the action as previously

referred in this judgment.

Finally, the Appellant tries to argue that the Petitioner failed in proving the last will,

the subject matter of the D.C. Colombo case No.28578/T. Proof of the last will is a

matter depending on the facts tendered before the original Court. Thus, this court

shall not interfere unless the decision of the learned Additional District Judge is

perverse and not supported by the facts placed before him. The Appellant's

position in the amended objections was that it was not a duly executed will. In her

original objections, she has not taken up this position. As per her objections she

had admitted the averments No.1, 2 and 3 of the Petition which reveals the facts

relating to the making of the joint last will. If the execution of the will is admitted,

the appellant must explain why she states that it is not properly executed. This

Court observes that her evidence lacks integrity and uniformity. On certain

occasions as mentioned before she herself admits the relevant last will as a legally

valid last will. In such a backdrop, this Court cannot find fault with the learned

Additional District Judge's findings in the Judgment dated 20/03/2000.

Furthermore, the learned Additional District Judge has given ample and acceptable

reasons to support his findings in his judgments. Therefore, I do not intend to

interfere with the findings of the learned Additional District Judge.

Therefore, this appeal is dismissed with costs.

10

E.A.G.R. Amarasekara.

Judge of the Court of Appeal.

I agree.

A.H.M.D. Nawaz.

Judge of the Court of Appeal.