IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Thanthirige Somawathie de Silva,

Wijitha, Thalpe-East.

Plaintiff-Appellant (Deceased)

Naurunna Palliyage Samadara,

No. 853,

Matara Road,

Bogahawatte,

Talpe.

Substituted Plaintiff-Appellant

CASE NO: CA/180/1994/F

DC GALLE CASE NO: 10042/L

Vs.

Thanthirige Premawathie,

Mihiripenna,

Talpe.

Defendant-Respondent (Deceased)

Galhewage Priyanthi Asokamala,

Mihiripenna,

Talpe.

Substituted Defendant-

Respondent

2

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Razik Zarook, P.C., for the Substituted Plaintiff-

Appellant.

Substituted Defendant-Respondent is absent and

unrepresented.

Decided on: 01.11.2018

Samayawardhena, J.

The plaintiff instituted this action in the District Court of Galle

seeking declaration of title to the land described in the schedule

to the plaint, ejectment of the defendant therefrom and

damages. The defendant in the answer sought dismissal of the

plaintiffs action. At the trial, only the plaintiff and the

defendant gave evidence. The learned District Judge by

Judgment dated 22.02.1994 dismissed the plaintiffs action.

Hence this appeal by the plaintiff.

Despite notice being served, the defendant-respondent never

participated in the appeal proceedings.

The defendant is the elder sister of the plaintiff. The mother has

gifted the land to the plaintiff by the Deed marked P1 dated

13.06.1968.

Even though the defendant has raised issue Nos. 6-8 to say that

the said Deed is a forgery, it has never been pursued, and the

learned District Judge has answered those issues in the

negative.

3

Conversely, the learned District Judge, has come to the strong

finding that the plaintiff is the owner of the land by the aforesaid

Deed marked P1, and answered issue No.1 in the affirmative.

The defendant by way of issue No.9 has taken up the position

that she has acquired prescriptive title to the land.

The learned District Judge in the last paragraph of the

Judgment1 has clearly stated that the defendant has not proved

possession of the land.

In the Judgment, the learned District Judge, whilst analyzing

evidence led by both parties on possession, has categorically

stated that the defendant was an untrustworthy witness who

gave false evidence on that point.2

Issue No.6 raised on prescription by the defendant has

accordingly been answered in the negative.

It is significant to note that there is no cross-appeal against any

of those adverse findings by the defendant.

However, quite surprisingly, the learned District Judge has, at

last, dismissed the plaintiffs action with costs.

It is trite law that when the paper title is proved by the plaintiff

and accepted by the trial Judge, burden shifts to the defendant

to prove prescriptive title, if the defendant claims the property

on prescription. In other words, once the paper title is proved,

there is no further burden on the plaintiff to disprove the

1 Vide page 141 of the Appeal Brief. 2 Vide page 138 of the Brief.

4

prescriptive claim of the defendant. It is fairly and squarely the

burden of the defendant.

As Chief Justice Sharvananda held in Theivandran v.

Ramanathan Chettiar [1986] 2 Sri LR 219 at 222: In a

vindicatory action the claimant need merely prove two facts;

namely, that he is the owner of the thing and that the thing to

which he is entitled to possession by virtue of his ownership is in

the possession of the defendant. Basing his claim on his

ownership, which entitles him to possession, he may sue for the

ejectment of any person in possession of it without his consent.

Hence when the legal title to the premises is admitted or proved to

be in the plaintiff, the burden of proof is on the defendant to show

that he is in lawful possession. (Vide also: Siyaneris v. Udenis de

Silva (1951) 52 NLR 289 (PC), Candappa nee Bastian v.

Ponnambalampillai [1993] 1 Sri LR 184 at 187 (SC), Wijetunga v.

Thangarajah [1999] 1 Sri LR 53, Gunasekera v. Latiff (1999) 1 Sri

LR 365 at 370, Jayasekera v. Bishop of Kandy [2002] 2 Sri LR

406)

Here the learned trial Judge has held that the possession of the

defendant has not been proved and also answered the

defendants issue on prescription in the negative. In the said

backdrop, there is absolutely no room for the trial Judge to

dismiss the plaintiffs action with costs. In that sense, I doubt

whether the dismissal of the plaintiffs action is an accidental

slip on the part of the learned Judge!

5

However, when I carefully read the impugned Judgment, I find

that in one place of the Judgment3 the learned Judge has stated

that, as the plaintiff has not proved that the defendant has lived

elsewhere after 1970, the Court can come to the conclusion that

the defendant lived in the house located in the land in suit since

1970. This conclusion is legally untenable. As I stressed

earlier, there is no burden on the plaintiff to prove that the

defendant did not possess the land.

Right to possession is one of the significant attributes of

ownership. There is no requirement in law that the paper title

holder must possess the land.

In any event, mere possession over 10 years does not mean

prescriptive possession. In terms of section 2 of the Prescription

Ordinance, such possession to be considered as prescriptive

possession, shall inter alia be adverse against the true owner.

Who is the true owner of the land? Admittedly, the mother until

the Deed P1 was executed in 1968; and thereafter, the plaintiff,

subject to the life interest of the mother, by virtue of the Deed

P1. Until the mother died in 1979, according to the Admission

No.2,4 the mother had been in possession of the land. There is

no iota of evidence, nor has such a position ever been taken up

by the defendant at any stage of the case, that she maintained

adverse possession against the mother. Then even assuming

without conceding that she maintained adverse possession

against the plaintiff from 1979, the defendant has no 10-year

possession as this action was instituted in 1982. However, I

3 Vide page 140 of the Brief. 4 Vide page 55 of the Brief.

6

must stress that the defendant never spoke of adverse

possession against the plaintiff eithershe spoke only of mere

possession. What more, according to her evidence, what she

wants is her share of the property upon the death of the

mother5, that is, not on prescription, but by inheritance. This

militates completely against the claim of prescriptive possession.

I unhesitatingly set aside the Judgment of the District Court and

allow the appeal. Let the District Judge enter Judgment as

prayed for in the prayer to the plaint.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

5 Vide pages 116-117 of the Brief.