IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application in

the nature of writs of certiorari

and mandamus under Article 140

of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of

Sri Lanka

Wickramathanthrige Viraj

Amanda Wickramasinghe,

Raddella Road,

Manana,

Kalawana.

Petitioner

CASE NO: CA/WRIT/230/2016

Vs.

1. Minister of Education,

Ministry of Education,

Isurupaya,

Battaramulla.

2. Secretary to the Ministry of

Education,

Ministry of Education,

Isurupaya,

Battaramulla.

2

3. Chief Commissioner-Teachers

Education,

And the other Board Members of

the Colleges of Education Board,

Ministry of Education,

Isurupaya,

Battaramulla.

4. Provincial Director of Education,

Sabaragamuwa,

Provincial Education Office,

Gatangama,

Ratnapura.

5. Zonal Director of Education,

Zonal Education Office,

Nivithigala.

6. The Dean,

Siyane National College of

Education,

Veyangoda.

7. Administrative Officer,

Provincial Education Office,

Gatangama,

Ratnapura.

Respondents

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Asoke Fernando with A.R.R. Siriwardane for the

Petitioner.

Avanthi Weerakoon, S.C., for the Respondents.

Decided on: 08.01.2019

3

Samayawardhena, J.

The petitioner filed this application seeking to quash by way of a

writ of certiorari the decision not to admit the petitioner as a

trainee to a National College of Education to follow a Pre-Service

Professional Course in Teacher Education 2015; and to issue a

writ of mandamus compelling the 1st to 3rd respondentsthe

Minister of Education, the Secretary to the Ministry of Education

and the Chief Commissioner-Teachers Education of the Ministry

of Educationto select the petitioner as a trainee to follow the

above course.

The petitioner applied to follow that course in response to the

Gazette Notification published in the Gazette No. 1914 dated

08.05.2015 marked P1. There is no dispute that, according to

the Gazette Notification, inter alia, The number of trainees to be

admitted in the relevant secretarial division will be decided by

considering the teacher carder requirements of each secretarial

division in the school system in the year 2018.1 In other words,

selections were to be done on secretarial division basis

depending on the availability of teacher vacancies, provided the

applicants fulfilled the other requirements stated in the Gazette.

There is no dispute that the petitioner who was a resident of the

Kalawana Divisional Secretariat (of Ratnapura District in

Sabaragamuwa Province) was called for the interview and was,

after the interview, placed in that Divisional Secretariat in the

following positions.2

1 Vide 6.1.1 of P1. 2 Vide P11.

4

Science-English Medium 1st Place

Science-Sinhala Medium 2nd Place

English Language 2nd Place

However, the petitioner was not selected, as, according to the

statement of objections of the 1st-7th respondents, there were no

vacancies in the Kalawana Divisional Secretariat for Science in

the year 2018, and the one vacancy for English Language was

filled from the applicant who secured the 1st place.

I must pause for a while to state that, although the said

statement of objections purports to be that of the 1st-7th

respondents, as far as I can find, only the 2nd respondent has

filed the proxy, and the corresponding affidavit filed by the 2nd

respondent speaks only on his behalf and not on behalf of all the

respondents.

In order to convince that there were no vacancies for Science

and there was only one vacancy for English, the 2nd respondent

has tendered R2 and R3. R2 and R3 are undated, unsigned and

unauthenticated table charts indicating statistics. They do not

bear even a heading to understand what they purport to be. The

petitioner does not admit them as they are unauthenticated

documents. Despite the fact that the learned counsel for the

petitioner raised it in the counter affidavit and also at the

argument, the learned State Counsel for the respondent did not

think it necessary to tender certified copies of those two

documents with the permission of Court. It is clear to me that

the figures indicated in those two documents are unreliable. For

instance, according to R2, for the year 2018, in the Divisional

Secretariat of Kalawana, there were no vacancies for English

Language, Science (English Medium) and Science (Sinhala

5

Medium). However, the applicant who secured the 1st place for

English Language had been selected for English irrespective of,

according to R2, there were no vacancies.

The petitioner has conversely tendered P6 with her petition to

say that the figures contained in R2 and R3 are incorrect, and,

in fact, there were 6 vacancies for English, 1 vacancy for Science

(English Medium) and 1 vacancy for Science (Sinhala Medium)

for the Divisional Secretariat of Kalawana for the year 2018. P6

is an official letter dated 27.04.2016 sent by the 4th respondent-

Provincial Director of Education of the Sabaragamuwa Province

to the 3rd respondent-Chief Commissioner (Teachers Education);

and the statistics contained in P6 have been received by the

former, according to page 2 of P6, from the 5th respondent-Zonal

Director of Education of Nivithigala.

There is no doubt that P6 is the central document in this case.

Nevertheless, it is regrettable to note that the 2nd respondent has

not placed before this Court the clear standpoint which he takes

regarding P6. He says different things at different times. Either

he is confused or he is trying to confuse the Court.

In paragraph 4(j) of the statement of objections and the

corresponding affidavit he states that The document marked P6

relates to the vacancies for the intake for year 2016, and the

same has been issued after the relevant selections were made.

According to the first part of this paragraph, vacancies stated in

P6 relates to the year 2016 and not to the year 2018 and

therefore it is totally irrelevant to the matter in issue.3 Then in

the same breath, he states that P6 has been issued after the

3 It may be recalled that according to the Gazette P1 selections were to be made according to the vacancies to be created in 2018.

6

selections for 2018 were made. Once he takes up the position

that P6 is relevant to 2016 but not to 2018, I cannot understand

why again he states that P6 has been issued after the selections

for 2018 were made. That is meaningless.

Then in paragraph 7(h) of the statement of objections and the

corresponding affidavit the 2nd respondent states that The

documents marked as P5 & P6 relates to such current existing

vacancies in the school system, in respect of relevant divisional

secretariats. When the 2nd respondent states that P6 relates to

the current existing vacancies in the school system, that means

P6 relates to the vacancies in 2017 as the statement of

objections is dated 30.08.2017.

Then in the written submission the 2nd respondent states that

the document annexed as P6 has not been called by this Ministry

as P6 does not refer to any letter of this Ministry. Further P6 is

dated 27.04.2016, whereas the teacher requirement for 2018 was

decided in 2015 and the selections were completed in April 2016.

As such P6 has been prepared after the selections were done.

By this paragraph, the 2nd respondent has for the first time

attempted to attack the credibility of that document, which, in

my view, should not have been done. The petitioner, even before

the institution of this action, sent copies of P6 together with the

Letter of Demand to the respondents including the 2nd

respondent, but they opted not to reply.4 The 2nd respondent

did not take up such a position in his statement of objections

either. That paragraph further says that P6 is dated 27.04.2016

and selections were completed in April 2016. The 2nd

respondent does not exactly say on which date final selections

4 Vide P9 and the original registered postal article receipts marked P9A.

7

were done but make a vague and irresponsible statement

without any documentary proof that selections were completed

in April 2016.

It is my considered view that P6 is a genuine document and by

no means a biased or incorrect document. There was no reason

for the 4th respondent-Provincial Director of Education of the

Sabaragamuwa Province to send P6 to the 3rd respondent-Chief

Commissioner (Teachers Education) stating incorrect figures

regarding teacher vacancies for the Divisional Secretariat of

Kalawana for the year 2018.

The predominant argument of the 2nd respondent that P6 relates

to the vacancies in 2016 and not 2018 is in the teeth of the said

document because P6 explicitly and clearly states that it relates

to the vacancies for the year 2018. That is the first sentence of

that letter, and the argument of the respondents that P6 relates

to the vacancies in 2016 and not 2018 is simply outrageous.

In the circumstances, I have no hesitation to conclude that the

decision not to select the petitioner as a trainee to follow the

above-mentioned course for the year 2015 was, to say the least,

irrational5 and also unreasonable according to the standard of

unreasonableness set out in Associated Provincial Picture Houses

Ltd v. Wednesbury Corporation6, which is commonly known as

Wednesbury unreasonableness, and therefore the petitioner is

entitled to the reliefscertiorari and mandamusas prayed for in

the prayer to the petition.

5 Sesadi Subasinghe (appearing through her next fried) v. Principal, Vishaka Vidyalaya [2011] 1 Sri LR 75 at 79-81, Perera v. Tilakaratne [2011] BLR 218 6 [1948] 1 KB 223. Vide also Council of Civil Service Unions v. Minister for the Civil Service [1984] 3 All ER 935

8

However, the learned state counsel for the respondents for the

first time at the stage of argument heavily relied on a technical

objection to seek dismissal of the petitioners application in

limine without going into the merits of the matter. That is, as

the 1st-3rd respondents against whom mandamus has been

sought are not natural persons, mandamus cannot be issued.

This is different from the objection which the 2nd respondent has

taken in paragraph 7(j) of the statement of objections and the

corresponding affidavit, which reads as follows:

Without prejudice to the foregoing, the application of the

petitioner is defective and not in conformity with the Court

of Appeal (Appellate Procedure) Rules of 1990 as the

petitioner has failed to specify and identify the instant

respondents by their names.

This objection stated in paragraph 7(j) of the objections is

manifestly baseless, as I will explain later in this Judgment, the

said Rules speak of the exact antithesis, i.e., the Rules say that

the petitioner need not specify and identify the respondents by

names.

Before I go into detail of this point of law, I must make the

following general observation. Disposing of cases on technical

grounds is easy and speedy. But that is not what the aggrieved

party expects from Court. The aggrieved party wants case to be

disposed of on merits rather than on technical grounds. It is

generally the wrongdoer who cannot meet the case on merits,

tries to cling on technical objections to defeat justice. We must

understand that we are working in Courts of Law and not in

9

Academies of Law7 and therefore, in my view, we must, as much

as possible, try to dispose of cases on merits rather than on high

technical grounds. I fully endorse the following observations

made by Justice Wigneswaran in Senanayake v. Siriwardene.8

Courts are fast making use of technical grounds and

traversing of procedural guidelines to dispose of cases

without reaching out to the core of the matters in issue and

ascertain the truth to bring justice to the litigants. This

tendency is most unfortunate. It could boomerang on the

judiciary as well as the existing judicial system.

On what basis is this popular objectionthat mandamus can

only be issued against natural persons who hold public

officetaken to secure dismissal of writ applications in limine?

That is on the basis of the decision in Haniffa v. The Chairman,

Urban Council, Nawalapitiya.9 This decision has mechanically

been followed by a number of later decisions of this Court.10

Sometimes I wonder whether Haniffas case is being so blindly

followed by this Court because it was a Supreme Court decision.

However, we must understand that when Haniffas case was

decided in 1963, the Supreme Court was not the apex Court and

the Court of final appeal was the Judicial Committee of the Privy 7 Vellupillai v. The Chairman, Urban District Council (1936) 39 NLR 464 at 465, W.M. Mendis & Co. v. Excise Commissioner [1999] 1 Sri LR 351 at 354-355, Edirisinghe v. Wimalawardena [2002] 3 Sri LR 343, Perera v. Geekiyana [2007] 1 Sri LR 202 8 [2001] 2 Sri LR 371 at 375 9 (1963) 66 NLR 48 10 Vide Mahanayake v. Chairman, Ceylon Petroleum Corporation [2005] 2 Sri LR 193, Dayaratne v. Rajitha Senaratne, Minister of Lands [2006] 1 Sri LR 7 at 17, Martin v. Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Services [2011] 2 Sri LR 12 and a large number of unreported cases including Palitha Fernando v. The Registrar General, CA/WRIT/43/2012 decided on 07.07.2015, Rizvi v. The Magistrate, Samanthurai, CA/PC/APN/150/2016 decided on 18.05.2017.

10

Council of the United Kingdom. The Supreme Court at that time

was akin to the present Court of Appeal. Final appeal to the

Privy Council was abolished only in 1972 on Sri Lanka becoming

a Republic.

Is the Judgment in Haniffas case a well-considered Judgment?

This is a nagging question for me. This is the full Judgment

delivered by Tambiah J. (with the agreement of Sri Skanda

Rajah J.) in Haniffas case.

In this application the petitioner has made the Chairman,

Urban Council, Nawalapitiya, the respondent. The petitioner

should have named the person against whom a Writ of

Mandamus can be issued. The Chairman, Urban Council,

Nawalapitiya, is not a juristic person. The Privy Council has

pointed out that the juristic person must be created

specially by statute (62 N. L. R. 169, 174, and at 182-183;

65 N. L. R. 253). Even if the Chairman, Urban Council,

Nawalapitiya, was a juristic person I fail to see how we can

issue a Mandamus on a juristic person. A Mandamus can

only issue against a natural person, who holds a public

office. If such a person fails to perform a duty after he has

been ordered by Court, he can be punished for contempt of

Court. Therefore the contention of Counsel for respondent

must prevail. The application is dismissed with costs fixed

at Rs. 157.50.

On what basis was it decided in Haniffas case that mandamus

can only be issued against a natural person who holds a public

office? That is on the basis that If such a [natural] person fails

to perform a duty after he has been ordered by Court, he can be

punished for contempt of Court.

11

In the first place, why we are so pessimistic that the orders of

this Court will not be obeyed by juristic persons and public

officers cited only by official designation? Is that a good ground

to refuse mandamus? In my view, it is not. Can a Court, for

example, refuse to enter a money decree in a recovery matter on

the ground that the defendant has no assets?

We shall give solutions to the existing problems. We shall not

refuse to give solutions to the existing problems upon imaginary

or hypothetical problems.11

The observation in Haniffas case that If such a person fails to

perform a duty after he has been ordered by Court, he can be

punished for contempt of Court presupposes the position that if

mandamus is issued against a juristic person as opposed to a

natural person, in case of a violation, the juristic person cannot

be dealt with for contempt of Court. This is not correct. When a

writ of mandamus is issued against a juristic person the parties

who must obey it are those in control of the affairs of the juristic

person, and in case of a violation, they can be dealt with for

contempt. In Regent International Hotels Ltd v. Cyril Gardiner12,

Samarakoon C.J. (with Ismail and Wanasundera JJ agreeing)

held:

When an injunction is obtained against a juristic person the

parties who must obey it are those in control of the affairs

of the juristic person. In this case the injunction must

necessarily be honoured primarily by the Directors of the

Company. They are the persons whom the plaintiff sought

11 Vide Thiagarajah v. Karthigesu (1966) 69 NLR 73 at 78, Somapala v. Wanasundara [2011] BLR 80 at 82 12 [1978-79-80] 1 Sri LR 278 at 290

12

to bind. There was no requirement in law that they must

also be directed. The section requires only a direction on the

Corporation and then the officers of the Corporation whose

duty it is to do or refrain from doing the acts set out in the

order are the persons who are automatically bound by the

Enjoining Order. If they fail, they are guilty of contempt and

they are the persons to be charged.

I do not think that public officers will disobey orders of this

Court made upon the decisions which they or their predecessors

have taken in the discharge of their official duties. They have no

personal interest in those decisions. In fact, in practical terms,

in almost all the cases where mandamus is sought and allowed,

mandamus is ultimately issued not against the public officer

who made the decision, but against the incumbent public officer

who holds the office. Moreover, in most of the cases, the case

itself is instituted against the successor in office as the public

officer who made the impugned decision has ceased to hold

office by that time. This goes to show the illogicality and fallacy

of the argument that when mandamus is sought the public

officer shall be cited by name and not by designation only.

When mandamus is sought, public officers are made

respondents by their names and designations for otherwise their

applications are destined to be dismissed in limine on the

Judgment of Haniffas case. Quite often, holders of the public

office are changed, and whenever there is such a change,

substitution is made and caption is changed adding the

successor in office by his name, and notice is then issued upon

the successor. This is a never-ending process until the

Judgment is delivered. If the holder of the public office is

13

changed even after the delivery of the Judgment but before

giving effect to it, still the successor needs to be substituted as

the former has been cited by name.

One of the main causes for laws delays in writ applications, in

my view, is this unfounded and irrational objection. Arguments

are postponed due to constant changes of holders of the public

office. During the period (26.10.2018-13.12.2018) where there

was an uncertainty about holders of public office including the

ministers and their secretaries, I believe, no application for

mandamus could be taken up for argument or issued because of

the need to change the caption to fall in line with the dicta in

Haniffas case!

Even though in Haniffas case it was decided that A Mandamus

can only issue against a natural person, who holds a public

office, in Abayadeera v. Dr. Stanley Wijesundara, Vice

Chancellor, University of Colombo13, this Court did not agree with

it and took the view that mandamus can be issued against any

person, corporation, tribunal and public body. Atukorala J. as

the President of the Court of Appeal (with Thambiah and

Monemalle JJ. concurring) had this to say:14

A Mandamus can be directed to a Corporation.

The Order of Mandamus is of a most extensive remedial

nature, and is, in form, a command issuing from the High

Court of Justice, directed to any person, corporation, or

inferior tribunal, requiring him or them to do some particular

thing therein specified which appertains to his or their office

and is in the nature of a public duty.

13 [1983] 2 Sri LR 267 14 At page 279-280

14

(Halsbury's Laws of England, 4th Edn. Vol. 1, p. 111, para.

89).

In Pathirana v. Goonesekera 66 NLR 464, 467,

Weerasooriya, S.P.J. observed

Where officials having a public duty to perform, refuse to

perform it, mandamus will lie on the application of a person

interested to compel them to do so. The rule would also

apply where a public body fails to perform a public duty

with which it is charged.

In Abayadeeras case the petitioners sought mandamus against

the Vice Chancellor and the Dean of the Faculty of Medicine of

the University of Colombo. Whilst dismissing the application on

non-joinder of necessary parties, the Court, inter alia, held

that:15

In our view the proper body to be directed by a Mandamus,

assuring that a writ can go, is the University of Colombo

and not the respondents to this application. The University

of Colombo therefore is a necessary party and ought to

have been made a party to these proceedings. The failure to

do so is fatal to the petitioners' application.

In the recently decided Suriyarachchi v. Sri Lanka Medical

Council, popularly known as the SAITM case16, Malalgoda J. as

the President of the Court of Appeal (with Thurairaja J. agreeing)

rejected the argument of the respondentSri Lanka Medical

Council that mandamus sought against the said Council cannot

be issued as it is not a natural person. In that Judgment the

15 At page 281 16 CA/WRIT/187/2016 decided on 31.01.2017

15

Court referred to the aforementioned Abaydeeras case (supra)

and two other unreported Judgments of this Court17 to conclude

that the archaic argument that the mandamus can only be

issued against a natural person is no more valid. This is what

Malalgoda J. stated:

The learned Presidents Counsel for the 1st respondent

whilst relying on the case of Haniffa v. The Chairman

Urban Council Nawalapitiya 66 NLR 48 argued that a

Mandamus cannot lie against the Sri Lanka Medical Council

as it is a juristic person and not a natural person.

However in this regard this court is mindful of the decision

in Abayadeera and 162 others v. Dr. Stanley Wijesundara,

Vice Chancellor, University of Colombo and another [1983] 2

Sri LR 267 where Atukorale J (P/CA) whilst referring to the

decision in the Haniffas case had observed that;

The law has been stated as follows in paragraph 112, page

127, Vol. 1, of Halsbury's Laws of England, 4th Edition.

The Order of Mandamus will not be granted against one

who is an inferior or ministerial officer bound to obey the

orders of a competent authority to compel him to do

something which is part of his duty in that capacity.

The Vice Chancellor and the Dean of the Faculty of

Medicine are officers of the University. The Council is the

executive body and governing authority of the University

and can exercise and discharge the powers and functions

of the University, including the power to hold examinations.

17 Government Registered Medical Officers Association v. Hon. John Seneviratne, Minister of Health, CA/WRIT/1498/2000 decided on 24.02.2004; Ekanayake v. Attorney-General, CA/WRIT/58/2012 decided on 25.04.2016

16

The Senate has control and general direction of, inter alia,

education and examinations. The Vice Chancellor is subject

to the directions issued by the Council and it is his duty to

give effect to the decisions of the Council and the Senate.

The Dean is the Head of a Faculty, and the Faculty which

has powers over matters relating to examinations, is

subject to the control of the Senate. It seems to us that the

respondents are officers within the intendment of the above

quotation from Halsbury.

In terms of s. 29 (b) of the Universities Act, the University

has the sole power to hold examinations, including the 2nd

MBBS examination. The power is reposed in the University.

In their own petition, the petitioners state that they are

entitled to require the University that it holds the 2nd MBBS

examinations for them and others of their batch and those

repeating the said examination, and that the University has

the obligation to provide such an examination. The

petitioners want this obligation of the University enforced

through its officers or agents. It appears to us, assuming

that the Writ of Mandamus can issue, it must be directed to

someone in whom is lodged the power to do the act ordered

to be done. What if the University of Colombo takes up the

position that it has not been made a party to the application

and has not been heard and therefore not bound in any

way by these proceedings? In Jayalingam v. The University

of Colombo CA application No 415/81, we find that the

petitioner in that case, who was an external student, asked

for a Writ of Mandamus on the University of Colombo to

accept his application and permit him to sit the Final

Examination In Laws, on the basis that it was the

17

University that had the power to conduct external

examinations for enabling those who are not students of the

University, to obtain degrees of the University.

Learned Counsel for the petitioners relied on the decision in

Haniffa v. The Chairman, U.C., Nawalapitiya (supra). In

this case, the petitioner made the Chairman, U.C.,

Nawalapitiya, the respondent to his petition. He was not

named. Tambiah, J. pointed out that the Chairman was not

a juristic person; that even if the Chairman was a juristic

person, since disobedience to Writs of Mandamus is

punishable as contempt of Court, a person who asks for a

Mandamus to compel a public officer to perform a duty

should name the public officer who holds the office. It is in

this context, that Tambiah, J. said, I fail to see how we can

issue a Mandamus on a juristic person.

In Pathirana v. Goonesekera 66 NLR 464, 467,

Weerasooriya, S.P.J. observed,

Where officials having a public duty to perform, refuse to

perform it, mandamus will lie on the application of a person

interested to compel them to do so. The rule would also

apply where a public body fails to perform a public duty

with which it is charged.

Apart from this, the petitioners presented their petition on

the basis that the respondents are the persons who are

entrusted with the duty of carrying out the obligation which

was reposed in the University, to hold the 2nd MBBS

examination for them only. At the time they were made

respondents, the 1st respondent held the office of Vice

Chancellor by virtue of an appointment made by the

18

Chancellor, and the 2nd respondent held the office of Dean

of the Faculty of Medicine, by virtue of her election by the

Faculty (Sections 34 (1) and 49 (1) of the University Act).

Under the Emergency Regulation, they cease to hold their

respective office. The 1st respondent now holds the office of

Vice Chancellor on an appointment made by the Minister

(Reg. 3(2); the 2nd respondent now holds office as Dean on

an appointment made by the Vice Chancellor. It is now

sought to compel the 1st respondent to perform a duty on

the basis that he has, by reason of Regulation 4 (a),

absorbed in himself all the powers and duties of the

University. Would not all these result in a change in the

character of the petition and in the conversion of the original

petition into a petition of another kind? What if the

regulations are withdrawn tomorrow? Then the argument of

learned Counsel for the petitioners, based on the

Emergency Regulations, loses its validity.

In our view the proper body to be directed by a Mandamus,

assuring that a writ can go, is the University of Colombo

and not the respondents to this application. The University

of Colombo therefore is a necessary party and ought to

have been made a party to these proceedings. The failure to

do so is fatal to the petitioners' application..

In the case of the Government Registered Medical Officers

Association and another v. Hon. John Seveviratne Minister

of Health and four others CA Application 1498/2000 CA

minute dated 24.02.2004 K. Sripavan J (as he was then)

issued a writ of Mandamus directing the 4th respondent Sri

Lanka Medical Council to take steps in terms of law duly

recognize the MD degree awarded.

19

Recently in the case of Ekanayake v. Attorney General and

two others CA Application 58/2012 (CA minute dated

25.04.2016) this court reaffirm the position taken in the

Abeydeeras case referred to above and observed that the

law seems to have moved away. Today a juristic person, no

less than a natural person, can be commanded to carry out

its public duty and rejected the argument that Mandamus

cannot lie against a public body such as the Sri Lanka Ports

Authority.

When considering the decisions referred to above I see no

merit in the said argument raised by the 1st respondent.

In appeal, on behalf of the Supreme Court, Prasanna

Jayawardena J. (with Nalin Perera J. (as His Lordship the

present Chief Justice then was) and Wanasundera J.

concurring) upheld the Judgment of the Court of Appeal.18

There is one other point which goes to the root of the matter,

which has escaped the attention of the Court in the above cases

(except Dayaratne v. Rajitha Senaratne,19 which I will refer to

later). That is, Rule 5 of the Court of Appeal (Appellate

Procedure) Rules of 1990, which is directly relevant to the

matter under consideration, i.e., how a public officer, when he is

made a respondent for acts or omissions done in his official

capacity, shall be identified or cited in a writ application.

The Court of Appeal (Appellate Procedure) Rules of 1990 have

been made by the Chief Justice together with three Judges of

the Supreme Court in accordance with Article 136 of the

18 Sri Lanka Medical Council v. Suriyarachchi, SC Appeal No. 184/2017, SC SPL LA No. 41/2017 decided on 21.09.2018 19 [2006] 1 Sri LR 7

20

Constitution of the Republic and published in the Government

Gazette (Extraordinary) No. 645/4 dated 15.01.1991. By the

time these Rules were made, the Supreme Court is the highest

and final superior Court of the Republic.

It is noteworthy that when Haniffas case was decided in 1963,

the Court of Appeal (Appellate Procedure) Rules of 1990 were

non-existent. Hence, after the said Rules came into force20, the

Rules shall invariably take precedence and thereafter there is no

room to rely on Haniffas case to summarily dismiss the

applications for mandamus on the purported ground that the

party against whom mandamus is sought has not been made a

respondent by name.

Rule 5 of the Court of Appeal (Appellate Procedure) Rules of

1990 reads as follows:

(1) This rule shall apply to applications under Articles 140

and 141 of the Constitution, in which a public officer has

been made a respondent in his official capacity, (whether

on account of an act or omission in such official capacity, or

to obtain relief against him in such capacity, or otherwise).

(2) A public officer may be made a respondent to any such

application by reference to his official designation only (and

not by name), and it shall accordingly be sufficient to

describe such public officer in the caption by reference to

his official designation or the office held by him, omitting

reference to his name. If a respondent cannot be sufficiently

20 According to the Gazette No. 697 of 10.01.1992 inter alia Rule 5 came into force from 27.04.1992, and Rule 5(5) in particular came into force from 31.12.1991.

21

identified in the manner, it shall be sufficient if his name is

disclosed in the averments in the petition.

(3) No such application shall be dismissed on account of

any omission, defect or irregularity in regard to the name

designation, description, or address of such respondent, if

the Court is satisfied that such respondent has been

sufficiently identified and described, and has not been

misled or prejudiced by such omission, defect or

irregularity. The Court may make such order as it thinks fit

in the interest of justice, for amendment of pleadings, fresh

or further notice, costs, or otherwise, in respect of any such

omission, defect or irregularity.

(4) (a) In respect of an act or omission done in official

capacity by a public officer who has thereafter ceased to

hold such office, such application may be made and

proceeded with against his successor, for the time being in

such office, such successor being made a respondent by

reference to his official designation only, in terms of sub-

rule (2)

(b) If such an application has been made against a public

officer, who has been made a respondent by reference to

his official designation (and not by name) in respect of an

act or omission in his official capacity, and such public

officer ceases to hold such office, during the pendency of

such application, such application may be proceeded with

against his successor, for the time being, in such office,

without any addition or substitution of respondent afresh,

proxy or the issue of any notice, unless the Court considers

such addition, substitution, proxy or notice to be necessary

22

in the interest of justice. Such successor will be bound, in

his official capacity, by any order made, or direction given,

by the Court against, or in respect of, such

original respondent.

(c) Where such an application has been made against a

public officer, who has been made a respondent by

references to his official designation (and not by name), and

such public officer ceases to hold such office after the final

determination of such application, but before complying

with the order made or direction given therein, his

successor, for the time being in such office will be bound by

and shall comply with, such order or direction.

(5) The provisions of sub-rules (4)(b) and (4)(c) shall apply to

an application under Article 140 and 141 filed before such

date as may be specified by the Chief Justice by direction,

against a public officer, in respect of an act or omission in

his official capacity, even if such public officer is described

in the caption both by name and by reference to his official

designation.

(6) Nothing in this rule shall be construed as imposing any

personal liability upon a public officer in respect of the act

or omission of any predecessor in office.

(7) In this rule, ceases to hold office means dies, or

retires or resigns from, or in any other manner ceases to

hold, office.

According to Rule 5(1), Rule 5 applies to all the writ applications

made under Articles 140 and 141 of the Constitution of 1978, as

amended, across the board.

23

Article 140 says that the Court of Appeal has the power inter alia

to issue orders in the nature of writs of certiorari, prohibition,

procedendo, mandamus and quo warranto against the judge of

any Court of First Instance or tribunal or other institution or any

other person; and Article 141 inter alia says that the Court of

Appeal has power to issue orders in the nature of writs of

habeas corpus.

Article 140 does not make a distinction between mandamus and

other prerogative writs, and nowhere in that Article does it state

that mandamus can only be issued against a natural person.

According to Article 140, mandamus, like any other prerogative

writ, can be issued against the judge of any Court of First

Instance or tribunal or other institution or any other person.

Similarly, Rule 5 does not make a distinction between

mandamus and other writs, and does not state that mandamus

can only be issued against a natural person.

In summary, what Rule 5(2) says is that in the caption of such a

writ application the public officer can be cited by official

designation only and not by name; and if necessary, for clarity,

his name can be disclosed in the body of the petition. 5(3) says

that no application shall be dismissed due to misdescription of

such public officerit is a curable defect. 5(4) says that if such a

public officer has ceased to hold office (a) at the time of filing the

application, (b) during the pendency of such application and (c)

after the delivery of the order but before complying with it, the

same can be filed and proceeded with against his successor by

official designation.

24

Dayaratne v. Rajitha Senaratne21 may be the first case Rule 5

was referred to in an application for writ of mandamus. In that

case, it is important to understand that, both the respondents

against whom mandamus was sought had been cited both by

names and official designations. Pending determination of the

case both of them ceased to hold office. Nonetheless, even at the

time of argument, the petitioner had not taken steps to add or

substitute the successors in office in order to proceed with the

application. When this matter was inter alia raised as a

preliminary objection, the petitioner relied on Rule 5(4)(b) read

with 5(5) to argue that the application can be proceeded with

against their successors for the time being in office without

addition or substitution. This argument was rightly rejected by

Marsoof J. as the President of the Court of Appeal (with Sri

Skandarajah J. agreeing) on the basis that Rule 5(4)(b) read with

5(5) was inapplicable in this instance as this was a case filed

against the public officers both by name and designation, and as

such, for the said Rules to be applicable, the case should have

been filed before the specified date nominated by the Chief

Justice, which, in this instance, was 31.12.199122, but this case

had been filed long after the said specified date. That finding is

in complete consonance with Rule 5. Rule 5 applies in

applications where a public officer is made a respondent in his

official designations only and not by name. The only exception

is Rule 5(5) which is applicable only in respect of applications

filed before 31.12.1991. The reference to Haniffas case by

Marsoof J.23 is clearly obiter dicta. This Judgment of Marsoof J.

21 [2006] 1 Sri LR 7 22 Vide Gazette No.697 of 10.01.1992 23 At page 17

25

is not an authority to say that writ of mandamus is an exception

to Rule 5.

It is a myth that mandamus can only be issued against natural

persons. Mandamus, like any other prerogative writ, can be

issued against natural, juristic or non-juristic persons including

tribunals, corporations, public bodies, public officials identified

by their official designations provided the other requirements to

issue mandamus are fulfilled.

I issue both the writs of certiorari and mandamus sought by the

petitioner as prayed for in paragraphs (c) and (d) of the prayer to

the petition. The 3rd respondent shall pay a sum of Rs.

100,000/= as costs of the action to the petitioner.

Before I part with this Judgment, I might remind that, in terms

of Rule 5(3):

No (writ) application shall be dismissed on account of any

omission, defect or irregularity in regard to the name

designation, description, or address of such respondent, if

the Court is satisfied that such respondent has been

sufficiently identified and described, and has not been

misled or prejudiced by such omission, defect or

irregularity. The Court may make such order as it thinks fit

in the interest of justice, for amendment of pleadings, fresh

or further notice, costs, or otherwise, in respect of any such

omission, defect or irregularity.

Hence, to minimize laws delays, in the pending mandamus

applications where respondent public officers have been cited

both by name and official designation, with the consent of the

counsel for the opposite party, amended captions can be filed

26

citing the said respondents by official designations only. If it is

not done, the successors in office shall be substituted when the

respondents cited both by names and designations cease to hold

office.

Judge of the Court of Appeal