The Court of Appeal of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka CA Appeal No: 137/2011 High Court Kegalle Case No: HC 1816/2002

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Complainant Vs. Kanathotha Liyanage Sirithunga alias Chuti alias Booti.

Accused And Now Kanathotha Liyanage Sirithunga alias Chuti alias Booti.

Accused-Appellant Vs. Hon Attorney General, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

Respondent

C.A. 137/2011

Before

Counsel

Argued &

Decided on

s. Thurairaja, PC. J.

1

H.C. Kegalle case No: 1816/02

S. Devika de L. Tennekoon,J.

S. Thurairaja, pc. J.

Amila Palliyage, Nihara Randeniya, Upul

Dissnayake and Miss Sandeepani Wijesiooriya for the Accused-Appellant.

Thusith Mudalige DSG. for the A.G.

29.08.2017

This matter was taken up for argument previously and parties have

filed written submissions. Due to the elevation of judges to the Supreme

Court, this matter is re-argued before us. Both counsels submitted that

they are content and confining with the written submissions that they have

filed. Heard submissions of both counsels.

The Hon. Attorney General had preferred an indictment against the

accused appellant Kanathota Liyanage Siritunga alias Chooty alias Booty for

committing double murder on the 6th March 1999. After the trial, the

learned High Court Judge found that there is no evidence against the

accused for the murder of Rangallage Wimal Piyaratne alias Wasantha and

!

l!

IiII

2

acquitted the accused appellant. The learned trial Judge after giving reasons

convicted the accused appellant for the murder of Walimuni Devayalage

Sena Ranasinghe Fernando and imposed death sentence.

When we consider the facts of the case with the available evidence led

before the Court. It appears that both the deceased were in their early 20's

attached to the Sri Lankan Army and serving at Paranthan, situated at

Northern operational area. On the fateful day, they couldn't make the sea

voyage to join their platoon in operation hence returned to their home.

There, both of them had gone to see a coconut decoration (coconut pandol )

on the way they were confronted by the accused-appellant, these two

received several stab and incise wounds. The first deceased succumbed to

his injuries at the General Hospital, Kegalle and the second died at National

Hospital, Colombo on transfer of specialised treatment.

There is no eye witness to the incident. The available evidence

including the dying depositions does not reveal a pre-planned murder, but it

falls within the first exception to Section 294 of the Penal Code.

The counsel for the accused-appellant submits that the accused is not

denying the allegation of causing injury but he had not possessed the

murderous intention, therefore he prays that the accused appellant be

acquitted from the conviction for murder and convict him for culpable

homicide not amounting to murder.

The learned DSG, Mr. Thusith Mudalige, maintaining the highest

tradition of the Attorney General Department and submits that he conceive

I !1

I! I

3

the fact that there is no evidence to support the conviction for murder, but

the available evidence including the dying declaration points directly to the

culpability of causing the death of the deceased by the accused appellant.

He further submits that the accused appellant be convicted under Section

297 of the Penal Code for culpable homicide not amounting to murder on

the basis of grave and sudden provocation.

Considering the oral and written submissions of the counsels and the

available evidence before the High Court, we find that the evidence provided

at the trial Court does not warrant a conviction for murder. Therefore we

find the accused appellant guilty for culpable homicide not amounting to

murder which is punishable under Section 297 of the Penal Code.

The deceased was a very young person attached to the Sri Lanka

Army and involved in combat. His death cannot be condoned for any rhyme

or reason. Considering the injuries as per the Medical Officer it appears

that he had received 13 injuries out of which 4 were due to life saving

surgical wounds. There is no evidence that the accused appellant had

received any injuries. This shows the amount of power used on a youth who

was a Army soldier. Considering all evidence and circumstances we impose

18 years Rigorous Imprisonment on the accused-appellant.

Further we impose a fine of Rs. 5000/- in default 3 months simple

imprisonment. In addition to the above we also impose Rs. 100,000/-

compensation to be paid to the parents of the deceased, Walimuni

Devayalage Ranasinghe Fernando. (If both parents were living each will get

4

Rs. 50,000/-, if not, the living parent will get full Rs. 100,000/-). If the

compensation is not paid the accused appellant will be serving 2 years

Simple Imprisonment.

Considering the fact that the accused appellant was incarcerated from

the date of conviction namely, 20th July 2011 the 18 years sentence will be

operative from that date. If the fine and compensation are not paid the

default sentence will be operative consecutively.

Appeal partly allowed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

s. Devika de L. Tennekoon,J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Jmr/