IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCI1\ LIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A. Case No.1094/1999 (F)

D.C. Colombo Case No.l2437/MR

H.A.A. Perera,

Shop No.3, Temple Road,

Kelaniya.

PLAINTIFF

~Vs~

1. The Attorney~General,

Attorney~Gener; 1's DLpartment,

(' Colombo 12.

2. Kelaniya Pradc,hiya Sahha,

Mahara, Kadawaha.

3. LF.W. Balasuriya,

Oliyamulla, Negambo Road,

Peliyagoda.

DEFENDANTS

H.A.A. Perera,

Shop No.3, Temple Road,

Kelaniya.

PLAINTIFF~ A"PPELLANT

~Vs~

1

BEFORE

COUNSEL

Decided on

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, I.

1. The Attorney~General,

Attorney -General's Department,

Colombo 12.

2. Kelaniya Pradeshiya Sabha,

Mahara, Kadawatha.

3. LF.W. Balasuriva,

Oliyamulla, Negambo Road,

Peliyagoda.

DEFENDANT ~RESPONDENTS

A.H.M.D. Nawaz,j.

Athula Perera with Chathurani de Silva for the Plaintiff-Appellant

Chaya Sri Nammuni for the pr Def"endant-Respondent

Aravinda R.I. Athurupane with Bernard Hettiarachchi and Dr. Chamila S. Talagala for the 2nd Def"endant-Respondent

Chandrasiri de Silva with Nadeera \Verasinghe for the yd Defendant-Respondent

25.10.2018

By a plaint dated 07.0 U992, the Plaintiff-Appellant (hereinafter sometimes referred to

as "the Plaintiff") instituted this action against the Attorney-General, Kelaniya

Pradeshiya Sabha and a private individual named Balasuriya as the pr, 2nd and yd

Defendants respectively seeking, inter alia,

2

a) damages in a sum of Rs.225,OOO, continuing damqges in a sum of Rs.6,250 per month

and interest thereon;

b) an order that would direct the yd Defendant~ Balasuriya to prohibit unauthorized

sales which the Plaintiff claimed were taking place within the Sacred City around

the Kelaniya Raja Maha Temple.

A perusal of the plaint brings out the following salient (acts.

i. The Plaintiff is in lavvful occupation of a busines~ premises within the Sacred City.

1 ii. Any engagements it:. unauthorized businesses within the Sacred City are unlawful.

iii. The pt Defendant (Attorney~General) and 2nd Defendant (Kelaniya Pradeshiya

Sabah) have permitted multiple vendors to conduct unauthorized business within

the Sacred City.

iv. The pt and 2nd Defendants have assigned the 3rd Defendant with the tasks of

\ a) organizing the vendors who conduct unauthorized business;

b) allotting specific places from where these vendors could tram,act their

business;

c) collecting revenues from these vendors; and

d) providing safeguards to the said vendors.

The plaint further averred that owing to the aforesaid conduct of the 1st and 2nd

Defendants, the Plaintiffhqd suffered a loss of Rs.225,OUO during the preceding three years

to the institution of the a::tion and was continuing to suffer a loss of Rs.6,250 per month.

The Attorney~General (the pt Defendant) filed answer pleading that no cause of action

accrued against him as tLe Town and Country Planning Department had taken all steps

to prohibit unlawful business activities within the Sacred City.

The 2nd Defendant~ Kelaniya Pradeshiya Sabha travers~d in its answer that there were no

exclusive rights granted tE~ any person to conduct business within the Sacred City, and

that the Defendants had no legal duty towards the Plaintiff to allow her any exclusive right

to transact business within the Sacred City.

3

The 3rd Defendant-filing his answer denied that a cause of action had accrued to the

Plaintiff and averred that he was only a commission agent appointed by the incumbent

priest of the Kelaniya T ernple and thus was responsible only to the incumbent chief priest

of Kelaniya Temple and its Board of Trustees. It was the position of the yd Defendant that

the Board of Trustees of the Kelaniya Temple had allowed traders to engage in business

outside the Sacred City ar1.d had also collected authorized rentals from them on behalf of

the Kelaniya Temple. In any event, he traversed that he was not bestowed with a special

permission that enabled him to stop anyone doing bu~jness in the sacred area or outside

the sacred area.

Thus the basis of this action, as I enumerated above, is that an area surrounding the

Kelaniya Raja Maha Vihqraya is demarcated and gazetted as the Kelaniya Raja Mara

Vihara Urban Developm~I'lt Area and the area earmarkerJ within it is the sacred area which

is administered by the Department of Town and Country Planning. The Sacred City is set

apart for Buddhist pilgrims but the pt and 2nd Defendants have permitted unauthorized

vendors especially on Poya Days to ply their wares within the Scared City causing a loss of

business to the Plaintiff. . ,

This litigation went to triql on 42 issues and some of the relevant issues pivotal to the case

could thus be set down.

3rd Defendant

The Plaintiff had not sp~cified the damage that had been specifically caused to her and

there are no rights set out: in the plaint that could enable the Plaintiff to transact business

in the area described in the plaint. U 2nd Defendant's Issues

i. Has the 2nd Defendant-Kelaniya Pradeshiya Sabba permitted the yd Defendant to

collect rentals from the vendors conducting buslness within the Sacred City?

-Issue No.8

4

,

ii. Whether the 2nd Defendant-Kelaniya Pradeshiya Sabha has caused or is causing any

loss to the Plaintiff bv allowing vendors to transact business within the Sacred City?

Issue No.ll(iii)

iii. Whether there was any contract between the Plaintiff and 2nd Defendant-Kelaniya

Pradeshiya Sabha?

pt Defendant's Issue

Should the plaint be dismIssed for want of jurisdiction as there is no cause of action and

") there is no right to claim compensation?

All these issues have been answered in favour of the Defendants and by a judgment dated

09.11.l999-the learned Additional District Judge of Colombo dismissed the action of the

Plaintiff-Appellant specifically holding that she could llot maintain the action.

, What unfolded in the Plaintiff's case was that on Poya days, when large crowds gathered

at the Sacred city, vendOlis plied their wares and traIlsacted mobile sales. The Plaintiff

showed that the authorities had made attempts to pr~vent these happenings but their

efforts were futile. The testimony of the plaintiff, albeIt lengthy, does not go to show a

legal obligation that the defendants owed her, contractual or statutory. The evidence

proffered by the Defendant does not disclose any cause of action against the pt Defendant

(the Attorney General) nor does her testimony point to a breach of contract or any breach

of law on the part of 2nd GL'_"~d yd Defendants.

Upon a perusal of the plaine and the answer vis-a.-vis the evidence led in the case a common

thread that emerges is th~: unified stance that the Plaintiff did not disclose a cause of action

in the plaint and the issues raised on behalf of the Deft~ndants and the evidence does not

establish any wrong that might found an action.

;According to Section 5 of the Civil Procedure Code, a "cause of action' is the vvrong for

the prevention or redress i'}f which an action may be brought, and includes the denial of a

right, the refusal to fulfil an obligation, the n~glect to perform <,1. duty, and the infliction of

an affirmative injury".

5

I

,(

A cause of action generally imports two things. viz., a right in the plaintiff and a violation

of it by the defendant and a 'cause of action' means the whole cause of action, i.e., all the

facts which together con~;titute the plaintiff's right to maintain the action .... In section 5,

'cause of action' is defined as 'the wrong for the redress of which an action may be

brought .... The 'wrong' is (le combination of the rights and its violation". Per de Sampayo

A. J. in Lowe VS. Fernando-16 N.L.R 398 (F.B).

On the other hand, the term cause of action implies not only the wrong for the prevention

or redress of which action may be brought, but connotes the grounds upon which such

Nrong arises and thus enable their destruction. Amar:lsekera and CO. VS. Duckworth

(1909) 5 A.C.R 2.

J

In the case of an action O}"~ a contract, "the cause of action" consists of the making of the

contract and of its breach in the place where it ought to be performed.

A failure to perform a contract is a wrong within the meaning of the definitlOn of the

expression "cause of actiiJn". English decisions as to the meaning of the expression "cause

of action" were not follo\iV':'d~see Pless Pol VS. Lady dE' Soysa et al 9 N.L.R 316.

The case brought by the E;aintiff constitutes no cause of action within the confines of the

above constructions and [he learned Additional District Judge of Colombo reached the

correct decision when he stated that no cause of action had accrued to the Plaintiff~

Appellant against the Defendant~ Respondents and in the circumstances I see no reason to

disturb the conclusion of the learned District Judge ari.d I proceed to affirm the judgment.

The appeal is dismissed. 'l,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

6