1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for Orders in the nature of Writs of Mandamus under Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

CA (Writ) Application No: 431/2016

1. K. Gunapalan, Village President, Paddiruppu. 2. K. Selvarajah, President Rural Development Society, Paddiruppu. 3. R. Thillayampalam, President Sri Sithivinayagar Board of Trustees, Paddiruppu. 4. D. Nithiyanantharajah, President, Blue Diamond Sports Club, Paddiruppu.

PETITIONERS

Vs. 1. Hon. Minister Rural Economic Affairs, CWE Secretariat Building, No. 27, Vauxhall Street, Colombo 2.

2. The Secretary, Ministry of Public Administration and Home Affairs, Independence Square, Colombo 7.

2(a) The Secretary,

Ministry of Home Affairs, Independence Square, Colombo 7.

2

3. Mrs. P.S.M. Charles, Government Agent, Batticaloa. 4. M. Gopalaratnam, Divisional Secretary, Manmunai South and Eravur Pattu. Batticaloa. 4(a) S.Ranganathan,

Divisional Secretary, M.S and E.P. Batticaloa.

5. Hon. M.S.S Ameer Ali M.P., Attorney-at-Law, Deputy Minister of District Economic Affairs, Paddiruppu.

6. Hon. S. Ganesharajah, Former Minister and UNP Organiser, Paddiruppu.

RESPONDENTS Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J Arjuna Obeyesekere, J Counsel: S. Mandaleswaran with S. Abinaya for the Petitioner Vikum De Abrew, Senior Deputy Solicitor General with Ms. Indumini Randeny, State Counsel for the Respondents Written Submissions: Tendered on behalf of the Petitioner on 23rd September 2019 Tendered on behalf of the Respondents on 26th May 2020 and 31st August 2020 Decided on: 25th September 2020

3

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J

The 1st Petitioner is the President of the Village Society, Paddiruppu while the 2nd

Petitioner is the President of the Rural Development Society, Paddiruppu. The

Petitioners state that the village of Paddiruppu had a bus stand which had been

known as the Paddiruppu Kaluwanchikudi bus stand. Re-construction work of the bus

stand had commenced in July 2015. The work having been completed in December

2015, it had been ceremonially opened by the Deputy Minister of Economic Affairs in

April 2016. The Petitioners state that at the time of the opening, the bus stand had

been re-named as the Kaluwanchikudi Bus Stand as opposed to its previous name,

Paddiruppu Kaluwanchikudi bus stand. The Petitioners state that the land on which

the bus stand is situated falls within the village of Paddiruppu, and that naming the

said bus stand by any other name is a violation of the rights of the people of

Paddiruppu.

Having complained about the above change of name and not having received a

favourable response, the Petitioners filed this application, seeking inter alia the

following relief:

(a) Make order compelling the 1st and/or the 2nd Respondent or any other person

or authority named by Your Lordships Court, to hold an inquiry into the claim or

dispute of the Petitioners morefully set out in the petition;

(b) Make order granting the reliefs prayed for by the Petitioners in the petition,

namely:

(i) Change the name Kaluwanchikudi Bus stand to Paddiruppu

Kaluwanchikudi Bus Stand;

(ii) Demarcate and define the boundaries of Paddiruppu with meets and

bounds;

(iii) Make order preventing or restraining any Government authorities from

naming any institution, wit hospitals, schools etc. put up by them other

than with the name of Paddiruppu.

4

The learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General for the Respondents submitted that

even though the Petitioners claim in the caption that this is an application filed in

terms of Article 140 of the Constitution for Writs of Mandamus, the prayer does not

specifically state that what is sought are Writs of Mandamus. For this reason, he

submitted that this application is misconceived in law, as this Court cannot grant

relief that has not been prayed for. Having considered the manner in which the

aforementioned relief sought by the Petitioners has been couched, I am in

agreement with the said submission of the learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General

that the Petitioners have not specifically sought a Writ.

The learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General drew the attention of this Court to the

judgment in Dayananda vs Thalwatte1 where a situation similar to what has

occurred in this application had arisen. In that case, the petitioner had sought (a) to

quash the decision of the 1st respondent to institute proceedings in terms of the

State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act, and (b) to declare that the quit notice

dated 08th April 1997 is of no force or avail, without specifying the Writ that was

being sought. Upon an objection being taken that (a) the Petitioner has failed to

identify the writ he has sought from this Court, and (b) that the prayer is

misconceived and unknown to the law and therefore neither relief could be granted,

this Court held as follows:

It is necessary for the Petitioner to specify the writ he is seeking supported by

specific averments why such relief is sought. Even though the Petitioner has set

out in the caption that "In the matter of an application for writ of quo

warranto and prohibition" there is no supporting averment specifying the writ

and there is no prayer as regards the writ that is being prayed for. The failure to

specify the writ therefore renders the application bad in law.

Although it is apparent from the pleadings that the Petitioners are only seeking an

order directing the Respondents to inquire into this matter, I am in agreement with

the learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General that this Court cannot grant a Writ in the

complete absence of a prayer to that effect. An application in such a situation is

misconceived in law. This situation must however be distinguished from a situation

1 (2001) 2 Sri LR 73.

5

where there is a specific prayer for a Writ, and the power of this Court to issue the

said Writ, albeit in a modified form.

The learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General has also submitted that the relief sought

by the Petitioners is broad and vague. The order sought in paragraph (a) above is not

limited to the 1st and 2nd Respondents but is directed at any other person or

authority named by this Court. Similarly, the relief sought in paragraph (b)(iii) above

is directed at any Government authority which demonstrates that the Petitioners

themselves do not know who has the power to name roads etc. This Court, in

Sipkaduwa Anthony Danawathie Wimalasuriya vs Commissioner General of Lands

and Others2 held that, This Court cannot issue writs in such vague terms against an

array of Government Officials. This application, filed seeking vague reliefs, shall, in

my view, be dismissed in limine on that basis.

In the above circumstances, this Court upholds the above legal objections raised by

the learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General, with the consequence being that this

application is liable to be dismissed in limine.

However, for purposes of completeness, this Court would assume that the principal

relief sought by the Petitioners is a Writ of Mandamus, and consider whether this

Court is in a position to grant that relief.

The Petitioners have submitted that Paddiruppu is a small village which has

approximately 250 families. While it has its own Grama Niladhari division, several

public institutions such as the Paddiruppu National School, Paddiruppu Zonal

Education Office etc are situated within Paddiruppu. The argument of the Petitioners

is that the said bus stand is situated wholly within the village of Paddiruppu, and

therefore naming the bus stand as the Kaluwanchikudi bus stand is in violation of the

rights of the people of Paddiruppu.

The 4th Respondent, the Divisional Secretary, Manmunai South and Eruvil Pattu in his

Statement of Objections has admitted that Paddiruppu is situated within

Kaluwanchikudi. He has stated that the Paddiruppu Grama Niladhari division was

established in 2007, and is one of the six Grama Niladhari divisions coming within the 2 CA (Writ) Application No. 47/2014; CA Minutes of 29th July 2018(9).

6

ward of Kaluwanchikudi. He has stated further that the bus stand that existed prior

to the re-construction work that was carried out in 2015 was known as the

Kaluwanchikudi bus stand. It appears from the sketch of the Paddiruppu town

submitted by the 4th Respondent marked 4R2 and the photographs that have been

filed by the party that sought to intervene, that several public institutions in the area,

such as the Base Hospital, the Circuit Magistrates Court, the Police Station, the Post

Office etc carry the name Kaluwanchikudi. Thus, it appears that public institutions

have been referred to by either of the two names.

The learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General has drawn the attention of this Court to

the decision of the Supreme Court in Ratnayake and Others vs C.D.Perera and

others3 where it was held as follows:

The general rule of Mandamus is that its function is to compel a public

authority to do its duty. The essence of Mandamus is that it is a command

issued by the superior Court for the performance of public legal duty. Where

officials have a public duty to perform and have refused to perform, Mandamus

will lie to secure the performance of the public duty, in the performance of

which the applicant has sufficient legal interest. It is only granted to compel the

performance of duties of a public nature, and not merely of private character

that is to say for the enforcement of a mere private right, stemming from a

contract of the parties.

The above position has been reiterated in Jayawardena vs. Peoples Bank4 where it

was held that:

Courts will always be ready and willing to apply the constitutional remedy of

mandamus in the appropriate case. The appropriate case must necessarily be a

situation where there is a public duty. In the absence of a public duty an

intrusion by this Court by way of mandamus into an area where remedial

measures are available in private law would be to redefine the availability of a

prerogative writ.

3 [1982] 2 Sri LR 451. 4 [2002] 3 Sri LR 17.

7

In Rajeswari Nadaraja v. M. Najeeb Abdul Majeed, Minister of Indistries and

Commerce and Others5 Aluwihare, J held that, In an application for a writ of

mandamus, the first matter to be settled is whether or not the officer or authority in

question has in law and in fact the power which he or she refused to exercise. As a

question of law, it is one of interpreting the empowering statutory provisions. As a

question of fact, it must be shown that the factual situation envisaged by the

empowering statute in reality exists.

The Petitioners have not submitted any material to this Court that set out the

procedure that is followed when naming public places such as bus stands, nor have

the Petitioners submitted any material to establish that the Respondents are under a

legal duty to name the re-constructed bus stand as the Paddiruppu-Kaluwanchikudi

bus stand. In the absence of any public or legal duty owed to the Petitioners by the

Respondents, the question of issuing a Writ of Mandamus does not arise.

I am therefore of the view that this application is misconceived in fact and in law.

Accordingly, I dismiss this application, without costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J

I agree

Judge of the Court of Appeal

5 SC Appeal No. 177/15; SC Minutes of 31st August 2018.