1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A. (DCF) Case No:

324/97/F

D.C. (Mt. Lavinia) Case No:

1246/P

In the matter of an Appeal under Article 138 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. Don John Edward Wijesinghe, No 398, Mullewatte, Gothatuwa, Angoda

Plaintiff Vs.

1. D. Vilodovine,

No 70, Rattanapitiya, Borelasgamuwa 2. W.A. Dona Hilda,

No 70, Rattanapitiya, Borelasgamuwa 3. W.P. Fonseka,

No702, Ratlanapitiya, Borelasgamuwa 4. Wehellage Somawathei Paranavithana,

No 70, Rattanapitiya, Borelasgamuwa 5. Mutha Merannage Sethyavadi, No 70/3,

Kesbewa Road, Borelesgamuwa

Defendants

And now between

Don John Edward Wijesinghe, No 398, Mullewatte, Gothatuwa, Angoda

Plaintiff-Appellant Vs.

1. D. Vilodovine (deceased)

Substituted by 1A.W.A. Don Silva,

No 70, Rattanapitiya, Borelasgamuwa 2. W.A. Dona Hilda, No 70, Rattanapitiya.

Borelasgamiwa. 3. W.P. Fonseka No 70/2, Rattanapitiya,

Borelasgamuwa.

2

Before: M. T. Mohammed Laffar, J.

S. U. B. Karalliyadde, J.

Counsel:

Ranjan Suwandaratne, PC with Y.P. Matugama instructed by Ms. Ineka

Hendawitharana for the Plaintiff-Appellant

W.R.J. Peiris instructed by Ms. Chamali K. Rannulu for the substituted

5th Defendant-Respondents

Written submissions tendered on:

17.01.2020 (by the Plaintiff-Appellant)

25.11.2019 (by the substituted 5th Defendant-Respondents)

Argued on: 17.12.2021

Decided on: 18.02.2022

S.U.B. Karalliyadde, J.

The Plaintiff-Appellant (the Plaintiff) instituted the partition action in the District Court

of Mount Lavinia making the 1st and 2nd Defendant-Respondents (the 1st and 2nd

Defendants) as parties to the action for partitioning a land called Dawatagahawatta

morefully described in the schedule to the plaint. The 3rd - 5th Defendant-Respondents

4. Wehellage Somawathei Paranavithana,

No 70, Rattanapitiya, Borelasgamuwa 5. Mutha Merannage Sethyavadi (Deceased) Substituted by

5A. Chamandir Sathyawadi 5B. Randir Sathyawadi 5C. Sikkuarachchige Yamuna Ramyakanthi Sathyawadi

Defendant-Respondents

3

(the 3rd - 5th Defendants) intervened to the case after the preliminary survey was done.

The 3rd - 5th Defendants claimed that the land depicted in the preliminary plan No.

C/87/81 dated 03.12.1981 prepared by Mr. Bernard Joseph, Licensed Surveyor (marked

as X) is not the land described in the schedule to the plaint but it is a land called

Kahtagahawatta which they are co-owners.

The 3rd - 5th Defendants took out a Commission (Commission papers are at page 348 of

the Appeal brief) to Mr. Sena Dharmawardhana, Licensed Surveyor to superimpose the

three surveyor plans on the preliminary plan made by Mr. Bernard Joseph. Those three

plans were plan No. 201 dated 06.02.1940 of Mr. K.G.W. Silva (marked as 4V1), plan

No. 35/1970 dated 22.03.1970 made by Mr. Jerad Amarasinghe (marked as 4V3) and

plan No. 2833 dated 11.12.1983 of Mr. U.M. de Silva (marked as 4V4). Mr. Sena

Dharmawardhana prepared the superimposed plan bearing No. 1858A dated 15.01.1993

(marked as 4V2).

The case proceeded to trial on an admission on jurisdiction and two points of contest

raised on behalf of the Plaintiff. The Defendants did not raise any points of contest. The

two points of contest raised for the Plaintiff are as follows;

01. . . :

/87/81 ... ?

02. ?

(at page 90 of the Appeal brief)

After the trial, the learned District Judge held that the Plaintiff has failed to establish

that the land sought to be partitioned is depicted in the preliminary plan prepared by

Mr. Bernard Joseph Licensed Surveyor (marked as X) and the Pedigree. Therefore, the

points of contest were answered negatively and the action was dismissed. By this

appeal, the Plaintiff seeks reliefs, inter alia, to set aside the judgement dated 24.03.1997

of the District Court and direct the learned District Judge to partition the land depicted

in plan X in terms of the Partition Act, No. 21 of 1977 according to the evidence of the

Plaintiff allotting the shares to the parties to the action.

When this appeal was taken up for argument, both parties consented to abide by a

judgement delivered by this Court on their written submissions, dispensing with their

rights to make oral submissions. As per the schedule to the plaint, the extent of the land

4

sought to be partitioned is about 1 Acre. The extent of the land shown in plan marked

X is 2 Roods 30.66 Perches. Hence, it is apparent that there is a considerable difference

in extents between the land described in the schedule to the plaint and the land depicted

in plan X. Nevertheless, while giving evidence, neither Mr. Bernard Joseph, who

prepared the plan X nor the Plaintiff hen giving evidence had explained the reasons for

that difference.

Since the judgements in partition actions are judgements in rem, the District Court

Judges should take utmost care in deciding the corpus and the title in partition actions.

Our Apex Courts in many occasions emphasised the importance of considering the

boundaries and the extent when deciding to partition a land.1 In the instant action, the

boundaries of the land called Davatagahawatta which is sought to be partitioned,

according to the title deeds produced by the Plaintiff at the trial (marked as P1 and P2)

and the schedule to the plaint are as follows;

:-

:- (Stores)

:- . .

.

:- ,

. . H

205/185

Mr. Bernard Joseph, the Commissioner of the case has not mentioned about the

boundaries of the land depicted in his plan marked as X in a reference key.

Nevertheless, the Court will observe that even though, the Commissioner has stated in

his Report (marked as X1) that he had surveyed the land called Davatagahawatta

described in the schedule to the plaint none of the boundaries of the land shown in plan

X tallies with the boundaries of the land mentioned in the tittle deeds of the Plaintiff

and the plaint. Though the Commissioner had given evidence at the trial, not even a

single question had been asked from him about the boundaries of the land described in

the schedule to the pliant.

1 Brampy Appuhamy Vs. Menis Appuhamy (60) NLR 337, W. Uberis Vs. M.W. Jayawardena (62) NLR 217, Sedohami Vs. Mahomadu Ali (7) NLR 247.

5

The learned Counsel for the Plaintiff argued that though, the 3rd to 5th Defendants argues

that the land depicted in the Commissioners plan is Kahatagahawatta, they never

produced any plan or acceptable material to the Commissioner to consider and decide

on their contest on the basis that the land in fact is not Dawatagahawatta but

Kahatagahawatta. In the instant action, the burden is on the Plaintiff to prove that the

land described in the schedule to the plaint which is known as Dawatagahawatta is the

land which is shown in the Commissioners plan and no burden cast on the 3rd to 5th

Defendants to prove that the land shown in that plan is not Dawatagahawtta but it is

Kahatagawatta.2 Therefore, necessity does not arise for those Defendants to furnish

material to the Commissioner to consider whether the land surveyed by him is

Kahatagahawatta. I, therefore, hold that the above argument of the learned Counsel for

the Plaintiff is without merits.

The learned Counsel for the Plaintiff further argued that the superimposed plan

prepared by Mr. Sena Dharmawardhana (marked as 4V2) on behalf on the 3rd to 5th

Defendants could not be considered in determining the corpus for the reasons that plan

4V2 had been prepared in gross violation of the mandatory provisions contained in

section 16 and 18 of the Partition Act, No. 21 of 1977. On close examination of the

impugned judgement, it is apparent that even though, the learned District Judge has

considered 4V2, he has refused to accept that plan for the reasons mentioned in the

judgement. That fact is evident from the following portions of the judgement.

" '42' 1858

." (at page 159 of the Appeal brief)

" '42' ." (at page 160 of the

Appeal brief)

The learned District Judge has further observed that;

42 ,

, ." (at

page 160 of the Appeal brief)

2 Sections 101, 102, and 103 of the Evidence Ordinance.

6

In such circumstances, it is clear that the learned District Judge has not considered plan

4V2 in deciding that the Plaintiff has failed to establish the corpus. Therefore, the above

stated argument of the learned Counsel for the Plaintiff also has no merits.

Considering all the above stated facts, I hold that the learned District Court Judge has

correctly held that the Plaintiff has failed to establish the corpus sought to be partitioned

and dismissed the action. Since the Plaintiff has failed to prove the identity of the land,

it is a futile exercise for the Court to examine the finding of the learned District Court

Judge about the title.

Under the above stated facts and circumstances, I hold that the impugned judgement

dated 24.05.1997 of the learned District Court Judge is according to the facts of the case

and the law. Therefore, I affirm that judgement and dismiss the Appeal. The Plaintiff

will pay Rs. 30,000/= to the 5th Defendant as costs of this Appeal.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

M.T. MOHAMMED LAFFAR, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL