\ 1 I I

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Court of Appeal No. CA 555/94(F)

Punchirala Arachchilage Dingiri

Appuhami,

(Deceased)

Ganangamuwa,

Nakkawatta.

DC Kuliyapitiya Case NO.6218L

Plaintiff

Punchirala Arachchilage Amarathunga,

Ganangamuwa,

N akkawatta.

Substituted - Plaintiff

Vs.

01. Edirisinghe Mudiyanselage

KiriBandara,

N akkawatta.

02. Liyana Pathiranahalage Podimanike,

Ganangamuwa,

N akkawatta.

1

! 1 I !I! I

f 1t f ~ I

I l t I ! i f 1 I! ,

f ,

, l I

\

03. Liyana Pathiranahalage Milinona

Udagorake,

Anukkane.

04. Liyana Pathiranahalage PodiNona,

Koulwewa,

Horombawa.

05. Liyana Pathiranahalage Jayasena,

Ranwala,

Beligala.

06. Edirisinghe Mudiyanselage

Podimahaththaya,

Ganangamuwa,

Nakkawatta.

07. Liyana Pathiranahalage Thomas

Singho,

Ganangamuwa,

Nakkawatta.

7. L. P. Premadasa

(Deceased)

Substituted 7th A Defendant

08. Liyana Pathiranahalage Premadasa,

Ganangamuwa,

N akkawatta.

2

\ I ! t '" , , I ! 1I ! II , ;

,

I I

09. U.W. Wimaladasa,

Ganangamuwa,

Nakkawatta.

Defendants

Now Between

01. Liyana Pathiranahalage Podimanike,

Ganangamuwa,

N akkawatta.

02. Liyana Pathiranahalage Podi Nona

Koulwewa,

Horombawa.

03. U.W. Wimaladasa,

Vs.

Ganangamuwa,

N akkawatta.

2nd, 4th & 9th Defendants-Appellants

Punchirala Arachchilugc Dingiri

Appuhami,

(Deceased)

Ganangamuwa,

N akkawatta.

Plaintiff - Respondent

Punchirala Arachchilage Amarathunga

Ganangamuwa,

N akkawatta.

3

I

f I 1 ! t

r I

f f I t 1 Substituted - Plaintiff - I Respondent I 01. Edirisinghe Mudiyanselage I

KiriBandara,

Ganangamuwa, 1 I N akkawatta. I , I

i, I t I l 02. Liyana Pathiranahalage Milinona I Udagorake, l .' , Anukkane. I , ! r

03. Liyana Pathiranahalage Jayasena,

Ranwala,

Beligala.

t 04. Edirisinghe Mudiyanselage f , i , i Podimahaththaya, t I Ganangamuwa, f ,

~ ! f Nakkawatta.

, ;

05. Liyana Pathiranahalage Thomas , ,

Singho, \ Ganangamuwa, (Deceased) i

~-? Nakkawatta.

06. L.P. Premadasa,

7th Substituted Defendant - 6th

4

}

Respondent

07. Liyana Pathiranahalage Premadasa,

Ganangamuwa,

Nakkawatta.

Defendant - Respondents

Before : P.R.Walgama, J

Counsel : Rohan Sahabandu, PC with Ms. Chathurani De

Silva for the Appellant.

: D.K. Dhanapala with Mr. D.K.V. Jayanath for the

Substituted Plaintiff - Respondent.

Decided on: 05.05.2016

CASE- NO- 555/94/ (F)- ORDER -28/04/2016

P.R. Walgama, J

The instant order concerns an application made by the

Counsel for the Defendant - Appellants (in short the Appellants)

to try the below mentioned objection as a preliminary issue

and to set aside the judgment dated 01.07.1994 of the

Learned District Judge in the case bearing No. 6218 IL in the

District Court of Kuliyapitiya, and to send the record back

to the District Court to try the case de novo.

5

The 2nd ,4th and the 9th Defendant- Appellants assailed the

above judgment, on the basis that the Learned District Judge

has failed to consider the documents marked by the 8th

Defendant (who has not appeal against the said impugned

judgment). It is the contention of the Plaintiff - Respondent,

that the 8th Defendant marked 8d I, 8d2 and 8d3. As the 8d 1

and 8d2 was marked subject to proof and the said two

documents were not proved and such the Learned District

Judge has not considered the said documents when arriving at

the determination. Therefore it IS apparent that the said

contention is devoid of merits and should stand rejected.

The Plaintiff - Respondent has alleged that the Learned

District Judge has not considered the document marked as

8d3, which is the entire case record of the Partition case,

In respect of the land in issue, and has decided the rights

of the parties including the Plaintiff- Respondent's right of

way which is the contentious issue in the matter in hand.

I t is contended by the Appellants that to deal with the

rights given to the parties to partition action including the

right of way was intensely relevant to decide the instant

action weather the Plaintiff is entitled to the road way that

IS being claimed by him out of necessity. Hence it IS

abundantly clear that the Learned District Judge by f~iling to

consider the outcome of the said Partition Case has flawed

in arriving at the above determination. Therefore in the above

setting I am of the view that the said JUDGMENT IS

trammelled with infirmities, and needs to be set aside.

6

I

J ! I I

~

~ 1

f I i ,

i

Nevertheless it IS the stance of the Plaintiff that the said

case record was marked by the 8th Defendant who is not an

Appellant and no prejudice has been cau~ed to thf' 0ther

parties. But it IS salient to note that the Learned District

Judge should have considered the Plaintiffs rights after having

recourse to the outcome of the afore said Partition Action.

The Plaintiff- Respondent too has raised an objection as to

the maintainability of the said Appeal.

It is alleged by the Plaintiff - Respondent that the notice of

appeal as well as the Petition of Appeal are bad in law

and as such the appeal should be dismissed In limine.

It is viewed from the Petition of Appeal that the Appeal

has been lodged against the original Plaintiff who IS

deceased. In the course of the trial In the District Court the

said original Plaintiff died and his son Punchirala Arachilage

Amaratunge was substituted In place of the Plaintiff But it

IS seen In the Petition of Appeal the substituted Plaintiff-

Respondent has not been made a party to the appeal and it

IS apparent that the appeal has been lodged against the dead

person. Therefore it is contended by the Plaintiff that the

said error IS fatal and as such the appeal should be

dismissed in limine.

Further it is said that the Appellants had failed to make all

the Defendants as parties to this appeal, hence

that the Petition of Appeal is bad in law.

alleged

7

In support of the above proposition the Plaintiff- Respondent

adverted Court to the case of SUWARISHAMY .VS.

TELENIS - 54.NLR - 282 - which was held thus;

"when in an appeal a necessary party has not been made

as a Respondent appeal will be dismissed unless the default

IS not a one of an obvious character which could not

reasonably have been foreseen and avoided".

Therefore it is contended by the Plaintiff that In this instant

the default could be foreseen, and could have been avoided.

Further it is also brought to the notice of Court by the

Plaintiff that in the caption In the notice of appeal there are

two Plaintiffs. At the time the notice of Appeal was

tendered the original plaintiff was dead and his- .. son was

substituted In the place of the original plaintiff who was

dead. But it IS stated In the notice of Appeal, parallel to the

name of the original plaintiff it is indicated that he is a

party deceased.

In the above setting it IS stated that the above notice of

appeal is not in conformity with the Section 755 of the

Civil Procedure Code. Nevertheless it IS worthy to mention

that the Appellants had complied with the said requirements

laid down in the above Section 755 accordingly.

The Counsel for the Plaintiff while adverting Court to

Section 759(2) of the Civil Procedure Cod~ has "'dtebvti~dll)'

stated that if the Court acts in terms of the above Section

8

a material prejudice will be caused to the Plaintiff-

Respondent.

Section 759(2)

"in the case of any mistake, omISSIon or defect on the part

of any appellant in complying with the provisions of the

forgoing sections ...... the Court of Appeal may, if it should be

of opinion that the Respondent has not been materially

prejudiced, grant relief on such terms as it may deem just."

The Plaintiff- Respondent raised another objection that the

Appellants had moved for different relives in the notice of

Appeal and the Petition of Appeal.

In the notice of Appeal the Appellants had moved for the

following relives inter alia;

1. To set aside the judgment of the Learned District Judge

of Kuliyapitia,

2. Relief sought in the Answer of the Appellant.

In the Petition of Appeal the following reliefs are sought by

the Appellants,

1. To rescind the order of 17/1994 made by the Learned

District Judge,

2. Grant the alternate right of way as shown III plan No.

192

3. For such other further reliefs Court shall seems meet.

Therefore it is abundantly clear that there IS no uniformity III

the reliefs claimed by the Appellants.

9

Besides it is alleged by the Plaintiff -Respondent that the 5th

7th 8th and 9th relied on the same facts, but only the 9th

Defendant had appealed against the said impugned judgment,

therefore it IS said that one person who relied on the same

facts cannot appeal against the judgment.

It IS also been noted that the Petition of Appeal mentioned

as the Plaintiff the name of the original Plainti[[ who l~

deceased. But the Appellants position IS that III the notice of

appeal it is correctly stated and no material prejudice has

been caused to the Plaintiff - Respondent.

The Plaintiff- Respondent has also taken the objection that the

Appellant has failed to mention the names of all parties in

the present application. Therefore it IS urged . by the

Appellants that this Court to exerCIse its discretion III terms

of Section 759 (2) and 770 of the Civil Procedure Code to

add the necessary parties as the said omISSIOn has not

caused any material prejudice to the Plaintiff-Respondent.

In support of the above proposition the Counsel for the

Appellants had adverted Court to the judicial pronouncement

in the case of JA YASEKARA .VS. LAKMINI AND OTHERS-

2010-1 SLR- PAGE -41 which held thus;

"the issue at hand falls within the purvIew of a mistake,

omISSIOn or defect on the part of the Appellant in complying

with the provisions of Section 755. In such a situation if

the Court of Appeal was of the opinion that the Respondent

has not been materially prejudiced, it was empowered to

10

grant relief to the Appellant on such terms as it deemed

just"

"the power of the Court to grant relief under Section 759 (2)

is wide and discretionary and is subject to such terms as the

court may deem just. Relief may be granted even if no

excuse for non compliance is forthcoming- relief cannot be

granted if the Court is of the opinion that the Respondent

has been materially prejudiced in which event the appeal has

to be dismissed"

"It was further held that Section 770 shows that if it

appears to Court at the hearing of the appeal that any

person who was a party to the action In the court against

whose decree the appeal IS made but who has not been

made a party to the appeal, it IS within the discretion of

the court to issue the requisite notice of appeal on those

parties for service,"

"A discretion necessarily invokes an attitude of individual

choice, according to the particular circumstances, ~'1d differ

from a case where the decision follow exdibito juctitiae, once

the facts are ascertained. The exerCIse of the discretion

contemplated in Section 770 IS a matter for the decision of

the Judge who hears the Appeal"

In the above setting I am of the VIew that no material

prejudice will be caused to the Plaintiff- Respondent by

allowing the Appellants to make all the Defendants as parties

to this appeal.

11

Hence for the above mentioned factual and legal matrix I

am inclined to resolve the preliminary objections raised by

both parties in the following manner.

As contended by the Counsel for the Appellants the failure

on the part of the Learned District Judge to consider the

case record marked as 8d3 is fatale as the judgment of the

said Partition Action, the corpus of which IS the subject land,

and as the Plaintiff's rights including the road way had been

decided m the above case, was a vital point that would

have decided the main matter in the present action.

But it IS intensely relevant to note this Court at this

juncture need not dwell with the mam matter, as the

necessary parties are not before Court.

Nevertheless this court acting In terms of Section 759(2) and

Section 770(2) of the Civil Procedure Code IS inclined to

allow the application of the Counsel for the Appellants by

allowing to add necessary parties, subject to a cost of Rs.

10,0001.

.JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

12

I

J