==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0151/2024

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal filed in terms of

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979, read with

Article 138 of the Constitution

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Complainant

Vs

Dissanayake Mudiyanselage Lahiru

Krishantha

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Dissanayake Mudiyanselage Lahiru

Krishantha

Accused – Appellant

Vs

Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12.

Complainant - Respondent

Court of Appeal Case No:

CA/HCC/0151/2024

High Court of Badulla Case No:

HC 45/2019

CA/HCC/0151/2024

2 | P a g e

Before : P. Kumararatnam, J.

Pradeep Hettiarachchi, J.

Counsel : Malintha Jayasinghe for the Accused-Appellant.

: Janaka Bandara D.S.G for the Respondent.

Argued on : 18.05.2026

Decided on : 25.06.2026

Pradeep Hettiarachchi, J

Judgment

1. The Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as “the Appellant”) has preferred the

instant appeal against the conviction and sentence dated 07.06.2024 of the Learned

High Court Judge of Badulla. The Appellant was indicted before the High Court of

Badulla for committing grave sexual abuse on a boy under 16 years, an offence

punishable under Section 365(B) 2 (b) of the Penal Code.

2. Five witnesses testified for the prosecution. The Appellant made a dock statement.

During the argument, four grounds of appeal were advanced by the Counsel for the

Appellant, which are as follows:

a. PW1’s evidence contradicts the findings of the Medico Legal Report (MLR);

b. The date of offence contradicts with the findings of the MLR;

c. The Learned Trial Judge has failed to consider the credibility of PW3’s

testimony;

d. The Learned High Court Judge’s conclusion as to the date of the offence

contradicts with the findings of the MLR; and,

e. The Learned Trial Judge has failed to analyze the defence evidence.

CA/HCC/0151/2024

3 | P a g e

3. According to PW1, the victim, during the relevant period, resided with his parents

but frequently stayed at his grandmother’s house when his parents were at work.

His grandmother’s residence was situated in close proximity to his own home. PW1

further stated that his grandmother’s house consisted of two sections: an old house

and a newly constructed, but incomplete house.

4. According to the victim, on the day of the incident, he went to his grandmother’s

house and was watching television while seated on a bed. At that time, he was the

only person present in the house. While he was there, the Appellant arrived and

removed the victim’s clothes and committed the alleged offence.

5. The victim further stated that, while the Appellant was engaged in the act, his

grandmother happened to arrive at the house and witnessed the incident. Upon

seeing her, the Appellant ceased his actions. The grandmother reprimanded the

Appellant, following which he left the premises. Before leaving, the Appellant

allegedly instructed the victim not to disclose the incident to anyone.

6. On the following day, the victim informed his mother of the incident. Thereafter, his

mother accompanied him to the Police Station, where he made a statement regarding

the occurrence.

7. Subsequently, the victim was admitted to the Mahiyanganaya Hospital and was later

transferred to the Kandy Hospital for further treatment and examination. At the

Kandy Hospital, the victim was examined by a Judicial Medical Officer.

8. Since the Appellant contended that the findings of the Judicial Medical Officer, as

reflected in the Medico-Legal Report, were inconsistent with and contradictory to

the testimony of the victim, I shall now consider whether such a contradiction in

fact exists.

9. In his testimony, the victim stated that this was the first occasion on which he had

been subjected to such an offence. However, according to the evidence of the

Judicial Medical Officer, there was medical evidence suggestive of repeated anal

CA/HCC/0151/2024

4 | P a g e

penetration in the past. The Judicial Medical Officer further observed a healed tear

at the 6 o’clock position.

10. According to his testimony, the victim was examined on 02.09.2013 at about 11.00

a.m. at the Judicial Medical Officer’s Office of the National Hospital, Kandy. In the

opinion of the Judicial Medical Officer, the healed tear observed during the

examination could have been sustained approximately two weeks prior to the date

of examination.

11. The Appellant contends that, since the tear observed in the anus of the victim had

occurred approximately two weeks prior to the examination and the medical

evidence was suggestive of repeated anal penetration, the testimony of the victim is

rendered untrustworthy.

12. It is true that the victim stated he was subjected to this act by the Appellant only

once, despite medical evidence suggesting repeated anal penetration and, more

importantly, a two-week-old tear observed in the anus. Consequently, the Appellant

contended that the victim's evidence is untrustworthy. However, it must be noted

that the victim was only nine years old at the time of the offence, whereas he was

eighteen years old when testifying before the High Court. Needless to say, a boy of

that age is naturally reluctant and shy to fully disclose such incidents that occurred

during his childhood.

13. The evidence of PW3 also corroborates the victim’s testimony, as PW3 had

witnessed the incident. More importantly, PW3’s evidence further indicates that the

victim had been subjected to the said offence on several occasions when the

Appellant returned home on leave, as stated by the victim. What is discernible from

the evidence of PW3 is that the Appellant had committed the offence on several

occasions prior to the incident in question, but the victim had not complained to

anyone, as he was unable to comprehend the gravity of the act, given his tender age.

It was only after PW3 witnessed the incident in question that the victim made a

complaint.

CA/HCC/0151/2024

5 | P a g e

14. In State of Himachal Pradesh vs. Sanjay Kumar alias Sunny AIR 2017 SC 835,

and subsequent cases, the Supreme Court of India emphasized that the reluctance or

partial retraction by child victims may be viewed in light of the profound

psychological trauma they endure. Courts note that child witnesses are highly

vulnerable, and their hesitation should not automatically negate the prosecution's

case.

15. Thus, PW3’s testimony is in line with the medical evidence. Therefore, the mere

fact that the victim stated that the Appellant committed the offence only once does

not, in itself, render his evidence untrustworthy or unreliable. The credibility of

PW3’s testimony remains intact notwithstanding the fact that she was subjected to

cross-examination. The defence failed to elicit any material contradiction or

omission in her evidence that would give rise to a reasonable doubt as to the

truthfulness or reliability of her testimony. Consequently, I find no basis to reject

the evidence of PW3.

16. It is also significant to note that the history given by the victim to the Judicial

Medical Officer was also indicative of repeated acts of a similar nature on previous

occasions.

17. It was also contended that the Learned Trial Judge failed to properly analyze and

evaluate the defence case. In his dock statement, the Appellant admitted that he had

been seated on the bed with the victim. He further stated that he had come to the

house at the invitation of one Ranga and that, after switching on the television, he

left the premises together with the said Ranga.

18. Furthermore, the Appellant stated that the victim’s father was not on good terms

with him, as the latter had requested a loan of Rs. 50,000.00 from the Appellant,

which he was unable to provide. On that basis, the Appellant sought to suggest that

he had been falsely implicated in the offence.

19. The Learned Trial Judge has adequately considered the Appellant’s dock statement

and has provided cogent reasons as to why he was not inclined to accept it. If, as

CA/HCC/0151/2024

6 | P a g e

alleged by the Appellant, he had come to the house at the invitation of Ranga and

subsequently left the premises together with him, the Appellant could easily have

called Ranga as a witness to support that version of events. However, Ranga was

never called to testify on behalf of the Appellant.

20. In those circumstances, the Learned Trial Judge was justified in treating the

Appellant’s explanation with caution and in declining to place reliance upon it.

21. Moreover, none of the positions taken up by the Appellant in his dock statement had

been put to the prosecution witnesses during cross-examination. The Learned Trial

Judge carefully examined the contents of the dock statement and duly noted the

Appellant’s failure to challenge the prosecution witnesses on those matters when

they testified before the Court.

22. Very often, eyewitnesses to offences of this nature are not available, as such offences

are committed in secrecy and it is usually only the victim who is able to testify as to

what transpired. However, in the present case, PW3 has witnessed the incident, and

her evidence was found to be credible and convincing. At no stage was the

credibility of her testimony impeached in cross-examination by the defence.

23. The evidence of the victim and PW3, when considered in its totality, does not, in

my opinion, reveal any material contradictions or inconsistencies. The Learned Trial

Judge, in his analysis of the evidence, has carefully and correctly addressed all

relevant issues and has arrived at the conclusion that the prosecution has established

the charge against the Appellant beyond a reasonable doubt.

24. It is also desirable to emphasize that the Learned Trial Judge had the advantage of

observing the demeanor of the witnesses. Accordingly, Appellate Courts are slow to

interfere with the findings of a Trial Judge unless it is demonstrated that the Trial

Judge has manifestly misdirected herself on a material issue, thereby causing

prejudice to the Appellant.

25. In Alwis vs. Piyasena Fernando (1993) 1 Sri. L R 119, it was held that:

CA/HCC/0151/2024

7 | P a g e

"It is well established that findings of primary facts by a trial Judge who hears

and sees witnesses are not to be lightly disturbed on appeal."

26. Similar sentiments were articulated in Dharmasiri vs. Republic of Sri Lanka [2010]

2 Sri. L.R.241, where it was held that:

“Credibility of a witness is mainly a matter for the trial Judge; the Court of

Appeal will not lightly disturb the findings of a trial Judge with regard to the

credibility of a witness unless such findings of the trial Judge are manifestly

wrong.”

27. In the Court of Appeal decision of Kumar de. Silva and 2 others vs. Attorney

General [2010] 2 Sri LR 169, Sarath de. Abrew J had held that;

“Credibility is a question of fact, not of law. The acceptance or rejection of

evidence of witnesses is therefore a question of fact for the Trial Judge.”

28. In Ariyadasa vs. Attorney General [2012] 1 Sri LR 84, the Court of Appeal held

that;

“Court of Appeal will not lightly disturb a finding of a Judge with regard to the

acceptance or rejection of a testimony of a witness, unless it is manifestly wrong,

when the Trial Judge has taken such a decision after observing the demeanour

and deportment of a witness…….”

29. In these circumstances, I find no basis to agree with the Appellant’s contention that

the Learned Trial Judge failed to properly analyze and evaluate the defence case.

On the contrary, the judgment demonstrates a careful consideration of both the

prosecution and defence evidence. Accordingly, the grounds of appeal advanced by

the Appellant are devoid of merit and must fail.

30. For the foregoing reasons, I find no basis to interfere with the findings of the

Learned Trial Judge. Accordingly, I affirm the conviction and sentence imposed by

CA/HCC/0151/2024

8 | P a g e

the Learned High Court Judge of Badulla on 07.06.2024. In the circumstances, the

appeal is dismissed.

31. However, having regard to the age of the victim, this Court is of the view that the

compensation awarded by the Learned High Court Judge is excessive. Therefore, it

is reduced to Rs. 50,000/-. In default of payment of the said compensation, the

Appellant shall undergo six months’ simple imprisonment. Subject to the aforesaid

variation in respect of compensation, the appeal stands dismissed.

32. Nevertheless, it is hereby ordered that the sentence shall take effect from the date of

conviction, namely 07.06.2024.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P. Kumararatnam, J

I agree

Judge of the Court of Appeal