IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A. Case No. 831/2000 (F)

D.C. Colombo 6971/HP

LB. Finance Co:mpany Ltd.,

No. 101, Vinayalankara Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

Plaintiff

~Vs~

1. Victor Dewapura alias Devapura Victorpala alias Victorpala Devapura

No. 585, Waragoda Road,

Kelaniya.

2. Pathiraja Mudiyanselage Nimalasena,

No. 1490, Waragoda Road,

Kelaniya.

3. Aloycious ] oseph Alphonso Serasinghe,

"Aloy Travel Srvices",

W aragoda, Kelaniya.

Defendants

And Between :

Pathiraja Mudiyanselage Nimalasena,

No. 1490, Waragoda Road,

Kelaniya.

2nd Defendant ~ Appellant

1

BEFORE

COUNSEL:

~Vs~

LB. Finance Company Ltd.,

No. 101, Vinayalankara Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

Plaintiff~Respondent

1. Victor Dewapura alias Devapura Victorpala alias Victorpala Devapura (Deceased)

n------No. 585, Waragoda ~oad~~~~--~-~ __ -~_~n-

Kelamya.

lA.Yakahatuge Somawathi,

No. 489, Waragoda Road,

Kelamya. , 2. Aloycious ] oseph Alphonso Serasinghe,

"Aloy Travel Srvices",

Waragoda, Kelaniya.

Defendant ~ Respondents

A.H.M.D. Nawaz,j.

Viresh Nanayakkara with Yajish Tennakoon

for the 2nd Defendant~ Appellant.

Palitha Kumarasinghe, P.C. with V.Fernando

and Viraj Bandaranayake for the Plaintiff~

Respondent.

2

Decided on 06.02.2017

A.H.M.D. NA W AZ, J.

This appeal raises the defence of caveat subscriptor or nqn est factum as the English Law

would call it and the 2nd Defendant~ Appellant who took up this defence in the District

Court seeks to contend that the Plaintiff~ Respondent Company misled him into

signing the guarantee bond marked as P4 and produced at the trial.

The litigation revolves around an agreement entitlec;l "lease agreement" dated 9th

September 1986 where the Plaintiff~ Respondent~ LB. Finance Ltd., (the lessor) agreed

- WIth the pc Defendant~ VIdor Dewapura(flie lesseeJto purchas~llre~SITbjectma.tter in

question for the purpose of leasing it to the lessee upon the terms and conditions

recited in the said lease agreement. The 2nd Defendant~Appeliant (hereinafter

sometimes referred to as the 2nd Defendant or appellant ) and 3rd Defendant who

guaranteed the lease agreement also signed this lease agreement at the bottom~ Please

see the agreement dated 9th September 1986 marked as PI. Both the 2nd Defendant~

Appellant and 3rd Defendant proceeded to sign the guarantee. which was

contemporaneous with the lease agreement. The guarantee marked as P4 recites:

'~In considerationofyour entering at our request into the foregoing lease agreement (hereinafter

called "the lease agreement'? with Victor Dewapura (hereinafter called "the lessee'? we the

undersigned do and each of us doth hereby jointly and severally guarantee to you the punctual

payment by the lessee of all rental .... "

As one could observe, there is also a covenant of joint and several liability unde:i:taken

by the 2nd and 3rd Defendants and moreover, in the 2nd covenant which reads as follows

there is liability undertaken as an indemnitor as well~' The respective clause runs as

follows:~

3

"We and each of us further jointly declare and specifically agree that our and each of our

liability under this guarantee and indemnity shall be as principal debtors and not merely as

sureties .... "

The import of this covenant is quite significant. The 2nd and yd Defendants have

undertaken to act not only as guarantors but also as indemnitors. In other words they

guarantee the payment of lease rentah in the event of a default by the principal debtor-

the pt Defendant. In the same breath they also agree that liability may b~ imposed on

them qua principal debtors as well. Whilst the 2nd and 3rd Defendants have undertaken

secondary liability as guarantors, they have also assumed primary liability as

indemnitors. Though there exists a distinction between a guarantee and an indemnity,

-- ----. --. . --------~ ~ -"- =, it so happens that in modern commercial transactions both kinds of liabilities are

incorporated in one and the same document. So the guarantee that the 2nd Defendant~

Appellant and 3rd Defendant signed with the Plaintiff~ Respondent was not qnly a

guarantee but also an indemnity.

When a guarantee is also worded as an indemnity, the agreement has to be construed

both as a guarantee and an indemnity. One could now see how a document, though

entitled as a guarantee, also acts as an indemnity .

. ~ __ I~e "1~l1ed Counsel for the 2nd Defendant~Appellant (Guarantor and Indemnitor)

sought to impugn the judgment dated 20th October 2010 on two grounds~namely the

learned Additional District Judge of Colombo failed to appreciate that a notice of

termination of the lease agreement was not served on ~he 2nd Defendant~ Appellant in

terms of the law and secondly the learned District Judge failed to consider the defence

of non est factum. In other words the 2nd mode of impugnation of the judgment flowed

from the argument that the 2nd Defendant~ Appellant did not understand the nature and

content of the agreement which he signed. As I obgerved before, there were two

agreements that were signed on 9th September 1986. One was a lease agreement

between the leasing company (the Plaintiff~ Respondent) and the lessee (the pt

Defendant in the case), vvhilst the guarantee which ~oubled up as an indemnity was

4

entered into by the 2nd Defendant (the Appellant) and the yd Defendant. I would

presently go into the two grounds on which the judgment dated 20th October 2010 was

impugned.

Notice of Termination was not in accordance with the law

The Counsel for the Appellant Mr Viresh Nanayakkara:argued that the letter dated 8th

April 1987 sent to the 2nd Defendant~Appellant was no notice at all as is contemplated

in Section 18(1) of the Consumer Credit Act, No. 29 of 1982. Section 18(1) of the said

Act enacts as follows:

(a) one week, in a case where the hire is a payable at weekly or lesser intervals; and

(b) two weeks in any other case"

Thus the above provision makes clear that when there is a repeat default after the first

default has occurred, a notice of termination of one week or two weeks depending on

the frequency of the obligation to pay installments is,triggered. The Counsel for the

Appellant argued that the Appellant was entitled to t\vo weeks' notice of termination

since the hire was not payable at weekly or lesser intervals and this mandatory

requirement was not followed in the case. The Counsel cited the case of Raymond

Fernando VS. Bank of Ceylon wherein Her Ladyship Shirani Bandaranayake J (as she

then was) held that in the context of a hire purchase agreement which stipulated 7

days' notice, the agreemept had not been duly termina~ed in terms of section 18 of the

Consumer Credit Act which required two weeks' notice of termination of agreement

to be given and that Section 18 of the Act prevailed over clause 11 of the agreement in

1 (2000) 1 Sri.LR 12 5

to be given and that Section 18 of the Act prevailed over clause 11 of the agreement in

that case which stipulated 7 days' notice. The tenor of the holding is that parties could

not have contracted out of the provisions of Consumer Credit Act, No. 29 of 1982.

In fact the relevant notice of termination in this case dated 8th April 1987 (P7) reads as

follows"

"Lease Agreement No. LC/31

Vehicle No. 50 Sri 2910

This is to inform you have defaulted in the payment of rentalls due to us in terms

of the aforesaid agreement for the months February 1987 - March 1987

amounting to Rs. 16,930.42.

We hereby terminate the agreement in terms of clauses 17(1)( c), and request you

to return Nissan Caravan immediately to our office at 101, Vinayalankara

Mawatha, Colombo 10 and to make the payment of the sum of Rs. 16,930.42

which is due to us in terms of the agreement. Sp.ould you fail to do so, we will

proceed with recovery action to safeguard our interests without further

warning. You will of course, remain fully liable under the terms and condi.tions

of the agreements signed by you.

Your faithfully,

LB. Finance Limited

General Manager"

The contention of the Counsel was that there was no~'compliance with Section 18 of

the Act and the notice was not in accordance with the law.

This argument engages another question,whether the two transactions between the 'parties

namely the leasing agreement and the contract of guarantee attract the provisions of the Consumer

Credit Act, No. 29 of 1982 ataH. No doubt these two agreements were entered into in the

6

/ f

I ! /

/ But it has to be noted that what was signed on 9th Sept~mber 1986 was entitled a lease

agreement and not a hire purchase agreement. But yet the counsel argued on the basis

that it was a Hire Purchase agreement.

Is this argument that the Consumer Credit Act, No 29 of 1982 can be superimposed on

an agreement which is entitled "lease agreement" sustainable having regard to the

content of the agreement? A perusal of the agreement and its contents makes patently

clear that it is nothing but a lease agreement. This agreement dated 9th September 1986

does not partake any of the features of a hire purchase agreement. The preamble to the

lease agreement states as follows:

Whereas at the reguest of the lessee, thelessor has agreed to pu~~_~~:~~~p~~ch_ased the

property hereinafter described for the purpose of leasing, the same to the lessee upon the terms

and conditions as hereinafter appearing .....

This preamble clearly identifies the purchaser to be the lessor who in turn leases the

property to the lessee~the pt defendant. It has to be noted that there is no hire that took

place. The mutual covenants thereafter begin from Clause 1 onwards. Clause 23 (1) of

the lease agreement makes it crystal clear that this is unmistakably a lease agreement.

Clause 23 (1) provides:

-Upon the expiration or earlier termination of this lease agreement for any reason whatsoever

Le~~ee shall deliver and surrender up property to Lessor at the address of the lessor stated in

this lease agreement or at such other address as lessor may specify or if so required by lessor

shall hold property available for collection by lessor or its agents ........... .

The aforesaid clause makes it quite clear that property in the property never passes to

the lessee. If the leased property has to come back to the lessor upon the expiration or

earlier termination of the .lease, that is indicative of the fact that the ownership in the

property never passes to.the lessee. That shows that what exists between the plaintiff

finance company and the pt defendant lessee is nothing but a lease agreement. This is

analogous to the Roman Law concept of locatio,conductio, denoting a transaction under

7

which the owner of property, the lessor, grants possession of the property to another

person, a lessee, for a specified or unspecified period of time (the lease term) in return

for periodic payment of money (the lease rentals). At the end of the term, the property

is returned to the lessor. The contemporaneous documents surrounding the lease

agreement establish the fact that it was nothing but a lease agreement that the plaintiff

company was entering into. For instance 17 days after the lease agreement was signed,

it would appear that the 2 nd defendant appellant was sent a copy of each morithly

installment that was dispatched to the lessee~the pt defendant. In other words, the 2nd

defendant appellant was put on notice of the terms and conditions of the lease

agreement~see P5 at page 157 of the appeal brief. The letter dated lrh September 1986

UO_~~O_""-~~"P7 which IS cruea tne: determination of the leasing allndes~~tcrthe-~ef-a-ttlt--in the

payment of rentals and it warns all the parties that recovery action will be proceeded

with if outstanding rentals are not paid~see page 163 of the appeal brief. Even the letter

I of demand sent to the 2nd defendant~appellant refers to a lease agreement.

All in all, the contemporaneous documents demonstrate that what was entered into

was a lease agreement, which was subject to payment of rentals and upon the

expiration of the lease agreement, the property must revert to the owner~lessor ~the

plaintiff finance company.

This has to be contrasted with the definition of a Hire Purchase agreement which is set

out in Section 31 of the Consumer Credit Act, No 29 of 1982. According to the

definition, a hire~purchase agreement means an agreement under which goods a,re let

on hire and under which;

( a) the possession of goods is delivered by the' owner thereof to a person on

condition thatlSuch person pays an agreed amount in periodic instalments:

and

(b) (i) either the hirer has an option to purchase the goods in accordance with

the terms of the agreement; or

8

(ii) the property in the goods is to pass to the hirer on the payment of the last

of such installments, .......... .

This definition encompasses three elements in a contract of hire purchase. Possession

of property is delivered by the owner to the hirer who is subject to a payment

obligation. The hirer has an option to purchase the goods in accordance with the terms

of the agreement or the property in the goods will pass to the hirer on the completion

of the last instalment. Thus the element of purchase predominates in a hire purchase

agreement, whereas the property in the goods will not pass to the lessee in the case of

a lease agreement. The contrast is quite striking. In a lease the property comes back to

the lessor at the end of the lease period, whereas in a hire purchase upon the fulfilment

. - ... of all conditions,rlle property Will De transferred to the Jiiier:-UsuaIIyontIie-conclusion

of the Hire Purchase contract, the 2Iticle hired automatically vests in the hirer on

payment of a pepper~corn rent. Sections 6 and 7 of the Consumer Credit Act, No 29 of

1982 respectively refer to passage of property and right of hirer to purchase the property

at any time with rebate. The hirer can also pay the full amount and secure ownership

of the property hired at an anterior point of time. Thus there is a marked difference

between a Hire Purchase and a Lease and from the forgoing analysis of the agreement

i entered into between the plaintiff and the pt defendant, it would appear that the

,!gre~m~nt P3 bears no features of a hire purch~~~ agreement and tllerefo:re the

argument of counsel for the 2nd defendant~appellant that Section 18 of the Consumer

Credit Act, No 29 of 1982 would apply in regard to termination of the agreement must

necessarily fail.

As Mr Palitha Kumarasinghe PC cor:ectly submitted, it is the contract of lease that

would apply to the termination of the lease agreement as this agreement was entered

into on 9th September 1986, so long before the Finance Leasing Act, No 56 of 2000 came

into effect. As far as the lease agreement is concerned, it is Clause 17 (1) ( c ) of the

agreement that would apply and upon a perusal of the relevant notice of termination in

this case dated 8th April 1987 (P7) which has been reproduced above in this judgment,

it is quite clear that the notice of termination of the lease has been given to the 2nd

9

defendant-appellant in accordance with Clause 17 (1) ( c ) -the covenant relating to

defaults. Thus the notice of termination was properly given.

Caveat Subscriptor or Non Est factum

The 2nd argument of Mr Viresh Nanayakkara for the 2nd defendant-Appellant was that

the guarantee or indemnity that was signed contemporaneously by the 2nd defendant

is vitiated by the fact that the 2nd defendant was unaware of the nature and contents of

the document that he signed. In other words he signed it as a witness and not as a

guarantor or indemnitor or indemnifier. This contention raises the defence of caveat

subscriptor or non est factum as the English Law would call it. Mr Palitha Kumarasinghe

PC argued that the conduct displayed. by the appellant .J~~tCltes~gains~ .. this

contention. It could be setn that the trial proceeded on a joint answer of the pt and 2nd

defendants dated 11.09.1990, though the 2nd defendant made two attempts to file an

amended answer. The trial against the 1st defendant le-ssee was held ex parte and an ex

parte judgment was del~vered against him on 1.06.1995 after a witness had given

evidence on behalf of the plaintiff finance company. In the inter parte trial that began

against the 2nd defendant-appellant, the 2nd defendant raised issue No. 8 on

misrepresentation which was material to the defence of non est factum or ~aveat

subscriptor. Issue No 8 vvent as follows; ~ .

Had the plaintiff ob~ained the 2nd defendant's signature to the document marked ','A" by

misleading him into signing it?

In fact the answer given by the learned Additional District Judge to this issue is in the

negative. It has to be noted that by his judgement dated'20th October 2000, the learned

Additional District Judge pronounced judgment in favor of the plaintiff finance

company and granted all reliefs as prayed for in its plaint. I must observe at thi~ stage

that the defence of misrepresentation was never pleaded in the answer of the 2nd

defendant. However, without any objections, the 2nd defendant raised an issue at the

trial on misrepresentatioJl on the part of the plaintiff finance company. The question

arises whether his testimony at the trial has established the defence. I must also observe

10

that the issue as framed bears an error on its face. Apparently it is the document marked

"A" that has been recorded as being the document to be vitiated for misrepresentation

but the document marked A was not the contract of guarantee signed by the 2nd

defendant but rather the lease agreement. The argument before this Court proceeded

on the basis that the challenge was thrown not to the lease agreement but in fact to the

guarantee. Though the error in the issue was not corrected (this once again emphasizes

the need to correct proceedings and not walk into a next day's trial headlong), it was

a given before this Court that the vitiating factor of misrepresentation or misleading so

to speak was alleged only against the contract of guarantee and not the lease.

The testimony of the appellant was that he signed the documents in English and

therefore he eQuId not understand the contents. He fiirtlier~~states tliat -:neCIoes not

remember whether the contents of documents (lease a~d guarantee) were explained to

him by the officers of the plaintiff. One could see thus' that there is no denial that the

documents were read over and explained to him. It was just that he could not re<;ollect

whether they were explained. Thus this testimony falls far short of conclusively

establishing a non explanation of the documents. He was also posed a question as to

whether he knew the consequence of signing a guarantee. The answer was that it

would entail liability on the part of the surety if the principal debtor defaulted. This

.... it~rp. 9 evidence shows that the 2nd defendant appellant was quite possessed of the

import of a guarantee.

~ also find that the 2nd defendant appellant was a technician and a tradesman on his

own admission. The witness came through as a man of the world who could not have

been so naIve as to be unaware of the implications qf placing one's signature to a

guarantee. If he knew that the act of signing a guarantee would spell for him disastrous

consequences of monetary burdens, he should have exhibited prudence. So his

assertion that he only signed as a witness and not as a guarantor does not inspire

confidence in this Court. The necessity to exercise prudence was emphasized by the

House of Lords in the context of the plea of non est factum; ( the plea that it is not my

deed). 11

In Saunders v. Anglia Building Society {1970} 3 All ER 961 - The House of Lords

redefined the scope of th~ principle of non est factum

The effect of this important decision (sometimes cited as Gallie v. Lee, the parties to

the lower courts) is that there is a heavy burden of proof on the person relying on the

principle;

1. There must be a fundamental difference between what he signed and what he

thought he signed and perhaps most important.

2. He must show that he acted carefully (His ,want of care is relevant ),the

requirement of pruilence.

Why did not the 2nd aefendant r~iroIIl sig:ningthe"gttantnt:e~ifhe--kHe-w.the--import

of a guarantee? He was possessed of full understanding and knowledge and as a

reasonable prudent man, he could have paused to reflect as to what he was subscribing

and if it were to prove burdensome, he could have refrained from doing what he did.

Only in quite exceptional circumstances can any person of full age and understanding

disavow his signature so as to prejudice the rights of an innocent third party.

The Court of Appeal considered the plea of non est factum in jayasiriwardcna v.

Piyaratne 2004 1 Sri.LR p.37. Nimal Dissanayake J (With Somawansa J concurring) -observed as follows particularly at p. 47 :

The defcndant,respohdent at the commencement of the trial admitted only the signing of

indenture o.flease Pl and P4. His position was although-he placed his signature on Pl and P4,

the contents of PI and P4 were not explained to him. Hence he was not aware of the contents

ofPlandP4.

It is interesting to note that despite documents PI and P4 being in English his son~in' law who

was an Inspector of Po I ice, accompanied him to the lawyer Hotmy who attested P 1 and P4.

He had Signed as an attesting witness. Therefore the evidence of the defenc1anr-n.:spondent

12

to. "

that the contents of PI and P4 were not explail1ed to him and as SLlch he did not Imow the

cOl1tents cannot be bdievcd.lt has been held in Saunders v Anglia Building Society that a

plea of non~est factum, will rarely succeed if the document was Signed by an adult or a

literate person.

Certain other items of evidence militate against accepting the defence of caveat

sLLbscriptor or 110n estfactum raised by the appellant.

The plaintiff's witness in his evidence marked as "PI" the proposal made by the pt

defendant lessee, which contains under the heading "Guarantor/lndernnfier" including

personal details such as the 2nd defendant's national identity card number, date of

.. ~~~~orrth, names of children ancr-nmstimpor tantly persornttbcmk-~aeet:}tl-n1;-detilils -dearly

suggesting that the information was tendered voluntarily by the 2nd defendant. The 2nd

defendant admitted in evidence that that he gave these details. The 2nd defendant

further admitted to having tendered his income tax payment certificates , reiterating

his voluntariness in the transaction. These are all antecedent acts of the 2nd defendant

that would go to show that the 2nd defendant did not exercise reasonable care before

signing the document.

In Mercantile Credit Ltd v Thilakaratne (2002) 3 Sn.LR 206 the plaintiff~appellant

filed action against the 1st (principal debtor), 2nd a!ld yd defendant~respondents

(guarantors) jointly and~everally to recover a certain sum of money, and the return of

the vehicle (on hire purchase) and damages. The 2nd defendant~respondent (guarantor)

whilst admitting signing the Guarantee Bond stated that he was not aware of the

conditions of the agreement, he had not renounced all the rights and privileges to which

the sureties are entitled to by lavv and that the clause rdating to the renunciation of the

benefit was not explained to the guarantors. The District Court held \\:ith the 2nd

defendant~respondent. Nimal Dissanayake J held as follows:

(1) The burden of proving that the: clauses relating to the renouncing of all benefits and

privileges to 'which sureties are entitled to by law vvere not understood by him is a

13

the burden of proving that fact is \-vith the person who asserts that fact.

(2) If as asserted to by the 2nd defendant/respondent that he vvas not aware of the

conditions of the agreement at the time he signed it, it \vas open for him to have opted

for his common la\V remedy of repudiating his suretyship when he came to know by

receipt of certain letters. Furthermore, he states in evidence that he did not care to read

it and that he signed because a friend told him to do so.

(3) Negligence on the part of the 2nd defendant--respondent is not an excuse to deny

liability.

"Where a person who is neither' illiterate nor blind signs a deed without e.,"(amining the contents he would

not as a general nde be permitted under the Roman Dutch Law to set up the plea that the dowment is

not his."

The plea of non cst factum arose before the Court of Appeal in the above case as to the

term beneficium sui divisionis excLlssionis 'which the guarantor alleged \vas not explained

to him. One could see ho\v the Court disbelieved the guarantor on the assertion having

regard to his conduct. The Court relied on Section 101 of the Evidence Ordinance to

bring home the fact the burden lies squarely and fairly on him to prove this fact.

It is pertinent to observe that the claim of the 2nd defendant that he had been misled

into signing as a guarantor is contrary to reason in light of certain other factors as well.

Business communications such as certified statenlent of accounts demonstrating the

failure of the pt defendant to make payments 'were copied to the 2nd defendant as well

as notice of termination and letters of demand. None of these documents were

contracbcted nor \vere they repudiated by the 2nd defendant. Thus, it is abundantly

clear that the 2nd defendant \vas aware of the breach of the lease agreement by the pc

14

defendant and silence on the part of the 2nd defendant adds credence to the probability

that the 2nd defendant \-vas fully aware of his obligations as a guarantor namely, he

became liable jOintly and severally in terms of the lease ~lgreement and the guarantee to

pay the sums of money as reflected in the statement of accounts P6" and as demanded

by the letter of demand.

In commercial matters, if a person states in a letter to another that a certain state of

facts exists, the person to whom the letter is addressed must reply if he does not agree

with or means to dispute the assertions. Otherwise, the silence of the latter amounts to

an admission of the truth of the allegations contained jn that letter~see Saravanamuttu

VS. R.A. De Mel 49 N.LR. 529. In fact Wimalachandra] adverted to this case in

i . - SenevlIatne ana Anotlier V LlmKatJriXLeasing company ftcftz086rl~Sri~I::R230.

In this case by way of 4 promissory note the defendants had promised to pay the

, . plaintiff a certain sum of money at its registered place; bf business. The plaintiff by its

letter of demand demanded the sum of money set out in the promissory note. The

plaintiff had to dispatch a letter of demand becaus~' a promissory note is a bill of

exchange payable on demand. The defendants though did not respond to this letter of

demand. In that context, Wimalachandra] held that this amounted to presentment of

the promissory note to the defendants. The learned judge further held that the only

,_",Q"~ible conclusion, for the failure to reply to the letter of demand is that the amount . ----,- ----. stated is correct and the defendants have not repaid the sum stated in the promissory

note. It is such silence that has been displayed by the 2nd defendant appellant at all

times in this case.

Such conduct as \-vas manifested by' the 2nd defendant is inconsistent \vith his plea of

caveat subscriptor or non cst factum. If it is apparent that a particular conduct shows

negligence vis a vis the plea of 110n cst factum, the loss must fall on the negligent actor.

In other words negligence of the 2nd defendant \\lould preclude hiIn from raising the

defence of 11011 estfactum. In the Saul1ders case (supra), the House of Lords declared that

a person who relied on a plea of 110n cst factum \vas required to show that he had

exercised reasonable care \vhen he signed the document.

l~

In order to establish the plea of non est factum, there must be clear and positive evidence.

The burden lies onthe party seeking to disown the document: this includes the burden

of sho\\ting that in signing the docunlent, he acted: with reasonable care. If one

examines the items of evidence pertaining to the acts indulged in by the2ud defendant

both prior to' signing the guarantee and at the time of subscribing to the guarantee,

there is no proof he too'k care. In the same way if 6ne examines the way the 2nd

defendant kept silent when he received the notice of default and the letter of demand,

~t is crystal clear that the2 nd defendant has not discharged his burden of shovving that

he took care .. In the <:ircumstances the third party vvho .has paid or is owed money by

the principal debto:r (thelessee in this case) cannot be prejudiced to his disadvantage.

A belated plea of non est factum only at the trial, which.js unsupported by evidence, is

not sustainable and' is bound to fail. In the circumstances the liability of the 2nd

defendant arising from the'contract of guarantee has to be affinned.

.' For the reasons set out above I affirm the judgment of the learned Additional District

judge of Colombo dated20th October 2000 and dismiss the appeal of the 2nd Defendant~.

,Appellant ...

_ ,.:' .~_. ___ ~ 4 ._ _ '.'_ _ ' ._.; ... ---,,-. -, ---.-"~.":~--,'-" ..

JUDGE OFTHECOURT OF APPEAL

16