==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/PHC/75/2021

Page 1 of 17

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal against the

judgment of the Provincial High Court of

Ratnapura established under and in terms

of Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

read with Article 154 P (3) thereof, and

made in the case bearing No. ප්‍රති 08/2019.

Alaka Appuhamilage Nandani Alwis,

No:69,

Hakamuva watte,

Pahala Hakmuwa,

Ratnapura.

Petitioner

Vs

1. SENAKA WERAPITIYA,

Werapitiya Walawuwa,

Katandola, Ratnapura.

2. SHYAMINI TENNAKOON GUNARATHNE

No. 472/3/5,

Inigala Road, Katugastota,

Kandy.

Respondents

Court of Appeal Case No: CA/PHC/75/2021 High Court of Ratnapura Case No: ප්‍රති/08/2019 Magistrate Court of Ratnapura Case No: 27678/A (Private) Section 66 of the Primary Court Procedure Act

CA/PHC/75/2021

Page 2 of 17

-----------------------------------------------------

1. SENAKA WERAPITIYA,

Werapitiya Walawuwa, Katandola,

Ratnapura.

2. SHYAMINI TENNAKOON GUNARATHNE

No. 472/3/5,

Inigala Road, Katugastota,

Kandy.

Respondents-Petitioners

Vs

ALAKA APPUHAMILAGE NANDANI ALWIS

No. 69,

Hakamuva watte,

Pahala Hakmuwa,

Ratnapura.

Petitioner-Respondent

AND NOW

2. SHYAMINI TENNAKOON GUNARATHNE

No. 472/3/5,

Inigala Road, Katugastota,

Kandy.

Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant

CA/PHC/75/2021

Page 3 of 17

Vs

ALAKA APPUHAMILAGE NANDANI ALWIS

No. 69,

Hakamuva watte,

Pahala Hakmuwa,

Ratnapura.

Petitioner-Respondent-Respondent

1. SENAKA WERAPITIYA,

Werapitiya Walawuwa, Katandola,

Ratnapura.

Respondent-Petitioner-Respondent

Before : D. THOTAWATTA, J.

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Counsel : Sandeepani Wijesooriya with Supun

Rathnayake for the 2nd Respondent–

Petitioner-Appellant.

Ovini Haththotuwa for the Petitioner-

Respondent-Respondent on the

instructions of Lakmini Amarasinghe of the

Legal Aid Commission of Sri Lanka.

Respondent-Petitioner-Respondent is

absent and unrepresented.

CA/PHC/75/2021

Page 4 of 17

Argued on : 12.01.2026

Written Submissions

of the Respondent-Petitioner-

Appellant tendered on : 15.05.2025

Written Submissions

of the Petitioner-Respondent-

Respondent tendered on : 08.05.2025 and 21.04.2026

Written Submissions

of the 1st Respondent-

Petitioner-Respondent

tendered on : Not tendered

Decided on : 08.05.2026

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Instant appeal arises from an order dated 20.07.2021 made by the learned High

Court Judge of the Sabaragamuwa Province holden at Rathnapura (hereinafter

called and referred to as the HC order) in an application in revision bearing No.

HCR/RA/08/2019, preferred to it by the 2nd Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant

and the 1st Respondent-Petitioner-Respondent against an order dated

21.12.2018 (hereinafter called and referred to as the MC order) made by the

learned Additional Magistrate of Rathnapura (hereinafter called and referred to

as the learned Additional Magistrate) in the proceedings initiated before it by the

Petitioner-Respondent-Respondent by filing information thereat under and in

terms of section 66(1)(b) of the Primary Courts Procedure Act No. 44 of 1979

(hereinafter called and referred to as the Act) citing therein the 2nd Respondent-

Petitioner-Appellant and the 1st Respondent-Petitioner-Respondent respectively,

CA/PHC/75/2021

Page 5 of 17

as the 1st and 2nd Respondents thereto whereby, the learned Additional

Magistrate had having held that the Petitioner-Respondent-Respondent had

been in possession of the land in dispute and had been dispossessed by the

Respondents within a period of two months immediately, before the date on

which the information was filed under section 66 of the Act, made a

determination to that effect.

It is this order of the learned Additional Magistrate that the 1st and 2nd

Respondent-Petitioners to the revision application filed before the High Court of

Rathnapura had sought to impugn before it on a number of grounds urged by

them in their petition dated 22.01.2019 filed thereat. However, the learned High

Court Judge of Rathnapura had by the impugned order, proceeded to dismiss

the application in revision holding that the 1st and 2nd Respondent-Petitioners

had not disclosed any exceptional circumstances warranting the invocation of

the extra-ordinary revisionary jurisdiction vested in it in revision of the MC order

as urged by the 1st and 2nd Respondent-Petitioners thereto. It is this order of the

learned High Court Judge of Rathnapura that the 2nd Respondent-Petitioner-

Appellant now, seeks to canvas before us on a number of grounds of appeal

urged in paragraph 6(i) to (vii) of the petition of appeal dated 05.08.2021 filed of

record.

The first ground argued before us by the learned Counsel for the 2nd Respondent-

Petitioner-Appellant (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the Appellant’) at the

hearing of this appeal is that the learned Additional Magistrate had misdirected

herself when she had proceeded to make a determination under section 68(3) of

the Act, notwithstanding the fact that, the Petitioner-Respondent-Respondent

had in the information filed before the Magistrate Court under section 66(1)(b) of

the Act, sought relief under section 68(1) of the Act, and the learned High Court

Judge of Rathnapura too, had misdirected herself, when she had proceeded to

dismiss the application in revision filed before it by them by affirming the MC

order.

CA/PHC/75/2021

Page 6 of 17

It may now, be examined.

A careful perusal of the grounds urged by the 1st and 2nd Respondent-Petitioners

in their revision application filed before the High Court of Rathnapura, it clearly,

and unequivocally, shows that a ground as such had never been urged by them

in their petition before the High Court of Rathnapura thereby, for her

consideration and determination in the application in revision and in the result,

the learned High Court Judge of Rathnapura had not proceeded to consider and

make a determination on a ground as such and therefore, this Court would not

in law, be in a position to consider the legality of a findings as such in the

absence of a finding as such arrived at by the learned High Court Judge of

Rathnapura in the impugned order.

What is more, it clearly, appears from a careful perusal of the grounds of appeal

urged in paragraph 6(i) to (vii) of the petition of appeal forwarded to this Court

by the Appellant, that a ground as such had never been urged in her petition of

appeal filed before this Court too. Hence, there has been no ground as such

urged by the Appellant in the instant appeal too, in her petition of appeal.

Besides, the question whether or not the matter comes under section 68(1) of

the Act or section 68(3) thereof, is not a pure question of law to be raised for the

first time in appeal but a mixed question of fact and law and therefore, the

Appellant is not entitled to raise a question as such mixed with fact and law for

the first time in appeal before this Court and hence, it should be rejected in-

limine.

The rest of the grounds of appeal argued by the Appellant at the hearing of this

appeal before us was centred upon sections 66(5) and (6) of the Act wherein, it

was contended by the Appellant that learned Additional Magistrate had erred in

law when she had failed to follow the procedure laid down by part VII of the Act

in that, it was contended that the parties were not afforded an opportunity to file

counter-objections thereby, depriving them of their right to file counter-affidavit

as provided for by section 66 of the Act.

CA/PHC/75/2021

Page 7 of 17

It may now, be examined.

Section 66(5) of the Act reads thus;

“(5) Where any affidavits and documents are filed on the date fixed for filing

them, the court shall, on application made by the parties filing affidavits,

grant such parties time not exceeding two weeks for filing counter-

affidavits with documents if any. The Judge of the Primary Court shall

permit such parties or their attorney-at-law to peruse the record in the

presence of the Registrar for the preparation of the counter-affidavits.”

In the light of the section 66(5) of the Act, where any affidavits and documents

are filed on the date fixed for filing them, the court shall, on application made

by the parties filing affidavits, grant such parties time not exceeding two weeks

for filing counter-affidavits with documents if any, which clearly, and

unequivocally, shows that Court shall grant such parties not exceeding two

weeks for filing counter-affidavits with documents if any, only on application

made thereto by the parties filing affidavits. [Emphasis is mine]

Upon a careful perusal of the record of the Magistrate Court, it clearly, appears

that no party had made an application to Court to file counter-affidavits with

documents if any, and hence, the Appellant cannot now, be permitted to allege

in appeal that the learned Additional Magistrate had failed to comply with section

66(5) of the Act in the absence of any application therefor made to Court by any

of the parties thereto, as required by section 66(5) of the Act.

I would therefore, hold that the ground of appeal argued by the Appellant based

on section 66(5) of the Act, too, is not entitled to succeed both in fact and law

and as such, it too should be rejected.

Let me now, examine the contention based on section 66(6) of the Act and it

reads thus,

“(6) On the date fixed for filing affidavits and documents, where no

application has been made for filing counter-affidavits, or on the date fixed

CA/PHC/75/2021

Page 8 of 17

for filing counter-affidavits, whether or not such affidavits and documents

have been filed, the court shall before fixing the case for inquiry make

every effort to induce the parties and the persons interested (if any) to

arrive at a settlement of the dispute and if the parties and persons

interested agree to a settlement the settlement shall be recorded and

signed by the parties and persons interested and an order made in

accordance with the terms as settled.”

It was held by this Court in CA(PHC)78/2005 and CA(PHC)78A/2005-CA

Minutes Dated 21.05.2019 that compliance by Court of section 66(6) of the Act

is not mandatory but directory and non-compliance would not vitiate an order

made by the learned Magistrate under Part VII of the Act.

Besides, the Appellant had not in any manner, raised any objection to Court for

the assumption of the special jurisdiction vested in Court under Part VII of the

Act at the time the non-compliance of section 66(6) of the Act had taken place

and thus, the Appellant had thereby, acquiesced to the special jurisdiction

vested in the learned Additional Magistrate under Part VII of the Act thereby,

clearly, submitting herself to the special jurisdiction of Court vested in it under

Part VII of the Act and therefore, the Appellant was deemed in law to have waved

her right to raise any objection to the assumption of special jurisdiction by the

learned Additional Magistrate vested in her under Part VII of the Act subsequent

thereto.

In view of the foregoing, I would hold that the next contention advanced by the

Appellant in appeal before us too, cannot sustain both in fact and law and as

such it too, should be dismissed in-limine.

Hence, I would see no error in the findings of both the learned Additional

Magistrate as well as the learned High Court Judge of Rathnapura in this regard.

Hence, I would hold that the learned High Court Judge of Rathnapura was right

in dismissing the application in revision for; the order sought to be revised is not

CA/PHC/75/2021

Page 9 of 17

one which is palpably wrong or not one which tend to shock the conscience of

the Court or not one which would tend to cause a grave miscarriage of justice to

the Appellants.

I would therefore, hold that the instant appeal is not entitled to succeed both in

fact and law and therefore, it ought to be dismissed.

A further reason for the above conclusion is manifest on an examination of the

provisions of Part VII of the Act.

The extra-ordinary revisionary jurisdiction was exclusively, vested with the Court

of Appeal before the enactment of the 13th Amendment to the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. However, after the enactment of the

13th Amendment to the Constitution, the revisionary jurisdiction is now, vested

with the High Court of the Province concurrently, with the Court of Appeal.

After an exhaustive analysis of all the authorities on this, it was held in Rustom

vs. Hapangama & Company (1978-79) 2 SLR 225, that “the powers by way of

revision conferred on the Appellate Court are wide and can be exercised whether

an appeal has been taken against an order of the original Court or not. However,

such powers would be exercised only in exceptional circumstances where

an appeal lay and as to what such exceptional circumstances are dependent

on the facts of each case”. [emphasis is mine]

Court in Rustom vs. Hapangama & Co (Supra) further observed in the following

manner; “The trend of authority clearly, indicates that where the revisionary

powers of the Court of Appeal are invoked, the practice has been that these

powers will be exercised if there is an alternative remedy available, only if the

existence of special circumstances are urged necessitating the indulgence of this

Court to exercise its powers in revision.”

It was further observed by Court in the decision in Rustom Vs. Hapangama &

Company(Supra) that, “This Court has the power to act in revision even though

the appeal is available, in appropriate cases. The question which has now to be

CA/PHC/75/2021

Page 10 of 17

decided is whether the instant case is an appropriate case in which we should

exercise our discretionary powers of revision. In his petition and affidavit the

petitioner has not set out the reasons for his seeking this method of rectification

of the order rather than the ordinary method of appeal. Nor has he set out any

exceptional circumstances as to why we should grant him the indulgence of

exercising our revisionary powers when he could have appealed against the order

with leave”.

It was held by Court in Dharmaratne and Another Vs. Palm Paradise Cabanas

Ltd and Others 2003 (3) SLR 24 at page 30 that “Thus, the existence of

exceptional circumstances is the process by which the Court selects the cases in

respect of which this extra-ordinary method of rectification should be adopted.

If such a selection process is not there, revisionary jurisdiction of this Court will

become a gateway for every litigant to make a second appeal in the grab of a

revision application or to make an appeal in situations where the legislature has

not given right of appeal. The practice of Court to insist on the existence of

exceptional circumstances for the exercise of revisionary powers has taken deep

root in our law and has got hardened into a rule which should not be lightly

disturbed. The words used by the legislature do not indicate that it ever intended

to interfere with this ‘rule of practice’.”

It was held in Urban Development Authority vs. Ceylon Entertainments Ltd.

and another reported in 2002 [B.L.R] at page 66 that “the petitioner who

invokes the revisionary jurisdiction of this Court should expressly set out the

exceptional circumstances and an express pleading to that effect is a sine quo

non, for this Court to consider the relief claimed by the petitioner. In the absence

of an express plea, this Court would be precluded from considering the relief

claimed in the application”.

Let me now, quote a passage from the decision in Perera v. Muthalib 45 NLR

412 “I would invite attention to the observations made by Wood-Renton J. in the

King v. Nordeen. He said; I do not think that that power (i.e. , revisionary power)

CA/PHC/75/2021

Page 11 of 17

is at all limited to those cases in which either no appeal lies or for some reason

or other an appeal has not been taken”, but he went on to add that this power

would be exercised only when a strong case is made out “amounting to a positive

miscarriage of justice in regard to either the law, or the judge’s appreciation of

the facts. In the case I am dealing with I should have felt compelled to give relief

solely on the ground that what may well be said to be a failure of justice has

been brought to the notice of this Court, and technical rules must make way for

the granting of redress in such a case. There has been a violation of the

fundamental rule of judicial procedure that a person sought to be affected by an

order shall first be heard. But, in this instance there is yet another ground upon

which this application for revision ought to be exercised and that is that the

petitioner had no knowledge of the order made against him till the time for

preferring an appeal had elapsed.”

In the case of Attorney-General v. Podi Singho 51 NLR 385 it was held that

“even though the revisionary powers should not be exercised in cases when there

is an appeal and was not taken, the revisionary powers should be exercised only

in exceptional circumstances such as (a) miscarriage of justice (b) where a strong

case for interference by the Supreme Court is made out or (c) where the applicant

was unaware of the order.” Court also observes that “the Supreme Court in

exercising its powers of revision is not hampered by technical rules of pleading

and procedure.”

In Bank of Ceylon vs Kaleel and others 2004 [1] SLR 284, at page 287 it was

stated that, “In the circumstances this Court will not interfere by way of revision

when the law has given the plaintiff an alternate remedy and when the plaintiff

has not shown the existence of exceptional circumstances warranting the

exercise of revisionary jurisdiction. In any event, for this Court to exercise

revisionary jurisdiction the order challenged must have occasioned a failure of

justice and be manifestly erroneous which go beyond an error or defect or

irregularity that an ordinary person would instantly react to it. In other words

CA/PHC/75/2021

Page 12 of 17

the order complained of is of such a nature which would have shocked the

conscience of Court.”

In Thilagaratnam Vs. E.A.P. Edirisingha 1982 [1] SLR, P56, it was observed

that “though the Appellate Courts' powers to act in revision were wide and would

be exercised whether an appeal has been taken against the order of the original

court or not, such powers would be exercised only in exceptional circumstances.

There were no exceptional circumstances in this case to justify the exercise of

the Court's powers of revision.”

In Cadaman Pulle Vs. Ceylon Paper Sacks Ltd 2001 [3] SLR, P112, it was held

that “no exceptional circumstances are disclosed why his application for

revisionary relief should be entertained after the lapse of nearly two years. The

existence of exceptional circumstances is a pre-condition for the exercise of the

powers of revision.”

The Supreme Court, in the case of Rasheed Ali Vs. Mohamed Ali 1981 [1] SLR,

P262, held that, “the powers of revision vested in the Court of Appeal are very

wide and the Court can in a fit case exercise that power whether or not an appeal

lies. Where the law does not give a right of appeal and makes the order final, the

Court of Appeal may nevertheless exercise its powers of revision, but it should

do so only in exceptional circumstances. Ordinarily, the Court will not interfere

by way of review, particularly when the law has expressly given an aggrieved

party an alternate remedy such as the right to file a separate action except when

non-interference will cause a denial of justice or irremediable

harm…………………… The fact that a Judge's order is merely wrong is not a

sufficient ground for exercising the powers of revision.”

The Supreme Court in AG. Vs. Najimudeen-SC Appeal No. 62/2016-SC Minute

of 13-03-2020 observed that, “the Defendant has had an alternative remedy

available. In the instant case, what the Provincial High Court was called upon to

exercise was its revisionary jurisdiction. The Defendant has not been successful

in convincing Court that the grounds he had urged have any exceptional

CA/PHC/75/2021

Page 13 of 17

character which is sufficient to move Court to exercise its discretionary

revisionary power. Thus, this Court has no reason to disagree with the

conclusion of the Provincial High Court that there are no exceptional

circumstances to invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court. In these

circumstances and for the foregoing reasons, the appeal is dismissed without

costs.”

In Geethani Nilushika Vs. Waruni Harshika-SC Appeal No. 93/2017-SC

Minute of 18.06.2021 Court observed that; “Revision is a discretionary

remedy. A party cannot invoke this extraordinary jurisdiction of the

Appellate Court as of right. When a right of appeal is available against a

Judgment or an Order, a party seeking to come before Court by way of

revision shall explain in the petition why he did not exercise his right of

appeal. In the revision application filed before the High Court there was no

such explanation at all.”

In the case of Seylan bank Vs. Thangaveil 2004 [2] SLR, 101 wherein Court

held that, “no revision lies. The petitioner has not resorted to his statutory right

of appeal with leave of court. He has not set out in his petition for revision any

exceptional circumstances.”

See also; Hotel Galaxy (Pvt) Ltd Vs. Mercantile Hotels Management Ltd.

1978 (1) SLR 05, Janita Vs. Abeysekara (Sri skantha Law Report Vol iv Page

22), and Thilagaratnam Vs. Edirisinghe 1982 (1) SLR 56.

In the light of the principle laid down by Court in the aforesaid decisions, an

Appellate Court can exercise its revisionary jurisdiction conferred on the

Appellate Court only and only, in exceptional circumstances, where an

alternative remedy lay. [emphasis is mine]

Section 67(1) and (2) of the Act enacts thus;

CA/PHC/75/2021

Page 14 of 17

“(1) Every inquiry under this Part shall be held in a summary manner and

shall be concluded within three months of the commencement of the

inquiry.

(2) The Judge of the Primary Court shall deliver his order within one week

of the conclusion of the inquiry.”

Section 68(2) of the Act enacts thus;

“(2) An order under subsection (1) shall declare any one or more persons

therein specified to be entitled to the possession of the land or the part in

the manner specified in such order until such person or persons are

evicted therefrom under an order or decree of a competent court, and

prohibit all disturbance of such possession otherwise than under the

authority of such an order or decree.” [Emphasis is mine]

Section 69(2) of the Act enacts thus;

“(2) An order under this subsection may declare that any person specified

therein shall be entitled to any such right in or respecting the land or in

any part of the land as may be specified in the order until such person is

deprived of such right by virtue of an order or decree of a competent

court, and prohibit all disturbance or interference with the exercise

of such right by such party other than under the authority of an order

or decree as aforesaid.” [Emphasis is mine]

Section 74(1) and (2) of the Act enacts thus;

“(1) An order under this Part shall not affect or prejudice any right or

interest in any land or part of a land which any person may be able to

establish in a civil suit; and it shall be the duty of a Judge of a Primary

Court who commences to hold an inquiry under this Part to explain the

effect of these sections to the persons concerned in the dispute.

CA/PHC/75/2021

Page 15 of 17

(2) An appeal shall not lie against any determination or order under this

Part.”

This Court observed in Mansoor and Another V. O.I.C. Avissawella Police &

Another [1991] 2 SLR 75 that, “In terms of section 67(1) an inquiry under this

Part has to be held in a “summary manner” and has to be concluded within three

months of the commencement of the inquiry. Section 74(2) provides that an

appeal will not lie against any determination or order under this Part. It appears

from section 74(1) that the remedy available to a person affected by an

order after such a summary inquiry is to establish his right or interest to

the land in a civil suit. A Judge of the Primary Court is specially required

to explain the effect of this provision to the persons concerned in the

dispute. Therefore, according to the legislative schemes an order made by

the Primary Court in a proceeding under Part VII will be operative only till

the dispute affecting land is finally resolved on a “civil suit”. The phrase

“civil suit” is clearly referable to an action filed in a regular Court

exercising civil jurisdiction. [Emphasis is mine]

It was held in Punchi Nona v. Padumasena and Others 1994 [2] SLR 117 at

page 122 that, “The jurisdiction conferred on a Primary Court under section 66

is a special jurisdiction. It is quasi-criminal jurisdiction. The primary object of

the jurisdiction so conferred is the prevention of a breach of the peace

arising in respect of a dispute affecting land. The Court in exercising this

jurisdiction is not involved in an investigation into title or the right to

possession which is the function of a civil Court.” [Emphasis is mine]

Hence, it is manifest that the primary object of the jurisdiction so conferred is

the prevention of a breach of the peace arising in respect of a dispute affecting

land and that the Court in exercising this jurisdiction is not involved in an

investigation into title or the right to possession which is the function of a civil

Court and that hence, the remedy available to a person affected by an order after

such a summary inquiry held in the proceedings under Part VII of the Act, is to

CA/PHC/75/2021

Page 16 of 17

establish his right or interest to the land in a civil suit and that a Judge of the

Primary Court is specially required to explain the legal effect of those provisions

quoted above, to the persons concerned in the dispute and therefore, according

to the legislative scheme, an order made by the Primary Court in a proceeding

under Part VII will be operative only till the dispute affecting land is finally

resolved on a “civil suit”. The phrase “civil suit” is clearly referable to an action

filed in a regular Court exercising civil jurisdiction.

It is significant to observe that, the learned Additional Magistrate had in no

uncertain terms, explained the effect of those provisions contained in Part VII of

the Act to the parties to the proceedings before him including the Appellant and

therefore, it is well within the Appellant’s knowledge that the remedy available

to him affected by the order of the learned Additional Magistrate after such

summary inquiry is to establish his right or interest to the land in dispute in a

civil suit in a regular Court exercising civil jurisdiction.

It was in paragraph 22 of her petition filed before the High Court of Rathnapura

that the Appellant had disclosed that civil action bearing No. 34214/L had been

instituted by her in the relevant District Court in respect of the land in dispute

and therefore, the Appellant had availed herself of the proper and effective

remedy so provided for by the Part VII of the Act to establish his right or interest

to the land in dispute in a civil suit in a regular Court exercising civil jurisdiction

and therefore, learned High Court Judge of Rathnapura was entirely, right in

refusing to act in revision of the MC order in the absence of the exceptional

circumstances warranting the invocation of the extra-ordinary revisionary vested

in it.

In the circumstances, it clearly, appears that, the Appellant had not shown in

his application in revision filed before the High Court of Rathnapura any

exceptional circumstances warranting the High Court of Rathnapura to exercise

its extra-ordinary revisionary jurisdiction vested in it to revise and set aside the

order of the learned Additional Magistrate for; an Appellate Court can exercise

CA/PHC/75/2021

Page 17 of 17

its revisionary jurisdiction conferred on it only and only, in exceptional

circumstances, where an alternative remedy lay. [Emphasis is mine]

Hence, I would hold that the application in revision filed by the Appellant in the

High Court of Rathnapura seeking to revise and set aside the order of the learned

Additional Magistrate, cannot in any manner, sustain both in fact and law and

as such it ought to have been dismissed on this ground too, by the High Court

of Rathnapura as rightly, done by the learned High Court Judge of Rathnapura.

I would therefore, see no reason why this Court should interfere with the order

of the learned High Court Judge of Rathnapura dismissing the application in

revision filed by the Petitioner who is now, the Appellant to the instant appeal.

In view of all the facts and circumstances enumerated above, I would hold that

the instant appeal is not entitled to succeed both in fact and law on the ground

enumerated above, too.

In the circumstances, I would proceed to dismiss the instant appeal with costs

fixed at Rs. 50,000/-.

I would affirm both the HC order and the MC order.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL