1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made

under Section 331(1) of the Code

of Criminal Procedure Act No.15

of 1979, read with Article 138 of

the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of

Sri Lanka.

Court of Appeal No: CA/HCC/ 0075/2020 Ranatunga Arachchilage Chandana Prasad Ranatunga High Court of Colombo Case No. HC/5486/2011 APPELLANT

vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

RESPONDENT BEFORE : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

P. Kumararatnam, J.

COUNSEL : Anil Silva, PC for the Appellant.

Azard Navavi, DSG for the Respondent.

2 | P a g e

ARGUED ON : 08/12/2022 DECIDED ON : 10 /02/2023 *******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) was indicted by the Attorney General in the High Court of

Colombo for committing the murder of Mohotti Mudiyanselage Ukku

Bandage Laxman on 27/06/2006.

As the Appellant opted for a non-jury trial, the trial commenced before a

Judge and the prosecution had led nine witnesses and marked production

P1-06 and closed the case. The Learned High Court Judge having satisfied

that evidence presented by the prosecution warranted a case to answer,

called for defence and explained the rights of the accused. The Appellant

made a dock statement and called a witness on behalf of him.

After considering the evidence presented by both the prosecution and the

defence, the Learned High Court Judge had convicted the Appellant as

charged and imposed death sentence on 26/06/2020.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and the sentence the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the

Appellant had given consent to argue this matter in his absence due to the

Covid 19 pandemic. At the hearing the Appellant was connected via Zoom

platform from prison.

3 | P a g e

The following Grounds of Appeal were raised on behalf of the

Appellant.

1. Has the prosecution proved the case beyond reasonable doubts.

2. Has the defence case been properly analysed by the Learned High

Court Judge.

The background of the case albeit briefly is as follows:

According to PW1, father of the deceased he had identified the deceaseds

body at the inquest. Further a police complaint was found in the wallet of

the deceased. When he inquired from the Dehiwala Police about the nature

of the complaint, he had come to know that the deceased had lodged a

complaint against the Appellant regarding a money dispute on the date of

the incident.

Although PW2 had given evidence, the Learned trial Judge had rejected his

evidence as he had given inconsistent evidence in the court.

PW3 is a police officer who was attached to Dehiwala Police Station during

the period relevant to this case. On the date of the incident while he was on

traffic duty along the Galle Road close to Waidya Road, had received an

information that a person was coming towards Waidya Road after stabbing

a person. Acting on that information the witness had crossed the road to

apprehended the Appellant who was in possession with a broken knife.

Blood had been noted on Appellants legs, hands, dress and on the broken

knife. This witness had taken the Appellant into his custody and

transported him in a three-wheeler to the Dehiwala Police Station. On the

way at the Dehiwala junction, another police officer also got into the three-

wheeler. As PW7, CI/Liyanagama, Officer-in-Charge of Crime Division of

the Dehiwala Police Station, was on his way to the place of incident, PW3

had stopped the jeep and handed over the Appellant to PW7 before he

4 | P a g e

could reach the police station. PW7 had conducted the investigation into

this crime.

PW6, Dr.Rajaguru had held the post mortem of the deceased on

28/06/2006. Thirteen cut injuries were seen on the deceaseds body.

According to PW6, the death has occurred due to haemorrhage shock

following a deep cut injury to the neck with a sharp cutting weapon.

The Appellant in his dock statement stated when he was at Dehiwala

junction after work, noticed two persons were fighting. As the people

shouted to save the two, he intervened and separated the two but one was

lying on the ground. When he moved away from the place of incident after

directing the people to take the injured to hospital, he was caught by a

police officer and taken to the police station. When he appeared before the

High Court, he had come to know that a complaint was lodged against him

regarding a money transaction by the deceased.

As the two grounds advanced by the Learned Presidents Counsel are

interconnected, both counts will be considered together in this appeal.

The essence of criminal law has been said to lie in the maxim- actus non

facit reum nisi mens sit rea. The essence of an offence is the wrongful

intent, without which it cannot exist.

The Learned High Court Judge in his judgment at page 317 of the brief very

extensively analysed the evidence of PW3 who was the police officer

apprehended the Appellant after leaving the place of incident with blood

stains and with a broken knife. Acting on the information received, PW3

had quickly crossed the road and caught the Appellant and transported

him to the police station. His evidence was not contradicted on material

points. Further he is not an interested witness. Although he had failed to

mention about blood stains on the Appellants clothes in his affidavit

submitted during the non-summary inquiry, but maintained his original

5 | P a g e

stance at the High Court trial. His evidence is mostly unchallenged and

accepted by the Appellant.

According to PW7, the Appellant was handed over to him by PW3 and PW4

when he was on his way to the place of incident. He had observed blood on

Appellants dress and the broken knife. This witness had recovered the

handle of the knife at the place of incident. The Appellants arrest and

handing over to PW7 is unchallenged and undisputed.

The Learned High Court Judge had analysed this evidence in its correct

perfective and admitted as true evidence.

According to the medical evidence 13 injuries had been noted on the

deceaseds body. According to the doctor all injuries could have been

inflicted with the knife which had been recovered from the Appellant at the

time of his arrest. The knife was marked as P 2(a) at the trial. According to

the doctor the death has caused due to haemorrhagic shock following a

deep cut injury to the neck with a sharp cutting weapon.

On the date of incident, the deceased had lodged a complaint against the

Appellant regarding a money dispute in the Dehiwala Police Station. PW13

had recorded the complaint lodged by the deceased against the Appellant.

According to PW1 a complaint receipt was found in the wallet of the

deceased.

With all the evidence presented by the prosecution and the defence, it

appears that the Learned High Court Judge had appropriately evaluated

the evidence in delivering his verdict. The Learned High Court Judge had

considered the dock statement of the Appellant in the judgment.

In this case the evidence given by the prosecution witnesses are not tainted

with uncertainty or ambiguity and it certainly passes the probability test.

As such, the Appellant is not successful in his Appeal grounds.

6 | P a g e

Therefore, I conclude that the prosecution had succeeded in adducing

highly incriminating evidence against the Appellant and thereby

established the charge beyond reasonable doubt.

As such, I conclude, that this is not an appropriate case in which to

interfere with the findings of the Learned High Court Judge of Colombo

dated 26/06/2020. Hence, I dismiss the Appeal.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send a copy of this judgment to

the High Court of Colombo along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

SAMPATH B. ABAYAKOON, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL