\

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

CA. Case No. CA. B.A. 0812019

M.C Mullaitive Case No. B 1269/2018

Head Quarters Inspector, Head Quarter Police Station, Mullaitivu.

Complainant

v.

Abdul Cader Misiriya,

Wannakulam, Mullaitivu

Suspect

And Now Between

Abdul Cader Misiriya,

Wannakulam, Mullaitivu

Suspect! Petitioner

Head Quarters Inspector, Head Quarter Police Station, Mullaitivu. I. ComplainantlRespondent

Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

2. Respondent

1

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

DECIDED ON

K. PRIY ANTHA FERNANDO, J.

K.K. WICKREMASINGHE, J K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J

N.S.N. Faris with N.J.F. Sumaiya and Ayomi Wanniarachchi for the Suspect Petitioner.

Nayomi Wickramasekara SSC for the AG.

28.06.2019

07.08.2019

01. This is an application for bail made by the suspect Petitioner (Petitioner) in

terms of Section 10 of the Assistance to and Protection of Victims of Crime

and Witnesses Act No. 04 of2015.

02. According to the facts of the case, there had been a complaint made by one

Sivagnanavel Janani against one Imran Khan who is the son in law of the

Petitioner for assault and robbery, on 14.09.2018, to the Mulathivu Police

Station. It is alleged, that the following day on 15.09.2018 at about 6.00

p.m., the Petitioner along with her daughter who is Imran Khan's wife had

come and threatened the said Janani and her sister Shive Abhirami and

Thawamani, for making the complaint to the police. Same day at 8.00 p.m.,

they have made the complaint to the police. Police have arrested the

2

Petitioner and produced her before the Mulathivu Magistrate. It was reported

that the suspect Fathima Mapasha (Imran Khan's wife) after threatening the

complainants had left for Thalei-Mannar where she resides. Although police

have sent messages through Thalei-Mannar police she had not surrendered

to the Police.

03. In terms of section 10 (I) (a) of the said Act, the alleged offence is

cognizable and non bailable and no person suspected, accused or convicted

of such an offence shall be enlarged on bail, unless under exceptional

circumstances by the Court of Appeal.

04. As exceptional circumstances it is submitted that, the Petitioner is 60 years

old, and had resettled with her husband in Mullaitivu from Puttalam. Her

son in law is also still in remand custody. They have made complaints to the

learned Magistrate, of torture and ill treatment of her son in law. They also

had made complaints to the Human Rights Commission, and Defence

Secretary. It is submitted that the Petitioner was arrested only on

I l.l 1.20 18, although the complaint was made on 15.09.2018. It is submitted

that, police attempt to take revenge from them, because of the complaints

made by them to the Human Rights Commission.

05. The above personal circumstances averred in this case, cannot be

considered as exceptional circumstances to grant bail. It is to be

noted that, the complainants have made the complaint on the same

day within about 02 hours after the alleged threat. Just because the

pol ice have delayed the arrest of the petitioner, on that alone, one

3

cannot say that the complaint is a fabrication. Evidence on the substantive

matter where Imran Khan is a suspect, cannot be considered at this stage.

The second suspect Fathima, (Wife ofImran Khan) is yet to be arrested or to

surrender to the police. Hence, the circumstances urged cannot be

considered as exceptional to grant bail.

Application for bail is refused.

K.K. WICKREMASINGHE, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

4