1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

In the matter of an Application for Writs of Certiorari and Prohibition in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. CA (Writ) Application No: 224/2018

Kurunegala Plantations Limited, P.O. Box 25, No. 80, Dambulla Road, Kurunegala.

PETITIONER

1. R. P. A. Wimalaweera, Commissioner General of Labour.

2. Manoj Priyantha, Commissioner of Labour, Industrial Relations Division, Department of Labour, Labour Secretariat, Colombo 5. 3. A. D. S. R. Wijayasinghe, Assistant Commissioner of Labour, District Labour Office, Kurunegala.

4. N. M. S. K. Nillegoda, 100/4, Galkanda Road, Aniwatta, Kandy. 5. The Attorney General, Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

2

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J Arjuna Obeyesekere, J Counsel: Razik Zarook, P.C., with Chanakya Liyanage for the Petitioner Ms. Anusha Fernando, Deputy Solicitor General for the 1st 3rd and 5th Respondents Indra Ladduwahetty for the 4th Respondent Argued on: 16th June 2020 Written Submissions: Tendered on behalf of the Petitioner on 29th July 2019. Tendered on behalf of the 1st 3rd and 5th Respondents on 3rd July 2019.

Tendered on behalf of the 4th Respondent on 29th July 2019. Decided on: 24th July 2020 Arjuna Obeyesekere, J

The issue that arises for determination in this application is whether the

decision of the 1st Respondent, the Commissioner General of Labour,

contained in the letter dated 21st March 2018, marked P25, directing the

Petitioner to pay the 4th Respondent gratuity based on the last drawn salary of

the 4th Respondent at the rate set out in Circular marked 1R4B, is illegal

and/or ultra vires the powers of the 1st Respondent.

The facts of this matter briefly are as follows.

3

The Petitioner is a company duly incorporated under the provisions of the

Companies Act No. 7 of 2007, and the entirety of its shares is presently held on

behalf of the Government by the Secretary to the Treasury.

The Petitioner states that the 4th Respondent was appointed as its Chief

Executive Officer on 1st July 2005, on contract basis, for a period of three years,

but subject to renewal at the end of each year, depending on satisfactory

performance. A copy of the contract of employment has been marked P4. The

Petitioner states that at the request of the 4th Respondent that his services be

made permanent, P4 was terminated prematurely on 31st May 2007, and by a

letter dated 25th May 2007 marked P5, the 4th Respondent was appointed as

the Chief Executive Officer on a permanent basis with effect from 1st June

2007, and duly absorbed into the permanent cadre of the Petitioner.

The Petitioner states that it paid all its employees gratuity calculated at the

rate of half months salary for each year of completed service, which is the

minimum rate at which gratuity must be paid in terms of the Payment of

Gratuity Act No. 12 of 1983, as amended (the Act). A Board Paper marked P6

signed by (a) the 4th Respondent in his capacity as the Chief Executive Officer,

(b) the Manager (Finance), and (c) the Manager (Human Resource and

Administration) had recommended that the gratuity payable to all those

employees who retire with effect from 1st February 2013 be enhanced to one

months salary for each completed year of service. It is not in dispute that the

proposal in P6 was approved by the members of the Board of Directors of the

Petitioner (the Board), subject to the amendment proposed by the Board that

the new scheme would apply in respect of employees who retire after

completion of 10 years of service. The said scheme was implemented with

effect from 1st February 2013 by way of Circular No. KP/2013/05 marked

1R4B, which reads as follows:

4

iS$i l=reKE., jejs,s iud.fuS wLKavj jir 10 lg fkdwvq fiajdld,hla imqrd

we;s fiajl uy;au$uy;auska fiajfhka bj;ajSfuSos f.jkq ,nk mdrsf;daIs;h

.Kkh lsrSfuSos udi l jegqm fjkqjg uil jegqm mdol lr .ekSug 2013-

01-24 osk mej;s iS$i l=reKE., jejs,s iud.fus 281 jeks wOHlaI uKav,

reiajSfusos ;SrKh lr we;s nj b;d i;=gska okajd isgsuq' l=reKE., jejs,s iud.u w;am;a lrf.k we;s wLkav m%.;sh yd uQ,H ia:djr;ajh i,ldn,d tA fjkqfjka lemjq fiajl uy;au$uy;auska osrs.ekajSfus wruqKq fldgf.k wOHlaI uKav,h jsiska fuu ;srKh .;a njo Tn fj; oekqus fouq' fus i|yd ysuslus ,nkafka fiajd ld,h lvjSulska f;drj wLKavj jir 10 fkdwvq fiajd ld,hla imqrd we;s fiajl uy;au$uy;auska fjS' fuh wod, jkafka 2013/02/01 osk fyda Bg miq fiajfhka jsY%du .kq ,nk

fiajlhka i|yd fjS' ta wkqj jir 10 blaujq fiajlhka i|yd mdrsf;daIs; .Kkh lsrSu my; mrsos l, hq;=h'

udisl jegqma ,nk fiajlhka i|yd wjidkhg ,enq udisl jegqm X fiajd jraI .Kk = ,ensh hq;= mdrsf;daIsl uqo,

ffoksl jegqma ,nk fiajlhka i|yd wjidkhg ,enq osk 28 l jegqm X fiajd jraI .Kk = ,ensh hq;=

mdrsf;daIsl uqo,

ie,lsh hq;=hs : fiajd ld,h jir 05 fkdwvq yd jir 10 fkdblaujq fiajlhka i|yd

mdrsf;daIs; .Kkh lsrSuS l, hq;= jkafka mdrsf;daIs; f.jSfuS mk;g wkqj udi

jegqm mokus lr.ksusks' fus i|yd 2012-09-11 oske;s KP/2012/14 pl%f,aL

Wmfoia ms<smosk f,i okajd isgsuq' mdrsf;daIs; f.jSus mk;g wod, wksl+;a fldkafoais yd kshuhka fmrmrsosu

fkdfjkiaj mj;skq we;'

Even though the above Circular has been issued pursuant to approval granted

for the said scheme by the Board of the Petitioner, the Petitioner is now

5

alleging that the 4th Respondent has tabled and got approval of the Board to

the said Board Paper arbitrarily, without following due process or procedure or

by obtaining the approval of the Ministry of Finance.1

The Petitioner states that the increase of the gratuity to one months salary for

each year of completed service had been queried by the Auditor General on

the basis that such an increase is contrary to the provisions of the Act. It

appears that the Auditor General has not taken into consideration the

provisions of Section 10 (1) of the Act which provides for such an increase. The

issues arising from the said audit query had been discussed by the Board of the

Petitioner at a meeting held on 11th May 2016. According to the minutes of the

said meeting marked P16, the representative of the Secretary to the Treasury

on the Board of the Petitioner had stated that, he was of the view that since

the Company is already awarding incentives to the employees the current

method of payment of the full one months salary as gratuity is unsuited and

will create an unnecessary precedent to other companies as well. Thereafter he

added that if a full one months salary is paid as gratuity, then the incentives

should not be paid. This demonstrates that the members of the Board did not

consider the payment of the enhanced gratuity as illegal, or as an arbitrary

decision taken by the 4th Respondent. The Board had decided that the Circular

1R4B be declared null and void and to pay gratuity calculated at half months

salary for each year of completed service to those employees who retire after

25th April 2016, which is the date that the Petitioner had received the letter

from the Auditor General. Circular No. KP/2016/10 marked P17 had been

issued to implement the said decision with effect from 25th April 2016.

The initial contract of appointment P4 stipulated that the 4th Respondent

shall be paid an all inclusive monthly salary of Rs. 70,000. The letter of

1 Vide paragraph 16 of the petition.

6

appointment that was issued thereafter, P5 specified that the 4th Respondent

shall be entitled to an all inclusive remuneration of Rs. 80,000. P5 also

specified that the granting of increments will be at the sole discretion of the

Board of Directors, depending on your performance. The Petitioner is alleging

that the 4th Respondent in violation of applicable financial regulations has

increased his salary to Rs. 352,425 inclusive of a budgetary allowance of Rs.

47,125 to which he is not entitled.2

The 4th Respondent, who was due to retire from service on 26th May 2016, had

requested by a letter dated 19th May 2016 marked P7 that the gratuity

calculated on the salary last drawn by him be paid in terms of the Circular

1R4B. Almost a year later, the Petitioner informed the 4th Respondent by

letter dated 2nd May 2017 marked P8 as follows:

2016.05.25 osk fiajfhka jsY%du .ekSug wod,j Tnf.a mdrsf;daIs; osukd ielisu

i|yd wod, lr.; hq;= jegqm iusnkaOfhka m%Yakldrs ;;a;ajhla mekke.=K fyhska ta ms<sn|j l<uKdlrk fiajd fomdra;fuska;=fjka ksis Wmfoila ,efnk f;la Tnf.a mdrsf;daIs; osukd ielisu m%udo jsh' 2016.12.21 osk mej;s iS$i l=reKE., jejs,s iud.fus jdraIsl uyd iNd

reisjSfusos fuS .egj jsifok ;=re Tnf.a mdrsf;daIs; osukdj re' 72,300/- f,i

jq jegqm mdol lr.ksuska ielish hq;=nj yd ta ms<sn|j Tn fj; oeKqusfok f,i ;SrKh fldg we;'

Dissatisfied by the above decision of the Petitioner, the 4th Respondent had

complained to the Department of Labour that the gratuity payable to him has

not been paid. The Department of Labour had conducted an inquiry with the

participation of the Petitioner and the 4th Respondent, and by a letter dated

21st March 2018 marked P25 informed the Petitioner that it is liable to pay

the 4th Respondent a sum of Rs. 3,053,000 being the gratuity payable for a

2 Vide paragraph 20 of the petition.

7

period of ten years calculated at the rate of (a) one months salary for each

year of completed service; (b) on the salary last drawn by the 4th Respondent,

together with a surcharge of 30% on such sum, as there has been a delay in the

payment of gratuity.3

Dissatisfied by the said decision, the Petitioner instituted this application,

seeking inter alia the following relief:

a) A Writ of Certiorari to quash the notice marked P25;

b) A Writ of Prohibition preventing the 1st 3rd Respondents from taking

steps on the Board Paper marked P6.

Prior to considering the several arguments presented on behalf of the

Petitioner, it would be convenient to lay down the applicable provisions of the

Act.

In terms of Section 5(1) of the Act, Every employer who employs or has

employed fifteen or more workmen on any day during the period of twelve

months immediately preceding the termination of the services of a workman in

any industry shall, on termination (whether by the employer or workman, or on

retirement or by the death of the workman, or by operation of law, or

otherwise) of the services at any time after the coming into operation of this

Act, of a workman who has a period of service of not less than five completed

years under that employer, pay to that workman in respect of such services,

and where the termination is by the death of that workman, to his heirs, a

gratuity computed in accordance with the provisions of this Part within a

period of thirty days of such termination.

3 Vide Section 5(4) of the Act which provides for the imposition of a surcharge at the rates specified therein.

8

Section 6(2) provides that, A workman referred to in subsection (1) of section

5 shall be entitled to receive as gratuity a sum equivalent to:- (a) half a months

wage or salary for each year of completed service, computed at the rate of

wage or salary last drawn by the workman, in the case of a monthly rated

workman...

There is no dispute between the parties that the Petitioner has more than

fifteen employees and that the 4th Respondent had served more than five

years with the Petitioner at the time he retired. Therefore, there is no dispute

with regard to the entitlement of the 4th Respondent to the payment of

gratuity in terms of the Act. The parties however are at variance on the

quantum of the last drawn salary, as well as the rate at which the gratuity

should be calculated i.e. whether the 4th Respondent should only be paid

gratuity at the rate of half months salary for each year of completed service as

stipulated by Section 6(2) of the Act, or one month, in accordance with the

Circular 1R4B. The learned Presidents Counsel for the Petitioner also

submitted that the 4th Respondent had not served a period of ten years and

therefore in any event, the Circular 1R4B would not apply to the 4th

Respondent. This is an argument that was taken up for the first time at the

hearing of this application.

I shall now consider the underlying question relating to each of the three

arguments of the learned Presidents Counsel for the Petitioner, which are as

follows:

a) What is the salary at which the gratuity of the 4th Respondent should be

calculated?

b) What is the rate at which gratuity should be paid to the 4th Respondent?

9

c) In any event, has the 4th Respondent completed ten years of service with

the Petitioner.

There is no dispute that the Petitioner is a 100% Government owned Company,

and that the Petitioner is governed by the provisions of the Companies Act.

The Petitioner has its own Articles and Memorandum of Association, and has a

Board of Directors who are appointed by its shareholder, the Secretary to the

Treasury. There is also no dispute that an employee of the Ministry of Finance

referred to as the nominee of the Secretary to the Treasury served on the

Board of Directors of the Petitioner, at all times relevant to this application.

The primary objects and the ancillary powers of the Petitioner are set out in

the Memorandum of Association marked P2. In terms of paragraph 9 of the

ancillary powers, the Petitioner has the power to appoint, engage, employ ...

staff and employees, and to remunerate any such (persons) at such rate and in

such manner as shall be thought fit. Paragraph 16 thereof empowers the

Petitioner to, grant pensions, allowances, gratuities and bonuses to managers,

employees ..... The Petitioner states that notwithstanding the above powers in

terms of P2, the Department of Management Services, which is a Department

within the Ministry of Finance had issued a letter dated 24th March 2007,

marked P3 setting out the salary structures applicable to the employees of

the Petitioner, as approved by the National Salaries and Cadres Commission,

by its letter dated 31st January 2007. Thus, it appears to this Court that by

virtue of being a Government owned Company, the power of the Petitioner

with regard to payment of salaries was subject to the directions issued to it by

the Department of Management Services and the National Salaries and Cadres

Commission.

10

As noted earlier, the initial contract of employment P4 stipulated that the 4th

Respondent shall be paid an all inclusive monthly salary of Rs. 70,000. While

this Court has not been provided with the salary structure approved by the

Department of Management Services that was applicable at the time the letter

of appointment P4 was issued, the salary that was paid to the 4th Respondent

from 2005 was Rs. 70,000. The salary structure approved by the National

Salaries and Cadres Commission annexed to P3 permitted the payment of a

sum of Rs. 72,300 to the Chief Executive Officer of the Petitioner. P5 which is

the letter of appointment issued to the 4th Respondent in 2007 when he was

appointed on a permanent basis not only specified that the 4th Respondent

shall be entitled to an all inclusive remuneration of Rs. 80,000, it also specified

that the granting of increments will be at the sole discretion of the Board of

Directors, depending on your performance. This is a specific acknowledgment

by the Petitioner that the 4th Respondent is entitled to increments.

There is no dispute between the parties that the 4th Respondent has been

given the following salary increments by the Board of the Petitioner:

Effective date of

increment

Value of Monthly

Increment

Has the Board approved it

1st July 2010 10,000 Yes evidenced by 4R4

1st July 2011 20,000 Yes vide Board decision 4R7

1st July 2012 25,000 Yes - vide Board decision 4R10

1st January 2013 30,000 Yes - vide Board decision 4R12

1st September 2013 30,000 Yes - vide Board decision 4R15

1st January 2014 30,000 Yes - vide Board decision 4R18

1st December 2014 10,000 -

11

It would thus be seen that the 4th Respondent has been given periodical salary

increments by the Board of Directors of the Petitioner. Quite apart from

whether the Board had the power to grant such increments, the fact of the

matter is that the Petitioner has suppressed this fact from this Court, and it

was left to the 4th Respondent to produce documents to establish that at least

part of the increments were approved and granted by the Board. The next

matter that is evident by the above documents is that it was not the 4th

Respondent who in violation of applicable financial regulations increased his

salary, but it was the Board who increased his salary. Thus, the allegation

made in the written submissions filed on behalf of the Petitioner that the 4th

Respondent, as the former Chief Executive Officer has arbitrarily overdrawn his

salary during his tenure of office is contradicted by the Petitioners own

documents. There is another important matter that this Court must advert to,

which is the fact that the Treasury was represented on the Board by its

nominee director, and that such director was present, at least when the

decisions marked 4R7, 4R10 and 4R12 were taken.

It is in the above factual circumstances that the Petitioner is claiming that for

purposes of computing the gratuity of the 4th Respondent, the salary of the 4th

Respondent should be calculated at the rate of Rs. 72,300 per month, which is

the salary that was approved by the Department of Management Services as

far back as in 2007. It is noted that this Court has not been provided with any

documents relating to the revision of the salary structure after 2007.

The question that this Court must consider is not whether the Petitioner paid

the 4th Respondent a salary which it was not supposed to pay, but the salary

that the Department of Labour must take into consideration when deciding the

gratuity payable to the 4th Respondent. As noted earlier, in terms of Section

6(2) of the Act, a workman shall be entitled to receive as gratuity a sum

12

equivalent to half a months wage or salary for each year of completed service,

computed at the rate of wage or salary last drawn by the workman.

Section 20 of the Act defines wage or salary to mean:

(a) the basic or consolidated wage or salary;

(b) cost of living allowance, special living allowance or other similar

allowance; and

(c) piece rates.

The Department of Labour, having considered the said issue had informed the

Petitioner by letter dated 13th November 2017 marked 1R5D, as follows:

by; wra: ksrEmkhg wkqj iSudiys; l=reKE., jejs,s iud.u u.ska tls

fiajlhskag f.jk ,o jegqma f,aLk msrslaisfusos m%Odk jsOdhl ks,Odrs tka'tus'tia'fla' ks,af,af.dv uy;dg f.jd we;s uQ,sl fyda tAldnoaO jegqm jkafka

re 297,500.00 ls' Psjk jshous osukdj f,i re. 7800.00 ls' tu uQ,sl jegqfma yd

Psjk jshous osukdfjs tl;=j re. 305,300.00 ls'

;jo iSudiys; l=reKE., jejs,s iud.u jsiska 1958 wxl 15 orK fiajl

wra:idOl wruqo,a mk; hgf;a tka'tus'tia'fla' ks,af,af.dv uy;dg bmehsu f,i

mdol lrf.k we;af;a o re. 305,300.00 l by; ls uQ,sl jegqm yd Psjk jshous

osukdfjs tl;=jhs' by; oelajq lreKq wkqj Tn jsiska tka'tus'tia'fla' ks,af,af.dv uy;df.a uQ,sl

jegqm fyda fps;kh yegshg re. 72300.00 f.jq njla luslre flduidrsiajrhd

bosrsfha ikd: fldg ke;' ta wkqj iSudiys; l=reKE., jejs,s iud.u jsiska tka'tus'tia'fla' ks,af,af.dv uy;dg f.jk ,o jegqma f,aLk mokus lr .ksuska Tyqg ysus mdrsf;daIs; uqo,

.Kkh lr ;sfnk nj fuys ,d oekqus fous'

13

There is no dispute that the salary last drawn by the 4th Respondent, as

confirmed by the documents submitted by the Petitioner to the Department of

Labour, was a sum of Rs. 305,300 per month, and therefore, I am of the view

that the 4th Respondent is entitled to receive gratuity calculated at that sum. It

is not the function of the Department of Labour to determine the legality of

such payments, nor can the 1st Respondent embark on a journey to ascertain

whether the necessary approvals have been obtained by the Petitioner. I am of

the view that the duty cast on the 1st Respondent in terms of Section 6(2) of

the Act is to determine the entitlement of Gratuity based on the last drawn

salary of the 4th Respondent, and nothing more. Therefore, I am of the view

that the decision of the Department of Labour set out in P25, on the quantum

of the last drawn salary is not illegal, and therefore, the said decision is not

ultra vires the powers of the 1st Respondent in terms of the Act.

The next issue that I must consider is whether the decision of the Department

of Labour that the gratuity payable to the 4th Respondent should be calculated

at the rate of one months salary for each year of completed service, is illegal

or irrational.

The concept of gratuity has been explained by the Supreme Court of India in

Delhi Cloth & General Mills Co Ltd. vs The Workmen4 in the following manner:

Gratuity in its etymological sense means a gift especially for services

rendered or returned for favours receivedin the early stages in the

adjudication of industrial disputes gratuity was treated as a gift made by

the employer at his pleasure and the workmen had no right to claim it. But

since then there has been a long line of precedents in which it has been

ruled that a claim for gratuity is a legitimate claim which the workmen

4 1970 Lab.I.C. 787 at 798 (SC) as referred to in Some Concepts of Labour Law by S.R. De Silva at page 30.

14

may make and which in appropriate cases may give rise to an industrial

disputeGratuity paid to workmen is intended to help them after

retirement on superannuation, death, retirement, physical incapacity,

disability or otherwise. The object of providing a gratuity scheme is to

provide a retiring benefit to workmen who have rendered long and

unblemished service to the employer and thereby contributed to the

prosperity of the employer. It is not paid to an employee gratuitously or

merely as a matter of boon; it is paid to him for long and meritorious

service rendered by him to the employer.

There are three sections in the Act which are important for a consideration of

this issue. The first is Section 5(1) which sets out the circumstances in which an

employer becomes liable to pay gratuity. The second is Section 6(2), which sets

out the minimum gratuity that must be paid to an employee who is qualified to

receive gratuity in terms of Section 5(1). The third is Section 10 which reads as

follows:

(1) Where the gratuity payable to a workman is governed by a

collective agreement, award of an Industrial Court or arbitrator

under the Industrial Disputes Act or any other agreement, the

computation of such gratuity in respect of his services shall be made

in accordance with the terms of such collective agreement, award of

an Industrial Court or arbitrator or other agreement, as the case may

be, provided that the gratuity or terminal benefits set out therein are

more favourable to the workman than the gratuity payable under

this Act.

(2) No workman shall be entitled to a gratuity or terminal benefit in

terms of any collective agreement, award of an Industrial Court or

15

arbitrator or other agreement in addition to the gratuity under this

Act or vice versa.

While Sections 5 and 6 require an employer to pay gratuity at a minimum rate,

Section 10 permits an employer and an employee to negotiate a rate higher

than the minimum rate. Such higher rate can be governed by a Collective

Agreement, an Award of the Industrial Court, Award of an Arbitrator, or can be

evidenced by any other agreement. I have already noted the manner in which

the Board of the Petitioner approved the payment of gratuity at a higher rate

and thereafter published the said scheme by Circular 1R4B. I am of the view

that there cannot be any doubt that by the said Circular, the Petitioner held

out to its employees that if they remain in service for 10 years or more, they

would be remunerated at the higher rate. Many employees, and certainly the

4th Respondent would have acted on the said holding out and arranged their

careers accordingly. Thus, the offer of the Petitioner has been accepted by the

employees including the 4th Respondent, thus giving rise to an agreement

contemplated by Section 10(1) of the Act. Hence, it would be unreasonable

and illegal to unilaterally amend the said agreement.

I also observe that the Petitioner did not cancel the Circular 1R4B in limine.

1R4B having come into operation on 1st February 2013, was cancelled only

with effect from 25th April 2016. Thus, by keeping the said Circular open for a

period of little over three years and by paying those employees who retired

during that period upon completion of 10 years of service, gratuity at the rate

of one months salary for each year of completed service, the Petitioner has

acknowledged that it has the power to increase the rate at which gratuity

should be paid over and above the statutory minimum set out in Section 6(1).

16

It appears from the letter dated 21st June 2016 marked P11 sent by the

Department of Labour to the Petitioner that the issue of payment of gratuity to

the 4th Respondent had been discussed with the Department of Labour in June

2016. P11 reads as follows:

Wla; lreKg wod,j ud fj; tjd we;s Tnf.a 2016.06.16 oske;s ,smsh yd nefoa'

02' 1983 wxl 12 orK mdrsf;daIs; mk; hgf;a 6^2& ^w& j.ka;sfha jsOsjsOdk wkqj udisl jegqma ,nk fiajlhska iusnkaOfhka tu fiajlhska jsiska wjidkhg ,nd .;a jegqm fyda fjs;kh wkqj .Kka n,kq ,enq iusmqraK jYfhka fiajh l,

tla tla jraIh i|yd udi Nd.hl (1/2) jegqm fyda fjs;khg iudk uqo,la

mdrsf;daIs; jYfhka f.jsh hq;= nj olajd we;' 03. fus wkqj Tnf.a ,smsfha i|yka fiajlhd iusnkaOfhka o mdrsf;daIs; f.jSfus

mkf;a by; jsOs jsOdk wkqj lghq;= l, hq;= jk w;r wjidk jrg ,enq jegqfma ks;Hdkql+,Ndjh mrslaId lsrsu iusnkaOfhka mdrsf;daIs; f.jsfus mkf;a jsOsjsOdk

hgf;a luslre flduidrsia fj; n,hla ysusjs fkdue;s nj ldreKslj okajd isgsus'

The question whether gratuity should be calculated at one months salary or

half months salary had arisen prior to the retirement of the 4th Respondent,

with several other employees complaining to the Department of Labour. A

meeting had accordingly been held between the officials of the Department of

Labour, the Petitioner and the Unions on 3rd August 2016. According to the

minutes of the meeting marked 1R6A, the discussion had centered on

whether payment of gratuity over and above what has been stipulated by

Section 6(2) of the Act is illegal, and the explanation of the Department of

Labour that such payment is not illegal.

The Department of Labour had thereafter sought the views of the Department

of Management Services, who had replied as follows by their letter dated 7th

September 2016 marked 1R4A:

17

rdPH ixia:d" jHjia:dms; uKav, iy iusmqraKfhka rPh i;= iud.usj, fiajl

osukd iusnkaOfhka l<ukdlrK fiajd fomdra;fuska;=fjs wkque;sh ,nd .; hq;= kuq;a" tlS ,smsfhys i|yka mdrsf;daIs; f.jSus iusnkaOfhka" 1983 wxl 12 ork

mdrsf;daIs; f.jsus mk; wkqj lghq;= l< hq;= nj ldreKslj okajus'

The Department of Labour had also considered whether the decision of the

Petitioner taken in May 2016 vide P16- to reduce the gratuity to half

months pay for each year of completed service is illegal, and taken the view

that the employer cannot unilaterally amend the terms and conditions of

employment. The following passage in 1R6B which is an internal letter dated

15th November 2016 explains the views of the Commissioner of Labour who

conducted the inquiry:

fiajdfhdaPlfhl= iy fiajlfhl= w;r ,sLs;" jdpsl" wkqus; iy .uHudk hk

wdldr "jk .sjsiqus fiajdfhdaPlg fiajlhdf.a leue;a; fkdue;sj talmdlaIslj wfydais l, fkdyels nj jsksYaps; kvq ;Skaoq u.ska olajd we;' fus wdldrfhka wod< pl%f,aLh u.ska fiajdfhdaPl l=reKE., jejs,s iud.u iy tjlg fiajfha fhos isgs fiajlhka w;r .sjsiqula we;s js we;' wod< .sjsiqu m%ldrj tla fiajl msrsilg jirlg tla udihl mdrsf;daIs; ,nd oS ;j;a msrsilg th wysus lsrsu u.ska Tjqkag fjkia fldg ie,lsula isoqfjS' tjeks wdldrfha .sjsiqula u.ska ,ndoqka ysuslula tu .sjsiqu we;s jk wjia:ddfjSos fiajfha fhos isgs ish,qu fiajlhka iusnkaOj wod< jk w;r tu .sjsiqu we;sjk wjia:djg miqj fiajhg nefok fiajlhka iusnkaOfhka muKla fjk;a wdldrfha .sjsiqulg t<USug

yelsfjS'

A similar issue had arisen in Seylan Bank vs Commissioner General of Labour

and Others.5 In or about the year 2004 as an employee friendly measure, a

decision had been taken by Seylan Bank to increase the statutorily mandated

quantum stipulated by the Act, to a full months pay per each year of service for

employees who have more than 10 years of unblemished service. Thereafter

an internal memorandum had been issued to give effect to such decision. The

5 CA(Writ) Application No. 891/2009; CA Minutes of 21st January 2015.

18

enhanced amounts in the manner indicated in the said Circular was adopted

and paid. At the time the scheme was initiated, the petitioner was enjoying a

profitable and financially successful period. However, by about December 2008

a financial crisis emerged within the Ceylinco Group, which affected the ability

of the petitioner to continue to pay gratuity at the enhanced rate. As such the

petitioner had reverted to the statutory half months pay, with the petitioner

claiming that such a course of action is in the best interest of the petitioner

and its employees.

A divisional bench of this Court had held as follows:

When gratuity payable to an employee is higher than the statutory

minimum, it is governed by any other agreement as in the case in hand. If

it is so gratuity should be computed in accordance with such agreement,

and the employer would be estopped from denying such benefit to an

employee. The scheme of the Act contemplates in a broad sense two

options. (a) The statutory minimum of month salary for each, year of

service. (b) An enhanced payment of gratuity based on any other

agreement between the employer and employee. It could also be on a

collective agreement or award. I observe that both (a) and (b) above fall

within the four corners of the statute. To enter into 'any other agreement'

is recognized by the payment of Gratuity Act itself and to provide for

payment of enhanced gratuity. .... I would go further in this regard and

state it is a 'right' of an employee and not a privilege. As such an employee

or workman would have a legitimate expectation for payment of

enhanced gratuity which cannot be exploited/denied by the employer, on

any account. I cannot accept and agree with the views expressed contrary

to above on behalf of the Petitioner Bank.

19

In the above circumstances, I am of the view that the 1st Respondent was right

when he arrived at the finding in P25 that the increase in gratuity granted by

1R4B cannot be withdrawn unilaterally and that the 4th Respondent must be

paid gratuity at the rate of one months salary for each year of completed

service. Therefore, I am of the view that the decision of the 1st Respondent in

P25 that the 4th Respondent should be paid gratuity in terms of 1R4B is

neither illegal nor ultra vires the powers of the 4th Respondent.

The final argument of the learned Presidents Counsel for the Petitioner was

that in any event, the 4th Respondent had not completed 10 years of service

and therefore is not entitled to the payment of gratuity in terms of 1R4B.

Quite apart from the fact that this argument had not been taken up before the

Department of Labour, this argument fails to take into consideration the fact

that the contract of employment evidenced by P5 is in effect a continuation

of the initial contract of employment granted by P4 for the reason that (a)

there has not been a break in employment between the two contracts; and (b)

the duties entrusted to the 4th Respondent and the privileges that the 4th

Respondent was entitled to, continued to remain the same.6

Before concluding, there are three matters that I must advert to. The first is

that although the Petitioner claims that it has paid the 4th Respondent a salary

over and above what it was authorized to pay in terms of the Circulars issued

by the Department of Management Services, no steps have been taken to

recover the purported excess payments from the 4th Respondent. The second

is the fact that the Petitioner has already paid other employees referred to in

the table marked P33 gratuity in terms of 1R4B. The third is the fact that at

the time the Petitioner introduced the scheme for enhanced gratuity, it has

6 See Bogawanthalawa Tea Estates PLC v. Commissioner General of Labour and Others [CA (Writ) Application No. 282/2018, CA Minutes of 20th December 2018] for a discussion on payment of gratuity under two different contracts of employment.

20

made financial provision to meet the extra expenditure that needs to be

incurred to meet the said obligation.

In the above circumstances, I see no merit in this application. The application

of the Petitioner is accordingly dismissed, without costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal Mahinda Samayawardhena, J I agree

Judge of the Court of Appeal