1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

MC. Matugama Case No.63828 Kalutara High Court Revision Application No. RevAO/2004 Appeal No. CA(PHC) 100/2007

Director, Plantation Management Monitoring Division of Ministry of Plantation Industries.

Applicant

Vs.

Govindan Raja Rajapaksha, Asweliyawatte, Badureliya.

Respondent.

AND

Govindan Raja Rajapaksha, Asweliyawatte, Badureliya.

Respondent - Petitioner

Vs.

1. Director, Plantation Management Monitoring Division of Ministry of Plantation Industries.

BEFORE:

COUNSEL:

2

2. Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

Respondents

AND

l. Govindan Raja Rajapaksha, Asweliyawatte, Badureliya.

2. Director, Plantation Management Monitoring Division of Ministry of Plantation Industries.

3. Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

Respondents

W.M.M. Malinie Gunaratne, J. &

P.R. Walgama, J.

Anuruddha Dharmaratne for the 1st Respondent

Yuresha Fernando, SSC for the 2nd Respondent

III !I I!Ii

~ I I

j

~

~

Ii!I

Jt,I,

~r~

~ F

~t,,

3

Argued on : 29.05.2015

Written submissions filed on: 02.09.2015 and 14.10.2015

Decided on: 22.10.2015

Malinie Gunaratne, J.

The Applicant- Respondent- Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the

Respondent) instituted proceedings under the Case No.63828, against the

Respondent- Petitioner- Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Appellant)

in the Magistrate's Court of Matugama under the Provisions of State Land

(Recovery of Possession) Act No.7 of 1979. It was filed on 20.11.2003,

seeking for an order from the Magistrate's Court to eject the Appellant from

the premises morefully described in the Schedule to the Application.

The learned Magistrate pronounced the Order, dated 24.03.2004,

granting the relief sought by the Respondent and issued Order ejecting the

Appellant from the said land, as the Appellant failed to show cause as

required by Section 9 of the State Land (Recovery of Possession) Act, that

he was in possession of the said land upon a valid permit or other written

authority of the State.

Being aggrieved by the said Order of the learned Magistrate, the

Petitioner preferred an application to the High Court Kalutara, seeking that

the Order of the Learned Magistrate be revised. The learned High Court

Judge, pronounced the judgment dated 14.06.2007, affirming the Order of

the learned Magistrate, and dismissed the Petitioner's application. The

4

Appellant has now filed this Appeal, seeking to set aside the said judgment

of the learned High Court Judge.

When the Appeal was taken up for argument, in the absence of the

Appellant, Counsel for the 1 st Respondent raised a preliminary objection as

to the maintainability of this Appeal.

The Counsel submitted that, as required by Rule 14 (1) of the Court of

Appeal Rules, the purported Petition of Appeal has not been forwarded to

this Court and therefore the purported Petition of Appeal should be rejected

in limine. Further he has submitted, the following defects are evident ex

facia;

(a) The caption does not contain a name of an Appellant;

(b ) the purported Petition of Appeal is not in duly numbered

paragraphs;

(c) it does not contain a proper prayer and it merely states to grant the

relief prayed for in the Petitioner's Petition and to set aside the

Order of the learned High Court Judge dated 14.06.2007. Also

there is no specific prayer to set aside the Order of the learned

Magistrate made in Case No.62328.

I will now tum to consider the legal posItIon of the preliminary

objection which was raised by the Counsel for the 1 st Respondent.

The Court of Appeal Rule 14 (1) reads as follows:-

14( 1) The Petition of Appeal shall be distinctly written upon good

and suitable paper and shall contain the following particulars:-

14(1)

(a) The name of the Court in which the application is pending;

5

(b)the names of the parties to the application;

(c) the names of the appellant and of the respondent;

(d) the address to the Court of Appeal;

(e) a plain and concise statement of the grounds of objection to the

order appealed against such statement to be set forth in duly

numbered paragraphs.

(f) a demand of the form of relief claimed.

It is important to note that the Appellant has not complied with the

Rule (14)(1) (a), (c) and (f) of the Supreme Court Rules which is mandatory.

I am agreeable with the contention of the learned Counsel for the 1 st

Respondent. Hence, I am of the view since the Appellant has not complied

with the Rule 14 (1) of the Supreme Court, there is no proper petition of

appeal filed and accordingly, the Appellant has not properly invoked the

jurisdiction of this Court.

It has been held over and over again by this Court as well as the

Supreme Court, non-compliance with the Court of Appeal (Appellate

Procedure) Rules is fatal to the application.

The importance and the mandatory nature of the observance of the

Rules of the Court of Appeal in presenting an application has been

repeatedly emphasised and discussed in a long line of decided authorities by

the Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court.

In the case of Coomasaru vs. Mis Leechman and Co. Ltd., and Three

Others, Tennekoon, C.J. stated as follows:

6

"Rules of Procedure must not always be regarded as mere

technicalities which parties can ignore at their whim and pleasure". In that

case, the preliminary objection raised on behalf of the Respondent that

relates to the non compliance of Rules upheld and dismissed the case.

It was held in Nicholas vs. Macan Marker Ltd; (1981) 2 SLR 1, non

compliance with the Rule which is in imperative terms would render such

application liable to be rejected.

Justice Soza stated in Navarathnasingham vs. Arumugam and Another

(1980) 2 SLR 1 "This Petition therefore should have been rejected for non-

compliance with Rules. Further he stated that the Supreme Court Rules are

imperative and should be complied with.

Same decision was followed in the case of Rasheed Ali vs. Mohamed

Ali (1981) 2 SLR 29.

In the case of Koralage vs. Marikkar Mohamed and others (1988) 2

SLR 299, it was held, compliance of the Rules is a mandatory requirement

and non -compliance is a material defect in the application and cannot

maintain the application.

Same decision was followed in cases Brown and Company Ltd. V s.

Rathnayake (1990) 1 SLR 92, The Attorney General vs. Wilson Silva (1992)

1 SLR 44 and Balasingham and another vs. Puvanthiram (2000) 1 SLR 163.

It was stated by Perera J. in Balasingham case, failure to comply with Rules

is indeed a failure to show due diligence. The appeal was accordingly

dismissed. In the cases of Facy vs. Sanoon and Others (2003) 2 SLR, and

Jeganathan vs. Sajyath (2003) 2 SLR 372 same decision has been followed.

7

It was held in Shanmugadivu vs. Kulatilake (2003) 1 SLR 215, the

requirements of Rules are imperative and the Court of Appeal had no

discretion to excuse the failure to comply with the Rules.

Hence, the weight of authorities mentioned above, thus favours the

view, that non-compliance with Rules is fatal to the application. Parties

who invoke the jurisdiction of the Court cannot ignore the Rules and then

ask to be heard.

It is to the best interest of the administration of Justice that Judges

shall not ignore or deviate from the procedural law and decide matters on

equity and justice as Dr. Amarasinghe J. pointed out in the case of Fernando

vs. Sybil Fernando and Others (1997) 3 SLR 12. In that case Dr.

Amarasinghe J. has made reference to the observation of Lord Justice

Scrutton in his lecture "The Work of the Commercial Courts" (1921 - 23) 1

Cambridge Law Journal 6 at P 8 - 9. " ..... The Oath which every judge takes

is: I will do right to all manner of people without fear or favour or prejudices

according to the law and customs of the realm. And it is the laws and

customs of this realm that the judges have to administer. If once you allow

the laws and customs which you have to administer to be diverted by the

particular view you take of the particular case, another judge may think

otherwise on the same facts, and there ceases to be any certainty in the law.

If the laws and customs you have to administer are wrong it is for Parliament

to put them right - not for the judges. It is important that the Judges should

interpret the settled laws without altering them according to their views of

right or wrong in the particular cases".

8

Dr. Amarasinghe J. pointed out in the case of Fernando vs. Sybil

Fernando "there is the substantive law and the procedural law. Procedural

law is not secondary. The two branches are complementary. Halsbury points

out it is by procedure that the law which puts life into substantive law, gives

it remedy and effectiveness and brings it into being".

Hence, in the interests of the administration of justice, there must he

order, and therefore there must be compliance with the Rules of the Court of

Appeal. As I have observed the defect was not of a purely formal or

technical nature. Invoking the jurisdiction of the court is a crucial step in the

proceedings.

The Petition of Appeal filed by the appellant in this case has not been

directed to the proper forum under the proper provision of law in as much as

no proper legally tenable appeal is pending. Therefore my considered view

is that the Appellant has not invoked the jurisdiction of this Court in a proper

manner complying with Rule 14( 1) of the Court of Appeal Rules.

F or the reasons stated above the purported Petition of Appeal should

be dismissed in limine.

Without prejudice to the aforesaid decision, now I will tum to

consider the merits of the case.

The Respondent instituted proceedings in terms of Section 5 of the

State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act, against the Appellant, in the

Magistrate's Court of Matugama, seeking for an order to eject the Appellant

from the land more fully described in the schedule to the application.

9

The scope of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act was to

provide a speedy or summary mode of getting back possession or occupation

of "State Land" as defined in the Act, where there was not subsisting on the

relevant date, in the opinion of the Competent Authority a valid permit or

authority.

The Appellant has failed to show that he was in possession of the said

land upon a valid permit or other written authority of the State. Therefore the

learned Magistrate has made an order ejecting the Appellant from the said

land.

Being aggrieved by the said order of the learned Magistrate the

Appellant preferred an application, seeking to revise the Order of the learned

Magistrate. The learned High Court Judge made an Order affirming the

Order of the learned Magistrate and dismissed the Appellant's application.

The Appellant has filed this purported Petition of Appeal seeking to set aside

the judgment of the learned High Court Judge.

On perusal of the entirety of the judgment of the learned High Court

Judge, it is apparent that the learned High Court Judge has taken into

consideration the submissions made by both parties and has come to the

conclusion that the Appellant has failed to show cause as required by

Section 9 of the State Land (Recovery of Possession) Act.

Hence, I do not see any error in the manner in which the learned High

Court Judge has considered the facts and the way in which he has applied

the law in this instance.

.. 10

Accordingly, I see no basis to interfere with the Order made by the

learned High Court Judge and affirm the Order of the learned High Court

Judge dated 14.06.2007.

F or the reasons stated above, this Appeal is dismissed with costs of

Rs.2S,0001-.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

P.R.Walgama, J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Appeal is dismissed