, ~.

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBUC OF SRI LANKA

CA. No. CPA OOa9/19

In Ule matter of an Application For

Revision in terms of Section las (I) ofule

1978 Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri L.1.,nka,

B,A" ,M, 13alachandra,

Assistant Commissioner of L1.bour,

Labour Otlice of Call1paha District,

C;;Ullpaha,

COMPLAINANT

HC Gampaha Rev. No. 11/16 -Vs-

MC Attanagalla No. 90008/LB

E.M. Thilak;u'atna

Thilak;mttne Contractors,

Kimcla Ucla, Masnoruwa,

Giriulla,

RESPONDENT

AND

E.M. Thilak;u'aule

Thilak;u'atne Contractors,

K;ulda Ucla, Masnoruwa,

Giriulla.

RESPONDENT - PETITIONER

BEFORE

COUNSEL

(1'.\003919

-Vs-

B.A.JM. Balachanclra

Assistant Commissioner of Labour,

Labour Office of GampaJ1a District,

G<Ullpal1a.

COMPLAINANT - RESPONDENT

AND NOW BE1WEEN

E.M. Thilakaratne

Thilak,u-atne Contractors,

K;U1cla Ucla, MasnoJUwa,

Giriulla.

RESPONDENT -PETTIOONER -

PETITIONER

-Vs-

B.AJ .M. Balacll<Ulclra

Assist<ult Commissioner of Labour,

Labour Office of G<U11paha District,

G<Ul1palIa.

COMPLAINANT - RESPONDENT -

RESPONDENT

Shir;U1 GooneratneJ. &

Dr. Ruw<U1 Fem<Ulclo].

P.K. Prince Perera with

S. P;U1chads<u-;U1 for the Respondent-

CPA He Campaha (Rev.) 1\0. 11 /16 ~I.c. Altanagalla No. 90008/LB

. ..

.. -

ARGUED ON

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS

DECIDED ON

Dr. Ruwan Fernando. J.

Introduction

Peti tiOlI er-Petitioner

Madubashini Sri Meththa, State Counsel

for tlle Complainant-Respondent-

Respondent

OH.07.2020

22.0S.2020 (by the Respondent-

Peti tioner-Peti tioner}

07.07.2020 (by the Complain;mt-

Re s I /0 II( Ie nl-Res po nde n t)

11 .09.2020

III This is an application lo sel aside by way of revision, die judl,'lllent of

dle le;Ulled High Court Judge of C;mlpaha dated 02.0;J .. 2019, allirming

dIe order dated 20.11.20 IS of the le;u'ned Magistrate of Attanagalla who

directed dIe recovery of a sum of Rs. I, 71 G,:~OO/- as Employees' Provident

Fund dues Ii'om dIe Respondent-Petitioner- Petitioner under section ilH(2)

of die Employees' Provident Act No. IS of 1958 as ;unended.

Background

121 The Complai;mt-Respondent-Respondent (hereinalier relerred to as

the Respondent) filed a Certificate in die Magistrate's COUlt of Attanagalla

in terms of Section 38 (2) of die Employees' Provident Fund Act No. IS of

1958 as ;unended for dlc reCOVCIY;1 sum of Rs. 1,7 I G,300/- as EPF dues

Ii'om dIe Respondent-Petitioner- Petitioner (hereinaJier referred to as dIe

( 1',\-003'/-19 CP \ lie Ga,npaha tllc..) :-'0. 11116 \1.C . . \ttana~alla No. 90008/L11

Petitioner) in respect of 32 workers employed by him for the period from

April 2006 to September 20 I O.

131 The learned Magistrate summoned the Respondent to show cause why

further proceedings lor the recovery of die sum due under dIe Act should

not be taken against him. The Respondent appeared in court in response

to dIe sunmlons and die leamed Magistrate by order dated 21.11.2014

directed dIe recovel)' of dIe said sum Irom dIe Respondent as a fine and in

default, she imposed a 6 monuls impnsolUnent

141 Being aggrieved by the said order, the Petitioner preferred an appeal

against the said order to dIe Provincial High Court of Gampalla stating dlat

he had not been given an oPPOlillnity to show cause against dIe recovery of

dIe sum mentioned in dIe cel1ilicate. The leamed High Comt Judge by

order dated 10.07.2015 directed dIe learned Magistrate to atlord an

opportunity to dIe Respondent to show cause against dIe sum mentioned

in dIe certificate (P4). Consequent to dIe said order, dIe learned Magistrate

of Attanagalla afforded ill1 oPPOlillnity to dIe Petitioner to show cause and

dIe Petitioner filed oi:liections in wTiting, stating dIe following matters by

way of showing cause against ule sum mentioned in dIe certiIicate:

I. The Respondent is not dIe employer of dIe said workmen whose

n,lI1leS appear in dIe schedule to ule cel1ificate and ule real

employer was Kimdy Pl;mtations Ltd to which die Petitioner

supplied labour services;

2. The cel1ificate in question had been tIled by dIe Respondent widlOut

holding a proper inquiry to identitY dIe real employer of dIe

workmen in violation of the 11] les of natural justice.

151 After counter oi:liections were filed by dIe complain;mt-Assistill1t

COlTunissioner, Ule leamed Magistrate having permitted dIe parties to Iile

CI' \-0039-19 CP\ lie Ca,npaha (Jlc,.) '.0.11 /16 ,\I.e. Attanagalla No. 90008/LB

- ..

written submissions, by her order dated 20.11.2015 held that die Petitioner

was die employer of die said workmen and directed die recovery of die

said sum of Rs. I, 71 (j,:~00/- hum the Respondent as a tine.

161 The Petitioner moved by way of revision to the Provincial High Court

of Gampaha ,md die le;u'ned High Court Judge by judl,'l1lent dated

02.04.2019 while a.ttilllling die lindings of die le,mled Magistrate held dlat

dIe Petitioner had bibl to establish the existence of exceptional

circul1lst,mces warranting die exercise of revision;uy jurisdiction of the

High Court. Being aggrieved by the said judgment of die learned High

Court Judge of C,ullpaha, U Ie Petitioner has filed dlis revision application

seeking to revise ;uld set aside the said judl.,'l1lent of the learned High Court

./udge ,md the said order of Ule le,u'ned Magistntte of Att,magalla.

171 Wltile dtis application was pending in dlis Court, die ie;mled State

Counsel for die Respondenl brought to our attention that Ule Petitioner

had luruler tiled ,m appeal against Ule s,tid order of the learned MagistTate

dated 20.11.20 IS a11d Ule ule le;u-ned High COln1.Judge of Gampaha by

judgment dated 05.06.2018 had dismissed the s,tid appeal (Vide-motion

dated 29.07.2019 ,md Ule judgment of die High Court dated 20.11.20 IS).

Main grounds urged by ilie Petitioner

181 At the he,u'ing, die learned Counsel li)r die Petitioner submitted that

Ule judgment of the le,u'ned High COUlt .Judge is erroneous for Ule

following reasons:

I. The learned High Court has erred in holding that Ule Petitioner had

not challenged die certificate of the Deputy Commissioner of

Ltbour;

CI'A003919 CP \ lie (;a'"paha (I{c,.) :'10.11 /16

2. The The learned High Court has tailed to consider the judgment of

the Supreme Court in Ceylon MercanDle ( Inion v. Ceylon Feditizer

CO/poraDon 1985 (I) Sri LR 1\.01;

B. The learned High COUit has erred in law by not considering dle fact

dlat dle Respondent had not observed dle rules of natural justice by

its failure to hold an inquil1' tor dle detellnination of die real

employer of dle workmen in question;

1\.. The The learned High COUIt has elTed in law by holding dlat dIe

Petitioner who sought revision;u1' jurisdiction of die High Court has

lailed to adduce exceptional circumstances.

Analysis

The scope of ilie proceedings under section 38 (2) of ilie Employees'

Provident Fund Act

191 It is necessary, at dlis stage to identify dIe scope of dle proceedings for

die recovery of arre;u's of payments due from an employer under section

38 of dle Employees' Provident Fund Act No. 15 of 1958 ;I.~ ;mlended.

Section ::18(2) of dIe Act provides that where an employer makes delault in

dIe payment of any sum which he is liable to pay under dle Act and die

Commissioner is of dIe opinion dlat recovery of any sum due under

section 17 is impractical or inexpedient, he may issue a certilicate

containing p<LIticulars of die sum so due <LIld dle nanle <LIul place of

residence of dIe delilUlting employer to die Magistrate having jurisdiction

in die division.

1101 Setion :~8(B) of die Act provides dlat die correctness of die celtiticate

shall not be called in question or ex;mlined by the COUIt in <LIly proceedings

under dlis section ;md accordingly, die Commisioner's celtiticate shall be

(P .~-0039-19 CI'\ lie Gampaha (lIe,.) '\0.11116 \1.<'" Allanagalla No. 9000811.8

sullicient evidence that die ;1I110l1llt due under dlis Act Ii'om die del;LUlting

employer has been duly calculated ;U1d dlat die amount is in debtult,

Section 38 (3) reads ;l~ l()llows:

(.'-J) 77Je COIu:c/J1ess o/;UI.v slalell/ent Iii a celtl/icalioJ] isslled by Ille

COJ]ulIimoner Ii')}' Ille jJlllposes o/Ilu:\' sectioJ] shall nol be called Iii

ques/Joned or ex;ulIJiled b)' Ille COlIIt Iii ;UI)' plVceerhilgs under Ilu:\'

secfJoJ], ;Uld accon:hill[('~ nolluill[ IiI dJJ:5 sectJoJ] shall aulllOl1ze die

court Iv consider or deode die COITeC/lless o/ ;w v s/alem enl Iii slIch

celtl/icale, and /lle COJ]lIl1i5SJ(JIler ~5 certificate Shill/ be sullicieJJl

eVidence /iJ;J1 1111' ;ulIo/JIII dlle under IlJJ:5 Act k OIl/ t/ie deliw/fJill[

emp/o.ver has been dll/v cakll/aled ;U](/ dial slIch ;ullo/JIII i 5 Iii

deJiw/t':

1II1 Section 38 (3) of die Act was inlerpreted by die Court of Appeal in

A llvl1Iey-(;eneral v. O(y C unt:J:5 Ltd (1 9~) I) I Sri LR 227) and die Court

of Appeal held dlat die only permissible defences to challenge Ule

certilicate belore Ule Magistrate ;u'e:

(a) the respondent has paid the amount due;

(b) the respondent is not die dcl;lulter;

(c) Ule cel1ilicale has been liled in a Court which has no jurisdiction to

initiate recovery proceedillgs.

11 21 In appeal, die Suprelllc Court 111 Oly C unt:J:5 Ltd v. The A I/ol1lq -

Cen eral (1 992) 2 Sri LR 2,'17, held that die certilicate shall contain Ule

p;uticu[;u's of Ule sum claimed in tlle certilicate ;U1d where Ule certilicate

contains no particu[;u's of die SUlll claimed, it is not a cel1ilicate liled in

terms of sub-section (2) of section 38 of die Employees' Provident Fund

Act. In Jl1o/i;ulIed A llleer ;U](/ A nollier v; Assist;ull COllJllli5.5loner 0/

Labour (1 998)) I Sri LR l 5ei, die Supreme Court fUl1Jler held Ulat section

38(2) requires dlat Ule employees in respect of whom dcbult is alleged

( 1'1-0039-19 CI' \ IIC Campaha (I!e,,) 1\0,11/16 :\I.( , \""na~allll ~o, 90008/L Il

must be muned or othelwise adequately identified and that (at least) where

def;LUlt is alleged in respect of a period during which there have been

ch;Ulges in remuneration ;mcVor rates of contributions, dIe remuneration in

relation to contributions and debult has been computed must also be

disclosed.

I I:-~I In dIe circumstances, the following four permissible defences are

available to a respondent in a recovery proceeding under section 38 (2) of

the Act before a Magistrate's Court:

(a) the respondent has paid the amount due;

(b) (he respondent is not (he del;lulteI~

(c) die certificate has been filed in a Court which has no jurisdiction to

initiate recovery proceedings;

(d) dIe ceI1:ilicate does not contain proper paI1:iculars of the sum due in

dIe maImer aIld to dIe extent required by section 38(2) of dIe Act.

Determination of d!e employer of d!e workers in question and d!e failure

to consider d!e Judgment of the Supreme Court in Ceylon Mercantile Union v. Ceylon Fertilizer Corporation

1141 In die present case, dIe above-mentioned first, third aIld ford!

defences aI'e not releviU1t as die Petitioner has challenged dIe ceI1:ificate of

the Commissioner of 1~1bour filter alia, on dIe above-mentioned second

ground, niU11ely, dlat he is not dIe employer of 32 workmen who worked in

the Mahawatta Estate owned by dIe KaIldy PlaIltations Ltd ,U1d dms, he is

not liable to pay dIe sum stated in dIe certificate issued under section 38(2)

of dIe Act.

1151 At dIe heaI'ing, the learned Counsel for dIe Petitioner submitted dlat

dIe Petitioner challenged to dIe certiJicate of dIe Commissioner on dIe

ground dlat he is not liable to pay aIly sum under dIe Employees'

C I' ,\ -0039-19 CPA He Camp.ha (Rev.) No. 11116 M.e. Auanagalla No. 90008ILB

Provident Fund Act as he only supplied labour servICes to K;Uldy

Pl;Ultation Ltd but the learned Hi!\h COlnt .Iud!\e I;ulcd to consider thc

Petitioner's said defence in the context of the test of 'control' ,Uld thc test

of 'inteh'Tation' laid down by the Supreme Court in Ceyloll Jl1en ,uwle

[Illioll v. Ceyloll Fellilizer COIpOI,,/jOIl (supra) ;md thus, his judgment is

misconceived in law. He hn1.her suhmitted that the learned Mal,>istratc too

has I;tiled to apply the s;ud two tests in the COiTect legal perspective whcli

thc I;l('ts ,mel the CirClH1lst;mces reveal that the Pctitioner had only sllpplicd

labour services to Kanday Pl,Ultatiolis Ltd and notllin!\ morc.

II iii In view of tllis defence taken by tllC Petitioner, tlle crucial question lilr

tllC determination belore tlle le;mlcd MagislJ'ate was whetller tlle Petitioncr

was tlle "employer" of the workers rcferred to in tlle schedule to thc

certilicate on die hasis of a contract of employment hctwecn the Petitioncr

;Uld die s;ud workers ,Uld if not, whether the Petitioner only supplied

labour services to Kandy Plantations Ltd ;U1d dillS, he was not an

"employer" wid lin die me,min!\ of scction 47 of die Employees' Provident

Fund Act

11 71 The term "employee" is delined III section 1.7 of the I-:mployecs'

Provident Funel Act ;L~ lilliows:

"elllployee" I1IC,UIS illly pel:WII who has entered lil/O or works under a COII/],;IC/ witil ,llI employer Iii ,llIy capacr(y, whetiler tile conuac/ i5 expressed or lillplier/, or OIal or Iii wlilJilg, ,llId wheti/{;r Ii i5 a con/Tact of' selvice or of apprell/jceslnil or ;J COIl/Iact pel:w l/ally /0 execute 'U~v work. of' labolll; iUld lileludes ,llIy pel:50n oldlilill1(V el1lployed ullder ,llIy such COII/],;/{'/, IVhetiler sucli person is or il' no/ Iii employm en/ a/ ,llIy Piu1Jcu/;u' /iille ':

II HI T he term "employer" is also delined in section 17 of tlle Employees'

Provident Fund Act as follows:

"el1lployer" m eilllS iWv per:l'OIl who employes or 011 whose behalf' illly otller persoll emploY5 iU~V work/J/illl ,llId lilCludes a body of'

( "\-0039-19 ('1'\ II( (,:lIlIp"ha (It.,.) \0.11 /16 \1.( .\tI"lIa~all" -:0. 90008/l,il

emplyees (whedler such body is a linn, company, cOlpori/tion or u"lIde ullion), and any person who on behalf" of" allY adler person employs ;lIlY workman ;lIld lilc/udes dIe legaJ heli; successor IiI law, executor or "dlll/iuJu"afOr ill7r1 liquidator of a comp;lI7y,' and IiI die case of ;UI lilcolporaterl body, dIe President or SeaetalY of" sudl

bor~v, and lil dIe case of a parlJJel:lilliJ, dIe Managlilg Partner or M;lIlager':

1191 The essential condition of a person being an "employee" within the

terms of this definition is that he has entered into or works under a

contract with an employer in any capacity and dlere should be, in odler

words, a relationship between dIe employer and employee or master and

selvant. Unless a person is dlus employed by an employer under any such

contract in any such capacity, dlere can be no question of his being an

"employee" widlin dIe definition of dIe telll1 as contained in dIe Act.

1201 Thus, it IS clear dlat there has to be ,U1 employer-employee

relationship between dIe Petitioner ,ll1d dIe employees stated in dIe

schedule to dIe certificate on the basis of a contract of selVice to make dIe

Petitioner liable under section 38 (2) of dIe Employees' Provident Fund

Act. In order to establish dIe existence of a contract of employment, it is

necess;ul' to distinguish between a contract of selvice and a contract for

selvices. A contract of service will give rise to a master and selvant

relationship while dIe contract lor services will contemplate a relationship

of employer and independent contractor. The distinction depends on dIe

rights conferred and duties imposed on dIe parties by dIe contract.

Control Test

1211 In dIe case of./. and W Henderson, Ltd 62 TLR 127, Lord

Thankerton at 12<) found dIe following ingredients as being essential lor

dIe existence of a contract of selvice:-

1. dIe master's power of selection of his selvant;

( 1',\-0039-19 CPA He Cam"aha (Ilev.) 1\0. 11116 ~I.c. Atta""galla No. 90008/LB

2. the payment of wages or other remllnera60n;

3. the master's right to control the method of doing the work; and

4. the master's right of suspension of dismissal.

1221 The most crucial l;lCtor in determining whedler a contract of service

exists between die master and servant is die degree of contTol, die master

has over the serv;Ult. This is what is caUed the 'control test' which

detellllines whetller a person is a serv;Ult or ;Ul independent contractor.

This interpreta60n presupposes tllat a 'selwult' is a person suqject to the

comm;Uld of his master as to the m;ull1er in which he shaU do his work

whereas ;1I1 'independent contractor' may not exactly occupy the posi60n

of a servant hut is a person who may have undertaken die duty of taking

care lor a specilic work, but not: necessarily because he is a servant.

(YeWew.5 v. Noakes (I 880) G QBD 530, at 532).

1231 An independent contractor is a person who is aSSil,'11ed to do any

specific work ;Uld thus, undertakes such work under a contract lor sen~ces

to produce ;Uly given result, but in tlle actual execu60n of the work, he is

not under die direct control of die person for whom he does works,

because he is not a serv;lI1l under him on die basis of a contract of service.

Thus, he is independent and free 10 use his own discre60n in dlings not

specified belorehand in die execu60n of his assigned work.

1241 Lord Thankerton in ShOll v . .f & W HendeHoll, Ltd. (I 9,1.6)

62T.L.R. 1.27,'1.29, recapil1daled die four indicia of a contract of semce as

follows:

(a) die master's power of seiec60n of his serv;lI1t;

(b) the payment of wa!(es ;Uld odler remunera60n,

(c) tlle master's ri!(ht to control die metllOd of doing the work, ;Uld

(d) die master's right of suspension or dismissal.

cr.\ lie Campalill (neL) ~o. 11 / 16 \I.e. \ttll"agalla No. 90008/L1l

Integration Test

1251 However, the control test which was the traditional test to detemline

the relationship of 'master ,md serv,mt' or 'employer-employee'

encountered celtain diHiculties in the modern complexities of the indusu)'.

This led to dIe formulation of ,modler test known as dIe 'integral' or

'integration' or 'organizational' test. According to dlis test, under a contract

of service, a m,m is employed as a 'Palt of dIe business', whereas under a

contract lor services too, he works lor dIe business, but it is not integrated

into it but is only accessol)' to it.

1261 In Stevensoll.!Old,Ul & HiU7iwIJ v. MacdoIJald & Evans (1952) I TLR

101 , dIe Court established dIe "integration test" to decide whedler or not

dIe work of a person is all integral palt of dIe business of all employer.

Delling LJ. held dlat dIe test to detennine whedler tl1e person is ,m

employee or all independent contractor depends on whedler a person is

p,ut alld pal'Cel of an org,mization ,md not on dIe control test alone.

Dening LJ. stated at 11.2 dIat dIe 3"' Respondent being a Motor Claims

Assessor played all import..'Ult role in dIe Petitioner's insurallCe business

alld dillS, he becalne a Palt of dlat business. He stated dlat dIe Petitioner

COmpallY depended on reports of Motor Claims Assessors; ,md dIe 3'"

Respondent had a very long period of employment widl dIe Petitioner

COmpallY, which established a long staJlding regulal' relationship.

1271 The intel,'Tai test was 1i.1I1her refined in United States v. SIlk (191.6) 331

U. S. 704 where dIe US Supreme Court held dlat when detenuining

whedler celtain employees were, in fact, employees widlin tl1e mealling of

a stanlte, dIe test to be applied is not whedler or not a 'power of control

was exercised over dIe manner of peIionuing service to dIe undeltaking'

but whedler dIe men were employees 'as a matter of economic reality'.

Cooke.J. suggested dlat dIe fi.ll1damental test to be applied is dlis:

C 1',\-U039-19 CP.\ 11(' Campaha (Ilev.) 1'10.11116 \I.e. ,.\uanagal". No. 90008fLB

''l.~ a peHon who has engaged lui1JselF to peIi()11l I lilese sellfices peIiol1JJJilg lhem as a PCHOII Iii bllsliless olllu:~ OWII accouIII? IFtile

;UJswer to tile qlles/ioll il' Jfes' {hell tile cOlltract il' iI cOll/racl lor selVices. IF tile answer il' '110 ' tilen tile contracl is a COIlI1'7CI of

. " se/vlce .

1281 In l'eJera v. M;U1K.;u/Jawill,ld 1989 (I) Sri LR :11,7, the quest jon was

whether die appell;mt was a workman wid lin die me;ming or the Industrial

Disputes Act, The Court held th;11 (i) tJle appellant did not c<my on his

business or Head CUller as ;1 business belonf,>ing to him ;md it was a

business done by the appellant j(lr tJle respondent; (ii) the appellant's work

was an intergral part or the respondent's business ,mel tJlUS, he was p;lrt and

p;m:el or tJle org;mizauon; and (iii) tJIUS, tJle appell;mt was a workm;m ;md

;m employee witJlin tJle meaning or die Industrial Disputes Acl.

1291 Thus, under dlis test, die main factor dlat has to be determined IS

whedler the service is done by tIle worker 1'01' his own economic benelits or

1'01' die economic benefits or another person. So, if he is working lilr his

own economic benelits, dlen he should be regarded as an independent

contractor. In dlat event, tJlere is a contract lor service. However, if he is

working lor tJle economic benelits or another, tJlere is a contTact or service

and tJle worker is an employee.

1301 Let me now turn to tJle decision heavily relied on by tJle le;u'ned

Counsell'or tJle Petjtioner in support or the Petitioner's delence. In Ceyloll

Men',UJlile { Inioll v. Ceyloll Fel1Jiixcr CO/poralion (supra), die Supreme

Cotllt applied not ollly tJle test or 'control', but also die Lest or'integrauon'

to determine (i) die relauonship or tJle workers widl tJle Hunupitiya Co-

operative Society (the 2'"' respondent) and Ceylon Ferulizer Corporation

(I " respondent) ;md (ii) the quest jon whetJler die HUllupitiya Labour Co-

operative Society (2'''' respondent) had only acted as agent 1'01' die supply or

labour services to the Fertilizer Corporation.

( P\-U039-19 (,P \ 11(' (;'"lll'aha (1Ic\.) 1\0.11 /16 \1.(. \t!:l"agaUa '10. 9000S/Lil

1311 In Ceylon Merowlile [Inion v. Ceylon Fertilizer COIPOl;11ion, the

H unupitiya Co-operative Society entered into a wlitten agreement (R6)

with the Fertilizer Corporation for the supply of labour and be liable in

d;U1lages if the Fertilizer Corporation was compelled on account of the

Society's failure to supply labour and to engaging other labour at higher

rates. The schedule to the agreement set out the rates of payments agreed

upon payable to the Society. The a!,'Teement sets out terms with regard to

the detemlination of wages, dIe adv,U1ces of die workmen, assiglllllent of

dIe work, supervision and control of its execution and making payments by

dIe Corporation to die workmen dlrough die Society.

1321 His Lordship die Chieflustice S;U11arakoon held dlat dIe Co-operative

Society (2'''' respondent) was not merely ,1Il agent for die supply of labour

services but it was actively engaged in working and putting into practice of

dIe terms of die contract R6 widl dIe Corporation O respondent) and

dlereiore, die Fertilizer CoqJoration was not dIe employer of dIe

workmen.

1331 Wanasundera, ./. and Wimal;uatneJ. disagreed ",~dl His Lordship dIe

Chief Justice. Wimalaratne./. held at page 411 dlat:

"77le President ol die Labour TiibuJJ;Ji, found as a Hlet dial; nolwldlstanrhiJg die con/J;?ct (R6), most ol die workers had been

worluiJg lor tile r respondent pHor to die lonna/Jon oldie Labour Co-opelaa"ve Society, die 2 "' respondent and sliJce, dlere have been even sOllie liJst;wces ol rhiect leCluit5 of some workers by die r lespondent. Such recruits have not even been members of die 2" respondent at dial /Jine, but aJier leCl1lilment, die r lespondent

would lilJOHJJ Ihe 2"' lespondent of such leclwtment. 77le Plesldent also found Ikll die 1st le5pondent kid exerci5ed the light of delenwil:Juon of wages, die assignment of work, die exercise of supervision ;wd control liJ die execuuon ol work, disciphi/iIlY conuvl, iIlld die paymenl otar/wwces iIIlr/ compensalion. Even die

C I' "-0039-19 CPA 11(' Gampaha (Hev.) 1\0. 11 /16 M.e. AUanagalia No. 90008/LB

hilal tenlllila/ion o/dleli'sell/ices, Ii iI' alleged, was the r re.lpondent iU1d die 2" re.lpondenl had no hiwd ill dIe maltel:

Cle;uj)~ dIe miU7JJer IiI whidl dIe whereas Ille r respundent has dealt with dIe worlunen i, more IiI hile, as dIe Preslden says~ with labour Co-operative Sociely belilg IiI dIe nature a/a mere agent tu supp(y labolll; whJle dIe r respondenl lise//beciulle die empluyer 0/ such labulll: Two udlel' li}(tOl:1 lelilJ{)fCe dll:, VieW, n;une/y Ihal nol a slilgle workmiU1 cuncemed IiI dns case is' a member o/dll:I' Labour

Co-operative SOCiety and Ille onlf nexus was dIe mal(Jilg u/ payments by die r respondent tu lile workmen dllough dIe Labour

Co-operative SOCiely, Ii would appeiU' that dlese workmen had much greater contact illld liwolvement with dIe 1st re.sjJondent d"uI wlill

die 2'" respondent':

"771e workmen had Ille most /enuous con/ae/ wlill dIe 2" respondent iU1d IiI twdl iUJ(f IiI /i/Ct, it was dIe 1" respondent who calculated iWel detenlJllled dIe wages ;u](1 advances tu dIe wurkmen iwd not the 2'" respondenl which aCled as a mere condllli lor dIe

1r;7JJsm/~'sion 0/ dIe paymenl: 'l7le 2" respondent, as dIe Presidenl

says~ had merely undeltaKen to SUPPlf labour illld not 10 peilhnll allY speulic selVices, It is IiI tln's con/ext dlat dIe President cumpareel dIe work or Ihe loilbour Co-operative Society to the ok! Kallgany syslem iwd held dlat dIe 2" resjJondent limc/ioneel only as an agent lor dIe supply oFlabolll: , .. , "

1311 Wimal;u-atnc./. who agreed wih Ule views expressed by W;Ulasundera

./. observed at page 1.18 as lilllows:

"771e liIS/;llIt case iI' sJilllfar 10 a sliualion where a ('onITac/or leglilady bnilgs labour to dIe employer:, workplace to peilon1J work Ii) dIe regular course of'dle bUSllless or dIe employel; iU1d lile employer

(lii-ect.1 how die work i, /0 be peJion1Jed, and even call5 upon tlle conU'ilclor nol 10 employ par/jcul;u' persons limn ;ullong die

work/orce, In tklf slilla/ion, my l'7ew I~' dlat dlere is no contract 0/ employment be/ween die conlJ,IClor and die worKmen ':

1351 At page 1.19, Wimalaratne./. observed Ulal:

( 1''\-0039-19 CPA lie Call1paha (ncv,) :-'0, 11 / 16 \I.e, '\ttana~alla No, 90008/L1l

"WilJJilsunderil,.f. I;iRes die VIew dlaf 017 die li/Cts 0/ dlls case, die

reiationsllJi) 0/ employer flJld employee between die CoqJoralion

flJld the workmen /i;IS beell established IIOt ollfy by fIJI application of

Ille test of 'con/Jo/: but also by dIe test of ~/llegra/JolI: Ihal i5 Ihe

workmen were liJlnil.5ic 10 Ille worluilg of die CO/poralioll. I fUll Iii

agreement widl die Views 0/ WanilSundera,'/' The payment of wages

by die Society was ollly a physical act of /J;ulChllg over die willfes Iii

Ille capaCliy a/die agent a/die Co/POI<lUOII. One had 10 remember Ilat it WiIS die CoqJOmflOIl flJld nol dIe SOCIety dlat delenmiled die

willfes of each categO/), 0/ wO/kers-check roll ilS weil ,1S piece-rafe

Walkers. As repuris COIl/Jo/ of walk, even dIe CllIel}usflc'e h,15 110

doubt dlat it was die C'O/pOri/flOIl dlat assigned die wO/k, situpulated

die pmpol11ons 0/ lIIixlilg ,1I1d Illdlc,IIed die mode 0/

di5/Jibufloll .. Whal afJpefU:5 10 have liJiluenced die ClllelJus/J(:e IS

dlat disciphilfu), cOllflo/ was IiI die iJ;lJId5 of die Society. There is;

ho we vel; a strong liJlchil!,' of lin:t by Ihe President dIal "it is

absolutely clear IA1t die slIpelVisloll ilnd C017/J"01 of die wO/kmell

were exercised 1I0t by die 2'" respolldellt (die SOCIety) but by dIe r

respondent (die COlpori/floll) ':

1361 In 5/i LlJlka InslllrlJlce COlpOri//JolI ulllIied v. Commissioner of

Labour ,1I1d Odlers S.C. Appeal no. 27 N2009 decided on 14.12.2016, tlle

question lilter ,1Iia, was whether the 3"' Respondent who was one of tlle

Assessors of tlle Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation could be properly

described as an employee or a servant of the Sri uU1ka Insurance

Corporation and if so, whellier tlle Corporation was liable under Ille EPF

Act having regard to tlle nature of work entrusted to him by die

Corporation. Anil Cooneratne.J. applied dIe 'integration' test and held

tllat tlle 3"' Respondent was 'p;u"! and parcel of tlle business' of die

Insur;U1ce Coq)oration ;U1d Il1US, was a 'workman' or an 'employee' widlin

die meaning of tlle ErF Act

1371 As Halsburv's Laws of England, Hailshanl edition, Vol. 22, page 112,

p;ua. 191 c1;uifies the position of law:- "Whetller or not, in ;U1y bo1ven case,

( I'A-0039- 19 ('1'\ IICGampaha (RC\.) '0. 11116 ~I.c. Atlanagalla No. 90008/1.8

die relation of master ;mel servant, exists is a question of lact; but in all

cases die relation imports the existence of power in die employer not only

to direct what work die servant is to do, but also die m,umer in which die

work is to be done'. As Batt's "Law of Master ;mel Servant", ~, '" edition,

states at page 10:

"The line between ;m independent contractor ;md a servant is olien a very tine one; it is a mixed question of liKt ;md law, ;md die judge has to lind ;mel select die lacts which govern the true relation between the parties as to die control of die work, ;md dlen he or die jury has to say whether the person employed is a servant or ;1

contractor".

The odler import;mt tilctor lex die judge to take into account whedler die

worker was p;u"! ;md parcel of the business of die person who employed

him.

lalll In die back6'Tound of die legal principles enumerated above, let me

now turn to the true nature ;md character of the relationship of the workers

widl die Petitioner ;md/or Kandy Pl;mtations Ltd. The le;u-ned Counsell!)r

the Petitioner submitted d1at le;lI"Iled Magistrate had wrongly applied the

principles laid down III Ceylon MerDUJule { fnioll v. Ceylo/J FertJ/iLer

Corporatioll decision III die absence of ;my express terms of contract

between die Petitioner and die workers in question. In my view, die

absence of any express terms of die contract did not preclude the lc;m1ed

Magistrate Ii'om inquiring into die true nature of die contract and the

relationship between d Ie workers ;md the Petitioner. Such an ;u'!;lIment,

cannot, succeed in view of tile detinition contained in section ~,7, which

refers to a contract witll ;ill employer "in any capacity, whetller tile contract

is expressed or implied, or or;d or in writing, and whether it is a contract of

service or of apprenticeship or ;1 contract personally to execute any

work .. _ .. ".

( I' ,\ -0039-19 CP \ lie G,l/lIp.lta (Hcv,) '<0, 11 / 16 \1.e. Attanagalla :\0, 90008/1.1l

1391 The next submission of the learned Counsel for the Petitioner was

d1at die Petitioner had only supplied labour services to Kandy Plantations

Ltd as mentioned in die certificate and thus, die Petitioner could not be

given d1e status of an "employer" wid lin die me,Uling of die Act..

1401 At die hearing, die learned State Counsel brought to our attention to

d1e statements made by die Petitioner, certain workers and die

Representatives of Kandy PI;Ult;ltions Ltd before the Conm1issioner of

Labour prior to the certificate was filed in Court marked Pl. The learned

State Counsel subnutted dlat in the proceeding before die learned

Magistrate, die Petitioner had not denied die statement made by him to die

Commissioner or challenged die odler statements recorded by die

Commissioner at die C;ullpaha Labour Office prior to die issuance of die

certificate.

141\ A pemsal of die statement made by die Representative of Kandy

Pl;Ultations Ltd at page 145 of die brief reveals dlat dlere was a Wlitten

agreement between die Petitioner and Kandy PI;Ultations Ltd for d1e

supply of labour services to die said Company by die Petitioner and in

terms of die said written agreement (i) die contractor (die Petitioner) was

obliged to pay die wages to die workers and d1e EPF contributions; (ii)

weekly payments were made by die Comp;UlY to die contractor according

to die number of coconut~ husked by die workers; (iii) Kandy Plantations

Ltd was not involved in die supervision of die works perlonned by die

workers; (iv) d1e contractor was required to use his OWlI equipment lor die

works performed by the workers.

1421 The Petitioner has not however, produced any such an agreement or

provided ;Uly material and information to establish iliat he had contracted

with K,Uldy Plantations Ltd only for the supply of labour and Ius Palt of d1e

work ended after collecting die payments from die COmpailY alld

( 1'.\003919 CPA 11(' Campaha (I~cv.) 1\0. 11116 'I.e. Mta""g"lIa No. 900081LB

tJlerefore, he was not obliged to pay tJle EPF contributions to the workers

in question.

14:~1 The le,mled State Counsel further submitted tJlat tJle Petitioner in his

statement made to tJle Commissioner at tJle Labour Olliee marked P I at

page I 19 of tJle brief has admitted tJlat he exercised the control over tJle

workmen supplied by him to the Comp;UlY, paid wages ,Uld 8% perc-enct of

EPF contributions, given instructions to tJle workers. She submitted tJlat

under such circumstances, the ie;mled Ma!,>lstrate had correctJy ;Ulalysed

the said statements and determined tJlat tJle Petitioncr had not only

supplied tJle labour to K'Uldy Plantations Ltd but also had control over tJle

workers and tJIUS, tJle Petitioner I;dls within tJle delition of tJlC "employer"

in scc-tion ;[,7 of the Employees' Provident Fund Act.

1441 A perusal of tJle Petitioner's statement made to the Labour

Commission (PI) reveals tJlat (i) he had registered himself at die

Kuliyapitiya Labour Ollice as an EPF Contributing Member and obtained

the EPF Contributing Memhership Cilnl No. 162;[,;[, Ii'om the KuliyapitiYil

Labour OHice; (ii) he ohtained the services of tJle 40 employees on a

contract basis by the end of 20 I 0 and supplied tJleir labour services at the

Mahawatta Estate owned by Kandy Plantations Ltd; (iii) the employees

wcre assigned v;u'ious functions in the coconut Estate by him ;Uld dleir

sa];uies were paid by him at the rate of Rs. 325/- to 350/- per day; (iv) hc

deducted 8% of die EPF contribution li'om tJleir sahu'ies till April 2008 and

tJle Company agreed to PilY die bal,lI1ce percentage; (v) he repaid die said

8% of the EPF contribution deducted [i'om tJleir sa.l;uies and a.ller May

2008, he did not deduct EPF contributions li'om their sal,u'ies ;IS tJle

Company failed to pay die ha.l'Ulce contrihution as promied.

1151 A perusal of the Magistrate's Court record ;Uld the order of the

leamed Ma!,>lstrate reveals tJlat tJle Petitioncr has not denied t.lle statement

( 1',\-01J39-\9 CP\ lie (;:uupaha (Hev.) i\o. 11 / 16 ,I.e. Atlanagalla No. 900081L11

made by him to the L,bour Otfice marked PI as correctly submitted by

the leiU-ned State Counsel. The statement of tlle Petitioner before tlle

L,bour Commissioner cleiU-ly contradicts his own defence that he merely

supplied labour services to KiUxly Pl;mtations Ltd iUld tl1Us, he only played

a passive role of suppl)~ng labour sen~ces to tlle CompiU1Y. If tlle

Petitioner merely supplied labour sen~ces, collected his commssion and

leli. all die odler matters to be decided by KiUldy PliUltations Ltd iUld die

workers, surely, dlere was no reason for him to actively engaged in

deducting 8% of die EPF contributions fj-Olll dIe salaries of workers

supplied by him to die Comp,my, decide dIe rates of wages made to dIe

workers iUld pay dleir weekJy wages.

1461 The statements made by die workers at pages 116148 of dIe brief

furdler reveal dlat dley were recruited as labourers by dIe Petitioner ,U1d

attached to dIe Mallawatta Estate for plucking coconuts, removing die

husks of coconut ,U1d loading COCOllut nuts into lorries iUld tlleir weekJy

wages were paid by tlle Petitioner. Having considered tlle titets and die

circumst;ulces including tlle statements miU-ked PI , dIe leall1ed Magistrate

has decided ulat dIe dIe piUt of die work pertoIl11ed by the Petitioner was

not confined to ule supply of labour but actively enagage in die control of

the workers, determination ,U1d payment of wages ,U1d deducting EPF

contributions from uleir salaries and dillS, the Commissioner has cOlTected

decided dlat dIe Petitioner is dIe "employer" widlin die meiUling of section

47 of the EPF Act. Her findings at page 9 of die order are as follows:

@@J@ 0)0100 ql2tl 12tl6 ElW t:J@J(5)CJ ocle)=i5 (Xe:JC5@)

@t:ilJei}Q)Jo1oxX@Eltl) @@el reO) ~ 00 q~6l 00 oo~ OOlJel eJ@

@del~ t:l@Er05~ ~ eJJ@iX:l 6m@@) ~ = El~~e:J" !;l@JliJD 00

ffi6liJDc:J 00 @(5)e:l@@ 0l0gCi) @@e;) @ ocle)Ol efM t:JJG)0l ef6@e.@ ~

OOgtl) ~ reO) eJSei) 8s:. 00 ef~6l 00 =Ja 00 EV~ @e5ElJ c:J:ld=

(I'A-0039-19 CPA IlC Gampaha (Ilev.) :-'0. 11 /16 ,\I.e. AUanagalla No. 90008/LB

e:>I3d@OO ~t1J t1J@ tilC5 e:J~@i!I3OO~ 00eD &~e:> t1J6 t'1~61 )OO

at:i)@:JaJ t:D6@.

1171 The m,UlIler in which the Petitioner had dealt widl the workers clearly

point to a contract of service between the Petitioner ,md tJle workers as the

lilCts ,md tJle circumst,mces dearly establish tJle following matters:

I. All workers were directly recruited by die Petitioner lor tile purpose

providing a labour service tu Kimdy Plantations Ltd ,md not a single

worker was recruited by K,mdy Pl,mtations Ltd;

2. The Petitioner had exercised dIe supervision ,lIIeI overall control of

tlle workers, including their disciplin,u), action and K,mdy

PI<Ultations Ltd had notlling to do witll dIe supervision or control

,md disciplinaJ)' control of tile workers;

:~. The Petitioner had exercised the right of assignment of work tu each

worker in tile Mahawatta Estate of K,mdy Pl;mtations Ltd including

plucking and removing the outer skins of coconuts and loading

coconut nuts into Lorries;

4. The determination of rates of wages ,md payment of wages to the

workers was determined by the Petitioner ,lIId no material or

int<>rIlIation was provided by die Petitioner to eSl<1.blish dlat tJle rates

of payments were determined on die basis of tJle recommendations

and directions made by K,uuly Plantations Ltd;

5. K,lI1dy Pl,lI1tations Ltd only made payments to tile Petitioner

according to tJle works peli<Jrlned by tJle workers employed by the

Petitioner ,lIId the workers had no cont;lC! witll Kandy PI<Ultations

Ltd other dlall to work ill tile Estate according to die directions given

by tJle Petitioner

('1'\ IlC Gampaha (Ilev.) No. 11116 \I.e. A(IlInagalia ~o. ?0008/LB

6. The workers had all worked on behalf of dIe Petitioner ;U1d dillS,

dley were p;ut and parcel of die business of die Petitioner.

11\.81 I ,U11 of die view dlat in die light of dIe aforesaid filets and

circumst;U1ces, die mere supply of labour services to kandy Plantations Ltd

and collection of payments to be paid to the workers are insufIicient to

hold dlat die Petitioner had acted as a passive service provider for dIe

supply of labour and his p;u1 of work ended upon collecting dIe payment

from K;mdy PI;U1tations Ltd to be tramnsmitted to dIe workers.

11(,91 I hold dlat on die facts and circumstances of die case, a relationship of

die employer-employee between dIe Petitioner and the workers has been

cle;u'ly established not only by die application of die test of 'contTol', but

also by dIe test of 'integration', dlat is, dlat the workers were p;ut ;uld p;u'Cel

of the Petitioner's business.

1501 It seems dlat die le;u'ned High Court .Judge has not specifically

referred to die decision of die Supreme Court in Ceyloll Merchillltile

l lnioll v Ceylon Femlizer Co/pora/ioll (supra). I find, however, Ulat ule

le;mled High Court Judge has held that dIe order of the le;u'ned Magistrate

has dealt widl all filcts and circumst,U1ces of die case ;uld applied die legal

principles laid down in decided cases, dlat is ;Ul obvious reference to

Ceylon Merchilnule l fnion v. Ceylon Fertilizer Co/porauoll. This seems to

be the case referred to by die le;u'ned Magistrate in her order. In dIe light

of very strong tindings of Ule le;mled Mah>1Sn-ate, die le;u'ned High Court

.J udge found no reason to intelfere widl her order.

1511 It is to be noted dlat in Ceyloll MerciJanuie Ullion v. Ceyloll Fe/1jjizer

COIporauoll, ule minority judl,'lllent held ulat Ule conn'actor had actively

engaged in working ;U1d putting into practice die teI1llS of its conn'act R6

and hence, he was not merely ;U1 agent for die supply of labour ;md

( I' \-0039-19 CPA lie Campaha (Ile\'.) :-0. 11/16 " I.e. Altana~all" '10.90008/1.8

collection of agency commsisoll. The m;\jority of the judges held that the

limited supervision eqjoyed by the contractor fllr the t:r<lIIsmission of the

payment made by dIe CO'l)or,ttion to the workers without performing ,lilY

specific sen~ces is insuflicient to spell a contract of services.

1521 It W,tS not dIe position of the Petitioner that he had entered into a

written agreement with Kandy Pl;lIItations Ltd and acted as an agent of

Kandy Plantations Ltd lor dIe supply of labour and his contract ended after

collecting dIe agency colllmission. His defence is dlat he merely supplied

labourers to K,lIIdy Plantations Ltd and dIUS, he cannot be regarded as ;1II

"employer" of dIe workers widlin the meaning of section 1.7 of dIe Act.

The le;u'ned Magistrate, in my view, has correcdy considered dIe legal

principles laid down in Ceylon Meuhiwtile ["lion v. Ceylon FemJixer

Corpor;ltJoll (supra) and distinguished the filets of dIe said case !i'om the

present case on die basis dlat the Petitioner is not a person who had merely

provided labour services to Kandy Plantations Ltd ,Uld collected payments

to be t:r;lIIlsmitting to dIe workers, but actively engaged in working and

putting into practice his contractual relationship with dIe workers as shown

in the statement m,u'ked PI.

1531 The Petitioner has failed, in my view, to convince dlis Court dlat in

dIe light of dIe stJ'Ong findings of dIe learned Magistrate dlat a contract of

service between dIe workers ,lIId the Petitioner has been established, as to

how dIe mere lailure of dIe learned High Court Judge to specifically refer

to dIe said decision could have vitiated dIe order of dIe le;u-ned Mal,ristrate.

151.1 For those reasons, I hold dlat dIe le;u'ned Magistrate has ,lIIalysed the

racts and circumstances of dIe case and correcdy come to dIe conclusion

dlat the Petitioner is ;1II "employer" widlin dIe meaning of section 17 of dIe

EPF Act and dial he had detilulted in the payment EPF dues to the

( "'\-0039-19 CPA lie C"mpah" (Rev.) r-o. 11116 ,\1.(. Att""ag,,lIa NQ. 90008!Lll

workers in question. Under such circumstances, the learned High COUlt

./udge cannot be f;ll1lted for aJlirming Ule said well-considered order.

Failure to obseIVe the rules of natural justice

1551 It was Ule contention of the leamed Counsel for Ule Petitioner Ulat

the learned High COUll./ udge had (;tiled to consider in ltis order Ulat Ule

Respondent had f;tiled to hold a formal inquiry for Ule identification of Ule

real employer of Ule workers in violation of Ule rules of natural justice. He

further submitted Ulat Ule procedure adopted by Ule Commissioner to

merely record statements wiUlOut atlording an opportunity to cross

examine Ule persons who made statements to Ule Commissioner at a

formal inquilY amounts to a nullity of Ule certificate issued by Ule

Commissioner. He relied on two decisions of Ule Supreme Court in

Ceylon Pnilters Ltd ;Uld Allodler v. Wee/<ikooll, Commissioner 0lL7bour

;Uld Odlen (1998 (2) Sri LR 29 ,lI1d Kusumawadlle alld Odlen v Aitken

Spence ;Uld Co. Ltd (1996 (2) Sri LR 18) and complained Ulat in addition,

Ule Commissioner has failed to give reasons for his decision

1561 Ceylon PrillteJ:5 Ltd and Anodler I~ Wee/,Moon, Commissioner 0/

1~7bollr and OdJeJ:5 (supra) concerned a writ application filed in Ule Court

of Appeal under Ule Termination of Employment of Workmen (Special

Provisions) Act. The issue Ulat ,u-ose was whether Ule failure to consider

Ule material produced at Ule inquilY and give an opportunity of challenging

Ule new matelial and tailure to give reasons amounts to non-compliance

wiul Ule rules of natural justice. It was held Ulat Ule such failures amounted

to a breach of Ule principles of natural justice.

1571 KusumawadJle alld OdJeJ:5 v. AitRell Spence and Co. Ltd (supra) was

also a writ application tiled under section 2 of Ule Termination of

Employment of Workmen (Special provisions) Act No. 45 of 1971. The

CI'.\-0039-19 CPA HC GlImpahll (Ilc\'.) r-o. 11116 M.e. AUlI":lgaUa No. 90008/LB

..

issue was whether in the absence of a specilic statutory requirement to give

reasons, die Commissioner has to communicate his reasons in compliance

widl die principles of nat1lral justice. The Court of Appeal held dlat die

linding tllat there is no stat1ltory requirement in law to give reasons should

not be construed as a gateway to ,lrbitr;u-y decisions and orders.

1581 This is not a writ application seeking to challenge die administrative

decision of the Commissioner lor wrongJully making tJle Petitioner liable

liJr EPF dues in violation of the principle of nat1lral justice. This is a

revision application seeking to sct aside the judgment of die High COlut

.I udge allirming the order of the learned Ma!,ristTatc made in proceedings

instituted under section 38 (2) of t:lle EPF Acl.

1591 Section a8 of die Act prescribes two modes of recovel-Y of EPF dues.

Sub-section (I) of Section 38 states that "where ,U1 employer makes de!~\Ult

in the payment of ,U1y sum which he is liable to pay under tJlis Act ,U1el the

Commissioner is of opinion tat rccovel-Y tmder section 17 of the Act is

impracticable ,md inexpedient, he may issue a certiJicate to the Dist:rict

COlut ,md t:lle court shall t:llereupon direct a writ of execution to issue to

t:lle Fiscal aut:llorizing ,md requiring him to seise ,md sell all t:lle property,

movable and immovable of t:lle del;tulting employer.

1601 Sub-section (2) of section a8 provides that where an employer makes

debult in the payment of any sum which he is liable to pay under t:llis Act

and t:lle Commissioner is of opinion t:llat it is impracticable ,lI1d

inexpedient to recover t:llat sum under section 17 or under sub-section (J)

or where the ItIlI ,Ullount due has not been recovered by seizure ,U1d sale,

then he may issue a celtificate containing p,u-ticulars of the sum so due

from t:lle debulting employer to t:lle Magistrate having jurisdiction.

CI'A-0039-19 CP\ IIC Campalla (Ilc".) ~o. 11 /16 \1.('. Alta"agalla No. 9000S/Lil

1611 As noted, Ule con-ectness of ,Uly statement in a certificate issued by Ule

Conunissioner for Ule purposes of Uus section shall not be called in

question or examined by Ule COUlt in ,lilY proceeedings under utis section

,lIld such certificate shall be suHicient evidence Ulat Ule amount due under

Ulis Act Ii-om Ule defaulting employer has been duly calculated and Ulat

such ,ullounl is in default

1621 The Act is silent, however, as to Ule requirement of holding an inquiry

before determining wheUler Ule employer has debulted in Ule payment of

EPF contTibutions ,Uld before tiling a certificate in Ule Ma!,ristrate's Court

Tltis may not preclude Ule Commissioner from exercising a discretion and

aflording Ule employer a he;u'ing in ,Uly foml before deciding Ule

procedure set out in section 38 (1) or 38 (2) of Ule Act, to clarify his

position before Ule Commissioner. In Ule present case, Ule Commissioner

had alTorded ,lIl opportunity to Ule Petitioner to present IDS case and

recorded his statement as well as oUler statements to asceltain Ule nature of

his relationslup wiul Ule workers and decide wheUler Ule Petitioner is Ule

employer of the workers (P 1).

1631 On Ule material placed before the Commissioner, Ule Commissioner

had formed his opinion Ulat Ule Petitioner being Ule employer of Ule

workers in question had defimlted in Ule payment of EPF dues to Ule said

workers and correcUy issued Ule certificate under section 38 (2) of Ule Act

161\.1 Where it is alleged Ulal a Commissioner had exercised his discretion

wrongfully in violation of Ule rules of natural justice as it is claimed by Ule

Petitioner in Ulis revision application, such decision ought to be challenged

in writ proceedings where Ule principles of adminisll-ative law principles

are applicable. As noted, Ule scope of Ule defences Ulat are av;tilable to an

employer in proceedings instituted under section 38(2) ,u-e limited to 4

Cl'c\-0039-19 CPA lie G:tmpah:t (It .. .) r.o. II /I(, M.e. Atta"agana No. 9000S/LB

..

'.

delences and hence, any question whedler the COIllmissioner has

exercised his discretion correcdy or he has I;uled to lollow evelY aspect of

procedure are not matters that GUI be r,lised in proceedings instituted

helore a Ma!,';strate under section :1S(2) of the Act.

1651 On die odler h,Uld, the Petitioner had been alhmled every

opportunity by the le;u'ned Magistrate of Atlanagalla to show cause ag;unst

dle recovelY of the SUill mentioned in die certilicate ;lI1d to challenge die

certiticate on die basis that he had no contractual relationship with the

workers ,lI1d thus, he is not die employer under section 1\7 of t.he Act.

1661 In my view, die Petitioner has I;uled to establish that he is not die

employer of dIe workers in question ,lI1d thus, he is liable to pay the EPf

dues to the workers whose n,Ulles appear in the schedule to die certificate

issued under section as (I) of dIe Act as correctly decided by the learned

MagistTate.

Failure to consider exceptional circumstances by dJe learned High Court

Judge

1671 The tinal suhmission of the le,u'ned Counsel lor dIe Petitioner was

dlat the failure ofdle learned High COlnt.ludge to consider dle exceptional

circumst,lI1ces pleaded by die Petitioner in the Petition filed in die High

Court ;lI1lOunt~ to a misGuTiage of justice. The tinal question t.o be

considered is whedler there ;u'e exceptional circlImstances amounting to a

positive misc;uTiage of justice calling lor the intervention of dlis Court by

way of revision.

1681 In Rflsheed Ali v. Molwlled Ali (1981) I Sri LR 262 (CA) SOZ;l.J.

referring to dIe decisions in AlllkoJ"flie v. S;ullYJI:ldl;W (1939) 1\,1 N.L.R.

165, SlIva v. SIlvfl (194:1) 1\,4, N.L.R. 1\" Fem;wdo v. Fem<Lndo (1969) 72

('1'\-0039-19 CPA 11(' (;"mpaha (Hev.) No. 11 /16 M.e ,\ (fa"agalla No. ?0008/I.B

N.L.R. 549 and Rustow v. HapaJlgawa (1978-79 (2) Sli LR 225) stated at

page 34 that "it is well established that the powers of revision confen'ed on

this Court are very wide and the Comt has dle discretion to exercise dlem

whedler ,U1 appeal lies or not or whedler ,U1 appeal where it lies has been

taken or not. But dlis discretionary remedy c<U1 be invoked only where

dlere are exceptional circumstances wiUTanting die intervention of dle

COlllt."

l(iC)1 On appeal to the Supreme Court, \VanasundcraJ., while atlirming the

"ielVs expressed by Soza.J. staled in Rashccd Ali 1'. Afoh;ullcd Ali (l ~)81) I

Sri LR 262 (SC) at page 265:

'''Illc JJOWCJ:\" Orn'I'i5ioll vcslcd Iii thc COIllI 01 Appcal arc I'el}' widc alld the GOUlI call Iii a Iii Ci/se exerci;'e Iha/powcr whether or I/O' ;U/ ilppcal lies. HThcn~ Ille law docs 110 1 r;il'e a ni ht oFappeal ilJld Illakcs the order filial. thc COllll or Appeal may lIel'crllleless exenise ils powcn of rCli<;J()JJ, btll Ii should do so ollly Iii exceptiollal

ninllllstilIlCt'S ... . :

1701 In Rtlstom I '. Hi/pill/gam" 1971\-79-110 I Sri LR :~52 (SC). IsmailJ, at

page 360 staled:

"7"e trclld of illldlOJ7fy deady lildJ"cilles dIal where die revisionillY powers of die COll/l of Appeal a]'(~ liJlloku/, dIe practice has been

that dlese poweJ:5 will be exercised Il'dlere is iIII altemative remedy

aVill/able only Ji' dle existence of spedal circumst;mces are urged neccssifillJilg dIC lildulgence 01' tllls court to exerCIse its powers III revision ':

17 11 As noted. ule Petitioner has bibl to adduce sullicient material to

e~tahlish tllat he had no contract or service widl the workers in question as

he had onl" supplied labour senlces to KiUHiy PI,lIltation Ltd or there was

a gl;u'ing defect in the procedure before the Magistrate or a m,lIlilest error

in law in tlle order or the learned Magistrate or ule High Court Judge

<1'.'.-0039-19 ('1'.\ 11(' Camp.ha (Hev.) />0. 11116 M.e. A11.nag,,"" No. 90008/LB

.'

,

which has re,lIlied in l1a~r<lnt JlllSC<lrna~c of ,iusticc. l ndcr ,uch

circulllstanccs, the learned Hi~h COllli JlId~c has c()[Tl'l'tly held that the

Petitioncr has I;liled to estahlish the existence of cxceptional circumstiU1ces

W<uTiUltin); the intervention of UIC High Court.

1721 I hold Ulat Ule Pctitioner hilS I;tiled to establish the existcnce of

exceptional circumstiU1ces <Ullountin); to a posi6ve misl'<uTiage of jus6ce

calling I()r Ule intervention of this Court by way of revision under AI1icle

138 of Ule Constitu60n.

Conclusion

1731 For UIOSC reasons, I do not see mcrit in ,U1y 01' Ule grounds urged by

Ule leiU"lled Counsel for Ule Pctitioner. I accordingly, allirm Ule order of

the learned Magistrate dated 20.11.2015 and Ule judi,'lllent of UIC lc;U"lled

High Court.Judge dated 02.01( .. 2019.

In Ule result, Ule Peti60ner's revision applica60n is dismissed WiUl costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Shiran Gooneratne J.

[ ai,'lee.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

('1'.\-0039-19 CP \ IIC (;:lIllpaha (Ile .. ) '\0. 11 /16 \I,e. \tlaoa~a l ll' '1;0. 90008/LB