==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/PHC/0033/2019

Page 1 of 16

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

Assistant Commissioner of Corporative Development, (Kandy District), Department of Central Province Corporative Development. Ehelepola Kumarihamy Road, Bogambara, Kandy.

Plaintiff

Vs.

Central Province Vehicle Dealing Cooperative Society Limited, No 172/4/A, Miniruwan, Kudagalawatta, Polgolla. Presently at No 207, D. S. Senanayaka Street, Kandy.

Defendant Cooperative Society

1. Amal Pradeep Jayasinghe,

No 90/2, Aniwaththa, Kandy. 2. L. N.S. Naurunna,

No 02, Sirimalwaththa, Gunnepana. 3. M.K. Weerasinghe,

No 32, Bahirawakanda Lane, Asgiriya, Kandy. 4. S. M. S. Herath,

Dodamwala road, Asgiriya, Kandy.

Court of Appeal Case No:CA/PHC/0033/2019 Kandy High Court Case No: HC(APPEAL)02/2019 Kandy Magistrate Court Case No: 9549

CA/PHC/0033/2019

Page 2 of 16

Presently at NO 207, D. S. Senanayaka Street, Kandy.

Notice received Respondents

AND BETWEEN

1. Central Province Vehicle Dealing

Cooperative Society Limited, No 172/4/A, Miniruwan, Kudagalawatta, Polgolla. Presently at No 207, D. S. Senanayaka Street, Kandy.

Defendant-Appellant Vs.

2. Amal Pradeep Jayasinghe,

No 90/2, Aniwaththa, Kandy. 3. L. N.S. Naurunna,

No 02, Sirimalwaththa, Gunnepana. 4. M. K. Weerasinghe,

No 32, Bahirawakanda Lane, Asgiriya, Kandy.

2nd to 4th Appellants Vs.

Assistant Commissioner of Corporative Development, (Kandy District), Department of Central Province Corporative Development. Ehelepola Kumarihamy Road, Bogambara, Kandy.

Plaintiff-Respondent

CA/PHC/0033/2019

Page 3 of 16

2. S. M. S. Herath,

Dodamwala road, Asgiriya, Kandy. Presently at NO 207, D. S. Senanayaka Street, Kandy.

2nd Respondent AND NOW BETWEEN

1. Central Province Vehicle Dealing

Cooperative Society Limited, No 172/4/A, Miniruwan, Kudagalawatta, Polgolla. Presently at NO 207, D.S.Senanayaka Street, Kandy.

Defendant-Appellant-Appellant

2. Amal Pradeep Jayasinghe,

No 90/2, Aniwaththa, Kandy. 3. L. N.S. Naurunna,

No 02, Sirimalwaththa, Gunnepana. 4. M. K. Weerasinghe,

No 32, Bahirawakanda Lane, Asgiriya, Kandy. Notice Received 2nd to 4thAppellants-Appellants

Vs.

Assistant Commissioner of Corporative Development, (Kandy District), Department of Central Province Corporative Development.

CA/PHC/0033/2019

Page 4 of 16

Ehelepola Kumarihamy Road, Bogambara, Kandy.

Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent

2. S. M. S. Herath,

Dodamwala road, Asgiriya, Kandy. Presently at NO 207, D. S. Senanayaka Street, Kandy.

2nd Respondent-Respondent AND NOW BETWEEN

In the matter of an application for re-listing under and in terms of section 769(2) of the Civil Procedure Code. 1. Central Province Vehicle Dealing

Cooperative Society Limited, No 172/4/A, Miniruwan, Kudagalawatta, Polgolla. Presently at NO 207, D.S.Senanayaka Street, Kandy.

Defendant-Appellant-Appellant

2. Amal Pradeep Jayasinghe,

No 90/2, Aniwaththa, Kandy. 3. L. N.S. Naurunna,

No 02, Sirimalwaththa, Gunnepana.

4. M. K. Weerasinghe,

No 32, Bahirawakanda Lane, Asgiriya, Kandy. Notice Received 2nd to 4thAppellants-Appellants

CA/PHC/0033/2019

Page 5 of 16

Vs.

Assistant Commissioner of Corporative Development, (Kandy District), Department of Central Province Corporative Development. Ehelepola Kumarihamy Road, Bogambara, Kandy.

Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent

2. S. M. S. Herath,

Dodamwala road, Asgiriya, Kandy. Presently at NO 207, D. S. Senanayaka Street, Kandy.

2nd Respondent-Respondent Before: D. THOTAWATTA, J. K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J. Counsel: Priyantha Alagiyawanna with Sahan Gunasekara instructed by Bushra Hashim for the Defendant-Petitioner-Appellant.

Shemanthi Dunuwille S.C. instructed by Dr Rizni Firdous, S.S.A. for the Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent. Argued on : 04.09.2025 Written Submissions of the 1st Defendant- -Appellant-Appellant and the 2nd , 3rd and the 4th Appellants-Appellants tendered on : 03.10.2025

CA/PHC/0033/2019

Page 6 of 16

Written Submissions of the Plaintiff-Respondent -Respondent and the 2nd Respondent-Respondent tendered on : Not tendered. Decided on : 24.10.2025

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Being aggrieved by the order made by the learned Magistrate of Kandy dated

22.01.2019, the 1st Defendant-Appellant and the 2nd, 3rd and 4th Appellants

had preferred an appeal to the Provincial High Court of the Central Province

holden in Kandy and the learned High Court Judge of the Provincial High

Court of the Central Province had by his order dated 15.03.2019, dismissed it

on the basis that right of appeal from the said order of the learned Magistrate

of Kandy was not available to the Appellants. Being aggrieved by the said order

of the learned High Court Judge, the 1st Defendant-Appellant-Appellant and

the 2nd, 3rd and 4th Appellants–Appellants had preferred an appeal therefrom to

this Court. When this matter came on before this Court on 30.01.2024, this

Court had dismissed the appeal without costs for want of appearance of the

Defendant-Appellant-Appellant and the 2nd, 3rd and 4th Appellants-Appellants

in Court on that day. Thereafter, the 1st Defendant-Appellant-Appellant and the

2nd, 3rd and 4th Appellants-Appellants had made an application to this Court

seeking to set aside the order of this Court dated 30.01.2024 dismissing the

instant appeal for want of appearance of the 1st Defendant-Appellant-Appellant

and the 2nd, 3rd and 4th Appellants-Appellants in Court on that day and to have

it re-listed for hearing. At the hearing into the application for re-listing, this

Court heard Counsel in support of their respective positions so adverted to by

them and the 1st Defendant-Appellant-Appellant and the 2nd, 3rd and 4th

Appellants–Appellants had afterwards, furnished written submissions to this

Court.

CA/PHC/0033/2019

Page 7 of 16

I would think it expedient at this juncture to examine the law governing an

application for re-listing.

Rule embodied in Sub-Rules (1) and (2) of the Rule 7 of the Court of Appeal

(Procedure for Appeals from High Courts) Rules 1988, Published in the Extra-

Ordinary Gazette of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka bearing No

549/6 of 13.03.1989 to be read with Sub-Rule (1) of Rule 2 thereof, would be

the Rule that would in my opinion, be relevant and pertinent in this regard and

therefore, not the section 769(2) of the Civil Procedure Code as relied on by the

Appellants in their application for re-listing for; the instant appeal had arisen

from an order made by the Provincial High Court in the exercise of the

Appellate Jurisdiction vested in it by Article 154P(3)(b)of the Constitution to be

read with section 5 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act

No. 19 of 1990, and they may be reproduced verbatim the same as follows;

“7(1) When the appeal comes on for hearing, the appellant if present,

shall be first heard in support of the appeal and then the respondent if

present shall be heard against it.

(2) If the appellant does not appear to support his appeal, the Court shall

consider the appeal and may make such order thereon as it may deem

fit.”

Having cited the relevant Rule, let me now, examine the binding judicial

precedents applicable in this regard.

It was held in Packiyanathan Vs. Singarajah-1991 [2] Sri L.R 205 at page

209 that,

“Relief will not be granted for default in prosecuting an appeal where,

(a) the default has resulted from the negligence of the client or both the

client and his attorney-at-law,

CA/PHC/0033/2019

Page 8 of 16

(b) the default has resulted from the negligence of the attorney-at-law in

which event the principle is that the negligence of the attorney-at-law is

the negligence of the client and the client must suffer for it.”

It was further held in Packiyanathan Vs. Singarajah (Supra) at page 205 that,

“A mere mistake can generally be excused; but not negligence, especially

continuing negligence. The decision will depend on the facts and circumstances

of each case. The Court will in granting relief ensure that its order will not

condone or in any manner encourage the neglect of professional duties

expected of Attorneys-at-Law.”

It was held in Pakir Mohideen Vs. Mohamadu Casim- 04 N.L.R 299 that, “If

the Proctor did not do his duty, he is to blame for the absence of the defendant

and the defendant must suffer for the fault of his position.”

Similarly, it was held in Schareguivel v Orr [1926] 11 N.L.R 302, that, “To my

mind facts indicate that there was negligence on the part of the proctor and not

personal negligence on the part of the Plaintiff. That however is immaterial. The

plaintiff must suffer for his proctor's negligence. This is clearly laid down by

Bonser CJ in Pakir Mohideen v Mohamadu Cassim (4 NLR 299).”

It was held in Appuhamy Vs. Appuhamy 14 N.L.R. 233 at page 236 that, “The

Court has undoubtedly a discretion as to whether or not an appeal shall be

dismissed, when it is first called for hearing, on the ground of non-appearance,

and we exercise that discretion every day”.

In Jinadasa and another Vs. Sam Silva and Others [1994] 1 Sri L.R. 232 it

was held at page 248 that, “A judge must ensure a prompt disposition of cases,

emphasising that dates given by the court, including dates set out in “lists”

published by a court’s registry, for hearing or other purposes, must be

regarded by the parties and their counsel as definite court appointments. No

postponements must be granted, or absence excused, except upon emergencies

occurring after the fixing of the date, which could not have been anticipated or

CA/PHC/0033/2019

Page 9 of 16

avoided with reasonable diligence, and which cannot be otherwise provided

for.”

The Court in Jinadasa and another Vs. Sam Silva and Others (Supra) had

cited the Abdul Aziz v. Punjab National Bank [AIR 1929 Lahore 96, 99,

100], where Court had stated that, “In this connection due regard must be had

to the nature of duties of counsel towards his other clients and the other

courts. At the same time the court cannot be expected to give unlimited or

unreasonable latitude to counsel in this respect. Counsel is ordinarily expected

to be ready in court when the case is called and it is no good excuse to say he

was busy elsewhere.”

In Kanagasabai Vs. Kirupamoorthy 62 N.L.R. 45, while elucidating that if

parties are required by law or by court to be present, then they must be

present, Court had held at page 58 that, “Where, as in this case, the party is

required to appear in person and he does not do so, then he must suffer the

consequences of his non-appearance. It is not sufficient to say that he gave a

proxy to a Proctor and that the Proctor failed to appear by an “oversight”.

It was held in D.S Ranaweera Vs. W.W.P Jinadasa and another [1992] BAL

Vol.IV, Part II at page 20 that, “Dealing instead, in the matter before it, with a

mere invocation for the assistance of the Court of Appeal in the exercise of its

discretion, the court had an uncontrolled power of disposal, so long as that

power was not exercised in transgression of the law and legal principles, and so

long as it was not actuated by whim or caprice, and exercised in good faith.”

In Shamdasani and others Vs. Central Bank of India, [1938 Bombay 199]

at page 202 it was held that, “It is, after all, a very serious matter to dismiss a

man’s suit or summons, or whatever if may be, without hearing it, and that

course ought not be adopted unless the court is really satisfied that justice so

requires.”

CA/PHC/0033/2019

Page 10 of 16

If the court is to wield its discretion to dismiss a case without hearing, such

must be done to meet the ends of justice. In D.S Ranaweera Vs. W.W.P

Jinadasa and another (Supra) it was held that “‘the needs of justice’ go

beyond the narrow interest of justice one or all of litigants in a matter and it

was further held at page 21 that, “The needs and expectations of the

community as a whole in the due administration of justice must be considered.

Interest rei publicae ut sit finis litum.” It was further held at page 23 that “the

Court would order reinstatement in an application dismissed for want of

appearance only if the defaulting party furnished the court with a

‘comprehensive and satisfactory disclosure of all attendant circumstances”.

It was inter-alia, held in Jinadasa and another Vs. Sam Silva and Others

(Supra), at page 250 that, “The court may have reinstated the matter upon

such terms as to costs or otherwise as it thought fit, yet it could only do so if

sufficient cause for reinstatement had been established.”

It was inter-alia, held in Jinadasa and another Vs. Sam Silva and Others

(Supra), at page 233 that, “A court will hold that there was sufficient cause if

the facts and circumstances established as forming the grounds for absence

are not absurd, ridiculous, trifling or irrational but sensible, sane, and without

expecting too much, agreeable to reason.”

The law governing an application for re-listing of an appeal dismissed for want

of appearance of the Appellant in Court as can be deducible from the above

binding judicial precedents, may be laid down as follows;

a) The Court has undoubtedly, a discretion as to whether or not an appeal

shall be dismissed, when it is first called for hearing, on the ground of non-

appearance, and the Court exercises that discretion every day;

b) If, the parties are required by law or by Court to be present, then, they must

be present, and where, as in this case, the party is required to appear in

person and he does not do so, then, he must suffer the consequences of his

CA/PHC/0033/2019

Page 11 of 16

non-appearance. It is not sufficient to say that he gave a proxy to an Attorney-

At-Law;

c) When, an Attorney-At-Law fails to appear by an “oversight”, the Court would

order reinstatement in an application dismissed for want of appearance only if

the defaulting party furnishes the court with a ‘comprehensive and satisfactory

disclosure of all attendant circumstances”;

d) The Court may reinstate the matter upon such terms as to costs or

otherwise as it thinks fit, yet, it can only do so if sufficient cause for

reinstatement has been established;

e) A Court will hold that there was sufficient cause if the facts and

circumstances established as forming the grounds for absence are not absurd,

ridiculous, trifling or irrational but sensible, sane, and without expecting too

much, agreeable to reason.

It is in this context, let me now, consider the facts and circumstances that led

this Court to have by its order dated 30.01.2024, dismissed the instant appeal.

It is in this endeavour, I would think it most appropriate and necessary to

reproduce verbatim the same the minutes of this Court pertaining to

30.01.2024 in its totality as contained in the record and it reads thus;

“Appellant is not present and had not been present for some time.

However, on 18/12/2023 there is a minute to say that the Appellant's

lawyer bearing a letter, received the brief from the office.

The letter mentioned carries the seal of Mr. Bushra Hassim as the

Attorney-at-Law and the letter instruct to hand over the brief to

Hewayalage Shashikala Madhuwanthi Jayaratne, the Junior lawyer of

Mr. Bushra Hassim.

There is no appearance of anyone in this Court today, neither the Senior

Lawyer nor the Junior lawyer is present.

CA/PHC/0033/2019

Page 12 of 16

The Court has issued notices on the Appellant on two occasions.

Since the Appellant has not taken interest to appear and present this

case, we dismiss this application without costs.

Proceedings are terminated.”

Upon a careful scrutiny of the minutes of Court pertaining to 30.01.2024 as

reproduced above, it manifestly, appears without any doubt that, neither the

Appellants nor the senior or junior Attorney-At-Law for the Appellants were

present in Court on that day, despite notices being issued on them directing

them to be present in Court on that date; and that they had not been present

in Court not only on that day, namely; 30.01.2024, but also had they not been

present in Court for sometime even though brief had been collected by one

Attorney-At-Law who is said to be the junior to one Mr. Bushra Hassim-

Attorney-At-Law. In the circumstances, this Court had proceeded to dismiss

the appeal in the premise that, the Appellants had not taken interest to appear

and support their appeal in Court.

In the light of the law set out above, in order to succeed in their application for

re-listing, the sole burden of proof is rested upon the Appellants to furnish

sufficient cause for their default in appearance in Court on 30.01.2024.

The sole reason adduced in paragraph 4 of the re-listing application furnished

to this Court by the 1st Defendant-Appellant-Appellant and the 2nd, 3rd and 4th

Appellants–Appellants for their default in making appearance before this Court

on 30.01.2024 is that although notices were issued on the Appellants, they

could not appear before this Court inasmuch as the said notices were not

received by the Appellant Society, Namely; the 1st Defendant-Appellant-

Appellant for; the office of the 1st Defendant-Appellant-Appellant had been

shifted to No. 90/2, Aniwatta Road, Kandy since January 2022 as manifest

from the lease agreement annexed to their Petition marked as P3 and the true

copies of letters dated 28.03.2024 and 02.05.2024 dispatched to the new

CA/PHC/0033/2019

Page 13 of 16

address of the 1st Defendant-Appellant-Appellant by the Department of

Cooperative Development annexed to their Petition marked as P4.

Furthermore, the 1st Defendant-Appellant-Appellant and the 2nd, 3rd and 4th

Appellants–Appellants had in paragraph 5 of their re-listing application had

explicitly, conveyed regrets to this Court for inconvience caused to it in view of

the inadvertence of not furnishing to this Court the said new address of the

Appellants. It is in this premise that the 1st Defendant-Appellant-Appellant and

the 2nd, 3rd and 4th Appellants–Appellants had urged that the order of this

Court dated 30.01.2024 dismissing the appeal, be set aside and it be re-listed

for hearing.

However, in my view, the ground so urged in the application for re-listing by

the 1st Defendant-Appellant-Appellant and the 2nd, 3rd and 4th Appellants–

Appellants, should fail at least for the following two reasons that I would

enumerate.

It is significant to observe that the instant appeal had been preferred to this

Court by four appellants, namely; the 1st Defendant-Appellant-Appellant, and

the 2nd, 3rd and 4th Appellants-Appellants.

Hence, this is not an appeal preferred to this Court only by the 1st Defendant-

Appellant-Appellant as being the sole appellant thereto, but also, there are

three other appellants to the instant appeal.

The sole ground urged by the Appellants in paragraph 4 of their re-listing

application for their default in appearance in Court on 30.01.2024 is that

although notices were issued on them, they could not appear before this Court

inasmuch as the said notices were not received by the Appellant Society,

Namely; the 1st Defendant-Appellant-Appellant for; the office of the 1st

Defendant-Appellant-Appellant had been shifted to No. 90/2, Aniwatta Road,

Kandy since January 2022 as manifest from the lease agreement annexed to

their Petition marked as P3 and the true copies of letters dated 28.03.2024 and

02.05.2024 dispatched to the new address of the 1st Defendant-Appellant-

CA/PHC/0033/2019

Page 14 of 16

Appellant by the Department of Cooperative Development annexed to their

Petition marked as P4.

However, it is significant and interesting to observe, that the 2nd, 3rd and the 4th

Appellants-Appellants had anywhere in their application for re-listing, stated

that the addresses stated in the caption to the appeal had undergone any

change at any point of time thereafter and therefore, they did not receive the

notices issued by this Court on them, directing them to be present before this

Court on 30.01.2024 and therefore, they too, were not able to make an

appearance in Court on 30.01.2024 as directed by this Court.

Furthermore, it is significant to observe that, three different addresses had

been mentioned in the caption to the appeal as the addresses of those three

Appellants, namely; the 2nd, 3rd and the 4th Appellants-Appellants thereby,

clearly, showing that the 2nd, 3rd and the 4th Appellants-Appellants are living in

three different places.

In the absence of an allegation and/or a denial as such, the 2nd, 3rd and the 4th

Appellants-Appellants are in law, deemed to have duly, received the notices

issued by this Court on them, directing them to be present before this Court on

30.01.2024-Vide-Illustration “d” to section 114 of the Evidence Ordinance.

In the circumstances, even, if, it is to be assumed for a moment only for the

sake of argument that, the assertion of the 1st Defendant-Appellant-Appellant

that it did not receive the notices issued by this Court directing it to be present

before this Court on 30.01.2024, for; the office of the 1st Defendant-Appellant-

Appellant had been shifted to No. 90/2, Aniwatta Road, Kandy since January

2022, yet, the other three Appellants to the instant appeal, namely; the 2nd , 3rd

and the 4th Appellants-Appellants could have been present in Court as directed

by this Court on the notice dispatched on them in the absence of denial and/or

allegation that they too, had not received notices dispatched on them by this

Court directing them to be present before this Court on 30.01.2024.

CA/PHC/0033/2019

Page 15 of 16

Hence, I would hold that the sole reason and/or the ground adduced by the

Appellants for their default in appearance in Court on 30.01.2024, as

enumerated above, is absurd, ridiculous, trifling or irrational and therefore, not

sensible and sane and hence, it cannot in any manner, sustain both in fact

and law and as such it should be rejected in-limine.

Secondly, as clearly, and unequivocally, admitted by all the Appellants in

paragraph 5 of their application for re-listing, alleged change of the address of

the 1st Defendant-Appellant-Appellant had not been notified to Court at any

point of time thereafter as required by law and therefore, the Appellants are in

breach of the law in this regard and as such the Appellants should bear

whatever the consequences that would derive by law upon their failure to

forthwith notify the Court of the alleged change of address of the 1st Defendant-

Appellant-Appellant as required by law.

Hence, I would hold that the sole reason and/or the ground adduced by the

Appellants as forming grounds for their default in appearance in Court on

30.01.2024, as enumerated above, is absurd, ridiculous, trifling or irrational

and therefore, not sensible and sane and hence, it cannot in any manner,

sustain both in fact and law and as such it should be rejected in-limine.

It is to be noted that for the reasons stated above, the facts and the

circumstances of the case in SC/APPEAL No. 92A/2008 which is relied on by

the Appellants in support of their application for re-listing, differ from the facts

and circumstances of the instant application for re-listing and therefore, the

facts and circumstances of the said case can clearly, be distinguishable from

the facts and circumstances of the instant application for re-listing, and as

such, it has, if I may say so respectfully, no application to the facts of the

instant application for re-listing.

In view of all the above facts and circumstances, I would hold that this Court is

under no obligation to order a reinstatement of the appeal dismissed by this

CA/PHC/0033/2019

Page 16 of 16

Court for default in appearance of the Appellants before this Court of

30.01.2024.

In the result, I would dismiss the instant application for re-listing with costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL