1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

CA Revision Application No. CAlPHC/APN/144/2014 Provincial High Court of Kalutara Certiorari Writ Application No.16/2002 Arbitration No. 1131

In the matter of an Application for Revision and/or Restitutio in Integrum under Article 138 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Pothpitiyage Don Edward Prematilleke, "Priyawasa" , Remunegoda, Kalutara.

Petitioner

Vs.

01. Commissioner of Co-operative Development (Western Province) Department of Cooperative Development (Western Province) P.O.Box 444, Duke Street, Colombo 01.

02. W.H. Piyadasa, Arbitrator, 21/11, Hegalla Road Welipillawa, Horana.

2

03. The Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

04. Seemasahitha Remunegoda Sekasuruwam Ha Nayaganudenu Pilibanda Samupakara Samithiya, Remunegoda, Kalutara.

Respondents

AND BETWEEN

Pothpitiyage Don Edward Prematilleke, "Priyawasa' , Remunegoda, Kalutara.

Petitioner-Petitioner

01. Commissioner of Co-operative Development (Western Province), Department of Co-operative Development (Western Province), P.O.Box 444, Duke Street, Colombo 01.

02. W.H. Piyadasa, Arbitrator, 21/11, Hegalla Road, Welipillawa, Horana.

03. The Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

BEFORE

COUNSEL:

Argued on

Decided on

3

04. Seemasahitha Remunegoda Sekasuruwam Ha Nayaganudenu Pilibanda Samupakara Samithiya, Remunegoda, Kalutara.

Respondents-Respondents

W.M.M. Malinie Gunaratne, J.

P.R. Walgama, J.

D.M.G. Dissanayake with M.D.J. Bandara for the Petitioner - Petitioner.

R. Pathiranage, D.S.G. for the 1st to 4th Respondents.

12.03.2015

27.07.2015

Malinie Gunaratne, J.

The Petitioner was the Treasurer of the 4th Respondent, Seemasahitha

Remunegoda Sakasaruwam Ha Nayaganudenu Pilibanda Samupakara

Samithiya during the period 1986 - 1998. A letter dated 14.06.1998 was

served on the Petitioner under the hand of the 4th Respondent, suspending the

Petitioner's Committee membership. A Committee Meeting was held on

10.10.1999 and it was decided to recover a sum of Rs.97,001l17 together

with an interest of 16% per annum, from the Petitioner and he was served a

letter of demand dated 26.10.1999.

4

The said Committee has further decided to hold an arbitration, if he

fails to comply with the said decision of the Committee. The 4th Respondent

appointed the 2nd Respondent to hold an arbitration to which the award dated

14.08.2000 was made.

Thereafter the Petitioner made an appeal against the said arbitration

award, to the 1 st Respondent, which was dismissed and the award affirmed.

Thereafter the Petitioner instituted the Writ Application bearing No.

16/2002 against the said award dated 14.08.2000 in Kalutara High Court.

The learned High Court Judge dismissed the said application on 23.08.2006.

Being aggrieved by the said Order the Petitioner lodged an appeal

bearing No. CAlPHC/269/2006 against the said order. Due to some

procedural defects, on 13.10.2014 the appeal was dismissed. Thereafter the

Petitioner has instituted this revision application.

When this matter was called on 12.03.2015 to support for interim

relief referred to in sub paragraph (3) of the prayer to the petition, the

learned Deputy Solicitor General objected to the Petitioner's application and

raised the following preliminary objections on the maintainability of this

application before considering the application for notice being issued on the

respondent.

(a) There is a delay and 1 or laches on the part of the Petitioner in that

the order of the learned High Court Judge sought to be challenged

by these proceedings is dated 23.08.2006 and this application has

been filed on or about 09.12.2014, over 08 years later.

5

(b) The Petitioner has not pleaded or established any exceptional

circumstances warranting the exercise of revisionary powers.

On the aforesaid Preliminary Objections, both parties have filed

written submissions with case law authorities and have also tendered oral

submissions when the matter was called on 12.03.2015.

I will now consider the Preliminary Objections raised by the learned

Deputy Solicitor General. As set out before, the first Preliminary Objection

is namely, undue delay in filing this application. The learned Counsel for

the Petitioner submitted that there is no delay in filing the present petition as

proceedings before Court on the material issue was alive until 13.10.2014,

on which date the Court of Appeal entered judgment dismissing the appeal

due to procedural defects.

The learned Deputy Solicitor General for the Respondent contended

that the Petitioner has filed this Revision Application after 08 years from the

order of the High Court and therefore he is not entitled to any relief due to

laches.

I will tum to consider the authorities in regard to the first preliminary

objection, namely the delay of filing the application. In the case of Attorney

General vs. Kunchihambu 46 NLR 40 I, it was held the delay of three

months was to disentitle the Petitioner for relief. In Camillus Ignatious vs.

Officer in Charge of Uhana Police Station (Rev) CA 907/89 M.C. Ampara

2587 held that a mere delay of 04 months in filing a Revision Application

was fatal to the prosecution of the revision application before the Court of

Appeal.

6

In Nandawathie vs. Gunawathie CA 769/2000 District Court Mount

Lavinia 33/921P it was held that the delay of three (03) and a half years was

considered to be fatal. Similarly it was held by Amartunga J. in the Attorney

General vs. Herath, CA Revision 2060/2004, S.C. Colombo 68421M C.A.

minutes of lih November 2004, that revision will not be available where

there is a delay of (9) nine years.

Delay would normally be a ground upon which a revision application

could be referred. Therefore, in every case where there is a delay the

applicant should explain the reason for the delay (Gnanapandithan vs.

Balanayam 1998 (1) SLR 391).

The Petitioner has filed this application after 08 years from the order

of the High Court. The inordinate delay has not been explained by the

Petitioner to the satisfaction of this Court. Moreover the Petitioner has not

disclosed exceptional circumstances why the application for revision

should be entertained by this Court after a lapse of nearly (08) years from

the original High Court order.

In Dissanayake vs. Fernando 71 NLR 356, it was held, it is essential

that the reason for the delay in seeking relief should be set out in the

petition. The Petitioner has failed to account for the delay. Accordingly, the

long period of inaction and failure to seek relief on the part of the Petitioner

was fatal to an application in revision.

I will now consider the next objection namely, failure to show

Exceptional Circumstances when filing this revision application. The

Counsel for the Petitioner has submitted, that the Petitioner has caused to file

this application based on the questions of law set out in paragraph 21 of the

7

Petition which constitutes exceptional circumstances. He has further

submitted, that although the phrase "exceptional circumstances exist" has

not been used in the Petition, the questions of law raised in Paragraph 21 of

the Petition do constitute exceptional circumstances on the face of it.

The learned Deputy Solicitor General contended that the Petitioner's

application should be dismissed in limine since the Petitioner has not

pleaded or established exceptional circumstances necessitating the

indulgence of Court to exercise its powers in revision. He further

contended, in the present case the Petitioner, has not indicated to Court that

any special circumstances exist which could invite this court to exercise its

powers of revision.

In support of Deputy Solicitor General's argument the attention of this

Court has been drawn to several cases.

The trend of authority clearly indicates that the revisionary powers of

the Court of Appeal will be exercised if the exceptional circumstances exist

only.

The object of the power of revision as stated by Sansoni Chief Justice

in Mariam Beebee vs. Seyed Mohamed 68 NLR 36 is the due administration

of justice. "The Court will not hesitate to use its revisionary powers to give

relief where a miscarriage of justice has occurred". (In the words of Soza J.

in Somawathie vs. Madawala and Others 1983 (2) SLR 15).

In Atukorale vs. Saminathan 41 NLR 165 Soertsz J. stated, that the

right of the Court to revise any order made by an original court will be

exercised only in exceptional circumstances.

8

In Caderamanpulle vs. Ceylon Paper Sacks 2001 (3) SLR 172, the

court has held the existence of exceptional circumstances is a pre-condition

for the exercise of the powers of revision and the absence of such

circumstances in any given situation results in refusal of granting remedies.

In Ameen vs. Rasid (Supra) Abraham C.J. has explained the rationale for

insisting on the existence of exceptional circumstances for the exercise of

revisionary jurisdiction. According to Abraham C.J., revision of an

appealable order is an exceptional procedure and a person seeking this

method of rectification must show why this extraordinary method is sought

rather than the ordinary method of appeal.

Thus, the existence of exceptional circumstances is a process by

which the method of rectification should be adopted. In Perera vs. Silva

(Supra) Hutchinson C.J. has stated, that if such selection process is not

available, then revisionary jurisdiction of the court will become a gateway

for every litigant to make a second appeal in the garb of a revision

application to make an appeal in situations where the legislature has not

given the right of appeal.

Furthermore, in Dharmaratne and Another vs. Palm Paradise Cabanas

Ltd. 2003 (3) SLR 24, Gamini Amartunga J. stated, that the practice of

Court to insist on the existence of exceptional circumstances for the exercise

of revisionary powers has taken deep root in our law and has got hardened

into a rule which should not be lightly disturbed.

On a consideration of the above authorities, it is abundantly clear, the

revisionary powers of the Court of Appeal will be exercised if the

exceptional circumstances exist only.

9

It is now pertinent to peruse the petition and written submissions of

the Petitioner in order to determine whether the Petitioner has pleaded or

established such exceptional circumstances. It is abundantly clear that the

Petitioner has not specifically or expressly pleaded such exceptional

circumstances.

In Biso Menika vs. Ranbanda and Others CA 95/98 -CAM

09.01.2002 and followed by Urban Development Authority vs. Ceylon

Entertainers Ltd. And another (Supra) the rigid rule was formulated in order

to justify the exercise of revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal, on

examination of either the Petition or Affidavit which must reveal a specific

plea as to the existence of special circumstances.

The contention of the learned Counsel for the Petitioner is that though

the phrase "exceptional circumstances exist" has not been used in the

Petition, the questions of law raised in Paragraph (21) of the Petition do

constitute exceptional circumstances on the face of it.

I disagree with the submissions of the learned Counsel for the

Petitioner that the averments in Paragraph 21 of the Petition purporting to set

out exceptional circumstances is factually and legally unsupportable.

Due to the aforesaid reasons, this Court has no alternative but to

conclude that the Petitioner failed to substantiate presence of exceptional

circumstances by way of illegality or error on the face of the record.

Accordingly his plea for invoking of discretionary revisionary powers of this

Court must necessarily fail.

10

Therefore taking into consideration the entirety of the submissions

adduced by both parties, this Court upholds the Preliminary Objections

raised by the Respondents, and conclude that this is not a fit and proper case

to invoke the discretionary revisionary powers of this Court.

Accordingly the interim relief sought for is refused and I dismiss the

Petition.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

P.R. Walgama, J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Petition dismissed.