==== BLOCKS ==== 

CPA/0087/2020

Page 1 of 41

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for revision

in terms of Article 154P of the Constitution

of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka read together with Section 5 of the

High Court of the Provinces (Special

Provisions) Act. No 19 of 1990 (as amended)

MAHENTHIRAN SUBRAMANIUM,

No: 146/5, Havelock Road,

Colombo 05.

Complainant

Vs

SASHITHARAN GANESAN,

No.175, Sri Sumanatissa Mawatha,

Colombo-12.

SATHIAMOORTHY HARIDARSHAN,

No. 175, Sri Sumanatissa Mawatha,

Colombo 12.

NIRANTHARI THAYAPARAN,

No. 175, Sri Sumanatıssa Mawatha,

Colombo 12.

Defendants

Court of Appeal Case No: CPA/0087/2020(APN) HC Revision Application No: HCRA/155/2019 MC Colombo Case No: 12302/05/19

CPA/0087/2020

Page 2 of 41

AND

SASHITHARAN GANESAN,

No.175, Sri Sumanatissa Mawatha,

Colombo-12.

SATHIAMOORTHY HARIDARSHAN,

No. 175, Sri Sumanatissa Mawatha,

Colombo 12.

NIRANTHARI THAYAPARAN,

No. 175, Sri Sumanatıssa Mawatha,

Colombo 12.

Defendants-Petitioners

Vs

MAHENTHIRAN SUBRAMANIUM,

No. 146/5, Havelock Road,

Colombo 05.

Complainant Respondent

AND NOW

SASHITHARAN GANESAN,

No.175, Sri Sumanatissa Mawatha,

Colombo-12.

SATHIAMOORTHY HARIDARSHAN,

No. 175, Sri Sumanatissa Mawatha,

Colombo 12.

CPA/0087/2020

Page 3 of 41

NIRANTHARI THAYAPARAN,

No. 175, Sri Sumanatıssa Mawatha,

Colombo 12.

Defendants-Petitioners-Petitioners

Vs

MAHENTHIRAN SUBRAMANIUM,

No. 146/5, Havelock Road,

Colombo 05.

Complainant Respondent-Respondent

Before : D. THOTAWATTA, J.

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Counsel : Dr. Romesh de Silva, P.C. with N. R.

Sivendran & Roshani Emmanuel

instructed by M/S Sarravanan

Neelakandan Associates for the

Defendants-Petitioners-Petitioners.

Nishan Premathiratne with Vikum

Jayasinghe & Manith Dasanayake

instructed by Sanjay Fonseka for the

Complainant-Respondent-Respondent.

K. V. S. Ganesharajan instructed by

Saravanan Neelakandan and Neelakandan

CPA/0087/2020

Page 4 of 41

Associates for the Defendant-Petitioner-

Petitioner.

Written Submissions

of the Complainant

Respondent-Respondent

tendered on : 26.02.2026

Written Submissions

of the Defendants-Petitioners

-Petitioners tendered on : 06.03.2026

Decided on : 13.03.2026

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Instant application in revision has been preferred to this Court by the

Defendants-Petitioners-Petitioners (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the

Petitioners”) seeking inter-alia, to revise and set aside the order dated

26.05.2020, made by the learned High Court Judge of the Western Province

holden in Colombo (hereinafter called and referred to as “the learned High Court

Judge”) in an action bearing No. HCRA 155/2019 in the exercise of the

revisionary jurisdiction vested in it by Article 154P(3)(b) of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka (hereinafter called and referred

to as ‘the Constitution”) to be read with Article 138 of the Constitution, a certified

copy of which was annexed to the petition furnished to this Court by Petitioners

marked as Z11 (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the HC order”) wherein, the

learned High Court Judge had dismissed an application in revision preferred to

it by the Petitioners seeking to revise and set aside the order dated 10.09.2019

made by the learned Magistrate of Colombo in case bearing No. 12302/05/19.

CPA/0087/2020

Page 5 of 41

When this matter was set down for argument after a number of adjournments

being granted therefor, the learned Counsel for the Complainant-Respondent-

Respondent (hereinafter called and referred to as “the Respondent”) had by way

of motion dated 18.11.2015, raised a preliminary objection with regard to the

jurisdiction of this Court to hear and determine the instant action in that it was

contended by the learned Counsel for the Respondent that this Court does not

have jurisdiction to hear and determine the instant application in revision

as it emanates from a judgement given by the learned High Court Judge in

the exercise of its concurrent revisionary jurisdiction. It was on the other

hand, contended by the learned President’s Counsel for the Petitioners in

resisting it, that this Court has jurisdiction to hear and determine an

application in revision emanating from an order made by a High Court of

the Province established by Article 154P of the Constitution in the exercise

of its revisionary jurisdiction vested in it by law.

This matter was then, fixed for inquiry into the jurisdictional objection on

27.01.2026 on which day the learned President’s Counsel for the Petitioners

moved to postpone the hearing into the jurisdictional objection until a decision

is made by His Lordship, the President of the Court of Appeal in respect of an

application made to it by him in case bearing No. CA/RII/0026/25 for a fuller

bench to be constituted in that case. However, this Court was apprised that there

was no order or direction as such made by His Lordship, the President of the

Court of Appeal in respect of that application even on the day this case was next

fixed for inquiry into the jurisdictional objection on 05.02.2026 and in

consequence, this Court fixed this matter for order on the jurisdictional objection

and permitted parties to file written submissions on the same. Hence, this matter

comes on before us today for order thereon on the strength of the written

submissions.

In view of the jurisdictional objection so raised to this Court by the Respondent,

the pivotal question that would arise for our consideration is whether this Court

CPA/0087/2020

Page 6 of 41

can exercise its extra-ordinary revisionary jurisdiction vested in it by

Article 138 of the Constitution in relation to an order made by a High Court

of the Province established under Article 154P of the constitution enacted

by the 13th Amendment in the exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction under

and in terms of Article 154P(3)(b) of the Constitution to be read with Article

138 thereof.

It may now, be examined.

Before the 13th Amendment, Article 138 of the Constitution read thus;

“The Court of Appeal shall have and exercise subject to the provisions of

the Constitution or of any law, an appellate jurisdiction for the correction

of all errors in fact or in law which shall be committed by any Court of

First Instance, tribunal or other institution and sole and exclusive

cognizance, by way of appeal, revision and restitutio in integrum, of all

causes, suits, actions, prosecutions, matters and things of which such

Court of First Instance, tribunal or other institution may have taken

cognizance:” [Emphasis is mine]

Proviso-not reproduced.

In the light of the Article 138 of the Constitution as it existed before the 13th

Amendment, appellate and revisionary jurisdiction was solely, and

exclusively, vested with the Court of Appeal (Vide-Weragama v. Eksath

Lanka Wathu Kamkam Samithiya and Others 1994[1] SLR 329, at page 295).

[Emphasis is mine]

After the 13th Amendment, Article 138 of the Constitution now, reads thus;

“(1)The Court of Appeal shall have and exercise subject to the provisions

of the Constitution or of any law, an appellate jurisdiction for the

correction of all errors in fact or in law which shall be [committed by the

High Court, in the exercise of its appellate or original jurisdiction or

by any Court of First Instance], tribunal or other institution and sole

CPA/0087/2020

Page 7 of 41

and exclusive cognizance, by way of appeal, revision and restitutio in

integrum, of all causes, suits, actions, prosecutions, matters and things

[of which such High Court, Court of First Instance], tribunal or other

institution may have taken cognizance:” [Emphasis is mine]

Proviso-not reproduced

(2)-not reproduced.

Hence, Article 138 of the Constitution was amended by the Thirteenth

Amendment to the Constitution by the substitution for the words “committed

by any Court of First Instance” of the words “committed by the High Court

in the exercise of its appellate or original jurisdiction or by any Court of

First Instance.”[Emphasis is mine]

The Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution enacted Article 154P(1) to the

Constitution and it reads thus;

“There shall be a High Court for each Province with effect from the date on

which this Chapter comes into force. Each such High Court shall be

designated as the High Court of the relevant Province.”

Article 154P(1) of the Constitution so enacted by the Thirteenth Amendment,

made provisions for the establishment of the High Courts in the provinces.

Article 154P(3)(b) of the Constitution enacted by the Thirteenth Amendment to

the Constitution, reads thus;

“Every such High Court shall –

(b) notwithstanding anything in Article 138 and subject to any law,

exercise, appellate and revisionary jurisdiction in respect of convictions,

sentences and orders entered or imposed by Magistrates Courts and

Primary Courts within the Province;” [Emphasis is mine]

Hence, Article 154P(3)(b) conferred upon the High Court so established under

Article 154P(1) the appellate and revisionary jurisdiction in respect of

CPA/0087/2020

Page 8 of 41

convictions, sentences and orders entered or imposed by Magistrates

Courts and Primary Courts within the Province notwithstanding anything

in Article 138 and subject to any law. [Emphasis is mine]

Article 154P(6) of the Constitution enacted by Thirteenth Amendment to the

Constitution confers upon any person aggrieved by a final order, judgment or

sentence of any such High Court so established under Article 154P(1) of the

Constitution made in the exercise of its jurisdiction under paragraphs (3)(b) or

(3)(c) or (4) a right of appeal to the Court of Appeal in accordance with Article

138 of the Constitution subject to the provisions of the Constitution and any law

and it reads thus;

“(6) subject to the provisions of the Constitution and any law, any

person aggrieved by a final order, judgment or sentence of any such Court,

in the exercise of its jurisdiction under paragraphs (3)(b) or (3)(c) or (4) may

appeal there from to the Court of Appeal in accordance with Article 138.”

[Emphasis is mine]

Nonetheless, no provision was made with regard to the procedure to be followed

in such High Courts. With a view to providing for the lacuna in the law with

regard to the procedure to be followed in the High Court of the Provinces, so

established under Article 154P(1) of the Constitution which enacted by the

Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution, the High Court of the Provinces

(Special Provisions) Act, No. 19 of 1990 (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the

Act”) was enacted making provision “regarding the procedure to be followed in,

and the right to appeal to, and from, the High Court established under Article

154P of the Constitution”.

The Act also made provision for the appeals to be brought in before the Court of

Appeal as well as the Supreme Court from the High Court. While section 9 of the

Act provides for the appeals to Supreme Court from High Court, section 11

thereof provides for appeals to Court of Appeal from the High Court established

under Article 154P of the Constitution.

CPA/0087/2020

Page 9 of 41

Section 9 of the Act reads thus;

“9. Subject to the provisions of this Act or any other law, any person

aggrieved by

(a) a final order, judgment, decree or sentence of a High Court established

by Article 154P of the Constitution in the exercise of the appellate

jurisdiction vested in it by paragraph (3) (b) of Article 154P of the

Constitution or section 3 of this Act or any other law, in any matter or

proceeding whether civil or criminal which involves a substantial question

of law, may appeal therefrom to the Supreme Court if the High Court

grants leave to appeal to the Supreme Court ex mero motu or at the

instance of any aggrieved party to such matter or proceedings :

Provided that the Supreme Court may, in its discretion, grant special leave

to appeal to the Supreme Court from any final or interlocutory order,

judgment, decree or sentence made by such High Court, in the exercise of

the appellate jurisdiction vested in it by paragraph (3) (b) of Article 154P

of the Constitution or section 3 of this Act, or any other law where such

High Court has refused to grant leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, or

where in the opinion of the Supreme Court, the case or matter is fit for

review by the Supreme Court:

Provided further that the Supreme Court shall grant leave to appeal in

every matter or proceeding in which it is satisfied that the question to be

decided is of public or general importance; and

(b) a final order, judgment or sentence of a High Court established by

Article 154P of the Constitution in the exercise of its jurisdiction conferred

on it by paragraph (3) (a), or (4) of Article 154P of the Constitution may

appeal therefrom to the Court of Appeal.”

Section 11 of the Act reads thus;

CPA/0087/2020

Page 10 of 41

“(1) The Court of Appeal shall have and exercise, subject to the provisions

of this Act or any other law, an appellate jurisdiction for the correction of

all errors in fact or in law which shall be committed by any High Court

established by Article 154P of the Constitution in the exercise of its

jurisdiction under paragraph (3) (a), or (4) of Article 154P of the

Constitution and sole and exclusive cognizance by way of appeal, revision

and restitutio in integrum of all causes, suits, actions, prosecutions,

matters and things of which such High Court may have taken cognizance

:

Provided that, no judgment, decree or order of any such High Court, shall

be reversed or varied on account of any error, defect, or irregularity which

has not prejudiced the substantial rights of the parties or occasioned a

failure of justice.

(2) The Court of Appeal may in the exercise of its jurisdiction, affirm,

reverse, correct or modify any order, judgment, decree or sentence

according to law or it may give directions to any High Court established by

Article 154P of the Constitution or order a new trial or further hearing

upon such terms as the Court of Appeal shall think fit.

(3) The Court of Appeal may farther receive and admit new evidence

additional to, or supplementary of, the evidence already taken in any High

Court established by Article 154P of the Constitution touching the matters

at issue in any original case, suit, prosecution or action, as the justice of

the case may require.”

Section 10 of the Act deals with the powers of the Supreme Court on appeal and

it reads thus;

“(1) The Supreme Court shall, subject to the Constitution be the final Court

of appellate jurisdiction within Sri Lanka for the correction of all errors in

fact or in law which shall he committed by a High Court established by

CPA/0087/2020

Page 11 of 41

Article 154P of the Constitution, in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction

vested in it by paragraph (3) (b) of Article 154P of the Constitution or

section 3 of this Act, or any other law and the judgments and orders of the

Supreme Court shall, in such cases, be final and conclusive in all such

matters.

(2) The Supreme Court shall, in the exercise of its jurisdiction, have sole

and exclusive cognizance by way of appeal from any order, judgment,

decree or sentence made by a High Court established by Article 154P of

the Constitution, in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in such

High Court by paragraph (3) (b) of Article 154P of the Constitution or

section 3 of this Act or any other law and it may affirm, reverse or vary any

such order, judgment, decree or sentence of such High Court and may

issue such directions to such High Court or Court of First Instance or

order a new trial or further hearing in any proceedings as the may require

and may also shall for and admit fresh or additional evidence if the

interests of justice so demands and may in such event, direct that such

evidence be recorded by such High Court, or any Court of First Instance.”

Both sections 5 and 12 of the Act would in my opinion, be significantly,

important for the proper resolution of the jurisdictional objection raised before

us and therefore, it would for clarity and convenience, be useful to reproduce

both of them verbatim the same as follows;

Section 5 of the Act makes provisions for the procedure for appealing to High

Court so established under Article 154P(1) of the Constitution and it reads thus;

“The Provisions of written law applicable to appeals to the Court of Appeal, from

convictions, sentences or orders entered or imposed by a Magistrate's Court, and

to applications made to the Court of Appeal for revision of any such conviction,

sentence or order shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to appeals to the High Court

established by Article 154P of the Constitution for a Province, from convictions,

sentences or orders entered or imposed by Magistrate's Courts, Primary Courts

CPA/0087/2020

Page 12 of 41

and Labour Tribunals within that Province and from orders made under section

5 or section 9 of the Agrarian Services Act, No. 58 of 1979, in respect of land

situated within that Province and to applications made to such High Court, for

revision of any such conviction, sentence or order.”

Section 12 of the Act makes provisions where appeal or application in respect

of same matter is filed in Court of Appeal and in High Court and it reads

thus;

“(a) Where any appeal or application is field in the Court of Appeal and an

appeal or application in respect of the same matter has been filed in a High

Court established by Article 154P of the Constitution invoking jurisdiction

vested in that Court by paragraph (3) (b) or (4) of Article 154P of the

Constitution, within the time allowed for the filing of such appeal or

application, and the hearing of such appeal or application by such High

Court has not commenced, the Court of Appeal may proceed to hear and

determine such appeal or application or where it considers it expedient to

do so, direct such High Court to hear and determine such appeal or

application:

Provided, however, that where any appeal or application which is within

the jurisdiction of a High Court established by Article 154P of the

Constitution is filed in the Court of Appeal, the Court of Appeal may if it

considers it expedient to do so, order that such appeal or application be

transferred to such High Court and such High Court shall hear and

determine such appeal or application.

(b) Where the Court of Appeal decides to hear and determine any such

appeal or application, as provided for in paragraph (a), the proceedings

pending in the High Court shall stand removed to the Court of Appeal for

its determination.

CPA/0087/2020

Page 13 of 41

(c) No appeal shall lie from the decision of the Court of Appeal under this

section to hear and determine such appeal or application or to transfer it

to a High Court.

(d) Nothing in the preceding provisions of this section shall be read and

construed as empowering the Court of Appeal to direct a High Court

established by Article 154P of the Constitution to hear and determine any

appeal preferred to the Court of Appeal from an order made by such High

Court in the exercise of the jurisdiction conferred on it by paragraph (4) of

Article 154P of the Constitution.” [Emphasis is mine]

Upon a plain reading of Article 138 of the Constitution as amended, Article

154P(1), Article 154P(3)(b), and Article 154P(6) in conjunction with sections 5

and 12 of the Act, it makes it abundantly, clear that both Courts namely; the

Court of Appeal as well as the High Court established by Article 154P(1) of

the Constitution which enacted by the Thirteenth Amendment to the

Constitution, now, enjoy and exercise concurrent or parallel or coordinate

appellate and revisionary jurisdiction on matters referred to in Article

154P(3)(b) of the Constitution as quoted above which the Court of Appeal

otherwise, had solely, and exclusively, exercised before the Thirteenth

Amendment to the Constitution. [Emphasis is mine]

In the circumstances, I am of the view that the revisionary jurisdiction that was

solely, and exclusively, vested with the Court of Appeal before the Thirteenth

Amendment to the Constitution, would after Thirteenth Amendment to the

Constitution, now, be exercised by a High Court established by Article 154P(1)

of the Constitution which enacted by the Thirteenth Amendment to the

Constitution, concurrently or parallel or coordinately with the Court of Appeal.

The view taken by me as aforesaid is fortified and well supported by a plethora

of authorities of the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal and they may now,

be examined.

CPA/0087/2020

Page 14 of 41

Supreme Court in dealing with the Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution

and the Provincial Councils bill, had determined on page 323(In RE Thirteenth

Amendment to the Constitution and the Provincial Councils Bill-1987 [2]

SLR 312) as follows;

“The Bills do not effect any change in the structure of the Courts or judicial

power of the People. The Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal continue

to exercise unimpaired the several jurisdictions vested in them by the

Constitution. There is only one Supreme Court and one Court of Appeal

for the whole Island, unlike in a Federal State. “The 13th Amendment Bill

only seeks to give jurisdictions in respect of writs of Habeas Corpus in

respect of persons illegally detained within the Province and Writs of

Certiorari, Mandamus and Prohibition against any person exercising

within the Province any power under any law or statute made by the

Provincial Council in respect of any matter in the Provincial Council list

and appellate jurisdiction in respect of convictions ‘and sentences by

Magistrate’s Courts and Primary Courts within the Province to the

High Court of the Province, without prejudice to the executing

jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal. Vesting of this additional

jurisdiction in the High Court of each Province only brings justice

nearer home to the citizen and reduces delay and cost of ligation. The

power of appointment of Judges of the High Court remains with the

President and the power of nominating them to the several High Courts

remains with the Chief Justice. The appointment, transfer, dismissal

continue to be vested in the Judicial Service Commission. Thus, the centre

continues to be supreme in the judicial area and the Provincial Council

has no control over the judiciary functioning in the Province.” [Emphasis

is mine]

The question before Court in Abeywardene vs. Ajith de Silva 1998[1] SLR 134-

a bench of five judges of the Supreme Court was whether a direct appeal

CPA/0087/2020

Page 15 of 41

lies to this court from an order of the High Court in the exercise of its

revisionary jurisdiction without first preferring an appeal to the Court of

Appeal, wherein, Supreme Court had on page 137, inter-alia, held that, “After

the 13th Amendment, section 5 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special

Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990 read with Article 154P (3)(b) of the

Constitution (enacted by the 13th Amendment) entitled him to file such

application in the High Court of the province. The jurisdiction of the High

Court in the matter is concurrent. In Re the 13th Amendment to the

Constitution. In the result, he may file an application in the Court of Appeal

or in the High Court.”[Emphasis is mine]

It was inter-alia, held by the Supreme Court in Gunaratne v. Thambinayagam

and Others 1993 [2] SLR 355 at pages 357 and 358, which was cited with

approval by a bench of five judges of the Supreme Court in Abeywardene vs.

Ajith de Silva(Supra), that, “In each of these cases a dispute relating to land

had been referred to a Magistrate (exercising the powers of the Primary Court) in

terms of S. 66 (1) (b) of the Primary Courts Procedure Act No. 44 of 1979. After

due inquiry, the Magistrate made his determination, the object of which is to

maintain the status quo until final adjudication of the rights in a civil suit. S. 74

(2) of the Act provides that an appeal shall not lie against such determination.

Prior to the 13th Amendment to the Constitution, a party aggrieved with

such a determination used to apply to the Court of Appeal to have it set

aside by way of revision in the exercise of the power of that Court under

Article 138 of the Constitution read with Article 154. S. 5 of the High Court

of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act, No. 19 of 1990 read with Article

154 P (3) (b) of the Constitution (enacted by the 13th Amendment) entitled

him to file such application in the High Court of the Province. The

jurisdiction of the High Court in the matter is concurrent. In Re the

Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution. In the result, he may file his

application in the Court of Appeal or in the High Court……S. 12 of Act No.

19 of 1990 makes provision for resolving some of the anomalies arising by

CPA/0087/2020

Page 16 of 41

reason of the provisions of Article 154P which vested new jurisdictions in

the High Court, but concurrently with the existing jurisdiction of the Court

of Appeal in the same sphere.”. [Emphasis is mine]

It was further held by Court in the decision in Gunaratne v. Thambinayagam

and Others (Supra) at page 362 that, “(a) that in the light of the concurrent

jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal and the High Court which still exists,

which fact is confirmed by S. 12 of Act No. 19/1990, the identical dispute

may be decided by the Court of Appeal or by the High Court. A decision in

the High Court would permit two appeals whilst a decision in the Court of Appeal

would permit one more appeal;” [Emphasis is mine]

It was inter-alia, held by Supreme Court in Weragama v. Eksath Lanka Wathu

Kamkam Samithiya and others (Supra) at page 296 that, “These amendments

affected the appellate, revisionary and writ jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal

only in two respects. Firstly, Article 154P (3) (b) conferred appellate and

revisionary jurisdiction (but not writ jurisdiction) in respect of Magistrate’s

Courts and Primary Courts (but not Labour Tribunals, or other courts and

tribunals); this was “notwithstanding anything in Article 138” (and that Article

was in any event “subject to the provisions of the Constitution"), and so either

the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal was pro tanto transferred to the High

Courts or the Court of Appeal and the High Courts had concurrent

jurisdiction.” [Emphasis is mine]

It was further held at pages 299 and 300 that, “….However, the jurisdiction of

the Court of Appeal under Article 138 is not an entrenched jurisdiction, because

Article 138 provides that it is subject to the provisions “of any law"; hence it was

always constitutionally permissible for that jurisdiction to be reduced or

transferred by ordinary law (of course, to a body entitled to exercise judicial

power). That is the reason why I held (in Swastika Textile Industries Ltd. v.

Dayaratne, that section 3 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions)

Act, No. 19 of 1990, conferred concurrent, appellate and revisionary jurisdiction

CPA/0087/2020

Page 17 of 41

on the High Courts in respect of Labour Tribunals, and that thereafter section

31D3 of the Industrial Disputes Act, as amended by Act No. 32 of 1990, made

that jurisdiction exclusive, thereby taking away the jurisdiction of the Court of

Appeal in that respect).

It was inter-alia, held by the Supreme Court in SC/Appeal/65/2025-Decided

on 10.10.2025 at page 32 that, “In this context, it would be legally

impermissible and institutionally unsound for the Court of Appeal, in pari

materia, to sit in appeal over judgments and orders pronounced by a Provincial

High Court in the exercise of its appellate or revisionary jurisdiction. A party

cannot pursue successive appeals before two courts of coordinate jurisdiction in

respect of the same matter. This strikes at the very root of the issue. Such a

practice is inimical to legislative intent, imposes unnecessary burdens on the

judicial system, and undermines the principle of finality in litigation. These

considerations make clear that concurrent jurisdiction was intended to provide

an alternative forum for appellate review, not to create an additional tier in the

appellate hierarchy.”.

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in Ramalingam Vs. Parameswary and

Others 2000 [2] SLR 340 at pages 347 and 348 that, “It is to be noted that the

power given under Article 138 of the Constitution to the Court of Appeal to hear

and determine applications in revision against orders made by Primary Courts

was not in any way taken away by either the Thirteenth Amendment or Act No.

19 of 1990. In effect both Courts were conferred concurrent jurisdiction in

respect of these matters……Further, the alleged equation of a Superior

Appellate Court to the High Court of a Province need not be considered

demeaning or debasing. The whole purpose of the Thirteenth Amendment

establishing a High Court in every province was to confer jurisdiction in

respect of certain matters in the High Court granting it concurrent

jurisdiction with the Court of Appeal. When concurrent or parallel

jurisdiction is given by Law to two Courts the question of a superior and

CPA/0087/2020

Page 18 of 41

inferior Court would not arise. As far as the jurisdiction granted to the two

Courts in certain matters goes, they are equal……”[Emphasis is mine]

In Sharif and Others Vs. Wickramasuriya and Others 2010 [1] SLR 255, it

was inter-alia, held by this Court at pages 265, 268 and 269 that, “It is thus clear

that both Courts enjoy concurrent jurisdiction on matters referred to in

Article 154P (3)(b). The jurisdiction enjoyed by the Court of Appeal had not

been disturbed by Articles of the Constitution or by the Acts of

Parliament…..Thus both Courts enjoy concurrent jurisdiction with regard

to judgments and orders of the Magistrate/Primary Courts and District

Courts. The powers enjoyed by the Court of Appeal had been given to the

High Court of the Provinces to facilitate the litigants in the provinces and

also to reduce the work load of the Court of Appeal.”. [Emphasis is mine]

In Seylan Bank PLC v. Christobel Daniels (CA/PHC/APN/58/2014, CA

Minutes of 14.12.2016), it was inter-alia, that “The structure of Article 138

would also prevent this Court exercising revisionary jurisdiction when the sole

and exclusive jurisdiction has been vested in the Supreme Court. The revisionary

jurisdiction is bestowed in the Court of Appeal thus in Article 138 of the

Constitution. “.....and sole and exclusive cognizance by way of appeal,

revision and restitutio in integrum, of all causes, suits, actions,

prosecutions, matters and things which such High Court, Court of First

Instance, tribunal or other institution may have taken cognizance”. It is

crystal clear beyond any scintilla of doubt that the revisionary power of

this Court lies only against orders made by such High Court, Court of First

Instance, tribunal or other institution when they have taken cognizance of

causes, suits, actions, prosecutions, matters and things. The words “such

High Court, Court of First Instance, tribunal or other institution” must be

read ejusdem generis and such collocation of words read together with the

words causes, suits, actions, prosecutions, matters and things clearly

indicates that these Courts exercise original jurisdiction. Only when the

CPA/0087/2020

Page 19 of 41

High Court of First Instance, tribunal or other institution has exercised

original jurisdiction, revision lies to this court. In other words, only when

the High Court has exercised original jurisdiction, the revisionary

jurisdiction of this Court can be invoked. In my view Article 138

intentionally suggests such a deliberate intendment of Parliament and

when the High Court has sat in its appellate jurisdiction as has happened

in this case, no revision lies to this Court.” [Emphasis is mine]

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA/MC/RE Application No. 04/2017-

Decided on 08.06.2018 at page 5 that, “The petitioner had filed revision

applications in Gampaha High Court seeking revision of the said orders made by

the learned magistrate and the said high court has dismissed the applications.

(Vide paragraph 8 of the petition). It must be noted that high courts now

exercised the same revisionary jurisdiction once this court exercised over

magistrate courts. As he has filed revision applications on the same orders

previously in the High Court of Gampaha he has exhausted his remedy. His

position is that his lawyers have not brought to the notice of High Court the facts

averred in this petition. A party to an action cannot be given a chance to

have a second bite of the same cherry. If this court allows this application it

may create a bad precedent to allow a party who fails to present his case properly

file another application.” [Emphasis is mine]

In the decision in SC/Appeal/65/2025(Supra), the Supreme Court cited with

approval the following observations of this Court made by it in the case in

Malwatta v. Softlogic Finance PLC and Others (CA/CPA/152/2022, CA

Minutes of 31.08.2023). which inter alia, identified several practical difficulties

that would arise if the Court of Appeal were permitted to review judgments and

orders of the Provincial High Courts made in the exercise of their appellate

jurisdiction. The said case concerned a party who, being dissatisfied with a

judgment of the Provincial High Court of Civil Appeal delivered in the exercise of

its revisionary jurisdiction, sought once again to invoke the revisionary

CPA/0087/2020

Page 20 of 41

jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal against the judgment of the Provincial High

Court. In practical terms, this amounted to two successive applications in

revision being pursued in respect of the same judgment of the District Court,

although the second application was formally directed against the judgment of

the Provincial High Court as observed by the Supreme Court in the said case in

SC/Appeal/65/2025(Supra).

“Moreover, if litigants are allowed to file a revision application in the Court

of Appeal against a judgment or order given by the Provincial High Court

exercising revisionary jurisdiction it would lead to unnecessary

duplication of court proceedings. This could result in a revision application

being filed in the Court of Appeal while an appeal is pending in the

Supreme Court. It would also have the effect of the Court of Appeal being

given an opportunity to overrule a judgment of the Supreme Court if the

revision application is successful while the appeal to the Supreme Court

is not, which is an unintended absurdity. is highly unlikely that

Parliament or the legislative draftsmen intended to manifestly complicate

the appeal process when the Provincial High Courts have been introduced

to reduce and simplify the court process not to complicate it even further.

According to the legal maxim ‘Boni judicis est lites dirimere, ne lis ex lite

oritur, et interest republicae ut sint fines litium’, it is the duty of a good

judge to prevent litigations, that suit may not grow out of suits, and it

concerns the welfare of the State that an end be put to litigation. It would

be contrary to the practice of a good judge to interpret statutes in a manner

that would give rise to unnecessary complications in the judicial process.

I would also mention here that allowing an appeal or a revision application

from a judgment or order from the Provincial High Court would also lead

to, the Court of Appeal having revisionary jurisdiction over an instance

where the Provincial High Court exercises its revisionary jurisdiction as is

requested for in the instant case. In effect, the Court of Appeal would lie

in revision of a revision application. Seeing as Revisionary jurisdiction is

CPA/0087/2020

Page 21 of 41

to be exercised in exceptional circumstances, allowing a revision

application on a revision application would be conceptually contradictory

to the spirit of a revision application. In the instant case, for example, this

court is invited to lie in revision of a revision application filed in the

Provincial High Court.”

It is in this backdrop of the case, I would think it expedient at this juncture to

examine the precise meaning assigned by the law dictionaries to the phrase

“concurrent jurisdiction”.

According to Black’s Law Dictionary-Eleventh Edition at page 1017,

concurrent jurisdiction is defined to mean as follows;

“1. Jurisdiction that might be exercised simultaneously by more than one

court over the same subject matter and within the same territory, a litigant

having the right to choose the court in which to file the action. 2.

Jurisdiction shared by two or more states, esp. over the physical

boundaries (such as rivers or other bodies of water) between them. - Also

termed coordinate jurisdiction; overlapping jurisdiction.”

According to Wharton’s Law Lexicon-Fourteenth Edition at page 228,

concurrent jurisdiction is defined to mean as follows;

“Concurrent jurisdictions, the jurisdiction of several different tribunals,

both authorized to deal with the same subject-matter at the choice of the

suitor. In equity, the jurisdiction was concurrent where no complete relief

was obtainable at law. It was exercised in order to avoid circuity of action

or multiplicity of suits”

In the light of the definition assigned to the phrase “concurrent jurisdiction” by

law dictionaries as referred to above, “concurrent jurisdiction” means and refers

to jurisdiction that might be exercised simultaneously by more than one court

over the same subject matter and within the same territory, a litigant having the

right to choose the court in which to file the action.

CPA/0087/2020

Page 22 of 41

Let me then, examine the primary objective intended to be achieved by conferring

concurrent jurisdiction upon more than one Court over the same subject matter

with a litigant having the right to choose the court in which to file the action. It

is in my opinion, to avoid circuity of action or multiplicity of suits with a view to

preventing a wasteful or unnecessary legal process where a party files multiple,

separate lawsuits to resolve issues that could have been dealt with in a single

action, so that it may avoid waste of judicial resources and unnecessary legal

costs.

In my opinion, the cumulative effect of the provisions of Articles 138, 154P(3)(b),

154P(6) and sections 5 and 12 of the Act and of the authoritative and biding

judicial precedent cited above taken in conjunction with the definition assigned

to the phrase “concurrent jurisdiction”, is that when the High Court established

by Article 154P(1) of the Constitution (enacted by the Thirteenth Amendment to

the Constitution) exercises revisionary jurisdiction, it exercises revisionary

jurisdiction hitherto exclusively, vested in the Court of Appeal before the

Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution and therefore, it exercises concurrent

or parallel jurisdiction with the Court of Appeal; and that, the High Court

established by Article 154P(1) of the Constitution (enacted by the Thirteenth

Amendment to the Constitution) when it exercises revisionary jurisdiction, is not

subordinate to the Court of Appeal for; when concurrent or parallel jurisdiction

is conferred by law upon two Courts, the question of a superior and inferior

Court does not arise; and that, as far as the jurisdiction granted to the two

Courts in certain matters goes, they are equal.

It is in this light, I would now, propose to deal with the written submissions

furnished to this Court by the Petitioners in resisting the jurisdictional objection.

Upon a careful perusal of the written submissions of the Petitioners in its totality,

it clearly, appears that the greater part of the written submissions, I would say,

almost the entirety of it, had been devoted and dedicated to strenuously,

challenge before this Court which is placed lower to the Supreme Court of this

CPA/0087/2020

Page 23 of 41

Country in order of Courts Hierarchy based on its superiority, the legal

proprietary of the decision pronounced by the Supreme Court in the case bearing

No. SC/APPEAL/65/2025(Supra) in that it was contended by the Petitioners

that the decision in SC/APPEAL/65/2025(Supra) is per incuriam and therefore,

the decision of this Court in Kospalage Don Kapila Lankaratne vs

Wanniachchige Kankanamage Siriyalatha-CA/CPA/0073/2025-Decided on

31.10.2025 too, is per incuriam for; it had followed the decision in

SC/APPEAL/65/2025(Supra) and as such this Court is not bound to follow

either the decision in SC/APPEAL/65/2025(Supra) or the decision in

Kospalage Don Kapila Lankaratne vs Wanniachchige Kankanamage

Siriyalatha(Supra) and therefore, this Court will have to re-consider the decision

in Kospalage Don Kapila Lankaratne vs Wanniachchige Kankanamage

Siriyalatha(Supra) and make a fresh determination in view of the submissions

made in the written submission by the Petitioners.

It is this context, I would think it pertinent at this juncture to re-produce

verbatim the same the question of law that arose for decision by this Court in

Kospalage Don Kapila Lankaratne vs Wanniachchige Kankanamage

Siriyalatha(Supra) as follows;

“whether this Court can exercise its revisionary jurisdiction in relation to

an order made by the High Court of the Provinces established under Article

154P of the constitution enacted by the 13th Amendment thereto, in the

exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction under and in terms of Article

154P(3)(b) of the Constitution to be read with Article 138 thereof.” (Vide-

Page 04 of the decision in Kospalage Don Kapila Lankaratne vs

Wanniachchige Kankanamage Siriyalatha(Supra))

The view held by this Court in relation to the question of law so arose for decision

by it in Kospalage Don Kapila Lankaratne vs Wanniachchige Kankanamage

Siriyalatha(Supra) as appeared on pages 22 and 23 of the judgement thereof,

may be re-produced verbatim the same as follows;

CPA/0087/2020

Page 24 of 41

“I would hold that, the Petitioners cannot invoke the revisionary

jurisdiction of this Court against the order dated 18.07.2025 made by the

learned High Court Judge of the Southern Province holden in Hambantota

(P3) in the exercise of concurrent or parallel revisionary jurisdiction vested

in it by Article 154P(3)(b) to be read with Article 138 of the Constitution

and section 5 and 12 of the Act for; the Petitioners have already exhausted

the remedy available by the law as enumerated above, and therefore, the

Petitioners are now, debarred from invoking the concurrent or parallel

revisionary jurisdiction of this Court against the said order of the learned

High Court Judge of the Southern Province holden in Hambantota made

in the exercise of concurrent or parallel jurisdiction, as rightly, contended

by the Respondent.”

It is to be observed that this view so held by the Court in the decision in

Kospalage Don Kapila Lankaratne vs Wanniachchige Kankanamage

Siriyalatha(Supra) had previously, been endorsed and laid down not only by the

Supreme Court but also by the Court of Appeal in a plethora of authorities as

cited above and the very reason why this Court opted to quote two citations in

the decision in Kospalage Don Kapila Lankaratne vs Wanniachchige

Kankanamage Siriyalatha(Supra) from the decision in

SC/APPEAL/65/2025(Supra) as contained in pages 15, 18 and 19 thereof, is

because of the fact that the very same principle as enunciated by the Supreme

Court and the Court of Appeal in a plethora of decisions as referred to above,

had been enunciated by the Supreme Court in the decision in

SC/APPEAL/65/2025(Supra) too, and therefore, not because of the fact that

this Court had opted to follow the decision in SC/APPEAL/65/2025(Supra) but,

except for the principle so enunciated by it by reason of the fact that it

immensely, assisted this Court in determining the question of law so arose before

this Court for its decision in Kospalage Don Kapila Lankaratne vs

Wanniachchige Kankanamage Siriyalatha(Supra).

CPA/0087/2020

Page 25 of 41

Besides, the question of law that arose for decision by the Supreme Court in

SC/APPEAL/65/2025(Supra) was whether the Court of Appeal has jurisdiction,

whether by way of final appeal, revision, or restitutio in integrum, to review the

judgments or orders of the Provincial High Court, whether in the exercise of its

appellate jurisdiction under Act No. 19 of 1990, as amended by Act No. 54 of

2006, or in the exercise of its original jurisdiction under Act No. 10 of 1996,

which was answered in the negative and held that such jurisdiction is vested

exclusively, in the Supreme Court whereas, the question of law that arose for

decision in the decision in Kospalage Don Kapila Lankaratne vs

Wanniachchige Kankanamage Siriyalatha(Supra) was whether this Court can

exercise its revisionary jurisdiction in relation to an order made by the High

Court of the Provinces established under Article 154P of the constitution enacted

by the 13th Amendment thereto, in the exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction

under and in terms of Article 154P(3)(b) of the Constitution to be read with Article

138 thereof which was answered in the negative by this Court. Hence, the

question of law that arose for the decision in SC/APPEAL/65/2025(Supra) was

entirely, different from the one which arose for decision in Kospalage Don Kapila

Lankaratne vs Wanniachchige Kankanamage Siriyalatha(Supra).

In the circumstances, this Court was mindful of the fact that the ultimate

decision reached by the Supreme Court in the decision in

SC/APPEAL/65/2025(Supra) was of no assistance to the determination of the

question of law arose in the decision in Kospalage Don Kapila Lankaratne vs

Wanniachchige Kankanamage Siriyalatha(Supra) and therefore, there had

been no reason for this Court to distinguish the decision in

SC/APPEAL/65/2025(Supra) from the decision in Kospalage Don Kapila

Lankaratne vs Wanniachchige Kankanamage Siriyalatha(Supra) hence, had

the Petitioners construed the decision in Kospalage Don Kapila Lankaratne vs

Wanniachchige Kankanamage Siriyalatha(Supra) in its proper context, they

would have clearly, understood that it was so. However, it is regretful to observe

that such a contention had been raised by the Petitioners in their written

CPA/0087/2020

Page 26 of 41

submissions on a total misconception and/or total misapprehension of the

decision in Kospalage Don Kapila Lankaratne vs Wanniachchige

Kankanamage Siriyalatha(Supra)

Hence, it clearly, and unmistakably, appears that such a contention as raised

by the Petitioners in their written submissions, namely; that the decision in

SC/APPEAL/65/2025(Supra) is per incuriam and therefore, the decision of this

Court in Kospalage Don Kapila Lankaratne vs Wanniachchige Kankanamage

Siriyalatha-CA/CPA/0073/2025-Decided on 31.10.2025 too, is per incuriam

for; it had followed the decision in SC/APPEAL/65/2025(Supra) and as such

this Court is not bound to follow either the decision in

SC/APPEAL/65/2025(Supra) or the decision in Kospalage Don Kapila

Lankaratne vs Wanniachchige Kankanamage Siriyalatha(Supra) and

therefore, this Court will have to re-consider the decision in Kospalage Don

Kapila Lankaratne vs Wanniachchige Kankanamage Siriyalatha(Supra) and

make a fresh determination in view of the submissions made in the written

submission by the Petitioners, had been raised by the Petitioners in their written

submissions as a result of their total failure to understand the decision therein,

in its proper context and as such it is misconceived in law and therefore, it

cannot in any manner, sustain in law and as such it should be rejected in-limine.

In support of the contention so advanced by the Petitioners in their written

submissions as enumerated above, it was further contended that the decision in

Sharif and Others Vs. Wickramasuriya and Others 2010(1) SLR 255 is

authority for the proposition that the Court of Appeal enjoys revisionary

jurisdiction over judgements of the Provincial High Court in view of Article 130

of the Constitution in the exercise of the revisionary jurisdiction.

It is in this context, let me now, carefully, examine the decision of this Court in

Sharif and Others Vs. Wickramasuriya and Others (Supra).

CPA/0087/2020

Page 27 of 41

It was held by Court in Sharif and Others Vs. Wickramasuriya and Others

(Supra) at page 262 that, “In terms of Article 138 the Court of Appeal shall

have and exercise. . . sole and exclusive cognizance by way of appeal;

revision... However Article 154(3) (b) has given the High Court appellate and

revisionary jurisdiction in respect of orders by Magistrate Courts and

Primary courts. Hence the Court of Appeal ceased to enjoy sole and

exclusive jurisdiction. Article 154P did not take away the powers exercised

by the Court of Appeal under Article 138.” [Emphasis is mine]

It was further held by Court in Sharif and Others Vs. Wickramasuriya and

Others (Supra) at page 265 that, “I am of the view that the jurisdiction enjoyed

by the Court of Appeal through Article 138 remains intact. Through Article 138

one has the liberty to invoke the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal or to

resort to a Provincial High Court in terms of Article 154P (3) (b). If one

chooses to go to the High Court, an appeal would lie to the Supreme Court

with leave first obtained from the High Court (Section 9 of the Act 19 of

1990). If one invokes the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal under Article

138 an appeal would lie from any final order or judgement of the Court of

Appeal to the Supreme Court with leave of Court of Appeal first obtained

(Article 128(1) of the Constitution). It is thus clear that both courts enjoy

concurrent jurisdiction on matters referred to in Article 154P (3)(b). The

jurisdiction enjoyed by the Court of Appeal had not been disturbed by Articles of

the Constitution or by the Acts of Parliament.” [Emphasis is mine]

It was further held by Court in Sharif and Others Vs. Wickramasuriya and

Others (Supra) at page 266 that, “There is no right of appeal from an order of

the Primary Court Judge. . . However parties appeal to the Court of Appeal by

way of revision under Article 138 of the Constitution read with Article 145 to

have the order set aside. After the 13th Amendment, section 5 of the High

Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990 read with

Article 154P (3) (b) of the Constitution entitled him to file such application

CPA/0087/2020

Page 28 of 41

in the High Court of the province. The Jurisdiction of the High Court in the

matter is concurrent (In re 13th Amendment to the Constitution (supra)) In

the result, he may file an application in the Court of Appeal or in the High

Court” (emphasis added). In Gunaratne vs. Thambinayagam Kulatunga J.,

G.P.S. De Silva C. J. and Ramanathan J agreeing referring to Article 138 of

the Constitution read with Act No. 19 of 1990 and 154P (3) (b) of the

Constitution held that ‘The jurisdiction of the High Court in the matter is

concurrent. . . In the result he may file his application in the Court of

Appeal or in the High Court” (at 357) (Also Kanagalingam vs. Logeswaran by J.

A. N. De Silva J. (now Chief Justice). Ramalingam vs. Parameshwary, Act No 19

of 1990 had made provision for the Court of Appeal either to transfer such

appeals or applications to High Court or to hear and determine such

applications (by the Court of Appeal). It appears that Act 19 of 1990 was

introduced for the purpose of expediting and disposing of cases.” [Emphasis

is mine]

It was further held by Court in Sharif and Others Vs. Wickramasuriya and

Others (Supra) at pages 268 and 269 that, “Thus both courts enjoy concurrent

jurisdiction with regard to judgments and orders of the Magistrate/Primary

Courts and District Courts. The powers enjoyed by the Court of Appeal had

been given to the High Court of the Provinces to facilitate the litigants in

the provinces and also to reduce the work load of the Court of

Appeal…….”[Emphasis is mine]

As is manifest from a careful consideration of the decision in Sharif and Others

Vs. Wickramasuriya and Others (Supra) in its totality, it was clearly, and

unmistakably, held by this Court in Sharif and Others Vs. Wickramasuriya

and Others (Supra) in no uncertain terms that after the 13th Amendment to the

Constitution, section 5 of the Act read with Article 154P (3) (b) of the Constitution

entitled a person to file such application in the High Court of the province; and

that the Jurisdiction of the High Court in the matter is concurrent (In Re 13th

CPA/0087/2020

Page 29 of 41

Amendment to the Constitution (supra)); and that in the result, a person may

file an application in the Court of Appeal or in the High Court; and that; the Act

had made provision for the Court of Appeal either to transfer such appeals or

applications to High Court or to hear and determine such applications by the

Court of Appeal; and that it appears that the Act was introduced for the purpose

of expediting and disposing of cases.

Hence, it clearly, appears that nowhere in the decision in Sharif and Others Vs.

Wickramasuriya and Others (Supra) had it been held that the Court of Appeal

enjoys revisionary jurisdiction over judgements of the Provincial High Court in

view of Article 138 of the Constitution in the exercise of its revisionary

jurisdiction as contented by the Petitioners in their written submissions.

Hence, it clearly, and unmistakably, appears that a contention as such had been

raised by the Petitioner in the written submissions as a result of their total failure

to understand the decision therein, in its proper context and as such it is

misconceived in law and therefore, it cannot in any manner, sustain in law and

as such it should be rejected in-limine.

In the circumstances, the decision in Sharif and Others Vs. Wickramasuriya

and Others (Supra) will certainly, militate against the position so adverted to by

the Petitioners in the written submissions as enumerated above.

In the result, the position so adverted to by the Petitioners in the written

submissions that the decision in Sharif and Others Vs. Wickramasuriya and

Others (Supra) is authority for the proposition that the Court of Appeal enjoys

revisionary jurisdiction over judgements of the Provincial High Court in view of

Article 138 of the Constitution in the exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction,

cannot in any manner, sustain in law as enumerated above, and as such it ought

to be rejected in-limine.

CPA/0087/2020

Page 30 of 41

The contention so advanced by the Petitioners in their written submissions as

enumerated above, that the decision of this Court in Kospalage Don Kapila

Lankaratne vs Wanniachchige Kankanamage Siriyalatha (Supra) is per

incuriam, is inter-alia, based on the premise that it was so held by this Court in

the decision in Sharif and Others Vs. Wickramasuriya and Others (Supra) that

the Court of Appeal enjoys revisionary jurisdiction over judgements of the

Provincial High Court in view of Article 138 of the Constitution in the exercise of

its revisionary jurisdiction, is devoid of merit and as such it too, cannot in any

manner, sustain in law and as such it too, should be rejected in-limine.

It was further contended by the Petitioners in their written submissions in

support of the contention as advanced by them as aforesaid, that the use of the

word "all" in Section 11(1) of the Act, makes it clear that any matter or thing

considered by the Provincial High Court, in the exercise of its original or appellate

or revisionary jurisdiction can be considered by this Court in revision and

therefore, the Court of Appeal still, enjoys its revisionary jurisdiction from the

orders made by High Court of the Province established under Article 154P(1) of

the Constitution in the exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction vested in it by

Article 154P(3)(b) of the Constitution in terms of the second limb of the section

11(1) of the Act.

It may now be examined.

Section 11(1) of the Act enacts thus,

“(1) The Court of Appeal shall have and exercise, subject to the provisions

of this Act or any other law, an appellate jurisdiction for the correction of

all errors in fact or in law which shall be committed by any High Court

established by Article 154P of the Constitution in the exercise of its

jurisdiction under paragraph (3) (a), or (4) of Article 154P of the

Constitution and sole and exclusive cognizance by way of appeal, revision

CPA/0087/2020

Page 31 of 41

and restitutio in integrum of “all” causes, suits, actions, prosecutions,

matters and things of which such High Court may have taken cognizance”

Second limb of section 11(1) of the Act enacts thus;

“and sole and exclusive cognizance by way of appeal, revision and restitutio

in integrum of all causes, suits, actions, prosecutions, matters and things

of which such High Court may have taken cognizance”

In my opinion, the words “all causes, suits, actions, prosecutions, matters and

things” should not be interpreted in isolation but together with the phrase “of

which such High Court may have taken cognizance”.

Hence, it becomes manifest that the words “all causes, suits, actions,

prosecutions, matters and things” found in second limb of section 11(1) of the

Act should be “all causes, suits, actions, prosecutions, matters and things” of

which such High Court may have taken cognizance.

The phrase “of which such High Court may have taken cognizance” refers to

matters such as suits, actions, cases, or prosecutions over which a High Court

may have exercised its original jurisdiction and it further denotes that the High

Court has applied its mind to the facts of a case to decide whether to proceed

with it or not, rather than just acting as a “post office” or “merely receiving

documents”, which clearly, shows that the words “such High Court, Court of

First Instance, tribunal or other institution" must be read ejusdem generis and

such collocation of words read together with the words causes, suits, actions,

prosecutions, matters and things clearly indicates that these Courts exercise

original jurisdiction. Only when the High Court of First Instance, tribunal

or other institution has exercised original jurisdiction, revision lies to this

court.

The view taken by me as aforesaid, is fortified and well supported by the decision

of this Court in Seylan Bank PLC v. Christobel Daniels (Supra) at pages 8 and

9 wherein it was inter-alia, held “The words “such High Court, Court of First

CPA/0087/2020

Page 32 of 41

Instance, tribunal or other institution" must be read ejusdem generis and such

collocation of words read together with the words causes, suits, actions,

prosecutions, matters and things clearly indicates that these Courts exercise

original jurisdiction. Only when the High Court of First Instance, tribunal

or other institution has exercised original jurisdiction, revision lies to this

court. In other words only when the High Court has exercised original

jurisdiction, the revisionary jurisdiction of this Court can be invoked. In my

view Article 138 intentionally suggests such a deliberate intendment of

Parliament and when the High Court has sat in its appellate jurisdiction as has

happened in this case, no revision lies to this Court.”

Hence, I would hold that the next contention so advanced by the Petitioners in

the written submissions as enumerated above, cannot sustain in law and as

such it too, should be rejected in-limine.

The Petitioners had filed the appeal in the Supreme Court bearing No.

SC/APPEAL No. 62/23 with leave to appeal first had and obtained against the

order of this Court refusing to grant an interim order at the first instance and

the matter was settled at the stage of the argument as manifest from the certified

copy of the same filed of record a copy of which was also produced to this Court

marked as RWS1 by the Respondent together with his written submissions. It

was on this premise, it was contended by the Petitioners that the Supreme Court

had taken cognizance of the instant revision application and made order therein

and in the circumstances, it cannot now, be contended that this Court has no

jurisdiction for; the Supreme Court had dealt with this matter on the basis that

this Court has jurisdiction.

It may now, be examined.

In view of my findings as aforesaid, this Court does not have revisionary

jurisdiction vested in it in terms of Article 138 of the Constitution in respect of

an order of the Provincial High Court established by Article 154P of the

Constitution and made in the exercise of the revisionary jurisdiction vested in it

CPA/0087/2020

Page 33 of 41

by sections 4,5 and 6 of the Act to be read with Articles 154P(3)(b) and 138 of

the Constitution. Hence, this Court suffers from a patent lack of jurisdiction and

therefore, this Court is subjected to a total want of, and/or patent lack of

jurisdiction to hear and determine the instant application in revision.

It is trite law that a plea of total want of, and/or patent lack of jurisdiction can

be raised at any stage of the proceedings including for the first time in appeal

for; no amount of acquiescence, waiver or inaction will cure a such a defect as

parties cannot expressly, or impliedly, confer jurisdiction on a Court where none

exists-Vide-Perera Vs. Commissioner of National Housing 77 NLR 361, State

Timber Corporation Vs. Moiz Goh Pte Ltd 2002 BALR 44, Ittepana vs

Hemawathie 1981 [1] SLR 476, Suriyaarachchi and Others Vs. Liyanage and

Another-CA Case No. 272/1997, CA Minutes of 08.06.2018 and JMC

Jayasekara Management Centre (Pvt) Ltd Vs. Commissioner General of

Inland Revenue SC APPEAL No.05/2021-Decided on 05.03.2025.

It is to be observed that, the jurisdictional objection had been raised by the

Respondent after the proceedings before the Supreme Court were terminated

and therefore, there was no such jurisdictional objection raised before this Court

during the times material to the Supreme Court matter. Hence, the Supreme

Court had proceeded to hear and determine the said appeal at a time when there

was no such jurisdictional objection raised before this Court. Hence, I would find

myself unable to agree with the contention so raised by the Petitioners that, the

Supreme Court had taken cognizance of the instant revision application and

made order therein and in the circumstances, it cannot now, be contended that

this Court has no jurisdiction for; the Supreme Court had dealt with this matter

on the basis that this Court has jurisdiction by reason of the fact that no amount

of acquiescence, waiver or inaction will cure a such a defect as parties cannot

expressly, or impliedly, confer jurisdiction on a Court where none exists as held

by Court in a plethora of decisions, namely; Perera Vs. Commissioner of

National Housing (Supra), State Timber Corporation Vs. Moiz Goh Pte Ltd

CPA/0087/2020

Page 34 of 41

(Supra), Ittepana vs Hemawathie (Supra), Suriyaarachchi and Others Vs.

Liyanage and Another(Supra) and JMC Jayasekara Management Centre (Pvt)

Ltd Vs. Commissioner General of Inland Revenue (Supra).

Hence, I would with all due respect to the Supreme Court, hold that the further

contention so advanced by the Petitioners is not entitled to succeed as such it

too, should be rejected in-limine.

It was submitted by the Petitioners in the averments in paragraphs 2.6 and 2.7

of the written submissions that the Supreme Court in the case bearing No.

SC/APPEAL No. 62/23, directed this Court to hear and determine the instant

application in revision on its merits; and that accordingly, hearing and

determination of this matter should be on the merits of the application and

not on any technical objection for; this Court is duty bound in view of the

direction of the Supreme Court to hear and determine this application on its

merits. [Emphasis is mine]

It is to be observed that a duly certified copy of the proceedings pertaining to the

Supreme Court case bearing No. SC/APPEAL No. 62/23 containing 1 to 3

pages, is filed of this record, and a copy of the same had also, been furnished to

this Court by the Respondent marked RWS1 in his written submissions and the

proceedings before the Supreme Court in its entirety may be reproduced

verbatim the same as follows;

“ SC. Appeal No. 62/23

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

In the matter of an application for Special

Leave to Appeal to the Supreme Court of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

under and in terms of Article 128 of the

CPA/0087/2020

Page 35 of 41

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sir Lanka read together with the

Supreme Court Rules.

SC. Appeal No. 62/23 SC Special Leave to Appeal No.101/22 Court of Appeal Revision Application No. 87/2020(APN) HC. Revision Application No. H.C.R.A/155/2019 MC Colombo Case No. 12302/05/19

1. Sasitharan Ganeshan

No. 175, Sri Sumanatissa

Mawatha, Colombo 12.

2. Sathiyamoorthy Haridarshan No.

175, Sri Sumanatissa Mawatha,

Colombo 12

3. Niranthari Thayabaran No. 69, 21,

Unity Residencies, Davidson

Road, Colombo 04

Defendants-Petitioners- Petitioners-Petitioners

CPA/0087/2020

Page 36 of 41

SC. APPEAL NO. 62/23

Vs.

Mahendran Subramanium,

No. 146/5, Havelock Road,

Colombo 05.

Complainant-Respondent-Respondent-Respondent BEFORE: S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J JANAK DE SILVA, J SAMPATH B. ABAYAKOON, J COUNSEL: Dr. Romesh de Silva, PC with N.R. Sivendran instructed by

Sarravanan Neelakanandan Law Associates for the Defendant Petitioners-Petitioners-Petitioners.

Nishan Premathirathne for the Complainant-Respondent-Respondent-Respondent. ARGUED & DECIDED ON: 09/10/2025 S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J

When the matter was taken up for argument, both Counsel informed the court that

they calling to settle the matter subject to the following terms of settlement.

Romesh de Silva, PC submits as follows:

This Court directs the learned Magistrate in MC Colombo case number

12302/05/19 to stay proceedings until the hearing and the final

determination of the Court of Appeal revision application number 87/2020

(apn).

CPA/0087/2020

Page 37 of 41

SC. APPEAL NO. 62/23

Counsel for the Respondent submits that "this direction to the learned District

Court is agreed without prejudice to the impugned order in the Court of Appeal

dated 23/02/2022."

subject to the above terms of settlement, both Counsel move that the proceedings

be terminated.

Accordingly, we enter the terms of settlement and terminate the proceedings.

We direct the Court of Appeal to hear and conclude the matter

expeditiously.

Both parties submit that the matter is listed for hearing in February, and

we direct the Court of Appeal to hear and conclude the matter.”

However, upon a careful perusal of the proceedings pertaining to the Supreme

Court case bearing No. SC/APPEAL No. 62/23 in its totality, there is no

direction as such which directs this Court to hear and determine the instant

application in revision on its merits and not on any technical objection except

for the direction contained therein, to the following effect;

“We direct the Court of Appeal to hear and conclude the matter

expeditiously.

Both parties submit that the matter is listed for hearing in February, and

we direct the Court of Appeal to hear and conclude the matter”

Hence, it clearly, appears upon a careful perusal of the proceedings pertaining

to the Supreme Court case bearing No. SC/APPEAL No. 62/23 in its totality,

that there was no such direction on this Court by the Supreme Court to the effect

CPA/0087/2020

Page 38 of 41

that this case must be heard and determined by this Court on its merits and

not on any technical objection, as submitted to this Court, by the Petitioners

as aforesaid and thus, It clearly, appears that the Petitioners had thereby, made

an endeavour to deliberately, misrepresent and/or mislead this Court by

erroneously, submitting that there was such a direction on this Court by the

Supreme Court as to the effect that this case must be heard and determined by

this Court on its merits and not on any technical objection when there is

none. [Emphasis is mine]

The Petitioners sought to rely on the decision in SC/APPEAL No.

111/2015(Supra) in support of the contention so advanced by the Petitioners to

resist the jurisdictional objection so raised by the Respondent.

The question of law that arose for determination by the Supreme Court in the

decision in SC/APPEAL No. 111/2015(Supra) as manifest from paragraph 3

thereof, is as follows;

“Having failed to exercise the right to file an appeal in terms of Section 9

of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990

as amended, could a person invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of the

Court of Appeal referred to in Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Republic of Sri Lanka in order to canvass a decision made by a Provincial

High Court exercising its appellate powers?”

On the other hand, the question of law that arose for determination by this Court

in the instant action as manifest from paragraph 2 of the written submissions of

the Respondent, is as follows;

“this Court does not have jurisdiction to hear and determine the

instant application in revision as it emanates from a judgement given

by the learned High Court Judge in the exercise of its concurrent

revisionary jurisdiction.”

CPA/0087/2020

Page 39 of 41

Hence, it clearly, appears to me upon a careful scrutiny of the question of law

arose before the Supreme Court and this Court, the question of law that arose

for determination by this Court in the instant action is totally, different from the

question of law that arose for determination by the Supreme Court in the

decision in SC/APPEAL No. 111/2015(Supra) for; the question of law that arose

for our determination in this case is; whether this Court does have jurisdiction

to hear and determine the instant application in revision as it emanates

from a judgement given by the learned High Court Judge in the exercise of

its concurrent revisionary jurisdiction, whereas, the question of law that

arose for determination by the Supreme Court in the decision in SC/APPEAL

No. 111/2015(Supra) is; Having failed to exercise the right to file an appeal

in terms of Section 9 of the Act, could a person invoke the revisionary

jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal referred to in Article 138 of the

Constitution of the Republic of Sri Lanka in order to canvass a decision

made by a Provincial High Court exercising its appellate powers?. [Emphasis

is mine]

Hence, I would hold that the facts and circumstances of the case in SC/APPEAL

No. 111/2015(Supra) can be clearly, distinguishable from the facts and

circumstances of the instant application and therefore, the decision in

SC/APPEAL No. 111/2015(Supra) has if I may say so with all due respect, no

bearing on the question of law arose before us in the instant application for our

determination.

There is another vital aspect of the jurisdictional objection which I think, I should

deal with before I depart from this judgment and it may now, be examined.

It was emphatically, delineated by a bench of five judges of the Supreme Court

in Abeywardene vs. Ajith de Silva (Supra) at page 139 that, “The cumulative

effect of the provisions of Articles 154P (3)(b), 154P(6) and section 9 of Act No.

19 of 1990 is that, while there is a right of appeal to the Supreme Court from the

orders, etc., of the High Court established by Article 154P of the Constitution in

CPA/0087/2020

Page 40 of 41

the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in it by Article 154P (3) (b) or

Section 3 of Act No. 19 of 1990 or any other law, there is no right of appeal to

the Supreme Court from the orders in the exercise of the revisionary jurisdiction.

An appeal from an order of the High Court in the exercise of its revisionary

jurisdiction should be made to the Court of Appeal. An appeal to the Supreme

Court from the decision of the Court of Appeal would lie, with leave;” [Emphasis

is mine]

It was further held by the bench of five judges of the Supreme Court in

Abeywardene vs. Ajith de Silva (Supra) at page 140 that, “……a direct appeal

does not lie to the Supreme Court from the order of the High Court in the exercise

of the revisonary jurisdiction. An appeal from the order of the High Court in the

exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction should be made to the Court of Appeal.

Where a party is dissatisfied with the order of the Court of Appeal, the party may,

with leave of the Court of Appeal or when such leave is refused by the Court of

Appeal, with leave of the Supreme Court, appeal to the Supreme Court”

[Emphasis is mine]

In the light of the principle enunciated by the bench of five judges of the Supreme

Court in Abeywardene vs. Ajith de Silva (Supra), an appeal from the order of

the High Court in the exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction should be made to

the Court of Appeal.[Emphasis is mine]

In view of the foregoing, I would find myself unable to agree with the contention

so advanced by the Petitioners that, the case in Kospalage Don Kapila

Lankaratne vs Wanniachchige Kankanamage Siriyalatha (Supra) had been

wrongly, decided by this Court and therefore, it was a decision made per

incuriam.

In view of the law set out above, I would hold that, the Petitioners cannot invoke

the revisionary jurisdiction of this Court against the order dated 26.05.2020

made by the learned High Court Judge (Z11) in the exercise of concurrent or

CPA/0087/2020

Page 41 of 41

parallel revisionary jurisdiction vested in it by Article 154P(3)(b) to be read with

Article 138 of the Constitution and section 5 and 12 of the Act for; the Petitioners

have already exhausted the remedy available by the law as enumerated above,

and therefore, the Petitioners are now, debarred from invoking the concurrent or

parallel revisionary jurisdiction of this Court against the said order of the

learned High Court Judge made in the exercise of concurrent or parallel

jurisdiction, as rightly, contended by the Respondent.

In the result, I would hold that the jurisdictional objection so raised by the

Respondent as to the maintainability of the instant application in revision, is

entitled to succeed in law.

I would thus, uphold the same.

Hence, I would dismiss the instant application in revision with costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL