IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

1

In the matter of an application for writs of

Certiorari, Prohibition and Mandamus in

terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Case No: CAlWRIT/132/2015 Vs.

Pussellawa Plantations Limited,

Level 11, FLC Tower,

19, Dudley Senanayake Mawatha,

Colombo 8.

PETITIONER

1. Hon. Minister of Plantation Industries,

55175, Vauxhall Lane,

Colombo 02.

lA. Hon. Gayantha Karunathillake, MP

Minister of Lands and Parliamentary

Reforms,

"Mihikatha Medura", Land Secretariat,

No. 1200/6, Rajamalwatta Avenue,

Baththaramulla.

2. Land Reform Commission,

C 82, Gregory's Road,

Colombo 07.

Ii I

! ! I ! I l l I I I I

Before

Counsel

3. Janatha Estate Development Board,

55/57, Vauxhall Lane,

Colombo 02.

4. Hon. The Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

5. Delgollalage Sandasiri Lakshman

Weeraratne,

"Malani Was a", Navgala,

Warakapola.

6. Delgollalage Induka Tissa Kumara

Weeraratne,

"Malani W as a" ,

Navgala,

Warakapola.

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

T. Weragoda for Petitioner.

RESPONDENTS

Dr. Sunil Cooray with A.W.D.S. Rodrigo for the 2nd Respondent.

2

Navin Marapana with Mr. Uchitha Wickramasinghe for the 5th and

6th Respondents.

Nayomi Kahawita, SC for 1st, 3rd and 4th Respondents.

Supported on 09/0112018

Decided on 23/02/2018

Order

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

1!

!

I!

~ I, i I I i

~ !I t:

rI f

3

By this application, the Petitioner has sought for an order of Writ of

Certiorari and a Writ of Prohibition among other reliefs, against the 2nd

Respondent (Hon. Minister of Plantation Industries) to quash decisions made

under the Land Reform Law No. 01 of 1972.

When the Petition was mentioned for support on 28/6/2017, Counsel

appearing for the 5th and 6th Respondents raised two preliminary objections to the

maintainability of this application and objected to the issuance of notice to the

Respondents on the basis that, the 1 st Respondent is not properly named and also

that the said Respondent is not a juristic person. The State Counsel appearing for

the 1 s\ 3rd and 4th Respondents and Senior Counsel appearing for the 2nd

Respondent did not associate themselves with the said objection raised by the 5th

and 6th Respondents.

The said objections are based on two grounds namely that,

Article 170 of the Constitution excludes a "Minister" from the definition of

"Public Officer" and therefore the said application is in violation of Part

(IV), Rule 5(2), of the Court of Appeal (Appellate Procedure) Rules 1990.

The 1 st Respondent is not a juristic person in terms of the law and therefore

the application is void ab initio.

Learned Counsel for the Petitioner has sought permISSIOn of Court to

amend the caption of the Petition. Therefore, the preliminary issue for

\

I Itf1j , f II

~ i J

f ! I I t

r

I

ftiIIII iI

t II

I t

4

determination before this court is, whether the court at this stage could permit the

Petitioner to amend the caption.

When this application was listed for support on 5/5/2015, the Petitioner was

directed to issue notice on the Respondents and support application. However on

911 0/20 15, when this application came up for support, the Counsel for the

Petitioner moved to amendment the caption. Thereafter due to various reasons this

case was not taken up for support. Meanwhile the 5th and 6th Respondents

appearing on notice on 28/6/2017, supported the said preliminary objection.

For ease of reference, I produce below sub rule (1), (2) and (3) of Rule

5(2) of Part IV, of the Court of Appeal (Appellate Procedure) Rules 1990,

referred to by the Petitioner.

05. (1) This rule shall apply to applications under Articles 140 and 141 of the

Constitution, in which a public officer has been made a Respondent in

his official capacity, (whether on account of an act or omission in such

official capacity, or to obtain relief against him in such capacity, or

otherwise ).

(2) A public officer may be made a Respondent to any such application by

reference to his official designation only (and not by name), and it shall

accordingly be sufficient to describe such public officer in the caption

by reference to his official designation or the office held by him,

omitting reference to his name. If a Respondent cannot be sufficiently

1

JI,

if

,

I

i

r

itII

~. ffI rII!I

\! II

I

I I I i

identified in the manner, it shall be sufficient if his name is disclosed in

the averments in the Petition.

(3) No such application shall be dismissed on account of any omission,

defect or irregularity in regard to the name designation, description, or

address of such Respondent if the Court is satisfied that such

Respondent has been sufficiently identified and described, and has not

been misled or prejudiced by such omission, defect or irregularity. The

Court may make such order as it thinks fit in the interest of justice, for

amendment of pleadings, fresh or further notice, costs, or otherwise, in

respect of any such omission, defect or irregularity.

In terms of sub rule 5(3), an application filed under Article 140 and 141 of

the Constitution, to amendment pleadings for any omission, defect or irregularity

to the name, designation description or address of such pleadings, the Court is

vested with discretion to permit such party to rectify the said irregularity in the

interest of justice.

The Petitioner in the original caption to the Petition has named the 1 sl

Respondent as the Minister in charge of Plantation Industries. The impugned order

sought to be challenged before Court is an order by the 1 st Respondent, Minister,

made under Section 27A (4) of the Land Reform Law No. I of 1972. The 1st

Respondent, Minister, is in charge of the subject, functions, and is also empowered

to perform relevant statutory duties in terms the said law. The amendment sought

6

by the Petitioner is to identify the said 1 st Respondent by name. Accordingly, if the

Court is satisfied that the said amendment would sufficiently identify the Minister

in charge to further the cause of justice of all relevant parties to this application,

the proposed amendment should be permitted in terms of the said rule. Therefore,

permitting the amendment of the caption in my view, does not in any manner

pervert the course of justice or prejudice the interest of the respective parties to

this application.

F or the reasons stated above, the amendment to the caption is allowed. In

the circumstances, the Petitioner is directed to pay costs fixed at Rs. 25,0001-.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

)

{i !fI \ ff !,fIiI f,i

tI( f I,

I

~

f! ! I

i

f

t i

1