==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/BOR/0001/2020

Page 1 of 28

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal under and in

terms of Section 28 of the Land

Acquisition Act No. 9 of 1950 as

amended read with Article 138 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

Appu Hennadi Totahewage Dawson

Silva (Deceased)

of No. 66, Madinnagoda Road,

Rajagiriya.

Appellant

1A. Mandadige Dharmi Swarnamali

Silva (nee Fernando)

(Deceased)

of No. 66, Madinnagoda Road,

Rajagiriya.

1B. Appu Hennadi Dilhan Nandika

Totahewage also known as Dilhan

Nandika Totahewa

of No. 66, Madinnagoda Road,

Rajagiriya.

1C. Appu Hennadi Ranga Ravinath

Totahewa of No. 66, Madinnagoda

Road, Rajagiriya.

Court of Appeal Case No: BOR/0001/2020 Land Acquisition Board of Review Appeal No. BR/36/2010/CL

CA/BOR/0001/2020

Page 2 of 28

Presently residing at :-

No. 59, Thornton Drive,

Penrith,

New South Wales 2750,

Australia.

1D. I.S. Totahewa

Both of No. 66, Madinnagoda Road,

Rajagiriya.

Presently residing at :-

No. 13, Yale Close,

North Rocks,

New South Wales 2151, Australia.

Substituted Appellants

Vs

Additional Division Sec. Acquiring

Officer,

Sri Lankan Land Reclamation and

Development Corporation,

No. 03, Sri Jayawardenepura Mawatha,

Welikada, Rajagiriya.

Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

1B. Appu Hennadi Dilhan Nandika

Totahewage also known as Dilhan

CA/BOR/0001/2020

Page 3 of 28

Nandika Totahewa, of No. 66,

Madinnagoda Road, Rajagiriya.

1C. Appu Hennadi Ranga Ravinath

Totahewa of No. 66, Madinnagoda

Road, Rajagiriya.

Presently residing at :-

No. 59, Thornton Drive,

Penrith,

New South Wales 2750,

Australia.

1D. I.S. Totahewa

Both of No. 66, Madinnagoda Road,

Rajagiriya.

Presently residing at :-

No. 13, Yale Close,

North Rocks,

New South Wales 2151, Australia.

1B, 1C, and 1D Substituted

Appellants-Appellants

Vs

Additional Division Sec. Acquiring

Officer,

Sri Lankan Land Reclamation and

Development Corporation,

No. 03, Sri Jayawardenepura Mawatha,

Welikada, Rajagiriya.

Respondent-Respondent

CA/BOR/0001/2020

Page 4 of 28

Before : D. THOTAWATTA, J.

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Counsel : U Abdul Najeem for the 1B, 1C and 1D

Substituted Appellants-Appellants

Prabhashanee Jayasekara, SC for the

Respondent-Respondent.

Argued on : 03.11.2025

Written Submissions

of the 1B, 1C and 1D

Substituted Appellants

-Appellants tendered on : 15.09.2020

Written Submissions

of the Respondent-Respondent

tendered on : 15.09.2020

Decided on : 27.03.2026

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Instant appeal has been preferred to this Court by the 1A, 1B, 1C and 1D

Substituted Appellants-Appellants (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the

Appellant’) from an order dated 14.10.2019 (hereinafter called and referred to

as ‘the Order’) made by the Land Acquisition Board of Review (hereinafter

called and referred to as ‘the LABR’) in the exercise of its appellate jurisdiction

vested in it by section 28(1) of the Land Acquisition Act No. 9 of 1950 as

amended (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the Act’) in respect of an appeal

preferred to it under and in terms of section 22 of the Act by the original

Appellant thereto, namely; Appu Hennadi Totahewage Dawson Silva who

had died during the pendency of the proceedings before it and the said 1A,

1B, 1C and 1D Substituted Appellants had been substituted as the

CA/BOR/0001/2020

Page 5 of 28

Substituted-Appellants in his place, thus, invoking the appellate jurisdiction

of this Court on the following questions of law among any other questions of

law that may be urged by Counsel at the hearing of this appeal, namely;

“(i) The honourable Land Acquisition Board of Review erred in law

in holding that the Appellant has not provided adequate proof

of relevant comparative sales.

(ii) The honourable Land Acquisition Board of Review erred in law

in holding that a direct comparison of sale should be preferred

over a valuation based on a notional development in the

present case;

(iii) The honourable Land Acquisition Board of Review erred in law

in failing to appreciate the total failure on the part of the

Respondent is justifying the valuation of Rs. 2,000/- per perch;

(iv) The honourable Land Acquisition Board of Review erred in law

in failing to justify the basis on which the Board concludes that

the value of a perch of the subject land as at the relevant date

should be Rs. 5,000/;

(v) The honourable Land Acquisition Board of Review erred in law

in holding that the subject land cannot be developed when in

fact the law provides for the Appellant to seek permission to

develop same;

(vi) The honourable Land Acquisition Board of Review erred in law

in holding that previous orders of the Board marked A5, A6, A7

and A8 are not relevant to the present Appeal.

(vii) The Board misdirected itself on excluding the evidence with

regard to the sales that took place which misdirection amounts

to a misdirection on law.

CA/BOR/0001/2020

Page 6 of 28

(viii) The several inferences were drawn by the board in arriving at

its decision based on conclusion of facts drawn by the board

are unsupported by legal evidence.

(ix) The conclusion drawn by the Board from relevant facts were

not rationally possible.

(x) The board has drawn wrong and/or incorrect inferences from

the evidence placed before the Board.

(xi) The conclusions arrived at by the Board had not been

supported by evidence.

(xii) The Board has failed to consider the statutory provisions of the

Land Acquisition Act and the Evidence Ordinance.

(xiii) The Board had misdirected itself based on several inferences

made after excluding admissible and relevant evidence and/or

without considering relevant evidence.

(xiv) The Board refused to acknowledge evidence placed before itself

based on assumptions which were not put to the witness which

amounts to a misdirection of Law.

(xv) The Board misdirected itself by basing its decision on matters

which did not arise during the course of the evidence.

(xvi) The Board has failed to give reasons as to how it arrived at its

decisions.

(xvii) All the Members of the Board that delivered the Order were not

present at the hearing of the evidence and therefore, did not

have the jurisdiction to make the Order in question.”

While, totally, denying the contentions advanced by the learned Counsel for

the Appellant at the hearing of this appeal before us, it was on the other hand,

CA/BOR/0001/2020

Page 7 of 28

contended by the learned State Counsel for the Respondent that computation

of the quantum of compensation awarded to the Appellant in its order by the

LABR is based on the evidence led before it and therefore, there is no error in

it and as such it can sustain both in fact and law and therefore, the appeal

should be dismissed with costs.

Although, the appeal was argued by the learned Counsel for the Appellant

mainly, on the three heads, namely; a) the proof of comparative sales; b) the

basis of valuation; and, c) failure of the LABR to give reasons in arriving at its

conclusions, however, upon a careful perusal of all those three heads, it

appears that all those three heads are interwoven, and therefore, I would

propose to deal with all of them together.

Before I venture to examine the legal sustainability of the arguments so

advanced by the learned Counsel for the Appellant under those three heads

as enumerated above, let me now, briefly, set out the facts and circumstances

relevant and material to the instant appeal as recited in the petition of appeal

by the Appellant.

Pursuant to a notice published in the Extra-Ordinary Gazette of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka (A2/R7) under section 7 of the

Act, by the Acquiring Officer-Sri Lanka Land Reclamation and Development

Corporation who being the Respondent-Respondent to the instant appeal

(hereinafter called and referred to as the ‘Respondent’), the deceased

Appellant had notified his claim for compensation in a sum of Rs.

112,400,000/- as the market value thereof at the time of the publication of

the notice, namely; 03.01.1994, to the Respondent in respect of the land

intended to be acquired by him, namely; lot 6 containing in extent of 1.871

Hectares or 4 Acres 2 Roods 9.41 Perches, as shown and depicted in the

Preliminary Plan bearing No. ක ො 7290, dated 10.12.1992, prepared by

Surveyor General for the purpose of acquisition under the provisions of the

Act (A1/R1A); and that the Respondent, had having held an inquiry into the

claims for compensation under the provisions of the Act, made a decision

under section 17 thereof (R11), thereby, determining that the deceased

CA/BOR/0001/2020

Page 8 of 28

Appellant is entitled to the entirety of the land intended to be acquired; and

thus, awarding Rs. 1,468,236.73/- to the deceased Appellant as being

compensation; and that being aggrieved by the award made by the

Respondent, the deceased Appellant had under section 22(1) of the Act,

preferred an appeal to the LABR on the premise that the amount of the

compensation allowed to him by the Respondent is insufficient; and that the

LABR had in appeal, set aside the award made by the Respondent, namely;

Rs. 1,468,236.73/- and substituted thereof, in a sum of Rs. 3,697,050/-

being compensation payable to the deceased Appellant; and that being

aggrieved only by that part of the decision of the LABR with regard to the mode

of the assessment of compensation, instant appeal had been preferred to this

Court by the Appellant praying for an order to set aside the award of the LABR

and to enhance it to a sum of Rs. 49,056,603/- being the market value of the

land intended to be acquired by the Respondent on the date of the publication

in the Gazette, of the notice under section 7 of the Act (A2/R7) namely;

03.01.1994.

Having briefly, set out the facts and circumstances relevant and material to

the instant appeal, let me now, examine the legal sustainability of the

arguments so advanced by the learned Counsel for the Appellant under those

three heads as enumerated above.

It is in this context, I would think it appropriate at this juncture to examine

the provisions governing assessment of quantum of compensation under the

provisions of the Act and the part VI of the Act comprising of sections 45, 46,

46A, 47 and 48, expressly, enact the special provisions with regard to the

assessment of the amount of compensation to be awarded to a person whose

land is subject to the acquisition under the provisions of the Act for a public

purpose and they read thus;

“45.

(1) For the purposes of this Act the market value of a land in respect

of which a notice under section 7 has been published shall, subject

CA/BOR/0001/2020

Page 9 of 28

as hereinafter provided, be the amount which the land might be

expected to have realized if sold by a willing seller in the open

market as a separate entity on the date of publication of that

notice in the Gazette :

Provided that, in determining that amount, all such returns and

assessments of income from, or of the capital or annual value of,

that land as have been made or acquiesced in by the owner of that land

for the purposes of any rate or tax imposed in respect of that land,

shall be taken into consideration.

(2) For the purposes of this Act the market value of a servitude shall-

(a) where it is a new servitude which is to be created by its

acquisition under this Act, be the amount by which the market

value of the servant tenement of the servitude will be diminished

by the creation of the servitude, or

(b) where it is an existing servitude which is to be extinguished

by the acquisition of the servitude and its servant tenement

under this Act, be the amount by which the market value of the

dominant tenement of the servitude will be diminished by the

extinction of the servitude.

(3) Where any portion of a land which is to be acquired under this Act

is situated within any street lines or building limit defined by or under

any other written law, the market value of that portion shall be the

market value which that portion would have if it does not fall within

such street lines or building limit :

Provided that the acquiring officer shall, notwithstanding anything in

this Act, tender and make payment of compensation in respect of that

portion of land in the following manner :-

(a) he shall forthwith on the making of an award under section

17 in respect of that portion, pay to the persons entitle to

CA/BOR/0001/2020

Page 10 of 28

compensation according to that award in the proportions in

which such compensation has been apportioned to such persons

by that award, cash in an amount equal to-

(i) the market value of such portion of land on March 31,

1978 ; or

(ii) the market value of such portion of land on the date on

which the street lines or building limits within which such

portion is situated, were defined, whichever date is later ;

and

(b) the difference between the market value of that portion of land

on the date on which a notice under section 7 was published in

respect thereof and the amount paid under paragraph (a) shall be

paid to the persons entitled to compensation according to the

award made under section 17 in the proportions in which such

compensation has been apportioned to such persons by that

award, in the form of Government bonds escapable after ten years

and carrying interest at the current rate of interest payable on

medium-term Government bonds issued by the Central Bank of

Sri Lanka.”[Emphasis is mine]

“46.

(1) The amount of compensation to be paid under this Act to any person

interested in a land shall-

(a) where the compensation is for the acquisition of that land, be

based on the market value of that land, or

(b) where the compensation is for the acquisition of a servitude

over that land, be based on the market value of that servitude,

and shall be proportionate to his interest in that land. No additional

compensation shall be allowed to him in consideration of the

CA/BOR/0001/2020

Page 11 of 28

compulsory nature of the acquisition, but, where it is the land which is

to be acquired, he shall be entitled to"

(i) compensation for any damage sustained by reason of the

severance of the land from his other land, the severance being

deemed to occur on the date on which the notice under section 7

in respect of the land is published in the Gazette;

(ii) compensation for any damage sustained by reason of the

acquisition of the land injuriously affecting, in any manner other

than that mentioned in paragraph (i), his adjoining land or any

immovable property thereon, the injurious affection being

deemed to occur on the aforesaid date;

(iii) compensation for any such loss of earnings from any business

carried on the land on the aforesaid date as may be caused by

the acquisition of the land; and

(iv) any reasonable expenses of effecting any change of residence

necessarily caused by the acquisition of the land:

Provided that-

(a) the total amount of the compensation under paragraph (i) and

paragraph (ii) of this subsection shall not exceed twenty per

centum of the market value of the land to be acquired;

(b) the amount of the compensation under paragraph (iii) of this

subsection shall not exceed three times the average annual net

profits from the business, as shown by the books of accounts, for

the three calendar years immediately preceding the date on which

the notice under section 7 in respect of the land is published in

the Gazette; and

(c) no compensation shall be allowed under paragraph (iii) of this

subsection if the business is the sale or disposal of the produce

of the land to be acquired.

CA/BOR/0001/2020

Page 12 of 28

(2) Where any premises which are to be acquired under this Act are,

and but for their compulsory acquisition would continue to be, devoted

to a purpose of such a nature that there is no general demand or market

for land for that purpose, the compensation payable in respect of those

premises under this Act may, if the acquiring officer assessing the

compensation is satisfied that the persons interested in those premises

genuinely intend, when those premises are acquired, to provide for the

aforesaid purpose premises equally convenient as the acquired

premises, be assessed on the basis of the reasonable cost of providing

for that purpose premises equivalent to those which are to be acquired

under this Act.”

“46A. In determining under section 46 the compensation to be paid to

any person for the acquisition of any land, no account shall be taken of

any improvements made on the land by the State whether before or

after the date of commencement of this Act.”

“47. Where the compensation assessed under section 46 is for the

acquisition of only a part of any land, the amount by which the market

value of the remaining part of that land is likely to increase by reason

of such acquisition shall be deducted from the amount of such

compensation, the amount of the deduction being not more than twenty

per centum of the market value of such part of that land as is acquired

under this Act.”

“48. In determining under section 46 the compensation to be paid to

any person for the acquisition of a land or servitude, none of the

following matters shall be taken into consideration:"

(a) the degree of urgency which has led to the acquisition of the

land or servitude under this Act;

(b) his disinclination to part with his interest in the land or to

allow the acquisition of the servitude ;

CA/BOR/0001/2020

Page 13 of 28

(c) any damage sustained by him which, if caused by a private

person, would not render such person liable to a suit;

(d) any damage which, after the award of compensation, is likely

to be caused by or in consequence of the use to which the land

or servitude will be put after its acquisition under this Act;

(e) any increase which is likely to occur in the market value of the

land by reason of the use to which it will be put after its

acquisition under this Act;

(f) any outlay or improvement made or commenced on the land

after the notice under section 4 in respect of the land was given

or exhibited unless such outlay or improvement was reasonably

for the purpose of maintaining or preserving the land or any

plantation, building, fixture, or machinery thereon;

(g) the special suitability or adaptability of the land for any

purpose to which it could be applied only under statutory powers

or for which there is no market apart from the special needs of a

particular purchaser or the requirements of any Government

department or local authority or of any body of persons

constituted by or under any other written law;

(h) the amount of any such increase in the market value of the

land as has been caused by the use thereof or of any premises

thereon in a manner which can be restrained by any court or is

contrary to law or is detrimental to the health of the inmates of

the premises or to the public health.”

In the light of section 46(1)(a) of the Act, the amount of compensation to be

paid under the Act to any person interested in a land shall where the

compensation is for the acquisition of that land as in the instant case, be

based on the market value of that land.

What then, is the market value for the purposes of the Act?

CA/BOR/0001/2020

Page 14 of 28

In the light of the section 45 of the Act, the market value of a land in respect

of which a notice under section 7 thereof has been published, shall subject to

the provisions contained in part VI of the Act, be the amount which the land

might be expected to have realized if sold by a willing seller in the open market

as a separate entity on the date of the publication of that notice in the Gazette.

What then is the test/criteria to be applied in determining the market

value for the purposes of the Act?

The test/criteria to be applied in determining the market value of a land in

respect of which a notice under section 7 thereof has been published shall

subject to the provisions contained in part VI of the Act, be the test/criteria

which will determine the amount which the land might be expected to

have realized if sold by a willing seller in the open market as a separate

entity on the date of the publication of that notice in the Gazette.

[Emphasis is mine]

Applying the test/criteria laid down in section 45 of the Act to the facts of the

instant appeal, the test to be applied in determining the market value of the

land intended to be acquired by the Respondent in respect of which a notice

under section 7 thereof had been published by him, shall subject to the

provisions contained in part VI of the Act, be the test/criteria which will

determine the amount which the land intended to be acquired in the

instant case might be expected to have realized if sold by a willing seller

in the open market as a separate entity on the date of the publication of

that notice in the Gazette. (A2/R7), namely; 03.01.1994 [Emphasis is

mine]

What then is the material to be taken into consideration in determining

the market value of the land in respect of which notice under section 7

of the Act has been published?

Answer thereto, can be found in the proviso to section 45(1) of the Act which

enacts that “Provided that, in determining that amount, all such returns

and assessments of income from, or of the capital or annual value of,

CA/BOR/0001/2020

Page 15 of 28

that land as have been made or acquiesced in by the owner of that land

for the purposes of any rate or tax imposed in respect of that land, shall

be taken into consideration.” [Emphasis is mine]

Hence, the material as envisaged by the proviso to section 45(1) of the Act,

shall be the material that should be taken into consideration in determining

the market value of the land in respect of which a notice under section 7 of

the Act has been published.

What then is the date on which the market value should be assessed?

In light of the proviso to section 45(1) of the Act, for the purposes of the Act,

the market value of a land in respect to which a notice under section 7 of the

Act has been published shall be the market value thereof, on the date of

the publication of that notice in the Gazette (A2/R7). [Emphasis is mine]

Applying the test to the facts of the instant action, the date on which the

market value shall be assessed, is the date of publication of the notice under

section 7 of the Act in the Gazette (A2/R7), namely; 03.01.1994 [Emphasis

is mine].

It is trite principle of law that once a test and/or criteria and/or guideline

has been laid down by a Statute itself in determining a particular fact, Court

is bound to follow and apply the test and/or criteria and/or guideline so laid

down by the Statute itself in determining a particular fact as such in instances

where the language of the Statute or the provision thereof, is plain, simple

and not lead to any ambiguity and a Court cannot in such circumstances,

rely on the judicial precedent in that regard totally, disregarding the law laid

down by a Statute without first applying the test and/or criteria and/or

guideline so laid down by the Statute itself in determining a particular fact as

such and judicial precedent would in such circumstances, be of no assistance

or of little assistance, in determining the same.

Hence, not only the Acquiring Officer-the Respondent in the instant action

but also LABR in the exercise of its appellate jurisdiction is bound to follow

the test and/or criteria and/or guideline so laid down by section 45 of the

CA/BOR/0001/2020

Page 16 of 28

Act in determining the market value of the land in respect of which a notice

under section 7 of the Act had been published by the Respondent in the

instant action for the purpose of determining the amount of compensation to

be awarded to the owner thereof, and neither the Acquiring Officer-the

Respondent in the instant action nor LABR has in such circumstances, power

to look elsewhere without first following and/ or applying the test and/or

criteria and/or guideline so laid down by section 45 of the Act in determining

the market value of the land in respect of which a notice under section 7 of

the Act had been published by the Respondent in the instant action for the

purpose of determining the amount of compensation to be awarded to the

owner thereof.

However, having properly, directed its mind in the first place to the statutory

provisions laying down the test/criteria to be applied in determining the

market value for the purpose of computation of compensation to be awarded

under the Act as enumerated above, the Acquiring Officer or LABR would

then, be entitled to be further guided, by the principle laid down by Court in

this regard and it is in this context, let me now, examine the principle laid

down by the judicial precedent in determining the market value of a land

intended to be acquired under and in terms of the provisions of the Act.

It was inter-alia, laid down by Court in Government Agent Southern

Province Vs. Silva 3 NLR 235 at 240 that “The value of a piece of land

cannot be determined so easily as that of a commodity like rice, for instance,

which has a recognized market price. The value of any given land depends on

its extent, situation, relative position, and its adaptability for any

particular use. This value may again be affected by the use made of the

property immediately adjoining it. Given all the surrounding

circumstances, What is the best use to which the land can be put.? is

I think a fair question to be asked in a case of the kind. Then, what are

the tests of the market value of a piece, of land? One that naturally

suggests itself is the price which any one would give for it at a public

auction. Another test is the price given at recent sales for pieces of land

CA/BOR/0001/2020

Page 17 of 28

similarly situated, but the value of this test altogether depends on the

circumstances attending such sales. The rent and the rate of interest

obtaining in the district are also material for computing the market

value. These rules are not of course exhaustive, but I think that they indicate

the line of inquiry to be taken in similar cases…” [Emphasis is mine]

In Government Agent Vs. Perera 7 NLR 313, at page 320 it was held by

Court that “There are undoubtably, several tests by which the market value

of any particular allotment of land may be arrived at, but one of the truest

and fairest is the actual amount paid for a similar allotment of land

situated in the same vicinity and used for similar purposes” [Emphasis is

mine]

It was inter-alia, laid down by Court in Perera Vs. Fernando 51 NLR 121 at

page 128 that “Now it well settled law that evidence of recent sales in the

vicinity, if properly adduced, is an important test in deciding upon the

market value provided, that such sales were of property similarly

situated;….. to this I would add that the sales must be shown to have been

by a willing seller to a willing buyer…..” [Emphasis is mine]

This Court in the decision in CA/LA/Acq. 04/2011 & 05/2011-decided on

12.12.2013, cited with approval a passage from the decision in Trustee Vs.

Rajarathnam 75 NLR 391, wherein it was inter-alia, held that, “In such a

case the prior sale price of a similar land in the vicinity should be taken

into account” [Emphasis is mine]

Applying the test and/or the criteria laid down by section 45(1) of the Act, the

market value of the land intended to be acquired in the instant action shall

subject to the provisions contained therein, be the amount which the land

might be expected to have realized if sold by a willing seller in the open market

as a separate entity on the date of publication of the notice under section 7 of

the Act in the Gazette (A2/R7), namely; 03.01.1994.

In the light of the proviso to section 45(1) of the Act, in determining that

amount, all such returns and assessments of income from, or of the

CA/BOR/0001/2020

Page 18 of 28

capital or annual value of, that land as have been made or acquiesced in

by the owner of that land for the purposes of any rate or tax imposed in

respect of that land, shall be taken into consideration. [Emphasis is mine]

It is no doubt that all such returns and assessments of income from, or of the

capital or annual value of, that land as have been made or acquiesced in by

the owner of that land for the purposes of any rate or tax imposed in respect

of that land should be in the possession of the Appellant in the instant appeal.

Hence, it was incumbent upon the Appellant to have furnished those material

before the Acquiring Officer and/or LABR so as to enable the Acquiring Officer

and/or LABR to have determined the market value of the land intended to be

acquired by the Respondent on the date of the publication of the notice under

section 7 of the Act on 03.01.1994 in the Gazette (A2/R7) for; it was the

Appellant who had asserted before the Respondent in the first place that the

market value of the land intended to be acquired by the Respondent on the

date of the publication of the notice under section 7 of the Act on 03.01.1994

in the Gazette (A2/R7) was Rs. 112,400,000/- which was subsequently,

amended by the original Appellant to be Rs 73,941,000/- in his appeal to the

LABR which was further amended by the Appellant to be Rs.

49,056,156.49/- in his written submissions furnished by him to the LABR

on the basis that market value of a perch thereof, was Rs. 66,345/- as

observed by the LABR in the impugned order, and therefore, sole burden of

proof was on the Appellant to have proved what he had asserted before it in

terms of section 3 of the Evidence Ordinance to be read with sections 101,102

and 103 thereof.

However, it manifestly, appears upon a careful scrutiny of the proceedings

before LABR, that the Appellant had totally, failed to furnish thereto, any of

those documents as envisaged by the proviso to section 45(1) of the Act as

enumerated above, so as to enable the Respondent and/or LABR to have

determined the market value of the land intended to be acquired by the

Respondent on the date of the publication of the notice under section 7 of the

CA/BOR/0001/2020

Page 19 of 28

Act on 03.01.1994 in the Gazette (A2/R7) on the basis that perch value

thereof, was Rs. 66,345/- on that day as asserted by the Appellant.

Furthermore, the Appellant had heavily, relied on the documentary evidence

produced before LABR through his expert witness-Mr. Kaleel-Private Valuer

marked as ‘A3’ to ‘A12’ in determining the market value of the land intended

to be acquired by the Respondent on the basis of the residual or development

method, by way of past awards and by way of past sales as a basis of valuation

thereof.

Let me now, examine them.

Under and in terms of Section 10(1)(a) of the Act, the original Appellant had

been awarded the entirety of the land intended to be acquired by the

Respondent being sole owner thereof.

In terms of Section 17 of the Act, the original Appellant had been awarded in

a sum of Rs. 1,468,236.73 as compensation. It is against this decision of the

Respondent awarding compensation to him as aforesaid, the original

Appellant had preferred an appeal to LABR.

The original Appellant had heavily, relied on the valuation prepared by Mr.

Kaleel-the private valuer in order to substantiate the claim notified by him to

the Respondent to the Land Intended to be acquired by him.

While giving evidence before LABR for the original Appellant, Mr. Kaleel-

private valuer had stated that he had valued a perch of the land intended to

be acquired by the Respondent at Rs. 66,000/-; and that his valuation was

based on the Notional Development Scheme proposed by him in the Notional

Development Plan (A12); and that it was based on the past sales of the Keels

lands which are geographically, located along Gothami Road, situated at

Borella within the Municipal Council limit of Colombo; and that the Keels

lands that were used as basis for his valuation of the land intended to be

acquired by the Respondent were at the time, valuation was prepared by him,

were developed lands by Keels Development Limited.

CA/BOR/0001/2020

Page 20 of 28

Upon a careful analysis of the Schedule of Deeds of Transfer of Blocks Relating

to Keels Development Limited-Sold by Public Auction Sale held on October

1992 (A9), the plan bearing No. 91/40A, dated 26.01.1992 (A10), Estimate of

cost of filling as of 1994 (A11) and Notional Development Scheme (A12), it

becomes manifestly, clear beyond any doubt that Mr. Kaleel-private valuer

had based his valuation in respect of the land intended to be acquired by the

Respondent on the basis of the value of the Keels Lands admittedly, sold by

public auction by Keels Development Limited as developed lands.

Conversely, the land intended to be acquired by the Respondent was a paddy

land which is now, abandoned and hence, a marsh land at the time of the

publication of the notice under section 7 of the Act on 03.01.1994 in the

Gazette (A2/R7).

Hence, the pertinent question that arose for consideration before the LABR as

manifest from the order sought to be impugned in the instant appeal being;

Can the value of the Keels Lands which are admittedly, the developed

lands as aforesaid, be considered as comparable in computing the value

of the land intended to be acquired by the Respondent which is

admittedly, a marsh land?. This question was answered in the negative by

the LABR for the reasons stated in the order and the correctness of it is now,

sought to be impugned by the Appellant in the instant appeal before us.

It is in this context, let me now, examine section 45(1) of the Act which enacts

thus;

“45.

(1) For the purposes of this Act the market value of a land in respect

of which a notice under section 7 has been published shall, subject

as hereinafter provided, be the amount which the land might be

expected to have realized if sold by a willing seller in the open

market as a separate entity on the date of publication of that

notice in the Gazette.”

CA/BOR/0001/2020

Page 21 of 28

In the light of section 45(1) of the Act, the market value of a land in respect

of which a notice under section 7 has been published shall, subject as

hereinafter provided, be the amount which the land might be expected to

have realized if sold by a willing seller in the open market as a separate

entity on the date of publication of that notice in the Gazette.[Emphasis

is mine]

In view of the test/criteria laid down in the judicial precedents quoted above,

the market value of any given land depends on its extent, situation, relative

position, and its adaptability for any particular use.

Furthermore, the market value of land may again be affected by the use made

of the property immediately adjoining it.

Moreover, what are the tests of the market value of a piece of land? One that

naturally suggests itself is the price which any one would give for it at a public

auction. Another test being the price given at recent sales for pieces of land

similarly situated, but the value of this test altogether depends on the

circumstances attending such sales. [Emphasis is mine]

One of the truest and fairest is the actual amount paid for a similar

allotment of land situated in the same vicinity and used for similar

purposes. [Emphasis is mine]

The evidence of recent sales in the vicinity, if properly adduced, is an

important test in deciding upon the market value provided, that such sales

were of property similarly situated.

Hence, the prior sale price of a similar land in the vicinity should be taken

into account in determining the market value of the land intended to be

acquired under the Act provided, that such sales were of property similarly

situated.

Let me now, examine the pivotal question that arose for its decision by the

LABR namely; Can the value of the Keels Lands which are admittedly, the

developed lands as aforesaid, be considered as comparable in computing

CA/BOR/0001/2020

Page 22 of 28

the value of the land intended to be acquired by the Respondent which

is admittedly, a marsh land? and the decision made therein, and the

reasons adduced therefor, by it. [Emphasis is mine]

In the light of the definition given to the phrase “the market value of a land

in respect of which a notice under section 7 has been published” as

contained in section 45(1) of the Act and the tests/criteria laid down by Courts

as enumerated above, in determining the Market Value of the same, namely;

the prior sale price of a similar land in the vicinity of the land intended to

be acquired in the instant appeal should be taken into account in determining

the market value of it provided, that such sales were of property similarly

situated, the pivotal question that arose before the LABR was; Can the value

of the Keels Lands which are admittedly, the developed lands as

aforesaid, be considered as comparable in computing the value of the

land intended to be acquired by the Respondent which is admittedly, a

marsh land? [Emphasis is mine]

It may now, be examined.

For the value of the Keels Lands which are admittedly, the developed lands as

aforesaid, to be taken into consideration as comparable in computing the

value of the land intended to be acquired by the Respondent, as being prior

sale price of a similar land in the vicinity of the land intended to be

acquired in the instant appeal, they too, ought to have been similarly, situated

in the vicinity of the land intended to be acquired in the instant appeal.

Point to be noted here is that, the land intended to be acquired by the

Respondent under the Act, is an abandoned paddy field which is now, a marsh

land with a depth of 4 to 5 ft as admitted by all the parties before LABR

whereas, Keels Lands are developed lands at the time of the notice under

section 7 of the Act being published by the Respondent and therefore, Keels

Lands are not the lands similarly, situated as the land intended to be acquired

and as such the sale price of the Keels Lands cannot in any manner, be

considered as comparable in computing the sale price of the land intended to

CA/BOR/0001/2020

Page 23 of 28

be acquired it being a marsh land as rightly, held by the LABR in rejecting the

valuation of Mr. Kaleel-private valuer being one of the grounds adduced

therefor.

Moreover, the land intended to be acquired by the Respondent is situated

1Km away from Rajagiriya and located along Madinnagoda Road within the

Urban Council Limits of Kotte, whereas the Keels Lands are located at

Gothami Road, Boraella within the Municipal Limits of Colombo, and hence,

Keels Lands are situated in a prime location closer to Colombo and the land

intended to be acquired is situated about 1Km off Rajagiriya along

Madinnagoda Road and access thereto therefrom through a private pathway

and hence, Keels Lands and the land intended to be acquired by the

Respondent under the Act are not only not similarly, situated but also not

situated in the same vicinity but rather in two different geographical areas

and therefore, Keels Lands are not the lands similarly, situated in the same

vicinity as the land intended to be acquired and as such the sale price of the

Keels Lands being developed lands at the time of the publication of notice

under section 7 of the Act, cannot in any manner, be considered as

comparable in computing the sale price of the land intended to be acquired it

being a marsh land as rightly, held by the LABR in rejecting the valuation of

Mr. Kaleel-private valuer being one of the other grounds adduced therefor.

Besides, Mr. Kaleel-private valuer had under cross-examination, expressly,

admitted his ignorance as to the date on which the property had been

purchased by Keels Development Limited or as to the price at which it had

been purchased by it. Furthermore, Mr. Kaleel-private valuer had under

cross-examination, expressly, admitted that he was unaware of the ground

situation of the Keels Lands that existed at the time it was purchased by Keels

Development Limited.

Hence, point to be noted here is that, although these two lands cannot be

compared in terms of its geographical location, however, the only sale that

has been submitted to the LABR in order to show the market value of the

lands referred to as swamps is the Keels Lands.

CA/BOR/0001/2020

Page 24 of 28

Hence, the past sales submitted to the LABR by the Appellant are

undoubtably, the sales made after development and in the circumstances, the

point to be taken into consideration is that neither the Appellant nor the

Respondent had submitted to the LABR any sales of marsh land or high land

near the land intended to be acquired by the Respondent under the provisions

of the Act to indicate the value of that area. Also, since the sales of high lands

have not been submitted to the Board, it appears that the area in question is

an area where there has been not many sales.

Therefore, the only land presented by the Original Appellant to the LABR with

a swampy commercial value is the one shown by the Keels Development

Limited.

The other material point to be noted here is that, evidence of Mr. Kaleel-

private valuer before LABR does not appear to have been consistent for; he

had one occasion, stated in evidence that the depth of the land intended to

be acquired by the Respondent under section 7 of the Act, is 3Ft whereas he

had on the other occasion, stated in evidence that the depth of the land was

4 to 5Ft thereby, clearly, showing his ignorance of this point which is very

vital in computing the market value of the land intended to be acquired. Hence

the pivotal question was; how did Mr. Kaleel-private valuer prepare a

valuation for the land intended to be acquired by the Respondent in the

absence of correct and accurate market data?

Hence, it clearly, appears that Notional Development Scheme (A12) proposed

by Mr. Kaleel-private valuer was not based on correct and accurate market

data and hence, the valuation based on the Notional Development Scheme

(A12) which is based on the sale price of the developed Keels Lands, cannot

in any manner, be considered to be accurate and precise showing the market

value of the land intended to be acquired by the Respondent for want of

correct and accurate market data as rightly, held by LABR.

CA/BOR/0001/2020

Page 25 of 28

In view of the above, the pivotal question that arose before the LABR for its

consideration was; Under those circumstances can the valuation of Mr.

Kaleel-private valuer be accepted and acted upon as one accurately, and

precisely, showing the market value of the land intended to be acquired by

the Respondent? This question too, was rightly, answered in the negative in

its order by the LABR for the same reasons as set out by me as hereinbefore.

It was the original Appellant who had asserted before LABR in appeal that the

award made by the Acquiring Officer-the Respondent to the instant appeal,

was insufficient and therefore, the sole burden of poof was rested on the

original Appellant under and in terms of section 3 of the Evidence Ordinance

to be read with sections 101, 102 and 103 thereof, to have proved his

assertion in the affirmative before the LABR as held by the Supreme Court in

SC(Appeal) No. 12/2006-Decided on 18.06.2009. However, the Appellant

had totally, failed to establish before the LABR that the award made by the

Acquiring Officer-the Respondent to the instant appeal, was insufficient and

the market value of the land ought to be Rs. 49,056,156.49/- as stated in

his post argument written submissions filed by the original Appellant before

the LABR as rightly, held by LABR in rejecting the valuation of Mr. Kaleel-

private valuer.

In view of my findings as aforesaid, I would hold that the LABR is entirely,

justified in rejecting the valuation submitted to it through the expert witness

of the Appellant Mr. Kaleel-private valuer.

Mr. Kaleel-private valuer while giving evidence for the Appellant before the

LABR in appeal, had sought to heavily, rely on the past decisions of LABR in

appeals bearing No. CL 1293 and CL 1294, CL 1257, CL 1151 and CL 1152

and CL 1221(A4) in support of the valuation submitted by him in respect of

the land intended to be acquired by the Respondent and the decisions of LABR

pertaining thereto had been submitted to LABR by the original Appellant

trough Mr. Kaleel-private valuer marked as ‘A5’, ‘A6’, ‘A7’ and ‘A8’.

CA/BOR/0001/2020

Page 26 of 28

However, it is to be observed that the LABR in its decisions in CL 1293 and

1294(A5) had observed that the lands-the subject matter of three past

decisions of the LABR in CL 1221(A8) and CL 1151 and CL 1152 (A7) which

were heavily, relied on by the Appellant in order to substantiate the valuation

submitted by Mr. Kaleel-private valuer, are situated within the Municipal

Council Limits of Colombo and therefore, they are in my opinion, in much

superior situation and are therefore, not comparable.

Furthermore, the findings of the LABR that the property-the subject matters

of those past decisions are situated along Gothami Road, Boraella and its

surroundings and that the value stated therein, was the value after

development of the property- had never been challenged by the Appellant in

the instant appeal and therefore, those findings of LABR remains

unchallenged. It therefore, appears that they would fall not within the Sri

Jayawardenapura Kotte, Urban Council Limit but within the Colombo

Municipal Council limit and as such they are in my opinion, in much superior

situation and are therefore, not comparable using the comparable method of

valuation as the basis of the valuation in determining the market value of the

land intended to be acquired by the Respondent on the date of the publication

of the notice under section 7 of the Act in the Gazette (A2/R7) on 03.01.1994

as rightly, held by LABR.

Hence, it clearly, appears that the valuation submitted by Mr. Kaleel- Private

Valuer for the original Appellant, of the land intended to be acquired by the

Respondent on the date of the publication of the notice under section 7 of the

Act in the Gazette (A2/R7) on 03.01.1994 had not been supported by any

evidence oral or documentary by the Appellant and therefore, it is without any

basis and as such it cannot, sustain both in fact and law and therefore, it

should be rejected as rightly, held by LABR.

These findings of LABR had been well, supported by the evidence of Ms.

Geetha Fernando-the Government Valuer before LABR that the past sales of

marshy lands pertaining to a similar allotment of land situated in the same

vicinity and used for similar purposes, could not be traced by her.

CA/BOR/0001/2020

Page 27 of 28

in view of the foregoing, I would hold that the Appellant had not established

in evidence either before the Respondent or LABR that market value of the

land intended to be acquired by the Respondent on the date of the publication

of the notice under section 7 of the Act in the Gazette (A2/R7) on 03.01.1994

is the value as notified to the Respondent in the first place or as indicated in

the petition of appeal filed in the LABR in the second place or as stated in the

post argument written submissions filed by the Original Appellant in the

LABR as enumerated above.

In the circumstances, LABR had having considered the evidence oral and

documentary adduced before it by both the Appellants as well as the

Respondent, proceeded to assess the amount of compensation to be awarded

to the original Appellant on the basis that the market value of a perch thereof

is Rs. 5000.00/- thereby, setting aside the decision of the Respondent with

regard to the award of compensation to the original Appellant and

substituting therefor the amount of compensation to be awarded to the

original Appellant as determined by LABR in its decision now under challenge

before us.

It is significant to observe that the original Appellant had not shown to us any

reason in the course of the argument why the order of LABR with regard to

the assessment of the amount of compensation to be awarded to the original

Appellant should be set aside or varied rather than contending that LABR had

not adduced any reason as to the manner in which compensation had been

so assessed by it. However, it is to be observed that a careful consideration of

the order in its totality, clearly, shows the very basis of the computation of the

compensation so awarded to the original Appellant in appeal by the LABR

Hence, I would see no legal basis to interfere with the order of LABR with

regard to the assessment of the amount of compensation to be awarded to the

original Appellant in the absence of any evidence to the contrary.

I would thus, affirm the order of LABR under appeal.

In the result, I would dismiss the appeal.

CA/BOR/0001/2020

Page 28 of 28

In view of all the above circumstances, I make no order for costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL