~ ! r! 1 l 1

\ 1 I j I ,

~ ! l :1

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

CNWRIT/403/2013

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for a mandate in

the nature of Writ of Certiorari under article 140

of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka

1. Engineering Diplomates Association

2. Technical Officers Union

Both of;

National Water Supply and Drainage Board,

Galle Road,

Ratmalana.

3. E.D. Subadra,

Jayathillake Garden,

Munagama,

Horana.

4. M.W. Chandrani,

23/20, New Hospital Road,

Pamunuwa,

Maharagama.

5. J.D.S.N. Karunathilake,

"Asiri Uyana", Palathota,

Kaluthara Sounth.

6. G .M. Ranasinghe,

650/L, Sudawila Road,

Nawagamuwa, Ranala.

I ,IIi fI

r!

I

[

t I

f

J[ I

~ i

iIIIIi ! ! i ,

\ !!

\

7. H.P.N.C. Siriwaradana,

205/9, 20th Mile Post,

Yakkala.

8. S.G.S.S. Kumara,

"Piyal", Aralaganwila,

Polonnaruwa.

9. RH. Suriyaarachchi

126/23A, Moratuwa Road,

Piliyandala.

10. RA. Kumanayake,

383, Weliwala Road, Kitigahawatte,

Angoda.

11. RG. A. Ranatunga,

483/11, Jeramius Fernando Mw,

Rawathawatta,

Moratuwa.

12. A.G.G .S. Kumara,

73/8, River Side Garden,

Peradeni ya Road,

Katugastota.

13. R.M.R. Rathnayake,

372/1, Bulukandagoda,

Embilmeegama,

Pilimathalawa.

PETITIOPNERS

2

Vs,

1. National Water Supply and Drainage Board,

Galle Road,

Ratmalana.

2. W.AC.N. Wickramarachchi,

No. 120A, Kamaragoda Rd,

Dewalapola.

3. AM.H.K. Abeykoon,

No. 24/2, Udathuththiripitiya,

Gampaha.

4. M.Sahadevan,

No.549/8, Galle Road,

Colombo 06.

5. S.T.D.O. Warapitiya,

No. 35/1, 151 Lane,

Kawraj Road,

Wekada,

Panadura.

6. J .A.C. Priyal,

No. 267/5, Sri Niwasarama Rd,

Pallimulla,

Panadura.

RESPONDENTS

AND NOW BETWEEN,

In the matter of an Application for Intervention,

3

National Water Supply and Drainage Board-Engineers Union, Galle Road, Ratmalana.

INTERVENIENT -PETITIOENR

Vs,

1. Engineering Diplomates Association

2. Technical Officers Union

Both of;

National Water Supply and Drainage Board,

Galle Road,

Ratmalana.

3. E.D. Subadra,

Jayathillake Garden,

Munagama,

Horana.

4. M. W. Chandrani,

23/20, New Hospital Road,

Pamunuwa,

Maharagama.

5. J.D.S.N. Karunathilake,

"Asiri Uyana", Palathota,

Kaluthara Sounth.

6. G .M. Ranasinghe,

650/L, Sudawila Road,

Nawagamuwa,

Ranala.

7. H.P.N.C. Siriwaradana,

205/9, 20th Mile Post,

Yakkala.

4

8. S.G.S.S. Kumara,

"Piyal", Aralaganwila,

Polonnaruwa.

9. R.H. Suriyaarachchi

126/23A, Moratuwa Road,

Piliyandala.

10. R.A. Kumanayake,

383, Weliwala Road,

Kitigahawatte,

Angoda.

11. R.G. A. Ranatunga,

483/11, Jeramius Fernando Mw,

Rawathawatta,

Moratuwa.

12. A.G.G.S. Kumara,

73/8, River Side Garden,

Peradeniya Road,

Katugastota.

13. R.M.R. Rathnayake,

372/1, Bulukandagoda,

Embilmeegama,

Pilimathalawa.

PETITIOPNERS-RESPONDENTS

Vs,

1. National Water Supply and Drainage Board,

Galle Road,

Ratmalana.

5

, I,

! I I t

t I i t

t t I! i I f I

~ t ! I

i I

i

i t ! i i I I 1

2. W.A.C.N. Wickramarachchi,

No. 120A, Kamaragoda Rd,

Dewalapola.

3. A.M.H.K. Abeykoon,

No. 24/2, Udathuththiripitiya,

Gampaha.

4. M. Sahadevan,

No.549/8, Galle Road,

Colombo 06.

5. S.T.D.O. Warapitiya,

No. 35/1, 1st Lane,

Kawraj Road,

Wekada,

Panadura.

6. J.A.c. Priyal,

No. 267/5, Sri Niwasarama Rd,

Pallimulla,

Panadura.

6

RESPONDENTS-RESPONDENTS

Before: Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J (PICA) &

H. C.J. Madawala J

Counsel: Faisz Musthapha PC with Lilanthi de Silva for the Petitioner-Respondents

Roshini Hettiarachchi for the Intervenient -Petitioner

Kushan de Alwils PC with Prasanna de Silva & Ayendra Wickramaratsekera

for the 1st Respondent- Respondent

Senany Dayaratne for the 2nd and 3rd Respondents- Respondents

7

Written Submission on: 12.10.2015

Order on: 11.12.2015

Order

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J (PICA)

Petitioners to this application are two trades unions namely,

1. Engineering Diplomates Association

2. Technical Officer's Union and some of the members of the said unions of the 1st Respondent

Board.

The above Petitioners have alleged before this court that the 1st Respondent board by an impugned

decision reflected in documents produced marked P-17 (a) to P-17(e) decided to promote all Engineers I

f from Board Grade 6 (MM1-1) to Board Grade 5 (MM1-1) and the said decision was illegal, unlawful,

arbitrary and capricious and therefore ultra virus. I

When the matter was supported before this court on 29.01.2014 court issued formal notices on the

Respondents and thereafter granted time for the Respondents to file limited objection before considering

the question of issuing interim relief as prayed in paragraph (e) to the prayer.

After giving due consideration to the limited objections filed by the 2nd to 6th Respondents this court on

2ih January 2015 decided to grant interim relief as prayed in paragraph (e) to the prayer subject to the

following conditions.

"If there are promotions of Engineers in Board Grade 6(MM1-1) to Board Grade 5 (MM1-1)

which can be implemented without violating the provisions of Scheme of Recruitment this court

l I {

t is not going to stop such promotion." t !

The said interim order is now in operation and the main matter is to be argued before this court once the I

pleadings are completed. I

8

However when this matter was pending before this court to support for the interim relief as referred

above by motion dated 21st July 2014, National Water Supply and Drainage Board - Engineers Union

Submitted papers before this court seeking intervention to the present case.

This court was not inclined to entertain the said application at that stage and therefore proceeded to

consider the issue of granting interim relief as prayed by the Petitioners.

At the conclusion of the said inquiry this court made the following order granting interim relief as

prayed by the Petitioners in paragraph (e) to the prayer,

"Petitioners during the inquiry submitted that they will not press for the suspension of the letters

P-17(a) - P-17(e) already issued and therefore we are not going make order suspending P-17(a)-

P-17(e)

If there are promotions of Engineers in Board Grade 6(MM1-1) to Board Grade 5 (MM1-1)

which can be implemented without violating the Provisions of Scheme of Recruitment this court

is not going to stop such promotions.

Subject to the above limitation, this court decides to make interim order staying the operation of

the said decision of the 1st Respondent Board reflected in the letters marked P-17 (a) - P-17 (e)

to promote all Engineers from Board Grade 6 (MM1-1) to Board Grade 5(MM1-1) pending the

final detennination of this application."

It is understood from the above Interim order by this court that the implementation of the decision

reflected in documents produced marked P-17 (a)- P-17(e) were stayed, except for the promotions

referred to in documents P-17 (a)-P-17 (e).

In other words all the promotions of the Engineers in Board Grade 6(MM1-1) to Board Grade 5(MM1-

1) based on the decision reflected in P-17(a) -P17 (e) were stayed until the conclusion of this case.

I I

\ I

I I

t

I

f II I II

II I

\

I

~ ! ;

9

Therefore this court is of the view that the request for Intervention by the Engineers Union will have to

be considered in the light of the above interim order and its consequences, and the extent to which it

affects its membership.

On behalf of the Intervenient -Petitioner it is submitted that, the said umon represents over 450

Engineers attached to the 1st Respondent Board and the quashing of the purported decision reflected in

documents produced marked 17(a) -17(e) will directly affect their members who are presently in Board

Grade 6(MM1-1). It is further submitted that the Petitioners have, by not making all Engineers in Board

Grade 6 (MM1-1) who are eligible to be promoted to Board Grade 5 (MM1-1) ensured that such

engineers are deprived of their legitimate right to be heard in opposition of the said application.

Whilst raising an objection to the application for intervention by the Intervenient-Petitioner, the

Petitioners-Respondents have raised two main objections, firstly that the said Intervenient -Petitioner

has not established sufficient interest to intervene in the present application and secondly the

Intervenient-Petitioner has no locus -standi in this matter.

In support of his first contention the Petitioners-Respondents have argued that,

a) That the Intervenient -Petitioner has failed to produce any decision purported to have

been taken by the 1st Respondent promoting all Engineers from Board Grade 6 to Board

Grade 5 and

b) That the Intervenient -Petitioner has failed to give any particulars of Engineers who are

members of the Intervenient-Petitioner's union purported to have been promoted by the

1 sl Respondent from Board Grade 6 to Board Grade 5

Petitioners have come before this court, seeking a Writ of Certiorari to quash the decision made by the

1st Respondent Board, as evinced in documents P-17(a)-P-17(e). The said document refers to promotions

of 2nd - 6th Respondents from Board Grade 6 to Board Grade 5. By taking into consideration the above

documents, this court granted an interim order preventing the 1st Respondent from promoting any other

10

Engineers from Board Grade 6 to Board Grade 5 subject to certain conditions which I have discussed

above. Therefore it is understood that this court has now taken notice of a decision by the 1st Respondent

to promote Engineers in Board Grade 6 to Board Grade 5 and that is the grievance of the Petitioners too.

Therefore, I see no reason for the Intervenient-Petitioner to establish the same fact once again before us.

The 1st and the 2nd Petitioners before this court are two trade unions representing their membership who

were affected by the above decision of the 1st Respondent Board. Similarly, the Intervenient-Petitioner's

Union represents Engineers attached to the 1st Respondent Board who are not belonging only to Board

Grade 6 but belonging to the other Grades as well. The Intervenient- Petitioner have submitted before

this court a list of 120 Engineers belonging to Board Grade 6 who are members of the Intervenient-

Petitioner's Union marked X and further submitted that 53 such members and directly affected from the

decisions of this court.

I !

\ ,

f

The Intervenient Petitioner has further argued that by the conduct of the Petitioners-Respondents, i.e. by )

not making the Engineers who are eligible to be promoted to Board Grade 5 under the impugned order,

their rights have been violated and therefore the Intervenient - Petitioner is a necessary party who can

assist the court to come to a correct finding.

As I have observed above, this court is mindful of the fact that an interim order has already being issued

preventing Engineers in Board Grade 6 to be promoted to Board Grade 5 under the impugned order and

therefore, this court has a duty to give an opportunity to those who are affected by the said order to place

their position before this court.

The Petitioners-Respondents have further submitted before this court, to several discussions between the

1 st Respondent and the Intervenient-Petitioner prior to reaching the said impugned decision, and

therefore this court is of the view that it is the Intervenient-Petitioner who can assist this court with

regard to their position, which resulted the 1st Respondent to implement the impugned decision.

J I I I f

t l i II l f f

..

11

The Petitioners-Respondents have further argued that the Intervenient -Petitioner has no locus -standi in

this matter.

In the case of Mahanayoka Thero, Malwattu Vihara V. Registrar General (1938) 39 NLR 186 the

Supreme Court allowed intervention by a third party and in his judgment Soertsz J observed that the

expelled priest was permitted to intervene" as he was vitally concerned in the matter."

In the case of Government Dental Therapists Association V. George Fernado Director of Health

Services CA Application No. 86/93 CA Minutes dated 21k July 1994 this court sought to adopt a liberal

approach in permitting third party intervention in to Writ proceedings.

In his judgment Amir Ismail J observed that "Each of the Intervenient-Petitioner's in the present case

cannot be said to be a meddlesome busybody or a meddlesome interloper who do not have a sufficient

interest in the pending application. I would therefore adopt the liberalized rules in regard to the case of

an intervenient who similarly has a sufficient interest in the subject matter of a pending Writ Application

and on this basis present intervention.

In the case of L.U.P. Jayawardana V. Minister of Health and Others [CA Writ Application No.

978/2008- CA minutes of 21.05.2009] Anil Goonaratne J observed.

What the court at this point of time need to consider is whether the intervenient party is a necessary

party and having such party in the case would in all circumstances assist court in considering the merits

and the demerits of the application before Court. I find that GMOA like the other party seeking to

intervene has some interest in the transfer scheme of medical officers and it would be necessary to

consider its view to arrive at a correct decision ... "

When considering the circumstances under which the Intervenient-Petitioner has come before this Court,

I observe that the above decisions of this court as well as by the Supreme Court permits me to conclude

that the Intervenient-Petitioner in the present case is a necessary party who can assist this court to arrive

i f I ! . ! ! 1 I II [ ,

I I I I

i

12 ..

at a correct decision. I therefore overrule the objections of the Petitioners-Respondents and allow

intervention of the Intervenient-Petitioner.

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

H.C.J. Madawala J

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE CUORT OF APPEAL

Intervention allowed.

!

\

i I, ! ! I I i I

~ i I [ I I I It L

J I

\

f If

~ ! I

~

I I