==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal in terms of Section 331(10 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 read with Article 138 (1) of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12

Complainant Court of Appeal No. CA/HCC/0042/2025 Vs. High Court of Awissawella Case No: HCA 17/2018

Wickramaarachchige Udayashantha Pushpakumara

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Wickramaarachchige Udayashantha Pushpakumara

Accused- Appellant Vs.

Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12

Complainant – Respondent

2

Before: Amal Ranaraja, J. Dr. Sumudu Premachandra, J. Counsel: Prashan Wickramaratne for the Accused-Appellant Yuhan Abeywickrama, D.S.G. for the Respondent Argued on: 11.06.2026 Decided on: 30.06.2026

Judgment Amal Ranaraja. J,

1. The accused-appellant (hereinafter referred to as the ‘appellant’) has

been indicted in the High Court of Awissawella in Case No. HCA

17/2018. The charge in the indictment is as follows;

01. That on around the 25th of January, 2016, in Hanwella,

within the jurisdiction of this Court, you have caused the

death of one Nalaka Mihira Abeyrathne, thereby committing

an offence of Murder, punishable under Section 296 of the

Penal Code of Sri Lanka.

2. At the conclusion of the trial, the appellant has been convicted of the

charge and sentenced to death. The appellant being aggrieved by the

conviction, disputed judgement and the sentencing order has preferred

the instant appeal to this Court.

3

Case of the Prosecution

3. PW02, and PW01 have been employed as the driver and conductor of a

bus. On the date of the incident, they have finished their work for the

day and have been taking the bus to its overnight parking location. At

this point, the appellant has boarded the bus with PW01’s permission

and taken a seat at the back, while PW01 has remained in the front.

4. A while later the deceased has also entered the bus from the rear and

remained there. Subsequently, PW01 has heard noise from the back of

the bus and seen the deceased walking towards the front, holding his

chest and bleeding from that area.

5. The appellant, who was at the rear has then disembarked from the bus.

PW01 and PW02 have immediately driven the deceased to the

Nawagamuwa hospital. The deceased has died at the hospital.

6. Dr. A. Dayapala, Consultant Judicial Medical Officer has conducted the

post-mortem examination and the resulting report, marked පැ 02, has

been submitted as evidence. Dr. Dayapala has concluded that the death

was caused by a stab injury to the chest.

Case of the Appellant

7. While the appellant has admitted boarding the bus, he has denied

causing injuries to the deceased.

Grounds of Appeal

8. When the matter was taken up for argument, the learned Counsel

appearing on behalf of the appellant has urged the following grounds of

appeal;

4

i. The learned Magistrate and learned High Court Judge have

erred in law, by failing to comply with the mandatory provisions

of Sections 374 and 375 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act

No. 15 of 1979, thereby violating the appellant’s right to a fair

trial.

ii. The proceedings before the High Court are vitiated in law as

there was no valid or proper committal of the appellant to the

High Court to stand trial.

9. The Counsel for the appellant has contended that the appellant, due to

a medical illness he was suffering from, was unfit to stand trial, and to

attend proceedings in the High Court. That his condition, prevented him

from providing proper instructions to his Counsel to make a proper

defense, thereby denying him a fair trial.

10. The appellant has been arrested on January 25th, 2016, in connection

to the incident for which the indictment was forwarded. Following the

directions of the learned Magistrate of Awissawella, the appellant has

subsequently been produced before Consultant Psychiatrist, Dr. Susil

Kulathilaka for examination.

11. During this assessment, Dr. Kulathilaka has opined that the appellant

was suffering from schizophrenia. Consequently, the appellant has

been admitted to the National Institute of Mental Health for treatment.

12. After undergoing treatment, the appellant has since recovered. This

recovery is documented in a medical report dated April 12th, 2016,

which has been prepared by Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist, Dr. L.A.P.

Alwis. The summary and the recommendations of this report state as

follows;

5

13. Thereafter the non-summary inquiry has been held and the learned

magistrate has considered the evidence sufficient to put the appellant

on trial. Consequently, committed the appellant for trial before the High

Court.

14. The trial against the appellant has commenced in the High Court of

Awissawella, after the indictment was forwarded. Initially, the

appellant has retained a counsel, who has later withdrawn from the

case citing lack of sufficient instruction from the accused.

15. Consequently, other counsel have been assigned on the appellant’s

behalf. They too have withdrawn, explaining that they did not receive

adequate instructions which they have attributed to the appellant’s

illness. On May 14th, 2024, the comprehensive application has been

submitted on the appellant’s behalf. This application has asserted a

prior history of the appellant being mentally ill and has requested for a

‘voir dire’ inquiry to determine his current mental status. It has been

further argued that if the appellant was mentally ill and unfit to stand

trial, he would be denied a fair trial.

16. Section 375 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 (as

Amended) is as follows;

Vide Page 497 of the Case Brief

6

“375. (1) If any person Committed for trial before the High Court

appears to the court at his trial to be of unsound mind and consequently

incapable of making his defence, the jury or (where the trial is without

a jury) the Judge of the High Court shall in the first instance try the fact

of such unsoundness and incapacity, and if satisfied of the fact shall find

accordingly and thereupon the trial shall be postponed.

(2) The trial of the fact of the unsoundness of mind and incapacity of

the accused shall be deemed to be part of his trial before the court.”

17. This particular section stipulates that if an accused person, during his

trial appears to be of unsound mind and is consequently incapable of

presenting a defense, the learned High Court Judge shall first conduct

a “voire dire” inquiry to determine such matter. If the judge is satisfied

with such finding, the trial should be postponed, and measures must

be taken as outlined in section 376(1) and (2) to ensure the accused

receives the necessary medical attention.

18. However, the learned High Court Judge has denied the application. He

has maintained that no medical report regarding the appellant’s mental

has been presented to the High Court. Furthermore, that the

prosecution has not agreed to a ‘voire dire’ inquiry and the trial was in

its final stages;

Vide Page 497 of the Case Brief

7

19. The learned High Court Judge has not adequately considered the

mandatory provision in Section 375 of the Code of Criminal Procedure

Act No. 15 of 1979, in its proper spirit and thereby misdirected himself.

20. Further, an omission to decide on the preliminary issue i.e., mental

condition of the accused, shall vitiate the whole trial when there’s no

proper inquiry.

21. Under these circumstances, I set aside the conviction, disputed

judgement and the sentencing order. I consequently order a retrial.

22. The learned High Court Judge shall, prior to the commencement of the

trial, conduct a ‘voire dire’ inquiry to determine whether the appellant

is fit to plead, stand trial and attend court. If at the conclusion of this

inquiry it is found that the appellant is not fit to do so, the learned High

Court Judge shall take action, as stipulated in the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979, to ensure the appellant receives

treatment and to postpone the trial. Otherwise, the trial proceedings

shall be expedited.

23. I make no order regarding costs

Retrial ordered

24. The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this Judgement to the

High Court in Awissawella for compliance.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Dr. Sumudu Premachandra, J.

I agree

Judge of the Court of Appeal