...

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C A (PHC) APN / 170/ 2017

Provincial High Court of

In the matter of an application for

revision of an order of the Provincial

High Court in the exercise of its

revisionary jurisdiction.

North Western Province (Kurunegala)

Case No. HCR 49 / 2016

Primary Court Kurunegala

Case No. 79308 / 66

1. H A Prasanji Thusitha Kumara Dias

No. 421,

Malkaduwawa,

Kurunegala.

\ I

2

RESPONDENT - PETITIONER -

PETITIONER

2. N L D G Uthika Dias

No. 421,

Malkaduwawa,

Kurunegala.

Intervenient - petitioner -petitioner

Vs

1. Hettiarachchige Dias

2. Jasinthu Hewage Kallyanawathie Dias

Both of No. 82,

Malkaduwawa circular road,

Kurunegala.

COMPLAINANT - RESPONDENT -

RESPONDENTS

3

Before: P. Padman Surasena J (P CIA)

K K Wickremasinghe J

Counsel; Luxman Perera PC with Upendra Walgampaya and T Ratnayake

for the Respondent - Petitioner -Petitioner.

Supported on: 2017 - 12 - 05.

Decided on : 2018 - 06 - 07

ORDER

P Pad man Surasena J

The Petitioners and the Respondents of this application are two rival

parties in the instant case which is a proceeding instituted under section 66

(1) (b) of the Primary Courts Procedure Act.

Learned Primary Court Judge having inquired into the complaint, had

pronounced its order.

4

Being aggrieved by the said order made by the learned Primary Court

Judge, the Petitioners had filed an application for revision in the Provincial

High Court of North Western Province holden in Kurunegala seeking a

revision of the order of the Primary Court.

The Provincial High Court after hearing refused the said revision application

by its order dated 2017-11-07.

Learned counsel for the Petitioner conceded at the outset that an appeal

has also been filed in respect of the same matter i.e. against the said

judgment of the Provincial High Court. It was his submission that the

purpose of filing this revision application despite the pending appeal is to

obtain the interim relief prayed for in the prayers of this petition.

In the case of Jayantha Gunasekara V Jayatissa Gunasekara and others1

this Court had held that mere lodging in the Court of Appeal, an appeal

against a judgment of the High Court in the exercise of its revisionary

power in terms of article 154 P (3) (b) of the Constitution, does not

12011 (1) Sri L R 284.

5

automatically stay the execution of the order of the High Court. A passage

from that judgment which would be relevant here is as follows.

" .... Obviously, to put off the execution process until the appeal is heard

would tantamount to prolong the agony and to let the breach of peace to

continue for a considerable length of time. This in my opinion cannot be

the remedy the Parliament has clearly decided upon. Hence, I am confident

, that the construction we are mindful of placing by this judgment would

definitely suppress the mischief and subtle inventions and evasions for

continuance of the mischief .... "

Since there is an appeal, pending before this Court it is open for the

parties to have their rights adjudicated by this Court in that appeal.

When there is a right of appeal provided for by law, an applicant in a

revision application must show the existence of exceptional circumstances

for any intervention by a revisionary Court. This Court cannot accept the

grounds urged in the petition as exceptional circumstances as they are

mere grounds of appeal upon which the petition of appeal may have been

lodged.

,

6

In these circumstances, this Court sees no basis to issue notices on the

Respondents.

The revision application should stand dismissed.

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K K Wickremasinghe J

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL