IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Sandanayake Pathiraja

Thyagaratne,

Dharshana,

Gamunu Mawatha,

Duwa Temple Road,

Kalutara-South.

Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant

CA CASE NO: CA (PHC) 188/2013

HC KALUTARA CASE NO: 55/2011/REV

MC KALUTARA CASE NO: 84601

Vs.

Assistant Commissioner of

Agrarian Development,

4th Floor,

District Secretariat,

Kalutara.

1st Party Applicant-Respondent-

Respondent

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney-Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

2nd Party-Respondent-Respondent

2

Before: K.K. Wickramasinghe, J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Shyamal A. Collure with A.P. Jayaweera for the

Appellant.

Sabrina Ahmed, S.C., for the Respondents.

Decided on: 05.08.2019

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The Commissioner General of Agrarian Development (hereinafter

respondent) instituted these proceedings against the

respondent (hereinafter appellant) in the Magistrates Court of

Kalutara under section 33(3) of the Agrarian Development Act,

No. 46 of 2000, as amended, (hereinafter Act) praying for the

issue of an order restraining the appellant from filling the paddy

land by the name of Madangahawatta Paula in extent of 3 roods

and 10 perches out of a larger land of 1 acre, which is morefully

described in the schedule to the application. In terms of section

33(4) of the Act, a supporting affidavit of the Commissioner of

Agrarian Development was tendered with the application.

Upon being satisfied with the complaint, the learned Magistrate

has, in terms of section 33(5) of the Act, made an interim order

ex parte restraining the appellant from continuing with the

offensive act and issued summons on the appellant to show

cause why he should not be restrained as prayed for in the

application.

The appellant by way of an affidavit with supporting documents

stated to Court that (a) the subject land is not a paddy land and

3

(b) he never filled the land, and therefore the application is

misconceived in law.

The respondent filed a counter affidavit together with documents

and stated that it is a paddy land.

Thereafter, the learned Magistrate, in terms of section 33(8) of

the Act, has made the restraining order, which is also the final

order, against the appellant.

Being dissatisfied with that order, the appellant has filed a

revision application in the High Court. The High Court, by

Judgment dated 31.10.2013, has affirmed the order of the

Magistrates Court and dismissed the application of the

appellant. It is against this Judgment of the High Court, the

appellant has come before this Court by way of final appeal.

Section 33(1) of the Act reads as follows:

No person shall fill any extent of paddy land or remove any

soil from any extent of paddy land or erect any structure on

any extent of paddy land except with the written

permission of the Commissioner-General.

From the proceedings of the Magistrates Court dated

29.04.2011, it is seen that the respondent has submitted to the

Magistrates Court that, in terms of sections 32(3) and 32 (5) of

the Act, the respondent issued Notice on the appellant to

abstain from filling the land and also complained to the police

prior to the filing of the application.

These factual matters have not been challenged before the

Magistrates Court by the appellant. Hence the appellant cannot

challenge them for the first time before this Court.

4

If the appellant has not filled or was not filling the land, and has

no intention to do so, no prejudice would have caused to the

appellant by making the restraining order.

If it is a paddy land, there is no dispute that the appellant

cannot fill the land without the written permission of the

Commissioner General of Agrarian Development.

The substantive issue raised or the defence taken by the

appellant before the Magistrates Court in his show cause

affidavit tendered with supporting documents is that the subject

land is not a paddy land.

The respondent with his counter affidavit by tendering inter alia

P3, which is the Agricultural Land Register (Paddy Lands), has

stated that this, i.e. Madangahawatta Paula, is a paddy land.

The respondent has also tendered P2, which is also the

Agricultural Land Register (Paddy Lands), to show that Dangaha

Liyadda is also a paddy land.

Underneath the document P2, it is written, as I understand, that

P2 was amended in 1995 and thereafter it was revised in June

1995.

It is not clear whether P2 is the Original Register or the

Amended Register or the Revised Register.

In any event, P2 does not refer to the subject paddy land,

namely, Madangahawatta Paula, but to a different paddy land,

namely, Dangaha Liyadda.

The matters contained in P2 and P3 are questions of fact and

not of law, which cannot be raised for the first time in appeal.

5

P2 and P3 have not been challenged before the Magistrates

Court.

The pivotal argument of the learned counsel for the appellant

before this Court is that both the learned Magistrate and the

learned High Court Judge failed to appreciate that the Paddy

Lands Register marked P2 very clearly indicates that the land

called Madangahawatta Paula was no longer a paddy land by

1995. With respect, I cannot understand how the learned

counsel makes such a bold assertion with confidence. For me,

P2 does not indicate that Madangahawatta Paula was no longer

a paddy land by 1995. Accordingly, in my view, the main

argument of the appellant shall fail.

It is significant to note that the appellant in the Magistrates

Court, in his affidavit, through which he showed cause why the

restraining order shall not be issued, has not taken up the

position that the land has not been properly identified. If I may

repeat, the only substantive matter which he has raised is that

the subject land is not a paddy land.

Hence he cannot take up that question of fact for the first time

in appeal.

The paddy land has been defined in section 101 of the Act as

follows:

paddy land means land which is cultivated with paddy or

is prepared for the cultivation of paddy or which, having at

any time previously been cultivated with paddy, is suitable

for the cultivation of paddy, and includes such other land

adjoining or appertaining to it as may be used by the

cultivator for a threshing floor or for constructing his

6

dwelling house, but does not include chena land or any

land, which, with the permission of the Commissioner-

General is used for any purpose other than cultivation in

accordance with the provisions of this Act, or which is

determined by the Commissioner-General not to be paddy

land.

Who can decide whether a land is a paddy land or not? It is the

Commissioner General of Agrarian Development. Section 28 of

the Act reads as follows:

28(1) The Commissioner-General may decide whether an

extent of land is a paddy land.

(2) The Commissioner-General may for the purpose of

making a decision under subsection (1) call for and obtain

the observations and information from the Agrarian

Development Council within whose area of authority the

extent of land is situate, and from the relevant government

departments statutory boards and institutions. It shall be

the duty of every such government department, statutory

board and institution to furnish such observations and

information as soon as practicable.

The learned counsel for the appellant states that Section 28(1)

of the Agrarian Development Act provides that the Commissioner

General may decide whether an extent of land is a paddy land.

However, it is trite law that discretion must be exercised fairly

and reasonably. No such decision can be made ex parte, contrary

to the rules of natural justice. The learned counsel will

understand that this is not a writ application challenging such

7

decision of the Commissioner General of Agrarian Development.

Probably, he can do it in a properly constituted writ application.

Section 33(7) of the Act debars the Magistrates Court to

question the validity of the contents of the application. That

section reads as follows:

Court shall not be competent to call for any evidence from

the Commissioner-General, or Additional Commissioner-

General or Commissioner or Deputy Commissioner or

Assistant Commissioner in support of the application.

In the application filed before the Magistrates Court, the

Commissioner of Agrarian Development has inter alia stated that

the land described in the schedule to the application is a paddy

land.

The Magistrates Court has no jurisdiction to call for evidence to

substantiate the position of the Commissioner of Agrarian

Development that the subject land is a paddy land. The

Magistrates Court has to accept the contents of the application

at face value.

At the inquiry into the application what are the possible

defences which one could take up? The answer is found in

section 33(8) of the Act, which reads as follows:

If after the inquiry the Magistrate is not satisfied that the

person showing cause has lawful authority to fill the extent

of paddy land or remove any soil therefrom or erect a

structure thereon, he shall confirm the interim order made

under subsection (5) restraining such person and his

8

servants and agents from doing any act in contravention of

this section.

According to that section, the only possible defence which could

be taken up is to produce the lawful authority to fill the paddy

land, which, according to section 33(1), is the written permission

of the Commissioner General of Agrarian Development.

Obviously, the appellant does not have such an authority given

by the Commissioner General of Agrarian Development.

For the aforesaid reasons, the Judgment of the High Court

which affirmed the order of the Magistrates Court is correct.

Appeal is dismissed. No costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

K.K. Wickremasinghe, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal