==== BLOCKS ==== 

Judgment CA Tax No. 57/2023

IN THE COURT OFSOCIALIST REPUBLI

CA No: TAX/057/2023TAC No: TAC/IT/048/20

F APPEAL OF THE DEMO

IC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal Stated Case on a question of opinion of the Court of Appeain terms of Section 11A oAppeals Commission Act, No. (as amended).

THE COMMISSIONER GEOF INLAND REVENUE,Department of Inland RevInland Revenue Building,Sir Chittampalam A. GardMawatha, Colombo 02.

-Vs-

CEYLON COLD STORES No. 117, Sir ChittampalamGardiner Mawatha, Colombo 02.

APPE

3

021

RESPO

Page 1|14

CRATIC

by way of law for the al under and

of the Tax

23 of 2011

ENERAL

venue,

diner

PLC, m A.

ELLANT

ONDENT

Judgment CA Tax No. 57/2023 Page 2|14

Before : JUSTICE M.CHAMATH.B.S. MORAIS

JUSTICE ANNALINGAM PREMASHANKER

Counsel: Chaya Sri Nammuni, Deputy Solicitor General,

with Madushanka Kannangara, State Counsel,

and Medhaka Fernando, State Counsel for the

APPELLANT.

Dr. Shivaji Felix, President’s Counsel with

Nivantha Satharasinghe, Attorney at Law, with

Sajith Nawaratne, Attorney at Law for the

RESPONDENT.

Written Submissions of the Appellant :- 18.06.2025,24.06.2025

Written Submissions of the Respondent :- 03.09.2024,28.04.2026

Argued on :- 24.02.2026

Judgement on :- 09.07.2026

ANNALINGAM PREMASHANKER, J.

A.

A1.

This is an appeal by the Commissioner General of Inland

Revenue (Hereinafter sometimes referred to as The

Respondent/CGIR) from the determination of the Tax Appeals

Commission dated 12.06.2023 made in TAC appeal no.

TAC/IT/048/2021. The Respondent is CEYLON COLD STORES PLC

JUDGEMENT

INTRODUCTION

APPEAL

Judgment CA Tax No. 57/2023 Page 3|14

(Hereinafter sometimes referred to as The Respondent /Tax

Payer)

A2.

The Appellant being dissatisfied with the determination of Tax

Appeals Commission (Hereinafter sometimes referred to as TAC)

requested for an appeal by a case stated for the opinion of the

Court of Appeal by their communication dated 11.07.2023.

B.

On 24th February 2026, both parties concluded the argument. The

Appellant has furnished written submissions on 24.06.2025. The

Respondent has furnished the written submissions on 28.04.2026.

C.

C1.

There were two questions of law presented for the opinion of the

Court of Appeal, in the case stated dated 27. 07. 2023. They are:

1. Whether the Tax Appeals Commission has erred in law

when determining that the Appellant Company was

denied fair hearing and the Appellant was not given

proper opportunity to present their case before the

Commissioner General of Inland Revenue?

2. Whether the Tax Appeals Commission has erred in law

when determining that is unnecessary to consider the

substantive aspects to this case?

ANALYSIS

ARGUMENT

CASE STATED

QUESTIONS OF LAW

Judgment CA Tax No. 57/2023 Page 4|14

C2.

The tax payer submits its return for the year 2016/2017, claiming

an income tax exemption on net income received on security

deposits on bottles and crates. This claim was rejected by the

Assessor and the return is not accepted and issued an

assessment.

C3.

Being aggrieved by the said Assessment, the tax payer made an

appeal to the CGIR. The Tax Payer made the same agitation before

the CGIR. CGIR by his determination dated 22.06.2021

determined the appeal by confirming the assessment.

C4.

The tax payer being not satisfied with the determination of the

CGIR, made an appeal to the TAC. TAC by its determination dated

12.06.2023, set aside the determination made by the Appellant

and allowed the appeal.

C5.

The basic matter in issue is that the Tax Payer is on the business

of selling soft drinks and there is an amount that has been

included as “opening income”, which the Tax Payer states is not

tax liable as this is forfeited deposit by the dealers not returning

the bottles and that there was no disposal of capital assets as the

ownership of the bottles and crates was with the Tax Payer.

TAX RETURN

FIRST APPEAL

SECOND APPEAL

OPENING INCOME

Judgment CA Tax No. 57/2023 Page 5|14

C6.

The Appellant states that the Tax Payer recognizes the said

amount as a revenue income. Section 25(3)(a) states that disposal

of a capital asset used in a business is taxed as a revenue income

if the depreciation on cost of acquisition has been claimed. It has

been held and not disputed by the Tax Payer that depreciation has

been claimed. Section 25(7)(b) defines a "capital asset" as any

"equipment" utensil etc used in relation to the trade and business.

The Distributer agreement, clause 5(i) states that the bottles and

crates are given to expand the distributorship and the bottles and

crates are given on deposit and rolled over with each distribution.

C7.

The Respondent argues that there is no sale if the bottles and

crates/ capital assets as the ownership is with the Respondent.

However, section 25(7)(d) (ili) describes 'disposal' as

"cessation of the use of such asset". Thus, the "proceeds" that are

taxable is defined in section 25(7)(c) (i) is the amount of the deposit

which is the money recovered, which would be the market value

because no entity would do business other that for profit and the

loss of the bottles and crates needs to be compensated at the

market price.

C8.

After hearing the Appeal, the Tax Appeals Commission, by

determination dated 12 June 2023, annulled the assessment

previously confirmed by the Commissioner General of Inland

CAPITAL ASSET

DISPOSAL

CASE STATED

Judgment CA Tax No. 57/2023 Page 6|14

Revenue and allowed the taxpayer’s appeal. Being aggrieved by

the aforesaid determination of the Tax Appeals Commission the

Appellant, Commissioner General of Inland Revenue, made an

application by letter dated 11 July 2023 for a Stated Case, for the

opinion of Court of Appeal on the questions of law enumerated

therein. In the case stated, the Appellant has submit two issues for

the opinion of the Court of Appeal, that is the Tax Payer denied fair

hearing and not given proper opportunity to present their case

before the CGIR and whether the TAC can determine the appeal

without considering the substantial issues.

C9.

In the appeal made to the TAC, after hearing the evidence, the

Commission shall on appeal either confirm, reduce, increase or

annul, as the case may be, the assessment as determined by

the Commissioner General or may remit the case to the

Commissioner-General with the decision of the Commission

on such appeal. Where a case is so remitted by the Commission,

the Commissioner General shall revise the assessment in order

that it is in conformity with such amount as stated in the decision

of the Commission. The decision of the Commission shall be

notified to the appellant and the Commissioner-General in writing.

C10.

The Appellant asserts that if the TAC was to 'annul' the

assessment, as was done by the TAC in this instant case, they

would have to annul the assessment that was determined by the

Appellant. The TAC never even considered what was determined by

TAC’S POWER

CONSIDERATION

Judgment CA Tax No. 57/2023 Page 7|14

the Appellant CGIR but proceeded to annul the assessments

issued. The word "determined" in this context means, "decided",

"considered" "analyzed". Because the TAC is the final appellate

authority on the facts.

C11.

An appeal had been made by the taxpayer. The inquiry was held

on 10 March 2020 by Ms. A I Abeywickrama, Senior Deputy

Commissioner. In the course of such inquiry an agreement was

not reached regarding the matters specified in the petition of

appeal. The Appellant's reasons for the determination dated 12

August 2021 incorrectly indicates that the Respondent had no

objection to referring to the Year of Assessment under review by

the Tax Appeals Commission. This is not the case and the

Respondent required an opportunity for presenting its argument at

a hearing.

The determination of the CGIR is dated 22 June 2021 and it

indicates that no hearing has taken place. This position is

confirmed in the Appellant's reasons for his determination.

C12.

It is the Respondent's position that no agreement had been

reached with the Assistant Commissioner as contemplated by

section 165 (7) of the Inland Revenue Act, No 10 of 2006 (as

amended). Therefore, the matter was fixed for hearing by the

Commissioner General of Inland Revenue. Here too no oral

submissions took place at a hearing. This opportunity had been

OPPORTUNITY

PROCEEDING

Judgment CA Tax No. 57/2023 Page 8|14

prevented for no fault made by the taxpayer. The Appellant

afforded no opportunity to the Respondent to present his case at a

hearing.

C13.

It is relevant to consider the document marked P3', by which the

Department of Inland Revenue communicated the determination of

the Commissioner General, regarding the Respondent's appeal to

the Commissioner General which had been signed by

Commissioner D.M.S Dissanayake. In communicating the

decision, the writer states that

"...having considered the written and oral submissions made

by authorized representatives and a few officials on behalf of

the appellant company and the views, explanations ruling

submissions made by the Department officials on behalf of

the revenue, I determine the above appeal by confirming the

assessment...”

The Determination, however, gives three dates of hearing, namely

13.12.2012, 21.01.2013 and 07.03.2013 and the notation added

by Commissioner DMS Dissanayake states that

"The above appeals heard before K. Dharmadasa and the

dates of hearing mentioned above are dates of hearing

made by him. "

The above, clearly shows that no hearings had taken place before

Commissioner D. M. S. Dissanayake and for him to say that he

considered 'oral submissions made by authorized representatives

NO HEARING

Judgment CA Tax No. 57/2023 Page 9|14

and a few officials on behalf of the appellant company. ' is patently

incorrect and demands inquiry, not only from the perspective

whether the Respondent was accorded a fair hearing but also

whether the submissions made on behalf of them received due

consideration. Therefore, it is incorrect to state that no prejudice is

allegedly caused to the Respondent.

Further, if the Respondent was not provided with a fair hearing,

then the assessment made by the Commissioner-General is

defective and the fact that the assessment was made by another

assessor is quite apparent. Then the TAC is not required to further

consider the defective assessment of the Commissioner - General,

since the objection of the Respondent goes to the root of the cause.

C14.

If the interpretation advanced by the Appellant is accepted, the

Court will inadvertently usurp legislative functions by limiting the

scope of the appeal, when an express limitation is not provided by

the Legislature. In terms of Section 8(1) (a) of the Tax Appeals

Commission Act;

"8(1) Any person aggrieved by the determination of-

a) the Commissioner-General, in respect of any matter

relating to the imposition of any tax, levy, charge, duty or

penalty; or

b) the Director-General under subsection (1B) of section

10 of the Customs Ordinance,

SUBSTANTIVE ISSUES

Judgment CA Tax No. 57/2023 Page 10|14

may if he is dissatisfied with the reasons stated by the

Commissioner-General or the Director- General, as the case may

be, prefer the appeal there from to the Commission within thirty

days from the date of receipt of such reasons; or"

If the Legislature intended the jurisdiction of the TAC to be limited

to only review of the substantive matter of the assessment, why

would the Legislature in Section 8(1)(a) allow an appeal to the TAC

in respect of 'any matter' relating to the imposition of any tax, levy

charge, duty, or penalty of the Commissioner - General? The

rational conclusion that could be drawn is that the Legislature

never intended to limit the jurisdiction of the TAC only to

substantive issues.

C15.

In any event, it is the fault of the Appellant to have waited until the

statutory time period for hearing an appeal which was almost at

an end before taking steps to hear and determine the appeal. The

Respondent cannot be faulted for the delay occasioned in hearing

the appeal. Therefore, since there has been a breach of procedural

propriety and the principles of natural justice, the assessment was

annulled and the appeal was allowed.

C16.

It has previously been held by the Supreme Court that the Tax

Appeals Commission is entitled to dispose of a matter on a

preliminary objection alone. This has been the basis of the

decision made by the Supreme Court in Seylan Bank PLC v

PROPRIETY

PRELIMINARY ISSUE

Judgment CA Tax No. 57/2023 Page 11|14

Commissioner General of Inland Revenue, SC Appeal No

46/2016. In this case, the decision was made by the Tax Appeals

Commission on a preliminary issue only. Similarly, in

Commissioner General of Inland Revenue v Koggala Garments

(Pvt) Ltd, CA Tax 1/ 2008, the Tax Appeals Commission made its

decision entirely on a preliminary issue.

C17.

In Commissioner General of Inland Revenue v Classic Travels

(Pvt) Ltd SC Appeal 55/2024, His Lordship Justice Aluwihare,

PC, J:

The Appellant argued that as per Section 9(10) of the Tax

Appeals Commission Act No.23 of 2011 (as amended) a final

determination cannot be given, which results in the assessment

being annulled if the substantive tax issue is not considered by

the TAC. On this basis the Appellant argues that the TAC

erroneously disposed of its mandate by way of a preliminary

objection. The contention simply stated was that the, the TAC is

only mandated to consider appeals, on merit.

Section 9(10) of the Tax Appeals Commission Act provides that,

"After hearing the evidence, the Commission shall on appeal

either confirm, reduce, increase or annul, as the case may be,

the assessment as determined by the Commissioner- General or

may remit the case to the Commissioner-General with the

decision of the Commission on such appeal. Where a case is so

remitted by the Commission, the Commissioner- General shall

CASE REFERENCE 01

Judgment CA Tax No. 57/2023 Page 12|14

revise the assessment in order that it is in conformity with such

amount as stated in the decision of the Commission.”

I do not find merit in the contention of the Appellant referred to

above, regarding the question of law. The advantage of a

preliminary objection is to prevent unnecessary litigation. Hence,

the purpose of preliminary objections is not to stifle legitimate

adjudication but to dispose a matter expeditiously when it is

apparent that the action cannot be maintained.

C18.

The Supreme Court in Commissioner General of Inland

Revenue v Classic Travels (Private) Limited, SC Appeal No

158/2018 held:

It is a well- established principal that a jurisdictional question

can be decided prior to the substantive issue. Wade and

Forsyth's Administrative Law, states as follows:

Where a jurisdictional question is disputed before a tribunal,

the tribunal must necessarily decide it. If it refuses to do so, it

is wrongfully declining jurisdiction and the court will order it to

act properly. Otherwise the tribunal or other authority 'would be

able to wield an absolutely despotic power, which the

legislature never intended that it should exercise It follows that

the question is within the tribunal's own jurisdiction, but with

this difference, that the tribunal's decision about it cannot be

conclusive. This also was explained in the classic case.

CASE REFERENCE 02

Judgment CA Tax No. 57/2023 Page 13|14

In Commissioner General of Inland Revenue v Classic Travels

(Pvt) Limited, SC Appeal No 158/ 2018, the Supreme Court

judgement of His Lordship Aluwihare J, states as follows:

As judicial review is a collateral challenge and not an appeal,

it will only be in exceptional circumstances that the courts will

allow the collateral process of judicial review to be used to

attack an appealable decision, when Parliament has expressly

provided by statute an appellate procedure. But exceptional

circumstances may arise when it would be unjust for the

taxpayer to appeal a decision of the Commissioner - General.

For example, if the Commissioner - General during the hearing

acted illegally or ultra vires, then exceptional circumstances

may arise where judicial review is appropriate to challenge the

alleged abuse at its inception. Otherwise, the taxpayer would

be expected to proceed with the allegedly illegal hearing until

the determination is issued by the Commissioner - General to

appeal the Commissioner - General's assessment to the TAC.

Accordingly, in my opinion judicial review is not the proper

remedy unless exceptional circumstances justify a claim for

judicial review. If judicial review is eliminated as a remedy

unless exceptional circumstances justify a claim, then the

proper remedy would be an appeal to the TAC, therefore, if

find no merit in the contention of the Appellant.

Judgment CA Tax No. 57/2023 Page 14|14

The above judgements clearly reveal that the TAC can decide the

appeal only on the valid preliminary objection without considering

the substantial issues.

C19.

For the reasons adumbrated above, the questions of law are

answered as follows:

Q.N.1. No.

Q.N.2. No.

D.

As analyzed above and as the two questions raised in the case

stated are answered as above, the determination of the TAC

dated 12.06.2023 is affirmed, the appeal is dismissed.

The Registrar is directed to forward a copy of the judgment to the

Tax appeal commission.

On this 9th day of July 2026

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

M. C. B. S. MORAIS

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

CONCLUSION

ANSWERS TO THE QUESTIONS OF LAW