1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCLIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

C.A.No.345/2017( Writ)

In the matter of an application for mandates

in the nature of Writs of Certiorari and prohibition in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socia list Republic of Sri Lanka.

Athma Labbe Ahamed Hubail

No.llC, "Notaries Villa"

2nd Cross Street,

Akkarrai pattu - 14

Petitioner.

1. D.K.Rohitha Swarna

Director General,

Road Development Authority,

" Maganaguma Mahamedura"

No.216, Denzil Kobbekaduwa Mawatha,

Koswatta, Battaramulla.

And 17 ohers.

Respondents.

1

2

C.A.No.345L2017( Writ)

Before

Counsel

Argued and

Decided on

P.Padman Surasena, l. (PICA) and

A.L.Shiran Gooneratne,l.

Dr. U. L. Ali Zakky for the Petitioner.

Nayomi Kahawita SSC for Respondents.

12/03/2018

P.Padman Surasena,] (PLCA).

At the outset Learned Senior State Counsel brings to the notice of

Court that the Supreme Court has refused leave to proceed in the

Fundamental Rights Application filed by the petitioner for the same reliefs

on the same grounds with regard to the same matter. Learned Senior

State Counsel tenders to this Court, a copy of the order of the Supreme

Court dated 17/11/2017 relevant to the said application. She also draws

the attention of this Court to the amended petition dated 18/12/2017 filed

2

", ".

3

by the petitioner in this Court. It is her submission that the petitioner in

the writ application filed before this Court has failed to disclose the fact

that the Supreme Court has refused leave to proceed in the said

Fundamental Rights Application.

Learned Counsel for the petitioner concedes these facts.

Petitioner is unable to offer any reason for the non discloser of this

fact in the writ application he has filed before this Court. This Court

observes that the amended petition has been filed after the Supreme Court

had refused leave to proceed in the Fundamental Rights case. It is trite

law that a petitioner in a writ application is under a duty to disclose all

relevant facts to Court. The facts that the supreme Court had refused

leave to proceed in the relevant application is very much relevant fact in

this application as this application has been filed by the petitioner for the

same grievance on the some facts. It is the view of this Court that it

should not (due to the above reason) further consider this application.

Application is dismissed without costs.

3

4

Registrar is directed to file, the order of the Supreme Court tendered

by the learned Senior State Counsel and the copy of the petition filed in the

Supreme Court in to the record of this case.

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

A.L.Shiran Gooneratne,J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

WC/-

4