1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

CA (PHC)APN 20/2016 H.C. Panadura Case No-39/2015 MC Kesbewa B294/15

In the matter of an application for revision under and in terms of Article 138 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka read along High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of

1990.

Officer in Charge Police Station Piliyandala

Vs.

Lansage Nirmal 163 Church Road, Angulana

Complainant

Presently at Colombo Remand Prison Colombo 08

And

Lansage Basil No 206 Costal Road, Angulana

Vs. Officer in Charge

Suspect

Petitioner

Police Station Piliyandala

Complainant-Respondent

The Hon. Attorney general, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

Respondent Lansage Nirmal 163 Church Road, Angulana

And now Between

Lansage Basil No 206 Costal Road, Angulana

Suspect Respondent

Presently at 163 Church Road,

Angulana,11oratuvva

Petitioner-Petitioner Vs.

Office in Charge Police Station Piliyandala

2

Complainant-Respondent-Respondent

The Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

Respondent-Respondent

i

!fi

I,

I I; r

i f ! f , , I r

i ,

Before

Counsel

H.C.J. Madawala, J

&

L.T.B. Dehideniya, J

Lansage Nirmal 163 Church Road, Angulana, Moratuwa

Suspect Respondent-Respondent

Madusanka Hewawithana for the Petitioner Varunika Hettige SSC for the Respondent

Written Submissions on : 08/07/2016

Order On 08 108/2016

Order

H. C. J. Madawala , J

3

This is an application for revision to set aside and or revise the order of the Learned High

Court Judge dated 13/0112016 and to enlarge the suspect accused Lansage Nirmal on bail

on suitable terms and conditions that seem meet and for further relief as prayed for in the

prayer of the petition.

When this matter came up for inquiry on 517/2016 the Senior State Counsel appearing for

the respondent raised preliminary objection with regard to the maintainability of this

application namely that the petitioner the father of the accused has no Locus Standi to

institute this proceedings. It was pointed out that the suspect respondent is one Lansage

Nirmal and the petitioner one Lansage Basil and that the person seeking bail from this court

i i

~

\

!I!!I

~ I !

rI 1 I !I

t,I f I I II t !, Ii Il ! I I

~

is not the suspect. Both parties agreed to file written submissions on the Locus Standi of

the petitioner. However written submissions has been filed by the Complainant-

respondent and the respondent-respondent has failed to do so. According to the petition of

petitioner the Complainant-respondent has instituted action against the suspect respondent-

respondent in the Magistrate Court in Kesbewa alleging that on or about 17/2/2015 the

petitioner has committed an offence of trafficking and possession of 42 grams of Heroin

and punishable under Section 54 A (c) of the Poisons Opium and Dangerous Drugs

Ordinance No 17 of 1929 as amended. The suspect respondent who was produced before

the Magistrate Court of Kesbewa under bearing No B294115 has been remanded by the

Learned Magistrate. After investigation has been concluded that Government Analyst had

submitted by his examination report that the pure quantity of Heroin indicated was 3.89

grams.

The petitioner the father of the suspect stated that the suspect was the sole bread winner in

the family and he maintained the petitioner and 1 112 year old child. The suspect

respondent-respondent was indicted in the High Court of Panadura for possession and

trafficking of3.89 grams of Heroin. The petitioner on or about 18/5/2016 in terms of Sec

83(1) of the Poisons Opium and Dangerous Drugs Ordinance No 17 of 1929 as amended

the petitioner preferred the bail application to High Court of Panadura under bearing No.

BA 39/2015.

However after the inquiry the Learned High Court Judge has refused to grant bail and has

rejected the bail application on the basis that the petitioner had failed to adduce any

exceptional Circumstances. Thereafter the father of the suspect had filed this revision

application in this court to set aside the Learned High Court Judge's order.

Senior State Counsel in her written submissions submitted the following authorities.

Namely,

I i , t l !! [ I

t f t

(~

\

5

"As his Lordship Justice F.N.D. jayasuriya with his Lordship Justice Kulatilake agreeing

has having relied on the cases Alwis v Wedamulla 1997 3 SLR 417. AG of Gambia v N' Jie

1961 AC 617 Vide S.M. Thio's monograph on locus standi and Judicial review on the

question of Locus standi and the problem of discretion, relying especially on De Smith

Judicial Review of Administrative Act 1987 impression of the 4th edition - at pages 409 to

421 went on to hold in Senatilake v s Attorney General 98(3) SLR 290 that the petitioner

who is the father of the accused, has no locus standi to maintain a revision application.

Further in CA(PHC) APN No. 09/2013 HC Gampaha No 145/2006 a similar view was

taken, having relied upon the judgment in Senathilake v Attorney General. The respondent

states that in the cases ofM. P. Piyaseeli v AG CA(PHC) 18/2009, M.M. Sonali Fernando

vAG CA (PHC) APN 144/2007 on the basis that it had been clearly laid down in the said

cases that no one else other than the accused himself can maintain an application to vary a

sentence imposed in respect of him. '

Accordingly it was submitted that the father of the suspect respondent-respondent have no

locus standi to have and maintain this revision application. Attention was drawn to the

Supreme Court of India , in the case of Adi Pherozshah Gandhi vs H. M. Seervai,

Advocate General 1971 AIR 385, 1971 SCR(2) 863 held that,

"It is apparent that any person who feels disappointed with the result of the case is not a

'person aggrieved'. He must be disappointed of a benefit which he would have received if

the order had gone the other way. The order must cause him a legal grievance by

wrongfully depriving him of something. It is no doubt a legal grievance and not a grievance

about material matters but his legal grievance must be a tendency to injure him."

Further we find that in the recent case of Savarimutthu Taavmani v Attorney General

CA( PHC)APN 37/2014 his Lordship Justice Dehideniya held that the mother of the

accused has no locus standi to institute a revision application.

t t t III f! Itf f I , I!

I ! l I I j j I I I I l

6

I now draw my attention to Section 16 subsection 2 of the Judicature Act which states as

follows,

16. (1) A person aggrieved by a judgment, order or sentence of the High Court in Criminal

cases may appeal to the Court of Appeal with the leave of such court first had and obtained

in all cases in which the Attorney-General has a right of appeal under this chapter.

(2) In this section "a person aggrieved" shall mean any person whose person or property

has been the subject of the alleged offence in respect of which the Attorney-General might

have appealed under this chapter and shall, if such person be dead, include his next of kin

namely his surviving spouse, children, parents or father descendants or brothers or sisters.

(3) Nothing in this section shall in any way affect the power of the Court of Appeal to

act by way of revision in an appropriate case.

The Bail Act No 13 of 1997 and the Poisons Opium and Dangerous Drugs Ordinance No

17 of 1929 as amended are silent and does not provide any provision as to who should

make a bail application or revision application. The Criminal Procedure Code is also silent

in this matter. However as aforesaid Section 16 subsection 2 of the Judicature Act provides

that aggrieved person can file an appeal and has indicated as to who is a person aggrieved.

Accordingly it is my view that in a revision application too, that the said provisions are

applicable. Accordingly I hold it is the suspect himself who is the aggrieved person who

should file the revision application.

This is a case where the extraordinary Jurisdiction which is exercised by the Court of

Appeal and the grant of relief is entirely dependent on the discretion of the court. The

accused's father is seeking discretionary relief from the Court of Appeal and in considering

the grant of discretionary relief, the court will closely examine the conduct of the accused.

I find that the accused has not moved this court in revision ofthe said order. In the exercise

1

f

l

I

f

1

ff ! J, l t IIt I I I !f

r~ !! I

f

f , f f I , ,

7

of a discretion the court scrupulously looks into the conduct of the ultimate part who is

deriving benefit from the orders to be made by the court in revision. Accordingly

considering the above authorities I uphold the objection made by the SSC that the petitioner

the father of the accused has no locus standi to institute this revision application.

Further in this case we find that the father of the accused Lansage Basil has not been given

any Authority in writing to make this application. In the light of the above cases and

according to law. We uphold the order dated 13/1/2016 of the Learned High Court Judge

ofPanadura and dismiss this revision application with State cost.

The Registrars ofthe Court of Appeal is directed to send a copy ofthis order to the Learned

High Court Judge ofPanadura.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

L.T.D.Dehideniya, J

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

I1

t f

\ I I

f I f