==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/217-218/2025

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979.

Court of Appeal No: 1. Tokhirove Tukhirbanu alias Jasmine

CA/HCC/0217-0218/2025 2. Thangaraj Lorence Thilagar

High Court of Colombo

Case No. HC 3294/2021 ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R.P.Hettiarachchci, J.

COUNSEL : Dinidu Ratnayake with Vinura Jinadasa

For the 1st Appellant.

Prashan Wickramaratne for the 2nd

Appellant.

Hiranjan Peiris, PC, ASG, for the

Respondent.

CA/HCC/217-218/2025

2 | P a g e

ARGUED ON : 22/07/2026

DECIDED ON : 22/09/2026

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellants (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellants) were indicted by the Attorney General in the High Court of

Colombo on the following charges namely:

Count 01 - Between 01.10.2019 and 22.10.2019, at Colombo, the 1st

Accused committed the offence of trafficking by recruiting Oksana

Karpowa Odlovina (PW01) through fraud or deception and/or by

performing any other act to bring PW 01 to Sri Lanka for the purpose of

prostitution or other forms of sexual exploitation, an offence punishable

under Section 360C(2) read with Section 360C(1)(b) of the Penal Code, as

amended by Act No. 16 of 2006.

Count 02 - At the same time period, place and during the same

transaction as mentioned in the 01st Count, the 2nd Accused-Appellant

in order to commit the offence mentioned in the 01st Count, aided and

abetted the 01st Accused-Appellant to commit the offence of trafficking

by recruiting Oksama Karpowa Odlovina (PW 01) through fraud or

deception and/or by performing any other act to bring PW 01 to Sri Lanka

for the purpose of prostitution or other forms of sexual exploitation, an

CA/HCC/217-218/2025

3 | P a g e

offence punishable under Section 360C(2) read with Section 360C(1)(b)

and Section 102 of the Penal Code, as amended by Act No. 16 of 2006.

Count 03 - In the same transaction as the 1st Charge, on or about 09.

01. 2020, at the Hilton Colombo Residence, Kompannavidiya, within the

jurisdiction of this Court, the 1st Accused committed the offence of

procuration, punishable under Section 360A(1) of the Penal Code as

amended by Act No. 22 of 1995, by procuring one Oksana Karpowa

Odlovina to become a prostitute in Sri Lanka.

Count 04 - At the same period and during the same transaction as

mentioned in the 01st Count, the 2nd Accused-Appellant in order to

commit the offence mentioned in the 03rd Count, aided and abetted the

01st Accused-Appellant to commit the offence of procuration, punishable

under Section 360A(1) read with Section 102 of the Penal Code as

amended by Act No. 22 of 1995, by procuring one Oksana Karpowa

Odlovina to become a prostitute in Sri Lanka.

Charge 05 - On or about 12.01.2020, at the Hilton Colombo Residence,

Kompannavidiya, within the jurisdiction of this Court, the 1st Accused

committed the offence of procuration, punishable under Section 360A(1)

of the Penal Code as amended by Act No. 22 of 1995, by procuring one

Oksana Karpowa Odlovina to become a prostitute in Sri Lanka.

Charge 06 - At the same time period, place and during the same

transaction as mentioned in the 05th Count, the 2nd Accused-Appellant

in order to commit the offence mentioned in the 05th Count, aided and

abetted the 01st Accused-Appellant to commit the offence of procuration,

punishable under Section 360A(1) read with Section 102 of the Penal

Code as amended by Act No. 22 of 1995, by procuring one Oksana

Karpowa Odlovina to become a prostitute in Sri Lanka.

Charge 07 - On or about 02.02.2020, at the Hilton Colombo Residence,

Kompannavidiya, within the jurisdiction of this Court, the 1st Accused

CA/HCC/217-218/2025

4 | P a g e

committed the offence of procuration, punishable under Section 360A(1)

of the Penal Code as amended by Act No. 22 of 1995, by procuring one

Oksana Karpowa Odlovina to become a prostitute in Sri Lanka.

Charge 08 - At the same time period, place and during the same

transaction as mentioned in the 07th Count, the 2nd Accused-Appellant

in order to commit the offence mentioned in the 07th Count, aided and

abetted the 01st Accused-Appellant to commit the offence of procuration,

punishable under Section 360A(1) read with Section 102 of the Penal

Code as amended by Act No. 22 of 1995, by procuring one Oksana

Karpowa Odlovina to become a prostitute in Sri Lanka.

After the trial the Appellants were convicted as charged and were sentenced

as follows:

1st Appellant

First count – 07 years rigorous imprisonment with a fine of Rs.25000/-

subject to a default sentence of 06 months simple imprisonment.

Third count – 07 years rigorous imprisonment with a fine of Rs.25000/-

subject to a default sentence of 06 months simple imprisonment.

Fifth count – 07 years rigorous imprisonment with a fine of Rs.25000/-

subject to a default sentence of 06 months simple imprisonment.

Additionally, she was ordered to pay a compensation of Rs.500,000/- with a

default sentence of 06 months simple imprisonment.

2nd Appellant

Second count – 07 years rigorous imprisonment with a fine of Rs.25000/-

subject to a default sentence of 06 months simple imprisonment.

CA/HCC/217-218/2025

5 | P a g e

Fourth count – 07 years rigorous imprisonment with a fine of Rs.25000/-

subject to a default sentence of 06 months simple imprisonment.

Sixth count – 07 years rigorous imprisonment with a fine of Rs.25000/-

subject to a default sentence of 06 months simple imprisonment.

Additionally, he was ordered to pay a compensation of Rs.500,000/- with a

default sentence of 06 months simple imprisonment.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellants

preferred this appeal to this court.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellants informed this court that the

Appellants have given consent to argue this matter in their absence. At the

time of argument, they were connected via the Zoom platform from the

prison.

Although the learned Counsel for the Appellants, in their written

submissions raised several grounds of appeal, at the time of argument, both

Counsel informed this court that they are only contesting the sentences

imposed in this case.

Background of the case

In this case, the Appellants are wife and husband respectively, it was alleged

that the Appellant had procured the victim for sexual activities in Sri Lanka.

The victim, PW1, is a Russian National and had come to Sri Lanka several

times and worked in shops before she had gotten to know the 1st Appellant.

The 1st Appellant had brought her back to Sri Lanka and had procured her

for sexual activities until the 1st Appellant was sentenced to jail. After the 1st

Appellant was jailed, the 2nd Appellant had continued to procure the victim

for sexual activities until she lodged her complaint with the Tourist Police.

CA/HCC/217-218/2025

6 | P a g e

The victim had visited Sri Lanka on five occasions prior to 2019, which was

confirmed by the Department of Immigration and Emigration. The victim had

become acquainted with the 1st Appellant via Facebook and had thereafter

come to Sri Lanka on 22.10.2019 using an air ticket sent by the 1st Appellant.

Upon her arrival to Sri Lanka, she was engaged in prostitution by PW1. This

was continued by the 1st Appellant until late January 2020. Thereafter, the

2nd Appellant had continued the same until March 2021. When she asked

for money from the 2nd Appellant to purchase an air ticket to return to her

country, the 2nd Appellant had refused to give money to her. As a result, she

had lodged her first complaint at the Sri Lanka Tourist Police in Colpetty

regarding a dispute over money in the month of March 2021 and had left the

accommodation provided at the Peterson Lane. The victim had not

mentioned about the procuration by the Appellants to the police. In her

second statement given in May 2021 too, she had not mentioned about the

procuration by the Appellants to the police.

In the meantime, a person called Rameez had taken her to Trincomalee and

assaulted her. She had lodged a complaint at the Trincomalee Police

regarding this incident but had not disclosed that she was used for

prostitution by the Appellants.

After coming to Colombo, she had rented a room at Roadster Studio,

Torrington, Colombo. At that time, a complaint was lodged by the IOM

regarding her detention at the Roadster Hotel and the CID had commenced

investigation and arrested the Appellants and filed the indictment in the High

Court of Colombo.

The JMO and the Consultant Physician both had not conducted a proper

physical examination but had submitted a report that the victim was

suffering from severe depression and post-traumatic stress disorder.

CA/HCC/217-218/2025

7 | P a g e

Both Counsel had strenuously argued that the Learned High Court Judge

has failed to consider the sentencing submissions made on behalf of the

Appellants.

As stated above, the Appellants are wife and husband and have children.

According to the submissions made before the High Court it was brought to

the attention of the Court that the 1st Appellant had married previously and

had two male children. One child, was 17 years old and the other child was

15 years old at the time of sentencing. The elder son had gone back to

Uzbekistan and the younger child had been admitted to the Bandaragama

Child Care Centre, where he is presently residing.

Upon the present marriage, she had delivered a female child who was 07

years of age at the time of sentencing and she too had been admitted to a

child care home given the present situation. The 2nd Appellant was a three-

wheeler driver and is the sole breadwinner of his family. He bore the

responsibility of looking after his mother and sister who was an

undergraduate at a university. Both the Counsel submitted that their

children are suffering due to their incarceration and therefore seeks the

mercy of this court to re-consider the sentence only to re-unite with their

children.

The learned Deputy Solicitor General in keeping with the highest traditions

of the Attorney General’s Department too agreed that this is an appropriate

case to re-consider the sentence imposed by the Learned High Court Judge

in considering the vulnerable situation of the children of the Appellants.

After the conviction of an Accused person, the discretion in imposing the

relevant sentence would lie with that particular Court, while being guided by

a number of factors, such as the circumstances under which the offence was

committed by the Accused. Where such specific sentencing guidelines would

not be available, it would be necessary to discuss the principles that must

be followed when imposing sentences.

CA/HCC/217-218/2025

8 | P a g e

In the case of The Attorney General v H.N.de Silva 57 NLR 121 Per

BASNAYAKE, A.C.J.-

" A Judge should, in determining the proper sentence, first consider the

gravity of the offence as it appears from the nature of the act itself and

should have regard to the punishment provided in the Penal Code or other

statute under which the offender is charged. He should also regard the

effect of the punishment as a deterrent and consider to what extent it will

be effective. If the offender held a position of trust or belonged to a service

which enjoys the public confidence that must be taken into account in

assessing the punishment. The incidence of crimes of the nature of which

the offender has been found to be guilty and the difficulty of detection are

also matters which should receive due consideration. The reformation of

the criminal, though no doubt an important consideration, is subordinate

to the others I have mentioned. Where the public interest or the welfare of

the State (which are synonymous) outweighs the previous good character,

antecedents and age of the offender, public interest must prevail. "

In the case of Don Percy Nanayakkara v The Republic of Sri Lanka [1993]

1 SLR 71 the Court held that:

“In assessing punishment, the Court has to consider the matter from the

point of both the offender and the public. The accused had held high public

office and exercised extensive statutory power in conducting public

examinations in this country. These examinations have to be conducted

fairly and the results declared accurately. Thousands of students who face

public examinations, every year, should have complete confidence in the

fairness and accuracy of every process of the examinations. The accused

has subverted the very basis of this confidence by his conduct in

dishonestly showing favour to persons with whom he was acquainted.

CA/HCC/217-218/2025

9 | P a g e

Therefore, public interest demands that he should be imposed a deterrent

punishment.”

In the case of Asan Mohammed Rizwan v Attorney General, CA [PHC] APN

141/2013 decided on March 25, 2015 it was held:

“Sentencing is an important aspect in the administration of criminal

justice system. A sentence ranges from death penalty to the mere

censure in the form of good behavior bond or probation. There are

multiple considerations relevant to the determination of a sentence. The

most important consideration is the seriousness of the crime.

Jurisprudentially, this position is persuasive despite pragmatic

difficulties associated with matching the harshness of the sanction to

the severity of the crime.

The judges are to pass lawful and appropriate sentence upon the

accused being convicted. In doing so, judges are to address their minds

to the objective of sentencing particularly when exercising the discretion

given to them under the law. Then only a correct sentence could be

passed upon a convicted accused. If not, criticism on lack of uniformity,

consistency and transparency in imposing sentences are bound to

surface. Therefore, it is necessary for the judges to keep in mind the

objectives of sentencing and also the sentencing guidelines, in order to

arrive at the correct and appropriate decision.

Objectives of sentencing include the following:

(i) To punish offenders to an extent and in a manner, which is

just in all the circumstances;

(ii) To protect the community from offender;

(iii) To deter offenders or other persons from committing offences

of the same or similar nature;

CA/HCC/217-218/2025

10 | P a g e

(iv) To establish conditions so that rehabilitation of offenders may

be promoted or facilitated;

(v) To signify that the court and the community denounce the

commission of such offences;

(vi) To maintain the required standards of societal expectations in

making decisions;

(vii) To prevent overcrowding prisons also could be considered as

one such objective particularly when it comes to developing

countries such as ours.”

In the case of Bandage Sumindra Jayanthi v. Attorney General (2015) 1

SLR 20 it was held:

“Sentencing belongs to the domain of the trial judge but that is no ground

for the prosecuting counsel to be complacent about his role in responding

to the mitigatory plea of a defense counsel.”

Under Section 360C of the Penal Code as amended, the minimum sentence

is 2 years imprisonment of either description and the maximum sentence is

20 years imprisonment of either description.

Under Section 360A of the Penal Code as amended, the minimum sentence

is 2 years imprisonment of either description and the maximum sentence is

10 years imprisonment of either description.

The Learned High Court Judge had imposed 07 years rigorous imprisonment

on each of the counts they had been charged subject to each sentence

running concurrently.

Considering all the circumstances with special attention to their children, I

consider imposing 4 years rigorous imprisonment is appropriate in this case.

Hence, their sentence on each count is reduced to 4 years rigorous

CA/HCC/217-218/2025

11 | P a g e

imprisonment which will run concurrently. Hence, each Appellant will have

to serve 04 years rigorous imprisonment. The fine and the compensation

imposed by the Learned High Court Judge will remain the same.

Considering the fact that the Appellants have been in remand custody since

their sentence, I order their sentences to take effect from the date of

conviction, namely 10.12.2024.

The Appeal is dismissed subject to the variation in the prison sentence.

The Registrar is directed to send this judgment to the High Court of Colombo

along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL