,

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

C.A.No. HCC No.0204/2015

H.C. Kuliyapitiya No. 260/2007

***********

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of

Section 3310f the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.IS of 1979.

Joseph Nilantha Rodrigo

Accused-Appellant

Vs.

Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo 12 .

Complainant- Respondent

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

DECIDED ON

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

DEVIKA ABEYRATNE, J.

Neranjan Jayasinghe for the Accused-Appellant.

Rohantha Abeysuriya A.S.G for the respondent

24.02. 2020 and 04.03.2020

26.06. 2020

****************

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, 1.

The accused-appellant (hereinafter referred to as the "Appellant") was

indicted before the High Court of Kuliyapitiya by the Hon. Attorney General

alleging that he committed murder of Jayakody Arachchige Nilochanie Sheila

Navaratne on or about 3rd March, 2006.

Upon election of the Appellant to be tried before a Sinhala speaking jury,

his trial commenced on 12th October 2015. At the conclusion of the prosecution

case, when the trial Court ruled that the Appellant had a case to answer, he made

a statement from the dock. The trial Court summed up the jury on 2nd November

2015. The jury returned a unanimous verdict of guilt and after his conviction, the

Appellant was sentenced to death by the trial Court.

Being aggrieved by the said conviction and sentence, the Appellant sought

to challenge its validity on the following grounds of appeal;

2

a. the evidence in relation to the alleged telephone conversation between

the prosecution witness No.1 and the Appellant is contradictory and

unsafe to act upon,

b. the evidence that the Appellant was wearing a blood stained trouser at

the time of his arrest is doubtful,

c. the prosecution had failed to establish a nexus of the items said to have

been recovered from the three wheeler to the Appellant and that

evidence fails the probability test,

d. the trial Court, by allowing the discovery of the identity card of the

deceased and a photograph without proving them, caused grave

prejudice to the Appellant,

e. evidence presented on the recovery of a sword is weak and unsafe to

act while the directions of trial Court in this regard caused grave

prejudice to the Appellant,

f. the language used by the trial Court in directing the jury had removed

the rights of the Jury to determine facts of the case,

g. the trial Court had failed to address the jury on the principles

governing voice identification,

h. directions of the trial Court on the Appellant's evidence to the Jury had

indirectly resulted them rejecting the same,

J. the directions of the trial Court on the difference between Section 293(2)

and 294(3) are inadequate since the injuries were sufficient to cause the

death in the ordinary cause of nature.

3

Of these multiple grounds of appeal, it is possible to identify most of them

under two broad areas of concern. Such grouping facilitates effective

considerations of closely related grounds of appeal.

One such area of concern would be the grounds of appeal that hinges on

the question of sufficiency of evidence in relation to certain items of

circumstantial evidence as presented by the prosecution while the other general

area would be the alleged instances of misdirection or non-direction on law and

fact made by the learned trial Judge during his summing up to the jury.

The grounds of appeal reproduced under (a) to (e) could be grouped into

the first category as identified above and the remaining grounds of appeal i.e. (f)

to (i) could be grouped into the second. '. -

Before this Court ventures to consider these multiple grounds of appeal of

the Appellant, under the two groupings referred to above it is necessary to make

a brief reference to the items of circumstantial evidence that had been presented

by the prosecution.

The deceased Jayakody Arachchige Nilochanie Sheila Navaratne was in her

mid-thirties at the time of her death. She had married quite young when she was

sitting for her ordinary level exams to one Kumara Tissera and had two children.

They separated over about 18 years ago and the deceased found regular

employment in the middle eastern countries where she served as a domestic

4

helper. She used to visit Sri Lanka regularly and would find shelter with her

sister Indrani Sheila Navaratne (PWl) who resided in Narangalla. Since her return

to the island in 2003,the deceased continued to live with her sister. The deceased

preferred to travel by three wheelers and through these regular taxi rides, the

deceased became acquainted with the Appellant as he who drove them around

regularly. After sometime the witness realised that the deceased was having a

romantic relationship with the Appellant. She had warned the deceased when

she learnt that the Appellant was already married. Indrani knew that the

deceased used to remit her earnings directly to the Appellant during this period

and it was he who looked after her children.

It was revealed that the Appellant opted to leave his family and start a

new life with the deceased since he admitted that he cannot provide for two

women. The Appellant then requested witness lndrani for a plot of land owned

by her in Narangalla for him to live with the deceased. The witness had declined.

This state of indecisiveness remained for some time. In 2005, the deceased and

the Appellant, have agreed to part ways. The deceased had thereafter consented

to remarry and Indrani had looked for a suitor. The deceased in the meantime,

had requested the Appellant to return her money.

It is not clear whether he had agreed to do so, but the circumstances

indicate that there had been two prior occasions in which the deceased was to

meet up with the Appellant in this regard. Indrani had learnt from the deceased

sister that in February and March in 2006 that she expects the Appellant to return

her money. The Appellant, having agreed to return her money initially, phoned

5

her that he does not have funds to return her money and cancelled their meeting

over the phone.

On 3rd March 2006, Indrani received a call from the deceased and was

informed that the latter was to meet the Appellant that day over her money. The

witness suggested her sister to go with someone. However, she learnt that the

deceased had proceeded alone to meet up with the Appellant. At about 2.00 p.m.

she was told that the bus in which the deceased travelled had mechanical

problems. The deceased had reached her destination at about 3.45 p.m. and the

anxious witness, called her between 4.00 and 4.15 p.m.

During that conversation the deceased told witness that the Appellant had

just arrived. The witness had then described the circumstances under which the

Appellant too had spoken to her over the phone. A~cordin.g ~9 ~.er, !he ,Appellant

had then grabbed (" ql<;@ qO@lGJI'lJ" ) the phone from'the deceased and said that he

would neither return her money nor would send the deceased back (" ~Cl @lGJ<;O

<!lCl.5\@l1'lJ I'llzCill. o@@ @l<;.5\@ll'lJoI I'llzCilz"). Having conveyed his intentions to the

witness, the Appellant had ended the phone conversation abruptly. The witness

claimed that she had identified the voice of the Appellant and has had heard his

voice over the phone in her previous conversations with him.

Witness Rita Fernando was residing adjoining the Kuliyapitiya General

Cemetery at Hettiwatta. She recollects an incident of homicide in 2006 but unable

to recollect the exact date. On that particular day, she heard scream of a woman

coming from the Crematorium area in the said Cemetery. She saw someone lying

near the Crematorium. She also saw a cream coloured three wheeler going out

6

to the main road from the Cemetery gates. She had informed her husband over

this happening and having rushed to the scene, saw the body of a woman with

bleeding injuries. She had identified the three wheeler marked "P9" as having a

similar body colour to the one she saw leaving the Cemetery. She also said the

Appellant too had lived in close proximity to the said Cemetery. Kapila Bandara

too had lived in the same neighbourhood and confirms that they saw the body of

a woman with injuries.

On 3rd March 2006 at 6.20, p.m. Kuliyapitiya Police received information

regarding a body of a woman, in front of the Crematorium of the Cemetery.

Having reached the scene at 6.40 p.m. IP Sirisena saw the body of the deceased,

lying face up. He also noted the deceased had several gaping wounds on her

head and neck. There were two large blood patches, located two and six feet

- , .-.,;- -;,.--. away from the body and tyre marks, apparently left by a three wheeler. The

officer had recovered two broken pieces of gold chain, one lying close to the

body and the other near her shoulder. There was a mobile phone, which rang

whilst being under her buttocks, and it was retrieved only after the completion of

scene visit by the Magistrate.

Witness Indrani meanwhile became anxious after the abrupt end of the

telephone conversation. She had repeatedly tried to contact her sister by dialling

her number. At about 5.30 p.m. a male had answered her call and conveyed that

her sister had died. She then tried the number again and was answered by a

woman. The witness then contacted her brother, a police officer attached to

Kurunegala Police Station, and conveyed this information.

7

CI Amarakoon of Kuliyapitiya Police Station had visited the scene.

Thereafter, he made arrangements for the Magistrate to visit the scene. After the

scene visit, one Sebastian Tissera identified the body and provided information in

relation to the Appellant as a person who had a close relationship with the

deceased. Having removed the body to the Hospital morgue, the witness

received information about the Appellant and had arrested him at 10.28 p.m.,

when they met him at Meegahakotuwa- Hiriliyedda main road, driving a three

wheeler, produced as "P9".

The witness noted blood stains on the T shirt and the pair of shorts worn

by the Appellant at the time of his arrest. Search of the three wheeler yielded a

pink coloured bag, which in turn contained an umbrella, a travelling bag, a

purse, a' blouse, woman's underwear, a brush, bottle of body lotion, a vial of

deodorant and some sanitary pads. This bag also had the NrC of the deceased.

Subsequent to the arrest of the Appellant, the witness had recorded his

statement at 10.35 p.m. and followed him to the rear part of the compound of his

father-in-law Aloysius Fernando, where the Appellant pointed out a blood stained

sword lying in the shrubs.

Witness Sujeewa said the three wheeler marked "P9" was with the

Appellant since January 2006 until he took its possession from the Magistrate's

Court upon executing a bond on 16.06.2006. The Appellant had transferred its

8

ownership to the witness on 07.03.2007, in favour of the witness over a prior

financial transaction between them.

The Government Analyst confirmed that human blood was identified on

the pair of trousers and also on the blade of the sword. The expert witness also of

the opinion that the pattern of the several human blood marks observed on the

trousers worn by the Appellant could be a result of blood splashing from the

wounds, as they are being inflicted on the deceased.

Death of the deceased was due to shock following excessive bleeding. The

medical expert testified that the deceased has suffered a total of 16 cut injuries

and the 1st to 5th injuries that were located on the head and torso, were the

serious injuries. Of these injuries, 1st to 5th and 8th cut injuries would cause death

in the ordinary course of nature since they contribute mostly for the loss of

bio'od:"It iso'his opi~i:bn that the 1st injury had resulted in cutting into the skull

bone and also cutting into brain matter. The medical witness also observed an

impression coupled with abrasions, over the stomach of the deceased, caused by

a vehicle running over her. The 5th injury on the neck had partially cut the 5th

cervical vertebra. These two injuries also could have splashed blood in droplet

form on the attacker, if he or she was about 2 feet from the deceased.

In his opinion, the attacker had inflicted each of the 16 cut injuries by

striking with a heavy sharp weapon such as the sword recovered upon the

information provided by the Appellant ("PIO"), by separate individual strokes.

The attacker had used the sharp edge of the weapon in inflicting all these

injuries, except for the injury No. 11, where he had used the blunt edge of the

9

weapon. The 16th, 17th and 18th injuries were defensive injuries when the

deceased attempted to ward off the attack on her. Medical expert also noted an

imprint abrasion over the stomach of the deceased caused by vehicle running

over her.

It is in the light of these items of circumstantial evidence, this Court must

consider the multiple grounds of appeal as urged by the Appellant.

The grounds of appeal that hinges on the question of sufficiency of

evidence in relation to certain items of circumstantial evidence as alleged by the

Appellant, namely;

a. the evidence in relation to the alleged telephone conversation between

the prosecution witness No.1 and the Appellant is contradictory and

unsafe to act upon,

b. the evidence that the Appellant was wearing a blood stained trouser at

the time of his arrest is doubtful,

c. the prosecution had failed to establish a nexus of the items said to have

been recovered from the three wheeler to the Appellant and that

evidence fails the probability test,

d. the trial Court, by allowing the discovery of the identity card of the

deceased and a photograph without proving them, caused grave

prejudice to the Appellant,

e. evidence presented on the recovery of a sword is weak and unsafe to

act while the directions of trial Court in this regard caused grave

prejudice to the Appellant,

should be considered by this Court at this stage.

10

These grounds of appeal are essentially impinging on the issue of

credibility of evidence. In Thurairatnam v The Queen 68 NLR 347, the Court of

Criminal Appeal reiterated that the questions of fact that arose in the trial should

be left to the jury to be decided by them and them alone. They have the right to

decide credibility of the prosecution witnesses and whether to accept their

evidence or not since credibility is a question of fact. However, it was said by the

Court of Criminal Appeal, in Walimunige John v The State 76 NLR 529, that it is

"incorrect in law to say that a mistake of fact by the jury is incapable of being

corrected." The question of the status afforded to a conclusion reached by a

properly directed jury upon a question of fact, when challenged before an

appellate Court, was considered in R v Cooper [1969)1 Q.B. 267. In this judgment

Widgery LJ stated;

"It has been said over and over again throughout the years that this

Court must recognise the advantage which a jury has in seeing and

hearing the witnesses, and if all the material was before the jury and

the summing up was impeccable, this Court should not lightly

interfere. "

The evidence of lndrani in relation to the brief telephone conversation, she

claimed to have had with the Appellant, forms the basis of this complaint. It was

contended on behalf of the Appellant that the times referred to by the witness of

the calls she initiated and received on the day her sister died did not find support

from the documentary proof by which the call details between the witness and

the deceased were revealed. It could not also be reconciled with that of the

evidence of the other witnesses.

11

Witness Indrani testified that the deceased called her" at about 2.00" p.m.

(2.00 0 (0)6) informing of the breakdown of her bus and again at about 3.45 (

3.450 (0)6). In between 4.00 and 4.10 p.m.( 4.0005 4.1005 GalO )., she received

another call informing her of the Appellant's arrival. Then she said it is at 5.30

p.m. she called her sister and a policeman answered the phone.

During trial, the prosecution presented documentary evidence from the

relevant service provider as to the call details from the witness's mobile phone

connection No. 0773210181 during the relevant time period. The detailed bill

CP1") in relation to the above mobile phone connection was presented by the

prosecution. The relevant parts of the call details that are listed under "Outgoing

Dialog to Dialog" on 3rd March 2006 from the mobile phone connection No.

0773210181 are tabulated below for easy reference.

Sequence Date Time Phone Units

number

30 03.03.2006 13:08:51 779614218 1

31 03.03.2006 13:10:37 773545060 1

32 03.03.2006 16:16:31 779614218 1

33 03.03.2006 16:21:07 779614218 1

34 03.03.2006 16:28:17 779614218 1

35 03.03.2006 17:09:20 779614218 2

36 03.03.2006 20:09:59 779614218 1

12

37

1 03.03.20061 20:10:40 779614218 4

The claim that the deceased was in constant contact with her sister Indrani

on the day the former had met with her death is clearly borne out by the call

details. Only the time of calls the witness had initiated after the death of the

deceased shows a significant gap. She said that when she called the deceased at

5.30 p .m. a male person spoke. The call records as well as the evidence of IP

Sirisena indicate that the witness's call on the deceased's phone was only

answered after 8.00 p.m.

IP Sirisena said even though he heard the phone ringing, did not retrieve it

by disturbing the body, since the visiting Magistrate was to record his

observations. The Magistrate had arrived at the scene sometimes after 7.30 p.m.

that evening and left having spent about 40 minutes making observations. The

time gap between the 5.09 p.m. call and 8.09 p.m. call is three hours. This

evidence supports the position that after the 5.09 p.m. call, the deceased's phone

was not used, until it was retrieved by IP Sirisena.

The witness was anxious as to the fate of her sister after the abrupt end of

her conversation with the Appellant. The witness was in disbelief when IP

Sirisena conveyed that her sister had been killed. Desperately she tried to contact

her relation, in order to ensure that the deceased is safe.

This Court notes in this context the time gap between the incident and her

testimony before the jury, as relevant consideration in evaluating evidence of a

13

witness as per Gunasekara v Director General, Commission to Investigate

Allegations of BribenJ or Corruption CA 210/2008 - decided on 21.06.2011. The

indictment reads the date of offence as 3rd March 2006. The witness gave

evidence only in October 2015. There is a gap of more than nine years exists

between these two points of time. Naturally her memory would have faded over

the years as to the exact timing.

In view of these considerations, the inaccuracies as to the exact timing of

the calls could easily be understood as she had to rely on her memory to recall

the timings.

Thus, it is clear there was sufficient evidence that had been led before the

trial Court in relation to the calls initiated and received by the witness Indrani.

The Appellant contended before this Court that her attribution of certain

utterances to him is a fabrication. No contradiction or omission was highlighted

by the Appellant nor he made any suggestion to her that it is a fabrication.

The acceptance of her claim of making calls and what had been conveyed

to her by the deceased as well as the Appellant during these calls therefore

purely depends on her credibility as a witness.

Whilst directing the jury, the trial Court had addressed them on these lines

over the issue and invited them to consider the question whether it is reasonable

to expect such discrepancies in her evidence in such circumstances.

14

There is no complaint by the Appellant that the learned trial Judge did not

adequately directed the jury how to evaluate evidence for its credibility and the

weightage they should be attaching to them if they found the evidence is

credible. In fact, as noted above, the learned trial Judge had adequately and

correctly directed the jury on evaluation of credibility of witnesses and the

applicable tests in evaluating evidence, and, in addition, had drawn their

attention to the inconsistencies pointed out by the Appellant.

This Court would not therefore intervene to disturb the determination of

fact reached by the properly directed jury unless their determination could be

termed as perverse. There is no material before this Court to conclude it is so.

The grounds of appeal that deal with the items ot" e'~idence that tlTe

Appellant was wearing a blood stained trouser at the time of his arrest and items

said to have been recovered from the three wheeler to the Appellant and that

evidence fails the probability test could be considered together since they revolve

around the circumstances under which the Appellant was arrested and a weapon

was recovered.

Learned Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the prosecution version

indicates that his client was arrested on a public road and by then he had already

concealed the blood stained sword in a shrub. He then raised the question,

according to the prosecution the Appellant had the presence of mind to conceal

any incriminating items that tends to connect him with the murder of the

15

deceased, and if that is the case, would it be a probable conduct on his part for

him to be still wearing the blood stained trouser at the time of his arrest?

This contention requires the applicability of the probability test to the

prosecution claim that the Appellant, although he concealed the sword, yet was

wearing a blood stained trouser at the time of his arrest.

The evidence indicate that the deceased had suffered her injuries, which

resulted in her death, in the evening at about 5.30 p.m. The Appellant was

arrested after about three hours, i.e. at 8.28 p.m. in the same evening. The

prosecution presented evidence that the Appellant knew the place where a

sword with human blood on its blade was found. At the time of arrest, the

Appellan.t was Clad in i pair of bl~e shorts. The blood like patches wei? 6b;erved ~c -, . . .. by IP Amarakoon at that point of time. The sword was recovered from a place,

located about 300 meters away from where he was arrested.

The Government Analyst, in his evidence described the pattern of the

blood patches that were found on the trouser. There were five places where

blood patches were noted as groups (o(3) OG<)@lG:)I:D), in addition to several other

individual ones smaller in size.

The time was dark and the trouser is of blue colour. The blood patches

were distributed over the fabric forming few clusters and several individual ones

as well. In these circumstances, it is more probable that the Appellant would not

16

have noticed the presence of few dark stains against blue background in the

limited light of late evening, if he was more keen to conceal the weapon as soon

as possible.

The jury were properly warned to assess the evidence by applying the

probability test, objectively based on their life experience. This direction is in line

with the description of the probability test, as described by this Court. The

judgment of Addaraarachchi v The State (2000) 3 Sri L.R. 393, where the Court

made certain observations in relation to applying the test of probability on the

evidence of a prosecutrix. It is stated therein;

".. . there is no other way to apply the test of probability and

improbability except by considering the yardstick of accepted and

expected behaviour of women in society. In other words, it is the

application of the test of normal human conduct. As Jayasuriya f.

observed in the case of Wickramasuriya v. Dedoleena & others,

II A judge m applying the test of probability and

improbability relies heavily in his knowledge of men and

matters and the patterns of conduct observed by human

beings both ingenious as well as those who are less talented

and fortunate. "

In this case it would appear that both the trial Judge and the learned

Senior State Counsel who prosecu ted (as observed from his written

submissions) seem to have been imbibed with an erroneous notion

that when applying the test of probability and improbability it is the

17

subjective test and not the objective test that has to be resorted to,

"

In the summing up, learned trial Judge had adequately and correctly

directed the jury in applying the test of probability when they proceed to

evaluate credibility of the witnesses by making references to the normal human

conduct and it should be applied objectively.

It is important that the second segment of the submission also is

considered in this context. It had been submitted on behalf of the Appellant that

if the Appellant was keen to conceal any incriminating evidence as the

prosecution claim, then why he would keep the deceased's hand bag in his three

wheeler? Compounding this submission, the Appellant complains that the .- .

prosecution had failed to prove that the bag in fact belonged to the deceased.

In the light of these submissions, it is appropriate to consider whether the

prosecution had proved that the hand bag that had been found in the three

wheeler at the time of arrest of Appellant, actually belonged to the deceased as

the first consideration since if the answer in the negative, then its recovery has no

relevance to the prosecution except to the limited extent that an inference could

have been drawn that the bag must have belonged to a woman.

IP Samarakoon said that the bag was recovered from the rear part of the

three wheeler. It is only through a search of the vehicle, the officer had seen the

18

bag and took charge of it. If the Appellant has caused the injuries to the deceased

with a sword, as the prosecution alleges, then it is reasonable to infer that he

would distance himself from the weapon with the first available opportunity. If

one were to apply the three categories of knowledge as per Ariyasinghe &

Others v Attorney General (2004) 2 Sri L.R. 357, the evidence clearly indicate that

it was the Appellant himself who concealed the sword given the facts that the

land belonged to his father-in-law, the relatively short period of time since the

incident and the recovery. The sword was recovered from the shrub of the back

yard of his father-in-law's property. This factor indicates that the Appellant had

deliberately chosen a place where the possibility of an accidental recovery of the

sword by a third party is placed at its minimal.

The important question is then whether the bag belonged to the deceased.

IP Samarakoon said in evidence that the NrC of the deceased, bearing number

7274438438V, was found in it. The witness, having entered the recovery of NrC in

his notes, had thereafter produced it along with other contents of the bag under

PR 571/2006 to the Station. These productions were handed over to the custody

of Court at a subsequent stage.

However, the NrC was not produced during the trial before the jury and

its recovery details were only elicited in the re-examination of the witness by the

prosecution. The Appellant, although afforded an opportunity to further cross

examine the witness on this issue, had no questions.

19

that;

It was decided in Edrick de Silva v Chandradasa de Silva 70 NLR 169,

" ... Where there is ample opportunity to contradict the evidence of

a witness but is not impugned or assailed in cross-examination that

is a special fact and feature in the case. It is a matter falling within

the definition of the Word "prove" in section 3 of the Evidence

Ordinance, and as trial Judge or Court must necessarily take that

fact into consideration in adjudicating the issue before It .. . ".

More recently, in an unreported judgment of Phillipu Mandige Nalaka

Krishantha Kumara Thisera v Attorney-General-CA 87/2005 -CAM

17.5.2007this Court has held tha t;

~ . ~. ,. ;:...... . ';. '

" ... whenever evidence given by a witness on a material point is

not challenged in cross examination, it has to be concluded that

such evidence is not disputed and is accepted by the opponent

subject of course to the qualification that the witness is a reliable

witness." .

Production clerk of the Magistrate's Court of Kuliyapitiya said that he had

received a parcel containing the NrC along with other productions from the

police under PR 571/2006 on 15.03.2006.

20

In these circumstances, the effect of the evidence presented by the

prosecution on this aspect deemed proved since it was left unchallenged.

During summing up, learned trial Judge had however directed the jury to

disregard the evidence presented by the prosecution on recovery of the

deceased's NIC since it had not been produced before them.

In Gunapala v Attorney General (2007) 1 Sri L.R. 273, one of the grounds

upon which the validity of the conviction was challenged is non-production of

the "murder weapon" by the prosecution during trial. In delivering judgment

Ranjith Silva J rejected this contention and stated;

"The provisions of the Evidence Ordinance itself have made a clear

distinction with regard to documentary evidence on the one hand

and real evidence on the other. Section 91 of the Evidence

Ordinance excludes parole evidence whereas Section 60(1) and (2)

of the Evidence Ordinance enacts that if the oral evidence refers to a

fact which could be seen or perceived by any other sense or in any

other way, it must be the evidence of the witness who says that he

saw or perceived that fact by that sense or in that manner, that

should be led to prove that fact, although the Court may, if it thinks

fit, require the production of such material thing for its inspection.

(Section 165 of the Evidence Ordinance) Thus the prosecution was

entitled to lead oral evidence of a witness without producing the

material object."

21

Similar view was expressed in Sudu Banda v Attorney General (1998) 3 Sri

L.R. 375, where Jayasuriya L having compared the English law on the point had

concluded that;

" ... the contention that as the gun was listed as a production

in the indictment, its non-production at the trial is fatal to

the conviction is an untenable proposition certainly as far as

the law of Sri Lanka is concerned."

In relation to the appeal before this Court, the recovery of the NIC was

another item of circumstantial evidence presented before the jury. Thus, the

withdrawal of the evidence in relation to the recovery of NIC of the deceased

from the three wheeler as an item of circumstantial evidence against the

Appellant by the learned trial Judge, although contrary to the principle

enunciated in the said judgment, had resulted in placing him in an advantageous

position since it had deprived the prosecution of an important item of evidence.

Apparently, the submission of the Appellant that the prosecution had

failed to establish a nexus between him and the bag was made on the footing that

the NrC was the only item of evidence that connected the bag to the deceased. It

is clearly not so.

Witness Indrani had identified the hand bag and the blouse found in the

said bag as items that belonged to the deceased. She gave a convincing reason

for the positive identification of the blouse, and her assertion was not contested

22

by the Appellant. lndrani claimed it is her blouse and it had been gifted to the

deceased by her.

The Jury was directed upon this item of evidence in considering the

question of fact whether the bag belonged to the deceased or not. Therefore, the

submission of the Appellant on this point does not reflect the available evidence

before the jury, when they proceeded to evaluate the evidence after the summing

up. Contrary to the claim of the Appellant, when the evidence that had been

presented before the jury is considered in the proper perspective, the finding of

fact by the jury could not be assailed since this Court is of the view that the

relative probabilities tilts heavily towards the prosecution.

The two remaining grounds, namely that the trial Court, by allowing the

discovery of the identity card of the deceased and a photograph without proving

them, caused grave prejudice to the Appellant and also the evidence presented

on the recovery of a sword is weak and unsafe to act while the directions of trial

Court in this regard caused grave prejudice to the Appellant, should be

considered now.

In relation to the evidence of recovery of the NIC of the deceased has

already been dealt with in the preceding paragraphs. The basis of the complaint

of a photograph was due to an attempt by the prosecution to mark a photograph

in which the Appellant and the deceased appeared in the background of a three

wheeler. Learned trial Judge, in his summing up, had clearly directed the jury to

23

totally disregard that evidence from their consideration. The Appellant,

however, now claim the failed attempt to admit the photograph had prejudiced

the jury in arriving at a finding against him.

What the prosecution sought to achieve by producing the photograph

must have been to convince the jury of his association with the deceased and that

he owned a three wheeler. As already referred, the prosecution had led the

evidence of current owner of the three wheeler marked as "P9" in order to

establish that it was in the possession of the Appellant on the day the deceased

was killed. His evidence remained unchallenged since there was no cross-

examination by the Appellant. On the question of the Appellant's association

with the deceased, the prosecution led the evidence of Indrani who had personal

knowledge of the nature of their relationship. In his statement from the dock, the

Appellant too admits that he had known -her and had sexual" telationswith her

upon payment of money.

Moving on to the consideration of the last ground of appeal in this

segment, that the evidence of recovery of a weapon is "weak and unsafe to act"

while the directions of trial Court in this regard caused grave prejudice to the

Appellant, it is noted, that this submission has two inbuilt components to it.

Firstly, it claims the evidence of the recovery of a weapon is weak and unsafe to

act. Then, secondly, it claims that the direction of the trial Court on the same had

caused grave prejudice to the Appellant.

24

As far as the evidence in relation to the recovery of the sword is concerned,

the Appellant's submission was even for his arrest, the prosecution did not place

any evidence why he was suspected and it also had failed to call the father-in-

law, in whose land the recovery of the sword was made.

IP Amarakoon, in his evidence described the circumstances under which the

recovery of the sword was made. He had recorded the statement of the

Appellant at the place of the arrest. Then the Appellant had led the police officer

to a shrubby back yard of a property located about 300 meters away from the

place of arrest and pointed out the blood stained sword. It was later revealed that

the recovery was made on a land belonged to the Appellant's father-in-law, and

his wife was also in her father's house at that point of time. The Appellant

,,- challenged the place of his arrest by suggesting that he_. was arrested at the

" residence of an Attorney-at-law while waiting there with a person called

Aloysius. He challenged the place of the recovery of the three wheeler by

suggesting that it was taken charge from a place on Delgahakotuwa Road. Both

these suggestions were denied by IP Samarakoon.

The Appellant also did challenge the witness on the recovery of the sword

from his father-in-law's property by simply suggesting to the witness that his

statement is a lie. The witness denied this suggestion as well. The Appellant had

stated in his dock statement that his father-in-law had told him, once he was

enlarged on bail, that his fish knife was taken by the police. This position was not

put to the witness who said the weapon was recovered upon the Appellant's

information and therefore it lacks consistency. This claim could also be taken as a

25

statement bordering falsehood since the prosecution evidence, that the sword

was handed over to the reservist on the same day after it was recovered, and that

fact was not challenged by the Appellant. Obviously the jury had disbelieved the

Appellant's evidence.

In these circumstances, this Court is not inclined to accept the Appellant's

contention that the evidence in relation to the recovery of the weapon is "weak

and unsafe to act" as it is clearly a misstatement, in view of the evidence referred

to above.

It is appropriate at this juncture to consider another ground of appeal

raised by the Appellant. He complained that the language used by the trial Court

, . in directing the jury had removed the rights of the jury to determine facts of the

case. This claim was basically stems from two statements from summing up. One

of impugned statements read " ... qz@Gl c:))01/Wo <!)<'10 Glz~@O<'1> QJool QJz~QJz~O

@o61 [;)<'1>0)" while the other statement read" .. , 00C;0I BG 6\O@~~ CS))OO)) 0)0<'1>~C;

o~ CS))@!iClool 6\@QJ<'1> 00)<'1>001 ool6\O)oz C;z<'ll B5[;)) ... ".

A similar contention was placed before the Court of Criminal Appeal in

Albert Singho v The Queen 74 NLR 368, where the Court cited words of Lord

Reading, in the judgment in Leo George O'Donnell 12 Cr. App. R. 219, which

stated that" ... in the course of his summing up such language as leads them (the jury)

to think that he is directing them, that they must find the facts in the way which he

indicates" in determining the appellant's complaint.

26

The above quoted direction with the adjective "I:D)O" in addressing the

jury in assessing testimonial trustworthiness of Indrani is a mere observation of

the learned trial Judge when he presented police evidence for their consideration.

It was said in the context of Indrani's evidence that since her conversation with

the Appellant, which abruptly ended, she had repeatedly tried her sister's

number to establish contact with her. After repeated attempts, finally a male

answered the phone. Then she tried the number once more, and a female

answered. Learned trial Judge, having referred to evidence of IP Sirisena who

said in evidence it was he who answered the phone for the first time, and when it

rang for the second time, he had handed it over to a woman who was there

asking her to take the call. Learned trial Judge made the comparison of the two

Vl'itnesse~ and alluded the said remark. In this context, it is not possible for this

Court to conclude that the trial Judge has led the jury to find the facts" the way he

indicates" .

Other disputed direction, the Appellant had relied on, was " .. . 00C;0I

8~BO~ 3:))00) Cl)01:D (5C; o GJ)~ClOol Biiill:D "'<:))1:D00l oolBCl)OI C;11:D 8(0) ... ".

Here, the trial Court refers to the knowledge of the Appellant as to a place where

a sword with traces of human blood on its blade was found. Obviously, it is not

natural in the ordinary circumstances to find a sword with human blood on its

blade. Clearly the trial Court is justified in referring to the sword as "00C;0I

8~BO~ GJ)OO) Cl)01:D (5C;". If the trial Court directed the jury by adding the

Appellant, before the said quotation and thereby directed that "oolBCl)OI 08cl

001;01 8~BO~ GJ)OO)) Cl)01:D (5C;" instead of what it did use to direct the jury,

then that addition would definitely qualify to be termed as a misdirection by

this Court. If one reads through the remaining part of this segment of directions,

27

it would reveal that the trial Court had thereafter clearly directed the jury that

the recovery of the weapon does not entitle them even to treat it as a mere hint ("

cgle)(.jci") that he did commit the crime. Therefore, this direction is unable to be

termed as a direction prejudicial to the Appellant.

The several grounds of appeal that had been considered thus far are

without any merit when considered in the light of the entire body of evidence

that had been placed before the jury. These grounds of appeal that are essentially

founded upon credibility and sufficiency of evidence therefore necessarily fails.

Learned Counsel for the Appellant, in his submissions also raised several

grounds of appeal on the deficiencies in the summing up. In order to refresh

memory, these grounds are reproduced below once again, after rearranging them

for convenience of dealing in with more clarity;

i. directions of the trial Court on the Appellant's evidence to the Jury had

indirectly resulted them rejecting the same,

ii. the directions of the trial Court on the difference between Section 293

and third limb of Section 294 of the Penal Code are inadequate since the

injuries were not necessarily fatal ones and are only sufficient to cause

death in the ordinary course of nature,

iii. the trial Court had failed to address the jury on the principles

governing voice identification.

28

The Appellant made a lengthy dock statement. In his statement, the

Appellant admits that he had prior sexual relations with the deceased upon

monitory terms. He states that he provided transport, when she was to meet up

with her clients, without directly attributing that she was engaged in

prostitution. Referring to her death, the Appellant claimed that he lived adjacent

to the cemetery where she was found with bleeding injuries and when he saw

her that evening, he thought that he should inform the police of his relationship

and therefore sought legal assistance.

It was submitted that the directions given to the jury regarding the

evaluation of the dock statement of the Appellant had indirectly resulted in

rejecting his evidence. The grievance of the Appellant in this particular ground of

appeal is the perceived impression created in the minds of the jury upon the

directions by the trial judge in evaluating his evidence, which he alleges resulted

~ -in rejecting his evidence. These directions appear in pages 906 t~ . 912,-where-the

trial Court directed the jury in applying the tests of consistency and probability

by making reference to the evidence of the Appellant.

Perusal of these directions coupled with the evidence did not reveal any

error in fact or in law. Learned trial Judge had directed the jury in evaluating the

Appellant's evidence, once in general terms and repeated them on specifically in

relation to the evidence presented before them.

In Yahonis Singho v The Queen 67 NLR 8, the Court of Criminal Appeal

laid down the rule in relation to evaluation of a dock statement, that the jury

must be directed on the intermediate position where there was neither an

acceptance nor a rejection of it. The judgments of The Queen v Kularatne 71 NLR

529 and Somasiri v Attorney General (1983) 2 Sri L.R. 225 have further added

29

that, if there are no directions to the jury as to if they believe it then they must act

on it, if it raised a reasonable doubt the prosecution case, the defence must

succeed and it should not be used against any other accused, then such a failure

constitutes a non-direction on an important aspect of the law.

In the instant appeal, not only the trial Court had adequately directed the

jury on all these important principles of law and repeated them once more when

it directed them in relation to valuation of the dock statement for its credibility

with specific references to the evidence. Learned trial Judge, ventured further

into the territory of safeguarding the interest of the Appellant by inviting the jury

to a factor in favour to him as it was directed that;

"l @00 0C;(3)~ Ol(5J oolO3OlOz 00103 ot8@~ 80 gOll~CJO)

OlG 00 OCJ Olo)CJo) C)~@CJ~ oz@03CJ g~ wC)O. OCJ

oz@dl@@~ l @Olb@~ 0C;(3)~ OlG. @ OOo)<WlC) Ol -.... -. . oolO3tll6z@G3. Olo)CJC; ~lO@)!)CJ OlGg~ @C)~C)l. 0@c:5 gC)C;

wOOOl@ @Elj C;~lC)OlO ~~@)!)~ 85 oolO3Ol0i@Gl Olo)

OGOll wz@@@~ CJ@ qlOllOCJOlO qroq)oI Olo) OlOzc)~o C)Cll

(!)~ CJ@ l~8Ol OlzGOl @(3)j ClolOl @~C;~lC)6\~ g~C)

8D0 (3)z6\CJlC)O) qz03 wC)oI oC)zro qC)c:5ClC)OlO 00lC) 85~

q@CJq) Olo) @C;~ 00 (!)~@Gl Olo)CJ OGOll wz@@~ CJ@

qlOllOCJOl ol~OlS80l C;zo6\~ g~C) wz@C; g~ @C)~C)l. @@

q)Ol)O@c.5 00lo3@c.5 O)O)CJ OGOll wz@@@~ @ OllO@)!))c)O

CJoolC) qroq)oI Olo)C)@ oQi)C)lo&CJoIC)CJ OGOll w@~

q)Ol)OCJo OGOl) wz@ 8 bOlG g~ @C)~C)."

Hence, it is clear that this ground of appeal is devoid of any merit.

The contention of the Appellant that the learned trial Judge had failed to

direct the jury in respect of the distinction between the" intention of causing such

bodily injury as is likely cause death" as described in Section 293 of the Penal

30

Code with the "intention of causing bodily injury intended to be inflicted is sufficient

in the ordinary course of nature" as in third limb of Section 294, and thereby

deprived the jury of the option imposition of lesser culpability on him resulting

in grave prejudice should be considered now.

This submission appears to have stemmed from the evidence of the

medical expert that none of the 16 injuries suffered by the deceased were

necessarily fatal ones and only some of them were sufficient to cause her death in

the ordinary course of nature.

In view of this submission, it is helpful to refer to some of the judicial

precedents which already dealt with this contentious issue and had laid down

the applicable governing principles, because, it is against the background of

those principles only that this Court intends to evaluate the directions to the jury

given by the learned trial Judge on this particular aspect. .

::fhe "intention" referred to in third limb of Section 294 of the Penal Code

was described by Basnayake J in Farook v Attorney General (2006) 3 Sri L.R. 174.

It is stated by his Lordship that;

"The intention that is required, is to cause the injury in fact

inflicted. If the intended injury is sufficient to cause death in the

ordinary course of nature, the offence is murder. The law is crystal

clear on this point",

It was decided by Sisira de Abrew J in Vithana & Another v The Republic of Sri

Lanka (2007) 1 Sri L.R. 169, that;

31

" ... the intention that is contemplated in the third limb of sec. 294

is the intention to cause bodily injury. This injury should be

sufficient, in the ordinary course of nature, to cause death. The

emphasis here is on the sufficiency of the injury to cause death in

the ordinary course of nature and not on the intention. This

posi tion is amply justified by illustration 'c' to sec. 294 which is

reproduced below:

"A intentionally gzves Z a sword-cut or club-wound

sufficient to cause the death of a man in the ordinary course

of nature. Z dies in consequence. Here A is guilty of murder,

although he may not have intended to cause Z' s death. "

This illustration says that' A' is guilty of murder although he may

not have intended )0 . c(Juse_ the . death of '2'. This shows thaI . -'~ ~--. -. . -. prosecution can prove a charge of murder even if the accused,

charged with murder, did not entertain murderous intention at the

time of inflicting the bodily injury, if the accused entertained an

intention to inflict bodily injury and that this injury is sufficient, in

the ordinary course nature, to cause the death of the victim. In my

view an accused person charged with murder cannot claim, when

the victim has succumbed to the injury which is sufficient, in the

ordinary course of nature, to cause death, that he did not intend to

cause the death of the victim but he only intended to inflict bodily

injury and that he should be exonerated from the charge of

murder."

32

His lordship further added,

" ... the intention contemplated in the 3rd limb of sec. 294 is the

intention to inflict a bodily injury. According to 3rd limb of sec.

294, this injury must be sufficient to cause death in the ordinary

course of nature. The emphasis in the 3rrl limb of sec. 294 is on the

sufficiency of the injury in ordinary course of nature to cause death.

The sufficiency is the high probability of death in the ordinary

course of nature which evidence must be elicited from the doctor

who conducted the post-mortem who is called upon to express an

opinion on the post-mortem report."

In relation to the "high probability of causing death" resulting from an

injury, Jayasuriya J, in Sumanasiri v Attorney General (1999) 1 Sri L.R. 309, acted

on the principle that" clause 3 of section 294 requires that the probability of death

resulting from the injury inflicted was not merely likely but very great though not

necessarily inevitable".

The basis of determination of the question of fact whether an accused has

had the requisite "intention of causing bodily injury to any person", as referred to

in the third limb of Section 294 of the Penal Code, was also considered in Farook

v Attorney General (supra). The Court stated thus;

"The third clause discards the test of subjective knowledge. It deals

with acts done with the intention of causing bodily injury to a

person and the bodily injury is sufficient in the ordinary course of

nature to cause death. In this clause the result of the intentionally

caused injury must be viewed objectively. If the injury that the

33

offender intends causing and does cause is sufficient to cause death

in the ordinary way of nature the offence is murder whether the

offender intended causing death or not and whether the offender had

a subjective knowledge of the consequences or not."

In relation to the question, whether a particular injury could be termed as

an injury which is "sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death",

Jayasuriya J in acted on the consideration that "where death is caused by bodily

injury, the person who inflicted the wound will be held to have caused death although by

resorting to proper remedies and skilful treatment death might have been avoided."

Having reproduced some of the recent judicial pronouncements on the

applicable legal principles in relation to the requisites the prosecution must

prove if it alleges murder under 3rd limb of Section 294 of Penal Code, it is very

n;levant to quot~ the judgment of Chandrasena v Attorney General (2008) 2 Sri

L.R. 255, where it had been explicitly laid down that;

"In order to establish a charge of murder under third limb of Section 294 of

the Penal Code, prosecu tion must prove the following ingredients beyond

reasonable doubt:

1. The accused inflicted a bodily injury to the victim.

2. The victim died as a result of the above bodily injury.

3. The accused had the intention to cause the above bodily

inJury.

4. The above injury was sufficient to cause the death of the

victim in the ordinary course of nature."

Returning to the consideration of the complaint of the Appellant, it is

important at this stage of the judgment to consider the directions of law as given

by the learned trial Judge to the jury, on this important aspect.

The segment of the summing up dealing with the issue commences from

pages 819 to 821 and continues from pages 853 to 855 ..

In his directions to the jury, learned trial Judge, having informed of them

of the offence of culpable homicide not amounting to murder and the difference

between the murderous intention and mere knowledge of likelihood of death,

had thereafter directed that, if they find the Appellant only had knowledge, then

he is entitled to the benefit of imposition of lesser culpability and accordingly to

find him guilty to culpable homicide.

He then directed the jury on the applicability of the general exceptions,

and further directed them to consider their relevance, in spite of the total denial

as asserted by the Appellant.

Learned, trial Judge, in providing a bridge to the direction oj law on' lesser

culpability and the evidence that had been presented before the jury, had invited

their attention to the fact that among the 16 injuries seen on the body of the

deceased there were only two injuries, namely injury Nos. 3 and 4, that had been

described by the medical expert as "fatal in the ordinary course of nature". He

then directs them to decide the nature of the intention the Appellant had by

considering the location, number and nature of the injuries.

Another reference was made of murderous intention and knowledge,

when the learned trial Judge had referred the medical evidence to the jury and

had reminded them once more of the lesser culpability in his concluding

segment of the summing up. Thus, this Court is of the considered view that

35

adequate directions were issued on the jury of the availability of the option of

finding the Appellant guilty to lesser culpability.

The jury had the evidence before them that the Appellant was to meet up

with the deceased on prior arrangement. He did meet with her. She was then

taken to the cemetery in a three wheeler which appeared similar to the one used

by the Appellant. The screams of a woman heard by neighbours indicate the

deceased was alive at that point of time. Then her body was seen with cut

injuries. The injuries were linked to the sword recovered upon information by

the Appellant. It is thus clear that when the deceased was taken into the

cemetery, the Appellant had the sword with him, indicating he had already

thought a design in relation to the deceased negating any issue of private

defence.

In view of these considerations, this Court is of the opinion that the jury

had sufficient evidence to arrive at the conclusion they eventually did, if there

were adequate and proper directions by the trial Court to guide them to arrive at

that conclusion. Since above analysis clearly indicate that the jury were

adequately and properly directed by the trial Court, accordingly this ground of

appeal too fails.

In view of the conclusions reached upon the several grounds of appeal as

referred to above, it is opportune at this stage to pause for a while to consider the

role of an appellate Court in determining the grounds of appeal raised by an

appellant after a jury trial.

36

The provisions of Section 2(1) of the Criminal Appeal Act of 1966 in England,

provides that the Court of Appeal shall allow an appeal against conviction, if

they think the conviction is "unsafe".

R v Cooper [1969]1 Q.B. 267. In this judgment Widgery L.J., in determining

what is meant by it is unsafe to allow a conviction to stand;

" ... the Court must in the end ask itself a subjective question,

whether we are content to let the matter stand as it is, or whether

there is not some lurking doubt in our minds which makes us

wonder whether an injustice has been done. This is a reaction which

may not be based strictly on the evidence as such; it is a reaction

which can be produced by the general feel of the case as the Court

experience it."

This test, referred to as the "lurking doubt test" in the English legal

literature, was adopted in Sri Lanka by the Supreme Court, in its judgment of

Mendis v The Republic of Sri Lanka (1992) 1 Sri L.R. 124,when it reproduced the

above quoted statement of Widgery LJ and proceeded to hold;

"We agree with the interpretation given to the phrase

"unreasonable or cannot be supported having regard to the

evidence" by Moseley, S.P.]. in The King v. Mustapha Lebbe 44

NLR 505 and in the English cases as unsafe or unsatisfactory.

The verdict of the jury should be set aside on the ground that it is

unsafe or unsatisfactory even though all the material was before the

jury and the summing-up was impeccable."

37

The Court of Criminal Appeal in The King v. Mustapha Lebbe (ibid) had

spelt out its approach in appeals, by adopting certain principles of law

enunciated in English judgments, as follows;

"This Court has, however, repeatedly laid down that, assuming a

proper direction by the Judge, it is not its function to re-try a case

unless it has been shown to the satisfaction of the Court that the

verdict is unreasonable or that it cannot be supported having regard

to the evidence"

A divisional bench of the Supreme Court, in delivering its judgment of

Mannar Mannan v Republic of Sri Lanka (1990) 1 Sri L.R. 280, agreed with the

submissions of the Additional Solicitor General, as it is stated therein;

"As submitted by Mr. Marapone, Additional Solicitor-General, the

enacting part of sub-section (1) of section 334 " mandates " the

Court to allow the appeal where (a) the verdict is unreasonable or

cannot be supported having regard to the evidence, or (b) there is a

wrong decision on any question of law, or (c) there is a miscarriage

of justice on any ground. We are here concerned only with ground

(b) set out above. As regards the proviso, it is relevant to note, first,

that it clearly vests a discretion in the Court and, secondly, that

recourse to it arises only where the appellant has made out at least

one of the grounds postulated in the enacting part of the sub-

section. Moreover, it seems clear that on a plain reading of the sub-

section there is no warrant for the view that the Court is precluded

38

from applying the proviso in any particular category of" wrong

decision " or misdirection on question of law as, for instance,

burden of proof"

In the instant appeal, this Court is of the firm view that, for the reasons

enumerated in the preceding paragraphs, the Appellant had failed to impress it

that the verdict of the jury is unreasonable or that it cannot be supported having

regard to the evidence, by placing reliance upon the several grounds of appeal

that had been dealt with by the Court thus far.

Lastly this Court should now consider the ground of appeal based on the

failure of the trial Court to direct the jury on voice identification of the Appellant.

ICwas contended stron~ly by tfielear~e.d' C~un~el f~~_tn; Appella~t that

the prosecution had heavily reiied on the alleged telepho~e co~versation

between the witness Indrani and the Appellant when the deceased initiated the

call to inform her sister that the Appellant had come to meet her that evening. It

was submitted that the prosecution utilised this item of evidence to convince the

jury of their allegation by the words attributed to the Appellant during the

alleged conversation indicated that he had no intention of returning the money

belonged to the deceased nor he had any intention of letting her return back to

Indrani.

In his summing up to the jury, learned Counsel contended, that the trial

Judge had failed to direct them as to the manner in which they should consider

the issue of voice identification. It was also highlighted the last telephone

conversation between Indrani and the Appellant had taken place over 10 years

39

prior to the one relied upon by the prosecution. The Appellant therefore

contends that this vital non-direction is fatal to the conviction since the absence

of proper guidance to the jury on voice identification, the prejudicial value of this

item of evidence far exceeds its relative probative value.

Learned Additional Solicitor General had rightly conceded that the trial

Court had unfortunately failed to direct the jury on this issue. However, it was

submitted by the learned ASG that the conviction could nonetheless be

sustained, in view of the proper legal directions given on remaining items of

circumstantial evidence.

In Bandaranaike v Jagathsena (1984) 2 Sri L.R. 394, the Supreme Court

remarked that "the witnesses did not have that degree of familiarity with the voices of

the respondents and others in the assembly to identify them by their singing", placing

emphasis on the degree of familiarity of the witness with th~ Y6ice- he clai"m1i to . .;. ~- _ . -have identified, if weightage is to be given on the claim of voice identification.

The non-direction by the trial Court as to the voice identification would

have resulted in a misdirection, if there was only that items of evidence to

establish that the Appellant did meet the deceased that evening. In Mendis v The

King 52 NLR 486, the Court of Criminal Appeal, having quoted English

judgments which dealt with determining the circumstances under which a non-

direction could be considered as a misdirection, stated thus;

"The question whether there has been misdirection by reason of

non- direction is not an abstract question of law. R. v. Stoddart

(1909) 2 CAM. 217, Lord Alverstone c.r said that mere non-

direction is not necessarily misdirection and that those who allege

misdirection must show that something wrong was said or that

40

,

something was said which would make wrong that which was left to

be understood. Again in R. v. Warnn (1912) 7 CAM. 146,Lord

Alverstone c.]. said ' That to have any effect in itself the mis-

statement of the evidence or the misdirection as to the effect of the

evidence must be such as to make it reasonably probable that the

jury could not have returned their verdict of guilty if there had been

no mis-statements".

It is correct, as the Appellant submitted, that the words attributed to him,

not only brings him to the presence of the deceased but extends to indication of

his intentions that he would not let the deceased return to Indrani nor would he

return her money.

In eliciting the disputed conversation with the Appellant during

examination in chief of the witness Indrani, iearned-prosecutor failed to clarify _

the attendant circumstances that may have had assisted the jury in assessing

that item of circumstantial evidence. When the witness said that the Appellant

had grabbed the phone C ql<;~ qO@)(3),!)-l"j, there was no probe as to why she

described the incident in that fashion. It is obvious that she could not see actions

of the Appellant since it was only a voice call, yet she had ascribed such an act

to the Appellant. Then there was a failure to elicit, the details of conversation

that had apparently taken between the two. The witness merely stated in

summary form that the Appellant had asserted that the deceased will not be

sent back and he would not return her money.

41

It appeared that the prosecutor had unwittingly starved the essential

details of the conversation as to its duration, its content in proper context, and

the witness's familiarity with the voice of the Appellant over a phone

conversation. A mere reference in this regard was found when the witness said

that he would address her as "lndrani Akke" on his part. The Appellant did not

cross examine the witness on this aspect and in his statement from the dock,

there was no denial of this conversation with Indrani.

Upon examination of relevant evidence, it is clear that this is not the only

item of evidence available to the prosecution to present before the jury to

convince them that the Appellant did meet the deceased that evening. The

evidence is that just prior to "grabbing" the phone from the deceased, she had

confirmed to Indrani that the Appellant had arrived there. The recovery of a bag . . . containing the NrC and personal items of the deceased, further supports not

only they met that evening, but also the fact that she had travelled with him to

the cemetery where she sustained the injuries which resulted in her death. The

absence of any substantial amount of cash with the body of the deceased or with

her belongings, indicate the Appellant, although had undertaken to return,

never did return her money that evening.

The absence of a direction as to voice identification by trial Court could

well be attributable to the closing addresses of the Counsel since if they had

placed emphasis on this item of evidence, it would compel the trial Court to

issue directions. Be that as it may, the evidence of a phone conversation was

42

unfortunately left before the jury to determine the weightage they should attach

it, by the trial Court, unaided by proper directions.

The Supreme Court, in delivering judgment of Mannar Mannan v Republic

of Sri Lanka (supra) adopted the test formulated in the English case of Stirland v

D.P.P. 30 Cr. App. Rep. 40, when it acted on the proviso to Section 334(2),after

considering the question whether "a reasonable jury, properly directed, would

inevitably and without doubt have returned the same verdict". Having answered the

said question in the affirmative in relation to the appeal before Court, their

Lordships have thereafter proceeded to dismiss the same on that premise.

In the circumstances, this Court must then examine whether "a reasonable

Jury, properly directed, would inevitably and without doubt have returned the same

verdict" in view of the body of evidence presented before it.

Even if the prosecution did not place the evidence of these words

attributed to the Appellant by Indrani, there were other convincing evidence

before the jury to arrive at the same finding.

The evidence presented by the prosecution therefore supports the

reasonable inference that the deceased had met the Appellant that evening prior

to her death, travelled with him in his three wheeler and was later found in a

cemetery with multiple cut injuries, thus significantly reducing the probability of

the jury solely acting on the impugned item of evidence in coming to the

43

conclusion as to the guilt of the Appellant, in the absence of proper directions as

to how they should set about in considering it. Hence, the said non-direction

could not be termed as a misdirection which by necessary implication vitiate the

conviction, by applying the criterion as laid down in Mendis v The King (supra).

In applying the test whether "a reasonable jury, properly directed, would

inevitably and without doubt have returned the same verdict", this Court firmly holds

the view that it would in view of these other items of circumstantial evidence

referred to earlier on.

" In these circumstances, this Court affirms the conviction and sentence

imposed by the trial Court on the Appellant by applying the proviso to Section

334(2) since no substantial prejugice had been caused to the Appellant by the

non-direction.

Before this Court parts with the judgment, although the ground of appeal

raised on voice identification was decided on a different consideration, it is

appropriate to refer to the areas of concern affecting the quality of voice

identification.

The identification of voice by a witness who is familiar with the voice of

an accused, as an item of evidence in relation to his identity, had received

considerable attention from the jurisdictions all over the world. In American

jurisprudence, such witnesses are referred as "ear witnesses" following the

.. 4

universal description of a witness who saw something relevant is called an eye

witness.

If the witness is considered truthful, then the next question that arises is

the weightage that should be attached to the claim of voice identification. Over

the years, the claim of voice identification has been evaluated by Courts, by

developing many considerations for that purpose, depending mostly on the

manner in which the witness has heard the voice of the accused. Whether the

witness heard the voice of the accused in its natural form or through some

electronic device seemed the basic line of division in identifying the applicable

criterion.

In relation to identification of voice, by a witness simply on his familiarity

with the voice of the accused, with no electronic device adding distortion, the

English Courts would expect the prosecution to carry out a voice comparison

exercise by placing the suspect among several volunteers and getting them to

recite a specific text while the witness to make the identification by voice, as per

Hersey [1999] Crim LR 281, a procedure somewhat akin to that of holding an

identification parade in cases of visual identification.

If the voice was heard by the witness through some device, such as a

phone, a listening device or by through a recorded conversation; then a

technical evaluation is insisted by English Courts. Such technical evaluations

would be in the form of opinion of a voice expert or of an acoustic phonetician,

expressed after an audi tory analysis.

45

.. ,

In Flynn and St John [2008] EWCA Crim 970, following principles were

identified in this regard;

" 1. Identification of a suspect by voice recognition is more

difficult that visual identification,

2. Identification by voice recognition is likely to be more

reliable when carried out by experts using acoustic and

spectrographic techniques as well as sophisticated

auditory techniques, than lay listener identification,

3. The ability of a lay listener correctly to identify voices

is subject to number of variables. There is at present

little research about the effect of variability but the

following factors are relevant;

a. the quality of the recording of the disputed

voice or voices,

b. gap in time between the listener hearing the

known voice and his attempt to recognise the

disputed voice,

c. the ability of the individual lay listener to

identify voices in general. Research shows

that the ability of an individual to identify

voices varies from person to person,

d. the nature and the duration of the speech

which is sought to be identified as important.

Obviously, some voices are more distinctive

46

,

than others and the longer the sample of

speech the better the prospect of

identification,

e. the greater the familiarity of the listener with

the known voice the better his or her chance

of accurately identifying a disputed voice.

The judgment of Court of Appeal in Attorney General's Reference (No.2

of 2002) [2003] 1 Cr App Rep 21, added another important factor in voice

identification. It stated" ... the key to admissibility is the degree of familiarity of the

witness with the suspect's voice. Even then the dangers of a misidentification remain;

... ". This judgment also added a requirement of a warning to be given for the

benE!fit of the jury about the use of such evidence and the n~ed for some explicit

modified directions in the lines of Turnbul [1977] QB 224, where such were

formulated to warn the juries of the potential dangers of acting on witnesses

who made mistaken visual identifications.

These concerns expressed by English Courts were cited here in order to

stress the point as to the extent to which the Courts have developed safeguards

to ensure the reliability of voice identification and also to highlight some areas

of concern to the trial Judges in their judicial work. In the appeal before this

Court, the Appellant's ground of appeal that no direction to the jury on voice

identification by the trial Court was decided upon utilisation of a different

consideration. Hence, adaptation of these concerns as expressed by the English

Courts into Sri Lankan context and to the extent to which it should be done, did

not arise in this instance, and is therefore left to a future Court to deal with.

47

-. ,

In view of the foregoing, this Court sees no basis to interfere with the

conviction and sentence in relation to any of the grounds of appeal as raised by

the Appellant. Accordingly, his appeal is dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

DEVIKA ABEYRATNE, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

48