\

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for Revision of an Order by the High Court of Sri Lanka Holden in Ratnapura in terms of Article 138 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka read with Section 404 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act 15 of 1979 as amended.

Kahengoda Mudiyanselage Rangani Saman Rupasinghe, of "Sithumina" Andana Kahawatta.

Petitioner

VS.

CA (PH C) APN 1. Hon Attorney General, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12. CA Revision Case No. 110/15 Ratnapura HC Case No. BA 1112015 Pelmadulla MC Case No. 61645. 2. Officer-in-Charge,

Police Station, Kahawatta.

2

1

3. Officer-in-Charge,

Homicide Unit, Criminal Investigations Department, Colombo 1.

Respondents

4 Jayakody Arachchilage Aruna Nilantha Jayasinghe, Presently at the Remand Prison Kuruwita.

1 st Suspect-Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

Kahengoda Mudiyanselage Rangani Saman Rupasinghe of "Sithumina" Andana, Kahawatta.

Petitioner-Petitioner

VS

1. Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General's Department Colombo 12.

2. Officer-in-Charge,

Police Station, Kahawatta.

\

BEFORE

COUNSEL

Decided on

Malinie Gunaratne, J.

3

3. Officer-in-Charge, Homicide Unit, Criminal Investigations Department, Colombo 1.

Respondents-Responden ts

4. Jayakody Arachchilage Aruna Nilantha J ayasinghe, Presently at the Remand Prison, Kuruwita.

1 st Suspect-Respondent-Respondent.

W.M.M. Malinie Gunaratne, J. and

L. T .B. Dehideniya, J

Palitha Fernando, P.C. with Dilum Jayamitha for the Petitioner.

H. Jayanetti, S.C. for the 1 st Respondent.

08.02.2016

The learned State Counsel has no objection to the application of the

Petitioner being allowed on heavy bail conditions, since the 1 st Suspect -

Respondent has been on remand for one year and already the Plaint has been

filed in the Magistrate's Court ofPelmadulla.

4

Taking into consideration all these matters, I am of the view that the

1 st Suspect - Respondent in respect of whom the Revision Application is

filed is entitled to be released on bail.

As such, the impugned order of the learned High Court Judge of

Ratnapura dated 21.09.2015 is set aside and I direct that the 1st Suspect-

Respondent be released on the following bail conditions:-

1. Cash Bail in a sum of Rupees One hundred thousand.

(Rs.l 00,0001-)

11. Surety Bail with two sureties of the value of Rupees Five

hundred thousand (Rs.500,0001-) each.

111. The sureties should be family members of the suspect (wife,

children, parents, own brothers or sisters) .

IV. After the grant of bail, the 1 st Suspect-Respondent is directed to

report to the Officer in Charge of the Murder Investigations

Unit, Criminal Investigation Department, Colombo 01 on the

last Sunday of every month between 9.00 a.m. and 12.00noon.

v. Passport of the suspect is to be impounded, ifhe has one and if

not, the suspect has to tender an affidavit stating that he does

not possess a passport.

VI. Learned Magistrate is directed to inform the Immigration and

Emigration Authority accordingly.

Registrar is directed to send a copy of this Order to the learned

Magistrate of Pelmadulla.

\

5

Registrar is also directed to issue a certified copy of this Order to the

Petitioner on payment of the usual charges.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

L.T.B. Oehideniya.J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL