==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0101/2025

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal Case No. Paragala Ange Hapan Peligedara

CA/HCC/0101/2025 Rasika Wijekumara

High Court of Kandy

Case No. HC/115/2020

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

COUNSEL : Rukshan Mendis for the Appellant.

: Akila Dalpatadu for the Respondent.

CA/HCC/0101/2025

2 | P a g e

ARGUED ON : 15/07/2026

DECIDED ON : 21/09/2026

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Appellant was indicted by the Attorney General under

Section 355 of the Penal Code for committing one count of the offence of

Abduction and one count of Attempted Murder under Section 300 of Penal

Code on Ottukal Kirillage Kelvin Prasanna on 20.10.2017.

After service of the indictment to the Appellant and before commencement of

the trial, the learned Counsel for the Appellant informed Court that his client

is considering to tender an unqualified plea of guilty. Hence, the plea was

taken on 07.02.2024. After considering the submissions of both parties, the

Learned High Court Judge has sentenced the Appellant as follows:

For the 1st Count the Appellant was sentenced to 02 years rigorous

imprisonment with a fine of Rs. 5000/-. This carries the default sentence of

06 months simple imprisonment.

For the 2nd Count, the Appellant was sentenced to 15 years rigorous

imprisonment with a fine of Rs.10,000/-. This carries a default sentence of

06 months simple imprisonment.

Additionally, the Appellant was ordered to pay a compensation of 500,000/-

to PW1. In default, 01-year rigorous imprisonment was imposed. Further,

CA/HCC/0101/2025

3 | P a g e

the court ordered the sentence imposed on 1st and 2nd counts to run

concurrent to each other.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid sentences, the Appellant preferred this

appeal to this Court.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the Appellant

has given his consent to argue this matter in his absence. At the hearing,

the Appellant was connected via the Zoom platform from prison.

The Facts of this case which has been revealed at the sentencing

submissions albeit briefly are as follows:

The victim PW1 was running a welding shop and owned a three-wheeler,

which he used to operate for hire. On the morning of the day of the incident,

the Appellant had come to his house and offered a hire. Although the

Appellant was not someone he knew, he agreed to go on a hire as he did not

have enough money for his expenses. The victim had driven the three-

wheeler as directed by the Appellant. At one point, two young men had also

gotten into the vehicle but had later gotten off after travelling for some time.

The victim had suspected that the Appellant had no clear destination, as the

Appellant had directed to go through by roads as well.

At a particular place, the Appellant had pulled a knife and cut the victim’s

neck from behind. After much persuasion, the victim had freed himself, run

towards a small town and fallen down. The people of the area had

hospitalised him immediately. The Appellant had escaped after the victim

ran off from the three-wheeler. The Appellant’s bag was found inside the

three-wheeler. Upon seeing the bag, the people of the area had identified the

Appellant, stating that he would usually carry this bag wherever he goes to

engage in this sort of activity.

Further, in the sentencing submission, the learned State Counsel submitted

that, although evidence transpired that the Appellant used to engage in this

CA/HCC/0101/2025

4 | P a g e

type of activity, no conviction was reported except for two minor assault

cases.

After the incident, the victim had fallen sick, lost his routine job, lost his

income and had spent about Rs.500,000/- for his recovery. According to the

Medico-Legal Report, the cut of 10cm placed on the front of the neck is

categorised as an injury sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause

death, while the cut of 3cm on the palmar and outer aspect of the proximal

end of the right index finger constitute non grievous injuries.

In the mitigation, the Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the Appellant

had pleaded guilty at the very first opportunity without wasting the valuable

time of the Court. Further, the Appellant is the sole breadwinner of the family

as his wife had gone abroad. He has two children to support. Due to his

incarceration, the said children are being looked after by their relations.

Although evidence transpired that he had committed similar offences earlier,

his previous conviction report indicates that he had only committed two

minor offences. Therefore, the Counsel for the Appellant prays for mercy on

the Appellant and requests the court to impose a lenient sentence.

After the conviction of an Accused person, the discretion in imposing the

relevant sentence would lie with that particular Court, while being guided by

a number of factors, such as the circumstances under which the offence was

committed by the Accused. Where such specific sentencing guidelines would

not be available, it would be necessary to discuss the principles that must

be followed when imposing sentences.

In the case of The Attorney General v H.N.de Silva 57 NLR 121 Per

BASNAYAKE, A.C.J.-

" A Judge should, in determining the proper sentence, first consider the

gravity of the offence as it appears from the nature of the act itself and

should have regard to the punishment provided in the Penal Code or other

statute under which the offender is charged. He should also regard the

CA/HCC/0101/2025

5 | P a g e

effect of the punishment as a deterrent and consider to what extent it will

be effective. If the offender held a position of trust or belonged to a service

which enjoys the public confidence that must be taken into account in

assessing the punishment. The incidence of crimes of the nature of which

the offender has been found to be guilty and the difficulty of detection are

also matters which should receive due consideration. The reformation of

the criminal, though no doubt an important consideration, is subordinate

to the others I have mentioned. Where the public interest or the welfare of

the State (which are synonymous) outweighs the previous good character,

antecedents and age of the offender, public interest must prevail. "

In the case of Don Percy Nanayakkara v The Republic of Sri Lanka [1993]

1 SLR 71 the Court held that:

“In assessing punishment, the Court has to consider the matter from the

point of both the offender and the public. The accused had held high public

office and exercised extensive statutory power in conducting public

examinations in this country. These examinations have to be conducted

fairly and the results declared accurately. Thousands of students who face

public examinations, every year, should have complete confidence in the

fairness and accuracy of every process of the examinations. The accused

has subverted the very basis of this confidence by his conduct in

dishonestly showing favour to persons with whom he was acquainted.

Therefore, public interest demands that he should be imposed a deterrent

punishment.”

In the case of Attorney General v. Mendis [1995] 1 Sri L.R. 138 it was held:

“In our view once an accused is found guilty and convicted on his own

plea, or after trial, the Trial Judge has a difficult function to perform. That

is to decide what sentence is to be imposed on the accused who has been

convicted. In doing so he has to consider the point of view of the accused

on the one hand and the interest of society on the other. In doing so the

CA/HCC/0101/2025

6 | P a g e

Judge must necessarily consider the nature of the offence committed, the

manner in which it has been committed the machinations and the

manipulations resorted to by the accused to commit the offence, the effect

of committing such a crime insofar as the institution or organisation in

respect of which it has been committed, the persons who are affected by

such crime, the ingenuity with which it has been committed and the

involvement of others in committing the crime.”

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant contended that the Learned High

Court Judge had not given any consideration to the mitigating circumstances

even though the Appellant had tendered an unqualified guilty plea at the

very outset of the trial. It was contended that this saved the valuable time of

the Court. Further, the Appellant repented for what he had done to the

victim. Hence, he submitted that considering the circumstances under which

he had pleaded guilty to the charges, the Court ought to have considered the

mitigating circumstances in his favour when passing the sentence.

The learned Counsel submitted that 1/3 discount should have been given to

the Appellant considering his early guilty plea.

In this case, the Appellant is a father of two children. His wife has gone

abroad leaving the two children in the custody of their relations. He is the

sole bread winner of the family. He has two previous convictions for

committing minor offences. He has been in remand custody since

09.10.2023.

Considering the submissions made on behalf of the Appellant and the

prosecution, I consider imposing 15 years for the 2nd count is not appropriate

in this case. Hence, considering all the circumstances of the case and

especially due to him being in remand custody since 09.10.2023 (prior to the

sentence), I consider imposing 08 years rigorous imprisonment is an

appropriate sentence to the Appellant in respect of the 2nd count. Hence, the

CA/HCC/0101/2025

7 | P a g e

15-year sentence imposed on the 2nd count is reduced to 08 years rigorous

imprisonment. I agree with the sentence imposed on the 1st count. I order

the sentences imposed on the first and the second counts to run

concurrently. The fine imposed on the first and second counts will remain

the same. The compensation imposed on count number two also will remain

the same.

Considering further, I order the 08 years rigorous imprisonment be deemed

to have commenced from the date of judgment i.e., on 17.01.2025.

The Appeal is dismissed subject to the above variation in the jail sentence.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgment to the High

Court of Kandy along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL