IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Court of Appeal Case No. HCC 232/2017

High Court of Colombo Case No. HC 6204/2012

Complainant

v.

Chandana Pradeep Hewabaddage

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Chandana Pradeep Hewabaddage

Accused Appellant

v.

Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

Complainant Respondent

1

Website Copy Website Copy

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS

FILED ON

JUDGMENT ON

K. PRIY ANTHA FERNANDO, J.

K.K. WICKREMASINGHE, J

K. PRIY ANTHA FERNANDO, J

Hafeel Farisz for the Accused Appellant.

Riyaz Bary SSC for the Respondent.

05.11.2019

22.05.2018 by the Accused Appellant.

29.08.2018 by the Respondent.

10.12.2019

o I. The Accused Appellant (Appellant) was indicted in the High Court of Colombo

for possession of 17.51 grams of heroin on 26.05.2011. After trial the learned

High Court Judge convicted the Appellant and sentenced him to death. Being

aggrieved by the above conviction and the sentence, the Appellant preferred the

instant appeal on the following grounds.

Grounds urged in the written submissions of the Appellant;

(a) That the conviction is contrary to law and against the weight of the

evidence led in the case.

2

Website Copy Website Copy

(b) The learned Trial Judge has failed to notice and/or take into

consideration the dubious, fluctuating evidence of the prosecution

witnesses.

(c) The learned Trial Judge has failed to put his judicial mind into

analyzing if the prosecution has proved its case beyond reasonable

doubt.

(d) The learned Trial Judge has failed to analyze the narrative of the

defence.

Ground urged at the argument stage;

(e) The Appellant was denied a fair trial.

02. Evidence for the prosecution was that, upon receiving the information by the

PW2, the officers of the Police Narcotics Bureau conducted the raid led by

PWI. The information had been that one Chandana had gone to bring heroin

and on his arrival, packing will be done in a wooden room near the 'Beire' lake.

The informant had gone with the raiding party in the vehicle to a certain point to

show the officers the wooden hut. The informant had guided the police officers

to the place and had left. As they opened the door, few people had escaped from

the door that was towards the lake. PW 1 had arrested the Appellant preventing

him from escaping. The illicit drugs had been found in the Appellant's

possession in his trouser pocket. A further Rs.14,350/- had been there in the

Appellant's wallet.

All five grounds of appeal will be discussed together.

03. Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the Appellant had been a drug addict

and that he had gone to buy heroin for his consumption. After buying heroin he

3

Website Copy Website Copy

had gone to smoke behind the abandoned house when he was caught by the

police as he had mentioned in his statement from the dock. It is improbable for

the Appellant to have such a quantity of heroin, counsel submitted. Counsel

further submitted that the evidence of the PWI that he led the other officers to

look for the persons who escaped in the vicinity is also improbable as according

to the evidence of the PWI they have escaped by jumping into the lake. The

investigators have failed to bring the owner of the house.

04. It was further submitted on behalf of the Appellant that the informant should not

be the investigator, otherwise an Accused is deprived of a fair trial.

05. Counsel for the Respondent submitted that the prosecution witnesses who took

part in the raid had given clear and consistent evidence as to how the Appellant

was arrested with heroin. It was further submitted that the position put to the

witnesses for the prosecution when cross examining them is inconsistent with

the statement the Appellant made from the dock. The police officers had no

reason to introduce such a big quantity of heroin to the Appellant, counsel

submitted.

06. PWI and PW2 had testified as to how they got the information, how they

conducted the raid and how the Appellant was arrested with the drugs in his

possession without contradictions. They have given clear evidence as to how the

other suspects escaped and how the Appellant was caught. In his dock

statement, the Appellant admitted that he was arrested, but that he was not in the

company of the others who escaped. In his dock statement Appellant said that

when he was smoking the drugs, four persons ran trampling him. Then the

police officers had arrested him. However, his suggestion to the PW2 in cross

examination was that three persons ran away from the house (page 141 of the

4

Website Copy Website Copy

brief) which is contrary to his statement from the dock. Although the Appellant

suggested to the PW2 that one 'Chuti' and two others escaped, in his dock

statement he said that four persons escaped. He never mentioned about 'Chuti'.

07. Although the counsel for the Appellant submitted that the owner of the house

was not brought by the investigators, the Appellant himself in his dock

statement said that it was an abandoned house. Further, the PWI also clearly

testified that it was an abandoned house with no furniture or clothes were seen.

It was also clearly evident that behind that house was a marsh connected to the

lake.

08. Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the informant should not be the

investigator. In this case, clearly the informant is not the investigator. Hence,

the decided case precedence, Mohan Lal V. The State of Punjab (Criminal

Appeal No.1880 of 2011) that was brought to the attention of this court by the

counsel for the Appellant has no application to this case. Therefore, the

Appellant was not deprived of a fair trial as submitted by the counsel.

09. The learned High Court Judge has sufficiently analyzed the dock statement of

the Appellant in pages 20 and 21 of his Judgment (pages 250 and 251 of the

brief). He has rightly rejected the defence version and given good and sufficient

reasons for doing so. The learned Trial Judge has carefully analyzed the

evidence of the prosecution as well as the defence and found that the

prosecution has proved the charge against the Appellant beyond reasonable

doubt.

10. For the aforementioned reasons, I find that the grounds of appeal urged by the

Appellant has no merit and should fail. I have no reason to interfere with the

conviction and the sentence imposed on the Appellant by the learned High

5

Website Copy Website Copy

Court Judge. Conviction and sentence imposed by the learned High Court Judge

is affirmed.

Appeal is dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K.K. WICKREMASINGHE, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

6

Website Copy Website Copy