IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

>

'~i

~----------------------------------------------------~

C.A. Case No. 184/2014 (Writ)

BEFORE

COUNSEL

Decided on

In the matter of an Application for a mandate in the nature of a Writ of Mandamus under Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Buddakoralalage Ranjitha Shiromani,

No. 162/5, Kaduwela Road,

Malabe.

PETITIONER

G.H. Buddhadasa,

The Mayor,

Kaduwela Municipal Council,

Kaduwela.

RESPONDENT

A.H.M.D. Nawaz,J.

c.E. de Silva with Sarath Walgama for the Petitioner.

Ananda Kasthuriarachchi with U denika Abeysiriwardena, Shehara Kadaradalage and M. Lamahewa for the Respondent.

26.10.2015

1

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J. T

he Petitioner in this case seeks a mandate in the nature of a writ of mandamus on

the Respondent to issue copies of extracts from the assessment register of the

Municipal Council of Kaduwela in respect of premises bearing assessment No.388/4,

Kaduwela Road, Malabe for the period ranging from the date of the 1st assessment to

the year 2014.

The Petitioner asserts that both by a Deed of Transfer bearing No. 644 dated 19.01.2013

and 28.01.2013 as well as by prescriptive possession she has become the lawful owner of

the premises referred to above, which is a residential premises situated within the

administrative limits of the Municipal Council of Kaduwela.

By way of a letter dated 21.03.2014 the Petitioner had made an application through her

Attorney~at~Law to the Municipal Commissioner of Municipal Council of Kaduwela to

obtain certified extracts from the assessment register pertaining to the premises but

this request appears to have proved futile as an officer who is designated in the petition

as one Mrs. U.G. Anula of the Municipal Council of Kaduwela is alleged to have

informed the Petitioner that the certified extracts from the assessment register would

not be made available.

The Petitioner further avers that she attempted again to obtain copies of the relevant

extracts by way of another written request on 24.04.20l4 but this request too was

turned down allegedly by an employee of the Municipal Council who had been

manning a counter at the said Council. The Petitioner followed this up by dispatching

via registered post a copy of this demand addressed to the Municipal Commissioner of

the Municipal Council of Kaduwela and copies of the demand and postal article have

been appended to the petition as X3 and X4 respectively.

The thrust of this application for a writ of mandamus as asserted by the Petitioner is

traceable to Section 235 (1) and (2) of the Municipal Councils Ordinance No.2 of 1947

as amended.

2

The aforesaid section could now be set down:-

1. The Council shall cause to be kept a book, to be called the "Assessment Book", in which the

annual value of each house, building, land or tenement within the Municipality shall be

entered every year, and shall cause to be given public notice thereofand the place where

the assessment book may be inspected.

2. Every owner or occupier of any house, bUilding, land, or tenement, or his authorized

agent, shall be permitted free of charge, to inspect any portion of the said

assessment book which relates to his premises.

The Petitioner contends that these two provisions of the Municipal Council Ordinance

No.2 of 1947 as amended give the Petitioner a right to make an application to the

Municipal Council of Kaduwela to obtain certified extracts from the assessment book

in respect of the premises bearing No. 388/4, Kaduwela Road, Malabe for the relevant

period. Another contention of the Petitioner is that the Respondent (the Mayor of

Municipal Council of Kaduwela) is under a mandatory legal duty to issue to the

Petitioner the certified extracts.

Apart from the argument based on Sections 235 (1) and (2) of the Municipal Council

Ordinance No.2 of 1947 as amended, the Petitioner has also mounted an argument

premised on Sections 74 and 76 of the Evidence Ordinance. Though there is a conflation

of the provisions of the Municipal Council Ordinance and the Evidence Ordinance both

in the petition and written submission of the Petitioner, for the reasons I would set

down presently, the argument based on "public documents' flowing from Sections 74

and 76 of the Evidence Ordinance has to be alternative to the statutory right in Section

235 of the Municipal Council Ordinance as both these sections relate to distinct

situations. In a nutshell the Petitioner's argument that she is entitled to obtain certified

extracts of assessment in respect of the premises emanates, according to her, from two

sources-namely Municipal Council Ordinance and Evidence Ordinance. By virtue of

Sections 74 and 76 of the Evidence Ordinance, the Petitioner contends that she enjoys

the right to obtain certified extracts of assessment (Section 76) because the assessment

3

book constitutes a public document in terms of Section 74 of the Evidence Ordinance. As

the argument goes, all these provisions impose a corresponding duty on the part of the

Respondent Mayor to issue to the Petitioner the certified extracts from the assessment

register in respect of the above premises for the relevant period.

Before I expatiate on this further, let me set out the rival contention of the Mayor of

Kaduwela that has been raised in the statement of objections and his affidavit.

Case for the Respondent Mayor

In the statement of objection that has been filed on behalf of the Mayor of the

Municipal Council of Kaduwela ~ the solitary Respondent to this case, the following

position in regard to ownership of this premises has been pleaded.

The objections raise some factual positions as to the ownership of the premises in

question namely;

1. The Petitioner is not the current owner of the premises.

2. By virtue of a Deed of Transfer bearing No.6993 dated 18.1l.2011, one

Buddakoralage Devika Priyangani had become the owner of the said premises

and the records of the valuation department of the Council declare the said

Buddakoralage Devika Priyangani as the owner.

In support of these claims the Respondent Mayor has marked and produced copies of

the said Deed of Transfer and the assessment record as RI and R2.

As regards the claim of the Petitioner that the assessment register becomes a public

document in view of the Municipal Councils Ordinance the Respondent contends that

in terms of Section 235 (1) of Municipal Councils Ordinance the Municipal Council has

to maintain an assessment book and according to Section 235 (2) the statutory scheme

provides a right of inspection only to two categories of person namely an owner or an

occupier. It is further argued that even if the Petitioner is the owner of the premises she

can only inspect the assessment book but there is no right to obtain a copy of the

assessment book.

4

In any event it has been contended that the assessment register cannot be considered a

public document in terms of Section 74 of the Evidence Ordinance as the assessment

register maintained at the Council does not fall within the parameters of 74 (a) of the

Evidence Ordinance.

As it is not a document forming the acts, or records of the acts of an official body or a

tribunal the Counsel for the Respondent has also relied on the case of Appuhamy v.

Ackmon Singho 38 N.LR 165 where it was held that a registry kept by a Vel Vidane is

not a public document. Similarly in Ramanather v. Ponnaih 2 CWR 333 it was held

that a temple register kept by a clerk in the Kachcheri for the information of the

government agent is not a public document even under Section 74 of the Evidence

Ordinance.

The Respondent has further contended that the Municipal Council of Kaduwela which

is not a party to the present application has decided on a policy not to issue certified

copies or extracts to 3rd parties as there have been a series of frauds committed by using

details in the assessment registers to prepare fraudulent deeds.

In the circumstances it is argued that as the Council owes no duty to a 3rd party such as

the Petitioner, no mandamus should issue.

Legal Matrix

Both these rival submissions could now be looked at from statutory indicia. It is

Section 235 (2) of the Municipal Councils Ordinance that gives a right to an owner or

occupier or an authorized agent of any house, building, land, or tenement, or his

authorized agent to inspect any portion of the assessment hook.

The precedent fact before the right to inspect arises is that the application for

inspection should be made either by the owner or occupier or an authorized agent of

the premises. This factual finding has to be made by the statutory functionary on whom

the duty has been imposed namely the Municipal Council~the corporate personality.

Whilst the Petitioner asserts that she became the owner of the premises by a Deed of

Transfer dated 19.0l.2013 the Respondent has contended that one Devika Priyangani is

5

reflected in their records as the owner of this premises by a virtue of a Deed of Transfer

dated IS.11.2011. Thus the ownership of this premises has been put in issue by the

Respondent.

This position of the Respondent Mayor that it is one Devika Priyangani who is the

owner of the premises has not been contradicted by a counter affidavit as the Journal

Entry dated 26.09.2014 indicates that the Counsel for the Petitioner has made an

express assertion before this Court that the Petitioner would not be filing any counter

affidavits and moreover when this matter came up before this Court on 05.05.2015 the

parties stated that this application may be disposed of on the written submissions. No

attempt has been made by the Petitioner to controvert the position taken by the

Respondent that according to the records the said Devika Priyangani continues to be

the owner of the premises. In the circumstances the question arises whether the

Petitioner does enjoy the right of inspection as far as the relevant assessments are

concerned.

Section 235 (1) and (2) of the Municipal Council Ordinance

It is evident that Section 235 (2) of the Municipal Council Ordinance limits the right of

inspection of any portion of the assessment book only to an owner or an occupier of the house.

This is a matter for the primary decision maker in the Council but the Mayor~the sole

Respondent in the case asserts that the Petitioner is not the current owner of this

premises. As I stated before there is no material to controvert this statement by way of

a counter affidavit except the Deed of Transfer bearing No.644 and attested on

19.01.2013 that has been attached to the petition. The resultant position is that whilst

the Deed of Transfer bearing No.6993 which is dated IS.11.2011 has been produced by

the Respondent indicating that one Devika Priyangani became the owner of the

premises in 2011 and her name is still reflected in the records of the Municipal Council,

the Petitioner asserts that she became the owner of this premises in 2013 by a Deed of

Transfer bearing No.644. It appears that the Municipal Council does not seem to

possess this information as it is apparent from the affidavit of the Mayor that the name

6

of the Petitioner is nowhere to be found in their records as the owner of the premises.

As I said before, this position of the Mayor remains uncontroverted by the Petitioner. It

is my view that if the Municipal Council does not possess this fact of ownership of the

Petitioner, it is the bounden duty of the Petitioner to bring it to the attention of the

Municipal Council and have the records regularized by furnishing her name as the new

owner. It is a salient fact that the Respondent Mayor has produced before this Court a

copy of the Deed of Transfer bearing No.6993 in favor of Devika Priyangani and he

couldn't have done so unless this copy of the deed had been handed over to the

Municipal Council after its execution in 2011. If the ownership was transferred to the

Petitioner in 2013, the only irresistible inference that this Court can draw from the

absence of any reference to the Petitioner's Deed in the statement of objections of the

Mayor is that a copy of the Petitioner's Deed of Transfer has not been handed over to

the Municipal Council as does usually happen after execution of deeds.

This Court is not unmindful of the long held practice that prevails in this country that

once a Deed of Transfer is executed in respect of premises falling within a Municipal

Council, a copy of the deed along with a list of devolution is handed over to the local

authority concerned and invariably an abstract of title (AT~form) is perfected. In this

manner the local authority is notified of the change of ownership and the name of the

new owner is entered in the records of the Municipal Council. The absence of the name

of the Petitioner from the records of the Municipal Council, in the absence of any mala

fides asserted against the Council for non appearance of the Petitioner's name in the

books of the Council as the current owner, appears to be explicable on the basis that

the change of ownership has not been notified to the Council post execution of the

Deed of Transfer bearing No.644 in 2013. That explains as to why the Respondent

Mayor holds out Devika Priyangani as the owner in his statement of objections. If the

Petitioner is now the new owner of the premises, the fact has to be borne out by the

Respondent and this Court does not find the material in the affidavit of the

Respondent Mayor who reiterates that the Petitioner is not the owner of the premises.

7

It is not for this Court to embark upon the title of the parties because this Court

exercising its powers of judicial review in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution does

not engage in an investigation of title. As the issue turns on disputed facts, this Court is

denuded of jurisdiction to go into such issues in judicial review.

Merely because the Petitioner did not apprise the Municipal Council of her ownership

in the prescribed manner provided such a prescribed procedure of formal notification

to the Council is required of every transferee of premises within the municipality of

Kaduwela, the failure to follow that procedure on the part of the Petitioner cannot be

overcome by instituting an application under Article 140 of the Constitution. The

Council does not appear to have been told that the Petitioner is the new owner of the

premises. How would the Council know that the Petitioner has become the new

owner? If the Mayor asserts on oath that the records in the Municipal Council do not

indicate the Petitioner as the owner, in the absence of a counter to this assertion this

Court cannot make use of the deed appended to the petition to draw conclusions that

the Petitioner is the owner whilst the Respondent Mayor has put forward another deed

bearing the name of Devika Priyangani as the owner. Such investigation as is necessary

to determine the right~holder under Section 235 of the Municipal Council Ordinance

has to be made by the Municipal Council and it is incompetent for this Court to engage

in that exercise.

Section 235 of the Municipal Council Ordinance creates rights of inspection of

assessment only for an owner or occupier of any house, building, land or tenement, or his authorized

agent.

The duty to allow inspection arises only upon proof of facts which establish that the

Petitioner is the owner or occupier or the authored agent of the premises. No stranger

other than the above categories enjoys access to assessments maintained by the

Council. In this context the interpretive provision namely Section 327 (1) of the

Municipal Councils Ordinance too becomes relevant.

8

Section 327 (1) of Municipal Councils Ordinance defines an owner as follows>

"(1) In this Ordinance, unless the context otherwise requires~

"Owner "includes the person for the time being receiving the rent of the

premises in connection with which the word is used, whether on his own

account or as agent or trustee for any other person, or who would receive

the same if such premises were let to a tenant;"

There is express assertion by the Mayor before this Court that the Petitioner does not

come within the rubric of an owner. Nor is there material before him that the Petitioner

is the occupier. No doubt the Petitioner may be the current title holder of the property.

But that has to be established before the statutory functionary namely the Municipal

Council because the Municipal Council is statutorily enjoined to make available the

assessment register only to an owner or occupier. There was no automatic right for all and

sundry to have access to the full information. By confining the right of inspection to an

owner or an occupier there is a deliberate intention on the part of the legislature to keep

the assessment register out of public domain.

So it behoves the Petitioner to make out to the Municipal Council that he is the owner or

occupier in the first instance. If there is a particular manner and form in which this

information has to be furnished to the Council such as a prescribed form, the Petitioner

must proceed to do so and have her name entered as the owner before he claims a right

under the provisions of the Municipal Council Ordinance to inspect relevant registers

maintained at the Council. Without having indisputably established her ownership

before the Council, the Petitioner cannot put forward title deeds before this Court to

make a finding of ownership which task is beyond the pale of competence of this Court

in judicial review proceedings.

In a similar vein this Court has expressed this principle in several of its judicial

precedents~vide Thajudeen v. Sri Lanka Tea Board & anothel, Mohamed Shafie

Raheem & another v. Dayananda Dissanayake Commissioner General of Elections

11982(2) SrLLR 472 9

& Other?, W.M Karunawathie & 2 others v. Arachchi HamUage Premawathie &

5 others of Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka3 and MB.N Peiris nee Perera v.

Wattala Pradeshya Sabha4.

So it is my view that the Petitioner has not made out a right which inheres in him to

demand a duty of the Municipal Council.

So this Court has to dismiss this application which is quite misconceived in the

absence of a right inherent to the Petitioner.

This Court is now left with the alternative argument of the Petitioner based on Section

74 of the Evidence Ordinance that sets out an exhaustive list of what would be public

documents in the country.

I have held that the assessment book in which the annual value of a house, building,

land or tenement shall be entered is not a public document in view of the deliberate

intention of the legislature to keep it out of public domain and though public notice of

where it could be inspected has to be given by the Council, the inspection itself is not

open to all and sundry but only to the owner or occupier of the said habitat.

On the basis of my above holding it is my view that Section 74 of the Evidence

Ordinance cannot invest the assessment book with the character of a public document.

In the circumstances this application for judicial review is refused.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

2 CA Writ No. 126/2011 (decided on 12.05.2011)

3 CA Writ Application No. 452/2008 decided on 06.03.2013 (Justice Anil Gooneratne J)

4 CA Writ No. 546/2011 (decided on 06.06.2013 (Justice Sriskandarajah J)

10