Page 1 of 15

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of

section 331 (1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

Court of Appeal No: Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

CA/HCC/0170/22 COMPLAINANT

Vs.

High Court of Vavuniya 1. Rasakumar Nirosh Kumar

Case No: HCV 2863/19 2. Sritharan Anton Jason

ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

1. Rasakumar Nirosh Kumar

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

Page 2 of 15

Before : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

: P. Kumararatnam, J.

Counsel : K. Kugaraja for the Accused-Appellant

: Azard Navavi, S.D.S.G. for the Respondent

Argued on : 27-08-2024

Written Submissions : 08-01-2024 (By the Accused-Appellant)

Decided on : 11-11-2024

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

This is an appeal by the 1st accused-appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

appellant) on the basis of being aggrieved by the conviction and the sentence of

him by the learned High Court Judge of Vavuniya.

The appellant, along with the 2nd accused indicted was indicted before the High

Court of Vavuniya for committing the following offences.

(1) That the appellant, having ganged up with the 2nd accused named,

committed rape on the female mentioned in the indictment, on or

about 29-05-2011 at Nelukulam within the jurisdiction of the High

Court of Vavuniya, and thereby committed the offence of gang rape

described in section 364(2)(g) of the Penal Code as amended by the

Penal Code (Amendment) Act No-22 of 1995, 29 of 1998 and 16 of

2006, punishable in terms of section 364(2) of the same.

(2) At the same time and at the same transaction, the 2nd accused

indicted ganged up with the appellant and committed rape on the

female mentioned in the indictment, on or about 29-05-2011 at

Nelukulam within the jurisdiction of the High Court of Vavuniya, and

thereby committed the offence of gang rape described in section

364(2)(g) of the Penal Code as amended by the Penal Code

Page 3 of 15

(Amendment) Act No-22 of 1995, 29 of 1998 and 16 of 2006

punishable in terms of section 364(2) of the same.

As the 2nd accused indicted has absconded the Court, the trial has proceeded

against him in his absence under the terms of section 241 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act.

At the Conclusion of the trial, the learned High Court Judge of Vavuniya of his

judgment dated 02-08-2022 found the appellant guilty of the 1st count

preferred against him while the 2nd accused was found guilty of the 2nd count.

Accordingly, the appellant has been sentenced to a period of 10 years rigorous

imprisonment, and to a fine of Rs. 5000/-, with a default sentence of one-

month rigorous imprisonment.

He has also been ordered to pay compensation in a sum of Rs. 500,000/- to

the prosecutrix, and in default of paying the said amount, to serve a period of

two years rigorous imprisonment.

The 2nd accused indicted has also been imposed a similar sentence, and an

open warrant has been issued against him.

The Facts in Brief

According to the evidence of the prosecutrix (PW-01), she was 18 years of age

when she had to face this incident on 29-05-2011. She has been a 30-year-old

married mother of one child by the time she has given evidence before the High

Court. On the day in question, she has left her home to attend the church

service, and had boarded a bus around 1.30 in the afternoon to return home.

After reaching Nelukulam area where she lived, she has alighted from the bus

near the 7th lane. Her home is situated about a kilometer away on that lane.

She has stated that after getting down from the bus she went to the Mohans

shop to buy some things but changed her mind and set out to go home. While

she was walking towards her home, a red colour three-wheeler driven by the

Page 4 of 15

appellant has come and the appellant along with the 2nd accused indicted who

was in the rear seat of the three-wheeler has forced her into the three-wheeler.

Once she was taken into the vehicle, they have told her that they will take her

home, but has tied her face with a shawl. She has fallen unconscious soon

thereafter. When she was awakened, she has observed that she is in a dense

jungle area and has seen the two persons who took her standing near her.

Initially, she has stated that when she regained consciousness there was

bleeding from her vagina, but has later described the incident stating that the

appellant and the other person, referring to the 2nd accused indicted, removed

her clothes and had sexual intercourse with her without her consent. She has

also stated that she saw the 2nd accused filming her being raped by the

appellant using his mobile phone. She has stated further that afterwards, she

got dressed and traveled with the two persons in the same three-wheeler in

order to get back home, and has stated that they pushed her out of the vehicle

near a paddy field at Kulumaattu junction and fled.

Thereafter, some persons have taken her near a shop situated in the area

where she has informed the police officers who arrived the incident faced by

her. According to her evidence, the police officers have arrested the appellant

and the 2nd accused shortly thereafter, and she has identified them as the

persons who raped her when they were brought under police custody and

shown to her near the shop where she was waiting.

The PW-02 was a person who lived near the Kulumannu junction mentioned by

the prosecutrix in her evidence, and a person who knew her father. He has

gone to a nearby shop to buy same petrol in the evening of the day of the

incident where he has observed the prosecutrix seated in front of the shop. The

shopkeeper has informed him that she was there for some time, and when

questioned, she has informed him that she is weak. When inquired further, she

as informed him that two persons raped her.

Page 5 of 15

After hearing that, PW-02 has immediately informed that to the police officers

who were on duty at the checkpoint nearby. He has seen the police bringing

two arrested persons before the prosecutrix, but has stated that he cannot

identify them due to passage of time.

PW-05, PS 59970 was the police officer instrumental in commencing

investigations into the incident and arresting the suspects. He has been on

duty at the police checkpoint situated at the Kulumaattu junction on 29-5-

2011. While on duty in the afternoon, he has observed a girl coming from the

direction of Nelukulam area. He has observed her crying and when inquired

with the assistance of one Thuraisingham Pradeep who assisted in translating

what the girl says, he has come to know about the incident of rape faced by the

girl. The mentioned Pradeep appears to be the PW-02 who gave evidence at the

trial. After informing the parents of the girl, he and a police team have gone

looking for the suspects. They have come across a parked three-wheeler which

matched the description given by the prosecutrix with two persons seated

inside. As they could not give satisfactory answers to his questions, he has

arrested them around 6 p.m. The two persons being the appellant and the 2nd

accused indicted. When the police officer brought them to the place where the

prosecutrix was, she has identified them as the two persons who took her and

dropped her off at place near Nelukulam junction after sexually abusing her.

He has taken steps to get the prosecutrix admitted to hospital and had handed

over the suspects to the police station for further investigations.

The Medico-Legal Report (MLR) prepared by the Judicial Medical Officer who

examined PW-01 after her admission to the Polonnaruwa hospital and a report

prepared by the Government Analyst has been admitted in terms of section 420

of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act and, hence, no evidence has been called

in that regard.

Page 6 of 15

It is clear from the MLR that the prosecutrix has given the short history of the

incident to the doctor saying that when she was coming from work two

unknown people came and forcefully took her to a jungle area and one of the

persons engaged in sexual intercourse and the other person took a video of the

incident with a camera.

The JMO has observed a healing abrasion measuring 0.5 cm in length over the

left side lower middle region on the back of the trunk. The genital examination

has revealed that she is having a fimbriated type hymen with fresh tear at 6 o

clock position, which was suggestive of recent vaginal penetration.

At the trial, several other officers who assisted in the investigation have given

evidence apart from the witnesses mentioned above.

When the prosecution case was closed and the appellant was called upon for a

defence, he has given evidence under oath.

It has been his position that he knew the prosecutrix well as both of them

studied together at Kalaimahal Vidyalayam, in Nelukulam. He has stated that

he worked at Mohan Sound Service shop situated in Mohan Multi Complex

situated as Veppamkulam. He has known the 2nd accused also well, and knew

that he had a red-coloured three-wheeler. While he was at the shop, the 2nd

accused has come to the shop in his vehicle. The prosecutrix has also come,

and all three of them have gone to a nearby ice-cream parlour. According to his

version of events, after they had ice cream, the prosecutrix and the 2nd

accused has invited him to come with them as they have somethings to talk

about, which has resulted him taking them in the three-wheeler belonging to

the 2nd accused. They have gone to Pamparimadu together. He has admitted

that they went about 100 meters into the jungle and two of them went inside

the jungle while he remained in the three-wheeler.

Page 7 of 15

He has claimed that both of them returned after sometime and while they were

returning, the 2nd accused removed the chain the prosecutrix was wearing and

that was the reason for her to lodge a false complaint of rape against them. He

has denied that he raped her.

The Grounds of Appeal

At the hearing of the appeal, the learned Counsel for the appellant formulated

the following grounds of appeal for consideration of the Court.

1. No identification parade was held, which caused prejudice towards

the appellant.

2. The learned High Court Judge has rejected the defence version of

events on a wrong premise.

3. The version of the prosecutrix does not favour the test of probability.

Consideration of The Grounds of Appeal

It was the contention of the learned Counsel for the appellant, since the

prosecutrix has claimed that the two persons who allegedly abducted her were

strangers, the police should have taken steps to hold an identification parade

once the appellant and the 2nd accused were arrested.

It was his view that the dock identification made by the prosecutrix at the trial

has caused prejudice towards the appellant.

In relation to this ground of appeal, the learned Senior Deputy Solicitor

General (SDSG) relied on the Supreme Court judgment in Wanasinghe Vs. The

Attorney General and Another (2011) 1 SLR 01 to argue that an

identification parade in order to identify a suspect would not be necessary at

all times, but only under certain circumstances. It was his view that since the

arrest has been made soon after the incident and the prosecutrix has clearly

identified the persons who committed the crime, there was no necessity to hold

an identification parade.

Page 8 of 15

In this context, I find it necessary to consider the stand taken up by the

appellant in his evidence. It had been his position that the prosecutrix is

known to him from his school days and the 2nd accused had an affair with the

prosecutrix, which shows that the position of the appellant had been that both

of them were well known to her. If that was the case, there would be no

purpose in holding an identification parade as the prosecutrix will in anyway

could clearly identify them. The facts revealed in evidence also shows that soon

after the arrest, the prosecutrix has informed the police that the two persons

arrested were the ones who committed the offence on her, which again mean

that holding a parade would have served no purpose.

Therefore, I am unable to agree with the submission of the learned Counsel

that the failure to hold an identification parade has caused prejudice towards

the appellant.

Having determined as such, I will now proceed to consider the 2nd and the 3rd

ground of appeal together, as they are interrelated.

The prosecutrix was an 18-year-old at that time and appeared to have been

independent enough to move about on her own. According to her version of

events, she has attended the church service on her own and had returned.

While walking towards her home, which was about a kilometer away, she has

been forced into a three-wheeler by two strangers and soon after she was taken

in, a cloth has been placed on her face which resulted her getting unconscious.

Her initial evidence had been to the effect that, when she regained

consciousness, she saw blood in her vaginal area which is suggestive of the fact

that she has been raped while being unconscious. However, subsequently, she

has stated that the appellant raped her while the 2nd accused was filming it

and later, the 2nd accused also raped her.

Page 9 of 15

According to her version of events, after the incident, she has travelled again

in the same three-wheeler towards the place where she was forced into the

three-wheeler in order to get off of it, and later, the appellant and the other

accused pushed her out of the three-wheeler.

The appellant, who gave evidence had given a different version of events.

According to him, the prosecutrix was well known to him from his school days

and she has come to the shop he was working in the afternoon of the day of the

incident, where she met up with the 2nd accused. After consuming ice-cream

together, he has agreed to take the prosecutrix and the 2nd accused in the

three-wheeler of the 2nd accused as they informed him that they have things to

discuss.

He has admitted to driving the three-wheeler and going into a wooded area and

has claimed that the prosecutrix and the 2nd accused went inside the jungle

and returned after sometime. He has claimed that while travelling back, the 2nd

accused took the chain worn by the prosecutrix which resulted in a false

complaint of rape against him.

I am of the view that since the appellant has also given evidence and had faced

the test of cross-examination, the learned High Court Judge should have given

equal weight to both the version of events in order to test the story narrated by

the appellant.

In the case of James Silva Vs. The Republic of Sri Lanka (1980) 2 SLR 167

at 176 following the Privy Council case of Jayasena Vs. The Queen 72 NLR

313 (PC) it was observed;

"A satisfactory way to arrive at a verdict of guilt or innocence is to consider

all the matters before the Court adduced whether by the prosecution or by

the defence in its totality, without compartmentalizing and, ask himself

whether as a prudent man, in the circumstances of the particular case, he

believes the accused guilty of the charge or not guilty."

Page 10 of 15

According to the version of events as described by the prosecutrix, there cannot

be any eyewitnesses to the incident. Therefore, it is necessary for the Court to

consider whether her evidence is cogent enough to be accepted without any

corroboration in that regard.

It is an accepted fact that a person who is committing a crime of this nature

would make sure no one will notice his actions, unless it happens by chance. It

is therefore necessary to consider whether the version of events as narrated by

the prosecutrix is probable under the circumstances relating to the offence

committed.

In her evidence, the prosecutrix has admitted that after she got down from the

bus, she went to the Mohans shop, although she has claimed that she

changed her mind and returned. The evidence of the appellant had been to the

effect that she in fact came to the Mohans shop where he worked and the 2nd

accused also came there, and all of them had ice-cream together before leaving

the place in the three-wheeler belonging to the 2nd accused.

Under the circumstances, it is necessary to consider whether the prosecutrixs

claim that she was taken into the three-wheeler forcibly by the appellant and

the other person can in itself be cogent enough to be believed. She has also

claimed that when she was taken into the three-wheeler, they covered her face

with a shawl which made her unconscious.

However, this version of events by the prosecutrix can also be construed as an

attempt to show that she had no connection whatsoever with the accused

persons in order to cover up what may have actually happened. As correctly

pointed out by the learned Counsel for the appellant, the evidence of the

appellant has not been contradicted to conclude that he is uttering falsehood in

order to put the blame on the 2nd accused.

Page 11 of 15

Under the circumstances, I am of the view that what happened after the alleged

rape should also needs to be considered as material in deciding whether the

prosecutrixs evidence was cogent enough in that regard.

According to the evidence of PW-02, he has seen the prosecutrix near a shop at

the town and had come to know that she was there for some time. When

questioned, she has informed him the problem faced by her which has led to

PW-02 informing that fact to the police post nearby, and the police arresting

the appellant and the other person.

However, according to the evidence of the police officer who made the arrest,

while he was on duty near the Kulumaattu junction checkpoint, he has

observed a girl approaching him while crying. He has got the assistance of one

Pradeep which is a reference to PW-02 to inquire from the girl as to the reasons

of her crying and had come to know about the incident of rape. Thereafter, the

said police officer, together with some other officers had gone in pursuit of the

suspects and had arrested the appellant and the 2nd accused a short distance

away, while they were seated in a three-wheeler. This goes on to show that the

evidence of the prosecution witnesses as to how they came to know about the

incident or how they met the prosecutrix does not provide sufficient

corroboration of the evidence of the prosecutrix.

According to the prosecutrixs version of events, after she was pushed out of

the three-wheeler, it was some people from the area who took her near the

shop and informed the police, which is different to the evidence of PW-02 and

the police officer who made the arrest.

Another matter that concerns me is the reason as to why the appellant and the

other accused and the prosecutrix travelled back together in order to drop off

the prosecutrix in the same three-wheeler they have allegedly abducted her and

committed rape on her.

Page 12 of 15

The normal human behaviour would be to abandon her in a lonely spot or

where the offence was committed, and move away from the place of the offence

in order to cover their tracks. Especially, if they made her unconscious and

committed this offence on her, they would have easily left after committing the

act, leaving the prosecutrix to fend for herself.

The way the police officer who made the arrest had arrested the appellant and

the other person shows that the two of them had not fled the area or attempted

to cover up any crime, since they have been arrested in the vicinity of the

checkpoint while being on the same three-wheeler. I find that all these factual

matters require looking for some kind of corroboration as to the version of

events by the prosecutrix if the trial Court is to act on her evidence alone.

On the question of requiring corroboration, Glanville Williams in his book

Proof of Guilt 3rd Edition at page 58 and 59 states as follows.

On a charge of rape and similar offences, it is the practice to instruct the

jury that it is unsafe to convict on the uncorroborated evidence of the

alleged victim. The rule applies to a charge of indecent assault, or any

sexual offence, including an unnatural offence between males. There is a

sound reason for it, because these cases are particularly subject to the

danger of deliberately false charges, resulting from sexual neurosis,

phantasy, jealousy, spite or simply a girls refusal to admit that she

consented to an act of which she is now ashamed.

In Gurucharan Singh Vs. State of Haryana AIR, 1972 S.C. 2661, the Indian

Supreme Court held thus;

As a rule of prudence, however, court normally looks for some

corroboration on her testimony so as to satisfy its conscions that she is

telling the truth and that the person accused of rape on her has not been

falsely implicated.

Page 13 of 15

However, this Court is very much mindful of what the Indian supreme Court

observed in Bhoginbhai Hirjibhai Vs. State of Gujarat (1983) AIR S.C. 753

which is equally applicable to Sri Lankan setting as well.

It was observed;

In the Indian setting, refusal to act on a testimony of a victim of sexual

assault in the absence of corroboration as a rule is adding insult to the

injury.

As I have stated before, although one cannot always expect corroboration in a

case of rape and other sexual abuse matters, I am also of the view that for the

Court to act based only on the prosecutrixs evidence, such evidence should be

probable and cogent enough to be believed.

In this regard, I find considering whether the prosecutrix has been consistent

in her version of events should also be given equal consideration by the Court.

When the prosecutrix was produced before the doctor, the history given by her

to the doctor is a good yardstick that can be considered in order to conclude

whether the prosecutrix has been consistent.

When she was produced before the doctor, she has informed the JMO that she

faced this incident while coming back home from work, which is different to her

evidence that she returned after attending Church service. She has informed

the doctor that after taking her to a jungle area, one person engaged in sexual

intercourse with her, and the other person took a video of the incident with a

camera, which is also a different version to what the prosecutrix narrated in

Court, where she has stated that both of them raped her.

I am of the view that this inconsistency of evidence invariably causes a

reasonable doubt as to whether the prosecutrix has come out with the true

version of events that took place when the incident occurred.

Page 14 of 15

Although it appears that the learned High Court Judge has relied somewhat on

the weaknesses of the defence case put forward by the appellant, it is trite law

that a conviction cannot be entered based on the weaknesses of the defence.

In the case of Kamal Addararachchi Vs. The State (2000) 3 SLR 393, it was

observed;

It is an imperative requirement in a criminal case that the prosecution

case must be convincing no matter how week the defence is, before e Court

is entitled to convict an accused. What the Court has done in this case is to

bolster up a weak case for the prosecution by referring to the weaknesses

in the defence case, that cannot be permitted. The prosecution must

establish its case beyond reasonable doubt.

At this juncture, I would also like to refer to what was stated at page 408 of the

same judgement referring to the observation of Justice Mackenna referred to

by E.R.S.R. Coomaraswamy in his book, the Law of Evidence Vol II (Book 2)

page 1052 which reads thus;

When I have done my best to separate the truth from the false by these

more or less objective tests, I say which story seems to me the more

probable, the plaintiffs or the defendants, and if I cannot say which, I

decide the case as the law requires me to do in the defendants favour.

In the case of Narender Kumar Vs. State of Delhi (NCT of Delhi, AIR 2012

SC 2281, it was held:

Prosecution case has to stand on its own legs and cannot take support

from the weakness of the case of the defence. However great the suspicion

against the accused and however strong the morel belief and conviction of

the Court, unless the offence of the accused is established beyond

reasonable doubt on the basis of legal evidence and material on the

record, he cannot be convicted for the offence. There is an initial

presumption of innocence of the accused and the prosecution has to bring

Page 15 of 15

home the offence against the accused by reliable evidence. The accused is

entitled to the benefit of every reasonable doubt.

I am of the view that the appeal under consideration is also falling under the

category where it is difficult to conclude whether the version of events narrated

by the prosecutrix is probable enough to be believed as cogent, and therefore, a

matter that should be decided in favour of the appellant on the basis that the

prosecution has failed to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt against him.

I am of the view that it is not safe to let the conviction and the sentence stand

in view of the considered discrepancies in the evidence placed before the Court.

Accordingly, allowing the appeal, I set aside the conviction and sentence of the

appellant, and acquit him of the 1st count preferred against him.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P. Kumararatnam, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal