IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Future Automobiles (Private)

Limited,

No. 14,

De Fonseka Place,

Colombo 5.

Petitioner

CASE NO: CA/WRIT/26/2016

Vs.

1. Consumer Affairs Authority of Sri

Lanka,

Level 1 and 2,

CWE Secretariet Building,

No. 27,

Vauxhall Street,

Colombo 2.

2. Indika Prasad Devasurandra,

No. 21,

Robert Place,

Dehiwala.

Respondents

2

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Thishya Weragoda for the Petitioner.

Indula Ratnayake for the 1st Respondent.

Sanath Weerasinghe for the 2nd Respondent.

Decided on: 18.02.2019

Samayawardhena, J.

The petitioner company filed this application predominantly

seeking a mandate in the nature of a writ of certiorari to quash

the decision (A15) of the 1st respondent Consumer Affairs

Authority made on 31.08.2015 in terms of section 13(4) of the

Consumer Affairs Authority Act, No. 9 of 2003. By this order,

the 1st respondent, after an inquiry into the complaint made by

the 2nd respondent consumer, directed the petitioner trader to

provide a brand-new Ford Ranger Double Cab instead of the

present one, to the 2nd respondent.

The pivotal argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner is

that the 1st respondent had no jurisdiction to hear this

complaint as the complaint is prescribed inasmuch as it has

been made to the 1st respondent three months after the sale of

the motor vehicle.

Section 13(2) of the Act reads as follows:

A complaint under subsection (1) which relates to the sale

of any goods or to the provision of any service shall be

made to the Authority in writing within three months of the

sale of such goods or the provisions of such service, as the

case may be.

3

As the learned counsel for the petitioner admits1, this Court in a

number of cases2 has held that, when there is a warranty or a

guarantee, the complaint could be made within three months

after the expiration of the said warranty or guarantee stated in

section 13(1)(b) of the Act.

Section 13(1)(b) reads as follows:

The Authority may inquire into complaints regarding the

manufacture or sale of any goods which does not conform

to the warranty or guarantee given by implication or

otherwise, by the manufacturer or trader.

The above conclusion has been reached on the following basis:

Section 13(2) must be given a purposive interpretation. If a

warranty of goods covers for a period of two years and the

purchaser can only complain within three months of the

purchase of the goods in relation to the breach of a

warranty or guaranty, it will lead to absurdity and the

protection given by section 13(1)(b) would be rendered

nugatory.3

I am in entire agreement with that reasoning.

If I may add a few words to elaborate it further, under section

13(1)(b), a consumer can complain to the Authority for any

1 Vide paragraph 14 of the written submission of the petitioner. 2 David Pieris Motor Company Limited v. Consumer Affairs Authority, CA/WRIT/635/2007 decided on 03.08.2009, Aqua Technological (Private) Ltd v. Consumer Affairs Authority [2012] 1 Sri LR 358, Micro Cars Limited v. Consumer Affairs Authority, CA/WRIT/189/2014 decided on 01.07.2016, A Base Mechfarms (Pvt) Limited v. Consumer Affairs Authority, CA/WRIT/31/2013 decided on 27.04.2016. 3 David Pieris Motor Company Limited v. Consumer Affairs Authority, CA/WRIT/635/2007 decided on 03.08.2009 at page 6.

4

violation of a warranty or guarantee given expressly or impliedly4

in relation to a good sold. If the warranty period for a particular

good, for instance, is three years, the consumer can, in terms of

section 13(1)(b), complain to the Authority during the period of

three years, but the Authority can entertain complains made

only during the first three months of the warranty period. Such

an interpretation obviously leads to absurdity. It is a canon of

interpretation that statutes shall be construed to avoid

absurdity. Further, such an interpretation also, ex facie, defeats

the intention of the legislature in introducing this special piece

of legislation, which is primarily the protection of the consumer.

Hence I am unable to accept the argument of the learned

counsel for the petitioner that the earlier decisions of this Court

on that point are per incuriam decisions.

In the instant case, although the complaint was not made within

three months of the purchase of the motor vehicle, it was made

within three year/60,000 km warranty period.

The next argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner is

that the warranty was not a full/comprehensive warranty but a

limited one and therefore most of the complaints of the 2nd

respondent were not covered by the warranty.

This kind of position has never been taken up by the petitioner

at the inquiry before the Authority and therefore this is an

afterthought. At the inquiry, as seen from the inquiry notes

1R6, the petitioner undertook to rectify the defects of the motor

vehicle. In the last page of 1R6 the petitioner has admitted that

4 For implied warranty see section 15 of the Sale of Goods Ordinance, No. 11 of 1896.

5

the warranty is for three years or 60,000 km. There the

petitioner has not mentioned the Authority that the warranty is

not a comprehensive one but subject to conditions. A4 is an

unsigned specimen warranty not relevant to this sale. It is the

position of the 2nd respondent that, as he was informed, three

years or 60,000 km whichever occurs first, is a comprehensive

warranty. If the petitioner says that it is a limited warranty, the

petitioner being the trader shall tender a copy of the signed

warranty given to the consumer at the time of the sale. It is

clear that no such signed warranty has been given to the 2nd

respondent. In any event, even this specimen warranty marked

A4 is not clear about the limitations. Under What is covered it

is stated The authorized Ford Motor Company dealer will,

without charge, repair, replace, or adjust all parts on your vehicle

that malfunction or fail during normal use during the applicable

coverage period due to a malfunctioning defect in factory-supplied

materials or factory workmanship.

The 2nd respondent has complained about various defects of the

vehicle when the vehicle has done about 30,000 kmvide inter

alia A13. When the vehicle has done about 40,000 km, the

petitioner admits, replacing of inter alia Transmission Solenoid

Control Body, Fuel Gauge etc. under warranty. Transmission

Solenoid Control Body is supposed to be the nerve center of the

transmission and failure of it directly affects the running of the

vehicle. Fuel Gauge is a basic one installed to indicate the

amount of fuel in a fuel tank. This also was malfunctioning and

therefore the vehicle at one time stopped in the middle of the

town forcing the petitioner to bring the vehicle to their place for

thorough investigation to later realize that the Fuel Gauge was

not working and the vehicle has stopped due to want of fuel.

6

This is a serious matter. That shows that the consumer who has

spent Rs. 4,900,000/= has not got what he expected and

promised.

The learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the

complains of Breaks, Air Conditioning, Shock Absorbers, Fuel

Consumption etc. are aspects falling within wear and tear, and

excluded from warranty. These are questions of fact, should

have been placed before the inquiry panel of the Authority which

inquired into the complaint of the petitioner. Take for instance,

malfunctioning of an Air Conditioner in a vehicle after 10,000

km is due to a factory fault or due to wear and tear is a question

of fact. That kind of questions cannot be decided in a writ

application.

Another complaint of the learned counsel for the petitioner is

that the inquiry by the 1st respondent Authority was tainted with

impropriety. At the last date of the inquiry, i.e. on 23.06.2015,

according to 1R9, the petitioner has not participated. The

petitioner in paragraph 32 of the petition stated that the 1st

respondent conducted a further hearing, however without any

notice on the petitioner and in the circumstances, the petitioner

was absent and unrepresented at the said hearing on 23rd June

2015. However when the 1st respondent tendered proof marked

1R8(a) and 1R8(b) with the statement of objections to say that

notice was in fact sent to the 1st respondent by registered post,

the petitioner in the written submissions has changed his earlier

position and stated that the absence on the second day was due

to the petitioner not receiving the notice in due time. That shows

the mala fides of the petitioner. It appears from A13, a letter

sent by the petitioner to the 1st respondent dated 22.08.2014,

7

the petitioner has decided to take action against the 2nd

respondent for tarnishing the name of the petitioner by making

complains against the petitioner. The last paragraph of that

letter reads as follows: We would like to bring to your (the 1st

respondents) attention that unless the customer (the 2nd

respondent) refrains from intentionally or unintentionally

tarnishing the good name of our brand and company, we will be

compelled to escalate this matter further to protect our interest.

In my view, that means, the petitioner has at that point decided

not to proceed with the inquiry any further. Therefore it can be

concluded that the absence of the petitioner at the last inquiry

date which fell after this letter was intentional.

The petitioner further says that the petitioner was not given

copies of the technical reports obtained by the petitioner

regarding this vehicle. The petitioner in paragraph 20 of the

petition admits that at the said hearing, the 2nd respondent

provided purported technical reports on the vehicle made by the

Automobile Association of Sri Lanka and Diesel and Motor

Engineering PLC and indicated that the vehicle had the following

faults which needed attention: (a) ABS-Need Attention (Pedal

Judder) (b) Auto Transmission-Sluggish (c) Shock Absorbers Need

Attention (Replace) (d) Suspensions Need Tuning. That means,

at the inquiry, those technical reports have been tendered by the

petitioner to the Authority in front of the petitioner and the

petitioner knew the contents of them. These inquiries are not

very formal inquiries. They are sui generis but conducted with

due regard to the rules of natural justice. As seen from the

email correspondence marked A6(c), the petitioner has informed

about these reports to the parent company also well before the

inquiry began. Hence even assuming that the copies of those

8

reports were not formally given to the petitioner at the inquiry,

as the petitioner was fully aware of the contents of them, no

grave prejudice has been caused to the petitioner thereby. It is

not the complaint of the petitioner that despite his requests, the

copies of those reports were not given to him.

Lastly, learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the order

of the 1st respondent to replace old vehicle with brand-new one

is disproportionate having regard to the fact that the 2nd

respondent at that time has used the vehicle for 2 years, and

therefore at most, the 2nd respondent is entitled only to nominal

compensation in respect of minor defects complained of. The

defects complained of and not rectified as stated in the

impugned order marked A15(b) may be minor to the trader but

not to the consumer and to the panel of inquirers. In terms of

section 13(4) of the Act, the 1st respondent Authority is entitled

to order the manufacturer or trader to pay compensation to the

aggrieved party or replace such goods or to refund the amount

paid for such goods. Taking into consideration all the facts and

circumstances relating to this complaint, I cannot say that the

decision of the 1st respondent is disproportionate to the

complaint made.

Application of the petitioner is dismissed. No costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal