==== BLOCKS ==== 

Judgment CA Tax No. 05/2021

IN THE COURT OSOCIALIST REPUBL

CA Case No.: CA/TAX/005/2021 Tax Appeals Commission NoTAC/VAT/001/2017

OF APPEAL OF THE DEM

LIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal byCase on a question of law forthe Court of Appeal under anSection 11A of the TCommission Act, No. 23 amended).

WEALTHTRUST SECURLIMITED, No.102/1, Dr. N.MMawatha, Colombo 08.[formerly No. 32, D.S. Mawatha (Castle Street08]

-Vs-

THE COMMISSIONER GOF INLAND REVENUE,Department of Inland ReInland Revenue BuildingSir Chittampalam A. GarMawatha, Colombo 02.

APP

o:

RESP

Page 1|40

MOCRATIC

y way of Stated

r the opinion of

nd in terms of Tax Appeals of 2011 (as

RITIES

M. Perera

Senanayake t), Colombo

GENERAL

evenue, g,

rdiner

PELLANT

PONDENT

Judgment CA Tax No. 05/2021 Page 2|40

Before : JUSTICE M.CHAMATH.B.S. MORAIS

JUSTICE ANNALINGAM PREMASHANKER

Counsel: Dr. Kanag Isvaran, President’s Counsel with N.R.

Sivendran, Attorney at Law, Achini Ranasinha,

Attorney at Law, R. Abilashini, Attorney at Law

and Fathima Hanifa, Attorney at Law instructed

by Sarravanan Neelakandan Law Associate,

Attorneys at Law for the APPELLANT.

Chaya Sri Nammuni, Deputy Solicitor General,

Drusilta Jayanthakumar, State Attorney for the

RESPONDENT.

Written Submissions of the Appellant :- 30.03.2023, 27.04.2026

Written Submissions of the Respondent :- 18.05.2023

Argued on :- 08.10.2025, 24.11.2025

Judgement on :- 11.06.2026

ANNALINGAM PREMASHANKER, J.

A.

A1.

This is an appeal by Wealthtrust Securities Ltd (Hereinafter

sometimes referred to as The Appellant/Tax Payer) from the

determination of the Tax Appeals Commission dated 20.01.2020

JUDGEMENT

INTRODUCTION

APPEAL

Judgment CA Tax No. 05/2021 Page 3|40

made in TAC appeal no. TAC/VAT/001/2017. The Respondent is

the Commissioner General of Inland Revenue (Hereinafter

sometimes referred to as The Respondent/CGIR).

A2.

The Appellant being dissatisfied with the determination of Tax

Appeals Commission (Hereinafter sometimes referred to as TAC)

requested for an appeal by a case stated for the opinion of the Court

of Appeal by their communication dated 20.02.2020.

B.

On 24th November 2025, both parties concluded the argument. The

Appellant has furnished written submissions on 30.03.2023 and

27.04.2026. The Respondent has furnished the written submissions

on 18.05.2023.

C.

C1.

There were sixteen questions of law presented for the opinion of the

Court of Appeal, in the case stated dated 08. 02. 2021. They are:

1. Did the Tax Appeals Commission err in law when it failed

to appreciate that the Company is not chargeable with

VAT on Financial Services as the purchase and holding of

ANALYSIS

ARGUMENT

CASE STATED

QUESTIONS OF LAW

Judgment CA Tax No. 05/2021 Page 4|40

Government securities does not fall within the meaning

"supply of financial services" defined in terms of section

25 F of the Value Added Tax Act No 14 of 2002?

2. Did the Tax Appeals Commission err in law when it failed

to give reasons as to how the purchase and holding of

Government securities falls within the meaning "supply of

financial services" defined in terms of section 25 F of the

Value Added Tax Act?

3. Did the Tax Appeals Commission err in law when it failed

to appreciate that the sale of Government securities does

not fall within the meaning “supply of financial services”

defined in terms of section 25 F of the Value Added Tax?

4. Did the Tax Appeals Commission err in law in failing to

appreciate the distinction between an "investment in

Government Security" and a "provision of loan"?

5. Did the Tax Appeals Commission err in law when it failed

to give reasons as to how the sale of Government

securities falls within the meaning "supply of financial

services" defined in terms of section 25F of the Value

Added Tax Act?

Judgment CA Tax No. 05/2021 Page 5|40

6. Did the Tax Appeals Commission err in law by failing to

determine the question whether the Assistant

Commissioner who made the Assessment had failed to

comply with section 29 of the Value Added Tax Act by

failing to communicate reasons on the assessment of gains

arising from sale of securities?

7. Did the Tax Appeals Commission misdirect in law when it

failed to appreciate that the Appellant as an admitted

Primary Dealer in Government Securities is entitled and

eligible to be excluded from being charged on the interest

income and gains from sale of securities?

8. Did the Tax Appeals Commission misdirect itself in law

when it failed to appreciate that the Appellant being

Primary Dealer cannot engage in business of providing

loans and has been strictly prohibited by the Central Bank

Regulations from lending money to any party?

9. Is it grievous misdirection in law from the Tax Appeals

Commission to have adopted Oxford dictionary definition

for the meaning of “loan” when the said definition does

not fit to the present case scenario for the reason that the

Appellant- Company makes this investment not only

expecting the interest but also expecting the trading gains

Judgment CA Tax No. 05/2021 Page 6|40

when the market value of the investment is favorable to

the company?

10. Did the Tax Appeals Commission err in law in having

adopted the Definition laid down in “Wikipedia” to

interpret a “Primary Dealer” and arrived at the conclusion

that “… it is clear that the functions of any loan includes

the activities of the Appellant- Company as a primary

dealer comes within the activities considered under

section 25 F g of the VAT Act?”

11. Is the Determination made by the Tax Appeals

Commission in breach of the statutory time limit, and

thus null and void and of no force or effect in law?

12. The appeal having been filed on 23rd March, 2017 and the

Commissioner General Of Inland Revenue having failed to

sign the acknowledgement did the Tax Appeals

Commission not have the power or jurisdiction to make a

determination on 20th January in contravention of

section 10of the Tax Appeals Commission Act, No 23 of

2000 as amended?

13. (a) Has the Assistant Commissioner not made the Notice of

Assessment in compliance and or observance with the

Section 29 of the Value Added Tax Act?

Judgment CA Tax No. 05/2021 Page 7|40

(b) Has the Assistant Commissioner failed to communicate

reasons as to why the "gains arising from sale of trading

Securities" and "marked to market gain on financial assets

held for trading are charged with tax?

(c) If so, is the Notice of Assessment issued bad in law and

not in accordance with the assessment process as

specified in the Value Added Tax?

14. Is the Notice of Assessment of the Assistant Commissioner

bad in law and null and void, in that-

(a) Notice of Assessment has not mentioned under

which provision of the Value Added Tax Act the

Assessment is issued;

(b) The Assistant Commissioner has issued one

Assessment for two taxable period in the years 2013

and 2014 under one charge number;

(c) One letter has been issued under Section 29 of the

Value Added Tax Act to cover more than one taxable

period.

15. Was the Commissioner prejudiced and made an erroneous

determination on fundamental issues pertaining to the

invalidity of the Assessment and the Notice of Assessment by

heavily weighing its determination on substantive issues?

Judgment CA Tax No. 05/2021 Page 8|40

16. Did the Tax Appeals Commission err in law in holding that

the activities of the Appellant fall within 25F (G) of the value

Added Tax Act. No. 14 of 2002?

C2.

Questions of Law No. 1, 2, 4, 11, 13 (a), (b), (C) and 14 (a) were

the only questions relied on finally argued by the Parties. On

that basis the rest of the Questions of Law raised in the case

stated will not be urged in appeal and not considered by the

court.

C3.

The tax payer submits its return for the year of 2012/2013 and

2013/2014, claiming an exemption of VAT on Financial Service.

This claim was rejected by the Assessor and the return is not

accepted and issued an assessment.

C4.

Having aggrieved by the said Assessment, the tax payer made an

appeal to the CGIR. The Tax Payer made the same agitation before

the CGIR. CGIR by his determination dated 16.01.2017 determined

the appeal by confirming the assessment.

TAX RETURN

FIRST APPEAL

QUESTIONS OF LAW IN ISSUE

Judgment CA Tax No. 05/2021 Page 9|40

C5.

The tax payer being not satisfied with the determination of the

CGIR, made an appeal to the TAC. In the appeal before the TAC the

tax payer raised the same issues. TAC by its determination dated

20.01.2020, confirmed the determination made by the Respondent

and dismissed the appeal.

C6.

The Appellant is a primary dealer and the principal activity of the

Appellant, “is dealing in Government Securities with approval and

appointment by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka”.

The contention of the Respondent before the TAC and in the appeal

before the Respondent that the purchase and holding of Treasury

Bills, Treasury Bonds, Repurchase Agreements and Reverse

Repurchase Agreements from the Government of Sri Lanka by the

Appellant are not “investments” but “loans” from the Appellant to

the Government of Sri Lanka.

The Tax Appeals Commission in its Determination dated 20th

January 2020 did not even consider the legal provisions which will

be discuss below, and failed to appreciate that the Appellant was

debarred from granting loans and thus, erred in determining that

the Appellant grants loans to the Government of Sri Lanka when

SECOND APPEAL

APPELLANT COMPANY

Judgment CA Tax No. 05/2021 Page 10|40

purchasing and holding Government Securities as a Primary

dealers.

The Determination of the Respondent dated 16th January. 2017 is

also bad in law and cannot stand, as apparent from the Reasons for

the Determination dated 23rd February. 2017 wherein this aspect

was not even considered by the Respondent in appeal.

C7.

A primary dealer’s activities are circumscribed by the Central Bank

of Sri Lanka and a primary dealer cannot in law and fact grant

loans to any person, even to the Government of Sri Lanka.

Regulation11(1)(1) of the Local Treasury Bills (Primary Dealers)

Regulations No. 01 of 2009 of Gazette Extraordinary No. 1607/18

dated 24.06.2009

“ 11. (1) The Central Bank may issue directions to a Primary

Dealer to ensure compliance by the Primary Dealer with

these Regulations. Without prejudice to the generality of

the foregoing and to the power of the Central Bank to

issue directions under the Ordinance or any other

written law, such directions may provide for all any of the

following matters:-

(a) ……………………………..;

………………………………

PRIMARY DEALER

Judgment CA Tax No. 05/2021 Page 11|40

(l) the activities and business which may be carried on by a

primary Dealer Company a activities or business

connected or incidental to the activities set out in

Schedule III;”

Schedule III of the Local Treasury Bills (Primary Dealers)

Regulations No. 01 of 2009 specifies the activities that

can be carried on by primary dealers as follows:-

"SCHEDULE III

ACTIVITIES OF PRIMARY DEALER COMPANIES

1) Bidding at Primary auctions conducted by the Central Bank of

Sri Lanka for Treasury Bills, Treasury Bonds and instruments

issued by the Government and the Central Bank and

purchasing such securities in such primary market;

2) Engaging in the secondary market in Treasury Bills, Treasury

Bonds, Government and Central Bank Securities with the

Central Bank and others;

3) Promoting and developing a secondary market in Treasury

Bills, Treasury Bonds and other Government and Central

Bank Securities;

4) Any activity connected with or incidental to the activities set

out in paragraph (1) to(3) above ;

Judgment CA Tax No. 05/2021 Page 12|40

5) To manage and invest in mutual funds up to a maximum

percentage/amount determined by the Monetary Board from

time to time ;

6) To invest in ordinary shares or debentures of its own group

companies either in subsidiaries or associates according to the

limits imposed by the Monetary Board, from time to time;

7) To invest in other quoted shares/quoted debentures or bonds

and commercial papers according to the fimits imposed by the

Monetary Board, from time to time;

8) To act as a broker in quoted corporate bonds/debentures ;

9) To engage in services to earn fee income such as portfolio

management, project appraisal, loan, syndication services,

merger and acquisition consultancy services, brokering and

any other related activities with the prior written approval of

the Monetary Board;

10) To borrow through debt instruments in accordance with

the directions or guidelines issued by the Monetary Board

from time to time; and

11) Any other business activity which the Monetary Board

may authorize a Primary Dealer to engage in."

Judgment CA Tax No. 05/2021 Page 13|40

C8.

It is clear from said Schedule III that primary dealers are not

authorized by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka to grant loans in

the course of its business

The Direction on Diversification of Primary Dealer Activities

Ref No:08/24/001/0001/009 dated 20 November, 2009 issued

under Section 11 of the Regulations dated 24.06.2009. The

activities that primary dealers can engage in were enlarged, but

significantly, this does not permit primary dealers to grant loans.

No.8 of the said Direction which reads as follows:-

"8. Primary Dealers should restrict their activities to

those which are detailed under 1(a) to 1.(d).

Primary Dealers should divest/cease to engage in

any other investment/activity carried out by

them, if any, within a period of six months from

the date of this direction."

The Primary dealers cannot grant loans.

C9.

a) The purchase and holding of Government Securities and

investment in government securities are not supply of

Financial Services.

GRANT OF LOAN

FINANCIAL SERVICES

Judgment CA Tax No. 05/2021 Page 14|40

Supply of Financial Services is defined in Section 25F of the Value

Added Tax Act No. 14 of 2002 (as amended) as follows;

“Supply of Financial Services mean -

(a) The operation of any current, deposit or savings account;

(b) The exchange of currency;

(c) the issue, payment, collection or transfer of ownership of

any note, order for payment, cheque or letter of credit;

(d) the issue, allotment, transfer of ownership, drawing,

acceptance or endorsement of any debt. security, being any

interest in or right to be paid money owing by any person

other than the transfer of nonperforming loans of a

licensed Commercial Bank to any other person in terms of

a re-structuring scheme of such bank as approved by the

Central Bank of Sri Lanka with the concurrence of the

Minister;

(e) the issue, allotment, transfer of ownership of any equity

security or a participatory security;

(f) issue, underwriting, sub-underwriting or subscribing of

any equity security, debt security or participatory security;

(g) the provision of any loan, advance or credit; the provision

h) the provision –

(a) of the facility of instalment credit finance in a hire

purchase conditional sale or credit sale agreement for

Judgment CA Tax No. 05/2021 Page 15|40

which facility a separate charge is made and disclosed

to the person to whom the supply is made;

(b) goods under any hire purchase agreement or

conditional sale or hire purchase agreement while

have been used in Sri Lanka for a period not less than

twelve months as at the date of such agreement"

It is very clear from the above definition that purchasing and

holding Government Securities are excluded from the definition of

supply of Financial Services.

C10.

It was contended by the Appellant before the Tax Appeals

Commission and in appeal before the Respondent that purchasing

and holding Government Securities are not and cannot be defined

as supply of Financial Services but are investment activities.

However, both the Tax Appeals Commission and the Respondent

held that purchasing and holding Government Securities are not

investment activities but are provision of loans falling under the

definition of supply of Financial Services in Section 25F (g) of the

Value Added Tax Act No. 14 of 2002 (as amended).

POSITION

Judgment CA Tax No. 05/2021 Page 16|40

C11.

The Appellant did not provide loans to the Government of Sri Lanka

when purchasing and holding Government Securities from the

Central Bank of Sri Lanka inasmuch as the sale transaction in

question is not an activity of borrowing money but an activity of

sale of security and the Appellant being a primary dealer is

prohibited from engaging in the business of lending.

The Tax Appeals Commission relied on Wikipedia definition, which

does not even incorporate granting of loan by buying government

securities or does not refer to a loan at all, erred even further in

holding that it “is clear that the functions of any loan includes that

activities of the Appellant company as a primary dealer”

C12.

An "investment", an activity must involve an expectation to earn a

profit. The purchasing and holding Government Securities by the

Appellant is carried out with the objective of earning a profit,

namely earning interest and resale in the course of business. Thus,

it is clear these activities are investment activities.

The Black's Law Dictionary defines "investment" as follows:-

"An expenditure to acquire property or other assets in order to

produce revenue"

REAL ACTIVITY

INVESTMENT

Judgment CA Tax No. 05/2021 Page 17|40

C13.

The Appellant cited the Oxford Dictionary and Black's Law.

Dictionary definitions of "investment" and pointed out the

expectation to earn income or profit in "investment" and

differentiated it from the definition of a "loan". By contrast, a loan

need not involve an expectation to earn profit or income.

The Respondent in his Reasons for the Determination dated 23rd

February, 2017 cited the following definition of "a lending" in

Black's Law Dictionary:-

"Delivery by one party to and receipt by another party of

sum of money upon agreement, express or implied, to

repay it with or without interest."

It is clear on the own submission of the Respondent that, a loan

need not be for profit or have as a term payment of interest.

The activities of purchase and holding Government Securities by

the Appellant which is carried out with the objective of earning a

profit, namely earning interest and resale in the course of business,

cannot be construed as a loan.

C14.

Differences between an "investment" and a "loan" are follows:-

(a) In the case of Government Securities, the Central Bank of Sri

Lanka determines the interest rate. However, in the case of a

LOAN

INVESTMENT AND LOAN

Judgment CA Tax No. 05/2021 Page 18|40

loan, it is the lender who decides the interest rate. However,

the Appellant does not decide the interest rate of Government

Securities it purchases and holds, but the rate is decided by

the Central Bank of Sri Lanka.

(b) In the case of loans, the level of risk of the borrower results in

variation of the rate of interest charged. However, in the case

of purchase and holding of Government Securities, the interest

rate does not vary but is fixed and will be decided in a

particular auction where they are purchased.

(c) In the case of a loan apart from the lending of money there is a

provision of collateral as security by the borrower whereas

there is no provision of collateral in the case of investment in

Government Securities.

(d) Government Securities once purchase are transferable without

the approval/consent of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka or the

Government of Sri Lanka. Loans are generally not

transferable.

(e) Government Securities are purchased through bidding at an

auction in the Central Bank of Sri Lanka. However, loans are

not provided at an auction.

(f) In the case of a loan repayment installments are on a

periodical basis as agreed upon by the parties. In the case of

purchase and holding of Government Securities, there is no

repayment but there is payment upon maturity of the

Government Security and after its surrendered to the issuer.

Judgment CA Tax No. 05/2021 Page 19|40

(g) In the case of a loan, there is negotiation of amount and terms

by the parties. In the case of purchase and holding of

Government Securities, the Appellant bids at an auction and

there is no negotiation.

The definition of "a lending" was expressly cited by the Respondent

in the defining a "loan", the Tax Appeals Commission did not give

its mind to or even consider the same in construing a loan.

The Tax Appeals Commission erred in law, in not appreciating that

a loan need not involve an expectation of earning interest or

income and failed to appreciate that the activities of purchase and

holding Government Securities by the Appellant are not provision of

loans, but are investments and therefore, cannot be construed as

"supply of Financial Services".

The purchase and holding Government Securities by the Appellant

do not come within the definition of supply of Financial Services in

Section 25F of the Value Added Tax Act No. 14 of 2002 (as

amended) inasmuch as the same is an investment and not a

provision of loan.

In People's Leasing and Finance PLC v CGIR (CA/TAX/21/2019,

C.A.M 20.07.2021)

The interest income received by the Appellant from

fixed deposits and government securities was not

an activity of increasing its mere capital or mere

Judgment CA Tax No. 05/2021 Page 20|40

acquisition and holding of government securities.

The Appellant as a finance company is engaged in

the business of supplying of financial services for

the purpose of generating interest income from

bank deposits and government securities. The

characteristics identified in Trinity Mirror Plc

(formerly Mirror-Group Newspapers Ltd) v. Customs

and Excise Commissioners (supra) are met in

respect of the said interest income received by the

Appellant from bank deposits and government

securities as a supply of financial services within

the meaning of section 25F of the VAT Act.

C15.

The Assessor who issued the impugned Notice of Assessment, did

not give reasons for assessing gains arising from trading securities

in his letter issued prior to the assessment.

The gains from trading securities were included in the profit before

tax in the Audited Accounts of the Appellant for the years

2012/2013 and 2013/2014.

In this connection page 3 of the respective audited accounts which

clearly shows that gains from trading securities of Rs.

GAINS FROM TRADING

Judgment CA Tax No. 05/2021 Page 21|40

199.614,339/- and Rs. 196.033,009/- respectively for the years

2012/2013 and 2013/2014.

The Assessor used the aforesaid figure of Profit before Tax in the

said Audited Accounts and made adjustments in calculating the

value addition relied on to charge VAT on financial services.

The amount of gains from trading securities is included in the said

Profit before Tax and thus, inasmuch as the value addition

assessed was calculated using the said Profit before Tax

accordingly, the purported value addition assessed includes the

purported value addition on gains from trading securities.

Perusal of the said letter dated 1/12/2014 shows that the Assessor

did not even refer to let alone, give reasons for including value

addition on gains from trading securities in assessing VAT on

financial services, although gains from trading securities are

included in the Profit before Tax in the said Audited Accounts.

C16.

The Assessor who issued the impugned Notices of Assessment, did

not give reasons or communicate said reasons for assessing market

gains on financial assets held for trading in his letter issued prior to

the assessment.

These are notional gains as per the income statement in the

Accounts and essentially unrealized gains. These gains were

REASONS

Judgment CA Tax No. 05/2021 Page 22|40

recognized in the Accounts due to SLFRS compliance requirements

and is not related to any "supply of financial services".

Market gains, on financial assets held for trading were included in

the profit before tax in the Audited Accounts of the Appellant for the

years 2012/2013 and 2013/2014.

A perusal of the letter dated 1st December, 2014 makes it clear that

the Audited Statements of Accounts of the Appellant were rejected

by the Assessor.

The Assessor did not even refer to let alone, give reasons for

including value addition on market gains on financial assets held

for trading in assessing VAT on financial services, although market

gains on financial assets held for trading are included in the Profit

before Tax in the said Audited Accounts.

Thus, the Notices of Assessments in question are erroneous and

bad in law. The Assessor had a duty to give reasons but failed to

give any reasons for taxing the gains from trading securities and

market gains on financial assets held for trading.

Hapuarachchi and others Vs. Commissioner of Elections and

another 2009 1 SLR 1, where the Supreme Court analyzed the

change in the law which now recognizes a duty to give reasons as

part of procedural fairness and under the rules of natural justice. In

that case the impugned decision was held null and void as no

reasons were given for the decision. Dr. Bandaranayake J.

Judgment CA Tax No. 05/2021 Page 23|40

Ranjith Flavian Wijeratne Vs. Asoka Sarath Amarasinghe and

others, S.C. Appeal No. 40/2013, SC (Spl) LA Application No.

23/2012, S.C. Minutes of 12.11.2015. This was an appeal filed

against the judgment of the Court - of Appeal quashing the

decisions of the Commissioner of National Housing and of the

Ceiling on Housing Property Board of Review. The Supreme Court

affirmed the judgment of the Court of Appeal. Priyantha

Jayawardena PC J. held.

There is an accepted rule that reasons should be given

for decisions, based on the principle of fairness which

permeates administrative law, subject only to specific

exceptions to be identified depending on the case.

Unless the reasoning behind the decision is given, a

person is unable to know whether it is lawful or not,

and thus he is deprived of the protection of the law. A

right to know the reasons is therefore an indispensable

part of the system of judicial review.

The Commissioner did not file objections in the writ

application. Hence, the Court of Appeal held " At this

point of this judgment I have to observe that the Hon.

Attorney-General though appeared and represented 7

and 7A & 94 Respondents (the Commissioner of

National Housing and the relevant subject Minister)

Judgment CA Tax No. 05/2021 Page 24|40

did not file objections on their behalf, may be for good

reasons. "

The Commissioner did not furnish any material to

defend the allegation made against him for the

violation of the principles of natural justice. Thus, it

appears that the Commissioner did not have an

explanation to offer in this regard."

C17.

The Assessor used the aforesaid figure of Profit before Tax in the

said Audited Accounts and made adjustments in calculating the

value addition relied on to charge VAT on financial services.

The amount of market gains on financial assets held for trading are

included in the said Profit before Tax and thus, inasmuch as the

value addition assessed was calculated using the said Profit before

Tax accordingly, the purported value addition assessed includes the

purported value addition on market gains on financial assets held

for trading.

C18.

Both Section 93(2) of the Inland Revenue Act No. 4 of 1963 as

amended by Law No.17 of 1972 and Law No. 30 of 1978, and

Section 29 of the Value Added Tax Act No. 14 of 2002 (as amended),

VALUE ADDITION

MANDATORY REQUIREMENT

Judgment CA Tax No. 05/2021 Page 25|40

require the Assessor to give reasons when rejecting a Return and

making an Assessment.

Section 93(2) of the Inland Revenue Act No. 4 of 1963 (as amended

by Law No.17 of 1972 and Law No. 30 of 1978), reads as follows:-

"93(2) Where a person has furnished a return of income, wealth, or

gifts, the Assessor may

(a) either accept the return and make an assessment

accordingly; or if he does not accept the return, estimate the

amount of the assessable

(b) if he does not accept the return, estimated the amount of

the assessable

income, taxable, wealth or. taxable gifts of such person and assess

him accordingly and communicate to such person in writing the

reasons for not accepting the return."

Section 29 of the Value Added Tax Act No. 14 of 2002 (as

amended reads as follows:-

29. Where the Assessor does not accept a return furnished by

any person under section 21 for any taxable period and

makes an assessment or an additional assessment on such

person for such taxable period under section 28 or under

section 31, as the case may be, the Assessor shall

communicate to such person by registered letter sent

through, the post why he is not accepting the return."

Judgment CA Tax No. 05/2021 Page 26|40

Section 29 of the Value Added Tax Act No. 14 of 2002 (as amended)

imposes a mandatory duty on an Assessor to give reasons for

rejecting a return when making an assessment.

The Assessor in question did not give reasons for rejecting the

returns which did not include the purported value addition on gains

from trading securities and marked to market gains on financial

assets held for trading.

The Respondent failed to consider the above aspect, when making

his Determination in appeal.

The Respondent failed to appreciate that that the impugned Notices

of Assessment were not made in compliance with Section 29 of the

Value Added Tax Act No. 14 of 2002 (as amended), and were bad in

law and nullities.

The Tax Appeals Commission also failed to consider this aspect and

particularly that, the impugned Notices of Assessment were not

made in compliance with Section 29 of the Value Added Tax Act No.

14 of 2002 (as amended).

The Tax Appeals Commission failed to appreciate that the impugned

Notices of Assessment were bad in law as submitted above and of

no force or effect and VAT on Financial Services could not be

charged on the Appellant.

Thus, the Determination dated 20th January, 2020 of the Tax

Appeals Commission is bad in law.

Judgment CA Tax No. 05/2021 Page 27|40

C19.

Section 10 of the Tax Appeals Commission Act No.23 of 2011 sets

out that the appeals received by the Tax Appeals Commission have

to be completed within 180 days from the date of commencement of

the hearing of the appeal. This Section 10 of the Tax Appeals

Commission Act No.23 of 2011 was amended by Amendment Act

No.20 of 2013 to increase the period to 270 days.

When the Tax Appeals Commission Act originally came into effect

Section 10 read as follows:-

"10 The Commission shall hear all appeals received by it

and make its decision in respect thereof, within one

hundred and eighty days from the date of the

commencement of the hearing of the appeal:

Provided that, all appeals pending before the respective

Board or Boards of Review in terms of the provisions of

the respective enactments specified in the Schedule to

this Act, shall with effect from the date of coming into

operation of the provision of this Act be deemed to

stand transferred to the Commission, and the

Commission shall make its decision in respect thereof,

within hundred and eighty days from the date such

transfer notwithstanding anything contained in any

other written law"

270 DAYS- DIRECTORY/ MANDATORY

Judgment CA Tax No. 05/2021 Page 28|40

The Commission shall hear all appeals received by it

and make its decision in respect thereof, within two

hundred and seventy days from the date of the

commencement of its sittings for the hearing of each

such appeal:

Provided that, all appeals pending before the respective

Board or Boards of Review in terms of the provisions of

the respective enactments specified in Column I of

Schedule I, or Schedule II to this Act, hotwithstanding

the fact that such provisions are applicable to different

taxable periods as specified therein shall with effect

from the date of coming into operation of the provision

of this Act be deemed to stand transferred to the

Commission, and the Commission shall

notwithstanding anything contained in any other

written law make its determination in respect thereof,

within twenty four months from the date on which the

Commission shall commence its sittings for the hearing

of each such appeal."

C20.

It is submitted by the Appellant that the Tax Appeals Commission's

jurisdiction extinguishes upon the period of Two Hundred and

Seventy (270) days. In law the Tax Appeals Commission was

APPELLANT’S SUBMISSIONS

Judgment CA Tax No. 05/2021 Page 29|40

mandated and/or had the jurisdiction to decide this Appeal within

270 days.

The Tax Appeals Commission did not make a decision of this Appeal

by 15th April, 2019 but purported to make a decision only on 20th

January, 2020 more than 9 months after. The intention of the

legislature was to confer jurisdiction on the Tax Appeals

Commission only for a period of 270 days to decide the said appeal,

as is clear from the above cited section.

The Tax Appeals Commission Áct No.23 of 2011 (as amende)

brought in very strict, stringent provision regarding the appeal

procedure and steps that have to be taken in relation to the appeal

procedure and also brought in very stringent provision regarding

the time limit within which the appeal should be heard and

determined. Section 10 of the Tax Appeals Commission Act No.23 of

2011 (as amended) sets out that the appeals have to be completed

within 270 days. The statute has given only a jurisdiction of 270

days to make the determination.

Jurisdictional time conferred for an appeal to be decided by the TAC

has been strictly specified as 270 days from the date of

commencement. Therefore, the mandate given by the legislature for

the determination of the appeal lapses after 270 days after the date

of commencement of sittings.

Judgment CA Tax No. 05/2021 Page 30|40

The appeal process being a process to be determined in terms of the

statute, the said 270 days has been specified in order to have a

finality to the appeal.

The first date of hearing being 19th July, 2018, as the

Determination must be made "within two hundred and seventy days

of the date of the commencement of the hearing of the appeal", the

Appeal should have been concluded within 270 days from the said

date, namely by 15th April, 2019. However, the appeal was not

concluded by 15th April, 2019 but the Appeal was concluded only

on 20h January, 2020 more than 9 months after the mandated

time.

However, this has been considered by the Supreme Court in

Stafford Motor Company (Private) Limited V. The Commissioner

General of Inland Revenue SC Appeal No. 120/2021, His

Lordship P.Padman Surasena J. held that;

"In Visuvalingam v. Liyanage (1983) 1 Sri LR 203, a

nine judge bench of this Court, having considered a

similar issue that arose for determination

pertaining to the time limit stipulated in Article

126(5) of the Constitution, proceeded to hold that

the adherence of the time limit in Article 126(5) of

the Constitution would be directory and not

mandatory.

Judgment CA Tax No. 05/2021 Page 31|40

In Jayanetti v. Land Reform Commission (1984) 2

Sri LR 172, and in Ramalingam v.

Thangaraja (1982) 2 Sri LR 693, this Court having

considered similar issues, proceeded to hold that in

the absence of any consequence stipulated in the

Act for the failure to adhere to the time limits

relevant to those cases in the relevant statutes,

there is no basis to hold that such process is a

nullity in those circumstances. "

It is evident that where the specific Act itself fails to prescribe the

consequences for non-compliance with the time limits stipulated by

the said Act, the courts cannot infer the repercussions of such non-

compliance.

Further, if the legislature intended strict compliance with the time

limit as a condition precedent to the validity of the act or

proceeding, it would have expressly provided for the consequences

of non-compliance; such as deemed invalidity, automatic dismissal

or the appeal being deemed allowed. Where such express provision

is lacking, the time limit is generally construed as directory rather

than mandatory.

Accordingly, I am compelled to disagree with the Appellant’s

submissions.

Judgment CA Tax No. 05/2021 Page 32|40

C21.

The Tax Appeals Commission has erred in law when it failed to

appreciate that, the Appellant cannot be charged with VAT on

Financial Services.

Similarly the citing of the definition of supply of Financial Services

in Section 25F of the Value Added Tax Act No. 14 of 2002 the sale

of Government Securities by the Appellant, which is a trading gain,

do not come within the definition of supply of Financial Services in

terms Section 25F of the Value Added Tax Act No. 14 of 2002 (as

amended).

The Tax Appeals Commission erred in law in holding that the

activities of the Appellant come within subsection (g) of the

definition of supply of Financial Services in Section 25F of the Value

Added Tax Act No. 14 of 2002 (as amended).

The Tax Appeals Commission in its Determination dated 20th

January, 2020 merely held that the "business of investment of

funds by purchasing of treasury bills and bonds" "come within the

ambit of" Section 25F of the Value Added Tax Act No.14 of 2002 (as

amended).

The TAC in its Determination dated 20" January, 2020 did not give

any reasons as to why the purchase and holding Government

Securities by the Appellant is a supply of Financial Services within

FINANCIAL SERVICE

Judgment CA Tax No. 05/2021 Page 33|40

the meaning of Section 25F of the Value Added Tax Act No. 14 of

2002 (as amended).

A statutory body such as the TAC has a duty to give reasons. -

However, the Tax Appeals Commission has failed to do so.

The Tax Appeals Commission erred in law in failing to give reasons

as to how the purchase and holding Government Securities by the

Appellant falls within the meaning of supply of Financial Services

defined in Section 25F of the Value Added Tax Act No. 14 of 2002(as

amended)

The TAC in its Determination dated 20th January, 2020 did not

give any reasons as to why the sale of Government Securities by the

Appellant is a supply of Financial Services within the meaning of

Section 25F of the Value Added Tax Act No. 14 of 2002 (as

amended).

C22.

Section 25A(1) of the VAT Act stipulates the circumstances under

which VAT on Financial Service ("VAT on FS) would be imposed and

the categories of entities that are specifically excluded from the

imposition on VAT on FS:

Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter I, II, Ill and item (xi) of

the First Schedule to this Act, a Value Added Tax (hereinafier in this

chapter referred to as "the tax") shall be charged in accordance with

VAT ON FS

Judgment CA Tax No. 05/2021 Page 34|40

the provisions of this Chapter on the supply of financial services in

Sri Lanka –

i. by any specified institution during the period commencing

January 1 2003 and ending on June 30, 2003; and

ii. by any person on or after July 1,2003 but prior to December

31,2007;

iii. by any person other than a Co-operative Society registered

under the Co-operative Societies Law. No 5 of 1972, on or after

January 1, 2008; and

iv. by any person other than a Co-operative Society registered

under the Co-operative Societies Law No 5 of 1972 or Lady

Lochore Loan Fund established under the Act No 38 of 1951,

commencing on or after January 1, 2009, or the Central Bank

of Sri Lanka established by the Monetary Law Act, (Chapter

422) (with effect from July 1, 2003:

Provided however, the supply of financial services by a Unit Trust or

a Mutual Fund shall not be treated as a financial service for the

purpose of this section.

Judgment CA Tax No. 05/2021 Page 35|40

C23.

Treasury bills and treasury bonds are issued by the Government of

Sri Lanka to raise loans. This is confirmed by Section 2 of the

Registered Stocks and Securities Ordinance and Section 2 of the

Local Treasury Bills Ordinance:

Section 2 of the Registered Stocks and Securities Ordinance

(1) Whenever by any enactment, whether enacted

before or after the date on which this Ordinance comes

into operation, authority has been or is hereafter given

to raise any sum of money by way of loan for any

purpose mentioned in that enactment, or

whenever it is necessary to raise any sum of

money for the purpose of repaying any loan

raised by the Government under this Ordinance

or any other enactment, the Minister in charge of the

subject of Finance may from time to time raise such

sum or any part thereof under the provisions of this

Ordinance in any one or more of the following modes:

(a) by the creation and issue of registered stock;

(b) by the issue of securities in the form of Government

promissory notes;

(c) by the issue of securities in the form of bearer bonds;

(d) by the issue of securities in the form of treasury bonds.

LOANS

Judgment CA Tax No. 05/2021 Page 36|40

Section 2 of the Local Treasury Bills Ordinance

(1) The Minister in charge of the subject of Finance

whenever authorized thereto by a resolution of

Parliament may direct the Deputy Secretary to the

Treasury to borrow by the issue in Sri Lanka of

Sri Lanka Government Treasury Bills, sums not

exceeding She staunch specified in such resolution;

and the Deputy Secretary to the Treasury may also,

with the approval of the Minister in charge of the

subject of Finance, borrow from time to time by the

issue of such Treasury Bills, such sums as may be

required to pay off at maturity, bills already lawfully

issued by him and outstanding.

(2) All acts or things necessary for the purpose of, and in

connection with, the issue and repayment of Treasury

Bills under this Ordinance shall be done on behalf of

the Deputy secretary to the Treasury by the central

Bank.

(3) Treasury Bills may be issued either as bills in the form

of written certificates or as Scripless Treasury Bills.

(4) Any application or bids for the purchase of Treasury

Bills may having regard to the interests of the national

economy be restricted to primary dealers and

designated non-dealer bidders.

Judgment CA Tax No. 05/2021 Page 37|40

By the above provisions, it can safely be concluded that the issue of

Treasury Bills and Bonds are to raise loans to the government,

which will not treated as supply of Financial Services.

C24.

The Letter of Intimation, the Department of Inland Revenue clearly

communicated its stance to the Appellant stating that the VAT

Returns were disputed since the audited financial statements of the

Appellant reflected interest income arising from the Appellant

engaging in purchase, holding and sale of governmental securities

i.e. treasury bills, treasury bonds and resale agreements. The

Respondent informed the Appellant that the purchase, holding and

sale of governmental securities was a financial service that falls

within Section 25F(g) of the VAT Act (as amended).

C25.

For the reasons adumbrated above, the questions of law are

answered as follows:

Q. N. 01. Did the Tax Appeals Commission err in law when it

failed to appreciate that the Company is not

chargeable with VAT on Financial Services as the

purchase and holding of Government securities does

not fall within the meaning "supply of financial

ANSWERS TO THE QUESTIONS OF LAW

INTIMATION

Judgment CA Tax No. 05/2021 Page 38|40

services" defined in terms of section 25 F of the

Value Added Tax Act No 14 of 2002?

ANS- Yes.

Q. N. 02. Did the Tax Appeals Commission err in law when it

failed to give reasons as to how the purchase and

holding of Government securities falls within the

meaning "supply of financial services" defined in

terms of section 25 F of the Value Added Tax Act?

ANS- Yes.

Q. N. 04. Did the Tax Appeals Commission err in law in failing

to appreciate the distinction between an "investment

in Government Security" and a "provision of loan"?

ANS- Yes.

Q. N. 11. Is the Determination made by the Tax Appeals

Commission in breach of the statutory time limit,

and thus null and void and of no force or effect in

law?

ANS- Though the TAC has exceeded the time limit, the

said determination is not null and void and of no

force or effect in law.

Q. N. 13 (a) Has the Assistant Commissioner not made the

Notice of Assessment in compliance and? or

Judgment CA Tax No. 05/2021 Page 39|40

observance with the Section 29 of the Value Added

Tax Act?

ANS- Yes.

(b) Has the Assistant Commissioner failed to

communicate reasons as to why the "gains arising

from sale of trading Securities" and "marked to

market gain on financial assets held for trading

are charged with tax?

ANS- Yes.

(c) If so, is the Notice of Assessment issued bad in

law and not in accordance with the assessment

process as specified in the Value Added Tax?

ANS- Yes.

Q. N. 14. Is the Notice of Assessment of the Assistant

Commissioner bad in law and null and void, in

that- (a) Notice of Assessment has not mentioned

under which provision of the Value Added Tax Act

the Assessment is issued;

ANS- Yes.

Judgment CA Tax No. 05/2021 Page 40|40

D.

As analyzed above and as the questions finally argued in the

case are answered as above, the determination of the TAC

dated 20.01.2020 and the determination of the CGIR dated

16.01.2017 are set aside, Assessment issued for 2012/2013

and 2013/2014 is annulled. The appeal is allowed. But

considering the circumstances of the case no cost is ordered.

The Registrar is directed to forward a copy of the judgment to the

Tax appeal commission.

On this 11th day of June 2026

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

M. C. B. S. MORAIS

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

CONCLUSION