IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal

in terms of Section 331 of the

Code of Criminal Procedure Act

No. 15 of 1979 read with Article

138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of

Sri Lanka.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Court of Appeal Case No.

CA/HCC/0089/2020 Complainant

High Court of Trincomalee Vs.

Case No. HCT/913/2019 Nambukaragamage Nandasena

alias M.P. Nandasiri.

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Nambukaragamage Nandasena

alias M.P. Nandasiri

Accused-Appellant

Vs.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Complainant-Respondent

Page 2 of 7

BEFORE : MENAKA WIJESUNDERA, J

WICKUM A. KALUARACHCHI, J

COUNSEL : Rienzie Arsecularatne, PC with Chamindri

Arsecularatne and Himasha Silva for the Accused-

Appellant.

Azard Navavi, SDSG for the Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 30.07.2024

DECIDED ON : 28.08.2024

WICKUM A. KALUARACHCHI, J.

The accused-appellant was indicted in the High Court of Trincomalee

for three counts of Grave Sexual Abuse committed between 01st of

March 2010 and 31st of December 2010. After trial, the appellant was

convicted of all three counts. He was sentenced for 10 years RI for the

1st Count, 07 years RI for the 2nd Count, 07 years RI for the 3rd Count

and the sentences were ordered to run concurrently. Fines and

compensation were also ordered.

A written submission has been filed only on behalf of the Appellant prior

to the hearing of the appeal. At the hearing, the learned Senior Deputy

Solicitor General (SDSG) for the Respondent conceded that the learned

Trial Judge had adopted totally a wrong procedure in taking evidence

and thus the conviction cannot stand. However, the learned SDSG

urged to send back the case for retrial as there is cogent evidence to

establish the charges leveled against the Accused-Appellant.

The learned Presidents Counsel for the Appellant vehemently objected

for sending the case for retrial and contended that there is no cogent

evidence to prove the charges. The learned Presidents Counsel pointed

out that what has been stated by PW-1 in her evidence had not been

stated in giving history to the doctor who examined PW-1 after the

Page 3 of 7

alleged incident. He also contended that PW-1 stated in her evidence

about penetration, but according to the doctor, there was no

penetration and thus, her evidence is not credible.

The learned Presidents Counsel filed of the record the entire

proceedings of the case bearing number HCT/914/2019 in the High

Court of Trincomalee. In the said case, this accused-Appellant was

indicted for three counts of rape. The victim in the said case is the same

victim of the instant case bearing number HCT/913/2019. The learned

SDSG admitted that the evidence is identical in both cases and it is

clear that evidence was taken once and the same evidence had been

adopted in both cases. It is apparent that evidence was taken only in

one case among the aforementioned cases of HCT/913/2019 and

HCT/914/2019 and the learned High Court Judge had adopted the

same evidence to the other case as well. When there are two indictments

in two cases, evidence led in one case cannot be adopted to the other

case, especially when the charges in one case are Rape charges and the

charges in the other case are Grave Sexual Abuse charges and that is

entirely a wrong and illegal procedure. In addition, serious issues arise

from this illegal procedure adopted by the learned High Court Judge are

that the learned Judge had not at least taken the consent of the parties

to do so and that no one knows in which case the evidence was taken.

At the commencement of the trial, in none of the cases, it is recorded

that the same evidence is adopted in both cases. Not only the consent

of the parties has not been taken to adopt the same evidence in both

cases, but also the learned Trial Judge has not even informed the

parties that the same evidence would be adopted in both cases. The

instant case, and the case bearing number HCT/914/2019 were

determined by the learned High Court Judge using the same set of

evidence and in the case bearing number HCT/914/2019, this

accused-appellant was acquitted of all three charges and in the case

bearing number HCT/913/2019, the accused-appellant was convicted

of all three charges.

Page 4 of 7

It is strange to see how the learned High Court Judge adopted the same

evidence in this way because apart from the fact that the offences of the

two indictments are different, the time periods that the alleged offences

were committed are also different. In the case bearing number

914/2019, the 1st count of rape is alleged to be committed between 01st

March 2010 and 31st March 2010 (the learned High Court Judge

wrongly mentioned the period in his judgment as between the dates of

1st March 2010 and 21st December 2010) and in the instant case, the

1st Charge of Grave Sexual Abuse is alleged to be committed between

01st March 2010 and 31st December 2010, in the case bearing number

914/2019, the second charge of Rape is alleged to be committed

between 01st April 2010 and 30th April 2010 and in the instant case,

the 2nd charge of Grave Sexual Abuse is alleged to be committed

between 01st March 2010 and 31st December 2010, in the case bearing

number 914/2019, the 3rd charge of Rape was alleged to be committed

between 01st December 2010 and 31st December 2010 and in the

instant case the 3rd count of Grave Sexual abuse is alleged to be

committed between 01st March 2010 and 31st December 2010. Not only

the nature of the offences is different in two cases, but also the time

periods are also different. However, the learned High Court Judge

adopted the same evidence in both cases without informing the parties

and determined the two cases.

In the case of Jayathilaka v Attorney-general- 2008 (2) Sri L.R 117,

it was held that In a charge of rape, the prosecution must prove the

penetration. In a charge of grave sexual abuse prosecution is not required

to prove penetration. Thus, the ingredients in a charge of rape are

different from the ingredients that must be proved in a charge of grave

sexual abuse. When the accused was convicted without being charged,

grave prejudice is caused to the accused since he was not given an

opportunity to answer the charge. Since the accused was not given an

opportunity to defend the charge of grave sexual abuse, we hold that

grave prejudice has been caused to the accused. Thus, the procedure

Page 5 of 7

adopted by the learned trial Judge amounts to a gross violation of the

rules of natural justice. The basis of this Judgment was that when the

accused was required to defend the charge of rape, he cannot be

convicted for a charge of grave sexual abuse without giving him an

opportunity to defend the charge of grave sexual abuse.

When delivering the Judgement in HCT/914/2019 the learned Judge

stated in his conclusion as follows.

It is stated that as a result of the act of this accused, a sexual abuse

case has been filed in the Trincomalee High Court under case number

HCT/913/2019 in the Trincomalee High Court by the Attorney General.

However, the case before us is HCT/914/2019. Since the statutory rape

in this case has not been proved beyond reasonable doubt by the

prosecution the Court in its Judgment discharges the accused from all

charges and orders for his acquittal.

From the aforesaid conclusion, it appears that the evidence was taken

in the case bearing number HCT/914/2019 because when analyzing

the evidence and coming to a conclusion, the learned Judge has stated

that the case before us is HCT/914/2019. The learned Judge had

decided that the rape charges in the case HCT/914/2019 have not been

proved on the evidence presented before him. However, without

informing the appellant, the learned Judge used the same evidence and

convicted the accused-appellant for three charges of grave sexual abuse

in the case bearing number HCT/913/2019. The accused-appellant did

not have opportunity to defend the three counts of grave sexual abuse.

Therefore, the illegal procedure that has been adopted by the learned

Trial Judge is not only in deprivation of right to a fair trial of the accused

but also a total violation of the rules of natural justice. Therefore, as

both the learned SDSG for the Respondent and the Learned Presidents

Counsel for the Appellant agreed, the impugned Judgement must be

set aside.

Page 6 of 7

The next matter to be considered is whether a retrial could be ordered

in this case. When considering this issue, it is needless to say that

adopting the same evidence to determine different charges in two

different cases is a fundamental error done by the learned High Court

Judge. There is a maxim Actus Curiae Neminem Gravabit. The

meaning of this maxim is that an act of the Court shall prejudice no

man. In the case of Kariawasam v. Priyadharshani- 2004 (1) Sri

L.R 189 also, it is stated as follows: I am also mindful of the often

quoted legal principle that no man shall be put in jeopardy by a mistake

made by a Court. In legal terms, jeopardy refers to the risk or danger

of conviction and punishment that a defendant faces in a criminal trial.

The Court must ensure that individuals are not subject to multiple

prosecutions for the same offence.

In view of the aforesaid maxim and the aforesaid judicial authority, the

accused-appellant of this case should not be tried again by sending this

case for retrial for the grave error done by the learned Trial Judge. On

the other hand, the victim who was 09 years at the time of the offence

would be 23 years at present and giving evidence again regarding the

unpleasant incident that she faced fourteen years ago would be a

harassment for her as well.

In addition, it was held in the case of Nandana V. Attorney General

(2008) 1 Sri L.R. 51, as follows: therefore, a discretion is vested in the

Court whether or not to order a retrial in a fit case, which discretion

should be exercised judicially to satisfy the ends of justice, taking into

consideration the nature of the evidence available, the time duration

since the date of the offence, the period of incarceration the accused

person had already suffered, and last but not least, the trauma and

hazards an accused person would have to suffer in being subject to a

second trial for no fault on his part and the resultant traumatic effect in

his immediate family members who have no connection to the alleged

crime.

Page 7 of 7

In the said Judgment of Nandana V. Attorney General, it is also stated

as follows: as regards the second ground as to the time duration, it must

be noted as the alleged offence has been committed on 07.02.99, almost

ten years have elapsed since the date of the offence. In a long line of case

law authorities, our Courts have consistently refused to exercise the

discretion to order a retrial where the time duration is substantial.

In Peter Singho V. Werapotiya 55 NLR 157, Gration, J. refused to

order a retrial where the time duration was over 04 years.

In Queen V. Jayasinghe - 69 NLR 413, Sansoni, J. refused to order a

retrial where the time duration was over 03 years.

In the instant action, according to the charges, the offence had been

committed in 2010. Now, fourteen years have elapsed since the date of

the offence. Hence, it is obvious that the instant case is not a fit and

proper case to order a retrial even if only the time duration is

considered.

For the reasons stated above, this Court decides to set aside the

convictions and the sentences dated 21.09.2020. The accused-

appellant is acquitted of all three counts.

The appeal is allowed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Menaka Wijesundera, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL