Page 1 of 23

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal under and in

terms of Section 320 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

Court of Appeal No: Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

CA/HCC/0088/2022 COMPLAINANT

Vs.

High Court of Colombo 1. Latheef Ihusan

Case No: 372/2019 2. Shinaz Mohamed

ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

Latheef Ihusan

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

Page 2 of 23

Before : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

: P. Kumararatnam, J.

Counsel : Shavindra Fernando, P.C. with Mirthula Skandarajah

for the Accused-Appellant

: Sudharshana de Silva, S.D.S.G for the Respondent

Argued on : 12-01-2024

Written Submissions : 25-11-2022 (By the Accused-Appellant)

: 10-01-2023 (By the Complainant-Respondent)

Decided on : 29-04-2024

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

The first accused-appellant (hereinafter referred to as the appellant), along with

another, both of whom are Maldivian Nationals were indicted before the High

Court of Colombo for committing the following offences.

1. On or about 22-04-2016 at Bambalapitiya, within the jurisdiction of

the High Court of Colombo, the 1st accused (the appellant) did commit

an offence by possessing 265.31 grams of the dangerous drug

Diacetylmorphine, commonly known as Heroin, which is a dangerous

drug prohibited to possess in terms of the Poisons, Opium and

Dangerous Drugs Ordinance as amended by Amendment Act No. 13 of

1984, and thereby committed an offence punishable in terms of the

said Ordinance.

2. At the same time and at the same transaction, the 1st accused

committed the offence of trafficking the same quantity of the dangerous

drug Diacetylmorphine, commonly known as Heroin, and thereby

committed an offence punishable in terms of the said Ordinance.

Page 3 of 23

3. At the same time and at the same transaction as mentioned in the 1st

count, the 2nd accused did commit the offence of possessing 69.08

grams of Diacetylmorphine, commonly known as Heroin, which is a

dangerous drug prohibited to possess in terms of the Poisons, Opium

and Dangerous Drugs Ordinance as amended by Amendment Act No.13

of 1984, and thereby committed an offence punishable in terms of the

said Ordinance.

4. At the same time and at the same transaction, the 2nd accused

committed the offence of trafficking a dangerous drug, by trafficking

the mentioned 69.08 grams of Diacetylmorphine, commonly known as

Heroin, and thereby committed an offence punishable in terms of the

said Ordinance.

When the indictment was read over to the two accused, both of them, including

the appellant have pleaded not guilty to the charges, and after the trial, the

learned High Court Judge of Colombo of the judgment dated 11-02-2022, has

found the appellant guilty of the 1st and the 2nd count preferred against him. The

2nd accused indicted has been acquitted on the basis that there was insufficient

evidence to prove the 3rd and the 4th count preferred against him beyond

reasonable doubt.

After having considered mitigatory as well as aggravating circumstances, the

learned High Court Judge has sentenced the appellant to life imprisonment on

both counts.

Being aggrieved by the said conviction and sentence, the appellant has preferred

this appeal.

Before considering the grounds of appeal urged on behalf of the appellant, I find

it appropriate to briefly summarize the facts placed before the trial Court by the

prosecution and the defence taken up by the accused in the case for better

understanding of the judgment.

Page 4 of 23

Facts in Brief

PW-01 was the officer who led the team that conducted the raid which led to the

arrest of the two accused indicted before the High Court.

She was attached to the Police Narcotic Bureau (PNB) and had concluded 14

years of service at the Bureau by the time relevant to this raid. At that time, she

had been functioning as the Officer-in-Charge of the Data Coordination section

of the South Asian Regional Drug Unit of the PNB.

On 04-04-2016, she has received a written instruction from the Director of the

PNB assigning her to investigate about a Maldivian National called Ihusan

Latheef, informing that he has arrived in Sri Lanka and is dealing with drugs.

She has marked the said letter as P-01 at the trial. Accordingly, having

commenced her investigations, she has reported facts to the Magistrates Court

of Negombo as she was of the view that the said Maldivian National may attempt

to depart Sri Lanka through the airport with the drugs.

While conducting her investigations, she has received another written

instruction from the Director of the PNB on 21-04-2016 informing that along

with the earlier mentioned person, two other persons, namely Mohamed Shinaz

and Mohamed Fazloon, who also are Maldivian Nationals are involved in drug

trafficking and to investigate further. She has been provided with photographs

of all three suspects, their passport numbers and some other relevant details.

The PW-01 has marked the 2nd letter received from the Director as P-02, and the

additional information provided with it as P-02A.

While conducting her investigations in this regard, she has come to know that

the person called Mohamed Fazloon has been already in Sri Lanka, but the

person called Ihusan Latheef has returned to Maldives, but would be coming

back to Sri Lanka on 21-04-2016. This information has been provided to her by

Sub-Inspector Weerakkody, whom she assigned to conduct further

investigations in this matter.

Page 5 of 23

Since she knew from her experience as a PNB officer that generally, Maldivian

Nationals do not bring dangerous drugs to Sri Lanka, but what they do is

trafficking dangerous drugs out of Sri Lanka, she has decided not to apprehend

the suspect while returning to Sri Lanka, but has directed her Assistant Officers

to do surveillance on the said suspect.

Her intention had been to track down the places where the suspects would stay

in Sri Lanka and to observe their actions. Although the mentioned Ihusan

Latheef has come to Sri Lanka on the mentioned date, the PNB officials have

failed to obtain specific information as to where he went on that day. However,

on the same night of 21-04-2016, she has come to know that the said suspect

Ihusan Latheef is staying at the Pearl City Hotel in Wellawatta. Although she has

taken steps to inquire whether the mentioned suspects are carrying dangerous

drugs or what their intentions may be, PW-01 has not been able to get specific

reliable information on that.

Subsequently, around 17 hours on 22-04-2016, she has received instructions to

conduct a raid at the Pearl City Hotel. Accordingly, she has assembled a team of

police officers attached to PNB, including another a female officer. After giving

them necessary instructions and following the due procedure in that regard, PW-

01 has left with her team of officers to conduct the raid.

All of them had been dressed in civilian clothing. She has used a civilian vehicle

used by the PNB to travel to the location. Four other officers had travelled in two

motor bikes. They have left the PNB at 19.45 hours and had reached the Pearl

City Hotel at 20.05 hours and had parked the vehicles they were using at the

common vehicle park situated in front of the hotel. Although she has earlier

mentioned that the hotel was situated in Wellawatta, in fact, the location of the

hotel had been in Bambalapitiya and the hotel was an eight storied building.

After their arrival, two other police officers sent by the Director of the PNB have

also come and joined the raiding party. The two officers had come in a three-

wheeler. After stationing themselves at the car park, SI Weerakkody who had

Page 6 of 23

contacts with the private informant in relation to the drug deal had contacted

him and has come to know that the two suspects they were looking for, namely

Ihusan Latheef and Mohomad Shinaz are not in the hotel, and the informant

does not know where they went.

Accordingly, PW-01 has decided to wait until they return and search them. By

that time, it was about 20.30 hours in the night, and PW-01 had stationed two

police officers at the entrance of the hotel from the Bauddhaloka Mawatha and

two other officers at the entrance to the hotel from Jayasinghe Edward Road.

She has stationed two other officers in the private car park and had instructed

two others to do surveillance near the hotel. She has also stationed two officers

who were with her near the traffic colour lights close to the entrance from

Bauddhaloka Mawatha towards Galle road and Dehiwala area.

After the said arrangement, PW-01, along with IP Subodha, PC-61771

Gunasekara and WPC Thilini has gone inside the hotel and had met the Manager

of the hotel at 20.40 hours. She has informed the purpose of their visit to him

and had come to know that the said suspects are occupying the room 710 of the

hotel.

After having received the assistance of the management of the hotel, PW-01 and

the officers accompanying her had waited in the lobby of the hotel pretending

that they were there to meet someone. After waiting for nearly an hour, IP

Subodha has signaled towards the entrance of the hotel from Bauddhaloka

Mawatha, where she had observed the two suspects for whom they were looking

for coming towards the hotel. She has observed that the suspect whom she

identified as Ihusan Latheef was carrying a tulip bag and having something

similar to a box inside the bag.

At the trial, the witness has identified him as the 1st accused indicted, namely

the appellant. She has identified the other person who accompanied the

appellant as the 2nd accused indicted. The tulip bag the appellant was carrying

had markings of a duty-free shop. The PW-01 and her team has confronted the

Page 7 of 23

two persons in the lobby of the hotel and informed them that they were from the

PNB and that they would be searched. When the appellant was asked for the

bag, he had reluctantly handed it over to PW-01. Inside the bag, there had been

a red-coloured box with a Bata mark, and when opened, PW-01 has found two

parcels with brown-coloured powder in a transparent polythene cover. Upon

inspection, she has determined that the brown-coloured powder contained

Heroin.

Accordingly, PW-01 has arrested the appellant. After the arrest, she has found

that the person who accompanied him was Shinaz Mohamed, the 2nd accused

indicted.

Upon questioning, she has come to know that they were occupying room 710 of

the hotel which they already knew. PW-01 and her officers have gone to the 7th

floor along with the two suspects and has ordered the 2nd accused to open the

room. Initially, he had refused, but later he has taken out the key card from his

pocket and had opened the door.

While inside the room, among other things, PW-01 has seen a travelling bag. At

that time, she was having the substance recovered from the appellant in her

custody. IP Subodha has searched the travelling bag which was a medium sized

bag. PW-01 has found the Maldivian National Identity Card belonging to the 2nd

accused inside the purse found in the travelling bag. When she opened the outer

zipper of the bag, she has found clothes, and after removing the clothes, another

zipper has been found towards the bottom of the bag. When IP Subodha has

opened the zipper, a parcel covered in a tulip cover between the two handles of

the bag has been found. Inside the parcel, PW-01 has found three smaller parcels

covered in polythene bags, and a brown-coloured powder has been observed in

all three.

Having been satisfied that the travelling bag belongs to the 2nd accused, PW-01

has proceeded to arrest him as well for possessing and trafficking of Heroin.

Page 8 of 23

She has taken charge of the second quantity of the substance found and kept it

separately under her custody. The witness has explained the steps she took to

keep them separate.

After the arrest of the two suspects, the 2nd accused indicted has settled the hotel

charges, and the raiding party has returned to the PNB around 23.05 hours

together with the arrested suspects, and the relevant productions that were

taken into custody.

The witness has weighed the first two parcels recovered from the custody of the

appellant after marking them as L1 and L2 respectively. She has found 624

grams in the parcel marked L1, and 333 grams in the parcel marked L2. The

witness has taken steps to mark the three parcels found in the travelling bag

belonging to the 2nd accused indicted, as S1, S2 and S3. She has found 72 grams,

96 grams and 129 grams of the substance respectively. Thereafter, she has taken

the necessary steps to seal the productions and hand over the productions to

the production keeper of the PNB at 6.35 hours on 23-04-2016. She has

identified the relevant productions at the trial.

When PW-01 was subjected to cross-examination, it had been suggested to her

that she came to know that the two Maldivian Nationals were staying in a hotel

named Pearl Garden Hotel situated near the Katunayake Airport. She has denied

that suggestion and has stated that they could not follow the 1st accused

appellant when he arrived at the airport from overseas and they lost track of

him, but only came to know that he came to Colombo via the expressway. She

has stated further that since it had been their experience that Maldivian

Nationals do not bring drugs into the country, she did not take steps to arrest

the appellant when he came to the country.

It clearly appears from the line of cross-examination that the learned Counsel

who represented the appellant at the High Court trial has taken a hint from the

investigating notes of PW-01, and that was the reason to suggest that the

surveillance was done at the Pearl Garden Hotel near the airport, and also the

Page 9 of 23

reason to suggest that the Heroin taken from the said hotel was introduced to

the two accused.

The witness has clearly explained her notes stating that their initial information

was that the appellant is staying at the Pearl Garden Hotel, which is situated

adjacent to the Pearl City Hotel at Bambalapitiya. Later PW-01 and her team has

come to know that both the hotels were managed under the same management

and the appellant had been staying in the Pearl City Hotel and not in the Pearl

Garden Hotel.

PW-01 has been strenuously cross-examined about the CCTV footages that may

be available at the hotel and the casino the appellant and the other accused has

claimed that they went, apparently in an attempt to establish that the

prosecution was hiding something.

The witness has stated that she is telling the truth as to what happened, and

she did not obtain CCTV camera footages from the hotel as there was no

necessity for her to obtain them.

The prosecution has called the earlier mentioned Police Inspector Subodha, to

corroborate the evidence of PW-01. His evidence has been similar to that of PW-

01 in relation to the information received, investigations carried out and the

arrest of the two accused indicted. He too has denied similar suggestions made

to him by the learned Counsel who represented the appellant and the other

accused where it had been suggested to him that the Heroin was introduced and

no such arrest was made in the manner claimed by the prosecution.

At the trial, the defence has admitted that the productions were in a properly

sealed state and the chain of the production. The fact that the productions were

handed over to the Government Analyst and the pure quantity of Heroin as

mentioned in the Government Analyst Report, and the Report of the Government

Analyst has also been admitted. The procedures adopted by the Government

Analyst in that regard also has been admitted. The said admissions had been

recorded in terms of section 420 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act. The

Page 10 of 23

Government Analyst Report and the two memorandums issued by the

Government Analyst had been marked through the Court Interpreter.

Once the prosecution case was concluded, the learned High Court Judge has

decided to call for a defence where the appellant and the 2nd accused has made

dock statements, and a witness has also been called on behalf of the appellant.

In his dock statement, the appellant has admitted that he and the 2nd accused

were arrested in the reception area of the Pearl City Hotel situated in

Bambalapitiya. He has stated that he was arrested when he and the 2nd accused

returned from Ballys Casino, and has claimed that he did not have in his

possession a Bata shoe box in a tulip bag as stated by the witnesses.

It had been his position that he was questioned about Heroin brought in the

previous day, but he denied the allegation. After that, he was taken to the room

where he was staying and there was nothing belonging to the 2nd accused in his

room.

He has claimed that while they were being questioned, he overheard the PNB

officials talking about the Pearl Garden Hotel, which he knew as a hotel situated

near the airport frequented by Maldivian Nationals. He has claimed that he came

to know that Heroin was detected from the Pearl Garden Hotel, and he believes

that the PNB officers thought that he brought Heroin to the country and kept it

hidden in the Pearl Garden Hotel, and because of that, he and the 2nd accused

was unreasonably arrested and charged in this manner. He has denied any

wrongdoing.

The 2nd accused who was later acquitted has stated in his dock statement that

his friend, the 1st accused was staying at the Pearl City Hotel situated near the

Bambalapitiya junction, and during that time, he was living at his sisters house

situated in Dehiwala. He has claimed that his friend left to Maldives suddenly,

and told him that he is returning, and to arrange for a room through another

friend. He has claimed that on 21-04-2016, he came to know that the appellant

Page 11 of 23

has returned and had come to the Pearl City Hotel, and thereafter, both of them

went to Ballys Casino and returned in the night.

He has claimed that the appellant had nothing in his possession, but both of

them were arrested at the hotel reception by the PNB officials. Although nothing

was found with them, they were arrested and the travelling bag which belongs

to the 1st accused was taken by the PNB officials, and they were taken to the

PNB. The 2nd accused has admitted that it was he who settled the bill of the

hotel. He has claimed that his purse was in his possession when they were

arrested and nothing belonging to him was found from the travelling bag of the

appellant. He has denied the charges against him.

On behalf of the defence, the Registrar of the Negombo Magistrates Court has

been called to give evidence. It has been suggested to her that a lawyer has made

an application on 29-06-2016 for the Court to call for CCTV camera footages of

the Pearl City Hotel, which the Registrar has confirmed. It has been suggested

to the Registrar that the learned Magistrate has issued summons on the 28-07-

2016 to Ballys, which the Registrar has confirmed, and the said summons have

been marked as V-01. A letter sent by the learned Magistrate to the University

of Colombo has been marked as V-02, where the learned Magistrate has called

for a report of a compact disc sent along with the letter to the said university.

After calling the evidence of the Registrar, the defence case has been closed.

The Grounds of Appeal

Although several grounds of appeal have been urged in the written submissions

filed on behalf of the appellant, the learned Presidents Counsel who represented

him at the hearing of this appeal submitted the following grounds of appeal for

the consideration of the Court.

1. The failure of the learned trial Judge to even consider the dock

statement of the 2nd accused, which totally corroborate the 1st

accuseds dock statement which stated that at the time the 1st accused

Page 12 of 23

was arrested, no bag was recovered in his possession. By not

considering that as evidence, which was favourable to the accused-

appellant, grave prejudice was caused to him rendering the judgment

of the High Court Judge fundamentally flawed, and the said fact of not

considering the 2nd accused evidence vitiates the conviction.

2. Under the aforesaid circumstances, did the accused-appellant not

received a fair trial guaranteed under The Constitution.

3. The dock statement of the accused was rejected unfairly by the learned

trial Judge.

It was the position of the learned Presidents Counsel that the letters marked P-

01 and P-02 where PW-01 has received written instructions in relation to the

investigation was to the effect to apprehend the suspects mentioned in the letters

when they arrive in the country. But according to the evidence, the police did

not arrest any suspects as instructed, but has waited in the hotel lobby and had

arrested them. It was his position that a doubt arises as to why the investigating

officer did not follow the instructions given to her.

The learned Presidents Counsel also suggested that the best evidence would

have been the CCTV footages as to the incident, and not taking steps to obtain

the said footages by the prosecution has created a doubt as to the story of the

prosecution. It was his view that this failure by the prosecution should be held

in favour of the appellant in terms of section 114(f) of the Evidence Ordinance.

The learned Presidents Counsel found fault with the prosecution for not calling

any witness from the hotel where the appellant was arrested, to verify the story

of the prosecution. The learned Presidents Counsel made submissions that the

learned High Court Judges decision not to analyze the dock statement of the 2nd

accused who was acquitted of the charges, was an erroneous decision based on

a misdirection as to the relevant law. He made extensive submissions to claim

that because of this alleged failure to consider the dock statement of the 2nd

Page 13 of 23

accused in favour of the appellant who was the 1st accused indicted, a fair trial

has been denied for the appellant.

The learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General (SDSG) submitted several decided

cases of our Superior Courts as to the manner in which a dock statement should

be considered by a trial Court, and the value that can be attached to it.

He was of the view that a dock statement made by one accused cannot be used

against another accused in the same case, either to corroborate or discredit the

accused. It was his position that the learned High Court Judge has come to a

correct determination in that regard.

In relation to the claim that the CCTV footages had not been obtained by the

prosecution, it was his position that the prosecution did not rely on such footage

but on evidence available to them in that regard. However, he brought to the

notice of the Court that the management of the hotel where the arrest was made

has informed the Magistrates Court that they no longer have the recordings

relevant to that day, as it has been removed from the system by an automatic

process. He has also explained the controversy as to the Pearl City Hotel and the

Pearl Garden Hotel. It was submitted by the learned SDSG that there had been

no material contradictions or omissions in relation to the evidence by the

prosecution witnesses and there was no reason for the prosecution witnesses to

concoct a false story against the appellant and the 2nd accused both of whom are

Maldivian nationals.

The learned SDSG moved for the dismissal of the appeal on the basis that the

grounds of appeal urged have no merit.

Consideration of the Grounds of Appeal

As the three grounds of appeal are interrelated and mainly based on the alleged

decision by the learned trial Judge not to consider the dock statement by the 2nd

accused indicted, and also on the premise that the dock statement of the

Page 14 of 23

appellant was unfairly rejected, I will now proceed to consider those grounds of

appeal together.

I am in no position to agree with the contention of the learned Presidents

Counsel that PW-01, without following the written instructions given to her by

the superior officer, has conducted this raid, and therefore, there is a doubt as

to the evidence in that regard.

It is clear from the letters marked P-01 and P-02 that the Director of the PNB

has communicated the information received by him to PW-01 who was the then

Officer-in-Charge of Data Coordination section of the South Asian Regional Drug

Unit of PNB. It is clear that by passing this information to her, the Director of

the PNB has authorized her to conduct the relevant investigations as she thinks

fit.

Being an experienced officer, she has determined that since Maldivian Nationals

generally do not bring Heroin into the country, but only take them out of the

country, not to apprehend the appellant at the airport, but to have him under

police surveillance after his arrival. It is in that process the appellant and the 2nd

accused had been apprehended at the lobby of the Pearl City Hotel situated near

the Bambalapitiya junction.

The appellant and the 2nd accused indicted has never denied that the arrest was

made at the hotel lobby as claimed by the prosecution witnesses. In fact, the

appellant and the other accused indicted has admitted the fact that the appellant

had been in Sri Lanka but left the country, and had returned on the 21-04-2016

as found out by PW-01 in her investigations. There had been no denial that the

appellant was staying at the hotel where the raid took place. There is no denial

that PW-01 and her team searched his room after their arrest and took a

travelling bag into their custody. There has been no denial, but an admission

that after the arrest, the hotel bill was settled by the 2nd accused, who was

acquitted after the trial.

Page 15 of 23

The only denial had been to the effect that no Heroin was found in the manner

claimed by the prosecution witnesses and the appellant did not carry a bag which

contained Heroin, and the travelling bag belongs to the appellant, not to the 2nd

accused as claimed.

As I have stated before, it clearly appears that the suggestions made to PW-01

that, in fact, the Heroin was found at a hotel named Pearl Garden Hotel situated

near the airport had been based on what the PW-01 has stated in her notes as

to a hotel named Pearl Garden, to build up a defence based on her notes and not

based on actual facts.

It is trite law that in a criminal case, it is up to the prosecution to prove the case

against an accused beyond reasonable doubt and an accused has no burden. It

is sufficient for an accused to create a reasonable doubt as to the evidence placed

before the Court or to provide a reasonable explanation as to the evidence against

him.

In the case of Pantis Vs. The Attorney General (1998) 2 SLR 148, it was held:

As the burden of proof is always on the prosecution to prove its case beyond

reasonable doubt and no such duty is cast on the accused and it is sufficient

for the accused to give an explanation which satisfies the Court or at least

is sufficient to create a reasonable doubt as to his guilt.

In the case of Narender Kumar Vs. State of Delhi (NCT of Delhi, AIR 2012 SC

2281, it was held:

Prosecution case has to stand on its own legs and cannot take support from

the weakness of the case of the defence. However great the suspicion

against the accused and however strong the morel belief and conviction of

the Court, unless the offence of the accused is established beyond

reasonable doubt on the basis of legal evidence and material on the record,

he cannot be convicted for the offence. There is an initial presumption of

innocence of the accused and the prosecution has to bring home the offence

Page 16 of 23

against the accused by reliable evidence. The accused is entitled to the

benefit of every reasonable doubt.

In the case of Karunadasa Vs. Officer-in-Charge, Motor Traffic Division,

Police Station Nittambuwa (1887) 1 SLR 155, it was stated by Perera, J. that;

It is an imperative requirement in a criminal case that the prosecution must

be convincing, no matter how weak the defence is, before the Court is

entitled to convict on it. It is necessary to borne in mind that the general rule

is that the burden is on the prosecution, to prove the guilt of the accused.

The prosecution must prove their case apart from any statement made by

the accused or any evidence tendered by him. The weakness of the defence

must not be allowed to bolster up a weak case for the prosecution. The rule

is based on the principle that every man is presumed to be innocent until

the contrary is proved, and criminality is never to be presumed.

In the case of The Queen Vs. M.G. Sumanasena 66 NLR 350, it was held:

In a criminal case suspicious circumstances do not establish guilt nor does

the proof of any number of suspicious circumstances relieve the prosecution

of its burden of proving the case against the accused beyond reasonable

doubt and compel the accused to give or call evidence

However, it is also well-settled law that a reasonable doubt that needs to be

considered in a criminal trial should not be based on fanciful doubts.

In the case of State of Punjab Vs. Karnail Singh (2003) 11 SCC 271, it was

held:

Exaggerated devotion to the rule of benefit of doubt must not nurture

fanciful doubts or lingering suspicion and thereby destroy social defence.

Justice cannot be made sterile on the plea that it is better to let hundred

guilty escape, than punish an innocent. Letting guilty escape is not doing

justice according to law. Prosecution is not required to meet any and every

hypothesis put forward by the accused. A reasonable doubt is not an

Page 17 of 23

imaginary, trivial or merely possible doubt, but a fair doubt based upon

reason and common sense. It must grow out of the evidence in the case. If a

case is proved perfectly, it is argued that it is artificial; if a case has some

flaws inevitable because human beings are prone to err, it is argued that it

is too imperfect. One wonders whether in the meticulous hypersensitivity to

eliminate a rare innocent from being punished, many guilty persons must

be allowed to escape. Proof beyond reasonable doubt is a guideline, not a

fetish. Vague hunches cannot take place of judicial evaluation. A Judge

does not preside over a criminal trial, merely to see that no innocent man is

punished. A Judge also presides to see that a guilty man does not escape.

Both are public duties. (Per Viscount Simon in Stirland Vs. Director of Public

Prosecution (1944 AC(PC) 315) quoted in State of U.P. Vs. Anil Singh (AIR

1988 SC 1998). Doubts would be called reasonable if they are free from a

zest for abstract speculation. Law cannot afford any favourite other than

truth.

I am unable to find anything suspicious about the PW-01s decision not to strictly

follow the instructions given to her in the letter marked P-01. As an investigating

officer, it was her duty to determine what would be the best cause of action under

the given circumstances. She has determined that no purpose would be served

by searching a Maldivian National who is coming into the country as her

experience has been to the effect that, what drug traffickers do is take the

dangerous drugs out of the country.

Her subsequent steps in relation to the investigations conducted amply

demonstrates the investigations and the actions taken by the PW-01 in this

regard.

Although the learned Presidents Counsel submitted that the best evidence

would have been the CCTV footages as to the incident, I am not in a position to

agree with that contention either. In this case, the prosecution has given best

evidence before the Court by calling the officers who were engaged in the raid

Page 18 of 23

and arrested the appellant as well as the other accused indicted. Although the

CCTV footages of the incident may have corroborated the incident further,

obtaining the CCTV footage was not a requirement in proving the case.

This is a matter where the appellant has admitted that the PW-01 and her team

waited for them in the lobby of the hotel and arrested them when they entered

the hotel, and the only difference being the PW-01s assertion that he did not

have a bag carrying a shoe box containing Heroin.

I am of the view that, that was a matter that needs to be looked at in the totality

of the evidence. In my view, the evidence of the prosecution cannot be doubted

merely on speculation in that regard. Besides that, it has been submitted to the

trial Court that the said CCTV footages were not available when the said footages

were requested on behalf of the appellant and the other accused, and the said

footages have been deleted under the normal procedures of the hotel

management.

I am in no position to hold that fact in favour of the appellant in terms of section

114(f) of Evidence Ordinance.

In the similar manner, I am of the view that since the raid and the arrest has

been an admitted fact apart from the claim that the appellant had no drugs in

his possession, there was no necessity for the prosecution to call a witness from

the hotel management who may have witnessed the incident, since it was not

the quantity that matters but the quality of the evidence.

Having made the above observations as to the submissions made by the learned

Presidents Counsel in relation to the other issues raised at the hearing of this

appeal, I will now focus my attention to the main grounds of appeal urged on

behalf of the appellant.

When called for a defence at the conclusion of the prosecution case, the appellant

as well as the second accused indicted has decided to make statements from the

dock.

Page 19 of 23

It is well-settled law that a dock statement made by an accused person can be

treated as evidence subjected to the infirmities it carries, such as the statement

is not a statement made under oath or subjected to the test of cross-examination.

E.R.S.R Coomaraswamy in his book, The Law of Evidence, Volume II (Book

2) at page 528, having referred to English cases on the subject of the value that

can be attached to an unsworn statement before such statements from the dock

was abolished in England by section 72 of the Criminal Justice Act of 1982

states;

The defendant who made an unsworn statement, instead of giving

evidence enjoyed considerable advantages, such as:

a. The absence of cross-examination;

b. He was not liable to be prosecuted for perjury, since he was not

sworn;

c. He could freely attack prosecution witnesses without any attack

on his own character, convictions, and dispositions;

d. He could incriminate the co-defendant and damage him, since

the latter could not give evidence in rebuttal, although the Jury

would have been warned to ignore this against the co-defendant.

The English Judges sought to neutralize these advantages as follows:

a. They gave directions to Juries by asking them, Why did the

accused elect to make an unsworn statement? Could it be that

he was reluctant to put his evidence to the test of cross-

examination? If so, why? He has nothing to fear from unfair

questions since he would be protected by his Counsel and by

Court.

b. As will be seen, the Court even went to the extent of stating that

the dock statement cannot prove facts not otherwise proved by

the evidence and that it is not evidence.

Page 20 of 23

c. They also said that it was not necessary to read out the unsworn

statement in the summing-up, if the Jury was reminded of it, and

that the Judge need not give the Jury a copy of the statement.

The position in Sri Lanka as to the value that can be attached to a dock statement

by an accused was considered in the case of The Queen Vs. Kularatne (1968)

71 NLR 529.

The Court referred to The King Vs. Vellayan Sittambaram (1918) 20 NLR 257

and to The Queen Vs. Buddharakkita Thero (1962) 63 NLR 433 and expressed

their agreement with the view taken in the latter case that the unsworn

statement must be treated as evidence subject to its infirmity referred to therein.

The Court held that the Jury must be directed that:

a. The statement must be looked upon as evidence, subject to the infirmity

that the accused had deliberately refrained from giving testimony, and

therefore, was not subject to an oath or cross-examination;

b. If they believe the unsworn statement, it must be acted upon;

c. If it raised a reasonable doubt in their minds about the case for the

prosecution, the defence must succeed; and that it should not be used

against another accused.

In the case of Srilal de Silva and Another Vs. The Republic of Sri Lanka

(1988)1 SLR 299, it was held:

1. The evidence led of the contents of the information was hearsay evidence

and could not be used to infer knowledge on the part of the first accused.

2. An unsworn statement made by an accused from the dock (dock

statement) should not be used against another accused in the same case.

In the case under appeal, the main contention by the learned Presidents Counsel

was that the dock statement made by the 2nd accused indicted was not

considered by the learned trial Judge in favour of the appellant to determine that

it favours the version of events narrated by the appellant in his dock statement.

Page 21 of 23

It is my considered view that a dock statement given the infirmities it carries

cannot be considered either in favour of a co-accused or against him. That has

been the consistent view expressed by our Superior Courts as to the weight that

can be attached to a dock statement.

The case of Rex Vs. Liyanage Simeion (1949) 40 C.L.W, 6 was a case decided

on the same point. This was a case where two accused were charged with murder

of a person on whose body was found with several incised injuries, only one being

fatal, and the first accused was convicted of the charge, while the second was

acquitted by the jury, and there was no evidence to eliminate the fact that the

second accused may have caused the fatal injury.

Held:

1. That the offence committed by the 1st accused was one of attempted murder.

2. That the statement made by an accused person from the dock cannot be

taken into account in considering the case against his co-accused.

For the reasons considered as above, I find no basis to find fault with the learned

High Court Judge in his decision to consider the dock statement made by the

2nd accused-appellant only if it becomes necessary in relation to the charges

preferred against him. I find that the learned High Court Judge has well analyzed

the evidence of the prosecution and the stand taken by the appellant in the

judgment.

In fact, even if the learned High Court Judge considered the dock statement of

the 2nd accused, it would not have made any difference to the determinations of

the learned High Court Judge. The learned High Court Judge has considered the

evidence placed before the Court by the prosecution against the 2nd accused

indicted and has come to a firm finding that the prosecution has failed to prove

that the 2nd accused had the knowledge of the quantity of Heroin recovered from

the room, and the prosecution has failed to prove that the 2nd accused had the

conscious possession of Heroin.

Page 22 of 23

The learned High Court Judge has decided to acquit the 2nd accused on that

basis. It becomes necessary for the learned High Court Judge to consider the

defence taken up by the 2nd accused if he finds that the prosecution has

established a strong prima facie case against the 2nd accused in order to

determine whether the 2nd accused has created a reasonable doubt or has

provided a reasonable explanation as to the facts against him. Since there was

no determination that a strong prima facie case has been established against

him, I find that the learned High Court Judge has correctly determined that it

would not be necessary for him to analyze the dock statement made by the 2nd

accused indicted.

I find no merit in the argument that the said decision has denied a fair trial

towards the appellant.

The next matter that needs the attention of this Court is whether it can be stated

that the learned High Court Judge has rejected the dock statement of the

appellant unfairly as claimed in the 3rd ground of appeal argued before this

Court.

The judgment of the learned High Court Judge amply demonstrates that the dock

statement has been considered along with evidence placed before the Court and

also the stand taken on behalf of the appellant when the relevant prosecution

witnesses were giving evidence.

The learned High Court Judge has considered the claim about PNB officials

discovering Heroin from a hotel called Peral Garden Hotel at Katunayake and

whether such a contention has any probability, and has rightly concluded the

probable reasons behind such a contention by the accused in the case. It has

also been considered whether the alleged failure by the prosecuting authority to

lead CCTV camera footage evidence in its correct perspective in order to come to

a firm finding has created a doubt as to the prosecution case.

It was only after analyzing the evidence in its totality, the learned High Court

Judge has come to a finding that the 1st and the 2nd count preferred against

Page 23 of 23

the appellant has been proved beyond reasonable doubt on the basis that the

appellant had in his exclusive possession, the quantity of Heroin mentioned

in the 1st and the 2nd count.

Having considered the gross weight of the substance found and the pure

quantity of Heroin which amounts to 265.31 grams, the learned High Court

Judge has correctly determined that this was not a user quantity and anyone

who possesses such a quantity, it should be for trafficking purposes, for

which I find no reason to disagree.

Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed for want of merit. The conviction and the

sentence dated 11-02-2022 is affirmed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P. Kumararatnam, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal