==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0123-124/23

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal No: 1. Mansoor Muhammadu Manas

CA/HCC/0123-124/2023 2. Mohommadu Ibrahim Mohammadu

High Court of Puttalam Ilyas

Case No: HC/40/2019

ACCUSED-APPELLANTS

Vs.

The Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

CA/HCC/0123-124/23

2 | P a g e

COUNSEL : Kalinga Indatissa, PC with Waseemul

Akram, Rashmini Indatissa, Razana Salih

and Vomini Jayasinghe for the Appellants.

Shanaka Wijesinghe, PC, ASG for the

Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 10.06.2026

DECIDED ON : 25.08.2026

******************************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellants (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellants) were indicted in the High Court of Puttalam as follows:

• On or about 03.10.2012, being in possession of a gun and thereby

committing an offence punishable under Section 22(1) read with

Section 23(3) of the Firearms Ordinance No. 33 of 1916 as amended

by Act No. 22 of 1996.

CA/HCC/0123-124/23

3 | P a g e

The trial commenced before the High Court Judge of Puttalam. The

prosecution had called three witnesses and marked productions P1 to P4

and closed the case. At that point, an application on behalf of the Appellants

was made under Section 200(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.15

of 1979. By order dated 03.08.2021, the Learned High Court Judge had

dismissed the said application and called for the defence. The Appellants

gave evidence from the witness box and called three witnesses on their behalf

and closed their case.

After considering the evidence presented by both parties, the Learned High

Court Judge who heard the case at the High Court of Puttalam delivered the

Judgement and had convicted the Appellants as charged and sentenced

them to life imprisonment.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellants

preferred this appeal to this court. The Learned Counsel for the Appellants

informed this court that the Appellants have given consent to argue this

matter in their absence. Also, at the time of argument the Appellants were

connected via the Zoom platform from prison.

Background of the Case.

In this case the Appellants were arrested on 03.10.2012. The arrest and the

investigation were conducted by the officers attached to the Unsolved Crimes

Unit of Puttalam Police Station.

PW1, SI/Ranjith was attached to the Puttalam Police Station when the

incident had happened. According to him, on the day of the incident as usual

left the police station with 03 other police officers to carry out an

investigation pertaining to unsolved crimes. They had positioned themselves

at Seemavelliya Junction between 4-4.50 hours. While stationed there, a

motorbike with two people arrived there from the direction of Seemawelliya

to Boraluvala and the police party had checked them. According to PW1, at

that time, the light condition was very good. Although there was no lamp

post, sufficient light was available at that time.

CA/HCC/0123-124/23

4 | P a g e

Upon seeing a motorbike approaching the T-junction from the direction of

Seemawelliya, PW3, 79592 Roshen had directed to stop the motor mike. The

motorbike had stopped about three meters before the junction and the other

officers who went with PW1 had surrounded the motorbike. The rider had

threatened PW3 while he was getting down from the motorbike, however, he

was brought under control using minimum force. A barrel of a gun was

recovered from the rider’s possession at the time of his arrest. He was named

as the 1st Accused in the High Court case.

Thereafter, the pillion rider was searched and a butt of a gun was found in

his possession. He too was arrested and named as the 2nd Accused in the

High Court case.

PW2, PS 46076 Bandulasena was called to corroborate the evidence of PW1.

The production had been sent to the Government Analyst and according to

the report, upon amalgamation, the parts recovered from the Appellants

consisted of a repeater shot gun made in the United States of America.

The Appellants had filed the following grounds of appeal:

1. That the Learned High Court Judge failed to appreciate that the

prosecution failed to prove the charge on the indictment beyond

reasonable doubt.

2. That the Learned High Court Judge failed to appreciate that the

indictment was not in conformity with law and therefore, the

Appellants had suffered a grave miscarriage of justice.

3. That the Learned High Court Judge failed to appreciate that the

prosecution had failed to prove the ingredients of an offence under

Section 22 of the Firearms Ordinance and specifically, that this

situation is not one that falls within the ambit of Section 22(2).

4. That the Learned High Court Judge failed to appreciate that by

concluding that the Appellants had not been misled by the offence not

being specifically stated after having observed that such misstatement

is defective, has denied the Appellants’ right to a fair trial and is

CA/HCC/0123-124/23

5 | P a g e

contrary to Section 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.15

of 1979.

5. That the Learned High Court Judge failed to properly evaluate the

evidence led at the trial.

6. That the Learned High Court Judge failed to properly evaluate the

evidence of the Appellants under oath led at the trial.

7. That the judgment is contrary to Section 283 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

8. That the Learned High Court Judge has misdirected herself with

regard to the consistency and probability of the prosecution story.

9. That the Learned High Court Judge failed to properly evaluate the

inconsistencies and contradictions raised by the evidence of PW1 and

PW2.

10. That the Learned High Court Judge failed to appreciate that

‘possession’ of a gun cannot lead to a sentence of life imprisonment.

11. That the Learned High Court Judge’s dismissal of the Appellants

Evidence on the basis that they had not mentioned ‘Hakeem’ in their

statements to the police even though they had, is incorrect.

12. That the Learned High Court Judge failed to appreciate that in a case

such as the present one, the prosecution has to prove ‘sole’ and

exclusive possession’ and the prosecution has failed to do so in this

case.

13. The Learned High Court Judge misdirected herself as to the burden of

proof by stating that the Appellants are the only people who can offer

an explanation pertaining to the gun.

14. The judgement of the Learned High Court Judge is contrary to the

evidence that was led at the trial.

15. That the Learned High Court Judge imposed on the Appellants a

burden of proof not required by law.

16. That the Learned High Court Judge failed to appreciate the omissions

and contradictions in the notes and other observations related to the

CA/HCC/0123-124/23

6 | P a g e

raid.

17. That the Learned High Court Judge failed to appreciate that the

reasonable doubt as to the place and time of arrest is material to this

case and that the benefit of such doubt should be afforded to the

Appellants.

18. That the Learned High Court Judge failed to appreciate that the

Suspicion created by the failure to properly submit the productions to

the Magistrate, should be afforded to the Appellants.

19. That the Learned High Court Judge failed to appreciate that the

Prosecution had failed to disprove or affect the credibility of the defence

Evidence.

As the appeal grounds are interconnected, all grounds will be considered

together hereinafter.

The learned President’s Counsel has strenuously argued that that the

evidence given by PW1 and PW2 contradict each other with regard to the

direction the motorbike arrived to the T-junction. According to PW1, the

Accused persons arrived to the junction from the direction of Seemavelliya

to Boraluwala. However, according to PW2, the motorbike had come from the

direction of Boraluwala to Seeemavelliya. As per the sketch submitted at the

commencement of the argument with the copy to the State, the evidence

given by PW1 in respect of the arrival direction of the motorbike consists of

a major contradiction, as the arrival direction stated by PW1 is the total

opposite direction of what PW2 stated in his evidence.

Inter se contradictions refer to major or substantial discrepancies relating to

a core material fact, between the testimonies of two or more prosecution

witnesses. Such major contradictions would greatly threaten the credibility

of that particular evidence, which would essentially force the court to

consider the resulting reasonable doubt in the accused’s favor.

CA/HCC/0123-124/23

7 | P a g e

Such contradictions are distinct from minor or trivial discrepancies which

arise due to normal lapses in memory of witnesses. Inter se contradictions

would affect the core of the matter, therefore, the portions of evidence which

consist of such contradictions would result in the entire testimony being

considered unworthy of belief. Courts would have to exercise caution in

distinguishing between such foundational conflicts and minor details that

do not affect the core of the case.

The inter se contradictions become more serious as the prosecution had

failed to call an essential witness who was directed to stop the motorbike in

which the Appellants arrived. According to the learned President’s Counsel,

PC 79592 Roshen was the person who stopped the motorbike, while being

clad in police uniform and with possession of a T56 gun. According to PW2,

when PC Roshen stopped the motorbike, the 1st Appellant had intimidated

him and the police had used reasonable force to subdue him before his

arrest. This was not elicited from the evidence of PW1.

In The Attorney General v. Sandanam Pitchai Mary Theresa [2011] 2 SLR

292 the court held that:

“Whilst internal contradictions or discrepancies would ordinarily affect

the trustworthiness of the witness statement, it is well established that

the Court must exercise its judgment on the nature of the inconsistency

or contradiction and whether they are true material to the facts in issue”.

In the case of Joy Devaraj vs The State of Kerala (2024) INSC 473 it was

held:

“The appellant was required to demonstrate that the incongruities in the

statements of the several eye witnesses shook the roots of their

credibility. The threshold for disbelieving a witness is not mere

discrepancy or inconsistency but material discrepancy and

inconsistency, which renders the account narrated by the witnesses so

CA/HCC/0123-124/23

8 | P a g e

highly improbable that the same may safely be discarded altogether

from consideration.”

Further, PC Roshen is an essential witness in order to prove the place of

arrest and how the Appellant were arrested. The defence had suggested to

both PW1 and PW2 that the Appellants were not arrested as suggested by

the prosecution but were arrested elsewhere.

Individuals such as police officers who would have the required firsthand

knowledge, professional expertise or direct observations necessary for the

court to establish facts, reconstruct events or determine the accused’s guilt

or innocence, would be essential witnesses.

In situations where a party in a criminal trial fails to call an essential witness,

the Court may draw an adverse inference that the missing testimony would

have been unfavourable to that party, and would therefore weaken their case

or create a reasonable doubt relating to the guilt of the defendant.

In Walimunige John v. The State 76 NLR 488, it was held:

“that the prosecution is not bound to call all the witnesses whose names

appear on the back of the indictment or to tender them for cross-

examination. Further, it is not incumbent on the trial Judge to direct the

jury, save in exceptional circumstances, that they may draw a

presumption under section 114 (f) of the Evidence Ordinance adverse to

the prosecution from its failure to call one or more of its witnesses at the

trial without calling all.

The question of a presumption arises only where a witness whose

evidence is necessary to unfold the narrative is withheld by the '

prosecution and the failure to call such witness constitutes a vital

missing link in the prosecution case and where the reasonable inference

to be drawn from the omission to call the witness is that he would, if

called, not have supported the prosecution. But where one witness's

evidence is cumulative of the other and would be a mere repetition of the

CA/HCC/0123-124/23

9 | P a g e

narrative, it would be wrong to direct a jury that the failure to call such

witness gives rise to a presumption under section 114 (f) of the Evidence

Ordinance."

In Republic of Sri Lanka v Udugamage Jayaratne CA/HCC/0236/2019

dated 31.03.2021 the court held;

“Although section 31 of the Firearms Ordinance provides that any

occupier of any house or premises in which any gun shall be found shall

for the purposes of the Firearms Ordinance be deemed to be the

possessor of the gun unless he proves that he had no knowledge or some

other person had the possession, as contended correctly, I am of the

view that the provisions of the section becomes applicable only if the

Court believes the evidence as to the recovery of the Firearm as stated

by the prosecution.

There cannot be any argument that there is a duty cast upon the

prosecution witnesses to divulge the full truth as to what happened and

not the suppression of facts which they may think that are not

favourable to the case of the prosecution.

I find that the prosecution witness Number 01 and 02 was not truthful

about the arrest of the appellant which is a matter that goes into the root

of the prosecution case against him. I am of the view that a reasonable

doubt has been created and a reasonable explanation has been

provided by the appellant in this action, which should have been viewed

in favour of him by the learned High Court Judge.”

As the place of incident was challenged by the defence, I consider calling

PW3 Roshen to be very essential in this case. The Learned High Court Judge

ought to have considered this suppression in favour of the Appellants.

In this case, when the defence was called, both Appellants opted to give

evidence from witness box.

CA/HCC/0123-124/23

10 | P a g e

The 1st Appellant, when giving evidence, stated that he is a mechanic by

profession. On the date of the incident, the 2nd Appellant came and informed

that one Hakeem was looking for him. Hence, both the Appellants had left in

a motorbike to meet Hakeem. Both of them had gone to an estate situated

on Seemavelli Road. At the estate they had met a person called ‘Massina’,

who had informed him that his services were needed to fix a gun. He knew

that the person called ‘Massina’ used to go hunting with Hakeem. As a

screwdriver was not available, the said person had gone to bring a

screwdriver, leaving two parcels. He did not open the parcels but waited until

the other person brought a screwdriver. At that time, the police had arrived

and arrested the Appellants. After the arrest, the police had obtained his

signature to a document which was in the Sinhala Language.

The 2nd Appellant also narrated the same in his evidence. He too placed his

signature to a document written in Sinhala Language.

The learned President’s Counsel argued that since the Appellants had

referred to a person called Hakeem, who was claimed to be the owner of the

gun, the police had not carried out investigations with regard to Hakeem.

Although the 2nd Appellant had referred to the name of Hakeem in his

statement, the Learned High Court Judge had stated in her judgment that

no reference with regard to Hakeem was made in their statement. Due to this

wrong inference, the learned President’s Counsel submits that this has

caused a great prejudice to the Appellants and deprived them of a fair trial.

In criminal trials, the burden of proof relating to establishing the guilt of the

accused would lie entirely on the Crown. This burden would lie on the Crown

in relation to every element or essential fact which would make up the offence

charged, and would never shift to the accused. The accused would not have

an obligation to prove any fact or issue that is disputed. In simpler terms,

the accused is not obliged to prove their innocence; rather, the Crown is

obliged to sufficiently prove their guilt.

CA/HCC/0123-124/23

11 | P a g e

The presumption of innocence is a major principle of the criminal justice

system. This would mean that any person charged with a criminal offence

would be presumed innocent until the Crown sufficiently establishes the

person’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt to a jury.

In The Queen v. K.A. Santin Singho 65 NLR 447 the court held that:

“It is fundamental that the burden of proof is on the prosecution.

Whether the evidence the prosecution relies on is direct or

circumstantial, the burden is the same. This burden is not altered by the

failure of the appellant to give evidence and explain the circumstances”.

In Miller v. Minister of Pensions (1947) 2 All E.R. 372 the court held that:

“…the evidence must reach the same degree of cogency as is required

in a criminal case before an accused person is found guilty. That degree

is well settled. It need not reach certainty, but it must carry high degree

of probability. Proof beyond reasonable doubt does not mean proof

beyond the shadow of a doubt. The law would fail to protect the

community if it admitted fanciful possibilities to deflect the course of

justice. If the evidence is so strong against a man as to leave only a

remote possibility in his favour which can be dismissed with the

sentence, “of course it is possible, but not in the least probable,” the case

is proved beyond reasonable doubt, but nothing short of that will

suffice”.

In The King Vs. W. P. Buckley 43 NLR 474, it was stated by Howard, C.J.:

“In arriving at a verdict of guilty, the majority of the jury must have viewed

the evidence in sections accepted and convicted the appellant on those

parts that were satisfactory and disregard those facts that pointed to the

improbability of the story put forward by the Crown. The jury should have

CA/HCC/0123-124/23

12 | P a g e

viewed the evidence as a whole. If they had done so, we are of opinion

that they must have had a reasonable doubt as to the guilt of the appellant.

The verdict is in our opinion, unreasonable, in as much as taken as a whole

the evidence does not support the conviction.”

In the case of Officer - In - Charge, Police Station Udu Dumbara Vs. U.G.

Sunil and Others (SC/APPEAL/27/2019), decided on 05.06.2024 it was

noted:

“It has been firmly established that, in a criminal case, that the charges

against the Accused should be proved beyond reasonable doubt. Proof

beyond a reasonable doubt generally means the Court must carefully

consider the entirety of admissible evidence to such scrutiny to see

whether the ingredients of the charges are proved. If the Court is not

satisfied the accused person must be acquitted.”

One extremely important metric in assessing the fairness of a trial would be

the observance of the principle of equality of arms, by both the defence as

well as the prosecution. Equality of arms refers to both parties being treated

equally, in a manner which ensures their procedural equality throughout the

trial.

In this case PW1 and PW2 are the key witnesses. If their evidence is clear,

cogent, and unambiguous, the court could without any hesitation rely on

their evidence and convict the Appellants in the absence of any

corroboration. However, due to the reasons discussed above the evidence

given by PW1 and PW2, in my view, has not passed the probability test. It is

tainted with much ambiguity and uncertainty, which definitely affects the

root of the case. Further, the prosecution has failed to call PW3, who is, in

my opinion, a very essential witness in this case.

As the prosecution had failed its duty to prove this case beyond a reasonable

doubt, I set aside the conviction and sentence imposed by the Learned High

CA/HCC/0123-124/23

13 | P a g e

Court Judge of Puttalam dated 31/05/2023 on the Appellants. Therefore,

they are acquitted from this case.

Accordingly, the appeal is allowed.

The Registrar is directed to send this judgment to the High Court of Puttalam

along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL