IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A. No. 946/98 (F)

D.C.No.Trincomalee/2337/L

In the matter of an application for

Re-listing of the appeal bearing

No. 946 j98(F)

K.B. Charles Silva of No.256,

Main Street,

Kantale.

Plaintiff

Vs.

T.H. Chandra alias

Chandrathilaka of No. 140,

Pottan Kadu Road, (Opposite

Bank of Ceylon)

Kantale.

Defendant

And

T.H. Chandra alias

Chandrathilaka of Nu. 140, Pottan Kadu Road, (Opposite

Bank of Ceylon)

Kantale.

1

Before

Defendant - Appellant

Vs.

K.B. Charles Silva of No.256,

Main Street,

Kantale.

Plaintiff - Respondent

T.H. Chandra alias

Chandrathilaka

Defendant - Appellant -Petitioner

Vs.

K.B. Charles Silva

Plaintiff - Respondent -Respondent

: W.M.M.Malinie Gunarathne, J

: P.R.Walgama, J

Counsel : Athula Perera with Chathurani de Silva for the Defendant - Appellant - Petitioner.

: Srinath Perera P.C. with Nevillie Ananda for the Respondent.

Argued on : 30.11.2015

Decided on: 28.03.2016

2

CASE-NO- CAl 946 /98 F - JUDGMENT- 28/03/2016

P.R.Walgama, J

The Defendant - Appellant - Petitioner (in short the Petitioner)

made the instant application to Court to have the

appeal relisted as the same has been dismissed by this

Court on 22.11.2011 for want of appearance of the

parties.

A schematic examination of the journal entries reveal

that on 02.10.2013 the Defendant-Appellant- Petitioner has

filed a petition and an affidavit along with the

necessary documents to have this matter relisted for

argument.

The following facts stemmed from the petition of the

Petitioner;

The Plaintiff - Respondent instituted action against the

Defendant In the District Court of Trincomalee, for a

declaration that he IS entitled to the land more fully

described in the schedule to the plaint.

At the conclusion of the trial the Learned District

Judge entered the judgment and the decree In favour

of the Plaintiff.

Being aggrieved by the said judgment the Petitioner

appealed to this Court to have the impugned judgment

set aside / vacate.

3

t!I i

1;, i-,

It IS stated by the Petitioner that he was anxlOus to

prosecute this appeal and was awaiting a notice from

this Court. Nevertheless for his dismay he received a

notice from the District Court of Trincomalee requesting

him to appear before the District C01_1rt of T!'incomelee

for the purpose of pronouncement of the Judgment of

Court of Appeal.

Pursuant to the afore said notice, when the Petitioner

went to the District Court he came to know that the

appeal has been dismissed due to the non payment of

the brief fees.

It IS viewed from the journal entries that when this

case came up on 07.10.2011 both parties were absent

and unrepresented and the Registrar of this court was

directed to re Issue notices returnable 22.11.2011 and

also the Registrar was directed to Issue notice In

terms of Rule 13(b) requesting the Appellant to pay

the brief fees on or before 08.11.2011. The said notice

has been dispatched on 25.10.2011 and it is seen from

the journal entry dated 21.11.2011 the said notice has

been returned with the endorsement " that there was

nobody came to accept the letter".

But it IS the contention of the Petitioner that he IS

residing In the same address gIven In the caption

which is No. 140, Pottan Kadu Road (opposite Bank of

Ceylon) Kantale and right throughout he IS residing In

the said address.

4

It IS also submitted by the Petitioner that the said

Bank of Ceylon Kantale Branch had been shifted

further 500 meters away from the house of the

Petitioner, and presently it IS located at Depot junction

of Kantale town.

Therefore it IS alleged by the Petitioner that the

postman has gone to a wrong address, where the

Petitioner is not residing, and the said notice has been

returned with the endorsement as stated above.

In the above setting it IS stated that the Petitioner

that he was keen to prosecute his appeal, therefore if

he had received the said notice he would have

deposited the brief fees In time. In addition to the

afore said the Petitioner stressed the fact that the

demise of his Attorney at law, he was unable to receive

any information as to the progress of the case. In

proof of the said death of the Attorney at law his

death certificate has been marked as Z and tendered

to Court.

It IS contended by the Petitioner that the Plaintiff-

Respondent had taken steps to execute the writ and

if the writ IS executed irreparable loss and damage

would be caused to the petitioner.

The substituted objection

following;

to the

Plaintiff-Respondent by way said application has stated of the

5

That the Defendant after the pronouncement of the

judgment of the District Court of Trincimalee in favour

of the Plaintiff- Respondent, the Petitioner has permitted

one Samarasekara Gunasekara Stanley and his agents

to occupy the said premises for a consideration received

by him. A-J ,. 1) ~ X7. _ I _ 1t is ~/[S/J atler 6~ 'ItA-<--f--~ pvvt ()~

A After the afore said act of the Petitioner he has been

residing at No. 85, Main Street, Kantale.

Therefore it IS said that the Petitioner has failed to

informed Court of his correct address and there by had

failed to act with due diligence. But it IS salient to

mention that said facts remaIn without any proof.

In the said backdrop it IS alleged by the Plain tiff-

Responden t that

facts from this

the Petitioner has suppressed material

Court In order to 0 btain an order

from this Court to have this matter re-listed.

It IS reiterated by the Plaintiff- Respondent that the

Petitioner has failed to bring to the nonce of this

Court the change of the residence and the fact that

the disputed land has been sold to a third party.

The Plain tiff - Respondent

the non disclosure of

alleges that, cumulative effect of

the above material facts, should

result in a refusal of the Defendant-Appellant-Petitioner's

application for the re listing of the instant appeal.

6

ii

tIIt!

I

It IS pertinent to note that as per document marked

'R1' the claimant - Petitioner has tendered a Petitioner In

the case bearing No. L/2337/86 and stated thus;

That on 28.08.2013 the fiscal of the District Court of

Kantale had moved to execute the writ In respect of

the land described In the schedule to the plaint. But

it IS the position of the Claimant that the said land

IS a state land and he has made an application for

a permit for the said land. But the claillla.1J.t ha3 not

taken the position that the said land was purchased

from the Defendant - Appellant - Petitioner.

In dealing with applications of this nature this Court

IS vested with a wide discretionary power to consider

whether or not to grant to re list the appeal. The said

rationale was observed In the case of JINADASA .VS.

SAM SILVA AND OTHERS - (1994)-1 Sri.L.R. 232 which

states thus;

"Since there IS no legislation governIng the matter

under what authority could the court have ordered the

relisting of the application, I think the Court had the

power to restore the application to the list In the

exerCIse of its inherent jurisdiction" . (emphasis added)

Further it is handed down in the said judgment that;

"I have pointed out later on my judgment that a

Court ought not to be too severe and ngorous In

exerCISIng its powers relating to reinstatement, but

7

rather that it should be generous. Yet it is an entirely

different matter to hold that a court must be

prepossessed with a favourable opInIOn with regard to

an absent party. The burden of alleging and provIng

the existence of facts on the basis of which a court

may decide that there IS a good cause for absence

rests on the absent party who seeks reinstatemen t." .

Thus In the above exposition of the fact and law I

am compelled to hold with the Defendant - Appellant -

Petitioner by allowing the application for relisting.

Accordingly Petitioner's application allowed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

W.M.M.Malinie Gunarathne, J I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

8

t

i

"