CA/PHC/0160/2019

Page 1 of 21

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Appeal under and in terms of Article 138 read with Article 154(P)6 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

E. M. S. P. Ekanayake, Divisional Secretary, Weerambugedra.

Plaintiff Vs.

Dewathaapedigedara Nishanthi Ranasinghe, Nimal Stores, Wehera, Wadakada.

Respondent

Dewathaapedigedara Nishanthi Ranasinghe, Nimal Stores, Wehera, Wadakada.

Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant Vs.

Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12.

Court of Appeal Case No:CA/PHC/0160/2019 High Court Revision Application No: HCR 12/2018 Kurunegala MC Case No of: 96057

CA/PHC/0160/2019

Page 2 of 21

E. M. S. P. Ekanayake, Divisional Secretary, Weerambugedra.

Plaintiff-Respondents AND NOW BETWEEN

Dewathaapedigedara Nishanthi Ranasinghe, Nimal Stores, Wehera, Wadakada.

Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant Vs. Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12.

E. M. S. P. Ekanayake, Divisional Secretary, Weerambugedra.

Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondents Before: D. THOTAWATTA, J. K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J. Counsel: Nuwan Bopage with Hansaka Chandrasinghe for the Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant. D. Sampath, S.C. for the Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent.

CA/PHC/0160/2019

Page 3 of 21

Argued on : 28.05.2025 Written Submissions of the Respondent-Petitioner -Appellant tendered on : 17.02.2023 and 21.08.2025 Written Submissions of the Plaintiff-Respondent -Respondents tendered on : 08.11.2023 Decided on : 19.09.2025

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

This is an appeal filed before this Court by the Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant

(hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the Appellant’) against the order of the

learned High Court Judge of the North Western Province holden in Kurunegala

dated 04.10.2019 made in revision application bearing No. HCR 12/18.

The facts relevant to the instant appeal as can be gathered from the petition of

appeal, may be briefly, set out as follows;

The 2nd Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter called and referred to as

‘the 2nd Respondent’) had made an application to the Magistrate Court of

Kurunegala in case bearing No. 96057 under and in terms of the provisions of

Section 5 of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act No. 07 of 1979 (as

amended) (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the Act’) for the eviction of the

Appellant from a State Land called ‘Thambilikotuwewatta’ as morefully

described in the schedule to the application (hereinafter called and referred to

as the ‘State Land’). The Appellant who appeared before the Magistrate Court of

Kurunegala in pursuant to the summons issued on her by Court to appear and

show cause against the application made to Court by the 2nd Respondent

under Section 5 of the Act for her eviction from the State Land, had shown

cause on the premise that the original owner of the land from which her

CA/PHC/0160/2019

Page 4 of 21

eviction was sought in the said application was one Mr. E. A. S. Munasinghe

who had by virtue of deed bearing No. 12286, dated 23.09.1935, donated 1½

acres therefrom to Sawandena Government School; that the middle portion of

the remainder of the land had by 2 deeds bearing Nos. 1236 and 6775 dated

03.10.2014 and 08.02.2015 respectively, been sold by the said Mr. E. A. S.

Munasinghe to the daughter of the caretaker of the land (X6 & X7) and prior to

the execution of the said deeds, Mr. E. A. S. Munasinghe had obtained an

opinion from the Ayurvedic Department wherein, the Ayurvedic Commissioner

had clearly, given his consent to the said transaction; that it had been

properly, informed to the Divisional Secretary by letter marked X2; that the

land which had been so donated to the Government School had subsequently,

been gifted by the said Mr. E. A. S. Munasinghe to Ayurvedic Department by

virtue of the deed of gift bearing No.7449, dated 28.01.2009 (X3); that in terms

of the said deeds, the land which had been so purchased by the Appellant had

been identified as “Divulgahakumbura”, however, the land from which her

eviction was sought had been identified as “Thambilikotuwewatta” and not

“Divulgahakumbura”, and hence, the Divisional Secretary had failed to identify

the subject matter; that furthermore, Mr. A. H. S. Wijesinghe, then, Divisional

Secretary of Weerambugedra had issued a letter (X1) stating that the land from

which her eviction was sought, had not been acquired by the State and hence,

problematic issue had arisen as to the present ownership thereof, but,

however, the Divisional Secretary of Weerambugedra had made the said

application to the learned Magistrate of Kurunegala for her eviction therefrom

without considering the matters stated in the said letter (X1) by the then,

Divisional Secretary of Weerambugedra-Mr. A. H. S. Wijesinghe; that in the

premise, the Appellant had duly, become the owner of the land occupied by

her; that, in the circumstances, the Land from which her eviction had been

sought by the 2nd Respondent, had not been correctly, identified by him in his

application made to Court under Section 5 of the Act and hence, the Appellant

CA/PHC/0160/2019

Page 5 of 21

is not liable to be ejected from the land belonging to her. and therefore, it

should be dismissed.

However, the learned Additional Magistrate of Kurunegala in his order dated

11.05.2018 had having rejected the showing cause of the Appellant, proceeded

to grant the application directing eviction of the Appellant from the State Land

by inter-alia, holding that the Appellant too, who had maintained that the 2nd

Respondent had not properly, identified the State Land, had not properly,

identified the land claimed by her, namely; ‘Divulgahakumbura presently,

highland’ by way of a plan prepared by a Surveyor.

Being aggrieved by the said order of the learned Additional Magistrate of

Kurunegala dated 11.05.2018, the Appellant had invoked the extra-ordinary

revisionary jurisdiction of the High Court of the North Central Province holden

in Kurunegala seeking to revise and set aside it. Learned High Court Judge of

the North Central Province holden in Kurunegala had by the order dated

04.10.2019, dismissed the application in revision by holding that the order

sought to be revised is not contrary to law. Hence, the instant appeal arises

therefrom.

The principal position so adverted to by the Appellant before the Magistrate

Court of Kurunegala is that the land in question is not a state land as referred

to in the said application made to it by the 2nd Respondent under Section 5 of

the Act, namely; “Thambilikotuwewatta” but, a private land called

“Divulgahakumbura now, high land” as referred to in the title deeds marked

(X6 and X7) and relied on by the Appellant which according to her, belongs to

her in terms of the pedigree pleaded in her showing cause in the Magistrate

Court of Kurunegala, and in the circumstances, the 2nd Respondent had not

identified the land in question correctly, and as such the Appellant is not liable

to be ejected therefrom and therefore, the said application ought to be

dismissed.

CA/PHC/0160/2019

Page 6 of 21

It is in this context, I would think it expedient at this juncture to examine the

structure and/or the scheme embodied in the Act and the provisions contained

therein with regard to an application that may be made to a Magistrate Court

by a competent authority under section 5 thereof for the eviction of a person

who is in unauthorized possession or occupation of a state land and for the

recovery of the same.

Section 3 of the Act enacts thus;

“3. (1) Where a competent authority is of the opinion

(a) that any land is State land; and

(b) that any person is in unauthorized possession or occupation of such land, the competent authority may serve a notice on such person in possession or occupation thereof, or where the competent authority considers such service impracticable or inexpedient, exhibit such notice in a conspicuous place in or upon that land requiring such person to vacate such land with his dependants, if any, and to deliver vacant possession of such land to such competent authority or other authorized person as may be specified in the notice on or before a specified date. The date to be specified in such notice shall be a date not less than thirty days from the date of the issue or the exhibition of such notice.

(1A) No person shall be entitled to any hearing or to make any representation in respect of a notice under subsection (1).

(2) Every notice under subsection (1) issued in respect of any State land is in this Act referred to as a "quit notice ".

(3) A quit notice in respect of any State land shall be deemed to have been served on the person in possession or occupation thereof if such notice is sent by registered post.

(4) Every quit notice shall be in Form A set out in the Schedule to this Act.”

Section 4 of the Act deals with the obligation to comply with a quit notice and it

enacts thus;

CA/PHC/0160/2019

Page 7 of 21

“4. Where a quit notice has been served or exhibited under section 3 (a)

the person in possession or occupation of the land to whom such notice

relates or any dependants of such person shall not be entitled to possess

or occupy such land after the date specified in such notice or to object to

such notice on any ground whatsoever except as provided for in section

9, (b) the person in possession or occupation shall together with his

dependants, if any, duly vacate such land and deliver vacant possession

thereof to the competent authority or person to whom he is required to

do so by such notice.”

Section 5 of the Act deals with the effect of non-compliance with a quit notice

and it enacts thus;

5. (1) Where any person fails to comply with the notice provisions of

section 4 (b) in respect of any quit notice issued or exhibited or

purporting to have been issued or exhibited under this Act, any

competent authority (whether he is or not the competent authority who

issued or exhibited such notice) may make an application in writing in

the Form B set out in the Schedule to this Act to the Magistrate's Court

within whose local jurisdiction such land or any part thereof is situated

(a) setting forth the following matters (i) that he is a competent authority

for the purposes of this Act. (ii) that the land described in the schedule to

the application is in his opinion State land, (iii) that a quit notice was

issued on the person in possession or occupation of such land or was

exhibited in a conspicuous place in or upon such land, (iv) that such

person named in the application is in his opinion in unauthorized

possession or occupation of such land and has failed to comply with the

provisions of the aforesaid paragraph (b) of section 4 in respect of such

notice relating to such land, and

(b) praying for the recovery of possession of such land and for an order of

ejectment of such person in possession or occupation and his

CA/PHC/0160/2019

Page 8 of 21

dependants, if any, from such land. (2) Every such application under

subsection (1) shall be supported by an affidavit in the Form C set out in

the Schedule to this Act verifying to the matters set forth in such

application and shall be accompanied by a copy of the quit notice. (3)

Every application supported by an affidavit and accompanied by a copy

of the quit notice under the preceding provisions of this section shall be

referred to as an " application for ejectment ". (4) No stamp duties shall

be payable for any application for ejectment.

Section 6 of the Act deals with the role of a Magistrate upon receipt of an

application made under section 5 thereof and it enacts thus;

“6. (1) Upon receipt of the application made under section 5, the

Magistrate shall forthwith issue summons on the person named in the

application to appear and show cause on the date specified in such

summons (being a date not later than two weeks from the date of issue of

such summons) why such person and his dependants, if any, should not

be ejected from the land as prayed for in the application for ejectment.

(2) The provisions contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure Act shall,

mutatis mutandis, apply to the issue of summons referred to in

subsection (1) and the service thereof and other steps necessary for

securing the attendance of the person summoned.”

Section 7 of the Act, makes provisions for an order for ejectment where no

cause is shown and it reads thus;

“7. If on the date specified in the summons issued under section 6 the

person on whom such summons was issued fails to appear or informs

the Court that he has no cause to show against the order for ejectment,

the Court shall forthwith issue an order directing such person and his

dependants, if any, to be ejected forthwith from the land.”

CA/PHC/0160/2019

Page 9 of 21

Section 8 of the Act, makes provisions as to the inquiry if cause is shown and it

enacts thus;

“8. (1) If a person on whom summons has been served under section 6

appears on the date specified in such summons and states that he has

cause to show against the issue of an order for ejectment the Magistrate's

Court may proceed forthwith to hear and determine the matter or may

set the case for inquiry on a later date.

(2) Where any application for ejectment has been made to a Magistrate's

Court, the Magistrate shall give priority over all other business of that

Court, to the hearing and disposal of such application, except when

circumstances render it necessary for such other business to be disposed

of earlier.”

Section 9 of the Act deals with the scope of inquiry and it reads thus;

“9. (1) At such inquiry the person on whom summons under section 6

has been served shall not be entitled to contest any of the matters

stated in the application under section 5 except that such person

may establish that he is in possession or occupation of the land

upon a valid permit or other written authority of the State granted

in accordance with any written law and that such permit or

authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered invalid.

(2) It shall not be competent to the Magistrate's Court to call for any

evidence from the competent authority in support of the application

under section 5.” [Emphasis is mine]

Section 10 of the Act makes provisions for order of ejectment and it reads as

follows;

“10. (1) If after inquiry the Magistrate is not satisfied that the person

showing cause is entitled to the possession or occupation of the land he

shall make order directing such person and his dependants, if any, in

CA/PHC/0160/2019

Page 10 of 21

occupation of such land to be ejected forthwith from such land. (2) No

appeal shall lie against any order of ejectment made by a Magistrate

under subsection (1).

(2) No appeal shall lie against any order of ejectment made by a

Magistrate under subsection (1).”

Upon an analysis of section 3 of the Act in conjunction with sections 9(1)

which enacts that “At such inquiry the person on whom summons under

section 6 has been served shall not be entitled to contest any of the

matters stated in the application under section 5 except that such person

may establish that he is in possession or occupation of the land upon a

valid permit or other written authority of the State granted in accordance

with any written law and that such permit or authority is in force and not

revoked or otherwise rendered invalid” and 9(2) thereof, which enacts “It

shall not be competent to the Magistrate's Court to call for any evidence

from the competent authority in support of the application under section

5.” it would become manifest that where the competent authority is of the

opinion that; a) any land is state land, and b) that any person is in

unauthorized possession or occupation of such land, the competent

authority may serve a notice by any of the modes set out therein on such

person in possession or occupation thereof, requiring such person to vacate

such land with his dependents if any, and to deliver vacant possession of such

land to competent authority or any other authorized person as may be specified

in the notice on or before a specified date to be specified therein; and that at

such inquiry the person on whom summons under section 6 has been

served shall not be entitled to contest any of the matters stated in the

application under section 5 except that such person may establish that he

is in possession or occupation of the land upon a valid permit or other

written authority of the State granted in accordance with any written law

and that such permit or authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise

CA/PHC/0160/2019

Page 11 of 21

rendered invalid; and that It shall not be competent to the Magistrate's

Court to call for any evidence from the competent authority in support of

the application under section 5.

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in Farook vs. Gunewardene-Government

Agent, Amparai 1980 (2) SLR 243, at pages 245 and 246 that, “Section 9(2)

is to the effect that the Magistrate cannot call for any evidence from the

competent authority in support of the application under section 5, which

means that the Magistrate cannot call upon the competent authority to prove

that the land described in the schedule to the application is a State Land

(Section 5(1)(a)(ii))......The structure of the Act would also make it appear that

where the competent authority had formed the opinion that any land is state

land, even, the Magistrate is not competent to question his opinion. Alternative

relief is given by section 12 which empowers any person claiming to be the

owner of a land to institute action against state for the vindication of his title

within 6 months from the date of the order of ejectment and section 13 is to the

effect that where action is instituted by a person, if a decision is made in favour

of that person, he will be entitled to recover reasonable compensation for the

damage sustained by the reason of his having been compelled to deliver

possession of such land...”.

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA/PHC/41/2010 decided on

31.01.2017 that, “The party noticed is not entitled to challenge the opinion of

the competent authority on any of the matters stated in the application....By

this amendment, the opinion of the competent authority in relation to the state

land was made unquestionable....”.

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA (PHC) APN 29/2016-decided on

09.07.2018 that, “....He cannot contest any of the matters stated in the

application made under section 5 of the Act. One of the matters required to be

stated in the application is that the land described in the schedule to the

application is in the opinion of the competent authority state land. This fact

CA/PHC/0160/2019

Page 12 of 21

cannot be contested by the person summoned....Hence, a dispute on the

identity of the land cannot arise for consideration of the learned Magistrate.

The identity of the land can arise for consideration only to the extent of

examining whether the valid permit or other written authority produced by the

party summoned is in relation to the state land described in the application.

Where it is not the Magistrate must issue an order of eviction in terms of the

Act...”

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA(PHC)48/2016-decided on

02.09.2025 that, “Under section 9 of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession)

Act, as amended in 1983, the competent authority’s opinion that land is a

‘state land’ is conclusive and not open to judicial challenge at the ejectment

stage and the only permissible defence available to an occupier is to prove

possession or occupation under a valid permit or written authority issued by

the state with the burden of proof resting on the occupier, whose failure to

establish such authority would necessitate an order of ejectment.”

Upon a plain reading of section 3(1) of the Act together with section 9(2) thereof

and the judicial precedents referred to above, it becomes abundantly, clear

that, where the competent authority had formed the opinion that any land is

state land, even, the Magistrate is not competent to question his opinion and

therefore, not open to judicial challenge at the ejectment stage in an

application made to Court by a competent authority under section 5 of the Act.

In the light of the law set out in section 3(1) of the Act to be read with sections

9(1) and 9(2) thereof and in the light of the law established by the judicial

precedents as referred to above, it is my considered view that a dispute as to

the identity of the land-the subject matter of the application under section 5 of

the Act, is wholly, foreign and utterly alien to a proceedings that may be

initiated before a Magistrate Court by a competent authority for eviction of a

person who in his opinion, is in unauthorized possession or occupation of a

land which in his opinion, is state land and therefore, such a defence to an

CA/PHC/0160/2019

Page 13 of 21

application made to Court by a competent authority under section 5 of the Act

is wholly, untenable in law, and therefore, not in any manner available to such

a person who in his opinion of the competent authority, is in unauthorized

possession or occupation of a state land for; the Legislature in enacting section

9 of the Act had never intended a defence as such to be made available to a

person as such except only, for the defence expressly, and explicitly, made

available therein.

There is a further point which would in my opinion, fortify and strengthen my

view taken as aforesaid and let me now, examine it.

Upon a careful analysis of the Act, it becomes abundantly, clear that “Urgency”

appears to be the hallmark of this Act as observed by this Court in Farook vs.

Gunewardene-Government Agent, Amparai (Supra). Under section 3, 30

days notice shall be given. Under section 4, the person in possession is not

entitled to object to notice on any ground whatsoever except as provided for in

section 9 and the person who is in possession is required to vacate the land

within the month specified by the notice. Under section 6, the Magistrate is

required to issue summons forthwith to appear and show cause on a date not

later than two weeks from the date of issue of such summons. Under section

8(2) the Magistrate is required to give priority over all other business of that

court. Under section 9, the party noticed can raise objections only on the basis

of a valid permit issued by the State. Under section 10, if the Magistrate is not

satisfied, “he shall make order directing ejectment forthwith and no appeal

shall lie against the order of ejectment. Under section 17, the provisions of this

Act have effect notwithstanding anything contained in any written law.

Besides, it was inter-alia, held by the Supreme Court in Senanayake Vs.

Damunupola-1982 (2) SLR 621 that, “The scope of the State Land (Recovery

of Possession) Act was to provide a speedy or summary mode of getting back

possession or occupation of ‘State Land’ as defined in the Act”, which was cited

CA/PHC/0160/2019

Page 14 of 21

with approval by this Court in case bearing No. CA (PHC) 140/2013-decided

on 10.10.2019.

Hence, it becomes abundantly, clear upon a careful analysis of sections 9(1)

and 9(2) of the Act in particular that the Legislature in enacting this special

piece of legislation, had never intended for a protracted trial to be held by a

Magistrate in an application made to it by a competent authority under section

5 of the Act when it had enacted section 9 thereto expressly, and explicitly,

setting out in unambiguous terms the scope of such an inquiry.

In the light of the above, the scope of the State Land (Recovery of Possession)

Act is to provide a speedy or summary mode of getting back possession or

occupation of ‘State Land’ as defined in the Act as explicitly, observed by the

Supreme Court in the decision in Senanayake Vs. Damunupola (Supra).

The learned Counsel for the Appellant sought to contend by relying on the

decision of this Court in CA/WRT/293/2017-decided on 18.11.2019 that the

2nd Respondent being the competent authority had failed to comply with the

fundamental requirement under the Act in that he had failed to form an

opinion that the land in question constitutes State Land and that without such

a determination the very foundation for issuing a quit notice is absent for; the

competent authority must be satisfied prior to initiating proceedings that the

State is lawfully, entitled to the land and in the present instance, there is no

material to demonstrate that the 2nd Respondent had discharged this obligation

and in the result, the procedure adopted by the 2nd Respondent is vitiated by

non-compliance with the mandatory precondition and therefore, the absence of

a lawful finding that the land belongs to the State renders the purported quit

notice invalid and of no effect (Vide-paragraphs 22 to 25 of the written

submissions of the Appellant dated 21.08.2025.)

In my view, the contention so advanced by the learned Counsel for the

Appellant is not entitled to succeed in law at least for two reasons; one being

that the decision relied on by the learned Counsel for the Appellant was a

CA/PHC/0160/2019

Page 15 of 21

decision made by this Court in a Writ application and the key considerations in

Writ jurisdiction are totally, different from the key considerations in an

application under section 5 of the Act and therefore, the facts of the case relied

on by the learned Counsel can be clearly, distinguishable from the facts of the

instant case and therefore, the decision relied on by the learned Counsel for

the Appellant has if I may say so respectfully, no bearing on the facts of the

instant application made to Court by the 2nd Respondent being the competent

authority under section 5 of the Act; and the other reason being that the

opinion of the competent authority that the land in dispute is State Land,

cannot be questioned by a person summoned to show cause under section 6 of

the Act, in view of the provisions in section 3, sections, 9(1) and 9(2) of the Act.

I would therefore, find myself unable to agree with the contention so advanced

by the learned Counsel for the Appellant for; it cannot sustain in law and as

such it ought to be rejected in-limine.

In view of the law set out above, the Appellant in the instant appeal cannot in

any manner, contest any of the matters stated in the application made under

section 5 of the Act by the 2nd Respondent to the Magistrate Court of

Kurunegala. One of the matters so required to be stated in the application

under section 5 of the Act is that the land described in the schedule to the

application, namely; “Thambilikotuwewatta” is in the opinion of the 2nd

Respondent being the competent authority, State Land. This fact, namely; that

“Thambilikotuwewatta” is in the opinion of the 2nd Respondent being the

competent authority, State Land, cannot in any manner, be contested by the

Appellant who was summoned under section 6 of the Act in view of sections,

9(1) and 9(2) of the Act and hence, dispute on the identity of the land morefully

described in the schedule to the instant application made to Court by the 2nd

Respondent, being the competent authority under section 5 of the Act, namely;

whether the land stated in the instant application namely;

Thambilikotuwewatta, is not state land but a private land called

CA/PHC/0160/2019

Page 16 of 21

“Divulgahakumbura now, high land” as raised by the Appellant in his showing

cause before the Magistrate Court of Kurunegala, cannot in law, raised by him

for consideration of the learned Magistrate of Kurunegala for; she has

expressly, been prevented and precluded by sections 9(1) and 9(2) of the Act by

raising a contest as such inasmuch as this is an issue to be adjudicated upon

in appropriate proceedings by a Court of competent jurisdiction for; such a

dispute as to the identity of the land in question, is utterly, foreign and alien

to proceedings as such initiated by the competent authority under section 5 of

the Act.

Hence, I would hold that, the dispute raised by the Appellant in the Magistrate

Court as to the identity of the land in question ought to fail in law as rightly,

held by the learned Additional Magistrate of Kurunegala.

The question that would next, arise for our consideration is as to the scope of

the inquiry in proceedings that may be initiated by a competent authority

under section 5 of the Act in a Magistrate Court and section 9 of the Act sets

out the scope of the inquiry and it may be reproduced verbatim the same as

follows;

“9. (1) At such inquiry the person on whom summons under section 6

has been served shall not be entitled to contest any of the matters

stated in the application under section 5 except that such person

may establish that he is in possession or occupation of the land

upon a valid permit or other written authority of the State granted

in accordance with any written law and that such permit or

authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered invalid.

(2) It shall not be competent to the Magistrate's Court to call for any

evidence from the competent authority in support of the application

under section 5.” [Emphasis is mine]

CA/PHC/0160/2019

Page 17 of 21

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in Farook vs. Gunewardene-Government

Agent, Amparai (Supra) that, “At the inquiry before the Magistrate, the only

plea by way of defence that the Petitioner can put forward is that he is in

possession or occupation of the land upon a valid permit or other written

authority of the State granted in accordance with any written law and that

such permit or authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered

invalid.”

It was inter-alia, held in Muhandiram v. Chairman, No. 111, Janatha

EstateDevelopment Board 1992 (1) SLR 110 at page 112 that, “Under

section 9(1) of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act No. 7 of 1979, the

person on whom summons has been served (in this instance, the Respondent-

Petitioner) shall not be entitled to contest any of the matters stated in the

application under section 5 except that such person may establish that he is in

possession or occupation of the land upon a valid permit or other written

authority of the State granted in accordance with any written law and that

such permit or written authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise

rendered invalid...... The said section clearly reveals that at an inquiry of this

nature, the person on whom the summons has been served has to establish

that his possession or occupation is upon a valid permit or other written

authority of the State granted according to the written law. The burden of proof

of that fact lies on that particular person on whom the summons has been

served and appears before the relevant Court.”.

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA/PHC/41/2010(Supra) that, “Under

section 9 of the State Land (Recovery of Possession) Act, the scope of the

inquiry is limited to the person noticed to establish he is not in unauthorized

occupation or possession by establishing that;

1. Occupying the land on a permit or a written authority.

2. It must be a valid permit or a written authority.

3. It must be in force at the time of presenting it to Court.

CA/PHC/0160/2019

Page 18 of 21

4. It must have been issued in accordance with any written law.”

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA (PHC) APN 29/2016(Supra) that, “A

person who has been summoned in terms of section 6 of the Act can only

establish that, he is in possession or occupation of the land upon a valid

permit or other written authority of the State granted in accordance with any

written law and that such permit or authority is in force and not revoked or

otherwise rendered invalid. He cannot contest any of the matters stated in the

application under section 5 of the Act.”

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA(PHC)48/2016 (Supra) that, “.... the

only defence available is to prove possession is upon a valid permit or written

authority, issued in accordance with law, and which should be in force....”.

In the light of the law set out in section 9 of the Act and the judicial precedent

referred to above, at an inquiry of this nature, the person on whom the

summons has been served (in this instance the Appellant) has to establish that

her possession or occupation is upon a valid permit or other written authority

of the State granted according to the written law and that such permit or

written authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered invalid.

It is significant to observe that, it had never been the position of the Appellant

taken up in the Magistrate Court that her possession or occupation of the land

in dispute which in the opinion of the 2nd Respondent being the competent

authority is State Land, namely; “Thambilikotuwewatta”, is upon a valid

permit or other written authority of the State granted according to the written

law and that such permit or written authority is in force and not revoked or

otherwise rendered invalid, but, a private land called “Divulgahakumbura

now, highland” which belongs to her in terms of the pedigree recited in her

showing cause (X6 and X7).

The 2nd Respondent being the competent authority had identified the State

Land as being lot ‘A’ of the land called “Thambilikotuwewatta” in extent of

CA/PHC/0160/2019

Page 19 of 21

0.1887 Hectares (1 Rood, 34.60 Perches) as morefully, shown and depicted in

the Extract bearing No. 2016/42 made and prepared by A. H. K. Wijayathilake,

Surveyor attached to Land Commissioner’s Department as being a part of lot 1

of the plan bearing No. PPA1756 made and prepared by Surveyor-General.

Hence, the Appellant’s argument that the land had not been properly identified

by the 2nd Respondent being the competent authority cannot sustain at least,

for two reasons; one being that, she is precluded by sections 9(1) and 9(2) of

the Act from raising such a contest as to the identity of the land-the subject

matter of the application made to Court by the 2nd Respondent being the

competent authority; the other being that although the 2nd Respondent-being

the competent authority does not have any burden in an inquiry before the

Magistrate so to do, nevertheless, the land in dispute had been properly

identified by the 2nd Respondent being the competent authority with reference

to a plan previously, made and prepared by the Surveyor-General and then, by

the extract made and prepared by the Surveyor attached to the Land

Commissioner’s Department.

Conversely, the Appellant had not even made any attempt at least, to

superimpose the land claimed by her as a private land belonging to her as

aforesaid on the State Land as morefully shown and depicted in those two plan

and the extract as enumerated above to establish her assertion that it was not

a State Land called “Thambilikotuwewatta” but, the land called

“Divulgahakumbura now, highland”.

On the other hand, the 2nd Respondent being the competent authority had

already formed the opinion that the land-the subject matter of the application,

is a State Land and that the Appellant is in unauthorized possession or

occupation therein. However, it is significant to observe that, not an iota of

evidence had been adduced by the Appellant to establish that she is in

possession or occupation of the State Land upon a valid permit or other written

authority of the State, granted in accordance with any written law and that

CA/PHC/0160/2019

Page 20 of 21

such permit or authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered

invalid as required by section 9 of the Act. Hence, the Appellant did not have

semblance of such a permit or authority as envisaged by section 9 of the Act.

In view of the above, it clearly, appears to me that the Appellant had adduced

not even an iota of evidence to satisfy the learned Additional Magistrate of

Kurunegala that she was entitled to the possession or occupation of the State

Land as rightly, held by the learned Additional Magistrate of Kurunegala.

Hence, I would hold that the learned Additional Magistrate of Kurunegala was

entirely, justified both in fact and law in making an order directing the

Appellant and her dependents, if any, in occupation of the State Land as

morefully, described in the schedule to the application made to Court by the

2nd Respondent being the competent authority namely;

“Thambilikotuwewatta” to be ejected forthwith therefrom.

In the circumstances, I would see no error both in fact and law in the order of

the learned Additional Magistrate of Kurunegala and therefore, it can sustain

both in fact and law as rightly, held by the learned High Court Judge of the

North Western Province holden in Kurunegala.

Hence, I would see no error both in fact and law in the order of the learned

High Court Judge of the North Western Province holden in Kurunegala too,

when she had proceeded to dismiss the application in revision filed by the

Appellant before the High Court inviting it to invoke its extra-ordinary

revisionary jurisdiction to revise and set aside the order of the learned

Additional Magistrate of Kurunegala by holding that, the order sought to be

revised is not contrary to law.

In view of the foregoing, I would hold that, the instant appeal is not entitled to

succeed both in fact and law.

Hence, I would proceed to dismiss the instant appeal with costs of this court

and the courts below.

CA/PHC/0160/2019

Page 21 of 21

In the result, I would affirm the orders of both the learned High Court Judge of

the North Western Province holden in Kurunegala and the learned Additional

Magistrate of Kurunegala.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL