IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

CA. PHC 140/05

PHC Balapitiya 577/2004

MC Balapitiya 51962

Godahewa Malinie,

No. 38, Halwatht;l.ra Housing Scheme, Ambalangoda.

RESPONDENT-PETITIONER-APPELLANT

Vs

Chairman, Urban Council, Ambalangoda.

PETITIONER-RESPONDENT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE: A.W.A.SALAM, J & MALINIE GUNARATNE, J

COUNSEL: Mewan Bandara for the Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant Mrs. Nilmini Arumapperuma for the Petitioner-Respondent -Respondent

ARGUED ON : 31.03.2014

DECIDED ON: 29.08.2014

Page 11

lIt

\

iI

(ri

r

!

(

I

A.W.A. Salam, J (PICA)

This appeal has been filed against the

judgment of the learned High Court Judge

dated 3 June 2005. The said judgment has

been delivered consequent upon a revision

application filed by the respondent-petitioner-

appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

"appellant") against the order of the learned

Magistrate allowing an application filed by the

Petitioner-Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter

referred to as the "respondent") seeking an order of

demolition of a building said to have been constructed

by the appellant in violation of the Provisions of the

Urban Development Authority Act.

The impugned order of the learned Magistrate has

been challenged in the High Court mainly on two

.grounds. They are as follows ....

1. That no notice has been issued against the person responsible for the construction of the un au thorised building under and in terms of Section 28 (b) (1) of the relevant Act. 2. That the application made by the respondent to the Magistrate's Court has not been filed by way of a petition and affidavit.

It was urged before the learned High Court Judge that

the order for the demolition of the building In

Page I 2

IlI

Ij!i

i

!

I

question had been entered without the learned

Magistrate having ascertained the credibility of the

information furnished in the said affidavits. The

learned High Court Judge dealing with this ground, Page 13

correctly stated that the Magistrate was not bound by

the law to ascertain the credibility of the content of

the said affidavits for two reasons. Firstly, that no

evidence is allowed to be called or n~cessary to

ascertain the correctness of the contents of the

affidavit when proceedings are filed under the relevant

Act. Secondly, that they had been no proper proof of

the notice having been served on the respondents.

As regards the failure on the part of the respondent to

issue notice on the appellant, the learned High Court

Judge has summed up that it is rather a technical

objection than an objection based strictly on law.

Another objection raised at the argument related to

the question of delegation of power to institute

proceeding of this nature against persons

contravening the provisions of the UDA Act. In this

respect, the respondent has adverted us to the

judgment In Kuragamage Harischandra Perera,

Municipal Engineer's Department (planning) Vs

Muniyadi Paneer Selwam SC Appeal No. 12309- SC

Special Leave Application No. 139/09 -SC Minute

I

I

dated 18.01.2012 in which the Supreme Court held

inter alia that the powers given to the UDA as

contained in Section 28A of the UDA Act may be

considered as falling within the scope of "planning" Page 14

and consequently such powers can be delegated in

terms of Section 23 (5) of the UDA Act.

As was observed by the Supreme C~urt in the

aforementioned case the intention of the' legislature by

bringing In Section 28A IS to ensure the

implementation of the development plan. Whenever

any person fails to comply with the notice received

under 28A (1) of the UDA Act may apply to the

Magistrate in terms of subsection 3 (a) to obtain a

mandatory order authorising the UDA to give effect to

such notice and such mandatory order may permit

the UDA to demolish a building or alter such building

in accordance with the permit.

Taking into consideration the draconian Legislation, I

am of the opinion that the learned High Court Judge

cannot be faulted for his judgment refusing the

revision application, on the basis that no exceptional

circumstances have been established for him to

exercise the discretionary powers of revision.

In the circumstances, the appeal filed by the appellant

stands dismissed. There shall be no costs.

~~~ .. Presidentj Court of Appeal

Malinie Gunaratne, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

KRLj-

Page I 5