IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Wijesinghe Arachchige Don Nadeeja

Wijesinghe,

No. 457/1,

Mawaramandiya,

Siyambalape.

Substituted Plaintiff Appellant

CASE NO: CA/373/1999/F

DC GAMPAHA CASE NO: 26937/L

Vs.

Amitha Luxmi Kalugampitiya,

No. 225,

Ihala Biyanwila,

Kadawatha.

And Several Others

Defendants Respondents

Before: A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Athula Perera for the Plaintiff-Appellant.

S.A.D.S. Suraweera for the Defendant-

Respondents.

Argued on: 04.09.2019

Decided on: 19.09.2019

2

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The plaintiff filed this action in the District Court against the 1st-

5th defendants seeking ejectment of them from the house in Lot

No.10 of Plan marked P4 at the trial1 and damages. The defendants

filed the answer seeking bare dismissal of the action without

making a claim in reconvention. However, at the trial, several

issues have been raised on behalf of the defendants seeking

substantive reliefs not prayed for in the prayer to the answer. This

has been rightly objected to2, but the learned District Judge,

without giving any reason whatsoever, has accepted them.3 I

totally disapprove that course of action, which is not in

consonance with the law. The defendants, by way of issues, have,

inter alia, claimed the land on (a) co-ownership and (b)

prescription.4 The learned District Judge, in the Judgment, has

answered those issues in favour of the defendants and dismissed

the plaintiffs action with costs. It is against this Judgment, the

plaintiff has filed this appeal.

At the trial, on behalf of the plaintiff, the plaintiff and the surveyor

who prepared Plan P4, have given evidence. The plaintiffs case

has been closed reading in evidence P1-P5 without any objection.

On behalf of the defendants, only the 3rd defendant has given

evidence. The defendants case has been closed reading in

evidence document marked D1.

1 Vide 1st admission at page 60 of the Brief. 2 Vide page 63 of the Brief. 3 Vide JE No.26 at page 20 of the Brief. 4 Vide issue Nos. 14-16 at page 62 of the Brief.

3

It is the case of the plaintiff that at one point Marthelis was the

owner of the land where the house in suit is standing by virtue of

Deeds marked P1 and P2, and thereafter, Marthelis gifted the land

including the house (excluding undivided Acre) to him by Deed

marked P3 subject to the life interest of Marthelis. The wife has

predeceased Marthelis and they have had no children. Marthelis

has died in 1973. It is the position of the plaintiff that the

defendants were permissive occupiers of the house as licensees,

first under Marthelis, and after the death of Marthelis, under him.

The fact that Marathelis was the owner of the land including the

house and thereafter Marathelis gifted aforementioned undivided

rights to the plaintiff was admitted or not contested by the 3rd

defendant in her evidence.5 Deeds P1-P3 tendered to prove the said

transactions were not marked subject to proof. The plaintiffs

undivided rights to the land by Deed P3 is therefore established.

The plaintiff is a co-owner of the land.

The 1st defendant who had been living in the house has died

pending action. She had been unmarried6, and after her death,

case has proceeded against the remaining defendants.7 She was

the elder sister of the 3rd defendants father, Johannas.8 The 2nd-

5th defendants are siblings.

I must emphasize that only the 3rd defendant gave evidence at the

trial. The 3rd defendant in her evidence has stated that she claims

the property on her fathers rights.9 But when questioned how her

5 Vide pages 119 and 124 of the Brief. 6 Vide page 127 of the Brief. 7 Vide JE No.53 at page 29 of the Brief. 8 Vide page 122 of the Brief. 9 Vide pages 116, 117, 129 of the Brief.

4

father got rights, she has failed to explain it.10 It appears that she

claims rights on inheritance. That claim is entirely based on the

premise that the land was subject to fidei commissum created by

the Last Will of John Appuhamy, onetime owner of the property.

At the argument before this Court, learned counsel for the

defendants candidly admitted that, in the facts and circumstances

of this case, there is no room for creation of a fidei commissum.

Therefore, the learned counsel for the defendants admitted that the

defendants claim for co-ownership of the land is unsustainable.

Hence it is clear that the learned District Judge has erred on that

vital matter. The Judgment of the District Court is based on the

premise that the defendants are co-owners of the land on fidei

commissum created by the Last Will. The defendants are not co-

owners of the land.

The submission of the learned counsel for the defendants is that

the defendants were even born in this house and they have thereby

prescribed to the house and the land appurtenant to the house.

As much as a party to an action cannot present at the trial a case

materially different from what he has pleaded in his pleadings, a

party cannot present in appeal a case materially different from

what he has placed before the original Court.11 In the District

Court the defendants position was that they acquired their

undivided rights (by virtue of them being co-owners of the land) by

prescription (

).12 In the first place, as they are admittedly not co-

owners, they cannot acquire their purported undivided rights by

10 Vide pages 129-130 of the Brief. 11 Candappa nee Bastian v. Ponnambalampillai [1993] 1 Sri LR 184 at 189 12 Vide issue No.16 at page 62 of the Brief.

5

prescription. Secondly, co-owners cannot prescribe to their

undivided rights. It is meaningless and against the concept of

prescription. A person, whether a co-owner or otherwise, can claim

prescriptive rights for a defined area. The learned District Judge

has palpably gone wrong on the question of prescription.

In the facts and circumstances of this case, the assertion of the

plaintiff that the defendants were licensees, first under Marthelis,

and after the death of Marthelis, under the plaintiff, is more

acceptable.

The 3rd defendant has also clearly admitted in evidence that, after

the death of Marthelis (in 1973), the plaintiff allowed them to

continue to occupy the house until they were asked to vacate the

house in 1980, which they refused. As this admission is vital and

cuts across the defence of the defendants that they were occupying

the house on their own, I must quote the relevant part verbatim.

:

?

: . .

: 1978 ?

: .

: 1980

, ?

: .

: ?

: .13

13 Vide page 137 of the Brief.

6

I hold that the defendants came into occupation of the house as

licensees of Marthelis and thereafter continued with their

occupation with the leave and licence of the plaintiff.

This is further fortified by the evidence of the 3rd defendant where

she admitted that her father, Johannas, earlier lived in a house

close to the house in suit with his wife and children. That belies

the evidence of the 3rd defendant that they were born in the house

in suit. Let me reproduce that portion of evidence as well.

: ?

: . 1973 . .

, .

. 1958 . 1957 .

.

:

,

?

: .14

If the defendants were born in this house and continued

occupation as such, I fail to understand why the 3rd defendant did

not produce a scrap of paper to prove it.

Even if they were so in possession, It is well settled law that a

person who entered property in a subordinate character cannot

claim prescriptive rights till he changes his character by an overt act.

He is not entitled to do so by forming a secret intention

14 Vide page 119 of the Brief.

7

unaccompanied by an act of ouster. The proof of adverse possession

is a condition precedent to the claim for prescriptive rights.15

According to the evidence of the 3rd defendant, the defendants

manifested the fact of changing the character of possession from

subordinate to adverse in 1980 by refusing to vacate the house.16

This case has been filed in 1984. There is no 10 year adverse

possession to stake a claim on prescription.

The 3rd defendant in evidence stated that all her siblings have got

married and left the house leaving only the 5th defendant

unmarried sister in the house.17 However, the 5th defendant did

not come forward to give evidence to make a claim to the house.

After the leave and licence given to the defendants were admittedly

terminated in 198018, the defendants became trespassers. A co-

owner is entitled to sue a trespasser for ejectment of the whole

land.19

The 3rd defendant has admitted in evidence that the plaintiff could

have earned Rs. 350/= per month if he were the owner of the

property.20 That is the damage which the plaintiff has asked in the

plaint from 21.05.1983 until restoration of possession. Hence that

relief can also be granted.

15 Seeman v. David [2000] 3 Sri LR 23 at 26. Vide also Sahabandu v. Gunasekera [2006] 2 Sri LR 208 16 Vide pages 124, 137 of the Brief. 17 Vide pages 128-129 of the Brief. 18 Vide page 137 of the Brief. 19 Hevawitharane v. Dangan Rubber Co. Ltd. (1913) 17 NLR 49 20 Vide page 139 of the Brief.

8

For the aforesaid reasons, I set aside the Judgment of the District

Court and allow the appeal with costs both in this Court and the

Court below. The learned District Judge is directed to enter

Judgment as prayed for in the prayer to the plaint.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal