==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 14

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC SRI

LANKA

A matter of application under in terms of

section 331 of Criminal Procedure Code read

together with Article 138 of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

CA/HCC/028/2021

HC Ratnapura : HCR/116/15

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Complainant

V.

Galgodage Sarath Wijesiri

Alapatha, Rathnapura

Accused

And Now between

Galgodage Sarath Wijesiri

Alapatha, Rathnapura

Accused-appellant

Vs.

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Plaintiff-Respondent

Page 2 of 14

Before : B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

Amal Ranaraja, J

Counsel: Eranda S. Wanasinghe for the Petitioner

Jayalakshi de Silva SSC for the State

Written

Submissions: 08.06.2022, 20.03.2023 (by the Respondent)

On

Argued On: 27.01.2025

Judgment On: 28.02.2025

JUDGMENT

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

The Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Accused’) was indicted before the

High Court of Rathnapura on two charges namely, committing the offence of abduction of

one minor Dodanduwa Waduge Dulani Shanika Senevirathne on 04.03.2010 punishable

under Section 354 of the Penal Code and the offence of rape of the said minor punishable

under Section 364(2) of the Penal Code as amended by Act No. 22 of 1995.

The Prosecution led the evidence through nine witnesses and marking document P1 and

thereafter closed its case. The Accused in his defence made a dock statement. At the

conclusion of the trial, the Learned High Court Judge by his judgment dated 02.02.2021

found the Accused guilty of both the counts and sentenced for the 1st count a fine of Rs.

5000/- (6 months default term) and for the 2nd count 10 years of rigorous imprisonment

and a fine of Rs. 5000/- (6 months default term). In addition, By Order dated 23.02.2021,

a payment of a compensation of Rs. 50,000/- to the complainant was ordered.

Being aggrieved by the afore-mentioned conviction, the sentence of fine and the award of

compensation, the Accused has preferred this application to this Court.

Page 3 of 14

The following are the grounds of appeal as set out in the written submission of the

Accused.

1. The Learned Judge of the High Court has failed to adhere to the basic principles

of law in delivering the judgment and/or exercise of its judicial discretion when

imposing of a minimum mandatory sentence and imposing the sentence against

the Accused.

2. The Learned High Court Judge has failed to give the benefit of doubt to the

Accused when delivering the judgment and convicting the Accused for the 1st and

2nd charges.

The facts and circumstances are that:

According to the testimony of PW1, Dodanduwa Waduge Dulani Shanika Senevirathne

(the prosecutrix), during her stay for the school vacation at her uncle’s place (PW3), she

went to a stream near her uncle’s place to have a bath in the evening on the day of the

incident. While she was having a bath, the Accused approached her and called her. She

has asked why and without replying the Accused has dragged PW1 by her hand to a

manioc cultivation nearby.

When she was dragged away, she started to shout asking for help saying ‘බේරගන්න’.

On page 58 of the brief;

“ප්‍ර : තමා ඇදබගන යන බෙලාබේ ඇදබගන යාම සම්බන්ධබයන් බමාකක් හරි පියෙරක් තමා ගත්තාද?

උ : මම කෑ ගැහුො.

ප්‍ර : බමානො කියාද?

උ : බේර ගන්න කියා.

ප්‍ර : බේරගන්න කියා තමා කෑ ගැහුබේ ඇයි?

උ : කරදරයක් කරන්න යන හින්දා.”

As per PW1, she was only wearing a ‘දිය බරද්ද’ at that time and the clothes came off when

she was trying to escape from the Accused. Thereafter, she was pushed to the bare land

and the Accused pulled down his shorts halfway and laid on top of PW1’s body.

It should be noted that she never said anything about bringing clothes in the bucket to

the place when the Accused dragged her to the place of the incident.

Page 4 of 14

According to her, thereafter, the Accused inserted his male organ into her female organ.

While these were happening, she shouted for help.

On page 65 of the brief;

“ප්‍ර : තමාට ඔය කරදරය වූ මයිබයාක්කා ඉඩම ඇතුබේ තමා උදේ ඉේලා කෑ ගැහුොද ඒ

අෙස්ථාබේදී?

උ : ඔේ.

ප්‍ර : බමානො කියලද තමා කෑ ගැහුබේ?

උ : මාබම් නැන්බද් කියලා කගහුො.”

She states that there were a few houses near the stream and that the Accused had asked

her not to shout in a low voice. The PW1 states that she tried to escape from the Accused

by fighting.

According to her, her uncle had come there and seen the uncle, the Accused ran away from

the scene.

On page 66 of the brief;

ප්‍ර : ඔය කරදර කලාට පස්බස් සරත් බමානෙද කබේ?

උ : මාමා ෙැඩ ඇරිලා බගදර ආො. මම පරක්ු බමාකද බලන්න මාමා ආො. ඒක දැකලා සරත් දිේො.

PW3 has chased behind him to catch him but the Accused has escaped. The PW1 then

wore her clothes, ran back to the house and told the incident to her aunt. She has told her

aunt that the Accused has raped her. Thereafter, the uncle and some other people have

come to the house.

The PW1 states that she had no affair with the Accused before the incident. Later, the

PW1 with her mother and father went to the Rathnapura Police and made a complaint in

the night on the same day. Thereafter, the Police took her to the hospital where she was

examined by PW8, the Judicial Medical Officer and she divulged the incident to the doctor.

When she was cross-examined, she stated that she stopped going to school after the said

incident.

Page 5 of 14

As per PW3, Panawela Dewage Lalith Kumara Amaradasa (the uncle of the prosecutrix),

who was supposed to be an eye-witness of the said incident states that on the day of

question, he was at home. He states that the PW1 has come to stay at his house during

her school vacation and on the day of the incident, the PW1 has left the house to go to the

canal (ala) to have a bath. He saw that she had taken the bucket and the clothes.

According to him, the stream is very close to his house. He also admits that there are

houses near his place. Later, since the PW1 has not returned, he has gone in search of her

towards the said canal. But there was no one near the canal. Then he came back and sent

his wife to the stream while staying at the house and his wife returned saying there was

no one.

On page 94 of the brief;

ප්‍ර : දුලානි නාන්න ගියාට පසු සිද්ිය වුන දිනබේ නාලා නිෙසට ආොද?

උ : කතා කළා ආබේ නැහැ.

ප්‍ර : ඒ අෙස්තාබේදී තමා දරුො ඔයා බලන්න පියෙරක් ගත්තද?

උ ; මම ගියා බලන්න '

ප්‍ර : බකාහාටද ගිබේ ?

උ : ඇල ගාෙට ගියා

ප්‍ර : බකාබහ් ඉදලද ගිබේ?

උ : බගදර සිට

ප්‍ර : ඇල ගාෙට ගියාම බමානෙද තිබුබන්?

උ : බමාුත් තිබුබන් නැහැ.

ප්‍ර : එතන කේද හිටිබේ?

උ : දුෙ හිටිබේ නැහැ.

ප්‍ර : එතන කේද හිටිබේ.

උ : දුෙ හිටිබේ නැහැ.

ප්‍ර : ඊටපසු?

උ : අබේ හාමිබන් යැේො බලා එන්න කියා.

Page 6 of 14

ප්‍ර : බකාහාටද යැේබේ?

උ : බදාළ ගාෙට. නාපු ෙල ගාෙට

ප්‍ර ; තමා කිේො ඇල ගාෙට නාන්න ගියා කියා?

උ :ඔේ.

ප්‍ර : ඇලයි ෙලයි කියන්බන් බමාකද්ද?

උ : ඇබේම තමයි තිබබන්බන්.

ප්‍ර : ඇබේ තිබබන්බන් බමාකද්ද?

උ : ෙලක් තිබබනො නාන්න.

ප්‍ර : හාමිබන් තමා කිේො විදියට දුෙ දුලානි බසායා බගන ඇලට යන බකාට තමා බකාබහද සිටිබේ?

උ : මම බගදර සිටිබේ.

ප්‍ර : හාමිබන් දුෙ බසායාබගන ආෙද?

උ : නැහැ කිේො බලල ඇවිත්. මම බදචාල ගාෙට ගියා. ඊටපසු දැක්කා ඉන්නො.

Then PW3 has gone to the stream again and has seen both PW1 and the Accused at the

manioc cultivation. According to him, PW1 had no cloths on her and the Accused had run

away as soon as PW3 went there. As stated by him, the manioc cultivation was 100 feet

away from the bathing place.

On page 97 of the brief;

ප්‍ර : ඇබේ නාන ෙල ගාෙ ලග සිට සරත් සහ දුලානි හිටිය මයිබයාක්කා කෑේලට බකාපමණද?

උ : ඇල ලග සිටම ඉඩම තිබබනො.එතන සිටම මයිබයාක්කා තිබබනො.

ප්‍ර : ඇල ගාෙ ඉදලා දුලානි බිම ෙැටී සිටි තැනට බකාපමණ දුරක් තිබබනෙද?

උ : අඩි 100ක් පමණ තිබබනො.

ප්‍ර : තමා බකාබහාමද දැන ගත්බත් මයිබයාක්කා කෑේබේ දුලානි ඉන්නො කියා?

උ : මම ගිහින් බසෝදිසි කලා.

ප්‍ර : තමා දුලානි නැෙත අරබගන බකාහාටද ගිබේ?

උ : බගදරට.

Page 7 of 14

Thereafter, PW3 took PW1 home and later made a complaint to the Rathnapura Police on

the same day.

When PW3 was cross-examined, he admitted the fact that PW1 came to his place only two

weeks before. During the cross-examination, it was suggested by the Counsel for the

defence that PW1 was brought to his place due to a love affair PW1 had with another man

which was continuously denied by PW3.

Those portions were marked as contradictions by the defence.

Further, he stated that PW1 was naked when he saw them and later, PW1 wore her clothe

which was in the bucket.

On page 104 of the brief;

ප්‍ර : එතබකාට මහත්මය ඔය සිද්ිය වුනා කියන සිද්ිය දෙබස් මයිබයාක්ක බකාටුෙ අතරින් බම්

විත්තිකරු සහ තමාබේ දුෙ හිටිය දැක්කා කිේෙද?

උ : ඔේ.

..........

ප්‍ර : දියබරද්ද බකාබහාමද බසායාගත්බත්?

උ : බාේදිබේ තිබුනා.

On page 105 of the brief;

ප්‍ර : ඇඳුම් බකාබහද තිබුබන්?

උ : දිය බරද්ද බාේදිබේ තිබුබන්.

ප්‍ර : බාේදිබයන් අරන් ශානිකා බරද්ද ඇදගත්තද?

උ : ඔේ.

ප්‍ර ; මහත්මය දැක්ක විට විත්තිකාරය දිේො කිේො?

උ : ඔේ.

ප්‍ර : විත්තිකරු තමාබේ බකාබහාමද ඥාති බෙන්බන්?

උ : තාත්තබේ නංගිබේ ළමබයක් .

Page 8 of 14

According to him, the Accused is related to him. Further, the Accused used to come to his

house. It was suggested by the defence that they had made this allegation in order to get

married PW1 to the Accused. Further, the defence proposed that PW3 did not see the

incident but fabricated this story.

According to PW4, Pussawela Hewage Nimal Rathnasiri, there was only 15 meters

between the stream and the manioc cultivation. Further, when he observed the place, “එම

ස්ථානය බබාරළු බපාළෙක් නිසා තණබකාළ බපාඩි වීමක් තිබුබන් නැහැ.”

Further they observed that, a person cannot see from outside “ආදී පාර දිබේ ගමන් කරන

පුද්ගලබයුට ඇතුබේ යම් කිසි සිද්ියක් වුනා නම් බපන්බන් නැහැ ස්ොමිනි. විමසිලිමත්ෙ බැලුබොත් බේනො”

According to PW8, Mannalage Athula Rathnaweera, the Judicial Medical Officer

examined the PW1 with the assistance of a lady doctor where PW1 stated that on the day

in question when she was coming from the stream, the Accused came after her and took

the towel from her and tied her mouth from the towel. Later, dragged her to the manioc

cultivation and had sex with her.

On page 141 of the brief;

ප්‍ර : ඒ අනුෙ ඇය මුහුණ පා සිටින සිද්ිය සම්බන්ධබයන් ඔබ සටහන් කරන ලද බකටි ඉතිහාසය

අිකරණයට කියන්න පුලුෙන්ද?

උ: ඇය මට පෙසා සිටිබේ 2010.03.04 දින සෙස 5.00 ට විතර සිරිපාගම ලියදිබෙල මාබේ මාමබේ බගදර

සිට බදාලට ගිහින් නානවිට දුරින් මබේ මාමා බකබනු ෙන සරත් විබේසිරි බදාළ ලගින් ගියා. ඊට

පසු මා බගදර එන්න හදන විට මබේ පිටුපසින් ඇවිත් මයිබයාක්ක ගස් තිබුන හරිබේදී මබේ කබේ

තිබුන තුොබේන් කට ෙහල මාෙ ඇඳගන ගිහින් බිම නිදි කරො මබේ කුේ බදක ඈත් කරලා මා

සමඟ එකතු වුනා කියල මුලින් ප්‍රකාශ කබේ.

This version of the story was not elicited in PW1’s evidence. If she says that her mouth is

tied, raising her voice for help is questionable. Further, the PW3 never mentioned a towel.

When we consider the evidence given by PW1 to the doctor, the police and before the

Courts in totality, her evidence was not consistent.

According to PW8’s observations, PW1 has had several intercourses before this incident

as he observed old tears were there in her vagina.

Page 9 of 14

Along with the evidence of PW6, the prosecution’s case was closed. Thereafter, defence

was called and the Accused gave the dock statement. In his evidence, the Accused denied

the said intercourse with her.

During the argument, the main defence taken by the Counsel for the Accused was that

this was a fabricated story and the testimonies of PW1 and PW3 are completely

untrustworthy as they contradict each other.

The question before us is whether the stories of PW1 and PW3 are credible and

trustworthy enough to come to a conclusion about the Accused’s guilt.

The question arises concerning the probability of the evidence of PW1 and PW3.

According to PW3, he has gone to the place of the incident twice and also he has sent his

wife to find the prosecutrix. As per PW1, she has cried for help. According to the Police

witness, the place where the incident took place as shown by the PW1 cannot be seen from

the outside or from the footpath. The question arises then as to how PW3 exactly found

the place.

Further, the Police have not seen any sign of struggling on the floor of the said place.

According to PW1, she has left the bucket at the stream but the PW3 has found the bucket

at the scene.

On Page 78 of the brief;

ප්‍ර : ඒ බහෝදපු ඇදුම් ටිකට බමාකද වුබන්?

උ : බහෝදපු ඇදුම් බගනිච්බච් නැහැ.

ප්‍ර : බහෝදපු ඇඳුම් බදාබේ දමා ගියාද?

උ : ඔේ.

ප්‍ර : අයි බදාබේ දමා ගිබේ?

උ : කරදරයක් වුනා. ඊට පස්බස් මම සරත්ට බබේ බගදර දිේො. නැන්දා ඇවිත් බරදි ටික බගදර

බගනිච්චා.

This creates doubt about whether any incident happened at the scene as divulged by the

PW1 and PW3.

Page 10 of 14

A similar incident was considered in the following judgments.

Ismail, J in Wijepala v. The Attorney-General, 2001 (1) 46 in page 58,

“Learned President's Counsel for the appellant submitted, however, that the

testimony of Senaratne was completely untrustworthy and of such poor quality

that a conviction against the appellant cannot possibly be sustained in law. His

testimonial trustworthiness on vital aspects relating to the incident was assailed

in an attempt to cast a doubt even in regard to his presence at the time the

deceased had received the fatal stab injury.

……………

Senaratne stated in his evidence that he took his injured son in a car to the

hospital. The Gramasevaka Jayapala testified that he provided his car for the

purpose and that he himself accompanied Senaratne and his injured son in the car

to the hospital. Although the Gramasevaka testified that Senaratne was known to

him, there is no evidence that Senaratne revealed the identity of the assailant to

him that night or even thereafter. The failure of Senaratne to inform the

Gramasevaka of the identity of the assailant therefore raises a serious doubt in

regard to the presence of Senaratne at the scene of the incident and his claim to

have identified the appellant as the assailant. Applying the test of spontaneity, his

belatedness reduces the weight of his evidence and affects his credibility.

………

The evidence of Senaratne who was the sole eyewitness to the incident is open to

suspicion. The trial judge has failed to appreciate that his evidence in regard to

the identity of the appellant has not been supported by any other item of evidence.

There is therefore a strong doubt as to the guilt of the appellant and, as such, the

benefit of the doubt should have been given to the appellant. The Court of Appeal

has erred in affirming the conviction without adequately testing the evidence of

Senaratne. For these reasons, I allow the appeal and set aside the judgment of the

Court of Appeal. The conviction and sentence imposed on the appellant by the High

Court are set aside and the appellant is acquitted.”

Page 11 of 14

Her Ladyship Rohini Marasinghe J. in Kalansuriya Alias Raja v. Attorney General, 2015

(1) SLR 415, held that;

“These facts are not corroborated by the witness's mother, his sister or by Piyal. In

fact, Ak's testimony was directly contradicted by the two of them.

In her testimony, the witness Gnawathie (widow) stated that she did not see AK

before the stabbing She had seen the witness AK only at the time the deceased was

taken to hospital by AK. She also stated in her testimony that AK did not mention

to her about the stabbing incident at any time during that period Strangely, the

witness AK had remained silent with the name of the assailant and the entire

incident of stabbing which he claimed to have witnessed that evening No reason

had been advanced for this abnormal behavior of AK's silence In these

circumstances only rational reasoning that could be given would be that AK had

not seen the stabbing.

It is natural that the first question any reasonable person would ask in these

circumstances would be 'who did this?' It is strange that none of the witnesses

mentioned to each other the name of the assailant, when according to AK the name

of the assailant was known According to these witnesses there was no animosity

between the deceased and the appellant to cause harm to the deceased The witness

Piyal does not state that he met AK at the time the deceased was walking drunk

and abusing Thilina. The witness Piyal also denies that AK had mentioned the

name of the assailant In fact his testimony at pages 129 and 130 of the Brief, was

that AK had not mentioned the name of the assailant or that he saw the stabbing

when AK got into the vehicle to take the deceased to hospital.

The trial court ought to have addressed its mind to all these supportive facts,

before accepting those facts as proved and supportive evidence Therefore, the

evidence of the sole witness AK, we find to be untrustworthy as it was discredited

by the other witnesses The uncorroborated evidence is sufficient for a conviction if

that evidence was not contradicted on material points by other witnesses who were

material witnesses (Vide Sumanasena v Attorney General.”

We further observe the contradictions in PW1’s testimony that she has testified that the

Accused came near the stream and asked her to come. Later, she told PW6 that while she

was coming from the stream, the Accused came after her, took the towel and closed her

mouth. Later, he dragged her to the manioc cultivation. Throughout the evidence, she

Page 12 of 14

says that she has cried for help, but no one has heard her. She told the doctor that her

mouth was tied with the towel.

We observe that PW1 was not consistent with her evidence. Therefore, we find the

evidence of PW1 untrustworthy.

I am also mindful that as per the PW1, she cried for help when the Accused dragged her

to the manioc cultivation. At the same time, as divulged to the Court, the PW3 and his

wife came towards the stream in search of PW1. Further, PW1 has stated that she tried

to escape by fighting against the Accused.

However, no one has heard the PW1’s cry for help. A prudent man would think this is

improbable in this situation where PW3 was looking for PW1 as she was late to come

home. The PW3 or his wife in this instance would have been cautious and have heard

even a mild sound if there was a cry for help or if PW1 was trying to escape as claimed by

PW1. However, no such indication was made regarding this to the Court.

The question is whether she raised her voice at the time of the incident. It creates doubts

about whether the incident claimed by the PW1 actually happened. The trial judge failed

to consider this evidence.

We are mindful of how PW3 has known the place of the incident as it cannot be seen from

the outside as stated by the Police witness unless he knows the exact place. Also, we are

mindful that according to PW3, there was a bucket with clothes at the scene which

contradicts the evidence of PW1.

When we consider both witnesses together, there is a strong doubt created due to the

discrepancy in the testimonies of the witnesses. We hold that there is a doubt created by

PW1 and PW3 whether the incident took place at the said time. This fact was not

considered by the Learned High Court Judge.

Therefore, we are inclined to consider whether the testimonies of PW1 and PW3 are

improbable. It directly affects the credibility of those witnesses. If so, the Learned High

Court Judge has failed to consider the test of probability regarding the Prosecution’s

version. In the instant application, PW3 and his wife have not heard any sound or cry for

help of PW1.

Page 13 of 14

Probability in the context of legal matters, is defined as follows:

Sarkar and Monohara, in their book "SARKAR ON EVIDENCE" (Fifteenth Edition) on

page 71, state,

"...probability is meant the likelihood of anything being true, deduced from its

conformity to our knowledge, observation, and experience. When a supposed fact

is so repugnant to the laws of nature that no amount of evidence could induce us

to believe it, such supposed fact is said to be impossible or physically impossible."

According to E.R.S.R. Coomaraswamy, in "The Law of Evidence Volume II Book 02" on

Page 1053,

"The test of improbability has been described as essential inconsistency. There

may be facts which may show it to be impossible or so highly improbable as to

justify the inference that it never occurred."

Furthermore, his Lordship Justice Jayasooriya in Wickremasinghe v. Dedoleena and

others 1996 (2) SLR held that;

“A Judge, in applying the test of probabilities and improbability relies heavily on

his knowledge of men and matters and the pattern of conduct observed by human

beings both ingenious as well as those who are less talented and fortunate.”

This proposition was followed by his Lordship Justice Gooneratne in, Singharam

Thiyagarajah v. AG CA 216/2010 Decided on 10.10.2014 wherein his Lordship held;

“I wish to observe that the realities of life and the testimony of a witness cannot

always be co-related. Nothing is perfect in life and the truth does not surface so

easily as a man so bias could attempt to hide the truth or distort it. The test of

probability needs to be applied and recognized to grapple with normal human

behavior and problems and pave the way for the likelihood of occurrence.”

His Lordship Justice K.M.G.H. Kulatunga in Weweldeniya Kushan Hasantha v. AG

CA/HCC/0061/2023 decided on 17.12.2024, following the judgment of Wickremasinghe v.

Dedoleena and others and held that;

“The credibility of a witness may be impugned by employing the test of probability

and improbability, consistency and inconsistency, interestedness and

Page 14 of 14

disinterestedness and spontaneity and belatedness (Wickremasinghe v. Dedoleena

and others – 1994 2 Sri LR 95). Improbability directly affects the credibility.”

Considering the evidence of PW1, she has cried for help, but no one even her uncle and

aunt who came in search of her during the same period of time did not hear her which is

improbable according to this Court. Thus, the improbability of this incident directly

affects the credibility of PW1. Further, when the evidence of PW1 and PW3 are carefully

perused, significant contradictions can be identified as analysed above.

We note that if the PW3 and his wife had really gone near the stream, they would have

seen the bucket and clothes if we were to believe the PW1’s story.

The Learned High Court Jude ought to have addressed his mind to all these improbable

facts.

Therefore, we hold that the prosecution has failed to prove the guilt of the Accused beyond

reasonable doubt.

For the above-mentioned reasons, conviction and sentence imposed by the Learned High

Court Judge on 02.02.2021 are set aside and the Accused is acquitted.

Appeal allowed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Amal Ranaraja, J.

I AGREE

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL