IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

1. Udayasiri Saman Kumara

Jayawardena,

No.19, Kitulgollawatta,

Rangoda,

Welamboda.

2. Udeni Siri Kumara Jayawardena,

Diwilla,

Yatawatta.

3. Uthpalawanna Chakrawarthi

Jayawardena,

Diwilla,

Yatawatta.

1st, 4th and 5th Respondents-

Petitioners-Appellants

CA CASE NO: CA (PHC) 7/2014

HC KANDY CASE NO: REV/183/2012

MC KANDY CASE NO: 47665

Vs.

1. Polwatte Gedara Gamini,

No.99, Rangoda,

Demanhandiya,

Petitioner-Respondent-

Respondent

2

2. P.G. Wijeratne,

3. T.G. Dhammika,

Both Aswadduma,

Rangoda,

Welamboda.

2nd and 3rd Respondents-

Respondents-Respondents

Before: K.K. Wickramasinghe, J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Lal Wijenayake for the Appellants.

Respondents are absent and unrepresented.

Decided on: 03.05.2019

Samayawardhena, J.

The 1st respondent filed this application in the Magistrates

Court under section 66(1)(b) of the Primary Courts Procedure

Act, No.44 of 1979 seeking an order against the 1st appellant

and the 2nd and 3rd respondents not to disturb his long

possession. The 2nd and 3rd appellants seem to have later

intervened. After filing objections and counter objections by way

of affidavits, inquiry has been concluded on written

submissions. Thereafter the order has been made by the

learned Magistrate granting the relief sought for by the 1st

respondent. The revision application filed against the said order

has been dismissed by the learned Provincial High Court Judge.

It is against that order of the High Court, the appellant has filed

this appeal.

3

The respondents did not come to contest the appeal, and the

learned counsel for the appellant invited the Court to dispose of

the appeal on the written submissions filed before this Court.

The land in question is about 90 perches in extent. There is no

dispute that the 1st respondents mother, Lasia, came into the

ancestral house of the land very long time ago (according to the

appellants as a domestic aide, which is disputed by the 1st

respondent) and thereafter got married and lived there. The 1st

respondent son (and another daughter who is not a party to this

case) were born there. It appears that the old house has

disappeared over the passage of time. The 1st respondent has

also later got married and living there having constructed a

house in the land. Lasia was still living with the 1st respondent

son when this case was filed in the Magistrates Court.

The 1st appellant states that he (together with the 2nd and 3rd

appellants) became entitled to this land by deed marked 1,4,5V1

dated 28.11.1960, and thereafter they gifted 20 perches and 6

perches to the 1st respondent and his wife by deeds marked

1,4,5V2 and 1,4,5V3 dated 01.05.2008. They also state that by

the affidavit marked 1,4,5V4 of the same date, the 1st

respondent and his wife promised not to claim rights to the

other portions of the land except the above-mentioned 26

perches. It is the position of the 1st respondent that he and his

wife have signed those documents at the request of the

appellants without understanding the contents of them.

Thereafter the appellants have sold 15 perches of this land to

the 2nd and 3rd respondents by deed No.680 dated 11.04.2011.

4

The dispute has arisen when the 2nd and 3rd respondents have

gone to clear that portion of the land in the first week of January

2012. Case has been filed on 14.02.2012.

It is abundantly clear from the documents filed including the

police statements that the 1st respondent together with her

mother has been in possession of the entire land from the day

he was born and the appellants have had no possession of the

land.

The learned counsel for the appellants has stated in the written

submissions that the learned Magistrate has failed to consider

the most important documents, i.e. deeds marked 1,4,5V(2),

1,4,5V(3) and affidavit 1,4,5V(4) which go to show that the

appellants have gifted to the 1st respondent and his wife on

behalf of the 1st respondents mother, Laisa, the two lots20

perches and 6 perches in extent; and the 1st respondent and his

wife have by way of an affidavit admitted without any reservation

the right of the appellants to possess the rest of the land. Those

are not important documents in a case of this nature where

possession is the key element to be considered.

The learned counsel for the appellants has also taken up several

technical objections in the written submissions.

One is that there was no imminent breach of the peace for the

learned Magistrate to proceed with the application. It appears

from the proceedings dated 14.02.2012 that the learned

Magistrate has satisfied with the threat to the breach of the

peace.

Another is that the learned Magistrate has failed to make an

effort to settle the matter before the case was fixed for the

5

inquiry as mandated by section 66(6) of the Act. By looking at

the journal entry dated 31.07.2012, I am satisfied that the

learned Magistrate has attempted to settle the matter.

Another is that there was no valid affidavit before the

Magistrates Court for the Court to act upon as the first

information because the purported affidavit does not mention

the date of attestation in the jurat. Both the learned Magistrate

and the learned High Court Judge has disregarded it as a pure

technical objection, which, in my view, is correct, especially,

having regard to the objective to be achieved by this special

piece of very important legislation, i.e., to make a provisional

order to arrest breach of the peace until the dispute is resolved

by a competent Court on merits.

When this matter of defective affidavit was taken up by the

appellants in the Magistrates Court in their objections, the 1st

respondent in his counter objections has, in turn, shown the

defects of the appellants affidavit, and thereafter sought

permission of Court either to correct the defect in open Court or

to tender a fresh affidavit.

In my view, in such a situation, the Court shall allow the party

to cure that defect by tendering a fresh affidavit for otherwise

the whole purpose of the section 66 application would be

defeated on high technical objections. There is no place for

technical objections in section 66 applications. All such

objections shall be viewed keeping in mind the main objective,

which is, nothing but to prevent the breach of the peace. In that

process, the Magistrate shall act within the frame of the law but

without clinging on high-flown technical objections.

6

This view of mine is supported by the Judgment of the Divisional

Bench of this Court in Senanayake v. Commissioner of National

Housing [2005] 1 Sri LR 182. In terms of Rule 3(1)(a) read with

Rule 18 of the Court of Appeal (Appellate Procedure) Rules 1990,

every application made to the Court of Appeal shall be by way of

petition together with an affidavit in support of the averments

therein. The affidavit filed in the said case was defective

because it had been attested before a Justice of Peace who did

not have territorial jurisdiction to attest the said affidavit.

Hence counsel for the respondent moved to dismiss the

application in limine as there was no application before Court to

consider on merits. The Divisional Bench of this Court was not

inclined to accept that argument and allowed the petitioner to

tender a fresh affidavit in identical terms instead of the defective

affidavit on the ground inter alia that the Court should not non-

suit a party where the lapse/defect takes place due to no fault of

that party.

I see no reason to interfere with the final conclusion of both the

learned Magistrate and the learned High Court Judge.

Appeal is dismissed but without costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

K.K. Wickremasinghe, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal