1

CA/PHC/0019/2017

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal in terms of Section

11 of the High Court of the Provinces

(Special Provinces) Act No. 19 of 1990 read

with Article 154P (6) of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Nekathimulla Manannalage Wasantha

Pushpakumara,

Daugalagama,

Kalawana.

CA No. CA/PHC/0019/2017

M.C. Kalawana Case No. PETITIONER

9816 (66)

H.C. Rathnapura Case No.

HCR/REV/11/2011

v.

Wadduwage Siripala

Elawella, Daugalagama,

Kalawana.

RESPONDENT

AND

Wadduwage Siripala

Elawella, Daugalagama,

Kalawana.

RESPONDENT PETITIONER

2

CA/PHC/0019/2017

v.

Nekathimulla Manannalage Wasantha

Pushpakumara,

Daugalagama,

Kalawana.

PETITIONER RESPONDENT

AND NOW

Wadduwage Siripala (Deceased)

Elawella, Daugalagama,

Kalawana.

Wadduwage Sunil Wijayananda

No. 290,

Delgoda,

Kalawana.

SUBSTITUTED RESPONDENTS

PETITIONER APPELLANT

v.

Nekathimulla Manannalage Wasantha

Pushpakumara,

Daugalagama,

Kalawana.

PETITIONER - RESPONDENT

RESPONDENTS

3

CA/PHC/0019/2017

BEFORE : M. Sampath K. B. Wijeratne J. &

M. Ahsan. R. Marikar J.

COUNSEL : Anuruddha Dharmaratne with Chaminda

Seneviratne for the Respondent Petitioner

Appellant.

Wishwa Jayaweera for the Petitioner -

- Respondent - Respondent.

ARGUED ON : Concluded through Written Submissions

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS : 04.05.2023 and 16.10 2024 (By the

Appellant)

17.07.2023 and 08.10.2024 (By the

Respondent)

DECIDED ON : 06.12.2024

M. Sampath K. B. Wijeratne J.

Introduction

In this appeal, the RespondentPetitionerAppellant (hereinafter referred to as

the Appellant) seeks to challenge the judgment delivered by the learned High

Court Judge of Ratnapura on 9th January 2017. In the impugned judgment, the

learned High Court Judge refused to revise the order made by the learned

Magistrate of Kalawana on 12th January 2011, in an application filed under

Section 66(1)(b) of the Primary Courts Procedure Act No. 44 of 1979.

(hereinafter referred to as the Primary Courts Procedure Act).

The Petitioner further seeks to have the aforementioned order of the learned

Magistrate set-aside.

4

CA/PHC/0019/2017

Factual background

The Petitioner Respondent Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the

Respondent) initiated proceedings in the Magistrates Court of Kalawana on

31st March 2010, against the Appellant. It was asserted that the Respondent and

their predecessors in title had maintained uninterrupted possession of the land,

as described in the schedule attached to the information filed, for a period of 50

years. According to the affidavit1, submitted by the original Respondent, the

disputed portion of the land, known as Daugalakadewatta, forms part of a

larger land.

In response, the Appellant filed a counter-affidavit, disputing several claims

made in the Respondent's affidavit and asserting that no breach of the peace2 had

occurred. Accordingly, the Appellant sought the dismissal of the Respondent's

application. On the same day the Respondent also filed a counter-affidavit3.

Following an inquiry, the learned Magistrate declared that the original

Respondent is entitled to possess the disputed land.

The aggrieved Appellant sought the High Court to revise the order of the learned

Magistrate, but was refused.

The Appellant appealed the decision to this Court.

When the matter was taken up for argument on 4th September 2024, both parties

agreed to conclude the argument through further written submissions and to file

consolidated submissions. Consequently, both parties submitted their respective

written submissions, and the matter was fixed for judgment.

Analysis

Breach of the peace

1 At page 130 of the appeal brief. 2 At page 151 of the appeal brief. 3 At page 128 of the appeal brief.

5

CA/PHC/0019/2017

This is an application arising from the information filed by the Respondent under

Section 66(1)(b) of the Primary Courts Procedure Act.

In the case of Jayasinghe and others v. Loku Bandara4 (C.A.), His Lordship

Samayawardhane J. (as His Lordship then was), having scrutinized Section

66(1)(a) and (b) of the Primary Courts Procedure Act, the repealed Section 62 of

the Administration of Justice Law, and the corresponding Section 145 of the

Code of Criminal Procedure in India, held that When first information is filed

under Section 66 (1) of the Primary Couts Procedure Act, irrespective of whether

the first information was filed by the Police or a party to the dispute, the

Magistrate is automatically vested with jurisdiction under Section 66(2) to

inquire into and determine the matter. There is no further requirement for the

Magistrate to ascertain whether the breach of the peace is threatened or likely.

In any event, I am content with the available evidence that there was a potential

breach of the peace, as the learned Magistrate correctly concluded.

Identity of corpus

The Appellant argued that the Respondent failed to adequately establish the

identity of the corpus. As a result, the learned Magistrate erred in identifying the

subject land in this application and the identification was based solely on the

observations made by the Police.

According to the information filed by the Respondent, the disputed portion of

land is stated to be 7 perches. However, the Respondent's affidavit states that the

disputed allotment measures 14.63 perches, which is part of a larger land

totalling 77 acres, 3 roods, and 7 perches. In contrast, the Police Officer who

investigated the Respondent's complaint estimated the disputed portion of land

to be approximately 20 perches.

However, as correctly observed by the learned Magistrate, the boundaries of the

4 [2019]2 Sri L.R. page 202.

6

CA/PHC/0019/2017

disputed land stated by both the Appellant and the Respondent are identical.

These boundaries are; to the North by the road leading to Elawella, to the East

by the Kalawana Weddagala main road, to the South by N.A. Dawithsinghos

land, and to the West by Cyril Abeywickremas land. Even according to the

sketch submitted by the Police Officer who conducted the investigations, two

sides of the disputed portion of land face a road, while the other two sides face

lands. According to the sketch, the land on the two sides is owned by the Plaintiff.

The land to the South, as per the boundaries stated by both the Appellant and the

Respondent, is owned by N.A. Dawithsingho, who is the father of the

Respondent who is also the predecessor in title of the Respondent. Therefore, in

the sketch, three of the boundaries align with the ones described above.

The Respondent has not described the land according to a survey plan.

Furthermore, the extent of 7 perches is given as an approximate value, as is the

case with the Police Officer, who also mentioned the extent as an estimate. It is

only the Appellant who has described the given extent in accordance with the

preliminary plan made in the partition action No. 4826/P of the District Court of

Rathnapura.

According to the Appellants affidavit, the name of the land is

Daugalakadewatta, which is the same name stated by the Respondent in his

affidavit. However, according to the Appellant's title deed No. 2610, dated 26th

August 19795, the name of the land, which is described as having an extent of

14.63 perches, is Delgodanindagama alias Hettipathira alias Parakoluwawe

Henyaya, which covers an area of 77 acres, 3 roods, and 7 perches. Therefore,

the title deed does not substantiate the Appellant's claim.

For the foregoing reasons, I am satisfied that the learned Magistrate has

sufficiently identified the corpus for the purpose of an application under Section

66(1) of the Primary Courts Procedure Act.

5 At page 136 of the appeal brief.

7

CA/PHC/0019/2017

Possession within the relevant period

The Appellant contends that he had been in possession of the subject matter of

this application, and during the preliminary survey in the partition action No.

4826/Partition conducted from 16th January 1997 to 10th February 1997, he

claimed Lot No. 32 in Plan No. 233, dated 11th May 1997. In support of this

contention, the Appellant submitted the plan and the report from the

aforementioned partition action6.. The Appellant argued in his written

submission7 that, in terms of Section 18(2) of the Partition Law, the preliminary

plan and its report can be used as evidence of the facts stated therein. However,

under Section 18(2) of the Partition Law, this rule of evidence applies only

within the partition action itself and does not extend beyond it.

Furthermore, it is acknowledged that the partition action was dismissed by

judgment dated 11th February 2009 upon failure to prove the corpus to the

satisfaction of Court8. The learned District Judge observed that the plaintiffs,

including the Appellant (who was the 2nd Plaintiff in the partition action), sought

to partition land with an extent of about 77 acres, which is an undivided portion

of land totalling over 500 acres, a claim that is not permissible under the partition

law.

Be that as it may, in the statement made to the Police on 10th April 2010, in

response to the complaint made by the Respondent, the Appellant claimed to

have obtained title to the disputed land through the District Court action, a claim

that is factually incorrect.

The Appellant contends that, since then, he and his heirs have continued to be in

possession of the land in dispute.

6 Vide pages 200 to 202 of the appeal brief. 7 At paragraph 15 of the Appellants final written Submission. 8 Vide pages 204 to 207 of the appeal brief.

8

CA/PHC/0019/2017

The Appellant submitted that the original Appellant transferred the subject

matter of this application to the substituted Appellant by deed No. 536, dated 9th

April 2012. However, this transaction took place after the order of the learned

Magistrate of Kalawana was delivered on 12th January 2011. It is also important

to note that, although the Appellant stated that the original Appellants title to

the disputed portion of land was transferred to the substituted Appellant9, the title

deed of the original Appellant has four other co-owners. According to the title

deed of the original appellant, the extent of the land is 77 acres, 3 roods, and 7

perches, of which he is a co-owner.

In addition to the statements made in the affidavits and the surveyors report,

which mention that the original Appellant made a claim to Lot No. 32 of Plan

No. 233 in 1997 and that the Appellant possessed the subject matter of this

application, the Appellant has not presented any other evidence to establish his

possession. Even if it is assumed that the subject matter of this application is Lot

32 of Partition Plan No. 233, the attached report only establishes possession as

of the date of the survey in 1997 and not as of the relevant period under Section

68, which requires possession to be established two months prior to the date of

filing the information.

According to Plan No. 233, the subject matter of the partition action was

described as Delgodanindagama alias Hettipathira alias Parakoluwawe

Henyaya. This is also the name of the land in the original Appellants title deed

No. 2610, dated 26th August 1979. However, in the Appellants affidavit, the

subject land is referred to as Daugalakadewatta. As a result, there cannot be a

dispute between the Appellant and the Respondent regarding the name of the

subject matter.

In the first complaint made to the Police on 23rd March 201010, the Respondent

stated that he had possessed the land named Daugalakadewatta for well over

9 At paragraph 18 of the Appellants final Written submission. 10 At page 114 of the appeal brief.

9

CA/PHC/0019/2017

40 years, and that the disputed portion was part of the same land. It was also

stated that the subject matter of the partition action involved land named

Hettipathira, with an extent of 77 acres, 3 roods. According to the Respondent,

the disputed portion of his land was wrongfully included in the corpus of the

partition action.

In my view, the aforementioned Plan No. 233, made in the partition action,

supports the Respondent's contention. It appears that Lot No. 32, the strip of land

below the road marked as Lot 35, with an extent of 14.63 perches, is part of a

larger lot that was not included in the corpus of the partition action. This position

is further supported by the sketch prepared by the Inquiring Officer. Even in the

sketch, the disputed portion is shown as part of a larger parcel of land held and

possessed by the Respondent.

As previously stated in this judgment, the partition action was dismissed.

Therefore, the inclusion of the disputed portion in the preliminary plan prepared

for the partition action holds no weight in determining the title. Above all, as

held by Sharvananda J. (as His Lordship then was) in the case of Ramalingam v.

Thangarajah11 (S.C.) Evidence bearing on title can be considered only when

the evidence as to possession is clearly balanced and the presumption of

possession which flows from title may tilt the balance in favour of the owner and

help deciding the question of possession.

In this instance, there is no balance of evidence regarding possession therefore,

evidence on title cannot be considered.

In any event, evidence related to the partition action cannot be given any weight

in the present case, as that action pertained to a different land, which, according

to the Appellant's own affidavit, is not the subject land of the instant appeal.

The Respondent has submitted six letters from the Grama Niladharis who served

in the Grama Niladhari Division where the disputed land is situated, to establish

11 [1982] 2 Sri L.R. 693, at page 699.

10

CA/PHC/0019/2017

his fathers possession12. However, under Section 68(1)(3) of the Primary Courts

Procedure Act, the relevant period to be considered is the two months

immediately prior to the filing of the application. In this case, the information

was filed on 31st March 201013.. Therefore, the only letter that falls within the

relevant period is the one issued by W. M. C. Wijethunga, Grama Niladhari of

Daugalagama 196F, Kalawana. This letter confirms that the land was possessed

by N.M. Dawithsingho, the father of the Respondent.

Based on the above analysis, I am convinced that the learned Magistrate of

Ratnapura arrived at the correct conclusion in his order dated 12th January 2011.

He rightly determined that the Respondent maintained continuous possession

and that there was no evidence to suggest the Appellant was dispossessed during

the relevant period, thereby affirming the Respondent's possession.

In the revision application filed against the said order, the learned High Court

Judge of Rathnapura, after analysing the facts relevant to the learned

Magistrates order, dismissed the revision application on the grounds that there

were no materials that would shock the conscience of the Court.

As held by His Lordship Sharvananda C.J. in the case of Hotel Galaxy Limited

v. Mercantile Hotel Management Limited14;

It is settled law that the exercise of revisionary powers of the appellate court is

confined to cases in which exceptional circumstances exist warranting its

intervention.

In the case of Caderamanpulle v. Ceylon Paper Sacks Ltd15 (C.A.) His Lordship

Nanayakkara J., held that;

12 At pages 120 to 126 of the appeal brief. 13 Vide the order at page 212 of the appeal brief. 14 [1987]1 Sri L.R. 6.

15 [2001]3 Sri L.R. 112 at p. 116.

11

CA/PHC/0019/2017

When the decided cases cited before us are carefully examined, it becomes

evident in almost all the cases cited, that powers of revision had been exercised

only in a limited category of situations. The existence of exceptional

circumstances is a pre -condition for the exercise of the powers of revision and

absence of exceptional circumstances in any given situation results in refusal of

remedies.

Hence, based on the reasons articulated above, this Court finds that there are no

grounds to interfere with the impugned orders made by either the learned High

Court Judge or the learned Magistrate.

Consequently, I hold that this appeal must fail.

Appeal dismissed, subject to cost of Rs. 50,000/-.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

M. Ahsan. R. Marikar J.

I Agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL