IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

CA No.841/2000(F)

D.C.Panadura 87/l

E. Gunaseeli Athulathmudali

No. 83/7,

4thLane,Nawala Road,

Rajagiriya.

Plaintiff

Vs.

Iliangage Gunadasa Perera,

No. 122, Moronthuduwa Road,

Melagama, Wadduwa.

Defendant

And

lIIangage Gunadasa Perera(Oeceased),

No. 122, Moronthuduwa Road,

Melagama, Wadduwa.

Defendant- Petitioner

lA. M.R.Mulin Nona

lB. I. Chandani Perera le. I. Mervin Perera

10. I. Chandrawathi Perera

lE. I. Wajira Pathmini Perera

IF. I. Jaynthi Kusumalatha Perera

IG. I. Sarath Perera

1

All of No. 23, Oias Road,

Habaragahalanda,

Melagama, Wadduwa.

Substituted-Defendant- Petitioners

Vs.

E. Gunaseeli Athulathmudali

No. 83/7,

4thLane, Nawala Road,

Rajagiriya.

Plaintiff-Respondent

And now Between

lA. M.R.Mulin Nona

lB. I. Chandani Perera

No. 23, Oias Road,

Habaragahalanda, Melagama, Wadduwa.

Substituted-Defendant- Petitioners

Vs.

E. Gunaseeli Athulathmudali

No. 83/7,

4thLane, Nawala Road,

Rajagiriya.

Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent

Ie. I. Mervin Perera

10. I. Chandrawathi Perera

IE. I. Wajira Path mini Perera

IF. I. Jaynthi Kusumalatha Perera

2

Before A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J

&

H.C.J. Madawala, J

IG. I. Sarath Perera

All of No. 23, Dias Road,

Habaragahalanda,

Melagama, Wadduwa.

Substituted-Defendant-Petitioners- Respondents

Counsel: M.S.A. Wadood with Tharanga Edirisingha for the substituted-Defendant-Petitioner-

Appellant

Argued on: 12 /02/2016

Judgment Date 23/03/2016

H. C. J. Madawala J

The substituted-defendant-petitioners-appellants filed this appeal to set aside the order dated 26-05-

2000 by the Learned District Judge of Panadura in DC Case No. 87/ @a@ .The plaintiff Respondent

respondent instituted the above styled action for a declaration of title to the land morefully described

in the schedule to the plaint and for ejectment of the original respondent therefrom and for damages

at Rs.500/- per month and for costs. Summons was issued to the original defendant and however the

said original defendant was unable to file his answer, and the case was fixed for ex parte trial. The

Learned Trial Judge thereafter delivered his ex parte judgment granting the reliefs prayed for by the

plaintiff. The decree was served on the original defendant and he filed his papers in time to purge his

default and to vacate the ex parte judgment delivered against him. When this matter came up for

3

trial on 11-09-1987 both parties agreed to settle their dispute and both parties agreed that the ex

parte judgment be vacated and on the same day entered the following terms of settlement.

I. Both parties agreed that the subject matter of this action is shown as Lots Bland B 2 in Plan

No. 1407 dated 28.1.1970 prepared by U.M. de Silva Licensed Surveyor.

II. By the consent of both parties that the judgment to be entered as prayed for by the plaintiff.

III. That the writ to be stayed till 31.1.1988 and on or before 31.1.1988 the defendant should

hand over vacant possession of Lot No. B 2 depicted in the said Plan, to the plaintiff-

respondent.

IV. That the plaintiff on or before 12.10.1987 should take steps to demarcate 12 perches, out of

Lot B1 and the boundaries be shown, on the soil, by U.M de Silva Licensed Surveyor or any

other surveyor.

V. That after the defendant handed over vacant possession of Lot B 2 as mentioned above on or

before 31.1.1988, the plaintiff should execute a deed in respect of the said Lot No B 1 to the

defendant at the defendant's expense.

VI. In the event of the plaintiff failing to execute a deed in favour of the defendant, after he

handed over vacant possession of Lot B 2 to the plaintiff, the defendant is entitled to execute a

deed through the Registrar of the Court.

VII. That the defendant is entitled to demolish the building standing on Lot B 2 and to remove the

materials on or before 31.1.1988.

VIII. That if the defendant is unable to remove the said building on or before 31.1.1988 or if the

defendant is unable to hand over the possession of Lot B 2 on or before 31.1.1988 to the

plaintiff, the plaintiff is entitled to obtain a Writ, without notice and to eject the defendant

from the entire land and from the building.

IX. That the plaintiff is entitled to remove 2 jak trees in Lot B1.

X. That if the defendant handed over possession of Lot B2 on or before 31.1.1988 to the plaintiff

should report to the Court that the defendant has complied with the decree.

XI. That the defendant must not prevent the plaintiff or her agents from removing the two jak

trees from Lot B 1. If the defendant handed over vacant possession of Lot B 2 as mentioned

above, the plaintiff will waive damages ordered in the judgment.

4

Thereafter, according to the settlement the appellants took steps to remove the building which was

on Lot B 2 in the said plan mentioned above and constructed a house on Lot B 1 and these appellants

further state that they allowed the plaintiff to remove 2 jak trees from Lot B 1. These appellants

stated that they complied with the said settlement and handed over vacant possession of Lot B 2 to

the plaintiff. However in May 1988 these appellants were dispossessed from Lot B 1 by the plaintiff

and subsequently they came to know that the plaintiff has obtained a writ without notice to eject

them stating that the appellants has not complied with the settlement.

It was submitted that the original defendant filed a petition and affidavit seeking to set aside the said

order to issue the writ and to recall the writ and to obtain possession back from the plaintiff in respect

of Lot B 1 of the said plan mentioned above. However the original defendant died and steps have

been taken to substitute these appellants in the room of the deceased defendant. The plaintiff -

respondent filed his objections to the original defendant's applicationstating that the original

defendants as agreed under the settlement has not handed over vacant possession and has not

demolished and removed the building which was standing on Lot B 2. Thereafter the matter was fixed

for trial and evidence was led and both parties tendered their written submissions and the Learned

District Judge on 26.5.2000 delivered his order dismissing these appellant's application to restore

them to the possession of the said Lot B 1. Being aggrieved by the said order the respondent's

appealed on the grounds set out in paragraph 17 of the petition of appeal.

I. That the said judgment is contrary to law and against the weight of the evidence led.

II. That the Learned District Judge has not analyzed and evaluated the evidence led in the correct

perspective.

III. That the Learned District Judge has not considered the evidence given by the Grama Seva

Niladari of the area.

IV. That the Learned District Judge erred in holding that these appellants have not complied with

the said settlement.

V. That the Learned District Judge has not considered the contradictory evidence given by the

plaintiff- respondent.

5

VI. These appellants respectfully submitted that Learned District Judge has failed to consider the

totally of the evidence led by the parties.

VII. Learned District Judge has failed to consider the fact that the plaintiff-respondent has

obtained the writ by misleading Court and by suppressing material facts depriving the rights of

these appellants.

VIII. It is respectfully submitted that the said judgment is void and bad in law.

When this matter came up for argument on 12/02/2016 the substituted- defendant -appellant was

present and was represented by Attorney-at- Law and plaintiff respondent was absent and

unrepresented. The plaintiff- respondent has been given notice several times for a long period oftime

and finally this matter came up for argument and was concluded ex parte on 12-2-2016. It was urged

by the counsel for the substituted defendant petitioner appellant that in accordance with the

settlement that was arrived between the parties and recorded on 11-9-1987 and which terms and

conditions were read over to the parties by the Learned District Judge and explained to the parties

and both parties having understood the contents signed the case record. This settlement has been

marked and produced as e)1 by the plaintiff-respondent and produced at the inquiry. In the e)1

settlement condition No. 8 was marked as olqand was produced by the plaintiff respondent 01

condition No.8 states as fallows,

" If the defendant as aforesaid fails to remove the building, or fails to hand over possession of the

portion of the land marked B2 to the plaintiff on or before 31-1-1988, the plaintiff is entitled to eject

the defendant from the building and from the entire land without any notice to the defendant and to

obtain the writ of ejectment."

Lot B2 mentioned above is Lot B2 in plan No. 1407 dated 26-1-1970 made by U.L.M.De Silva surveyor

and has been marked and produced as 02 by the plaintiff- respondent. The plaintiff- respondent case

was that the defendant- petitioner- appellant did not give vacant possession of the portion of the land

marked as B2 and therefore the plaintiff- appellant by petition and affidavit dated 19-5-1988 applied

to court to issue writ of execution. On 27-5-1988 on the order of the Learned District Judge the fiscal

6

went to the land and executed the writ and ejected the defendant- petitioner from entire land and

possession was given over to the plaintiff- respondent. It was plaintiff- respondent case that she

complied with all the conditions and terms of the settlement, and the defendant- petitioner-

appellant did not comply. According to the settlement she applied for writ of execution and on the

orders of the Learned District Judge the fiscal went to the land on 27-5-1988 and ejected the

petitioner appellant from the said land. However it was urged by the defendant petitioner appellant

that a part of a new house put by the defendant- petitioner- appellant encroached on Lot 82 and

therefore no vacant possession was handed over to the plaintiff- respondent.

It was urged by the defendant-petitioner-appellant that the Learned District Judge has not considered

the evidence of Grama Sevaka who was called by the defendant- petitioner and who gave evidence

stating that the entire land was sold by the plaintiff- respondent above 5 years ago. He has stated in

his evidence that she did not question the plaintiff- respondent and that he has never met her earlier

and that he cannot say whether the settlement made by the defendant- petitioner is true or false.

However he said that when he visited the land it was one land and not two separate blocks above 5

years ago and that she has no interest in the land now. The entire land is now occupied by several

persons who bought the blocks from her. She has stated that after the settlement she drew a plan by

survey K.P. Wijeweera No. 161 dated 25-9-1987 marked Lot 1 of that plan which is to be given to the

defendant- petitioner as a defendant- petitioner- appellant did not give vacant possession of Lot 2,

because part of the old house belonging to the defendant- petitioner was there and that the new

house built by the defendant- petitioner also encroached lot 1 and 2 and the small building used as a

poultry shed was not removed and was still there in Lot 2. She said that she made a complaint to the

Wadduwa Police and filed papers in the District Court to obtain vacant possession. Thereafter on the

order of the Learned District Judge the fiscal went and ejected the defendantpetitioner from the

entire land and possession on the entire land was given on to the plaintiff respondent. To prove her

case the plaintiff respondent has tendered to Court en, 02, 03, 04, oS, 06q),06@,07 and 08

according to these document the plaintiff-respondent has proved that there was absolutelyno fault on

the part of the plaintiff- respondent. It was urged by the defendant petitioner appellant that notice of

the ejectment was not given to them.

7

On a perusal of the record I find that the Learned District Judge had stated that as defendant-

petitioner did not comply with the terms and conditions of the settlement that the defendant-

petitioner is not entitled to any writ to enter or possess Lot B1 and B2 in plan No. 407 as aforesaid.

The defendant- petitioner -appellant Mapataralalage Miulin Nona was called to give evidence and she

stated that she is a widow of the deceased defendant Gunadasa Perera and the other petitioners are

there children and she come to know that the plaintiff has filed action against her husband when she

received the summons issued to Gunadasa Perera. According to the settlement arrived by both

parties on 11-9-1987 the plaintiff has agreed to give 12 perches to defendant Gunadasa had agreed to

give vacant possession on receiving same. Plaintiff who was entitled to a bigger Lot there was old

house in the said premises built by father of Gunadasa Perera. She stated that the defendant

Gunadasa and she demolished the building standing on block B2 and removed the material on or

before 31-1-1988 and constructed a house in lot B1 and occupied and took possession of block B1

containing 12 perches and build a house on the said land. She stated that the plaintiff son erected

concrete post and barbed wire fence on the land between the land dividing the plaintiff land and that

of the witness. Further that on 27 May 1988 the fiscal together with a Police Officer came to the land

and ejected them. Thereafter the plaintiff fenced the entire land including the 12 perches. The

deceased Gunadasa Perera made a complaint with the Grama Sevaka on 2-2-1988 marked and

produced as @lol.

That the plaintiff informed him to take possession of the 12 perches. However, the plaintiff Piyasily

Athulathmudali has not given him the respective deed to that premises. According to @lo2 which is a

statement made by plaintiff- respondent to the Wadduwa Police he had threaten her son and has

stated that he is not going to vacate the premises. He also have forcibly erected a kitchen and had

planted some banana trees.

On a perusal of the evidence and the submissions before court we find that vacant possession of the

land should be given by the defendant petitioner on or before 3Pt of January 1988. The partition of

Lot B1 and Lot B2 has been done on 29-11-1987. It has to been done by the plaintiff before 12-10-

8

1987 under the terms and settlement in this case. It was the contention of the respondent- petitioner

that the plaintiff has been extensively questioned about this during cross examination but has failed

to give a proper answer for it. Therefore it was plaintiff who is the one who violated the terms of

settlement first. However he has obtained a writ misleading court and by suppressing material facts

depriving the rights of the appellants. It was submitted even if the plaintiff version of events is correct

that if the defendant has failed to hand over the vacant possession of Lot 82 before 31-1-1988 it is

unfair to deprive only the defendant the right he got under terms of settlement. It has been further

submitted that the plaintiff on her own Police complaint admitted that she had violated terms of

settlement it is unfair to allocate all the shares of the land to her depriving the defendants' rights

because of some violation. It was further submitted that during cross examination the plaintiff made

many contradictory comments that suggests that the defendant has complied with the terms of

settlement entered in this case. It was a position of the substituted- defendant that the Learned

District Judge has failed to evaluate those evidence correctly and decided the case solely based on the

defendants failure to get executed a deed through the registrar of the court in his behalf. As such it

was submitted that the Judgement of the Learned District Judge liable to be set aside. We are off the

view that the Learned District Judge has not been misled as the plan drawn by the surveyorhas been

surveyed and partitioned on 2pt of September 1987.

Therefore it is incorrect to say that plaintiff did not comply with the terms of settlement. The witness

Gunasily has stated in the police statement that said 12 perches had been separated on 28th of

November 1987. Where's the plan marked X shows that it has been surveyed and partitioned on 25th

of September 1987.Accordingly we find that the contention of the substituted -defendant-petitioners

is incorrect. Accordingly we reject the contention of the substituted- defendant -petitioner-

respondent. We hold that plaintiff respondent has not violated the terms of conditions. Accordingly

we hold that the substituted-clefendant- petitioners has failed to give vacant possession by not

removing the poultry shed in the said premises and giving vacant possession of Lot 82 to the plaintiff

and as such is liable to ejected from the premises. Accordingly we hold that Learned District Judge has

not been misled by the plaintiff-respondent- respondent. Accordingly in the present case we find that

the respondent has already disposed of the said property to the 3rd parties and is no longer in

9

possession of the said premises. We hold that the application of the substituted- defendant -

petitioner is futile. Accordingly we dismiss the appeal of the substituted-defendant-petitioner-

respondents and affirm the order dated 26-5-2000 of the Learned District Judge of Colombo.

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

10