==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

CA (Writ) Application No: 152/2018

In the matter of an Application in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka for mandates in the nature of Writs of Certiorari and Mandamus.

1. A.w.M . Shihar,

No. 41/3/1/1, Sri Wagiragnana Mawatha, Colombo 9.

2. M.T.M. Najeeb, No. 41/3, Sri Wagiragnana Mawatha, Colombo 9.

3. S. Francis,

No. 421/92, T.B. Jayah Mawatha, Colombo 10.

PETITIONERS

Vs.

1. Commissioner General of Labour.

2. E.C.P. Dabare, Deputy Commissioner, Special Investigations Division.

3. P.B. Chandi Pemabandu,

Assistant Commissioner of Labour, Colombo West.

1st - 3rd Respondents at Labour Secretariat, Depa rtment of Labour, Colombo 5.

4. M.A.M. Abdul Cader (Pvt.) Limited, No. 97, Poorwarama Road, Colombo 5.

1

Before:

Counsel:

5. Leather Fashions Company (Pvt) Limited. No. 97, Poorwarama Road, Colombo 5.

6. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J

Pubudu De Silva for the Petitioners

Ms. Nayomi Kahawita, Senior State Counsel for the 1st - 3rd and 6th

Respondents

S.N.Vijith Singh for the 4th and 5th Respondents

Written Tendered on behalf of the Petitioners on 17th July 2020, 20th August

Submissions: 2020 and 28th August 2020

Tendered on behalf of the 4th and 5th Respondents on 30th July 2020

and 20th August 2020

Decided on: 16th November 2020

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J

The issues that arise for determination in this application is two fold. The first is

whether the decision taken by the 3rd Respondent, an Assistant Commissioner of

Labour that the 4th and 5th Respondents are liable to pay the Petitioners gratuity for

their period of employment with them, is final. The second is, whether such decision

can be subsequently reviewed or amended by the 3rd Respondent herself or another

Deputy or Assistant Commissioner, and if so, the circumstances in which such

decision can be amended.

The facts of this matter very briefly are as follows.

2

The 1st and 2nd Petitioners had commenced their employment with the 5th

Respondent, a limited liability company on 3'd January 1990. The 3'd Petitioner had

joined the 4th Respondent, also a limited liability company on 22nd September 1987

and was holding the post of General Manager at the relevant time. The Petitioners

state that a Director of the 4th and 5th Respondents had summoned the Petitioners

to his office on 5th May 2009, and informed them that the 4th and 5th Respondents

were facing financial difficulties, and unable to keep the Petitioners in employment

any longer. Although the Petitioners admit that they were paid a sum of Rs. 123,500,

237,500 and Rs. 315,000, respectively at that point, the Petitioners claim that they

were forced to accept the said sums of money and forced to sign letters

acknowledging the receipt of the said sums.

The Petitioners had filed three separate applications before the Labour Tribunal of

Colombo complaining of unlawful dismissal from their employment on 5th May 2009.

As a copy of the application filed before the Labour Tribunal has not been filed with

the petition, I am unable to ascertain if the Petitioners had sought any relief from the

Labour Tribunal with regard to gratuity. The position taken up by the 4th and 5th

Respondents before the Labour Tribunal was that the Petitioners had resigned from

service voluntarily and that the aforementioned sums of money had been paid to the

Petitioners as gratuity, calculated on the basis of their last drawn salary and their

period of service. I must state that the above position had been suggested to the

Petitioners during cross examination before the Labour Tribunal, and that each of

the Petitioners had admitted that the above sums of money were received by them

on account of gratuity.

After a full inquiry where the evidence of each Petitioner was led, the Labour

Tribunal had rejected the position of the 4th and 5th Respondents that the Petitioners

resigned voluntarily, and had held that the services of the Petitioners have been

unjustly terminated. The Labour Tribunal had not ordered reinstatement, but acting

on the basis that the aforementioned sums of money were paid as compensation,

had enhanced the quantum of compensation that each of the Petitioners should be

paid. The Labour Tribunal had however directed that the said sums of money that

had already been paid to the Petitioners be deducted from the final sum that had

been ordered as compensation. Thus, even though the Petitioners had admitted the

position of the 4th and 5th Respondents that the above sums of money reflect the

3

payment of gratuity, the Labour Tribunal had proceeded on the basis that the said

sums of money were in fact paid as compensation.

Dissatisfied by the Orders of the Labour Tribunal, the 4th and Sth Respondents had

filed an appeal with the Provincial High Court of the Western Province holden at

Colombo. I am not in a position to ascertain whether the 4th and Sth Respondents had

raised the issue of gratuity before the High Court, or if the payment of gratuity

formed a question of law in the said appeals, for the reason that the petition of

appeal has not been tendered to this Court. The High Court, having heard the parties

had dismissed the appeals filed by the 4th and Sth Respondents. The judgments of the

High Court do not contain any reference to the payment of gratuity. It is not disputed

that an appeal has not been made to the Supreme Court against the said judgments

of the High Court.

The Petitioners claim that they lodged a complaint with the Labour Department

relating to the non-payment of gratuity prior to the institution of proceedings before

the Labour Tribunal, but that the Labour Department did not proceed with the

inquiry in view of the fact that the above applications were pending before the

Labour Tribunal. The Petitioners have not made available to this Court, a copy of the

said complaint made to the Labour Department.

After the dismissal of the appeals of the 4th and Sth Respondents by the High Court,

the Petitioners had re-agitated the issue of non-payment of gratuity with the Labour

Department. The 3rd Respondent, an Assistant Commissioner of Labour, having

conducted an inquiry with the participation of the Petitioners and the 4th and Sth

Respondents, had made three Orders dated 29th January 201S marked 'P7a', 'P7b'

and 'P7c' directing the 4th and Sth Respondents to pay the Petitioners the following

sums of money as gratuity:

Petitioner Order Years of service Last drawn Sala ry Amount Surcharge

1st 'P7a' 19 13000 123,SOO 370S0

2nd 'P7c' 19 2S000 237,SOO 712S0

3rd 'P7b' 21 30000 409,SOO 94S00

4

Instead of complying with the said directives or seeking judicial review thereof, the

4th and 5th Respondents had moved the 3rd Respondent to reconsider the said

directives. However, none of the parties have tendered to this Court any material

that was tendered by the 4th and 5th Respondents at the time they sought a

reconsideration of 'P7a', 'P7b' and 'P7c'.

By a letter dated 28th December 2017 marked 'P10', the 2nd Respondent, Deputy

Commissioner of Labour, having re-considered the issue, had informed the

Petitioners as follows:

u ~ fI'~ ~) ~lol\l) ElSeD fl'OO oJi3e!l)I$!l) §lc;,@ @GJel® ~ row oeDJCj IIll@ 1!5ll:ti\

@@IDffi ~5005 tllO fl'OO @GJel® =~t ~ @eOC3eil ~OO05 @@® ~@

Cl®Q)~CllelI ~ ~ @ffileDtti\ ID~ 1\l)1Ot~ c;,~) ~®."

I must note that 'P10' does not specifically set aside 'P7a', 'P7b' and 'P7c', nor does

'P10' refer to the material that was considered in taking the decision embodied

therein.

Aggrieved by the above decision in 'P10', the Petitioners filed this application,

seeking the following relief:

a) A Writ of Certiorari to quash the decision contained in 'P10';

b) A Writ of Mandamus directing that 'P7a' - 'P7c' be implemented and/or

enforced.

The grievance of the learned Counsel for the Petitioners is that the Commissioner

General of Labour does not have the power to conduct an inquiry on the same issue

for a second time and for that reason, the issuing of 'P10' is illegal and ultra vires the

powers of the 2nd Respondent. He submitted further that the decision of the 3rd

Respondent is the decision of the Commissioner General of Labour, and that once

the Commissioner General of Labour makes a deCision, all other Officers of the

Department of Labour including the 2nd Respondent are functus with regard to that

issue. The essence of this argument is that the 2nd Respondent acted ultra vires his

powers when he issued 'P10'.

5

The above argument of the Petitioners is supported by the following definition of

'Commissioner General of Labour' found in Section 48 of the Industrial Disputes Act:

"Commissioner means the person for the time being holding the office of

Commissioner of Labour and includes -

(0) ony person for the time being holding the office of Deputy or Assistant

Commissioner of Labour;

(b) in respect of any power, duty or function of the Commissioner under this

Act, any person authorized in writing by the Commissioner to exercise such

power, perform such duty or discharge such function;

(c) in respect of the power conferred on the Commissioner by section 3(1) (b),

any Labour Officer;"

In terms of Section 48A "Where a labour officer exercises any power of the

Commissioner under this Act, such officer shall be subject to the general or special

directions of the Commissioner." Thus, a distinction has been drawn between

decisions of a Deputy or Assistant Commissioner, and a Labour Officer, wifh specific

provision for the Commissioner General of Labour to examine decisions of a Labour

Officer.

The issue that I must therefore answer is whether the 2nd Respondent, exercising the

powers vested in the Commissioner General of Labour can amend, vary or cancel a

decision taken by the 3rd Respondent, who was also exercising the powers vested in

the Commissioner General of Labour.

I would like to commence by re-producing the following passage from

Administrative Law by Wade & Forsyth 1:

"It may be necessary to determine whether there is power to revoke or modify

the decisions or orders of an administrative authority or tribunal. The question

here is whether the authority itself has power to do this. This is different from

1 H.W. R. Wade and C.F. Forsyth, Administrative Law (11'0 Edition, 2014, Oxford University Press), page 191.

6

the question whether some other authority has power to do so, which may be

affected by a statutory provision that the decision 'shall be final'."

Having said so, the authors proceed to state as follows:

"In the interpretation of statutory powers and duties there is a rule that, unless

the contrary intention appears, 'the power may be exercised and the duty shall

be performed from time to time as occasion requires.' But this gives a highly

misleading view of the law where the power is a power to decide questions

affecting legal rights. In those cases the courts are strongly inclined to hold

that the decision, once validly made, is an irrevocable legal act and cannot be

recalled or revised. The same arguments which require finality for the decision of courts of law apply to the decisions of statutory tribunals, ministers and other

authorities.

For this purpose a distinction has to be drawn between powers of a continuing

character and powers which, once exercised, are finally expended so far as

concerns the particular case. An authority which has a duty to maintain

highways or a power to take lond by compulsory purchase may clearly act Jrom

time to time as occasion requires.' But if in a particular case it has to determine

the amount of compensation or to fix the pension of an employee, there are

equally clear reasons for imposing finality. Citizens whose legal rights are

determined administratively are entitled to know where they stand." 2

What is in issue here is whether the same public authority who made the decision

can revoke it or vary it, or whether a decision once made is final and conclusive and

not capable of being revoked by the same authority. Where such decisions affect

legal rights of people, Courts are strongly inclined to hold that the decision, once

validly made, is an irrevocable legal act and cannot be recalled or revised. The

general rule therefore is that once a decision is made by a public authority, such

decision is final and cannot be varied, revoked or rescinded. Wade & Forsyth goes

onto state that, "If a public authority has statutory power to determine some

question, for example the compensation payable to an employee for loss of office3, its

1 Supra, p 191, ' Livingstone v. Westminster Corporation 11904) 2 KB 109.

7

decision once made is normally final and irrevocable. This is not because the authority

and the employee are estopped from disputing it, but because, the authority has

power to decide only once and thereafter is without jurisdiction in the case." 4

There are however several well recognized exceptions to the above rule. The first

exception is where the power of review is provided for in the statute itself. It must be

stated that even in such a situation, the party prejudiced must be heard prior to any

change of decision.

English Courts have identified certain instances where decision-makers are

empowered to review, rescind or vary their decisions, even though such a power has

not been expressly provided. The following passage from Administrative Laws sets

out in a nutshell what those instances are:

"Even where such powers are not expressly conferred, it seems that statutory

tribunals have power to correct slips6 and to set aside decisions obtained by

fraud or based upon a fundamental mistake of fact'. 7 There has been little

discussion of the source of these powers; presumably they are implied from the

tribunal's statute.8

In Akewushola v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, 9 Sedley U held that

once the decision is made, "the maximum power must be to carrect accidental errors

which do not substantively affect the rights of the parties or the decision arrived at."

He proceeded to state that, "/ do not think that, slips apart, a statutory tribunal- in

contrast to a superior court - ordinarily possesses inherent power to rescind or review

its own decisions."

4 Supra; page 202

5 Supra; page 191-192. 'Akewusholo v. Secretary of State for the Home Department [2000J 1 WLR 2295. 'Fajemisin v The General Dental Council [2013J EWHC 3501 para 37-8 (Keith 1) in reliance upon Porteous v West Dorset District Council [2004J EWCA Civ 244 (local authority had power to retake a decision where a fundamental error of fact was found); similarly Crawley Borough Council v. B [2000) EWCA Civ 50 disapproving

of R v. South work LBC ex p Oagou (1995) 28 HLR 72 to the opposite effect).

8 The High Court has an exceptional power to reopen proceedings it has already determined where it was shown there would otherwise be 'significant injustice' and there was no other remedy (such as an appeal): Taylor v. Lawrence [2002J EWCA Civ 90. 9Supra.

8

In the case of Fajemisin v The General Dental Council lO the above passage by Sedley

U was interpreted as follows:

"The use of the word "ordinarily" suggests that Sedley U thought that there may

be situations other than the need to correct occidental errors where a tribunal

could re-visit its previous decision, but he did not say what they might be ... ln

short, Sedley U was saying, I think, that a tribunal's power to re-visit a previous

decision was limited to cases analogous to the slip rule 40.1211 of the Civil

Procedure Rules. The fact that the tribunal proceeded to determine the appeal in

ignorance of the true facts as a result of an administrative error was not

something which was capable of being corrected by something akin to the slip

rule.. Sedley U was saying that ordinarily the only circumstance in which a

tribunal can re-visit a previous decision it made was in the case of an accidental error. 1/

The second exception to the rule would therefore be the power to correct an

accidental mistake.

The third exception is where a decision has been obtained by fraud or fundamental

mistake of fact. Lord Denning held in Lazarus Estate Ltd. v. Beasley12that:

"No Court in this land will allow a person to keep an advantage he has obtained

by fraud. No judgment of a court, no order of a Minister, can be allowed to

stand if it has been obtained by fraud. Fraud unravels everything. The court is

careful not to find fraud unless it is distinctly pleaded and proved; but once it

is proved it vitiates judgments, contracts and all transactions whatsoever;"

Whether a decision could be reviewed where there is a fundamental mistake of fact

arose in Porteous v West Dorset District CouncilB In this case, Miss Porteous had

applied to the local housing authority to be housed as a homeless person. She had

received a letter informing her that she was eligible for assistance, as she considered

to be homeless with a priority need on account of her children and not intentionally

10 [20131 EWHC 350l.

11 Civil Procedure Rule 40.12 of the Civil Procedure Rules which provides that 'the Court may correct an accidental slip or omission in a judgment or order.'

12 {1956] 1 QB 702.

13 [2004J EWCA Civ 244.

9

homeless. She had previously lived in the district, with a sufficient local connection

to warrant the local authority accepting a duty under section 193 of the Housing Act

1996 to secure permanent accommodation for her as a matter of urgency. This

decision however had been made in ignorance of the fact that she was the tenant of

a property in another part of the country which was available to her, as she had

mistakenly thought that her tenancy of the property had been transferred to her

sister. When the correct position was discovered, the authority withdrew their

decision. The Court held that this decision was correct.

Mantell U held that:

"Is the local housing authority entitled to revisit and change on earlier decision if

the earlier decision resulted from a fundamental mistake of fact? It would seem

surprising if it could not. If an exception may be made for fraud why not for

fundamental mistake? After all the resulting harm may be no greater in the one

cose than the other. Here, without there being any suggestion of bad faith on

either side, unknown to either party there was accommodation available at the

date of the original decision. Once the true position became known why in

commansense and justice should the local authority be held to a duty to provide

accommodation which the applicant does not need and which could be made

available in another more deserving case?"

In Fajemisin v The General Dental Council.14 it was held that:

"it would be surprising if the original decision could not be changed even though

it had resulted from "a fundamental mistake of fact." If the original decision

could be changed if it had been brought about by froud, such as the deliberate

non-disclosure of relevant facts, why not for fundamental mistake? If '1raud

unravels all", why should fundamental mistake not do so as well? The

resulting harm would be no greater in one case than the other."

Accordingly, it was held that the authority had been entitled to withdraw its earlier

decision. Although Mantell U did not refer to Akewushola in his judgment

(presumably because it was not cited to the court), Porteous is authority for the

14 Supra.

10

proposition that, in addition to cases in which a public body can re-visit a previous

decision under the equivalent of the slip rule, a public body can re-visit a decision

which was made in ignorance of the true facts when the factual basis on which it had

proceeded amounted to a fundamental mistake of fact. This would then be the

fourth exception to the rule.

Having identified the exceptions to the rule, I must state that a party who wishes to

bring a decision under any of the above exceptions have a high threshold to satisfy,

and that the public authority must exercise caution in resorting to the said

exceptions.

I shall now consider if the decision in 'P10' falls under any of the above exceptions.

There is no doubt that it was the Commissioner General of Labour and his Officers

who had been named as Respondents to this application who were in the best

position to justify 'P10'. Although the 1st - 3rd Respondents moved for time to file its

Statement of Objections/5 a Statement of Objections explaining the circumstances in

which the Department of Labour decided to reconsider 'P7a' - 'P7c' was not filed.

The 1st -3rd Respondents therefore have failed to avail themselves of the

opportunity to tender the documents referred to in 'P10' that are said to have been

submitted by the 4th and 5th Respondents, and/or explain the circumstances which

led to a change in the decision contained in 'P7a' - 'P7c'.

By a motion filed on 23rd January 2019, the Attorney-at-Law for the 1st Respondent

had informed that the 1st Respondent is agreeable to hold a fresh inquiry into this

matter with the participation of the Petitioners and the 4th and 5th Respondents and

make a decision based on the findings of such inquiry. The Petitioners however were

not agreeable to the said proposal of the 1st Respondent.

By a further motion filed on 28th March 2019, the Attorney-at-Law for the 1st

Respondent had submitted that the 1st Respondent has no objection to (the) issuance of a Writ of Mandamus to implement the decisions marked as P7(a), P7(b) and P7(c)

to the petition. It is therefore clear that the Commissioner General of Labour is not

supporting its decision contained in 'P10', nor is the Commissioner General of Labour

15 Vide motion filed on 24'h December 2018 by the Attorney-at·Law for the 1" - 3" Respondents.

11

resisting this application. Although I would have found it useful had the

Commissioner General of Labour adduced reasons for the above decision conveyed

by the said motion, the decision of the Commissioner General of Labour conveyed to

this Court by the final motion is nonetheless clear.

Thus, even though the decision of the 2nd Respondent could have been explained in

the light of the above legal position that I have discussed, in the absence of any

explanation and/or the reasons and/or the circumstances that prompted the 2nd

Respondent to issue 'P10', the decision in 'P7a' - 'P7c' are final. I am therefore of the

view that the 2nd Respondent was functus and that the decision contained in 'P10' is

liable to be quashed by a Writ of Certiorari.

The failure on the part of the Commissioner General of Labour to explain the

circumstances that led to the issuance of 'P10' leaves the 4th and Sth Respondents in

a precarious position. Therefore, I shall now consider the material placed by the 4th

and Sth Respondents before this Court.

The 4th and Sth Respondents have annexed to their Statement of Objections,

payment vouchers marked '4R1A', '4R2A' and '4R3A' for the payment of the

aforesaid sums of Rs. 123,SOO/, Rs. 237,SOO and Rs. 31S,000 to the 1st, 2nd and 3rd

Petitioners, respectively. The Petitioners have acknowledged the receipt of the said

sums of money by the documents marked '4R1B', '4R2B' and '4R3B'. These vouchers

together with the receipts were marked by the 4th and Sth Respondents before the

Labour Tribunal to support its position that the said sums of money were paid to the

Petitioners on account of the gratuity payable to each of them. The position of the

4th and Sth Respondents that the above sums of money reflect the payment of

gratuity is in fact supported by the breakdown of the said sums of money, as well as

by the admission by each of the Petitioners before the Labour Tribunal that the said

sums of money were paid as gratuity.

The issue that I am faced with, as already discussed, is that the Labour Tribunal has

proceeded on the basis that the said sums of money have been paid as

compensation. Thus, the position of the 4th and Sth Respondents that they have paid

gratuity to the Petitioners has either been rejected by the Labour Tribunal, or the

Labour Tribunal misdirected itself on this issue. Either way, the Labour Tribunal was

12

of the view that the Petitioners should be compensated for the loss of employment,

at the rate of two months salary for each year of service. Thus, I am not in a position

to conclude whether the Labour Tribunal would have ordered more than two months

salary as compensation, had it been conscious of the fact that the above sums of

money had been paid on account of gratuity. These are matters that should have

been addressed by the 4th and 5th Respondents in their appeal to the High Court,

which unfortunately has not happened.

Furthermore, there is no material before this Court that the documents '4R1A',

'4R2A', '4R3A', '4R1B', '4R2B' and '4R3B' were placed before the 2nd Respondent

and/or 3rd Respondent, or whether the decision in 'P10' was as a result of these

documents, or whether these documents, not having been presented before the

Department of Labour are being presented before this Court for the purpose of

resisting this application. Either way, the 4th and 5th Respondents have not

established that the decision in 'P10' can be brought under one or more of the above

exceptions.

Taking into consideration all of the above factors, I am of the view that the 2nd

Respondent acted ultra vires his powers when he issued 'P10'. I accordingly issue a

Writ of Certiorari quashing the decision contained in 'PlO'. The necessity to consider

the issuance of a Writ of Mandamus is premature, and will arise only if the 4th and 5th

Respondents do not comply with 'P7a' - 'P7c', and the Department of Labour refuses

to implement the directives given by 'P7a' - 'P7c'. I make no order with regard to

costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J

I agree

Judge of the Court of Appeal

13