IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C A.(PHC) 122/2010

PHC Gampaha 1/2008 Writ

Gajasinghe Janak Prasad

De Silva and :Preethika De

Silva of No.2D,

Horakelewatte,

Horagasmulla, Divulapitiya.

PETITIONER-ApPELLANTS

Vs.

L. P. Harischandra,

No.72,

Divulapitiya

Horagasmulla,

PLAINTIFF -RESPONDENT

M.H. Abeysinghe Bandara,

+-' 'C $ 00 o Assistant Commissioner of ~

Agricultural Development,

Sri Bodhi Road, Gampaha

and two others.

RESPONDENTS-

RESPONDENTS

-rl

ro ~ ro a. E ro l!) u :r: a.. o rl o N -N N rl U :r: a..

ro U 1

BEFORE: A.W.A.SALAM,J & SUNIL RAJAPAKSE, J

COUNSEL: Dr. Sunil Cooray for the Petitioner and Anusha

Samaranayake SSC for the 2nd , 3rd and 4th

respondents.

ARGUED ON: 20.01.2014

DECIDED ON: 26.08.2014

A.W.A. SALAM, J. (P/CA)

This appeal has been preferred against the judgment of

the learned High Court Judge dated 6 October 2010.

By the said judgment the learned High Court Judge

dismissed an application made by the petitioners-

appellants (referred to in the rest of this judgment as

the "appellants") seeking a writ of cetiorari to quash the

nd order made by the 2 respondent-respondent (referred

to in the rest of this judgment as the "2nd respondent")

and the order made in the proceedings of inquiry held

into the complaint of the 1 st respondent-respondent

(referred to in the rest of this judgment as the "1st

responden t") by the 3rd d t respon en s-

respondents (referred to in the rest of this judgment as

nd rd the 2 respondent and/or 3 respondent as the case

may be).

The learned High Court Judge dismissed the

application for a writ of certiorari upholding the

preliminary objection that she has no jurisdiction to

entertain an application for a prerogative writ by reason

+-' ";:: ~ 00 o o N -.-i

ro ..c: ro c. E ro (..!J u :::c 0.. o .-i o N -N N .-i U :::c 0..

ro U 2

of the decision of the Supreme Court in M. P

Wijesooriya vs Nimalawathie Wanigasingha and others

(SC appeal No 33/2007-SC (SPL) L.A No 41/07.

The decision in M. P Wijesooriya vs Nimalawathie

Wanigasingha and others needs to be discussed at the

outset with a view to ascertain the applicability of it to

the present appeal. In that case, the landlord of a

paddy field complained against the tenant .cultivator of

his failure to provide the due share of the paddy yield

as per agreement between the two. An inquiry was held

into the complaint by the Assistant Commissioner of

the Agrarian Services of the relevant area and order

was made against the tenant cultivator directing him to

provide the due share of the paddy yield to the owner of

the paddy field. As the tenant cultivator failed to

provide the due share of the paddy yield, the Assistant

Commissioner issued a quit notice on the tenant

cultivator. Aggrieved by the said decision of the

Assistant Commissioner, the tenant cultivator preferred

an appeal to the Commissioner General of Agrarian

Development who ordered the setting aside of the

findings and order of the Assistant Commissioner.

Aggrieved by the order of the Commissioner General of

Agrarian Development the owner of the paddy field

invoked the writ jurisdiction of the Provincial High

Court of the area seeking to have the decision of the

said Commissioner General reviewed. The High Court

+-' c $ 00 o o N ....... rl

co .c

co 0. E co l!:) u ::r: a. o rl o N .......

N N rl G ::r: a.

co U 3

in the exercise of its writ jurisdiction granted relief to

the landlord (owner of the paddy field).

The litigation did not end at that point. The tenant

cultivator thereupon chose to invoke the revisionary

jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal under Article 138 of

the Constitution to have the decision of the J:Iigh Court

revised and set aside on the ground that the High

Court lacked jurisdiction to review an order/decision

made by the Commissioner General. At the conclusion

of the revision application thus filed, the Court of

Appeal held that the High Court in fact lacked

jurisdiction to reVIew the order / decision of the

Commissioner General. The tenant cultivator remained

dissatisfied with the decision of the Court of Appeal

and therefore sought special leave to appeal to the

Supreme Court on the question as to whether the,

Court of Appeal had erred in law by holding that the

Commissioner General of Agrarian Development is not

an officer exercising powers within the Province.

The above question was raised by the tenant cultivator

in the Supreme Court, mainly because Article 154 (4)

(b) of the Constitution empowers the High Court inter

alia to issue -yvrits of certiorari, prohibition and

mandamus against any person exercIsIng powers

within the Province.

... c ~ 00 0 0 N -rl

"' .J::.

"' a. E "' f.!) u I Cl. 0 rl 0 N -N N rl U

I Cl.

"' u 4

III I ,II ,1 t t I t I I

1r ! I

It may be useful at this stage to reproduce the relevant

Article of the Constitution which empowers the High

Court to issue writs. It reads as follows ..

154 P (4). Every such High Court shall have jurisdiction to issue, according to law

(b) order in the nature of writs of certiorari, prohibition, procedendo, mandamus and quo warranto against any person exercising, within the Province, any power under (i) any law; or (ii) ~ny statutes made by the Provincial Council established for that Province, in respect of any matter set out in the Provincial Council List.

Act No 19 of 1990 provides for matters regarding the

procedure to be followed in, and the right of appeal to,

and from, the High Court established under Article

154P of the Constitution; and for matters connected

therewith or incidental thereto. In terms of Section 3 of

the said Act titled High Court of the Provinces (Special

Provisions) Act, provides that a High Court established

by Article 154 P of the Constitution for a Province shall,

subject to any law, exercise appellate and revisionary

jurisdiction in respect of orders made by Labour

Tribunals within that Province and orders made under

Section 5 or Section 9 of the Agrarian Services Act, No.

58 of 1979, in respect of any land situated within that

Province.

In the case of ~RAGAMA vs EKSATH LANKA WATHU

KAMKARU SAMITHIYA AND OTHERS 1994 Sri Lanka

Law Reports volume 1 at page 293, the Supreme Court

held inter alia that under Article 154P, introduced by the

.... . .: S 00 o o N -..-i

rc ..c

rc a. E rc ~ U I 0... o ..-i o N -N N ..-i U

I 0...

rc U

5

Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution, the High

Courts of the Provinces had not been conferred with the

jurisdiction to issue writs of whatever nature in respect of

the orders, awards and decisions of the Labour Tribunals.

Referring to the background in which the 13th Amendment

to the Constitution was passed the judgment in the case

of WERAGAMA found that the Thirteenth Amendment of

the Constitution revealed no intention on the part of the

Legislature to devolve judicial power. The court observed

in that case that it was merely a re-arrangement of the

jurisdictions of the judiciary. In the circumstances, the

Supreme Court further held that to endorse the view that

a liberal interpretation should be adopted with regard to

the powers of the High Court and to hold that the High

Court is vested with powers to issue writs of whatever

nature against the decisions of Labour tribunal would be

a clear trespass into the Legislative domain. Hence, the

Supreme Court in the case expressed in no uncertain

language that Article 154P, introduced by the Thirteenth

Amendment, conferred no writ jurisdiction in respect of

Presidents of Labour Tribunals.

The same interpretation gIven In respect of Labour

Tribunals also ~hould be adopted in respect of the

decisions of the Agrarian Development Act No 46 of 2000

subject to the variation as to whether a particular decision

has been given by an officer under the said Act at a

provincial level or in the exercise of island wide powers.

.... ';:: ~ 00 o o N -.-t

III ..c:

III c. E III l:) U J: a.. o .-t o N -N N .-t U J: a..

III U

6

The learned High Court Judge in the impugned order

placed reliance in the judgment of M. P Wijesooriya vs

Nimalawathie Wanigasingha referred to above. The pith

and substance of the judgment in that case is that the

exercise of the island wide powers by the Commissioner

General of Agrarian Development within the domain of

the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal and not the High

Court. -'--\. The impugned order in this case has been made by the \

Assistant Commissioner placed at the Provincial level but

not in the exercise of his island wide powers. In other

words, the Assistant Commissioner who made the

impugned order is not empowered to make a similar order

outside the area to which he is appointed. No doubt he

has exercised the powers of the Commissioner General

under Section 38 (5) which empower him to exercise allar

any of the Powers of the Commissioner-General within the

area to which such Assistant Commissioner is appointed. ..... 'C $ 00 0 0 N -ri

!tl .s::.

!tl 0-E !tl {!) U :::r: c... 0 ri 0 N -N N ri I u

:::r: c...

I

!tl U

In the circumstances, the impugned order cannot be

taken as one that has been delivered by the Commissioner

General. When the Assistant Commissioner exercises the

powers given to the Commissioner General at Provincial

level, in my opinion he exercises powers vested in him on

provincial basis. In the circumstances, the judgment cited

by the learned High Court Judge as being applicable to

decide the question of jurisdiction is not relevant to the

instant appeal.

__ I

" 7

!

As such, the learned High Court Judge has clearly

misdirected himself with regard to the applicability of

the decision in the case of M. P Wijesooriya vs

Nimalawathie Wanigasingha and others (SC appeal No

33/2007-SC (SPL) L.A No 41/07.

Hence, this appeal is allowed and the impugned judgment

of the learned High Court Judge is set aside. Accordingly,

the case is sent back to the High Court to consider the

application of the "appellants" on its merits.

Appeal allowed and case sent back to the High Court for

re-hearing. (Emphases are mine)

President/Court of Appeal

Sunil Raj apakse, J

I agree

Judge of the Court of Appeal

... c ~ 00 a a N -.....

nl .c

nl a. E nl C,,!) U :::c c.. a ..... a N -N N ..... G :::c c..

nl U 8

ii

J(

II I ,I

Ij It