IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Case No. CA (Writ) 270/2013

Before: Janak De Silva J.

K. Priyantha Fernando J.

Counsel:

D.D.P. Dassanayake for the Petitioner

In the matter of an application for a mandate in the

nature of a Writ Mandamus under of Article 140 of

the Constitution of Sri Lanka.

Rupahinge Gunarathn a, (Deceased)

Ganga Addara Hena, Udakarawita, Ratnapura.

l(a) Rupahinge Nayananda Indrakumara,

2(b) Rupahinge Sarath Chabdra Kumara,

Both of Ganga Addara Hena, Udakarawita,

Ratnapura.

Substituted Ilal and 21b) Petitioners

Vs.

1. Land Reform Commission

C82, Gregory's Road (Now Hector Kobbilkaduwa

Mawathal, Colombo 07.

2. The Chairman

C82, Gregory's Road (Now Hector Kobbakaduwa

Mawatha), Colombo 07.

3. Hon. Gayantha Karunathilake

The Minister of Lands and Land Development

Ministry,

No. 1200/6, Mihikatha Medura,

Rajamalwatta Road, Battaramulla.

Respondents

5.5. Sahabandu P.c. with I. Abeysinghe for 1st ilnd 2nd Respondents

Manohara Jayasinghe SSC for the 3'" Respondent

Page lofG

Written Submissions tendered on:

Petitioner on 20.09.2018

1" and 2nd Respondents on 04.10.2018

Decided on: 06.03.2020

Janak De Silva J.

There were three connected cases namely C.A. (Writ) 270/2013, C.A. (Writ) 271/2013 and C.A.

(Writ) 272/2013. On 02.04.2019 when all three matters were taken up for argument before this

bench parties agreed that the matter can be disposed by way of written submissions fi led in C.A.

(Writ) 270/2013 and that the parties in C.A. (Writ) 271/2013 and C.A. (Writ) 272/2013 will be

bound by that judgment.

On 20.09.2019 when judgment was to be delivered Court was informed that the Petitioner in C.A.

(Writ) 270/2013 had passed away a few days earlier. On that day parties in C.A. (Writ) 271/2013

and C.A. (Writ) 272/2013 agreed that judgment can be delivered in c.A. (Writ) 271/2013 and that

the parties in C.A. (Writ) 272/2013 will be bound by that judgment.

This judgment is delivered after effecting necessary substitution and based upon the agreement

of the parties that the matter can be disposed on the written submissions.

Petitioner claims that the original owner of the land called "Ganga Addara Hena" and "Loka

Deniya Hena" containing in extent six acres and six perches (A.6 R.O P.6) was one C.M.C.

Thennakoon and that upon his death the title devolved to his heirs and that later it was owned

by the Land Reform COJl1mission the 1" Respondent. He further states that the 1" Respondent

has already sold three acres out of the said land to the Petitioner and that based on minor lease

agreements granted by the 1" Respondent, the Petitioner and his two sons are in possession of

the balance portion of the said land.

The grievance of th e Petitioner is that the 1" and 2nd Respondents are wrongfully seeking to

transfer the said land to a third party. He seeks the following relief:

(a) A writ of mandamus to compel the 2nd Respondent to answer Attorney-at-Law Chandana

Gunaratne's letter dated 01.08.2013 marked "X11";

(b) A writ of mandamus to compel 1" and 2nd Respondent's to not to transfer the said land to

the third party,

Page 2 of 6

(c) A writ of mandamus to compel to transfer to the Petitioner who is holding the minor lease

agreement marked "X8" according to the provisions of the LRC Circular no. marked as

"XIOa"l "XIOb" and IIXIDe".

The first relief compelling the 20d Respondent to answer letter marked "XlI" must be denied on

at least two grounds.

Firstly, the 20d Respondent is neither a legal nor a natural person.

In Haniffa v. The Chairman, Urban Council, Nawalapitiya (66 NLR 48LThambiah J. stated that

mandamus can only issue against a natural person, who holds a public office. In Samarasinghe v.

De Mel and Another [(1982) 1 Sri.L.R .. 123 at 12B] this Court quoted with approval Haniffa's

judgment as follows:

"The petitioner's application is beset with other difficulties as well. The petitioner has

made W. L. P. de Mel, Commissioner of Labour, the respondent to his application. It is

common ground that he has now ceased to hold this post and is presently the Secretary,

Ministry of Trade. The petitioner has not sought to substitute the present holder of the

office. A Mandamus can only issue against a natural person, who holds a public office. If

such a person fails to perform a duty after he has been ordered by Court, he can be

punished for contempt of Court. (See, Haniffa v. The Chairman, U. C. Nawalapitiya, 66 NLR

48). Before this Court issues a Mandamus, it must be satisfied that the respondent will

in fact be able to comply with the order and that in the event of non-compliance, the

Court is in a position to enforce obedience to its order. Mandamus will not, in general,

issue to compel a respondent to do what is impossible in law or in fact. Thus, it will not

issue ............... to require one who is functus officio to do what he was formally obliged

to do." (de Smith, r d Edn. 581). So it seems to me, that even if th e petitioner's application

succeeded, the issue of a Mandamus would be futile." (emphasis added)

Haniffa's judgment was again quoted with approval by this Court in Abayadeera and 162 Others

v. Dr. Stanely Wijesundera, Vice Chancellor, University of Colombo and Another [(1983) 2 SrLL.R.

267]. In Dayoratne v. Rajitha Senaratne, Minister of Lands and Others [(2006) 1 Sri.L.R. 7) the

Petitioner sought to rely on the Court of Appea l (Appellate Procedure) Rules 1990 to support his

argument that an application for writ of mandamus can be maint"ined against a public office

without naming th e holder of the office. Marsoof J. (<1t page 17) disagreed with this contention

Page 3 of G

and said that " ... this being an application for mandamus, relief can only be obtained against a

natural person who holds a public office as was decided by the Supreme Court in Haniffa v.

Chairman, Urban Council, Nawalapitiya" (emphasis added).

It is also to be noted that the Court of Appea l (Appellate Procedure) Rules 1990 applies to ~

applications under Articles 140 and 141 of the Constitution and therefore is general in nature.

The rule that in an application for a writ of Mandamus the Respondent should be either a natural

or a legal person is specific in nature. The difference between the remedies of certiorari and

mandamus was adverted to in Shums v. People's Bonk and others [(1985) 1 Sri.L.R. 197 at 204J by

this Court as follows :

"The other cases relied on by learned State Counsel were all cases where writs of

Mandamus had been applied for. In A. C. M. Haniffa v. Chairman, Urban Council,

Nawalapitiya (8). it was held that "A Mandamus can only issue against a natural person

who holds a public office: Accordingly in an application for a writ of Mandamus against

the Chairman, Urban Council, the petitioner must name the individual person against

whom the writ can issue". The judgment in that case gives a reason why a Mandamus can

only issue against a natural person, who holds a public office when it says that "If such a

person fails to perform a duty after he has been ordered by Court, he can be punished for

contempt of Court". On, the other hand in the case of a writ of Certiorari, what this court

does is to bring up a decision or determination of a statutory. Tribuna l. or a functionary

and quash it. Once such a decision or determination is quashed, it ceases to exist and a

fresh decision or determination would have to be made if the matter is again proceeded

with. The tribunal or functionary is not enjoined to do anything or desist from doing

anything, the question of non-compliance with such Orders resulting in contempt of court

does not arise. Therefore, it would be seen that the remedy by way of writ of Certiorari

could not be equated to one of Mandamus as far as the effect on the parties is

concerned."

In Chandano v. Commissioner General of Examinations and Others [C.A. (Writ) Application No.

1/2008, C.A.M. 06.06.2014J Nalin Perera J. (as he was then) held th<1t a writ of mandamus will not

issue against a person sued nominee officii.

ragt' 4 of 6

The Supreme Court in Gnanasambanthan v, Rear Admiral Perera and Others [(1998) 3 SrLL,R,

169J was called upon to consider the necessary parties to an application for writs of certiorari

and mandamus and Amerasinghe J, held (at page 171):

"In any event the question before us is not whether the Chairman of REPIA could be cited

nominee officii, which perhaps was possible in respect ofthe application for Certiorari but

not in respect of the application of Mandamus .. ," (emphasis added)

A Writ of Mandamus could only issue against a natural person, who holds public office

[Mahanayake v. Ceylon Petroleum Corporation and Others (2005) 2 Sri,L.R. 193J.

Secondly, a writ of mandamus will be issued only if there is a public or statutory duty. [De Alwis

v. De Silva (71 N,L.R. 108); Weligama Multi Purpose Cooperative Society Ltd. v. Chandradasa

Daluwatta (1984) 1 SrLL.R. 195; Hakmana Multi Purpose Cooperative Society Ltd. v, Ferdinando

(1985) 2 SrLL.R. 272; Piyasiri v. People's Bank (1989) 2 SrLL. R. 47; Sannasgala v. University of

Keloniya (1991) 2 SrLL.R. 193 and Samaraweera v. Minister of Public Administration (2003) 3

SrLL.R,64].

The Petitioner has not satisfied Court that there is a public or statutory duty to rep ly letter marked

The second reli ef namely a writ of mandamus to compel 1" and 2nd Respondent's not to transfer

the said land to the third party must also fail. Mandamus lies to compel the performance of a

statutory or public duty whereas th e second relief is directed at preventing the 1" and 2nd

Respondent's from acting in a par'ticular manner which is more akin to what is done by issuing a

writ of prohibition preventing a public authority from acting in excess of its power.

The third relief must also fail on at least three grounds,

Firstly, the prayer does not state to whom the writ of mandamus should be issued.

Secondly, all persons who would be affected by the issue of Mandamus shall be made

Respondents to the application [Wijeratnc (Commissioner of Motor Traffic) v, Ven. Dr. Poragoda

Wimalawansa Thero and 4 others (2011) 2 SrLL.R. 258J. The iL,tter marked "XU" with the petition

indicates that part of the land in dispute was lo be transfcm"ci to one Migara Jayasuncle ra by the

1" Respondent. He has not been mad" a party to this application.

Page 5 of 6

Thirdly, parties admit that presently there is a partition case pending in D.C. Ratnapura case no.

I5049/P. But the Petitioner has failed to make all parties in the said partition action Respondents

to this application although he has prayed for a writ of mandamus to compel to transfer to the

Petitioner who is holding the minor lea,e agreement marked "X8" according to the provisions of

the LRC Circular no. marked as "XlOa", "XIOb" and "XIOc".

For all the foregoing reasons, the application is dismissed with costs.

Judge ofthe Court of Appeal

K. Priyantha Fernando J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal