==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/CPA/0047/2025

Page 1 of 26

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for revision under and in terms of Article 138 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka and Section 11(1) of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990.

Competent Authority, Sri Lanka Ports Authority, No. 19. Chaithya Road, Colombo 01.

Applicant Vs.

Algewaththage Kasun, No. 370/9A, Bonavista, Unawatuna.

Respondent AND

Algewaththage Kasun Sanjaya, No. 370/9A, Bonavista, Unawatuna.

Respondent-Petitioner Vs.

1. Competent Authority,

Sri Lanka Ports Authority, No.19.

Court of Appeal Case No: CA/CPA/0047/2025 (CA/CPA/0048/2025) (CA/CPA/0049/2025) (CA/CPA/0050/2025) High Court of Galle Case No: ප්‍රති 880/25 Magistrate’s Court of Galle Case No: 62731/24

CA/CPA/0047/2025

Page 2 of 26

Chaithya Road, Colombo 01.

Applicant-Respondent

2. The Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12

2nd Respondent AND NOW BETWEEN

Algewaththage Kasun Sanjaya, No. 370/9A, Bonavista, Unawatuna.

Respondent-Petitioner-Petitioner Vs.

1. Competent Authority,

Sri Lanka Ports Authority, No.19. Chaithya Road, Colombo 01.

Applicant-Respondent-Respondent

2. The Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

2nd Respondent-Respondent Before : D. THOTAWATTA, J. K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

CA/CPA/0047/2025

Page 3 of 26

Counsel : Saliya Pieris, PC with Thanuka Nandasiri

and Himesh Tharuka for the Respondent- -Petitioner-Petitioner.

Manohara Jayasinghe, DSG for the State. Supported on : 29.09.2025 Written Submissions of the Respondent-Petitioner -Petitioner tendered on : 21.11.2025 Written Submissions of the Applicant-Respondent -Respondent and the 2nd Respondent-Respondent tendered on : 08.12.2025 Decided on : 12.12.2025 K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

The Respondent-Petitioner-Petitioner (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the

Petitioner’) in the instant application in revision filed before this Court, seeks

inter-alia, to revise and set aside the order of the learned High Court Judge of

the Southern Province holden at Galle dated 30.04.2025 made in an application

in revision bearing No. ප්‍රති 880/25 (P2) and the order of the learned Magistrate

of Galle dated 30.01.2024 made in case bearing No. 62731/24 (P3).

The facts relevant and material to the instant application in revision may be

briefly, set out as follows;

The Applicant-Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the

Respondent’) had made an application dated 09.07.2024 (hereinafter called and

referred to as ‘the application’) to the Magistrate Court of Galle in case bearing

No. 62731/24 under and in terms of the provisions of Section 5 of the State

CA/CPA/0047/2025

Page 4 of 26

Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act No. 07 of 1979 (as amended) (hereinafter

called and referred to as ‘the Act’) for the eviction of the Petitioner from a State

Land as morefully described in the schedule to the application (hereinafter called

and referred to as the ‘State Land’). The Petitioner who appeared before the

Magistrate Court of Galle in pursuant to the summons issued on him by Court

had filed a statement showing cause against the application wherein, he had

raised a number of preliminary objections as to the maintainability of the

application mainly, on the premise;

a) that the Respondent cannot be considered as a competent authority

for; the written approval of the Minister of the Sri Lanka Ports Authority

in terms of subsection 14 (2)(c) of the Act and a document stating that

the Authority had been granted general or special authority in terms of

section 18(h) of the Act, had not been submitted to the Magistrate Court

of Galle by the Respondent together with the application at the time of

the filing of the same in Court;

b) that the subject land is not owned by the Ports Authority for; it belongs

to the Forest Conservation Department;

However, the learned Additional Magistrate of Galle in the order(P3) had having

rejected the preliminary objections so raised by the Petitioner as to the

maintainability of the application together with the entirety of the Petitioner’s

showing cause, proceeded to grant the application directing eviction of the

Petitioner from the State Land by inter-alia, holding that the Petitioner had

shown no valid cause as required by section 9(1) of the Act, to the application

for ejectment made to it by the Respondent under section 5 of the Act.

Being aggrieved by the said order of the learned Additional Magistrate of Galle

(P3), the Petitioner had invoked the extra-ordinary revisionary jurisdiction of the

High Court of the Southern Province holden at Galle (hereinafter called and

referred to as the “High Court of the Province”) seeking to revise and set aside it.

The learned High Court Judge of Galle had by the order (P2), dismissed the

CA/CPA/0047/2025

Page 5 of 26

application in revision by holding that the learned Magistrate does not have any

legal authority to consider any of the matters which are alleged not to have been

considered by her in the application made before her by the Respondent under

section 5 of the Act and therefore, the Petitioner has no legal authority to raise a

challenge before the High Court of the Province for not considering such matters

and that on the other hand, since the Act itself provides a mechanism for an

aggrieved party by an order made in accordance with Section 10(1) of the Act, to

seek alternative relief under sections 12 and 13 of the Act and therefore, there is

no basis for the Petitioner to seek extra-ordinary revisionary jurisdiction of the

High Court of the Province. Hence, the instant application in revision by the

Petitioner.

When this matter came on before us on 29.09.2025 for support of the application

for notice of the same, Counsel for both parties agree that applications in revision

bearing Nos. CA(CPA)0048/25, CA(CPA)0049/25 and CA(CPA)0050/25 all relate

to the same issue and as such both parties to each of the application undertake

to abide by the decision that may be pronounced by this Court in the instant

application in revision, namely; CA(CPA)0047/25, and hence, we are proceeding

to pronounce a single order in the instant application in revision, namely;

CA(CPA)0047/25 in relation to the application for notice, binding all the parties

in each of the applications in revision, namely; CA(CPA)0048/25,

CA(CPA)0049/25 and CA(CPA)0050/25, of consent and as urged.

As observed by me hereinbefore, the defence so raised by the Petitioner to the

application is mainly, two-fold, namely;

1) Land in dispute is not a State Land vested in, owned by, or under the

control of the Competent Authority within the meaning of section 14(2)

of the Act but, a land belonging to the Forest Conservation Department;

2) The Respondent is not the competent authority within the meaning of

section 18 of the Act to be read with section 14(2)(c) thereof, for; the

written approval of the Minister of the Sri Lanka Ports Authority in

CA/CPA/0047/2025

Page 6 of 26

terms of subsection 14 (2)(c) of the Act and a document stating that the

Authority had been granted general or special authority in terms of

section 18(h) of the Act, had not been submitted to the Magistrate Court

of Galle by the Respondent together with the application at the time of

the filing of the same in Court.

Let me now, deal with them separately.

1) Land in dispute is not a State Land vested in, owned by, or under the control

of the Competent Authority within the meaning of section 14(2) of the Act but,

a land belonging to the Forest Conservation Department;

It is in this context, I would think it expedient at this juncture to examine the

structure and/or the scheme embodied in the Act and the provisions contained

therein with regard to an application that may be made to a Magistrate Court by

a competent authority under section 5 thereof for the eviction of a person who

in his opinion, is in unauthorized possession or occupation of a state land and

for the recovery of the same.

Section 3 of the Act enacts thus;

“3. (1) Where a competent authority is of the opinion

(a) that any land is State land; and

(b) that any person is in unauthorized possession or

occupation of such land, the competent authority may serve

a notice on such person in possession or occupation thereof,

or where the competent authority considers such service

impracticable or inexpedient, exhibit such notice in a

conspicuous place in or upon that land requiring such person

to vacate such land with his dependants, if any, and to deliver

vacant possession of such land to such competent authority

or other authorized person as may be specified in the notice

on or before a specified date. The date to be specified in such

CA/CPA/0047/2025

Page 7 of 26

notice shall be a date not less than thirty days from the date

of the issue or the exhibition of such notice.

(1A) No person shall be entitled to any hearing or to make any

representation in respect of a notice under subsection (1).

(2) Every notice under subsection (1) issued in respect of any

State land is in this Act referred to as a "quit notice ".

(3) A quit notice in respect of any State land shall be deemed

to have been served on the person in possession or occupation

thereof if such notice is sent by registered post.

(4) Every quit notice shall be in Form A set out in the Schedule

to this Act.”

Section 4 of the Act deals with the obligation to comply with a quit notice and it

enacts thus;

“4. Where a quit notice has been served or exhibited under section 3

(a) the person in possession or occupation of the land to whom such notice

relates or any dependants of such person shall not be entitled to possess

or occupy such land after the date specified in such notice or to object to

such notice on any ground whatsoever except as provided for in section 9,

(b) the person in possession or occupation shall together with his

dependants, if any, duly vacate such land and deliver vacant possession

thereof to the competent authority or person to whom he is required to do

so by such notice.”

Section 5 of the Act deals with the effect of non-compliance with a quit notice

and it enacts thus;

5. (1) Where any person fails to comply with the notice provisions of section

4 (b) in respect of any quit notice issued or exhibited or purporting to have

been issued or exhibited under this Act, any competent authority (whether

CA/CPA/0047/2025

Page 8 of 26

he is or not the competent authority who issued or exhibited such notice)

may make an application in writing in the Form B set out in the Schedule

to this Act to the Magistrate's Court within whose local jurisdiction such

land or any part thereof is situated

(a) setting forth the following matters

(i) that he is a competent authority for the purposes of this

Act.

(ii) that the land described in the schedule to the application

is in his opinion State land,

(iii) that a quit notice was issued on the person in possession

or occupation of such land or was exhibited in a conspicuous

place in or upon such land,

(iv) that such person named in the application is in his opinion

in unauthorized possession or occupation of such land and

has failed to comply with the provisions of the aforesaid

paragraph (b) of section 4 in respect of such notice relating to

such land, and

(b) praying for the recovery of possession of such land and for an

order of ejectment of such person in possession or occupation and

his dependants, if any, from such land.

(2) Every such application under subsection (1) shall be supported by an

affidavit in the Form C set out in the Schedule to this Act verifying to the

matters set forth in such application and shall be accompanied by a copy

of the quit notice.

(3) Every application supported by an affidavit and accompanied by a copy

of the quit notice under the preceding provisions of this section shall be

referred to as an " application for ejectment ".

CA/CPA/0047/2025

Page 9 of 26

(4) No stamp duties shall be payable for any application for ejectment.

Section 6 of the Act deals with the role of a Magistrate upon receipt of an

application made under section 5 thereof and it enacts thus;

“6. (1) Upon receipt of the application made under section 5, the Magistrate

shall forthwith issue summons on the person named in the application to

appear and show cause on the date specified in such summons (being a

date not later than two weeks from the date of issue of such summons)

why such person and his dependants, if any, should not be ejected from

the land as prayed for in the application for ejectment.

(2) The provisions contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure Act shall,

mutatis mutandis, apply to the issue of summons referred to in subsection

(1) and the service thereof and other steps necessary for securing the

attendance of the person summoned.”

Section 7 of the Act, makes provisions for an order for ejectment where no cause

is shown and it reads thus;

“7. If on the date specified in the summons issued under section 6 the

person on whom such summons was issued fails to appear or informs the

Court that he has no cause to show against the order for ejectment, the

Court shall forthwith issue an order directing such person and his

dependants, if any, to be ejected forthwith from the land.”

Section 8 of the Act, makes provisions as to the inquiry if cause is shown and it

enacts thus;

“8. (1) If a person on whom summons has been served under section 6

appears on the date specified in such summons and states that he has

cause to show against the issue of an order for ejectment the Magistrate's

Court may proceed forthwith to hear and determine the matter or may set

the case for inquiry on a later date.

CA/CPA/0047/2025

Page 10 of 26

(2) Where any application for ejectment has been made to a Magistrate's

Court, the Magistrate shall give priority over all other business of that

Court, to the hearing and disposal of such application, except when

circumstances render it necessary for such other business to be disposed

of earlier.”

Section 9 of the Act deals with the scope of inquiry and it reads thus;

“9. (1) At such inquiry the person on whom summons under section 6 has

been served shall not be entitled to contest any of the matters stated

in the application under section 5 except that such person may

establish that he is in possession or occupation of the land upon a

valid permit or other written authority of the State granted in

accordance with any written law and that such permit or authority is

in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered invalid.

(2) It shall not be competent to the Magistrate's Court to call for any

evidence from the competent authority in support of the application

under section 5.” [Emphasis is mine]

Section 10 of the Act makes provisions for order of ejectment and it reads as

follows;

“10. (1) If after inquiry the Magistrate is not satisfied that the person

showing cause is entitled to the possession or occupation of the land he

shall make order directing such person and his dependants, if any, in

occupation of such land to be ejected forthwith from such land.

(2) No appeal shall lie against any order of ejectment made by a Magistrate

under subsection (1).”

Upon a careful analysis of sections 3(1), 5(1) and 6(1) of the Act in conjunction

with sections 9(1) which enacts that “At such inquiry the person on whom

summons under section 6 has been served shall not be entitled to contest

any of the matters stated in the application under section 5 except that

CA/CPA/0047/2025

Page 11 of 26

such person may establish that he is in possession or occupation of the

land upon a valid permit or other written authority of the State granted in

accordance with any written law and that such permit or authority is in

force and not revoked or otherwise rendered invalid” and 9(2) thereof, which

enacts “It shall not be competent to the Magistrate's Court to call for any

evidence from the competent authority in support of the application under

section 5.”, it would become manifest that where the competent authority is of

the opinion that; a) any land is state land, and b) that any person is in

unauthorized possession or occupation of such land, the competent authority

may serve a notice by any of the modes set out therein on such person in

possession or occupation thereof, requiring such person to vacate such land with

his dependents if any, and to deliver vacant possession of such land to competent

authority or any other authorized person as may be specified in the notice on or

before a specified date to be specified therein; and that at such inquiry the

person on whom summons under section 6 has been served shall not be

entitled to contest any of the matters stated in the application under

section 5 except that such person may establish that he is in possession or

occupation of the land upon a valid permit or other written authority of the

State granted in accordance with any written law and that such permit or

authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered invalid; and that

It shall not be competent to the Magistrate's Court to call for any evidence

from the competent authority in support of the application under section

5. [Emphasis is mine]

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in Farook vs. Gunewardene-Government

Agent, Amparai 1980 (2) SLR 243, at pages 245 and 246 that, “Section 9(2) is

to the effect that the Magistrate cannot call for any evidence from the competent

authority in support of the application under section 5, which means that the

Magistrate cannot call upon the competent authority to prove that the land

described in the schedule to the application is a State Land (Section

5(1)(a)(ii))......The structure of the Act would also make it appear that where the

CA/CPA/0047/2025

Page 12 of 26

competent authority had formed the opinion that any land is state land, even,

the Magistrate is not competent to question his opinion. Alternative relief is given

by section 12 which empowers any person claiming to be the owner of a land to

institute action against state for the vindication of his title within 6 months from

the date of the order of ejectment and section 13 is to the effect that where action

is instituted by a person, if a decision is made in favour of that person, he will

be entitled to recover reasonable compensation for the damage sustained by the

reason of his having been compelled to deliver possession of such land...”.

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA/PHC/41/2010 decided on

31.01.2017 that, “The party noticed is not entitled to challenge the opinion of

the competent authority on any of the matters stated in the application....By this

amendment, the opinion of the competent authority in relation to the state land

was made unquestionable....”.

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA (PHC) APN 29/2016-decided on

09.07.2018 that, “....He cannot contest any of the matters stated in the

application made under section 5 of the Act. One of the matters required to be

stated in the application is that the land described in the schedule to the

application is in the opinion of the competent authority state land. This fact

cannot be contested by the person summoned....Hence, a dispute on the identity

of the land cannot arise for consideration of the learned Magistrate. The identity

of the land can arise for consideration only to the extent of examining whether

the valid permit or other written authority produced by the party summoned is

in relation to the state land described in the application. Where it is not, the

Magistrate must issue an order of eviction in terms of the Act...”

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA(PHC)48/2016-decided on

02.09.2025 that, “Under section 9 of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession)

Act, as amended in 1983, the competent authority’s opinion that land is a ‘state

land’ is conclusive and not open to judicial challenge at the ejectment stage and

the only permissible defence available to an occupier is to prove possession or

CA/CPA/0047/2025

Page 13 of 26

occupation under a valid permit or written authority issued by the state with the

burden of proof resting on the occupier, whose failure to establish such authority

would necessitate an order of ejectment.”

Upon a plain reading of section 3(1), 5(1) and 6(1) of the Act together with

sections 9(1) and 9(2) thereof and the judicial precedents referred to above, it

becomes abundantly, clear that, where the competent authority forms an opinion

that any land is state land, even, the Magistrate is not competent to question his

opinion and therefore, not open to judicial challenge at the ejectment stage in an

application made to Court by a competent authority under section 5 of the Act.

In the light of the law set out in section 3(1), 5(1) and 6(1) of the Act to be read

with sections 9(1) and 9(2) thereof and in the light of the law established by the

judicial precedents as referred to above, it is my considered view that a defence

to an application made by a Competent Authority to a Magistrate Court under

section 5 of the Act, that land which is the subject matter of the application, is

not a state land vested in, owned by, or under the control of the Competent

Authority within the meaning of section 14(2) of the Act, is wholly, foreign and

utterly alien to a proceedings that may be initiated by a Competent

Authority under section 5 of the Act before a Magistrate Court for eviction

of a person who in his opinion, is in unauthorized possession or occupation of

a land which in his opinion, is state land and therefore, such a defence to an

application made to Court by a competent authority under section 5 of the Act

is wholly, untenable in law, and therefore, not in any manner available to such

a person who in his opinion of the competent authority, is in unauthorized

possession or occupation of a state land for; the Legislature in enacting section

9 of the Act had never intended a defence as such to be made available to a

person as such except only, for the defence expressly, and explicitly, made

available therein.[Emphasis is mine]

CA/CPA/0047/2025

Page 14 of 26

A further reason for the above conclusion is manifest on a careful examination

of the said provisions of the Act and the judicial precedents referred to above. It

may now, be examined.

Upon a careful analysis of the Act, it becomes abundantly, clear that “Urgency”

appears to be “the hallmark” of this Act as observed by this Court in Farook vs.

Gunewardene-Government Agent, Amparai (Supra). Under section 3, 30 days

notice shall be given. Under section 4, the person in possession is not entitled to

object to notice on any ground whatsoever except as provided for in section 9

and the person who is in possession is required to vacate the land within the

month specified by the notice. Under section 6, the Magistrate is required to

issue summons forthwith to appear and show cause on a date not later than two

weeks from the date of issue of such summons. Under section 6A every

application made under section 5 shall be finally disposed of within a period of

two calendar months from the date of such application and where a Court

makes, in pursuance of any such application, an order under section 7 or section

10, directing that any person be ejected from the land referred to in that order,

the court shall make all such orders as are necessary to ensure that such

persons are ejected from that land within a period of three months from the date

of the application for ejectment. section 8(2) the Magistrate is required to give

priority over all other business of that court. Under section 9, the party noticed

can raise objections only on the basis of a valid permit issued by the State. Under

section 10, if the Magistrate is not satisfied, “he shall make order directing

ejectment forthwith and no appeal shall lie against the order of ejectment. Under

section 17, the provisions of this Act have effect notwithstanding anything

contained in any written law.

Besides, it was inter-alia, held by the Supreme Court in Senanayake Vs.

Damunupola-1982 (2) SLR 621 that, “The scope of the State Land (Recovery of

Possession) Act was to provide a speedy or summary mode of getting back

possession or occupation of ‘State Land’ as defined in the Act”, which was cited

by this Court in case bearing No. CA (PHC) 140/2013-decided on 10.10.2019.

CA/CPA/0047/2025

Page 15 of 26

Hence, it becomes abundantly, clear upon a careful analysis of sections 9(1) and

9(2) of the Act in particular that the Legislature in enacting this special piece of

legislation, had never intended for a protracted trial to be held by a Magistrate

in an application made to it by a competent authority under section 5 of the Act

when it had enacted section 9(1) thereto in such a manner as to expressly, and

explicitly, set out in unambiguous terms the scope of such an inquiry.

In the light of the above, the principal objective intended to be achieved by the

legislature in enacting the Act is to provide for a speedy or summary mode of

getting back possession or occupation of ‘State Land’ as defined in the Act as

explicitly, observed by the Supreme Court in the decision in Senanayake Vs.

Damunupola (Supra).

In view of the law set out above, the Petitioner in the instant application in

revision cannot in any manner, contest any of the matters stated in the

application made under section 5 of the Act by the Respondent to the Magistrate

Court of Galle. One of the matters so required to be stated in the application

under section 5 of the Act is that the land described in the schedule to the

application, is in the opinion of the Respondent being the Competent Authority,

State Land. Opinion so formed by the Respondent being the Competent

Authority, that it is in his opinion, State Land, cannot in any manner, be

contested by the Petitioner who was summoned under section 6 of the Act in

view of sections 9(1) and 9(2) of the Act.

Hence, such a challenge that the land stated in the instant application is not

state land vested in, owned by or under the control of the Competent Authority

but a land belonging to the Forest Conservation Department as raised by the

Petitioner in his showing cause before the Magistrate Court of Galle, cannot in

law, be raised by him for consideration of the learned Magistrate of Galle for; he

has expressly, been prevented and precluded by section 9(1) and 9(2) of the Act

by raising a contest as such inasmuch as this is an issue to be adjudicated upon

in an appropriate proceedings by a Court of competent jurisdiction for; such a

CA/CPA/0047/2025

Page 16 of 26

challenge as to the land in question, is utterly, foreign and alien to

proceedings as such initiated by the competent authority under section 5

of the Act. [Emphasis is mine]

Hence, I would hold that the contention advanced by the Petitioner in the

Magistrate Court that the land in question is not State Land but, a land

belonging to the Forest Conservation Department, ought to fail in law as rightly,

held by the learned Additional Magistrate of Galle.

The question that would next, arise for our consideration is as to the scope of

the inquiry in proceedings that may be initiated by a competent authority under

section 5 of the Act in a Magistrate Court and section 9 of the Act sets out the

scope of the inquiry and it may be reproduced verbatim the same as follows;

“9. (1) At such inquiry the person on whom summons under section 6 has

been served shall not be entitled to contest any of the matters stated

in the application under section 5 except that such person may

establish that he is in possession or occupation of the land upon a

valid permit or other written authority of the State granted in

accordance with any written law and that such permit or authority is

in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered invalid.

(2) It shall not be competent to the Magistrate's Court to call for any

evidence from the competent authority in support of the application

under section 5.” [Emphasis is mine]

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in Farook vs. Gunewardene-Government

Agent, Amparai (Supra) that, “At the inquiry before the Magistrate, the only

plea by way of defence that the Petitioner can put forward is that he is in

possession or occupation of the land upon a valid permit or other written

authority of the State granted in accordance with any written law and that such

permit or authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered invalid.”

CA/CPA/0047/2025

Page 17 of 26

It was inter-alia, held in Muhandiram v. Chairman, No. 111, Janatha

EstateDevelopment Board 1992 (1) SLR 110 at page 112 that, “Under section

9(1) of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act No. 7 of 1979, the person on

whom summons has been served (in this instance, the Respondent-Petitioner)

shall not be entitled to contest any of the matters stated in the application under

section 5 except that such person may establish that he is in possession or

occupation of the land upon a valid permit or other written authority of the State

granted in accordance with any written law and that such permit or written

authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered invalid...... The said

section clearly reveals that at an inquiry of this nature, the person on whom the

summons has been served has to establish that his possession or occupation is

upon a valid permit or other written authority of the State granted according to

the written law. The burden of proof of that fact lies on that particular person on

whom the summons has been served and appears before the relevant Court.”.

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA/PHC/41/2010(Supra) that, “Under

section 9 of the State Land (Recovery of Possession) Act, the scope of the inquiry

is limited to the person noticed to establish he is not in unauthorized occupation

or possession by establishing that;

1. Occupying the land on a permit or a written authority.

2. It must be a valid permit or a written authority.

3. It must be in force at the time of presenting it to Court.

4. It must have been issued in accordance with any written law.”

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA (PHC) APN 29/2016(Supra) that, “A

person who has been summoned in terms of section 6 of the Act can only

establish that, he is in possession or occupation of the land upon a valid permit

or other written authority of the State granted in accordance with any written

law and that such permit or authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise

rendered invalid. He cannot contest any of the matters stated in the application

under section 5 of the Act.”

CA/CPA/0047/2025

Page 18 of 26

It was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA(PHC)48/2016 (Supra) that, “.... the

only defence available is to prove possession is upon a valid permit or written

authority, issued in accordance with law, and which should be in force....”.

In the light of the law set out in section 9 of the Act and the judicial precedent

referred to above, at an inquiry of this nature, the person on whom the summons

has been served (in this instance the Petitioner) has to establish that his

possession or occupation is upon a valid permit or other written authority of the

State granted according to the written law and that such permit or written

authority is in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered invalid.

It is significant to observe that, it had never been the position of the Petitioner

taken up in the Magistrate Court that his possession or occupation of the land

in dispute which in the opinion of the Respondent being the Competent Authority

is State Land, is upon a valid permit or other written authority of the State

granted according to the written law and that such permit or written authority

is in force and not revoked or otherwise rendered invalid, but, instead his

position had been that it is not State Land vested in, owned by, or under the

control of the Competent Authority within the meaning of section 14(2) of the Act

but, a land belonging to the Forest Conservation Department.

Hence, the Petitioner’s argument that the land is not a state land vested in,

owned by, or under the control of the Competent Authority within the meaning

of section 14(2) of the Act but, a land belonging to the Forest Conservation

Department, cannot sustain both in fact and law, for; he is precluded by section

9(1) and 9(2) of the Act from raising such a contest on the land-the subject matter

of the application made to Court by the Respondent being the Competent

Authority.

On the other hand, the Respondent being the Competent Authority had already,

formed an opinion that the land-the subject matter of the application, is a State

Land and that the Petitioner is in unauthorized possession or occupation

therein. However, as observed by me elsewhere in this judgment, it is significant

CA/CPA/0047/2025

Page 19 of 26

to note that, not an iota of evidence had been adduced by the Petitioner to

establish that he is in possession or occupation of the State Land upon a valid

permit or other written authority of the State, granted in accordance with any

written law and that such permit or authority is in force and not revoked or

otherwise rendered invalid as required by section 9 of the Act. Hence, the

Petitioner did not have semblance of such a permit or authority as envisaged by

section 9 of the Act.

In view of the above, it clearly, appears to me that the Petitioner had adduced

not even an iota of evidence to satisfy the learned Additional Magistrate of Galle

that he was entitled to the possession or occupation of the State Land as rightly,

held by the learned Additional Magistrate of Galle.

Hence, I would hold that, the contention so advanced by the learned President’s

Counsel for the Petitioner that, the land in dispute is not a state land vested in,

owned by, or under the control of the Competent Authority within the meaning

of section 14(2) of the Act but, a land belonging to the Forest Conservation

Department, is not entitled to succeed, both in fact and law and as such, it

should be rejected in-limine.

2) The Respondent is not the Competent Authority within the meaning of

section 18 of the Act to be read with section 14(2)(c) thereof, for; the

written approval of the Minister of the Sri Lanka Ports Authority in

terms of subsection 14 (2)(c) of the Act and a document stating that the

Authority had been granted general or special authority in terms of

section 18(h) of the Act, had not been submitted to the Magistrate Court

of Galle by the Respondent together with the application at the time of

the filing of the same in Court.

It may now, be examined.

In the course of his submissions made at the time of supporting the instant

application in revision for notice, it was further contended by the learned

President’s Counsel for the Petitioner that section 14(2)(c) of the Act stipulates

CA/CPA/0047/2025

Page 20 of 26

that the authority to act on behalf of the State must be vested through an

appointment made by the Minister in charge of the subject and therefore, unless

and until such an appointment is proved by producing the relevant Gazette

notification or written authorization, no person can lawfully, exercise powers

under the said provision. In support thereof, the learned President’s Counsel for

the Petitioner sought to heavily, rely on a decision of the Court of Appeal in

Alwis Vs. Wedamulla, Additional Director General U.D.A. 1997 [3] SLR 417

which inter-alia, held that, “….the proceedings in ejectment could be instituted by

the Urban Development Authority against a person who is in occupation of land

vested in the Urban Development Authority provided such applications to eject

are authorised and have had the written approval of the Minister of Housing.

Thus, the statutory provisions of the Urban Development Authority Act and the

State Lands (Recovery of possession) Act set out a condition precedent for the

filing of applications for ejectment before the Magistrate’s Court”

However, it is significant and interesting to observe that the Supreme Court in

the decision in Wedamulla Vs. Abeysinghe 1999 [3] SLR 26 had sitting in

appeal of the decision in Alwis Vs. Wedamulla, Additional Director General

U.D.A.(Supra), which was heavily, relied on by the learned President’s Counsel

for the Petitioner in support of the application for notice, set it aside by holding

that “With regard to the second ground, it might be assumed that the necessary

steps were taken, including the obtaining of the Minister's approval. Ominia

praesumuntur rite et solemniter esse acta.”.

The second ground so referred to in the Supreme Court Judgement in

Wedamulla Vs. Abeysinghe(Supra) being one set out in page 27 of the Supreme

Court Judgement (Supra) which reads thus; “(2) That the approval of the Minister

of Housing was "a condition precedent for the institution of proceedings in Court

directed at evicting or ejecting any person in possession of property vested in the

Urban Development Authority”. This being one of the principal findings of the

Court of Appeal in Alwis Vs. Wedamulla, Additional Director General

U.D.A.(Supra) which led the Court of Appeal to have set aside the orders made

CA/CPA/0047/2025

Page 21 of 26

by the learned Magistrate granting the applications filed by the Competent

Authority under section 5(1) of the Act for ejectment upon which the learned

President’s Counsel for the Petitioner had placed heavy reliance in support of his

contention so advanced before us as enumerated above.

Hence, I am inclined to the same view as expressed by this Court in the decision

in CA(PHC)212/2006-Decided on 24.07.2018 that, his Lordship, Justice

Amarasinghe in the decision in Wedamulla Vs. Abeysinghe(Supra), did not in

any manner, proceed to uphold the position of the Court of Appeal taken in the

decision in Alwis Vs. Wedamulla, Additional Director General U.D.A.(Supra)

that “….proof of grant of such approval is a condition precedent to the institution

of proceedings for ejectment.” That is why his lordship Justice Amarasinghe had

sought to rely on the maxim Ominia praesumuntur rite et solemniter esse acta

which means that there is a presumption known to the law that all legal and

official acts are correctly and duly performed by the relevant parties concerned.

Omnia praesumuntur rite et solemniter esse acta and this presumption is

generally, known and referred as the “Doctrine of Presumption of Regularity” and

this Doctrine of Presumption of Regularity has been given judicial recognition by

our Evidence Ordinance by enacting illustration d) to section 114 thereof, which

reads thus;

“The court may presume the existence of any fact which it thinks likely to

have happened, regard being had to the common course of natural events,

human conduct, and public and private business in their relation to the

facts of the particular case:-

(d) the judicial and official acts have been regularly performed;”

See also; Jayasinghe v. Gnanawathie Menike 1997 [3] SLR 410 at 412].

However, this is a rebuttable presumption and therefore, it can be rebutted by

proof on the contrary and in the result, the burden will solely, lie on the person

who asserts on the contrary in terms of sections 101 and 102 of the Evidence

Ordinance and hence, the contention of the Petitioner that the burden of proof

CA/CPA/0047/2025

Page 22 of 26

on the contrary will solely, lie on the Respondent, is one advanced on total

misconception and/or misapprehension of the section 114 of the Evidence

Ordinance to be read with sections 101 and 102 of thereof.

I would therefore, take the view following the Supreme Court decision in

Wedamulla Vs. Abeysinghe (Supra) that the correct legal position is that where

section 14(2) of the Act applies, the competent authority need not produce the

relevant approval with the application made to the Magistrates Court for; the

scheme of the Act prevents such matters been raised before the Magistrate (Vide-

sections 9(1) and (2) of the Act). However, it is to be noted that, nevertheless, the

learned Additional Magistrate of Galle acting in total contravention of the law set

out in sections 5(1) and 9(2) of the Act, called for those two documents (P14 and

P15) from the Competent Authority which is in my opinion, an act of ultra-vires

of the powers vested in the learned Magistrate.

Hence, it is my considered view, that the mere fact that the Competent Authority

fails to submit such approval to the Magistrates Court when he initiates

proceedings or during an inquiry, does not in any manner, constitute a valid

ground to dismiss an application made by a Competent Authority to a Magistrate

Court under section 5 of the Act.

In fact, the Minister's approval(P15) under section 14 (2) of the Act had been

obtained prior to proceedings for ejectment being taken on 09.07.2024 (P4). The

Minister's order is dated 09.08.2023-long prior to the institution of the

proceedings before the Magistrate Court of Galle by the Competent Authority on

09.07.2024 (P4). Furthermore, in terms of section 18(h) of the Act, Sri Lanka

Ports Authority had duly, appointed Thushara Chaminda Kariyawasam

Paranawithana, Superintending Engineer (Maintenance) as the Competent

Authority with effect from 01.09.2010 (P14)-long prior to the institution of the

proceedings before the Magistrate Court of Galle by the Competent Authority on

09.07.2024 (P4).

CA/CPA/0047/2025

Page 23 of 26

It thus, clearly, appears that such a contention as enumerated above, had been

advanced by the learned President’s Counsel for the Petitioner on a total

misconception and/or total misapprehension of the law embodied in sections

5(1), 9(1), 9(2) and 14(2) of the Act as well as the ratio decidendi of the Supreme

Court decision in Wedamulla Vs. Abeysinghe (Supra).

Hence, it clearly, appears that the Petitioner’s placing heavy reliance on the

decision in Alwis Vs. Wedamulla, Additional Director General U.D.A.(Supra)

in support of his contention as so advanced, was due to his total and/or complete

ignorance of the fact that the decision which he so heavily, relied on, had

subsequently, been set aside by the Supreme Court sitting in appeal in the

decision in Wedamulla Vs. Abeysinghe(Supra).

I would therefore, hold that the contention so advanced by the learned

President’s Counsel for the Petitioner as enumerated above, cannot in any

manner, sustain both in fact and law and as such, it should be rejected in-limine,

and the instant application in revision is therefore, dismissed in-limine.

In the light of the above, I would find myself unable to agree with the next

contention so advanced by the learned Counsel for the Appellant for; it cannot

sustain in law and as such it ought to be rejected in-limine.

A further reason for the above conclusion is manifest on a careful examination

of the said provisions of the Act and the judicial precedents referred to above. It

may now, be examined.

In view of sections 9 (1) and 9(2) of the Act, the person who has been summoned

is not entitled to contest any of the matters stated in the application under

section 5 of the Act and one of such matters to be stated in the application made

under Section 5 of the Act is that the person making the application is a

Competent Authority for the purposes of the Act.

Besides, the Respondent had in his affidavit filed along with his application

under section 5 of the Act before the Magistrate Court of Galle clearly, and

CA/CPA/0047/2025

Page 24 of 26

unequivocally, affirmed to the fact he is the competent authority within the

meaning of the Act which fact cannot in any manner, be contested by the

Appellant in view of sections 9(1) and 9(2) of the Act.

Furthermore, it was inter-alia, held by this Court in CA(PHC)APN

29/2016(supra) that “The Petitioner submitted that the Respondent was not the

competent authority in respect of the lands vested with the SLSPC. Such an

objection is not a matter that can be taken up before the learned Magistrate or

in these proceedings. One of the factors to be stated in the application made

under section 5 of the Act is that the person making the application is a

competent authority for the purposes of the Act. In view of section 6 of the Act,

a person who has been summoned cannot contest that the claimant is not a

competent authority. That is an issue to be tested in appropriate proceedings.”

Hence, I would hold that, the next contention advanced by the learned

President’s Counsel for the Petitioner, namely; the Respondent is not a

Competent Authority within the meaning of the “Act”, cannot in any manner,

sustain both in fact and law and therefore, it too, should be rejected in-limine.

Hence, I would hold that the learned Additional Magistrate of Galle was entirely,

justified both in fact and law in making an order directing the Petitioner and his

dependents, if any, in occupation of the State Land as morefully, described in

the schedule to the application made to Court by the Respondent being the

Competent Authority, to be ejected forthwith therefrom.

In the circumstances, I would see no error both in fact and law in the order of

the learned Additional Magistrate of Galle and therefore, it can sustain both in

fact and law as rightly, held by the learned High Court Judge of Galle

Hence, I would see no error both in fact and law in the order of the learned High

Court Judge of Galle too, when she had proceeded to dismiss the application in

revision filed by the Petitioner before the High Court inviting it to invoke its extra-

ordinary revisionary jurisdiction to revise and set aside the order of the learned

Additional Magistrate of Galle by holding that, the order sought to be revised is

CA/CPA/0047/2025

Page 25 of 26

not contrary to law and that in view of the alternative remedy provided for by

section 12 and 13 of the Act itself, Court would not in such circumstances,

invoke the extra-ordinary revisionary jurisdiction vested in it.

In view of the foregoing, I would hold that, the instant application in revision is

not entitled to succeed both in fact and law.

Hence, I would hold that this is not a fit and proper case for this Court to issue

notices on the Respondent and hence, notice is refused.

In the result, I would affirm the orders of both the learned High Court Judge of

Galle and the learned Additional Magistrate of Galle.

Above all, as a matter of pure question of law, the instant application in revision

ought to have been dismissed in-limine even without proceeding to hear the

application for notice in view of the decision of this Court in the case in Wanni

Arachchi Kamkanamge Siriyalatha and Another Vs. Kospalage Don Kapila

Lankarathne-CA/CPA/0073/2025-Decided on 31.10.2025 for; the Petitioner

in the instant application cannot invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of this Court

against the order dated 30.04.2025 made by the learned High Court Judge of

Galle (P2) in the exercise of concurrent or parallel revisionary jurisdiction vested

in it by Article 154P(3)(b) to be read with Article 138 of the Constitution and

section 5 and 12 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act as

amended, for; the Petitioner had already exhausted the remedy available by the

law as enumerated above, by invoking extra-ordinary revisionary jurisdiction

now, vested in the High Court of the Province which this Court had exercised

before the enactment of the 13th Amendment to the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka and therefore, the Petitioner is now,

debarred from invoking the concurrent or parallel revisionary jurisdiction of this

Court against the said order of the learned High Court Judge of Galle made in

the exercise of concurrent or parallel jurisdiction vested in her by Article

154P(3)(b) of the Constitution to be read with Article 138 thereof and section 5

and 12 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act as amended.

CA/CPA/0047/2025

Page 26 of 26

I would therefore, hold that the instant application in revision is misconceived

in law and therefore, bad in law and as such it should be dismissed in-limine.

Hence, I would proceed to dismiss the instant application with costs of this court

and the courts below in-limine.

In view of the agreement so reached by all the parties in Court at the outset as

stated above, I would hold that the applications in revision bearing Nos.

CA(CPA)0048/25, CA(CPA)0049/25 and CA(CPA)0050/25 too, would stand

dismissed with costs of this Court and below in view of the decision of this Court

in the instant application in revision, namely; CA(CPA)0047/25.

In the circumstances, I would direct the Registrar of this Court to file a copy of

the order in the instant application in revision of record of all three applications

in revision bearing Nos. Nos. CA(CPA)0048/25, CA(CPA)0049/25 and

CA(CPA)0050/25.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL