==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

Orders in the nature of Writs of

Certiorari, Prohibition and Mandamus

under Article 140 of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Warakamure Gedara Ahamed

Mohamed Mazeen,

No. 15/2, (8A), Kurundigaha Ela,

Akurana.

PETITIONER

CA (Writ) App. No. 151/2021

Vs.

1. Ms. A.H.M. Indika Kumari Abesinghe,

Divisional Secretary, Divisional Secretary’s Office, Akurana.

1A. Dilini Ruwandika Kumari Hennayaka,

Divisional Secretary, Divisional Secretary’s Office, Akurana. 2. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

2

Before: Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Counsel:

Murshid Maharoof with S. Ahamed and Ishfar Uwais instructed by A.M. Jiffry for the

Petitioner.

Shemanthi Dunuwille, S.C. for the Respondents.

Argued on: 29.04.2026

Delivered on: 26.06.2026

3

Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Judgement

Introduction

The Petitioner in this Application seeks to challenge the Notice to Quit issued by the 1st Respondent

under the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act, and the proceedings instituted in the

Magistrate’s Court to eject the Petitioner from the land in question in respect of which the said

Notice to Quit is sent marked as P13 annexed to the Petition was issued.

After formally supporting the matter, the Court issued formal notice and thereafter, the

Respondents have filed their respective Objections by which they have sought the dismissal of this

Application relying upon several documents which includes R1, which is the same document

marked as P16 annexed to the Petition and relied upon by the Petitioner himself. In addition to

that, two more documents have been relied upon by the Respondents.

However, after filing Counter Affidavits, the matter was argued before me on 29.04.2026, and the

following arguments were advanced by the counsel; hence, this judgement.

Arguments

The first contention advanced by Mr. Maharoof, the Counsel for the Petitioner is that the disputed

land is claimed by the 1st Respondent as well as the Petitioner, and the 1st Respondent is occupying

the office building of the adjacent land of the Petitioner; therefore, he cannot take a decision under

the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act and issue a notice on the Petitioner, which amounts

to judging his own cause; thus, the 1st Respondent has violated the rules of natural justice.

4

The second contention advanced by Mr. Maharoof is that the 1st Respondent, if at all, should have

established his title to the Lot A depicted in Plan P16 by a properly constituted action in the District

Court.

On the other, Ms. Dunuwille, S.C., the Counsel for the Respondents argues that the 1st Respondent

is the competent authority, and therefore, the Petitioner cannot dictate terms to him on what to do

and what not to do as he is under a duty to issue notice and empowered take actions under the State

Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act as the Petitioner has encroached upon a portion of the land

belonging to the State.

Secondly, she contends that although the Petitioner is challenging P16, he is not entitled to

challenge it by virtue of the provisions of Section 83 of the Evidence Ordinance, as there is a

presumption attached to the plan prepared by the survey general. Therefore, without directly

attacking it, he challenges the same in this action.

Thirdly, it is her contention that the Divisional Secretary has formed its opinion based on P16,

which is a plan prepared after P15; therefore, the decision reflected in P13 is rational because he

had formed his opinion on a recent plan prepared by the survey general.

The Petitioner’s position

The Petitioner claims that he became the owner of a land, which he claims is in extent of 6.23

Perches, situated in the heart of the town of Akurana, by virtue of the Transfer Deed bearing No.

42704 marked as P1, the Deed of Gift marked as P2, and another deed bearing No. 4952 marked

as P3. The Petitioner further claims that he submitted an application for a development permit

along with a building plan to the ‘Akurana Pradeshiya Sabha’, and the same had been approved,

which are marked as P4 and P5 respectively.

5

Thereafter, the Petitioner has constructed a three-storied shopping complex on the said land, and

the photographs thereof are annexed to the Petition and marked as P6(a) and P6(b). The Petitioner

asserts that part of the Petitioner's land, along with several other allotments of land belonging to

third parties, had been acquired by the Government as far back as 1983. The land so acquired is

depicted in the survey plan prepared by Mr. Abeywardhana, Survey Superintendent, which is

marked as P7, and the Gazette Notification relating to the acquisition is marked as P7(a).

Accordingly, following the acquisition, there had been a claim inquiry, as the Acquisition Officer

could not settle the title dispute. Consequently, the matter had been referred to the District Court

of Kandy in case No. LA/14781; subsequently, the Plaint and Caption filed in the said case are

marked as P8 and P9 respectively. The Petitioner claims that, after the judgment was delivered, as

reflected in P10 annexed to the Petition, he became entitled to compensation.

Thereafter, during the year 2019, the 1st Respondent, acting in his capacity as the Divisional

Secretary, issued a letter in respect of the disputed portion of land measuring 1.4 perches under the

Recovery of Possession of State Lands Act; the said letter dated 26.06.2019 is marked as P11.

Thereafter, the Petitioner replied to the said letter through his Attorney-at-Law by way of P12.

Subsequently, the 1st Respondent instituted proceedings in the Magistrate's Court, which are

reflected in P14.

The Petitioner claims that he, having re-surveyed the land claimed by the 1st Respondent, obtained

a plan and a superimposition thereof on the Survey Superintendent Mr. Abeywardhana's plan

marked as P7; the said superimposition is depicted in the plan marked as P15. Further, the alleged

encroached portion of land is indicated therein as Lot A. Therefore, in the present case, the

Petitioner challenges the Notice to Quit marked as P13.

6

The Respondents’ Objections

The Respondents have filed their Statement of Objections, denying the correctness of the title plan

and the other plans relied upon by the Petitioner. Further, the Respondents state that if there is any

defence to be taken, the same should be taken up in the manner stated in the case of Udagedara

Waththe Anusha Kumari Nikaathagoda v. Divisional Secretary of Lunuwatta1. In addition to that,

it is the position of the Respondents that the title of the Respondents cannot be denied by the

Petitioner.

The Respondents have marked the document R1, which is the same as P16, and according to which,

it is the position of the Respondents that the said plan is conclusive proof of the fact that the

Petitioner is in unlawful possession of the portion of land identified as ‘A’; therefore, the 1st

Respondent has to take a decision on that, and has taken a decision in terms of Section 3 to give

the Petitioner notice. Thus, the Petitioner has not made out a case, and as such, the Respondents

have sought the dismissal of the Application.

Undisputed facts

It is common ground that once there had been an acquisition in 1983 in respect of three plots of

land belonging to private parties including the Petitioner, and part of that land so acquired was

given to the Divisional Secretary to erect his office building where now he is having his office

building. However, the Petitioner claims that his land which he is possessing and became entitled

to by virtue of Deeds P1 to P3 lying to the eastern boundary of the Divisional Secretariat’s land,

is a separate land. The Petitioner also claims that based on his ownership and possession of the

said land, he has made an application to the Pradeshiya Sabha of Akurana for a development permit,

1 CA (WRT) Application No. 293/2017 (CA Minute 18.11.2019).

7

which was approved. Accordingly, he has erected a three-storey building thereon and having a

shopping complex; the Assessment Numbers of several shops are also mentioned.

Dispute

However, a dispute had arisen when the 1st Respondent formed the view that a part of the 1st

Respondent’s land vested in the 1st Respondent where his office is situated had been annexed to

the land claimed by the Petitioner based on P1 to P3.

Thereafter, it appears on the record that the 1st Respondent has caused a plan to be prepared by the

Survey Superintendent of the area. The said plan is marked as P16 annexed to the Petition by the

Petitioner himself. According to P16, the parcel of land identified as ‘A’ which lies between the

parcel of land claimed by the Petitioner where the Petitioner has erected the three-storey building

of the shopping complex and the land that belongs to the 1st Respondent Office. The 1st

Respondent’s position is that the portion of land identified as ‘A’ in P16 is now annexed to the

Petitioner’s land and possessed by the Petitioner exclusively, which is a state land.

Therefore, what the 1st Respondent has done is, without going to a District Court in a formal

vindicatory action, has decided to take an administrative action by issuing P13, the notice to quit,

on the basis that he being the competent authority in respect of the State land vested in the

Divisional Secretary, he is empowered to recover the possession thereof. Then only the whole legal

dispute has arisen; however, responding to the said notice to quit, the Petitioner has written to him

by and through an Attorney-at-Law marked as P12.

Nevertheless, since the Petitioner failed to hand over the possession of the disputed area marked

as ‘A’ depicted in P16, the 1st Respondent had instituted an application in the Magistrate’s Court

to eject the Petitioner; therefore, it appears, as contended on behalf of the Petitioner that the dispute

8

is a land dispute between two adjacent landowners, therefore, this appears to be an ideal case for

the District Court to decide on the matter. In such event, if the Divisional Secretary is of the view

that the land belongs to the State is now annexed to the Petitioner’s land surreptitiously or forcibly,

the Divisional Secretary should have filed an action in the District Court without triggering the

provisions of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act, No. 7 of 1979 (as amended). However,

instead of doing so, the 1st Respondent has taken the steps that have been provided for by the State

Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act, by which a competent authority is empowered to do.

Therefore, in this case, the main question that should be decided is whether the 1st Respondent

should have instituted a civil action in the District Court to recover the lost possession of the land

in dispute, or when the Petitioner received P13 without making an application under Article 140

of the Constitution invoking the jurisdiction of this Court to quash the quit notice and the

proceedings in the Magistrate’s Court by this case, he should have immediately gone to the District

Court to vindicate the portion of land he is in possession.

Violation of rules of Natural Justice

The 1st Respondent had taken the decision to issue the quit notice on the assumption that the small

portion of land Lot A is part of the larger land depicted in P16 prepared by the Survey General

Superintendent, is State land as identified as part of the land belonging to the State as a part of the

acquired portion of land. However, that position is denied by the Petitioner since it has been in the

possession of the Petitioner from the time he had become the owner, and it may have been from

the time of his predecessors-in-title as well. However, it is a disputed fact.

Therefore, when such a fact is in issue, the question arises as to whether the 1st Respondent can

take a decision in respect of such a disputed fact since the 1st Respondent himself is a party to such

9

a disputed fact and who raises the dispute, where, if such a decision is taken, will amount to judging

one’s own cause. Thus, it is a clear case of the violation of one part of the rules of natural justice,

which is identified in law as audi alteram partem.

As such, the allegation made by the Petitioner on the basis that the rules of natural justice are

violated when the 1st Respondent had taken the decision to issue the quit notice marked as P13

based on P16 is a good ground to challenge such a decision taken by an administrative authority

who takes decisions affecting the rights of some citizens, namely, the Petitioner’s rights, on a

disputed fact where such a disputed fact is raised by such a party who is empowered to take

decisions in terms of the law.

Therefore, it is my view that in such a scenario, a party opposing such a party who raises such a

fact in issue cannot judge his own cause; thus, in that case, the question arises whether the 1st

Respondent had acted in violation of the rules of natural justice, which in this instant Application,

it is my view that he has.

When the acquisition had taken place in 1983, there had been a master plan prepared by the Survey

General; the said plan is marked as P7, and such master plan indicates as to how the acquisition

took place in respect of the respective lands, including the parcel of land now vested in the

Divisional Secretary, whose possession is held by the 1st Respondent.

However, nowhere in P16 has it indicated that such a master plan has been superimposed by the

Survey Superintendent. Therefore, a question arises as to whether the land claimed by the 1st

Respondent, as the Divisional Secretary, is in fact a part of the land vested in the 1st Respondent.

It has been constantly held by the Supreme Court of this country from time-to-time, that competent

authorities have to decide that such land belongs to a statutory body corporate or such State agency

10

is a concluded opinion as far as the law is concerned. Therefore, when there is such an opinion

formed by such an authority against a person against whom such quit notice is issued, should not

issue such quit notice where he himself is a party to such issue because when he, as the competent

authority himself claims such parcel of land belongs to the State where the other person against

whom such quit notice is issued also disputes such fact on the basis that the parcel of land in suit

belongs to such person.

According to State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act, No. 7 of 1979 (as amended), as far as

lands situated in an area of a divisional secretariat, such divisional secretary is concerned the

competent authority who is empowered by the Act itself to issue quit notices to eject those who

are in unlawful occupation. Once such a competent authority forms the opinion to issue such quit

notice, it should issue such quit notice only on the understanding and having taken a decision

seriously according to law because if a party against whom such quit notice is issued does not

comply with such quit notice, the competent authority is also empowered to file an application in

the Magistrate’s Court to eject such a person.

However, such person is not entitled to challenge such quit notice on the basis that the competent

authority, before issuing the quit notice, had formed the opinion without any proper basis.

Therefore, such competent authority before forming such opinion or view that such land belongs

to the State, must surely ascertain that it belongs to the State.2

2 Senanayake v. Damunupola [1982] 2 Sri L.R. 621.

11

Conclusion

For the reasons adumbrated above, I grant relief as prayed for in prayer (b) of the Petition.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL