==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/PHC/0099/2019

Page 1 of 20

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal under Article 138 and Article 154 (P)6 of the Constitution of the Republic read with Rule 11 of the Court of Appeal(Procedure for Appeals From High Court Established By Article 154 of the Constitution) Rules, 1988.

Marasinghe Mudiyanselage Chandrani Kanthilatha, No. 87, Samudragama, Bendiwewa, Jayanthipura.

Petitioner Vs.

1. M. G. Nadeeka Dilrukshi,

Registrar of Co-operative Societies and Commissioner of Co-operative Development, Department of Co-operative Development, North Western Province, No. 352, Maithreepala Senanayake Mawatha, Anuradhapura.

2. K.G. Chaminda Dharmathilaka,

Assistant Commissioner of Co-operative Development, Office of the Assistant Commissioner of Co-operative Development, Polonnaruwa, Kaduruwela.

Court of Appeal Case No: CA/PHC/0099/2019 High Court (Polonnaruwa) Writ Application No: 06/2015

CA/PHC/0099/2019

Page 2 of 20

3. U.G. Ekanayake,

Arbitrator, Ihakuluwewa, Diyabeduma. 4. Polonnaruwa Multi Purpose Co-

operativeSociety Ltd, Polonnaruwa.

Respondents AND NOW BETWEEN

Marasinghe Mudiyanselage Chandrani Kanthilatha, No. 87, Samudragama, Bendiwewa, Jayanthipura.

Petitioner-Appellant

Vs.

1. M.G. Nadeeka Dilrukshi,

Registrar of Co-operative Societies and Commissioner of Co - operative Development, Department of Co-operative Development, North Western Province, No.352, Maithreepala Senanayake Mawatha, Anuradhapura.

2. K.G. Chaminda Dharmathilaka,

Assistant Commissioner of Co-operative Development, Office Of the Assistant Commissioner of Co-operative Development,

CA/PHC/0099/2019

Page 3 of 20

Polonnaruwa, Kaduruwela.

3. U.G Ekanayake,

Arbitrator, Ihakuluwewa, Diyabeduma. 4. Polonnaruwa Multi Purpose

Co-operative Society Ltd, Polonnaruwa.

Respondent-Respondents Before : D. THOTAWATTA, J. K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J. Counsel : Saradi Kamalathunga instructed by

Nadeeka B. Senanayake for the Petitioner -Appellant. Rajika Aluwihare, S.C. instructed by R. Firdouz, S.S.A. for the 1stand 2nd Respondent-Respondents. 3rd Respondent is absent and unrepresented.

Prabash Walisundara for the 4th Respondent-Respondent. Argued on : 01.07.2025 Written Submissions of the Petitioner-Appellant tendered on : 05.03.2024

CA/PHC/0099/2019

Page 4 of 20

Written Submissions of the 1stand 2nd Respondent-Respondents tendered on : 15.01.2025 Written Submissions of the 3rd and 4th Respondent-Respondents tendered on : Not tendered. Decided on : 20.11.2025 K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

The instant appeal arises from an order of the learned High Court Judge of the

North Central Province holden in Polonnaruwa dated 29.03.2019 (hereinafter

called and referred to as “the order”) whereby the learned High Court Judge

had dismissed an application made thereto by the Petitioner who is now, the

Petitioner-Appellant to the instant appeal (hereinafter called and referred to as

“the Appellant”) praying for orders in the nature of a writ of certiorari quashing

a decision made by the 1st Respondent thereto, who is now, the 1st

Respondent-Respondent to the instant appeal (hereinafter called and referred

to as “the 1st Respondent”) dismissing an appeal preferred to the 1st

Respondent by the Appellant against an arbitral award made by the 3rd

Respondent thereto who is now, the 3rd Respondent-Respondent to the instant

appeal (hereinafter called and referred to as “the 3rd Respondent”), appointed

by the 1st Respondent to arbitrate a dispute that had arisen between the 4th

Respondent thereto who is now, the 4th Respondent-Respondent to the instant

appeal (hereinafter called and referred to as “the 4th Respondent”) and the

Appellant due to her refusal to pay a sum of Rs. 1794812.29/- to the 4th

Respondent on account of cash shortage during her services with the 4th

Respondent as a manager of a retail store of the 4th Respondent, in view of her

failure to deposit as security a sum equivalent to 10% of the arbitral award

specified therein as required by Section 58(3) of the North Central Province Co-

CA/PHC/0099/2019

Page 5 of 20

operative Societies Statute of No. 05 of 2009 as amended and Rule 49(xii)(a) of

the Co-operative Societies Regulations 1973 and a writ of mandamus directing

and compelling the 1st Respondent to hear and conclude the said appeal

preferred to him by the Appellant.

The facts and circumstances material to the instant appeal as can be gathered

from the record, may be briefly, set out as follows;

The Appellant had at all times material to the instant application, been

employed as a manager of a retail store of the 4th Respondent; and that, the 4th

Respondent had demanded a sum of Rs. 1794812.29/- from the Appellant for

shortage of goods during her period of service as a manager of a retail store of

the 4th Respondent which demand had been rejected by the Appellant; and that

the 2nd Respondent thereto, who is now, the 2nd Respondent-Respondent to the

instant appeal (hereinafter called and referred to as “the 2nd Respondent”) had

on the advice of the 1st Respondent, referred the dispute to the 3rd Respondent

for arbitration; and that consequent to an inquiry held by him, the 3rd

Respondent had made his arbitral award by which the Appellant was held

liable to pay the 4th Respondent a sum of Rs. 1492634.62/-; and that being

aggrieved by the said arbitral award, the Appellant had then, preferred an

appeal to the 1st Respondent against the arbitral award and deposited only

Rs.50/- as security deposit together therewith; and that the 1st Respondent

had by her letters dated 14.10.2014 and 09.07.2015 informed the Appellant

that her appeal was rejected for; she had failed to deposit a sum equivalent to

10% of the arbitral award specified therein as required by Section 58(3) of the

North Central Province Co-operative Societies Statute of No. 05 of 2009 as

amended and Rule 49(xii)(a) of the Co-operative Societies Regulations 1973;

and that the Appellant had then, made an application to the High Court of the

North Central Province holden in Polonnaruwa praying for orders in the nature

of a writ of certiorari to quash the said decision of the 1st Respondent and a writ

of Mandamus compelling the 1st Respondent to accept and hear the appeal;

CA/PHC/0099/2019

Page 6 of 20

and that the learned High Court Judge had while observing that the decisions

in Sebastian Fernando, Wijesekara Subasinghe and the other decisions, relied

upon by the Appellant in support of her position, were decisions that had been

decided before the enactment of the North Central Province Co-operative

Societies Statute of No. 05 of 2009 as amended, dismissed the application by

holding that the decision of the 1st Respondent rejecting the appeal of the

Appellant could not be considered as one made in contravention of Section

58(3) of the North Central Province Co-operative Societies Statute of No. 05 of

2009 as amended for; the Officers of a Provincial Council have no power to act

in contravention of a law that may be enacted by such a Provincial Council and

therefore, the 1st Respondent had not acted ultra vires of the powers vested in

her by Section 58(3) of the North Central Province Co-operative Societies

Statute of No. 05 of 2009 as amended in rejecting the appeal for non

compliance by the Appellant, of the requirement relating to deposit of security

of a sum equivalent to 10% of the Arbitral Award as provided for by Section

58(3) of the North Central Province Co-operative Societies Statute of No. 05 of

2009 as amended and in the circumstances, there was no necessity to issue

orders in the nature of writs of certiorari and mandamus against the 1st

Respondent. It is this order of the Learned High Court Judge that the Appellant

now, seeks in the instant appeal to impugn on the grounds of appeal set out in

paragraph 5(a),(b) and (c) of the of the petition of appeal among any other

grounds of appeal which may be urged by Counsel at the hearing of this Appeal

and they may be reproduced as follows;

a) The High Court had made the said Order on the basis that Statute

No.05 of 2009 of the North Western Provincial Council in Section

58(3) requires an Appeal deposit of a sum of 10% of the Arbitrator’s

Award. However the said requirement of depositing10% of the award

is obnoxious to the right of appeal is therefore unlawful and the

learned High Court judge had failed to comprehend this legal issue;

CA/PHC/0099/2019

Page 7 of 20

b) The learned High Court Judge has misdirected himself in relation to

the law applicable and specially has failed to apply the principle of law

and the vision contained in the case of SEBASTIAN FERNANDO

V.KATANA MULTI-PURPOSE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETY LTD,AND

OTHERS reported in 1990 (1) SLR 342;

c) The learned High Court judge has failed to decide that the 1st

Respondent had acted in breach of his legal duty to hear and

entertain the appellant's appeal.

When this matter came up before us for hearing, Counsel for the Appellant had

informed Court that this matter could be disposed of by way of written

submissions, and the respective Counsel for the 1st, 2nd and 4th Respondents

had given their assent thereto. Furthermore, the Counsel for the 4th

Respondent had informed Court that he would rely on the written submissions

filed on behalf of the 1st and 2nd Respondents and therefore, not filing the

same. Hence, this Court will proceed to the judgment on the strength of the

written submissions as urged.

Upon a careful scrutiny of the written submissions of the Appellant furnished

to this Court in its totality, it becomes abundantly, clear that although, the

Appellant had in her petition of appeal, mainly, relied on three of grounds of

appeal as enumerated above in support of her appeal, however, she had at the

hearing of this appeal, opted to argue in her written submissions, only the

ground as urged in paragraph 5(b) of the petition of appeal which clearly,

shows that the Appellant had clearly, and explicitly, abandoned the rest of the

grounds of appeal so urged by her in paragraph 5(a) and (c) of her petition of

appeal.

It is significant to observe that the Appellant had in the High Court of the North

Central Province holden in Polonnaruwa too, raised the similar question of

vires of the act of the 1st Respondent which culminated in the rejection of the

CA/PHC/0099/2019

Page 8 of 20

appeal of the Appellant for non-compliance of the provisions of the Section

58(3) thereof with regard to the deposit of security as stipulated therein as

raised by her before this Court in paragraph 5(b) of the petition of appeal as

enumerated above and the learned High Court Judge of the North Central

Province holden in Polonnaruwa had having so examined the question of vires

of the act of the 1st Respondent which culminated in the rejection of the appeal

of the Appellant for non-compliance of the provisions of the Section 58(3)

thereof with regard to the deposit of security as stipulated therein, held that

the North Central Province Co-operative Societies Statute of No. 05 of 2009 had

been enacted by the North Central Provincial Council by virtue of the powers

vested in it by the Constitution; and that the 1st Respondent had rejected the

appeal acting under the powers vested in her by Section 58(3) of the North

Central Province Co-operative Societies Statute of No. 05 of 2009 as amended

and therefore, it was not a decision made in excess of the powers vested in the

1st Respondent by Section 58(3) of the North Central Province Co-operative

Societies Statute of No. 05 of 2009 as amended and as such, the decision of the

1st Respondent could not be considered as a decision made in excess of the

powers so vested in her by Section 58(3) of the North Central Province Co-

operative Societies Statute of No. 05 of 2009 as amended and the reasons

adduced therefor by Court being that the North Central Province Co-operative

Societies Statute No. 05 of 2009 had been enacted by the Provincial Council of

the North Central Province by virtue of the powers vested in it by the

Constitution and Rule 49(xii)(a) of the Co-operative Societies Regulations 1973

that had been made by the Minister in-charge of the Co-operative Societies

subject under the provisions of the Co-operative Societies Law No. 5 of 1972,

had in section 58(3) of the North Central Province Co-operative Societies

Statute No. 05 of 2009, been enacted by the Provincial Council of the North

Central Province as a law and it had thus, become a law in the North Central

Provincial Council and the Commissioner of Co-operative Societies and all the

officers thereto, are bound by it and appeal of the Appellant had thus, been

CA/PHC/0099/2019

Page 9 of 20

dismissed by the 1st Respondent in terms of the law enacted by Section 58(3)

thereof and therefore, the 1st Respondent has acted intra-vires of the powers

vested in her by Section 58(3) thereof in rejecting the appeal of the Appellant

for non-compliance of the provisions of the Section 58(3) thereof with regard to

the deposit of security as stipulated therein.

Hence, the learned High Court Judge of the North Central Province holden in

Polonnaruwa had in the impugned order, proceeded to examine the vires of the

act of the 1st Respondent that culminated in the rejection of the appeal of the

Appellant for non-compliance of the provisions of the Section 58(3) of the North

Central Province Co-operative Societies Statute of No. 05 of 2009 as amended

with regard to the deposit of security as stipulated therein, and rejected the

application of the Appellant made to it for orders in the nature of a writ of

certiorari quashing the decision of the 1st Respondent rejecting the appeal of

the Appellant for non-compliance of the provisions of the Section 58(3) thereof

with regard to the deposit of security as stipulated therein, and a writ of

mandamus directing the 1st Respondent to accept, hear and determine the

appeal of the Appellant on the premise that the Section 58(3) of the North

Central Province Co-operative Societies Statute of No. 05 of 2009 as amended

was intra-vires of the powers vested in the 1st Respondent by Section 58(3)

thereof.

However, it is significant to observe that the Appellant in the instant appeal,

had not in any manner, sought to impugn the findings of the learned High

Court Judge with regard to the question of the vires of the act of the 1st

Respondent that culminated in the rejection of the appeal of the Appellant for

non-compliance of the provisions of the Section 58(3) of the North Central

Province Co-operative Societies Statute of No. 05 of 2009 as amended with

regard to the deposit of security as stipulated therein, which led him to have

dismissed the appeal and hence, those findings of the learned High Court

CA/PHC/0099/2019

Page 10 of 20

Judge of the North Central Province holden in Polonnaruwa still, remain in

force, uncontroverted and unchallenged.

Besides, the said findings of the learned High Court Judge of the North Central

Province holden in Polonnaruwa are well supported and fortified by the

provisions of Article 154G(1) of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka which enacts that “Every Provincial Council may, subject

to the provisions of the Constitution, make statutes applicable to the Province

for which it is established, with respect to any matter set out in List 1 of the

Ninth Schedule (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Provincial Council List’)” and

item number 17 of the List 1 of the Ninth Schedule being the subject of Co-

operatives and hence, the North Central Province Co-operative Societies Statute

of No. 05 of 2009 and its Section 58(3) had been enacted by the North Central

Provincial Council by virtue of the powers vested in it by Article 154G(1) of the

Constitution to be read with item number 17 of the List 1 of the Ninth

Schedule to the Constitution.

Hence, I would hold that the said findings of the learned High Court Judge of

the North Central Province holden in Polonnaruwa with regard to the question

of vires of the act of the 1st Respondent that culminated in the rejection of the

appeal of the Appellant for non-compliance of the provisions of the Section

58(3) of the North Central Province Co-operative Societies Statute of No. 05 of

2009 as amended with regard to the deposit of security as stipulated therein,

can wholly, sustain in law, as enacted by Article 154G(1) of the Constitution to

be read with item number 17 of the List 1 of the Ninth Schedule to the

Constitution.

I would therefore, hold that the requirement of deposit of a sum equivalent to

10% of the arbitral award as stipulated by Section 58(3) of the North Central

Province Co-operative Societies Statute of No. 05 of 2009 as amended, is not in

any manner, obnoxious to the right of appeal and is therefore, lawful and

hence, the learned High Court judge of the North Central Province holden in

CA/PHC/0099/2019

Page 11 of 20

Polonnaruwa had correctly, comprehended this legal issue in the true sense for

which purpose it was enacted by the North Central Provincial Council and

therefore, the ground of appeal urged in paragraph 5(a) of the appeal of the

Appellant though not argued by the Appellant at the hearing of this appeal

before us, cannot in any manner, sustain in law, and as such it should be

rejected in-limine.

In the result, I would proceed to affirm the said findings of the learned High

Court judge of the North Central Province holden in Polonnaruwa.

I would next, propose to deal with the only ground of appeal argued by the

Appellant before us at the hearing of this appeal in the written submissions,

namely; ground of appeal urged in paragraph 5(b) of the petition of the appeal

of the Appellant.

b) The learned High Court Judge has misdirected himself in relation to

the law applicable and specially has failed to apply the principle of law

and the vision contained in the case of Sebastian Fernando Vs.Katana

Multi-Purpose Co-Operative Society Ltd, And Others reported in 1990

(1) SLR 342;

The averments contained in paragraphs 5 and 9 of the written submissions of

the Appellant in particular would in my view, be most relevant and appropriate

in this regard and they may be re-produced verbatim the same as follows;

Paragraph 5;

“The appellant thereafter filed an application bearing No: Writ/ 06/ 2015

in the provincial High Court of Polonnaruwa seeking a Writ of Certiorari

to quash the said decision of the 1st Respondent and a Writ of

Mandamus directing the 1st Respondent to entertain the said appeal.

(vide page 224 of the Appeal Brief). The basis of the said application was

CA/PHC/0099/2019

Page 12 of 20

that Rule 49 (xii) (a) of the Co-operative Society Rules 1973, made by the

Minister was ultra vires the Rule making power of the Minister.”

Paragraph 9;

“It is very clear that although Rule 49 (xii)(a) was not quashed for reasons

specified in the final paragraph of the judgment, the Supreme Court in

fact held that Rule 49 (xii)(a) was ultra vires.”

The averments in paragraphs 5 and 9 of the written submissions of the

Appellant taken cumulatively, clearly, shows that the Appellant thereby sought

to contend that although, Rule 49(xii)(a) of the Co-operative Societies

Regulations 1973 was not quashed for reasons specified in the final paragraph

of the judgment in Sebastian Fernando Vs. Katana Multi-Purpose Co-Operative

Society Ltd, And Others (Supra), the Supreme Court had infact, held that Rule

49(xii)(a) of the Co-operative Societies Regulations 1973 was ultra vires.

Hence, the Appellant had not in any manner, sought either before the High

Court of the North Central Province holden in Polonnaruwa or before this

Court, to canvas the question of vires of Rule 49(xii)(a) of the Co-operative

Societies Regulations 1973 read in conjunction with section 58(3) of the North

Central Province Co-operative Societies Statute No. 05 of 2009 as amended,

instead she had proceeded on an assumption that the Supreme Court in

Sebastian Fernando vs. Katana Multi-purpose Co-operative Society(Supra), had

already, declared and determined Rule 49(xii)(a) of the Co-operative Societies

Regulations 1973 to be ultra vires.

It is true that the Supreme Court in Sebastian Fernando vs. Katana Multi-

purpose Co-operative Society(Supra) had made an extensive and exhaustive

analysis on the vires of Rule 49(xii)(a) of the Co-operative Societies Regulations

1973. However, it is significant to observe that the Supreme Court had not in

CA/PHC/0099/2019

Page 13 of 20

any manner, declared it to be ultra vires, instead the Supreme Court had at

page 349, proceeded to state as follows;

“Thus a serious question arises as to the vires of Rule 49 (Xll) (a) that the

requirement of an appeal deposit is not authorised by sections 58 (3), 61

(1) or 61(2) (y). However, as that question was not placed before the

Court of Appeal for consideration, and as the Respondents were not

heard in that Court (nor in this Court, though duly noticed) it is only

proper that it should be determined by that Court, after such

amendment of the petition as that Court may permit in its discretion,

and after hearing the Respondents.”

It was further observed by the Supreme Court in Sebastian Fernando vs.

Katana Multi-purpose Co-operative Society (Supra) at page 360 that,

“For the above reasons, I am of the view that a serious question arises as

to the vires of Rule 49 (XII) (a). This question was not raised in the

appellant's application to the Court of Appeal but only in this Court;

leave was allowed on that ground and the question was argued without

the respondents being heard. As such, it is only proper that a

determination on that ground should be made by the Court of Appeal

after such amendment of the petition as that Court may permit in its

discretion.”

Hence, it clearly, appears that the Supreme Court in Sebastian Fernando vs.

Katana Multi-purpose Co-operative Society (Supra) left the vires of Rule

49(xii)(a) to be considered by the Court of Appeal. However, it was later revealed

upon an inquiry that when the matter was sent back to the Court of Appeal,

the State had given an undertaking to Court that the Registrar of Co-operative

Development notwithstanding the insufficiency of fees will entertain the

petition of appeal dated 21.03.1983. In view of this undertaking the petitioner

withdrew his application and hence the Court of Appeal did not make a finding

CA/PHC/0099/2019

Page 14 of 20

on the vires of Rule 49(xii)(a) as directed by the Supreme Court as observed by

this Court in the decision in CA(PHC)12/2014-Decided on 05.10.2018.

Thus, it becomes, manifest that the Supreme Court in Sebastian Fernando vs.

Katana Multi-purpose Co-operative Society(Supra) had not in any manner,

gone into the question of the vires of Rule 49(xii)(a) of the Co-operative Societies

Regulations 1973 nor had it declared it to be ultra vires, instead, the Supreme

Court had having observed that a serious question arises as to the vires of Rule

49(xii)(a) of the Co-operative Societies Regulations 1973, that the requirement

of an appeal deposit is not authorized by sections 58(3), 61(1) or 61(2)(y) and

left it to be considered the Court of Appeal but not considered by it for the

reasons enumerated above.

Hence, it clearly, appears that the observations so made by the Supreme Court

in Sebastian Fernando vs. Katana Multi-purpose Co-operative Society(Supra) is

clearly, not a ratio decidendi but, an obita dicta.

In the circumstances, I would hold that neither the principle ground so urged

by the Appellant in paragraphs 15(ඇ) and 16 of her petition in particular, filed

before the High Court of North Central Province holden in Polonnaruwa in

support of her application for writs of certiorari and mandamus against the 1st

Respondent nor the principal ground of appeal so urged by her in paragraph

5(b) of her petition of appeal filed before this Court in support of the appeal can

in any manner, sustain in law. Hence, the Appellant’s application for writs of

certiorari and mandamus ought to have been rejected in-limine by the learned

High Court of North Central Province holden in Polonnaruwa on this ground

alone, as rightly done by him in the order now sought to be impugned in the

instant appeal before us by the Appellant.

On the other hand, it was inter-alia, held by the Supreme Court in Weerakkody

Pathirennehelage Somarathne Vs. D.D. Premachandra, Commissioner of Co-

operative Societies and Others(Supra) at page 4 to the following effect;

CA/PHC/0099/2019

Page 15 of 20

“I am therefore of the view that Rule 49(xii)(a) is the rule that has been

framed under Section 61(2)(y) by the Minister and does not circumscribe

the right of appeal granted under section 58(3) of the Law as the rule

making powers of the Minister entitles the Minister in terms of the law to

prescribe forms, fees to be paid and procedure to be observed.”

It was further held by the Supreme Court in Weerakkody Pathirennehelage

Somarathne Vs. D.D. Premachandra, Commissioner of Co-operative Societies

and Others(Supra) at page 5 as follows;

“and therefore, I am of the view that, Rule 49(xii)(a) is not ultra vires, the

rule making powers conferred on the Minister.”

However, it appears that, the Supreme Court in Sebastian Fernando vs. Katana

Multi-purpose Co-operative Society (Supra) had proceeded to consider the

ruling in Weerakkody Pathirennehelage Somarathne Vs. D.D. Premachandra,

Commissioner of Co-operative Societies and Others(Supra) as to the vires of

Rule 49(xii)(a) of the Co-operative Societies Regulations 1973 as obiter dicta.

It is in this context, it would be pertinent at this juncture to examine the

distinction between the ratio decidendi and the obiter dicta of a decision.

Rupert Cross in Precedents in English Law (3rd Edition, 1977) delineates the

two legal terms as follows;

“The ratio decidendi of a case is any rule of law expressly or impliedly

treated by the judge as a necessary step in reaching his conclusion,

having regard to the line of reasoning adopted by him, or a necessary

part of his direction to the jury” (page 76)

“Obiter dictum is a proposition of law which does not form part of the

ratio decidendi” (page 79)

CA/PHC/0099/2019

Page 16 of 20

Rupert Cross in Precedents in the English Law (Oxford University Press, 1961

at p. 75) states that,

“in order to discover what the ratio decidendi of a particular case, one

must have regard to the facts of that case, the issues raised by the

pleadings and arguments and subsequent cases that have considered the

case under review.”

It was explicitly, held by Court in Walker Sons and Co. (UK) Ltd. v. Gunatilake

and others-1978-79-80 [1] SLR 231 at 232 that, the ratio decidendi of a

Superior Court is binding for all inferior Courts:

“The ratio decidendi of cases decided by the Court becomes a rule for the

future binding all courts which the courts of last resort are not whether

it be under the same system or under a different system.”

It is significant to observe that, in Weerakkody Pathirennehelage Somarathne

Vs. D.D. Premachandra, Commissioner of Co-operative Societies and

Others(Supra), although the petition of appeal was not sent to the Registrar of

Co-operative Development, the appeal deposit was also not paid and it is in

this context that the Court in Weerakkody Pathirennehelage Somarathne Vs.

D.D. Premachandra, Commissioner of Co-operative Societies and

Others(Supra) unlike in Sebastian Fernando vs. Katana Multi-purpose Co-

operative Society(Supra) had the benefit of a full argument on the vires of

Rule 49(xii)(a) of the Co-operative Societies Regulations 1973 and held

that it to be intra vires.[Emphasis is mine]

According to Rupert Cross in Precedents in English Law (3rd Edition, 1977), a

distinction can be drawn between different kinds of dicta.

This would be:

(a) dicta which are irrelevant to the case in which they occur-obiter dicta; and

CA/PHC/0099/2019

Page 17 of 20

(b) dicta which relate to some collateral issue in the case although not

forming part of the ratio decidendi-judicial dicta. [Emphasis is mine]

This distinction appears to suggest that judicial dicta have a higher level of

authority than mere obiter dicta. [Emphasis is mine]

In the light of the above, it is my view that the dicta in Weerakkody

Pathirennehelage Somarathne Vs. D.D. Premachandra, Commissioner of Co-

operative Societies and Others(Supra) would amount to judicial dicta.

Applying the Judicialdicta pronounced in Weerakkody Pathirennehelage

Somarathne Vs. D.D. Premachandra, Commissioner of Co-operative Societies

and Others(Supra), I would declare Rule 49(xii)(a) of the Co-operative Societies

Regulations 1973, to be intra vires.

There is a further point which is directly, linked with the issue at hand before

us, and it arises out of the doctrine of approbation and reprobation and it may

now, be dealt with.

As manifest from paragraph 15(ඇ) of her petition filed before the High Court of

North Central Province holden in Polonnaruwa, the Appellant does not in any

manner, seek to challenge before the High Court of North Central Province

holden in Polonnaruwa, the vires of Rule 49(xii)(a) of the Co-operative Societies

Regulations 1973 read in conjunction with section 58(3) of the North Central

Province Co-operative Societies Statute of No. 5 of 2009 as amended, instead

she assumes that the Supreme Court in Sebastian Fernando Vs. Katana Multi-

purpose Co-Operative Society(Supra) had already, determined and declared

Rule 49(xii)(a) of the Co-operative Societies Regulations 1973 to be ultra vires,

nevertheless, she had proceeded to partially comply with the Rule 49(xii)(a) of

the Co-operative Societies Regulations 1973 read in conjunction with section

58(3) of the North Central Province Co-operative Societies Statute of No. 5 of

2009 as amended when she had on her own volition, proceeded to furnish Rs.

CA/PHC/0099/2019

Page 18 of 20

50/- as a security deposit along with her appeal to the 1st Respondent as

required by the Rule 49(xii)(a) of the Co-operative Societies Regulations 1973

read in conjunction with section 58(3) of the North Central Province Co-

operative Societies Statute of No. 5 of 2009 as amended. Hence, it manifestly,

appears that the Appellant had by doing so on her own volition, affirmed the

Rule 49(xii)(a) of the Co-operative Societies Regulations 1973 read in

conjunction with section 58(3) of the North Central Province Co-operative

Societies Statute of No. 5 of 2009 as amended and when the 1st Respondent

rejected his appeal, she had then, proceeded to disaffirm the same rule that

she had once affirmed as aforesaid thereby contending that the Supreme Court

in Sebastian Fernando v. Katana Various Services Cooperative Society (Supra)

had declared it to be ultra vires.

It is in this context, I would think it appropriate at this juncture to examine the

principle enunciated by the Supreme Court in Ranasinghe Vs. Premadharma

and Others 1985 [1] SLR 63 at page 70, wherein it was held that, “The

rationale of the above principle appears to be that a defendant cannot

approbate and reprobate. In cases where the doctrine of approbation and

reprobation applies, the person concerned has a choice of two rights, either of

which he is at liberty to adopt, but not both. Where the doctrine does apply, if

the person to whom the choice belongs irrevocably and with full knowledge

accepts the one, he cannot afterwards assert the other; he cannot affirm and

disaffirm.”

In the light of the doctrine of approbation and reprobation enunciated by the

Supreme Court in Ranasinghe Vs. Premadharma and Others(Supra), if the

Appellant in the instant appeal seeks to rely on the Rule 49(xii)(a) of the Co-

operative Societies Regulations 1973 read in conjunction with section 58(3) of

the North Central Province Co-operative Societies Statute of No. 5 of 2009 as

amended, to contend that she had complied with Rule 49(xii)(a) of the Co-

operative Societies Regulations 1973 read in conjunction with section 58(3) of

CA/PHC/0099/2019

Page 19 of 20

the North Central Province Co-operative Societies Statute of No. 5 of 2009 as

amended when she had furnished Rs. 50/- as security deposit together with

her appeal to the 1st Respondent thereby affirming that, the said rule is intra-

vires, and when the 1st Respondent proceeds to reject it for non-compliance of

the same, she cannot afterwards, disaffirm it namely; Rule 49(xii)(a) of the Co-

operative Societies Regulations 1973 read in conjunction with section 58(3) of

the North Central Province Co-operative Societies Statute of No. 5 of 2009 as

amended which requires Rs. 50/- or 10% of the value of the Arbitral award

whichever is higher to be deposited along with his appeal as security deposit,

by contending that it is ultra vires, for; she cannot in law, affirm and disaffirm

the same inasmuch as if the Appellant to whom the choice belongs irrevocably,

and with full knowledge accepts the one, she cannot afterwards assert the

other.

In the circumstances, I would hold that the Appellant is now, debarred from

asserting that the Rule 49(xii)(a) of the Co-operative Societies Regulations 1973

read in conjunction with section 58(3) of the North Central Province Co-

operative Societies Statute of No. 5 of 2009 as amended is ultra vires, for; she

had once, affirmed it to be intra-vires by partly, complying with the same by

depositing Rs. 50/- as security deposit as required by the said rule.

I would therefore hold that, the contention so advanced by the Appellant,

cannot sustain in law and as such it ought to have been rejected in-limine on

this ground too.

With regard to the contention advanced by the Appellant in paragraph 20 of

her petition furnished by her to the High Court of North Central Province

holden in Polonnaruwa, based on a letter dated 28.03.2011 and issued by the

Former Additional Solicitor General which was annexed thereto marked as X3,

I would hold that in the light of the law set out above, it too, cannot sustain in

law in view of the judicial dicta pronounced by the Supreme Court in

Weerakkody Pathirennehelage Somarathne Vs. D.D. Premachandra,

CA/PHC/0099/2019

Page 20 of 20

Commissioner of Co-operative Societies and Others(Supra) that the Rule

49(xii)(a) of the Co-operative Societies Regulations 1973 is intra-vires and as

such it too should be rejected in-limine.

In view of the reasons enumerated above, I would hold that the appeal is not

entitled to succeed both in fact and law.

In the result, I would proceed to dismiss the appeal with costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL