I

I i I

j

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

CNWRIT /87/2015

OF SRI LANKA

Vs,

In the matter of an Application for a mandate

in the nature of Writ of Certiorari under article

140 of the Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Seelanga Durage Laxman Wickramasinghe,

362, Samagi Mawatha,

Kurana,

Katunayaka.

PETITIONER

1. Air Martial Gagana Bulathsinghala,

Commander of Air Force,

Sri Lanka Air Force,

Colombo 02.

2. Air Vice Martial Welikala,

Director Administration,

Sri Lanka Air Force,

Colombo 02.

3. Wing Commander A.D.M. Koralage,

Sri Lanka Air Force,

Colombo 02.

4. V.T.S. Sirimana,

Wing Commander,

Sri Lanka Air Force,

Colombo 02

RESPONDENTS

2

t

Before: Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J (PICA) I I

Counsel: Jagath Abaynayake for the Petitioner

Priyantha Nawana SDSG for the Respondents

Argued on: 26.05.2016

Written Submissions on: 30.06.2016, 30.09.2016

Judgment on: 20.01.2017

Order

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J

Petitioner to the present application Seelanga Durage Lakxman Wickramasinghe had come before this

court seeking inter alia,

b) To issue a mandate in the nature of a writ of Certiorari quashing the decision to

discharge the Petitioner with disgrace referred to in P-1 and P-2 by the 1st Respondent.

The Petitioner who joined the Sri Lanka Air Force as an airman in the volunteer Service with effect

from 19.07.1990 was recruited to the regular service on 18.07.1994 as a photographer in the same rank.

As submitted by the Petitioner he received promotions to the ranks of Corporal, Sergeant, Flight

Sergeant and Assistant Warrant Officer in the years 2004, 2008, 2012 and 2013 respectively and

decorated with several medals including, SLAF 50th Anniversary Medal, 50th Independence

Anniversary Medal, Puma Bhumi, Riviresa Campaign Service, East Humanitarian Operation and North

Humanitarian Operation Medals.

Il

I. , , I!I(I

I j 3

According to the Petitioner, his house at No. 361 Samagi Mawatha, Katunayake was raided by a group

of officers attached to Air Force Police and recovered, several items of Sri Lanka Air Force Uniforms

and Accessories belonging to several ranks, National Identity Cards and Sri Lanka Air Force Identity

Cards belonging to Air Force personnel and the Petitioner too was arrested during the said raid.

Even though the Petitioner claims that the arrest was made by Air Force Police, the Respondents have

taken up the position that the said raid was conducted by officers of Seeduwa Police and arrested the

Petitioner, produced him before court and remanded for Fiscal Custody. Subsequent to his release on

25th March 2015, the Chief Provost Martial interrogated the Petitioner and a statement was recorded

from him.

As admitted by both parties, subsequent to the investigations carried out by the Provost Martial the

Petitioner was tried at a summary trial under section 129 (1) of the Air Force Act on following four

counts.

1. Conduct prejudicial to Air Force Discipline; In that you at No 361 Samagi Mawatha,

Katunayake did keep in your possession unauthorized service uniforms and accessories

listed in annex 'A' when detected by a provost team on 21 st March which conduct is

prejudicial to Air Force good order thereby committing an offence punishable under section

129 (1) of the Air Force Act to be read in conjunction with section 42 of the Air Force Act.

2. Conduct prejudicial to Air Force Discipline: In that you at SLAF Base Ratmalana during the

period from 2011 to 21st March 2013 did engage yourself in unauthorized trade for profits

by hiring Air Force uniforms and accessories a conduct which is prejudicial to Air Force

good order, thereby committing an offence punishable under section 129 (1) of the Air

Force Act to be read in conjunction with section 42 of the Air Force Act.

3. Conduct prejudicial to Air Force Discipline; In that you at No 361 Samagi Mawatha,

Katunayake on 21st March 2013 did keep in your custody service identity cards/ National

Identity Cards of service personal listed in annex 'A' when hiring Air Force uniforms and

4

accessories to service men which conduct prejudicial to Air Force discipline and thereby

committing an offence punishable under section 129 (1) of the Air Force Act to be read in

conjunction with section 42 of the Air Force Act.

4. Conduct prejudicial to Air Force Discipline: In that you at SLAP Base Ratmalana during the

period from 2011 to 2151 March 2013 did engage yourself in unauthorized trade for profits

by doing wedding photography a conduct which is prejudicial to Air Force discipline and

thereby committing an offence punishable under section 129 (1) of the Air Force Act to be

read in conjunction with section 42 of the Air Force Act.

At the conclusion of the said summary trial on a plea of guilt tendered on behalf of the Petitioner, he

was found guilty and a punishment of forfeiture of seniority of rank for one year on each charge was

recommended at the summary trial which was confirmed by the 151 Respondent Commander of the Sri

Lanka Air Force on 1ih December 2014. (RIa-d)

However as revealed before this court the 1 sl Respondent after confirming the said recommendation of

the summary trial had decided to discharge the Petitioner with disgrace from the Sri Lanka Air Force

for committing offence of conduct prejudicial to Air Force Discipline and was communicated to the

Petitioner through Director Administration of the Sri Lanka Air Force by letter dated 18.12.2014. (P-l)

As observed by this court, the said decision was reached by the Petitioner to "Discharge him with

Disgrace" on 281h December 2014, at a time when he was engaged in his normal duty after the

proceedings in the summary trial.

During the argument before this court the Respondents have further taken up that, the Petitioner was

convicted on 2151 June 1995 for having given wrong information at the time of enlistment on 181h July

1995 and was awarded a seven-day confinement as the punishment.

Even though the Respondents have relied on the proceedings of the said summary trial held in 1995 to

challenge the Unblemished character of the Petitioner, this court is not prepared to consider the said

I

I

f I

f l' I

, J IIi

!

\

5

conviction against the Petitioner since the Air Force itself had not considered the same when the

Petitioner was granted promotions in 2004, 2008, 2012 and 2013 as referred to above. The Respondents

have further taken up the position that Section 155 of the Air Force Act provides for discharge with

disgrace in various situations identifies in Regulation 126 of the Sri Lanka Air Force (Regular and

Regular Services) Regulation 1951 read with Table B of the 5th schedule to the said Regulations.

Whilst referring to the said Regulations the Respondents have further argued before this court that,

"any conduct prejudicial to the Sri Lanka Air Force punishable under section 129 of the Air Force Act"

constitutes "misconduct" which attaches the consequence of 'discharge with disgrace' within the

meaning of Table B of the Fifth schedule.

Regulation 126 which deals with various cause of Discharge reads thus,

Regulation 126 (1) The various causes of discharge from the Regular Air Force and competent

officers to authorize, carryout and confirm such discharge and the special

instructions regarding the cause of the discharge, in each case, shall be as

specified in Table B of the fifth schedule here to

However when going through the Table B to the fifth schedule it is observed by this court that

Discharge with disgrace is only provided;

(vii) (a) Having been convicted by a Civil Court of Civil Offence

(b) Having been sentenced to Rigorous Imprisonment by Court martial or Civil Court

(ix) (a) For misconduct-An Airman will not be discharge under this item unless the misconduct is

of such a nature as to justify discharge with disgrace. The application for

discharge, which should be put forward as soon as possible after the

offence has been delt with, will be made on a special form on which full

II f!!I

\

~fI I,

I

I

f

6

particulars of the case will be recorded, and to which the conduct sheets

and copies of civil convictions will be attached.

(b) For misconduct-Having been sentenced to dismissal from Service-

applies to warrant officer dismissed from the service by sentence of

Court -Martial

(x) Having been sentenced to be discharged with ignominy-The discharge will be carried out, and the

certificate of service completed and sent I

to the officer in charge of the prison, if

the Airman is in prison. The discharge I , will be confirmed from the date of I

t dispatch. f

When going through the above provisions submitted before this court by the Respondents, it is observed

that the circumstance under which the Petitioner was discharged with disgrace is not covered under any

provision of the above regulation. As further observed by this court the punishment imposed on the

Petitioner not by a Court Martial but after a summary trial, only carried a sentence of 'forfeiture of

seniority of rank for one year' and not a dismissal from the service by a Court Martial as identified in the

said schedule. The Respondents have further failed to place before this court any material to satisfy that

there was a conviction and/or sentence by a Civil Court or a Court Martial and any recommendation on a

specified form on which full particulars of the case was recorded with conduct sheets attached with

copies of civil conviction as required under Table 'B' above.

In the said circumstances it is clear that the said decision of the lSI Respondent to discharge the

Petitioner from Sri Lanka Air Force with Discharge was made without having any legal basis to do so

and therefore the said decision is an ultravires decision.

7

The Petitioner has further placed before this court the Supreme Court decision in the case of Air

Marshal G.D. Perera and Other V. K.H.M.S. Bandara SC Appeal 104/2008 reported in Supreme Court

Law Report Volume II at page 213 where Wanasundera PC J had held,

1. The Regulations are made under the Air Force Act and under no the other Act of Parliament, anyway

regulation 126 does not confer an unfetted discretion on the lSI Appellant to discharge the

Respondent from service

2. Having read section 40, 42 and 43 I have observed that 'discharge from service' cannot be granted as

a punishment for any person who has been tried under a summary trial.

Even though the circumstances under which the 151 Petitioner had made the discharge order under

Regulation 126 of the Sri Lanka Air Force (Regular and Regular Services) Regulations 1951 on the

basis of 'Service No Longer Required' this court is in agreement with the conclusion of Supreme Court

when their Lordship concluded that 'Regulation 126 does not confer an unfetted discretion on the 151

Appellant (the Commander of the Sir Lanka Air Force) to discharge the Respondent from service.

As observed above, the Commander (151 Respondent to the present application) is bound to follow the

provisions of the Air Force Act and the Regulations made there under. Table 'B' to the fifth schedule

does not permit the lSI Respondent to discharge the Petitioner with disgrace when he was imposed with a

punishment of forfeiture of seniority of rank for one year on each count. When declaring that the said

order made by the lSI Respondent is ultravires, this court decides to grant the relief as prayed in

paragraph (b) to the Petition "quashing the decision to discharge the Petitioner with disgrace referred to

in P-l and P-2" with cost fixed at Rs. 25,000/-

Application is allowed with cost.

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

fI

1

f,

!II

f

~ I

)