IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for

Revision in terms of Section 753 of the

Civil Procedure Code.

CA. Rev. No. 137/2003

D.C. Balapitiya No. 3139/P

1. Agampodi Gerty Premalatha De

Zoysa,

2. Agampodi Sudath De Zoysa,

3. Agampodi Lionel De Zoysa,

4. Agampodi Mani De Zoysa,

5. Agampodi Piyawathie De Zoysa,

6. Agampodi Padmawathie De Zoysa

(deceased),

6A.Agampodi Piyawathi De Zoysa,

Nape, Kosgoda.

Substituted 6A Petitioner

7. Agampodi Jagath Kumara De

Zoysa,

8. Agampodi Nihal Athula De Zoysa,

9. Agampodi Madura Iranganie De

Zoysa,

10. Agampodi Monika Priyangani De

Zoysa,

11. Wijemuni Somawathie De Zoysa

(deceased),

11A. Agampodi Sam Chemley Mendis

2 C.A.REV 0137 - 03 D.C. BALAPITIYA 3139/P

Of 172A, Nape, Kosgoda.

Substituted 11A Petitioner

12. Agampodi Wasana Hemanthi De

Zoysa,

13. Agampodi Akman De Zoysa,

All of Nape, Kosgoda.

Petitioners

-Vs-

1. Porawagoda Samson De Silva

(Deceased),

Nape, Kosgoda.

Porawagoda Sudith Wasantha De

Silva,

181A, Nape, Kosgoda.

Substituted-Plaintiff-Respondent

2. Hakkimuni Adlin De Silva

(Deceased)

02A. A.A. Dislson De Silva,

Substituted 2A Defendant-Respondent

03. Agampodi Sumith De Zoysa,

Both of Nape, Kosgoda.

04. Agampodi Luwanis Zoysa,

Boraluketiya, Kosgoda.

05. Agampodi Beatuy Ratnawalie De

Zoysa,

06. Agampodi Lak Kapila De Zoysa

Both of Nape, Kosgoda.

Defendant Respondents

3 C.A.REV 0137 - 03 D.C. BALAPITIYA 3139/P

BEFORE : Dr. Ruwan Fernando J. &

M.Sampath K.B. Wijeratne J.

COUNSEL : Rohan Sahabandu, P.C. with S.

Senanayake for the Petitioners

S.N.Vijith Singh for the 1A Plaintiff-

Respondent

ARGUED ON : 08.09.2020

WRITTTEN SUBMISSIONS

: 17.07.2019 (by the Petitioners)

10.10.2018 (by the 1A Plaintiff-

Respondent)

DECIDED ON : 19. 02.2021

Dr. Ruwan Fernando, J. Introduction

[1] This is an application in revision filed by 14 Petitioners to set aside the

judgment of the learned District Judge of Balapitiya dated 26.11.2002 and

the interlocutory decree based thereon in Case bearing No. 3139/P of the

District Court of Balapitiya. By the said judgment, the learned District

Judge of Balapitiya decreed to partition the land called

Madinagedarawatta between the Plaintiff-Respondent and the 1

st

Defendant-Respondent.

Summary of the Plaintiff-Respondents Case

[2] The Petitioners stated in their Petition dated 27.01.2003 inter alia, that:

(a) One Hakkmuni Adlin De Silva instituted a Partition action in the

District Court of Balapitiya Case bearing No. 1411 seeking to

4 C.A.REV 0137 - 03 D.C. BALAPITIYA 3139/P

partition a land called Madinagedarawatta, containing in extent of 2

Acres morefully described in paragraph 2 of the Plaint dated

10.12.1986;

(b) According to the chain of title set out in the Plaint of the said case,

the said Plaintiff, Hakkmuni Adlin De Silva claimed that the parties

were entitled to undivided rights in the following manner:

The Plaintiff - undivided 1/108

The 1

st Defendant - undivided 105/108

The 2

nd Defendant - undivided 1/108

The 3

rd Defendant - undivided1/108

(c) At the Preliminary Survey, 20 persons, including the Petitioners and

their predecessors in title claimed rights to the said land and after the

Preliminary Plan was prepared, the Plaintiff made an application to

re-issue the commission on the Commissioner to mark the

permanent road that served as access to the corpus;

(d) The notices were ordered to be issued on the said 20 new claimants

to the land and accordingly, the notices were issued on the 3

rd and 9

th

claimants, but no steps were taken to issue notices on the other

claimants;

(e) No steps were taken thereafter, with regard to the said case by the

Plaintiff in the said case and the case was neither laid by nor

dismissed;

(f) In early January 2003, the Petitioners became aware that the land

called Madinagederawatta was to be sold and on inquiries being

made, they found that one Porawagoda Samson Silva had instituted a

partition action bearing No. 3139/P in the District Court of Balapitiya

to partition the same land called Madinagedarawatta in extent of 2

5 C.A.REV 0137 - 03 D.C. BALAPITIYA 3139/P

acres and obtained a partition decree without a contest to partition

the said land;

(g) The Plaintiff in Case No. 3139/P is the son of the Plaintiff in the

previous Case No. 1411/P, who was named as the 1

st Defendant in

the previous case No. 1411/P and the 2nd Defendant is his brother-

in-law while the 3

rd Defendant in Case No. 3139/P is the brother of

the Plaintiff in the previous case;

(h) None of the Defendants named in the previous case, apart from

Luwinis Silva had been made a party to the partition case No. 3139/P

and none of the 20 new claimants in the previous case were made

parties to the said case;

(i) There was no Preliminary Survey done in respect of the said land or

procedure followed to advertise the land sought to be partitioned in

Case No. 3139/P in terms of the provisions of the Partition Law and

the land surveyed in the Preliminary Plan No. 851 made by Sisira

Amendra, Licensed Surveyor is only 1 acre, whereas the land sought

to be partitioned is 2 acres;

(j) 1/4

th share of the land called Madinagederawatta was owned by one

Heen Appu Zoysa and his 6 brothers, including A. Guneris De

Zoysa, Rathu Appu De Zoysa, Sarnelis Hamy De Zoysa and Martin

De Zoysa;

(k) The Petitioners are the heirs of the said original owners of 1/4

th

share, according to the pedigree pleaded in paragraph 14 of the

Petition and thus, the Petitioners are entitled to undivided rights of

the said original owners;

6 C.A.REV 0137 - 03 D.C. BALAPITIYA 3139/P

(l) The house situated in the corpus of the action had been built by the

said Heen Appu Zoysa and the 1

st and the 2

nd Petitioners and the 5

th

Respondents are his children;

(m) The partition decree had been obtained in Case No. 3139/P by

fraud perpetrated by the Plaintiff in collusion with the other

Defendants who are his close relations and, in the result, the

Petitioners land, including the house and the plantation that stood

on the land had been partitioned between the Plaintiff and the 1

st

Defendant who are the son and the mother respectively.

Objections of the Plaintiff-Respondent

[3] The Plaintiff-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the Plaintiff) filed

objections and while denying all and singular the averments contained in

the Petition of the Petitioners, stated inter alia, that the land sought to be

partitioned in D.C. Balapitiya Case No. 1411/P is situated within the

Grama Sevaka Division No. 18 whereas the land sought to be partitioned

in Case No. 3139/P is situated within the Grama Sevaka Division No. 16.

The Plaintiff denied that the land referred to in Case No. 1411/P is the

same land referred to in Case No. 3139/P and prayed for the dismissal of

the Petitioners Application. Hearing of the Revision Application

[4] This case was fully argued before a Bench comprising Justice Shiran

Gooneratne and myself and as Justice Shiran Gooneratne has been

elevated to the Supreme Court, this Court on 03.02.2021, inquired from

the Attorneys-at-law for the Petitioners and the 1A Substittued Plaintiff

whether they wished to re-argue this matter before the present Bench or

invite the present Bench to deliver the judgment on the written

submissions. All Counsel, representing the Petitioners and the 1A

7 C.A.REV 0137 - 03 D.C. BALAPITIYA 3139/P

Substittued Plaintiff invited the present Bench comprising the remaining

Judge before whom the case was argued, to deliver the judgment upon the

written submissions filed by the parties without any further re-argument. Main complaint of the Petitioners

[5] The main complaint of the learned Presidents Counsel for the

Petitioners, Mr. Rohan Sahabandu is that the Plaintiff has instituted the

Partition action bearing No. 3139/P in collusion with the other Defendants

and obtained a partition decree by fraud perpetrated on the Petitioners

without notice to them and their predecessors-in-title who claimed their

rights to the same land in the previous Partition action bearing No. 1411/P.

[6] Mr. Sahabandu has drawn our attention to the Preliminary Plan and the

Journal Entries made in the previous Partition action bearing No. 1411/P

and submitted that almost 20 new claimants, including the Petitioners and

their predecessors-in-title who made their claims to the same land in the

previous partition action bearing No. 1411/P were deliberately not made

parties by the Plaintiff in the subsequent partition action bearing No.

3139/P instituted to partition the same land. In the result, he submitted that

the Petitioners house and their plantation stood on the land have also

been partitioned between the Plaintiff and the 1

st Defendant in the case

bearing No. 3139/P causing a grave miscarriage of justice to the Petitioners.

[7] The learned Counsel for the Plaintiff has conceded that the earlier

partition action was filed by the mother of the Plaintiff in the present action

bearing No. 3139/P and submitted that although it was not proceeded with,

it is not a bar to institute a fresh action. He has further submitted that the

persons who made their claims in the earlier partition action were fully

aware of the present partition action, but they were absent at the

preliminary survey and kept quiet. Accordingly, he has submitted that the

8 C.A.REV 0137 - 03 D.C. BALAPITIYA 3139/P

Petitioners cannot be given any relief now for their own folly, negligence

and laches.

Subject Land in Case No. 1411/P and 3139/P

[8] It is not disputed that the District Court of Balapitiya Case bearing No.

1411/P was instituted by the Plaintiffs mother, Hakkimuni Adlin de Silva

and the Plaintiff, Porawagoda Samsan De Silva in D.C. Balapitiya Case

bearing No. 3139/P was the 1

st Defendant in Case bearing No. 1411/P. It is

also not disputed that the said Hakkimuni Adlin de Silva who was the

Plaintiff in D.C. Balapitiya Case bearing No. 1411/P is the 1

st Defendant in

D.C. Balapitiya Case bearing No. 3139/P instituted by her son,

Porawagoda Samsan De Silva. It is not in dispute that after the initial steps

were taken, the said D.C. Balapitiya Case bearing No. 1411/P was not

proceeded with in the District Court of Balapitiya.

[9] The Plaintiff has, however, taken up the position in his objections that

the land sought to be partitioned in D.C. Case bearing No. 1411/P is not

the same land referred to in D.C. Partition Case bearing No. 3139/P (Vide-

paragraph 10 of the objections). In view of this position of the Plaintiff in

her objections, the first matter that arises for consideration is whether the

land depicted in the Preliminary Plan No. 104 filed in D.C. Balapitiya

Case No. 1411/P is the same land depicted in the Preliminary Plan No.

850 filed in D.C. Case No. 3139/P.

Land sought to be partitioned in the District Court of Balapitiya Case No.

1411/P

[10] The land sought to be partitioned called Madinagedarawatta in D.

C. Balapitiya Case No. 1411/P is in extent of 2 acres and the boundaries of

the said land are morefully described in paragraph 2 of the said Plaint

dated 10.12.1986 (P1) as follows:

9 C.A.REV 0137 - 03 D.C. BALAPITIYA 3139/P

North - Agampodigedera watta and Welbima adjourning it.

East - Welbima called Thanateriyana and land where

Wijemuni Adiris de Soysa resided.

South - Thodige Liyadda alias Boamaluwatta

West - Palugedarawatta.

[11] The Preliminary Plan No. 104 made by C.T.S. Manukulasuriya,

Licensed Surveyor dated 08.10.1987 depicts a land called

Madinagedarawatta in extent of 1 acre and 1.25 perches and the

boundaries are described in the said Plan (See- Annexure A) as follows:

North - Agampodigedera watta and Welbima adjourning it.

East - Katheranage Welbima.

South - Boamaluwatta, a land where Kodhi resided and land of

Adiyarage.

West - Palugedara watta.

[12] The Plaintiff, Porawagoda Samsan De Silva has instituted D.C.

Balapitiya Case bearing No. 3139/P to partition the identical land called

Madinagedarawatta and the boundaries are described in the schedule to

the said Plaint as follows:

North - Agampodigedera watta and Welbima adjourning it and

Bogahawatta and Galmencheyagewatta.

East - Kodigeliyadda alias Boamaluwatta, Welbima called

Kanneriya and land where Wijemuni Sandiris de Soysa

resided and Thodige Liyadda alias Boamaluwatta.

South - Welbima called Thanneriya and land where Wijemuni

10 C.A.REV 0137 - 03 D.C. BALAPITIYA 3139/P

Adiris de Soysa resided and kodiyeliyedda alias

Bomaluwewatta.

West - Palugedara watta alias land where Sandiris resided.

[13] The Preliminary Plan No. 851 dated 08.01.1999 made by Sisira

Amendra, Licensed Surveyor depicts a land called Madinagedarawatta in

extent of 1 acre (See- Annexure B) and the Surveyor has identified the

boundaries of the said land as follows:

North - Agampodigedera watta and Welbima adjourning it and

Bogahawatta and Galmencheyagewatta.

East - Kodigeliyadda alias Boamaluwatta, Welbima called

Kanneriya and land where Wijemuni Sandiris de Soysa

resided

South - Welbima called Kanneriya and land Thodige Liyadda

alias Bomaluwewatta where Wijemuni Adiris de Soyza

resided

West - Palugedara watta alias land where Sandiris resided.

[14] A perusal of both Preliminary Plans Nos. 104 and 851 and the two

Plaints filed in both Partition Cases reveals that the extent and the

boundaries of the land depicted in Plan No. 104 filed in D.C. Balapitiya

Case No. 1411/P sufficiently tally with the extent and the boundaries of the

land depicted in Plan No. 851 filed in D.C. Balapitiya Case No. 3139/P. A

perusal of both Plans and Plaints further reveals that the

Madinagedarawatta described in both Plaints and Plans is situated in

Nape in Kosgoda in the Bentota Walalawiti Korale in the Galle District

and identical buildings and two houses are situated within the corpus of the

action depicted in both Plans.

11 C.A.REV 0137 - 03 D.C. BALAPITIYA 3139/P

[15] It is crystal clear that both partition actions had been filed to partition

the same land called Madinagedarawatta and therefore, the position

taken by the Plaintiff in his objections that the land referred to in D.C.

Case No. 1411/P is not the same land referred to in D.C. Balapitiya Case

No. 3139/P has no merit and ought to be rejected.

Miscarriage of justice resulted from non-compliance with the provisions of

section 5 of the Partition Law

[16] A Plaintiff in a partition action is obliged under section 5 of the

Partition Law to make all persons, parties to the action whether they are in

actual possession thereof or not, if they are having any right or interest in

the land sought to be partitioned according to the knowledge of the

Plaintiff. Section 2 provides as follows:

The Plaintiff in a partition action, shall include in his plaint as parties to the action all persons who whether in actual possession or not, to his knowledge are entitled or claim to be entitled-

(a) any right, share or interest to, of, or in the land to which the action,

whether vested or contingent, and whether by way of mortgage, lease, usufruct, servitude, trust, life interest, or otherwise or; (b) any improvements made or effected on or to the land:.....

[17] The question that arises for decision is whether there is any non-

compliance with the provisions of section 5 of the Partition Law and if so,

whether any such non-compliance has caused a miscarriage of justice to the

Petitioners having a right, share or interest to the land to which the action

relates.

Interests of the Petitioners to the Land called Madinagederawatta

[18] The Petitioners have pleaded in the Petition that 1/4

th share of the said

land was owned by Agampodige Heen Appu De Soysa, and his 6 brothers,

including Agampodige Guneris De Zoysa, Agampodige Rathu Appu,

12 C.A.REV 0137 - 03 D.C. BALAPITIYA 3139/P

Agampodige Saraliyes Hamy De Soysa and Martin De Zoysa and upon

their demise, the Petitioners inherited the share from them according to

the pedigree pleaded by them in paragraph 14 of the Petition.

[19] The Petitioners have produced the Land Registry Extracts marked P6

and Deed marked P7 to prove that the land was owned by Agampodige

Heen Appu Zoysa and his brothers, the predecessor-in-title of the

Petitioners. Mr. Metha has submitted in the written submissions filed on

behalf of the Plaintiff that the Land Registry Extracts and the Deeds

produced by the Petitioners do not relate to the land partitioned in Case

bearing No. 3139/P and therefore, the said documents ought to be

disregarded in deciding the rights of the Petitioners.

[20] The Plaintiffs in Case bearing No. 1411/P and Case No. 3139/P have

described in their respective Plaints the land sought to be partitioned as the

land called Madinagederawatta where Kekulahandy Domis resided

(Vide- paragraph 2 of Plaint in Case No. 1411/P and paragraph 2 of the

Plaint in Case No. 3139/P). The Extracts marked P6 submitted by the

Petitioners clearly refer to the name of the land in folio 289 as

Madinagederawatta where Domischige resided. It is crystal clear that

both Partition actions had been instituted in respect of the land called

Madinagederawatta where Domis resided and the same land is referred

to in the said Extracts marked P6. [21] Moreover, the boundaries of the land called Madinagederawatta on

which Domis resided as referred to in the Extracts marked P6 sufficiently

tally with the boundaries of the Plaintiffs Title Deeds Nos. 7998 (P1),

16240 (P2) and 360 (P3). The boundaries of the land called

Madinagederawatta referred in the Extracts marked P6 289 are as

follows:

13 C.A.REV 0137 - 03 D.C. BALAPITIYA 3139/P

N - Walimuni Janeris Mendis Padinchiwatta &

Bogahaliyedda

E - Talagahaliyedde Wela;

S - Adiyanagewatta alias Wijemuni Hiinappu

Padinchiwunuwatta

W - Palugederawatta.

[22] The boundaries described in the Title Deeds Nos. 7998 (P1), 16240

(P2) and 360 (P3) are as follows:

N - Gelemendigjegewatta and Bogahawatta

E - Bomaliwewatta

S - Adiyanagewatta and Bomaluwewatta

W - Sandiris Padinchwatta

[23] It is not in dispute that the western boundary of the land depicted in

both Preliminary Plans is Palugederawatta and the eastern boundary inter

alia is a Wela as depicted in both Plans. Thus, it is absolutely clear that the

southern and western boundaries of the land described in the said Deeds

tally with the land described in the Extracts marked P6.

[24] On the other hand, the northern boundary of the land described in

the Extracts is Walimuni Janeris Mendia Padinchiwatta & Bogahaliyedda

and the northern boundary of the land described in the Plaintiffs Title

Deeds marked P1, P2 and P3 is Bogahawatta and Gelamanchiyagewatta.

The only difference is that in the Extracts marked P6, in addition to

Walimuni Janeris Mendis Padinchiwatta, Bogahaliyedda is mentioned,

whereas in the said Title Deeds, it is described as Bogahawatta.

[25] On the other hand, the eastern boundary of the land as described in

the Extracts marked P6 is Palugederawatta and the said Title Deeds refer

to the land where Sandiris resided. The Preliminary Plan No. 851 in Case

14 C.A.REV 0137 - 03 D.C. BALAPITIYA 3139/P

bearing No. 3139/P describes the eastrn boundary as Palugederawatta alias

land where Sandoris resided. This confirms that the eastern boundary

mentions in the Extracts marked P6 is more or less the same eastern

boundary described in Plan No. 851 in Case bearing No. 3139/P and Plan

No. 104 in Case bearing No. 1411/P.

[26] A perusal of the Extracts filed by the Petitioner marked P6 further

reveals that A.R.de Zoysa, A.C. de Zoysa, A.G. de Zoysa, A.H. de Zoysa,

A. S. de Zoysa and A. J de Zoysa had become entitled to undivided

share at one time together with the plantation of the land called

Madinagederawatta. Prima facie, the Petitioners have shown that they

have interests in the land called Madinagederawatta and that there are

entitled to be made parties to the action under the provisions of section 5

of the Partition Law. Fraud perpetrated on the Petitioners and collusive action filed by the

Plaintiff

[27] Mr. Sahabandu has submitted in the written submissions that the

Plaintiff had deliberately suppressed the previous case from the learned

District Judge of Balapitiya and the fact that 20 new claimants, including

the Petitioners and their predecessors-in-title appeared and made their

claims before the Surveyor at the preliminary survey in the previous case.

He has submitted that, except the close relations of the Plaintiff, all other

co-owners of land in dispute were purposely and conveniently kept out by

the Plaintifff as shown by the Affidavits filed by the very same Defendants

in Case bearing No. 3139/P marked P3-P5.

[28] The question that arises is whether the Plaintiff in instituting the

Partition Case bearing No. 3119/P purposely kept the Petitioners and their

predecessors in title out of the action and if so, whether it was a deliberate

15 C.A.REV 0137 - 03 D.C. BALAPITIYA 3139/P

act of perpetrating fraud on the Petitioners and their predecessors-in-title,

which had caused a manifest miscarriage of justice.

[29] The Plaintiff in the previous case bearing No. 1411/P was the mother

of the Plaintiff in Case No. 3139/P and the Plaintiff in Case No. 3139/P

was the 1

st Defendant in the D.C. Case No. 1411/P. The Plaintiff in Case

bearing No. 1411/P had made Samson de Silva (the 1

st Defendant),

Hakkimuni Misilin De Silva (the 2

nd Defendant), H. Luwnis De Silva (the

3

rd Defendant) and Agampodi Willie Mendis (the 4

th Defendant), W.

Somawathie (the 5

th Defendant) and Jayamini Wilfred Zoysa (the 6

th

Defendant) as parties to the said action. The said Plaintiff in the previous

case claimed that the following parties were entitled to undivided rights in

the following parties:

The Plaintiff (H. Adlin De Silva) - 1/108

The 1

st Defendant (P. Samson De Silva) - 105/108

The 2

nd Defendant (H. Misilin De Silva) - 1/108

The 3

rd Defendant (Agampodi Luwinis De Silva) - 1/108

[30] A perusal of the case record in Case bearing No. 1411/P reveals that

although the Court directed to issue notice on the new claimants, notices

had not been served on all the new claimants and no steps had been taken

by the Plaintiff in the previous case to serve notice on the 3rd and the 9

th

new claimants. As the Plaintiff in the previous case had not taken any

further steps, the Court directed the Plaintiff to take steps, but the Plaintiff

had not taken steps to proceed with the previous Partition action (Vide-

Journal Entry No. 57 dated 13.12.1995).

[31] A perusal of the Preliminary Report filed in the previous case No.

1411/P reveals that Willie Mendis who was the 4

th Defendant in the

previous case had claimed the plantation and buildings in Lot A in Plan

16 C.A.REV 0137 - 03 D.C. BALAPITIYA 3139/P

No. 104. The Plaintiff had not, however, made the said 4

th Defendant and

the 5

th Defendant (W. Somawathie) parties to the present Partition Case

bearing No. 3139/P.

[32] A perusal of the Preliminary Report filed in D.C. Case No. 1411/P

further reveals that at the preliminary survey, 20 new persons had claimed

their rights to the land sought to be partitioned. A perusal of the said

Report reveals that the 2

nd, 8

th, 15

th and 16

th claimants before the Surveyor in

the said case are the 11

th, 14

th, 5

th, 6

th Petitioners in the present application.

[33] It is crystal clear that the Surveyor had reported in the previous case

that 20 new claimants, including the 2

nd, the 8

th the 15 and the 16

th

Defendants had made their claims to the land in the previous case. The

Plaintiff who was the 1

st Defendant in the previous case should have known

very well that the Petitioners and their predecessors-in title had made their

claims to the land in dispute. The Plaintiff in the present case had

purposely failed to make them parties to the present Partition Case bearing

No. 3139/P.

[34] On the other hand, the Plaintiff in the present action did not take any

step to issue notice on the Petitioners and obtained a partition decree

which only allotted shares to the Plaintiff and his mother leaving out all

those who made claims to the identical land in the previous action.

[35] Mr. Sahabandu has submitted that there is a fundamental vice in the

procedure adopted in partition action bearing No. 3139/P for non-

compliance with Section 12 and Section 19 of the Partition Law and in the

result, the Petitioners had lost their inherited land, including the house and

plantation standing thereon, causing a manifest miscarriage of justice to the

Petitioners. Mr. Metha has however, submitted that the Surveyor had taken

steps under section 17 of the Partition Law and the Surveyor had reported

17 C.A.REV 0137 - 03 D.C. BALAPITIYA 3139/P

that no new claimants were present at the preliminary survey and and thus,

the Petitioners cannot dispute the case record that they had no notice of

the action. Mr. Metha has further submitted that the section 12 declaration

has been filed by the Plaintiffs Attorney-at-Law and thus, the Plaintiff has

complied with the section 12(1) of the Partition Law. Mr. Sahabandu has

submitted that there was no proper compliance with section 12 (1) of the

Partition Law. He has submitted that it is clearly manifested from the

conduct of the Plaintiff in not making the Petitioners, parties to the action

that the Plaintiff had acted in collusion with the other Defendants and

obtained partition decree by fraud perpetrated on the Petitioners and their

predecessors-in-title.

[36] Section 12 (1) of the Partition law reads as follows:

(1) After a partition action is registered as a lis pendens under the

Registration of Documents Ordinance and after the return of the duplicate referred to in section 11, the plaintiff in the action shall file or cause to be filed in court a declaration under the hand of an attorney-at-law certifying that all such entries in the register maintained under that Ordinance as relate to the land constituting the subject-matter of the action have been personally inspected by that attorney-at-law after the registration of the action as a lis pendens, and containing a statement of the name of every person found upon the inspection of those entries to be a person whom the plaintiff is required by section 5 to include in the plaint as a party to the action and also, if an address of that person is registered in the aforesaid register, that address. [37] Under this section, it is imperative that an Attorney-at-Law should file

a declaration under his hand certifying that all such entries in the Register

maintained under the Registration of Documents Ordinance as relate to

the land constituting the subject-matter of the action have been personally

inspected by him after the registration of the action as a lis pendens and

giving the names and where such is registered, the addresses of every

person found upon such inspection to be necessary party to the action.

18 C.A.REV 0137 - 03 D.C. BALAPITIYA 3139/P

[38] Had the Plaintiffs Attorney-at-Law personally inspected the entries in

the Register maintained under the Registration of Documents Ordinance

in respect of the land called Madinagederawatta, he could not have missed

the registration of the lis pendens in the previous partition action as it had

not been cancelled by the time the second action was filed in the same

District Court. Had he personally inspected all such entries in the register

maintained under that Ordinance, he could have easily found the previous

case number and ascertained that the previous action had been filed in

respect of the same land with identical boundaries.

[39] Had he checked the case record in Case No. 1411/P or inquired from

the Plaintiff, he could have found that 20 new claimants had been present

at the preliminary survey and claimed rights and thus, the Plaintiff was

required by section 5 to include in the Plaint as parties to the action, such

persons. No attempt was by the Plaintiff or his Attorney-at-Law to disclose

the names of the Petitioners and their predecessors in title who had

claimed their rights in the previous action filed to partition the identical

land as required by section 5. No step has been taken, at least, to issue

notice on the Petitioners as persons, to the knowledge of the Plaintiff, are

entitled to claim a right, share or interest in the land to which the action

relate.

[40] The failure to make the Petitioners and their predecessors-in-title

partities to the action in terms of section 5 and make a correct declaration

under section 12(1) of the Partition Law amounts to a procedural

irregularity which has resulted in a miscarriage of justice, in that the

Petitioners and their predecessors-in-title who claimed a right, title and

interest in the subject matter of the action had been kept out without being

made parties.

19 C.A.REV 0137 - 03 D.C. BALAPITIYA 3139/P

[41] The Plaintiff in Case bearing No. 3139/P has claimed that the Plaintiff

was entitled to undivided 7/8 share while his mother was entitled to

undivided 1/8 share and thus, they were the sole co-owners of the land

called Madinagedarawatta and obtained a partition decree in their favour

in respect of the entire land in extent of 160 perches.

[42] The Plaintiffs mother in the previous case claimed that the original

owner of the land called Madinagedarawatta was Lamanachchira and

according to the pedigree set up by her, she claimed that she was entitled to

undivided 1/108 share while his son was entitled to 105/108 share, the 2

nd

and 3

rd Defendants were entitled to 1/108 share each person. A perusal of

the pedigree set up by the Plaintiffs mother in the previous case reveals

that the Plaintiff and the 1st Defendant, his mother in Case No. 3139/P are

not the sole co-owners of the identical land called Madinagedarawatta.

[43] The Petitioners have claimed that the house No 10, the passage

No. 11 and the kitchen No. 13 in Plan No. 851 in Case bearing No.

3139/P were built by his predecessor-in-title, Agampodige Heen Appu and

the Plaintiff and the 1

st Defendant are not entitled to the said buildings. A

perusal of the buildings in Lot 1 of Plan No. 851 reveals that a part of the

house and the kitchen falls outside the corpus of the action and the mother

of the Plaintiff who is the 1

st Defendant had claimed the entire lot 1

including the said buildings.

[44] However, the mother of the Plaintiff who filed Partition Case No.

1411/P had not claimed the said house No. 1 and building No. 2 in

Plan No. 104 at the preliminary survey. The said house No. 1 and

building No. 2 in Plan No. 104 had been claimed by the 4

th Defendant in

the previous case, who was not made a party by the Plaintiff in Case

bearing No. 3139/P.

20 C.A.REV 0137 - 03 D.C. BALAPITIYA 3139/P

[45] The mother of the Plaintiff, who is the 1

st Defendant in Case bearing

No. 3139/P had however, claimed the entire buildings in lot 1 at the

preliminary survey done on 26.10.1998 and surprisingly, only the Plaintiff,

his mother (1

st Defendant) and the 2

nd Defendant (the Plaintiffs brother-in-

law) were present at the preliminary survey in the present case. It is to be

observed that the Commissioner Sisira Amendra had reported that at the

preliminary survey done on 26.10.1998, only the Plaintiff, the 1

st

Defendant and the 2

nd Defendant were present.

[46] The 2

nd Defendant-Respondent in Case No. 3139/P had given an

Affidavit marked P4 statting that although he was made a party to the

Partition action bearing No. 3139/P, no survey or beat of tom-tom was

done or proper advertisement was followed in respect of the land in

dispute. He has further stated in the Affidavit that the Plaintiff had

obtained a partition decree by misleading the authorities. The 3

rd

Defendant-Respondent in Case No. 3139/P, Luwinis de Silva, who is said

to be the brother of the Plaintiffs mother had also given an Affidavit (P5)

stating that although he had no rights to the land in dispute, he was made a

Defendant in the partition action at the instance of the Plaintiff.

[47] A perusal of the Report filed by the Commissioner in the previous

action bearing No. 1411/P reveals that the Plaintiff in case No. 3139 who

was the 1

st Defendant in Case No. 1411/P had only claimed buildings and

plantation in Lot B in Plan No. 104, along with his mother and the 3

rd

Defendant. Both the Plaintiff and his mother in the present case had not

claimed lot A in Plan No. 104 including the permanent buildings Nos.

1 and 3 and the plantation described in Plan No. 104. It appears that

only a new claimant had claimed lot A depicted in the said Plan (Vide-

page 46 of the brief). On the other hand, the Plaintifft in Case No. 3139/P

21 C.A.REV 0137 - 03 D.C. BALAPITIYA 3139/P

had not claimed Lot C in Plan No. 104 which is in extent of 2 roods and

17 perches.

[48]However, the Plaintiff in Case No. 3139/P had claimed that the sole

co-owners of the land called Madinagederawatta are the Plaintiff and his

mother and obtained a decree to partition the said without notice to all the

parties who were given shares in the previous action by his mother and the

Petitioners and their predecessors-in-title who claimed their rights in the

previous action.

[49] It is absolutely clear from the pedigree set up by the Plaintiffs mother

in the previous case, that apart from the Plaintiff and his mother, there are

more persons, including the Petitioners and their predecessors-in-title who

had claimed undivided rights to the land called Madinagederawatta.

[50] Mr. Sahabandu has submitted that the partition decree obtained by

the Plaintiff had deprived the Petitioners of their ancestral house and

buildings Nos. 10-13 depicted in Plan No. 851 and the same had been

given to the 1

st Defendant (mother of the Plaintiff) who did not even claim

the same at the preliminary survey in the previous case.

[51] At the hearing on 08.09.2020, Mr. Metha conceded that some

Petitioners are living in House in Lot 1 depicted in Plan No. 851 and thus,

they could have been made parties to the partition action. He, however,

disputed the contention of Mr. Sahabandu that the interlocutory decree

ought to be set aside as he was prepared to exclude the house in Lot 1 and

amend the interlocutory decree accordingly. Mr. Metha has drawn the

attention of Court to the decision of the Supreme Court in Somawathie v.

Madawela and Others (1983) 2 Sri LR 15 and submitted that justice would

be served only by excluding the house No. 10 without setting aside the

interlocutory decree and amending the interlocutory decree accordingly.

22 C.A.REV 0137 - 03 D.C. BALAPITIYA 3139/P

[52] In the case of Somawathie v. Madawela and Others (supra), the

substantial relief which Mr. Madawela wanted was to exclude lot 4 in Plan

No. 3392 as the said lot had been fenced by Mr. Madawela after he

purchased lot 4 and thus, the Supreme Court could identify lot 4 and

exclude it from the corpus of the action. In the present case, the Petitioners

have not restricted their substantial claims to the house Nos. 10-13 in

lot 1 of Plan No. 851. The Petitioners have claimed an undivided share

inherited from their predecessors-in-title from the entire land called

Madinagederawatta.

[53]. It is seen from the Preliminary Plan No. 851 that there are 2 houses

and buildings in Lot 1 depicted in Plan No. 851 and the house and

buildings Nos. 10-13 are part of the same house but part of the said

house, namely, the kitchen No. 13 is outside the land depicted in Plain

No. 851. In the circumstances, it is not possible to exclude only the house

marked 10 from the corpus of the action without first giving an

opportunity to the Petitioners to make their claim and establish their rights

in the District Court action.

[54] The Petitioners had claimed their rights in the previous case before

the Surveyor and the Plaintiff in the present case had full knowledge that

they were all necessary parties, as persons who were entitled to claim a

right, title or interest in the subject matter in terms of the provisions of

section 5 of the Partition Law. Their rights, title or interests have been

adversely affected by the partition decree fraudulently obtained by the

Plaintiff without notice to them. The entire land had been partitioned

between the Plaintiff and his mother (the 1

st Defendant) in violation of the

provisions of the Partition Law, which caused a miscarriage of justice to the

Petitioners and in my view, it amounts to a fundamental vice.

23 C.A.REV 0137 - 03 D.C. BALAPITIYA 3139/P

[55] The Petitioners have been the victims of a miscarriage of justice and in

my view, they are entitled to invoke the powers of revision vested in the

Court of Appeal. In Somawathie v. Madawala (1983) 2 Sri LR 15, Soza J.

referring to the finality clause in section 48 of the Partition Law stated at

page 23:

But although the Act stipulated that decrees under the Partition Act are final and conclusive even where all persons concerned were not parties to the action or there was any omission or defect of procedure or in the proof of title, the Supreme Court continued in the exercise of its powers of revision and restitution in integrum to set aside partition decrees when it found that the proceedings were tainted by what has been called fundamental vice.

[56] Soza J. in the course of his judgment in the aforesaid case referred to

the following statement made by T.S. Fernando J. (as he then was) in Ukku

v. Sidoris 59 NLR 90 at page 93:

While that section 48 (i.e. section 48 of the Partition Act) enacts that an interlocutory decree entered shall be subject to the decision of any appeal which may be preferred therefrom, be final and conclusive for all purposes against all persons whomsoever, I am of the opinion that it does not affect the extra-ordinary jurisdiction of this Court exercised by way of revision or restitutio in integrum where circumstances in which such extraordinary jurisdiction has been exercised in the past are shown to exist. [57] In Somawathie v. Madawala (supra), Soza J. held that:

(i) Although section 48 of the Partition Law invests interlocutory

and final decrees entered under the Partition Act with finality,

the revisionary powers of the Appeal Court are left unaffected

and the position is the same under the Partition Law;

24 C.A.REV 0137 - 03 D.C. BALAPITIYA 3139/P

(ii) The powers of revision and restitutio in integrum of the

Appeal Court have survived all the legislation that has been

enacted up to date.

[58] In Appuhamy v. Weeratunga 23 NLR 467, the Supreme Court held

that it is open to the Supreme Court to exercise its powers of revision on

the application of an aggrieved person not a party to the record. In

Mariam Beebee v Seyed Mohamed, 68 NLR 36, Sansoni C.J. stated at

page 38:

The power of revision is an extraordinary power which is quite independent of and distinct from the appropriate jurisdiction of this Court. Its object is the due administration of justice and the correction of errors, sometimes committed by the Court itself, in order to avoid miscarriages of justice. It is exercised in some cases by a Judge of his own motion, when an aggrieved person who may not be a party to the action brings to his notice the fact that, unless the power is exercised, injustice will result. The Partition Act has not, I conceive, made any changes in this respect, and the power can still be exercised in respect of any order or decree of a lower Court.

[59] In Lazarus Estates Ltd. v. Beasley. [1956] 1 Q.B. 702 Denning LJ.

held that no court will allow a person to keep an advantage which he has

obtained by fraud as fraud unravels everything and thus, the court had a

jurisdiction to relieve against fraud in all cases. He stated at page 713:

No judgment of a court, no order of a Minister, can be allowed to stand if it has been obtained by fraud. Fraud unravels everything. The court is careful not to find fraud unless it is distinctly pleaded and proved; but once it is proved, it vitiates judgments, contracts and all transactions whatsoever.

[60] In Sirinivasa Thero v. Sudesi Thero 63 NLR 31, the Court recognized

the principle that a court whose act has caused injury to a suitor has an

inherent power to make restitution as may be necessary to meet the ends

of justice. Sansoni J, stated at page 34:

25 C.A.REV 0137 - 03 D.C. BALAPITIYA 3139/P

Justice requires that it should be restored to the position be occupied before the invalid order made for it is a rule that the Court will not permit a suitor to suffer by reason of its wrongful act. The Court will, so far as possible, put him in the position which he would have occupied if the wrong order had not been made. It is a power which is inherent in the Court itself and rests on the principle that a Court of Justice is under a duty to repair the injury done to a party by its act.

[61] It is settled law that there is a paramount duty cast on the Court by the

Partition Law itself to investigate the title of the land sought to be

partitioned and the parties before the Court are those solely entitled to

such land. The necessity for a full investigation and strict proof of title has

been emphasized in a number of judgments. In Galagoda v. Mohideen 40

N.L.R. 92, it was held that the Court should not enter a decree in a

partition action unless it is perfectly satisfied that the persons in whose

favour it makes the decree are entitled to the property.

[62] In all the attendant circumstances of this case, this Court is satisfied

that the judgment complained of had been obtained by fraud perpetrated

by the Plaintiff on the Petitioners and the Plaintiff had acted in collusion

with the other Defendants, which had caused a manifest injustice to the

Petitioners. In such instance, the Court will not sit idly by and allow the

injustice to continue, simply on the ground that the Surveyor had merely

reported that no new claimants were present at the preliminary survey and

thus, the Petitioners now cannot contradict the Surveyors Report.

[63] I am of the view that this is a fit case for this Court to intervene in the

exercise of its revisionary powers to avert a miscarriage of justice. In the

circumstances, this Court will not hesitate to exercise its extraordinary

powers of revision where a manifest miscarriage of justice had occurred

due to the conduct of the Plaintiff in obtaining a partition decree by fraud

26 C.A.REV 0137 - 03 D.C. BALAPITIYA 3139/P

perpetrated on the Petitioners. If this Court fails to invoke its powers of

revision, grave injustice will result to the Petitioners

Conclusion

[64] In the interests of justice, I set aside the judgment of the learned

District Judge of Balapitiya dated 26.11.2002 and the interlocutory decree

based thereon in Case bearing No. 3139/P entered in the District Court of

Balapitiya Case bearing No. 3139/P. In the result, I direct the learned

District Judge of Balapitiya to have a trial de novo, after permitting the

Petitioners to intervene in the action as parties and file their statements of

claim and conclude the case as expeditiously as possible.

[65] The parties shall bear their own costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

M. Sampath K.B. Wijeratna J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

27 C.A.REV 0137 - 03 D.C. BALAPITIYA 3139/P

Annuxure A

Annexure B