,...

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C.A. Case No.l248/2000 (F)

D.C. Gampaha Case No.30821/L

1.

2.

Loku Pathirannehelage Karunasekera

of Happitiya, Wathurugama.

PLAINTIFF

-Vs-

KA.K Welusingho

KA.K Pemachandra

Both of Laulupitiya, Wathurugama.

3. G.P. David W imalasena

4. G.P. Lionel Karunapala

5. E.A. Thilakawathi

All of Happitiya, Wathurugama.

DEFENDANTS

AND NOW

I

Loku Pathirannehelage Karunasekera (Deceased)

1. Loku Pathirannehelage Ananda

2. Loku Pathirannehelage Chandralatha

Both of Happitiya, Wathurugama.

Substituted-PLAINTIFF-APPELLANTS

-Vs-

1

l. KA.K Welusingho (Deceased)

la &: 2. KA.K Pemachandra

Laulupitiya, Wathurugama.

Substituted l(a) &: 2 DEFENDANT RESPONDENT

3. G.P. David W imalasena

4. G.P. Lionel Karunapala

5. E.A. Thilakawathi

6. L Piyasirisena

All of Happitiya, Wathurugama.

DEFENDANT -RESPONDENTS

AND NOW BETWEEN

Loku Pathirannehelage Karunasekera (Deceased)

l. Loku Pathirannehelage Ananda

2. Loku Pathirannehelage Chandralatha

Both of Happitiya, Wathurugama.

Substituted PLAINTIFF -APPELLANT -PETITIONERS

-Vs-

1. KA.K Welusingho (Deceased)

la &: 2. KA.K Pemachandra

Laulupitiya, Wathurugama.

Substituted l(a) &: 2 DEFENDANT-RESPONDENT - RESPONDENT

2

BEFORE

COUNSEL

Decided on

AH.M.D. Nawaz, J.

3. G.P. David Wimalasena

4. G.P. lionel Karunapala

5. E.A Thilakawathi

6. L Piyasirisena

All of H appiti ya, Wathurugama.

DEFENDANT-RESPONDENT -RESPONDENTS

AH.M.D. Nawaz,J.

Chamantha Weerakoon Unamboowa for the Su bstituted Plaintiff-Appellant-Petitioners

S.A.D.S. Suraweera for the Defendant-Respondents

06.08.2019

T

he Plaintiff has filed this action on 25th January, 1988 against the Defendants in the

District Court of Gampaha for a declaration of title to the land called "Ank Kumbura"

bearing Lot No.8 in extent Al R3 P16 !, which is more fully described in the 2nd Schedule

to the plaint.

The Plaintiff's position, as stated in the plaint, is that the land in dispute is a paddy land,

which was originally possessed by his grandfather and after his death his father and

thereafter since 1965 the Plaintiff had been possessing the land up to 1981 cultivable

season, and in the 1981 season the Defendants forcibly harvested the crops cultivated by

him.

He further avers that the Defendants made a complaint to the Assistant Commissioner of

Agrarian Service under the provisions of the Agrarian Services Act No.58 of 1979 stating

that the Plaintiff was their " Ande Cultivator" who had failed to pay the ground rent and

3

therefore he must be evicted from the said land, but that the Commissioner decided that

he had no jurisdiction to inquire into the matter and wanted the Defendants to file a civil

action in the District Court, and that the Defendants forcibly ousted him from the land

without seeking civil remedy.

Therefore the Plaintiff says that he filed this action against the Defendants praying that he

be declared entitled to the said land bearing Lot No.8 and for damages. This statement

appears to be a falsehood as the Commissioner never made such an order. The Plaintiff

failed to prove this statement.

The Defendants in their answer denying the averments in the plaint except for admitting

the subject-matter, which, they say that by the Final Decree that had been entered in the

Partition action No.2650/P in the District Court of Gampaha, the 1st Defendant Yelun

Singho and the 2nd Defendant Emage Jayaman were jointly allotted Lot 8 in Plan No. 5176P

and later, after the public road was constructed on the northern side of the land, by Plan

No.1227 dated 06.11.1982 made by T.A. Ranasighe, licensed Surveyor, these two

Defendants amicably divided the land and thereby Yelun became entitled to Lots 1 and 2

and Jayaman became entitled to Lots 3 and 4.

The Defendants further say that the Plaintiff was their tenant cultivator of the said land

and that tenancy was terminated by the Commissioner of Agrarian Services in April, 1981

and therefore the Plaintiff had no right to the said land and they moved that the plaint

must be dismissed.

On 25.04.1990, when the case was taken up for trial, after recording 3 admissions the

Plaintiff raised 1 to 5 issues and the Defendants raised 6 to B . But subsequently, these

issues were abandoned and fresh issues were raised on 31.08.1992. The parties admitted

the subject-matter. The Plaintiff's main issues namely Issues No.1 and 2 were about his

long possession and his dispossession by the Defendants in 1981 and the 3'd issue related to

the decision of the Commissioner of Agrarian Services. This issue had been raised on the

purported basis that the Commissioner did not want to inquire into the matter and

wanted the parties to go for a civil remedy. As I said above, this issue was without any

4

foundation and the Plaintiff did not lead any evidence to prove this issue. According to the

documents submitted by the Defendants V2 and V3, the Commissioner had in fact held an

inquiry and decided to evict the Plaintiff from the said land.

The Defendants' main issues Nos.7 to llwere regarding their entitlement to the land

emanating through the final decree in the partition action in 2650/P and the deeds.

In his evidence the Plaintiff says that there was a Land Case No.21284 filed in the District

Court of Gampaha in which a settlement was arrived at, according to which the Defendant

Pathirannalage Karunasekera (Plaintiff in this case) agreed to give up possession of the

said land to the Plaintiff Velun and Jayaman (Defendants in this case). The details of this

case are not given. The learned Judge has commented on this case and said that that in that

case the Plaintiff in the present case had agreed to give up possession of the said land to

the Defendants Velun andJayaman.

Whilst the Plaintiff has claimed long and prescriptive possession, the 2nd and 3,d

Defendants claim rights to the said land on a final decree in Partition Case No. 2650/P-

(Vide VI). The position of the Defendants is that they are the owners of the said land and

the Plaintiff was the tenant cultivator, who had paid them ground rent and a share of the

produce. When the Plaintiff failed to pay the rent, in 1981, on a complaint made to the

Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Services, the Plaintiff's tenancy was terminated and

the Defendants were declared owners-(Vide V2 and V3).

As claimed by the Plaintiff, if he was the owner of the land, he must have produced any

documentary evidence to prove his ownership. But no such deeds were ever produced.

Alternatively, if he bases his claim on prescriptive possession, adverse possession must be

established by cogent evidence, which too the Plaintiff has failed to do. Assuming that the

Plaintiff had possessed the said land for a long period of time exceeding ten years, it was in

the capacity of an "Ande cultivator" as established by documents V2 and V3.

When perusing the documents V2 and V3, it is clear that the Plaintiff had been an "Ande

cultivator" and had been paying the Defendants rents out of the produce, i.e., by way of 20

bushels paddy for a season and since he failed to give rent for four seasons amounting to 80

5

bushels, on a complaint made by the Defendants against the Plaintiff, the Assistant

Commissioner of Agrarian Services ordered the Plaintiff to give the owners 80 bushels

before 25.01.1981 and if he failed to do so, action would be taken against him under Section

18(2) of the Agrarian Services Act to evict him from the land. This order was notified to the

Plaintiff by the Commissioner by his letter dated 01.01.1981 (V2).

Since the Plaintiff had failed to pay the rent (80 bushels of paddy), the Commissioner

decided to evict him from the land (Description of the land is given in (V3) as 'Ande

cultivator'. This order of the Commissioner had also been communicated to the Plaintiff by

V3 dated 06.04.1981. U the Plaintiff was aggrieved by the order, he should have appealed

against it to the Court of Appeal, within thirty days and if the tenant cultivator failed to

make any appeal, the decision of the Commissioner shall be final and conclusive-{vide

Section 5(6) of the Agrarian Services Act referred to above).

It appears that in terms of Subsection (4) of section 18 of the Agrarian Services Act, the

Defendant had taken over possession of the said land. Therefore, the Defendants' entry

into the land in 1981 and harvesting of the crop albeit cultivated by the Plaintiff cannot be

treated as unlawful in terms of the provisions of the Agrarian Service Act.

As it would appear, the possession of the land by the Defendants after the 1981 cultivable

season was not unlawful and the Plaintiff's cultivation of that season, commenced in

October 1981 and ended in January 1982. Notwithstanding the letter of the Agrarian

Commissioner (V2), the Plaintiff went on to cultivate and as such it was an unauthorized

cultivation and therefore the Plaintiff was not entitled to claim any damages therefore.

The learned Additional District Judge has correctly evaluated the evidence given in this

case and come to the conclusion that the documents marked VI to V8 by the Defendants

were not objected to by the Plaintiff, and the Plaintiff has not proved uninterrupted and

independent possession against the Defendants, and therefore the Plaintiff is not entitled

to claim prescriptive possession or ownership to the land.

Section 116 of the Evidence Ordinance is very clear that a person who enters into a land as

a tenant shall not deny the ownership of the landlord during the continuance of the

6

tenancy. The Plaintiff's position that he was never a tenant cultivator is untenable and

unsustainable. His failure to appeal against the decision of the Assistant Commissioner of

Agrarian Services clearly shows that he did not want to appeal because he would not

succeed in his appeal. The Plaintiff is therefore not entitled to the reliefs claimed in this

case. The learned Judge has answered the Issues Nos. 1 to 6 raised by the Plaintiff against

him and dismissed the Plaintiff's action.

Having regard to the evidence led in this case and the judgment thereon, I do not wish to

interfere with the findings of the learned Additional District Judge and I affirm the

judgment entered in this case. The Plaintiff is not entitled to any relief as claimed in ~s

plaint. v

The Plaintiff's appeal is dismissed with costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

7