IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

CA (Writ) Application No: 9/2019

In the matter of an Application for mandates in the nature of Writs of Certiorari, Prohibition and Mandamus in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Undiya Ralalage Lishantha Prabhakara Bandara Seneviratne, Henepola, Wadakada.

PETITIONER

Vs.

1. Anoma Dissanayake, Divisional Secretary, Polgahawela.

2. District Secretary, District Secretariat, Kurunegala.

3. Hon. Kabir Hashim, Minister of Highways and Road Development.

4. Secretary, Ministry of Highways and Road Development.

3rd and 4 th Respondents of 'Maganeguma Mahamedura' Koswatte, Battaramulla.

5. Weerakoon Mudiyanselage Mahinda Siri Weerakoon, Hiripanwella, Wadakada.

1

Before:

Counsel:

6. Herath Mudiyanselage Siriwardena Herath, Habarawa, Wadakada.

7. Mudaligedara Dharmadasa, Henepola, Wadakada.

8. Mudaligedara Lakshitha Pushpakumara, Henepola, Wadakada.

9. Road Development Authority, Koswatte, Battaramulla.

10. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J

Pradeep Perera for the Petitioner

Sabrina Ahamed, State Counsel for the 1st -4th, 9th

and 10th Respondents

Harith De Mel for the t h and 8th Respondents

Supported on: 8th July 2019

Written Submissions: Tendered on behalf of the Petitioner on 2nd August 2019

Decided on:

Tendered on behalf of the 1st

Respondents on 26th July 2019

Tendered on behalf of the t h and 8

th Respondents on 29th July 2019

1 t h February 2020

2

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J

The Petitioner states that he became the owner of a land in extent of 2 Y,

acres, situated in Polgahawela by virtue of Deed of Transfer No. 3839 dated

23rd October 1989. In 2010, the Petitioner had executed a lease over part of

the said land in favour of the 5th Respondent.1 The Petitioner states further

that in satisfaction of a monetary debt transaction between him and the 6th

Respondent, he transferred the same land, subject to the said lease, to the 6th

Respondent, by Deed No. 490 dated 10th August 2013, on the understanding

that the said land would be re-transferred to the Petitioner upon the payment

of the said debt.2 Barely five months later, the 6th Respondent transferred the

said land to the ih and 8th Respondents, by Deed No. 571 dated 22nd January

2014, subject to the leasehold rights of the 5th Respondent.

Almost three years later, the 1st Respondent, Divisional Secretary, Polgahawela

had issued a notice dated 11th August 2016 under Section 2 of the Land

Acquisition Act (the Act) informing the public that the lands mentioned in the

said notice, including part of the aforementioned land that by then had been

transferred to the ih and 8th Respondents, is required for a public purpose,

namely the construction of the Central Expressway. The Minister of Lands had

subsequently made an Order under proviso (a) of Section 38 of the Act to take

immediate possession of the lands referred to in the said Order, including the

aforementioned land. The said Order had been published in Extraordinary

Gazette No. 2008/23 dated 2

nd March 2017, produced by the 1st Respondent

marked 'lR4'. According to the 1st Respondent, the Acquisition Tenement List

1 The lease rental payable for the entire lease period of 10 years is Rs. 120,000.

2 The consideration for the said transfer is Rs. 300,000, which the Attorneyat-law attesting the Deed has certified was paid in his presence.

3

annexed to the Preliminary Plan lists the ih and 8th Respondents as being the

claimants to the said land.

The Petitioner as well as the 5th, ih and 8th Respondents had submitted their

respective claims in response to the publication of the notice under Section

7(1) of the Act.3 The 1st Respondent had thereafter held an inquiry in terms of

Section 9(1) where each of the above claims had been considered. Having been

satisfied that the ih and 8th Respondents are the owners of the said land,

subject to the leasehold rights of the 5th Respondent, the 1st Respondent had

arrived at the decision that compensation for the said land should be paid to

the 5th, ih and 8th Respondents. While the Order made under Section lO(l)(a)

of the Act has been produced marked 'lRIO', the award made under Section

17(1) of the Act has been produced marked 'lR13'.

The said decision in 'lRIO' had accordingly been conveyed to the Petitioner by

the 1st Respondent, by her letter dated 3rd October 2018, annexed to the

petition marked 'P13'. Dissatisfied by the said decision, the Petitioner filed this

application seeking inter alia the following relief:

a) A Writ of Certiorari to quash the decision of the 1st Respondent contained

in the letter marked 'P13' to award compensation to the ih and 8th

Respondents;

b) A Writ of Prohibition prohibiting the 1st Respondent from taking steps to

pay compensation to the ih and 8th Respondents;

, Section 7(1) of the Act requires the acquiring officer to cause a notice in accordance with Section 7(2) to be published in the Gazette. The said notice shall specify that it is intended to acquire the land referred to in the

said notice under the provisions of the Act and that claims for compensation for the acquisition of such land may be made to the acquiring officer mentioned in the notice.

4

c) A Writ of Mandamus directing the 1st Respondent to refer the dispute

with regard to the claims for compensation to the District Court, as

provided for in Section 10(3) of the Act.

As observed at the outset, the Petitioner's position is that the transfer he

effected in favour of the 6th Respondent was in satisfaction of a monetary debt

transaction between the Petitioner and the 6th Respondent, and was subject to

the understanding that the said land would be re-transferred to the Petitioner

upon the payment of the said debt. The Petitioner is therefore arguing that the

said transfer was only a 'conditional transfer' and that he continues to remain

the 'owner' of the land, with the result that the compensation for the

acquisition of the land should be paid to him.

After the publication of the notice under Section 2 of the Act, which as

observed earlier, was almost three years after the execution of the Deed of

Transfer in favour of the 6th Respondent, the Petitioner filed an application

with the Debt Conciliation Board in terms of Section 14(1) of the Debt

Conciliation Ordinance No. 39 of 1941, as amended. The purpose of a debtor

making an application under Section 14(1) is to seek the assistance of the Debt

Conciliation Board to effect a settlement of the debt/s owed by such debtor to

his secured creditor/so It is common ground that the application made by the

Petitioner is presently pending before the Debt Conciliation Board. The

Petitioner had informed the 1st Respondent Acquiring Officer of the pending

inquiry, and had requested that any determination on the payment of

5

compensation be deferred, pending the outcome of the decision of the Debt

Conciliation Board.

4

The complaint of the Petitioner to this Court is that, as there existed a dispute

with regard to the ownership of the said land, the Acquiring Officer ought to

have referred the said dispute to the District Court, as provided for in Section

10(1)(b) of the Act, instead of acting under Section 10(1)(a). What this Court is

therefore called upon to determine in this application is whether the said

decision 'IRIO' of the Acquiring Officer conveyed by 'P13' is ultra vires the

powers of the Acquiring Officer in terms of the Act, and/or whether the

Acquiring Officer's decision is unreasonable.

Prior to considering the complaint of the Petitioner, it would be useful to lay

down the provisions of the Act which deals with the consideration and

determination of claims for compensation for lands that are sought to be

acquired under the Act.

Once the notice under Section 7(1) of the Act calling for claims is published,

the Acquiring Officer is required by Section 9(1) of the Act to hold an inquiry to

determine:

"(a) the market value of that land or of the servitude which is to be

acquired over that land;

(b) such claims for compensatian as may have been notified to him

within the time allowed therefor by that notice ..... ;

4 Vide the letters marked 'P7', 'P8a' and 'P9' annexed to the petition.

6

(c) the respective interests of the persons claiming compensation; and

(d) any other matter which needs investigation for the purpose of

making an award under section 17."

There is no dispute between the parties that an inquiry as provided for in

Section 9(1) was held, and that the Petitioner was afforded an opportunity of

placing material to support his claim. This Court observes that the Petitioner

has not complained to this Court in his petition with regard to the manner in

which the inquiry was conducted, and for that reason, would disregard the

averment in paragraph 21 of the written submissions filed on behalf of the

Petitioner where it has been alleged that a proper inquiry had not been

conducted .

In terms of Section 10(1) of the Act:-

"At the conclusion of an inquiry held under section 9, the acquiring officer

holding the inquiry shall either-.

a) make a decision on every claim made by any person to any right, title

or interest to, in or over the land which is to be acquired or over

which a servitude is to be acquired and on every such dispute as may

have arisen between any claimants as to any such right, title or

interest, and give notice of his decision to the claimant or to each of

the parties to the dispute, or

(b) refer the claim or dispute for determination as hereinafter provided."

7

In this application, the l't Respondent Acquiring Officer had made a decision

under Section lO(l)(a) and conveyed her decision to the Petitioner by letter

marked 'P13', which the Petitioner admits to having received on 2nd November

2018.

The reference contemplated under Section lO(l)(b) as well as under Section

10(2), which section would be discussed later, is a reference to the "District

Court or the Primory Court having jurisdiction over the place where the land

which is to be acquired or over which a servitude is to be acquired is situated,

... ".5 The purpose of making a reference to the District Court is to enable the

District Court to make a determination on the claims that have been referred

to it by the Acquiring Officer, either in terms of Section 10(1)(b) or Section

10(2). In terms of Section 10(4), once a reference has been made to the District

Court, the acquiring officer shall defer making an award under Section 17 in

respect of the land to which such reference relates to.

In the absence of a reference being made to the District Court as aforesaid, the

Acquiring Officer shall act in terms of Section 17(1) of the Act and make an

award under his hand determining inter alia the persons who are entitled to

compensation in respect of the land or servitude which is to be acquired.6 The

award under Section 17(1) brings to a closure the role of the Acquiring Officer

with regard to the determination of claims for compensation for lands

acquired under the Act.

This Court shall now consider the complaint of the Petitioner that the decision

of the Acquiring Officer, produced by the Respondents marked 'lR10',

'Vide Section 10(3) of the Act.

6 The Award has been produced by the Respondents marked 'lR13'.

8

accepting the title of the 7th and 8th Respondents to the said land is ultra vires

his powers and is unreasonable.

The material that has been placed before this Court is the same material that

the Petitioner placed before the Acquiring Officer. This Court has examined the

Deed of Transfer in favour of the 6th Respondent, annexed to the petition

marked 'P3' and observes that it does not contain any clause:

(a) reflecting the monetary transaction referred to by the Petitioner;

(b) requiring the land to be re-transferred to the Petitioner; or

(c) restricting the 6th Respondent from alienating the land to a third party,

even though 'P3' does contain a clause that it is subject to the leasehold rights

of the 5th Respondent.

This Court must observe further thatthe Petitioner has not produced before

the Acquiring Officer any material to substantiate his position that the land

was transferred to the 6th Respondent as part of a monetary transaction

and/or that he subsequently requested the 6th Respondent to re-transfer the

said property to him, upon the payment of the debt, and/or that the Petitioner

had the necessary resources to re-pay the 'debt', and/or that he took steps

prior to filing an application with the Debt Conciliation Board to have the said

land re-transferred to him.

When one takes into consideration the material that was placed before the

Acquiring Officer by the Petitioner, or more appropriately, the lack of it, and

9

the Deed of Transfer produced by the ih and 8th Respondent conferring them

with absolute title, it is clear to this Court that there could not have been any

doubt in the mind of the Acquiring Officer that the ih and 8th Respondents had

an unencumbered title. It was in these circumstances that the Acquiring Officer

had held that compensation should be paid to the ih and 8th Respondents as

the ownership of the land is with the ih and 8th Respondents. This Court is

satisfied that it was a decision which had been arrived at by considering the

respective interests of the persons claiming compensation and that it is a

decision well within the powers of the Acquiring Officer in terms of Section

lO(l)(a) of the Act. Hence, the said decision cannot be said to be ultra vires the

powers conferred by the Act on the Acquiring Officer.

The next argument of the learned Counsel for the Petitioner was that the said

decision is unreasonable and irrational. Lord Diplock in Council of Civil Service

Unions vs Minister for the Civil Service7, described 'irrationality' as follows:

"By 'irrationality' I mean what can now be succinctly referred to as

'Wednesbury unreasonableness.8. It applies to a decision which is so

outrageous in its defiance of logic or of accepted moral standards that no

sensible person who had applied his mind to the question to be decided

could have arrived at it."

This Court, having taken into consideration the aforementioned material that

was placed before the Acquiring Officer, is satisfied, for the reasons referred to

earlier, that the decision of the Acquiring Officer is a decision that a sensible

person who had applied his mind to the question to be decided could have

7 (1985) AC 374 Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd v Wednesbury Corporation (1948) 1KB223

10

arrived at it. The Petitioner, by not furnishing any material to substantiate his

claim, has not helped his cause and has only himself to blame. This Court

cannot therefore agree with the submission of the learned Counsel for the

Petitioner that the said decision is unreasonable and irrational.

At this stage, this Court would like to advert to an important provision in the

Act, namely Section 10(2), which confers a statutory remedy on a person

dissatisfied with a decision made under Section 10(1)(a), or to put it

differently, by a refusal to refer a claim to the District Court .

Section 10(2) reads as follows:

"A claimant whose claim is wholly or partly disallowed, or a party to a

dispute which is determined, by the decision of an acquiring officer under

subsection (1) may, within fourteen days of the service on him of notice

of the decision, make application to that acquiring of/icer for the

reference of the claim or dispute, as the case may be, for determination

as hereinafter provided; and 'that acquiring of/icer shall make a

reference accordingly.,,9 (emphasis added)

Thus, if the Petitioner was dissatisfied by the decision of the Acquiring Officer

conveyed to him by 'P13', he ought to have made use of the statutory remedy

provided to him, and demanded that the 1st Respondent refer his claim to the

District Court, as provided by Section 10(3) of the Act. The Petitioner admits

that he received 'P13' on 2nd November 2018. Although he replied 'P13' by his

letter dated 5th November 2018 marked 'P14', the Petitioner did not make a

9 The words, 'and that acquiring officer shall make a reference accordingly is a reference to the provisions of Section 10(3) of the Act .

11

request as provided for in Section 10(2) nor has the Petitioner complained to

this Court that he made a request under Section 10(2) but that the Acquiring

Officer failed to act upon it. In these circumstances, this Court is of the view

that it was within the powers of the Acquiring Officer to proceed to make an

award under Section 17(1) of the Act.

This Court must observe further that the Petitioner is not without a remedy, as

Section 57(1) of the Act preserves the right of the Petitioner to claim from the t h and 8th Respondents the compensation that the State would pay them, in

the event of a favourable ruling by the Debt Conciliation Board.lO For the

avoidance of doubt, this Court wishes to state that this decision shall not

prevent the Debt Conciliation Board from arriving at a decision in terms of the

Debt Conciliation Ordinance, after having taken consideration the evidence

presented before it by the parties.

In the above circumstances, this Court does not see any legal basis to issue

formal notice of this application on the Respondents. This application is

accordingly dismissed, without costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

10 Section S7(1) reads as follows: "Nothing contained in this Act shall affect the right of any person who is lawfully entit led to any compensation which is paid under this Act to any other person to recover that

compensation from that other person"

12