1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made

under Section 331 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of

1979

CA 74/2020

HC/ COLOMBO/7165/2014

Thuwan Nisam Sahabdeen

Saman alias Baba

Accused-Appellant

vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

Complainant-Respondent

BEFORE : Devika Abeyratne J

P. Kumararatnam J

COUNSEL : Mr.Chamara Wannisekara with Mr.Dineth

Kaushalya and Ms.Sashika Wijeratne for

the Appellant.

Ms.Maheshika Silva SSC for the

Respondent.

2 | P a g e

ARGUED ON : 19/11/2021

DECIDED ON : 08/12/2021

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam J

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter after referred to as the

Appellant) was indicted by the Attorney General under Sections 54(A) (b) and

54(A) (d) of the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs Ordinance as amended

by Act No. 13 of 1984 for Trafficking and Possession respectively of 14.76

grams of Heroin on 18th November 2012 in the High Court of Colombo.

After the trial the Appellant was found guilty on both counts and the Learned

High Court Judge of Colombo has imposed life imprisonment on both counts

on 25th of June, 2020.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the Appellant

has given consent to argue this matter in his absence due to the Covid 19

pandemic. During the argument he was connected via Zoom from prison.

On behalf of the Appellant following Grounds of Appeal are raised.

1. The Learned High Court Judge has failed to satisfy the test of credibility

by analysing the consistency of the testimony of witnesses and

therefore the Learned High Court judge erred in law by convicting the

appellant on the evidence of the prosecution.

2. The Learned High Court Judge had not adequately considered the

probability of the raid.

3 | P a g e

3. The trial judge has incorrectly rejected the accuseds version.

Background of the case.

On 18/11/2010 PW01 SI Udara Chaturanga Premasiri attached to Police

Narcotic Bureau had received information from PC 38993 Padmakumara

about trafficking of Heroin near Cargills Food City in Maradana through a

green coloured three-wheeler bearing No.YE 5361 by a person called Baba.

He had left for the raid accompanied by 07 other police officers attached to

Police Narcotic Bureau after completing all necessary formalities. The team

had left the bureau at 8.55 am and reached the Maradana Bus Halt around

9.20 am as per the information.

The team had waited near the Maradana Bus Halt and the informant had

come there around 9.30 am and had met PW02 PS38993 Padmakumara and

had re-confirmed that the Appellant was planning to traffic drugs on that

day. After taking the informant into the vehicle the police party had

positioned themselves near Maradana Cargills Food City and waited about

15 minutes. At that time as per the information that particular three-wheeler

had arrived and parked after passing the police vehicle. PW01 along with

PW02 had gone up to the three-wheeler, displayed their official identity cards

to confirm their identities and directed the Appellant to alight from the three-

wheeler. The Appellant who was wearing a white colour shirt and a black

trouser had anxiously alighted from the vehicle. When he was subjected to a

body check PW01 had found a parcel wrapped in a grocery bag from his right

trouser pocket which contained a substance like Heroin. In his left pocket a

mobile phone and some documents were found by the police. On a field

examination the substance found in the possession had reacted for Diacetyl

Morphine alias Heroin. Hence the Appellant was arrested for possession of

Heroin around 9.50 am. The police party had then concluded their

investigation and returned to the Bureau at 10.30 am.

4 | P a g e

At the Police Narcotic Bureau, the Heroin was properly weighed and sealed

after obtaining the thumb impression of the Appellant. The parcel weighed

about 60 grams and was marked as production number 61/2012. The

witness had handed over the parcel to the reserve police officer IP

Rajakaruna. At the trial he had properly identified the production and the

Appellant.

PW02 PC Padmakumara who had received the information and participated

in the raid along with PW01 could not give evidence as he was subjected to

an acid attack when he was in the course of arresting a suspect at

Warakapola. Due to the acid attack, he had lost sight in both the eyes when

this case was taken up for trial. Due to his absence PW03 PC 15109

Rajapaksha who was a member of the raiding team had given evidence.

PW06 IP Rajakaruna to whom the productions were handed over by PW01

had given evidence and confirmed that he handed over the same to the

Government Analyst on 21/11/2012 and identified the production and the

Government Analyst Receipt which had been marked as P8 in the trial. In

the receipt the Government Analyst had confirmed that the productions

pertaining to this case had been handed over by PW06 IP Rajakaruna with

the seals intact.

PW07 Assistant Government Analyst Mrs.Kodithuwakku had given evidence

and confirmed that the parcel marked as PR 61/2012 had contained 14.76

grams of pure Heroin. The Government Analyst Report was marked as P8 at

the trial. Her qualifications and expertise in the field of narcotics have been

admitted under Section 420 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of

1979 by the defence.

After the close of the prosecution case defence was called and the Appellant

had made a lengthy dock statement and denied the charges.

In the 1st ground of appeal the Appellant contends that the Learned High

Court Judge has failed to satisfy the test of credibility by analysing the

5 | P a g e

consistency of the testimony of witnesses and therefore the Learned High

Court judge erred in law by convicting the appellant on the evidence of the

prosecution.

In this case PW01 had given very clear evidence regarding the raid and the

arrest of the Appellant. The prosecution was unable to call PW02 who

received the information and went along with PW01 to arrest the Appellant.

PW02 PC 38993 Padmakumara was subjected to an acid attack when he

went to arrest an accused while serving at Warakapola Police station. As both

his eyes were damaged rendering him blind due to the said attack, he could

not come to court to give evidence in this case. But the prosecution had

called PW03 PC 15109 Rajapaksha who was also part of the team during the

raid.

According to PW03 when PW01 and PW02 went to arrest the Appellant he

was seated in the vehicle which was parked 20 meters away from the place

of arrest and had observed them through the window of the vehicle. He had

clearly witnessed that the Appellant was checked inside and outside of the

three-wheeler by PW01 and PW02.

According to section 134 of the Evidence Ordinance:

No particular number of witnesses shall in any case be required for

the proof of any fact

In The Attorney General v Devunderage Nihal S.C Appeal 154/10 dated

12/05/2011 the Court held that:

It is a well-established principle that the prosecution is not required to

lead the evidence of a number of witnesses to prove its case. In a similar

case as the present instance, Jayasuriya J in A.G. v Mohamed Saheeb

Mohamed Ismath C.A.87/97 decided on 13.7.1999 stated that There

is no requirement in law that evidence of a Police Officer who has

conducted an investigation into a charge of illegal possession of heroin,

should be corroborated in regard to material particulars emanating

6 | P a g e

from an independent source. Section 134 of Evidence Ordinance states

that No particular number of witnesses shall in any case be required

for the proof of any fact. The principle has been applied in the Indian

Supreme Court where the conviction rested solely on the evidence of a

solitary witness who gave circumstantial evidence in regard to the

accuseds liability. The Privy Council upheld the conviction entered by

the trial judge and adopted the judgment of the Supreme Court in

Muulluwa v State of Madhya Pradesh AIR 1976 S.C.198. This principle

has been adopted with approval and applied in the judgment of

G.P.S.Silva J. in Wallimunige John v The State 76 NLR 488. King v

N.SA. Fernando 46 NLR 255. The principle affirmed is that testimony

must be weighed and not counted. Justice Vaithylingam dealing with a

bribery charge laid down for the future legal fraternity the principle that

even in a bribery case, that there is no legal requirement for a sole

witnesss evidence to be corroborated. No evidence even of a police

officer who conducted a raid upon a bribery charge is required by law

to be corroborated. Gunasekara v A.G. 79 NLR 348.

Considering above mentioned judgment a single witnesss evidence is

sufficient to prove a case beyond reasonable doubt against an accused in a

criminal trial. In this case the prosecution even though they could have led

only PW01s evidence, called PW03 as well to corroborate the evidence of

PW01 with regards to the raid.

The counsel for the Appellant argues that the PW03 had given contradictory

evidence against PW01s evidence which affect the root of the case. In this

case PW03 had not given contradictory evidence but he had given evidence

based on what he had witnessed while he was seated inside the police

vehicle. Both PW01 and PW03 mentioned in their evidence that the Appellant

was searched in and out of the three-wheeler in which the Appellant arrived.

Hence no contradictory evidence is adduced by the prosecution in this case.

7 | P a g e

In the second ground of appeal the Appellant argued that the Learned High

Court Judge had not adequately considered the probability of the raid.

PW01 had vividly explained to the court as to how this raid was conducted

and the Appellant was arrested. Whatever the productions necessary to

prove the case were produced and marked in court. The police had conducted

further investigation regarding the Appellants involvement in any other drug

dealings. That investigation had been carried out by a separate police team

after obtaining a 07 days detention order from the relevant court. As further

investigation has nothing to do with the present case those evidence with

other productions is not marked and produced in this case. Hence the

prosecution case will not fail the test of probability.

In the case of Wickremasuriya v. Dedoleena and others 1996 [2] SLR 95

Jayasuriya J held that;

A judge, in applying the Test of Probability and Improbability relies

heavily on his knowledge of men and matters and the patterns of

conduct observed by human beings both ingenious as well as those

who are less talented and fortunate

His Lordship further held that;

If the contradiction is not of that character the Court ought to accept

the evidence of witnesses whose evidence is otherwise cogent having

regard to the Test of Probability and Improbability and having regard

to the demeanour and deportment manifested by witnesses. Trivial

contradictions which do not touch the core of a partys case should not

be given much significance, especially when the probabilities factors

echo in favour of the version narrated by an applicant

8 | P a g e

In Iswari Prasad v. Mohamed Isa 1963 AIR (SC) 1728 at 1734 His Lordship

held that;

In considering the question as to whether evidence given by the

witness should be accepted or not, the court has, no doubt, to examine

whether the witness is, an interested witness and to enquire whether

the story deposed to by him is probable and whether it has been

shaken in cross-examination. That is whether there is a ring of truth

surrounding his testimony.

Justice Mackenna in Discretion, The Irish Jurist, Vol.IX (new series), 1 at

10 has said;

When I have done my best to separate the true from the false by these

more or less objective tests, I say which story seems to me the more

probable, the plaintiffs or the defendants, and If I cannot say which, I

decide the case, as the law requires me to do in defendants favour.

Guided by the above cited judgments I conclude that the learned High Court

Judge had adequately applied the probability test and come to a correct

finding. Hence it is incorrect to say that the Learned High Court Judge had

not adequately considered the probability of the raid.

Finally, the Appellant contends that the trial judge has incorrectly rejected

the accuseds version.

Learned High Court Judge in his judgment adequately considered the dock

statement of the Appellant and had given reasons as to why he disbelieves

the same. The position taken by the Appellant had been put to PW01 and he

had vehemently denied all such suggestions. Hence the defence had failed to

create any doubt in the prosecution case.

9 | P a g e

In this case the investigating officers had received specific information that

the Appellant was travelling with Heroin in a green coloured three-wheeler

bearing No.YE 5361. Accordingly, the raid was arranged and the Appellant

was taken into custody along with the Heroin he was carrying. Considering

this evidence there is no improbability occasioned. Their evidence pertaining

to the raid was clear, cogent and without any contradiction or ambiguity.

Considering all the circumstances their action cannot be faulted at any stage

of the raid. Hence the appeal grounds advanced by the Appellant are devoid

of merit due to aforesaid reasons.

Accordingly, we affirm the conviction and the sentence imposed and dismiss

the appeal.

Appeal dismissed.

The Registrar is directed to send a copy of this judgment to the High Court

of Colombo along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

DEVIKA ABEYRATNE, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL