IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

1

In the matter of an appeal made in terms of

Section 754 of Civil Procedure Code

CA No: CAl REM/ 05/ 2013 High Court of Colombo Action in Rem No: 01/ 2010

Marichem Marigases Ltd.

Majuro-Marshal Islands having its European

Administration Office at

No. 64, Sfaktirias Street,

Piraeus 185-45,

Greece.

Plaintiff

Against

1. M.V. "Thermopylae Sierra",

Now lying at the Port of Colombo

2. Scarlet Shipping Company Limited

No. 284, Arch. Makarios III Ave.,

Fortuna Court Block B,

2nd Floor, Limassol, Cyprus.

Defendants

-AND NOW BETWEEN-

1. M.V. "Thermopylae Sierra",

Now lying at the Port of Colombo

( I l !

Before

Counsel

2. Scarlet Shipping Company Limited

No. 284, Arch. Makarios III Ave.,

Fortuna Court Block B,

2nd Floor, Limassol, Cyprus.

2

Defendants - Appellants

-Vs-

Marichem Marigases Ltd.

Majuro-Marshal Islands having its European

Administration Office at

No. 64, Sfaktirias Street,

Piraeus 185-45,

Greece.

Plaintiff - Respondent

S. Th urairaja PC, J

&

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

Murshid Maharoofwith S. Ahamed for the Defendants-Appellants

Vinodh Wickremasooriya for the Plaintiff-Respondent

Written Submissions of the Defendants-Appellants filed on: 15/05/2018

Written Submissions of the Plaintiff-Respondent filed on: 25106/2018

Argued on 31110/2018

Judgment on: 28/11/2018

3

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

The Defendant-Appellants (hereinafter referred to as the 15t Appellant and

2nd Appellant) has invoked the jurisdiction of this Court, inter alia, to set aside the

judgment dated 27/09/2013, entered in terms of Section 2(1) of the Admiralty

Jurisdiction Act No. 40 of 1983, by the Judge of the High Court of Colombo

exercising Admiralty Jurisdiction. The Plaintiff-Respondent's claim (hereinafter

referred to as the Respondent) was based on goods and material supplied in the

form of chemicals and other gasses and for services rendered to the 15t Appellant

vessel.

The Appellants contend that the delivery of the said items were subject to

approval by the Respondent. Therefore, the Respondent has failed to establish that

the deliveries were approved and the relevant invoices were sent to the 2nd

Appellant. The Appellants also contend that the statement of accounts arriving at

the total payment due marked P8, was not produced in evidence through proper

custody.

In paragraph 4 of the answer, the Appellant states that "although the

plaintiff has provided some services to the defendant vessel, the defendants had

disputed the quantity and the items supplied by the plaintiff'. The Respondent has

led evidence of the sales manager of the Respondent Company, and in cross

examination, the Appellant's repeatedly took up the position that the Respondent

4

failed to provide the information required to satisfy the outstanding payments. It is

to be noted that the transaction material to this action was not the only time the

Respondent had supplied gas cylinders to the 15t Appellant vessel.

The witness recollects at least five other instances, where the Respondent

has supplied gas cylinders to the 15t Appellant vessel on credit notes issued in

favour of the vessel, notably when damaged cylinders were discovered. The

witness also stated that goods in question supplied by the Respondent Company

has been accepted and acknowledged on behalf of the 15t Appellant vessel and the

said delivery notes and invoices marked A2B-C, A3A-C, A4A-C, ASA-C, A6A-B

and A 7, have been stamped and signed by the marshal, on behalf of the 15t

Appellant vessel.

As noted earlier, the Appellants stand regarding the outstanding payment

was that the Respondent has failed to provide complete details of the quantity and

the items supplied to the Appellants.

The Learned High Court Judge after evaluating the available documents

tendered in evidence concluded that;

"Though the defendant has challenged the admissibility of the

documents marked Ai to A7 and A8, the witness as an agent of the

plaintiff has testified on the accuracy of the said documents and

originals/ certified copies of the originals, in the custody of the

5

plaintiff being produced, I do not see them requiring any further

proof hence admitted. "

In De Silva v. Seneviratne, (1981) 2 SLR 7;

it was held that where an appellate Court is invited to review the

findings of a trial Judge on questions of fact the principles that

should guide it should be as follows:

"(a) where the findings on questions of fact are based upon the

credibility of witnesses on the footing of the trial Judge's perception

of such evidence, then such findings are entitled to great weight and

the utmost consideration and will be reversed only if it appears to

the appellate Court that the trial Judge has failed to make full use of

his advantage of seeing and listening to the witnesses and the

appellate Court is convinced by the plainest considerations that it

would be justified in doing so;

(b) that however, where the findings of fact are based upon the trial

Judge's evaluation of facts, the appellate Court is then in as good a

position as the trial Judge to evaluate such facts and no sanctity

attaches to such findings of fact of a trial Judge; and

(c) where it appears to an appellate Court that on either of these

grounds the findings offact by a trial Judge should be reversed then

the appellate Court "ought not to shrink from that task".

,

6

In the circumstances, we are of the view that the Learned High Court Judge

has come to a correct finding that the documents tendered to Court can be

accepted with no further proof required. It is our considered view that, when the

Appellants admit that the "Plaintiff has provided some services to the defendant

vessel", at that point, the Appellants would certainly owe an explanation to Court

to substantiate their stand that the Respondent has failed to provide complete

details of supplies to the Appellants. It is observed that the Appellant's have failed

to disclose their stand on this issue when cross examining the Respondent's

witness or by any other documentary or witness evidence.

Therefore, in all the above circumstances, we are of the view that the

reasons given in arriving at the impugned judgment should not be disturbed and

accordingly, we affirm judgment dated 27/09/2013, and dismiss the appeal without

costs.

Appeal dismissed.

S.Thurairaja PC, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL