1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

CA (Writ) Application No. 87/2018

In the matter of an Application for a Writ of

Certiorari under and in terms of Article 140

of the Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Hettiarachchige Sujeewa Meena Kumari,

No. 97/72A, Jakotuwa , Welewatte,

Wellampitiya.

PETITIONER

Vs.

1) Debt Conciliation Board,

Debt Conciliation Board Department,

No. 35A, Dr. N.M. Perera Mawatha,

Colombo 8 or

No. 428/11, Weera Densil

Kobbekaduwa Mawatha, Battaramulla.

2) Malani Abeywardene

(Chairperson)

3) T.D.K. Pujitha Thilakewardene (Member).

1

Before:

Counsel:

Supported on:

Decided on:

2

4) K.P. Banduala (Member).

5) K.M. Karunaratne (Member).

6) K.H. Premadasa (Member).

Members of the Debt Conciliation Board

All of Debt Con"ciliation Board

Department,

No. 35A, Dr. N.M. Perera Mawatha

Colombo 8.

7) Hettiarachchilage Nimal Chandrasiri

No. 127, Wennawatte, Wellampitiya.

RESPONDENTS

P. Padman Surasena, J/ President of the Court of Appeal

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J

Ranjan Suwandaratne, P.e. with Anil Rajakaruna for the Petitioner

2nd July 2018

5th October 2018

2

3

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J

The Petitioner has filed this application seeking a Writ of Certiorari to quash the

order made by the Debt Conciliation Board on 11th September 20171, holding that

Deed No. 1753 dated 28th September 2006 and attested by Upali Dasarath Perera,

Attorney-at-Law and Notary Public, is in fact a mortgage and not a transfer. A

copy of the said deed has been annexed to the petition, marked 'Al'.

The facts of this matter are briefly as follows.

The Petitioner claims that she purchased from the ih Respondent a property

called 'Kongahawatta' depicted as Lot No.3 in Plan No. 792, containing in extent

7.25 perches, by virtue of the said Deed 'Al'. Even though the value given on 'Al'

is Rs. 100,000, the attestation of the Notary Public does not contain any details

with regard to the consideration. It is an admitted fact that a lease agreement

valid for a period of one year was executed between the parties at about the

same time as 'Al' and that the i h Respondent continued to live in the said

premises.

In terms of Section 14(1) of the Debt Conciliation Ordinance No. 39 of 1941, as

amended, the ih Respondent made an application dated 10th June 2010 to the 1st

Respondent Debt Conciliation Board. A copy of the said application is annexed to

the petition marked 'A2'. In terms of Section 14(1), the purpose of a debtor

making such an application is to seek the assistance of the Debt Conciliation

Board to effect a settlement of the debt/s owed by such debtor to his secured

1 A copy of the Order of the Debt Conciliation Board has been annexed to the petition, marked 'A9'. 3

4

creditor/so The i h Respondent claimed in 'A2' that he had borrowed a sum of Rs.

200,000 from the Petitioner at the rate of 84% interest per annum and that he

pledged the property referred to in the Deed' Al' as security. The i h Respondent

claimed that 'Al' is in fact a mortgage, although it is written as a deed of transfer

and admitted that the sum of money borrowed by him had not been paid to the

Petitioner.

The Debt Conciliation Board, comprising of the 2nd -6th Respondents, having

issued notices on the Petitioner, proceeded to conduct a preliminary hearing at

which the Petitioner and the i h Respondent were afforded the opportunity of

giving evidence, the right to summon witnesses of their choice and to produce

documentary evidence in support of their respective cases. At the conclusion of

this preliminary hearing, the 2nd -6th Respondents, by a decision dated 11th

September 2017 annexed to the petition marked 'A9', held that the Deed marked

'Al' is in fact a mortgage, for the reasons set out therein and that steps should be

taken in terms of Section 2S(1)(a)-(c) of the Debt Conciliation Ordinance.2

It is in the above factual background that the Petitioner has invoked the

jurisdiction of this Court seeking a Writ of Certiorari to quash the said Order

marked 'A9'. This Court observes that the Petitioner is not challenging the power

of the Debt Conciliation Board to make such an order nor is the Petitioner

challenging the said order on the basis that there has been any impropriety with

2 Section 25(1)(b) provides for a notice to be published in the Gazette stating that the Board proposes to attempt to effect a settlement under the Ordinance between the debtor and his secured creditor, and specifying the date on or before which such secured creditor has been called upon to submit a statement of the debts owed to him by the debtor.

4

5

regard to the conduct of the proceedings before the Debt Conciliation Board. The

Petitioners sole complaint is that the evidence led before the Debt Conciliation

Board does not support the Order 'Ag' amounting to an error on the face of the

record. It must be borne in mind that when exercising its Writ jurisdiction, this

Court is not concerned with the rights and wrongs of the decision sought to be

impugned but only whether the said decision is legal or not.

Section 21A of the Debt Conciliation Ordinance requires the Board when deciding

whether or not such transfer or conditional transfer is in reality a mortgage to

take into consideration all the circumstances of the case and in particular the

following matters:

"(a) the language of the notarial instrument of transfer and where provision

in regard to the right of the transferor or any other person to redeem or

purchase the property transferred is contained in any other notarial

instrument, the language of that other instrument;

(b) any difference between the sum received by the transferor from the

transferee and the value of the property transferred;

(c) the continuance of the transferor's possession of the property

transferred; and

(d) the existence of any agreement in whatever form between the

transferor and the transferee whereby the transferor is bound to pay

5

6

the transferee interest, or any sum which may reasonably be

considered to be interest, on the sum received by the transferor from

the transferee."

This Court has examined the decision marked 'A9' and notes that the 2nd -6th

Respondents have considered the following matters inter alia in arriving at its

decision:

1) The fact that the ih Respondent continues to be in possession of the

property which is the subject matter of the Deed marked 'Al'.

2) The evidence of Weliwita Vithanage Wilson3, an uncle of the husband of

the Petitioner who signed as a witness to the Deed marked 'Al'. In his

evidence, Wilson had stated that the i h Respondent had informed he is in

need of a sum of Rs. 200,000. Wilson in turn had referred the ih

Respondent to the Petitioner, who had agreed to give the money subject to

the said sum of money being secured by a property.

3) The evidence of the i h Respondent that he had only borrowed a sum of Rs.

200,000 from the Petitioner and that he had paid a sum of Rs. 216,000 and

Rs. 92,000 as interest.

4) The property being more valuable than the money paid by the Petitioner.

3 Annexed to the petition, marked 'A6'. 6

7

It is thus evident to this Court that the 2nd - 6th Respondents have acted on the

material that was placed before them in arriving at its decision. This Court is

therefore of the view that there is no merit in the argument of the Petitioner that

there is an error on the face of the record or that the said decision is irrational or

not supported by the evidence led before it.

In these circumstances, this Court does not see any legal basis to issue notices.

This application is accordingly dismissed, without costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P. Padman Surasena, J/ President of the Court of Appeal

I agree.

President of the Court of Appeal

7