==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0079-083/2024

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal No: The Democratic Socialist Republic of

CA/HCC/0079-083/2024 Sri Lanka

High Court of Colombo COMPLAINANT

Case No: HC/2976/2021

Vs.

1. Warnakulasuriya Chaminda

Rohana Fernando

2. Ranasinghe Arachchilage Anton

Krishantha Fernando

3. Gajaweera Arachchige Dulaj

Ravindu Perera

4. Liyavuruge Suranga Balagngna

5. Warnakulasuriya Tharindu

Jayamal Fernando

ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

CA/HCC/0079-083/2024

2 | P a g e

1. Warnakulasuriya Chaminda

Rohana Fernando

2. Ranasinghe Arachchilage

Anton Krishantha Fernando

3. Gajaweera Arachchige Dulaj

Ravindu Perera

4. Liyavuruge Suranga

Balagngna

5. Warnakulasuriya Tharindu

Jayamal Fernando

ACCUSED-APPELLANTS

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

COUNSEL : Kavithri Hirusha Ubeysekera for the 1st ,

2nd ,4th, and 5th Appellants.

Sarath Jayamanne, PC with Prashan

Wickramaratne, Sajeewa Meegahawatta

and Dinidu Rathnayake for the 3rd

Appellant.

Shanil Kularatna, ASG with Vishwa

Wijesuriya for the Respondent.

CA/HCC/0079-083/2024

3 | P a g e

ARGUED ON : 04/09/2025, 16/09/2025 and

26/09/2025

DECIDED ON : 21/11/2025

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellants (hereinafter referred as the

Appellants) were indicted by the Attorney General in the High Court of

Colombo under Sections 54(A) (b) and 54(A) (d) of the Poisons, Opium and

Dangerous Drugs Ordinance as amended by Act No. 13 of 1984 and under

Section 113(b) of the Penal Code read with Section 102 of the Penal Code for

Conspiracy of Trafficking of Heroin, Possession and Trafficking respectively

of 152.341 kilograms of Heroin (Diacetylmorphine) on 02nd November 2019.

The prosecution had called PW1, PW3, PW5, PW15, PW16, PW17, PW18,

PW19, PW22, PW39 and a witness from the Colombo High Court, marked

productions P1 to P41 and marked documents and photographs A to H and

closed the case for the prosecution.

When the defence was called, the Appellants made dock statements and

closed their case.

After the trial, the Appellants were found guilty on all counts and the Learned

High Court Judge of Colombo had imposed death sentences on all the

Appellants on the 27th of September 2023.

CA/HCC/0079-083/2024

4 | P a g e

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellants

preferred this appeal to this court.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the

Appellants have given consent to argue this matter in their absence. During

the argument they have been connected via the Zoom platform from prison.

Six grounds of appeal have been raised on behalf of the 1st ,2nd, 4th, and 5th

Appellants. The grounds are as follows:

1. The learned High Court Judge has failed to consider the grave

infirmities in the prosecution’s evidence.

2. The exclusive possession has not been proved beyond reasonable

doubt.

3. The inward journey of the productions has not been proved beyond

reasonable grounds.

4. The failure to consider the credibility of the prosecution witnesses;

mainly PW1, PW5 and PW3.

5. The defence evidence has not been properly considered.

6. The conviction and sentence are bad in law.

The 3rd Appellant also raised six grounds of appeal. His grounds of appeal

are as follows:

1. The learned High Court Judge has erred in law in finding that the

chain of custody was intact.

2. The learned High Court Judge has erred in law in failing to apply the

principle of “Conscious Exclusive Possession.”

3. The learned High Court Judge has erred in law in finding that there

was evidence that established the charges of conspiracy.

4. The learned High Court Judge has erred in law by unjustly shifting

the burden of proof onto the Appellant.

CA/HCC/0079-083/2024

5 | P a g e

5. The learned High Court Judge has erred in law in relying on the

evidence of PW1 and PW3 and failing to reject the same based on the

test of spontaneity.

6. The learned High Court Judge has erred in law in failing to reject the

testimony of PW1 based on the tests of inter alia consistency and

probability.

As some of the appeal grounds raised by the Learned Counsel for the

1st,2nd,4th and 5th Appellants and the Learned President’s Counsel for the 3rd

Appellant are inter-connected, this appeal will be decided on the common

appeal grounds mentioned below.

1. The learned High Court Judge has failed to consider the grave

infirmities in the prosecution’s evidence.

2. The learned High Court Judge has erred in law in failing to apply the

principle of “Conscious Exclusive Possession.”

3. The learned High Court Judge has erred in law in finding that the

chain of custody was intact.

4. The failure to consider the credibility of the prosecution witnesses;

PW1, PW5, and PW3, and failure to reject their evidence based on the

tests of consistency, probability, and spontaneity.

5. The learned High Court Judge has erred in law in finding that there

was evidence that established the charge of conspiracy.

6. The learned High Court Judge has erred in law by unjustly shifting the

burden of proof onto the Appellant.

7. The defence evidence has not been properly considered and therefore,

the conviction and sentence are bad in law.

Background of the case

On 01.11.2019 around 07.00 hours, a Sri Lanka Navy ship named

‘Suranimala’ set off from the Colombo Port under the command of PW3

Captain Buddhika Liyanagamage. PW1, Lieutenant Udayanga was the

CA/HCC/0079-083/2024

6 | P a g e

Gunnery Officer attached to ‘Suranimala’. While on the move, PW3 had

received an information about a suspicious trawler namely ‘Buddhima’. He

had passed this information to PW1 at about 18.41 hours. The relevant

information was communicated to PW3 by the Director of Navy Intelligence.

PW1 had arranged a team for the purpose of intercepting the said vessel.

Around 01.30 hours on 02.11.2019, the trawler ‘Buddhima’ was spotted on

the radar of ‘Suranimala’ close to the location of 06 Degrees 11 minutes

North, 78 Degrees 01 minutes East.

At 02.08 hours, on 02.11.2024 the trawler ‘Buddhima’ was ordered to stop

its engine and PW1 with his team had boarded the trawler and had found

five fishermen in the trawler. The location of boarding and intercepting the

trawler ‘Buddhima’ by PW1 and his team was 06 Degrees 11 Minutes North,

78 Degrees 03 Minutes at 02.08 hours on 02.11.2024 as it was about 116

nautical miles away from the Galle Light House.

The police team who had entered the trawler had identified the 1st Appellant

as the skipper of the trawler. Thereafter, PW1 had checked the trawler with

the assistance of Petty Officer Kumara. At that time the other Appellants had

been guarded by 6 Navy Personnel who had been on board. When the wooded

planks that cover the ice compartment of the trawler were removed, PW1 had

found 8 polythene bags with substances suspected to be drugs kept in the

ice compartment.

When this was communicated to PW3, upon his instructions, a Navy

personnel member had been assigned close to the ice compartment, further,

while keeping the 1st Appellant in the trawler, the 2nd to 5th Appellants had

been transferred to the Navy Vessel ‘Suranimala’ for security purposes. The

transfer had been done after the detection of the contraband. Afterwards,

due to the trawler ‘Buddhima’ encountering a starting problem, it was towed

by the Navy Vessel ‘Suranimala’ up to the location of 06 Degrees 44 minutes

376 seconds North, 79 Degrees 22 minutes 710 seconds East. In the

CA/HCC/0079-083/2024

7 | P a g e

meantime, PW1 had informed about the entire incident to the Director of

Navy Intelligence. In the meantime, the engine of the trawler had been

repaired and had proceeded towards Negombo.

On 03.11.2019 at 17.25 hours in the location of 07 Degrees 17 minutes

North, 79-degrees 35 minutes East, a dinghy boat which had approached

the trawler ‘Buddhima’ was also taken into custody, along with two other

persons inside this dinghy boat, by PW1.

Thereafter, both the vessel ‘Suranimala’ and the trawler ‘Buddhima’ had

entered the Colombo Port at 01.52 hours on 04.11.2019. Afterwards, the 8

bags of substances were unloaded to pier No.02 in the presence of the Police

Narcotics Bureau officers. The unloading had been done in the presence of

the Appellants as well.

In each bag, 25 parcels suspected to be Heroin were detected. Altogether,

200 parcels had been detected. The suspected Heroin had been weighed at

the pier and it showed a weight of 224.166 kilograms.

According to the Government Analyst Report, 152.341 kilograms of Pure

Heroin had been detected in the substances sent for analysis.

As the 1st and 4th grounds are interconnected, both grounds will be

considered together hereinafter. In the 1st ground of appeal, the Learned

Counsels contended that the learned High Court Judge has failed to consider

the grave infirmities in the prosecution evidence. In the 4th ground of appeal,

the learned Counsels argued that the learned High Court Judge had failed

to consider the credibility of the prosecution witnesses and failed to reject

the evidence of PW1, PW5, and PW3 based on the tests of consistency,

probability, and spontaneity.

The Sri Lanka Navy faces significant challenges in detecting drugs at sea,

particularly as a result of the country’s strategic location and vast ocean

territory, due to the Indian Ocean being one of the world’s largest and most

strategically significant maritime domains. They encounter difficulties as

CA/HCC/0079-083/2024

8 | P a g e

drug traffickers frequently use this route for drug trafficking by utilising

advanced techniques, particularly, by hiding drugs within fishing vessels or

using fake compartments, which makes it practically difficult for authorities

to detect or inspect drugs. The Sri Lanka Navy would also have to rely on

intelligence gathering and specialised training in the detection of narcotics,

which would result in the consumption of excessive amounts of time as well

as resources. The lack of resources and technological limitations faced by

the Navy, further adds to the challenge of detecting narcotics in such

situations.

In this case, PW3, the commanding officer of the Navy ship ‘Suranimala’ had

received information on Heroin being trafficked in a multiday fishing trawler

namely, ‘Buddhima’, from the Director of Navy Intelligence. Acting on this

information, he had passed the same to PW1, who was the Gunnery Officer

of the ship, and his subordinates to track down the said fishing trawler.

PW1 had vividly explained how they intercepted the trawler ‘Buddhima’ and

found eight bags of what was suspected to be drugs hidden in the ice

compartment. At the time of detection, all five Appellants were in the trawler.

After the recovery, upon the instruction of his superior officer and

considering the sensitive nature of the case, he had taken steps to transfer

the 2nd to 5th Appellants to the Navy ship ‘Suranimala’ and had kept the 1st

Appellant with them in the trawler ‘Buddhima’. This strategy was adopted by

the officers considering the delicate nature of the operation, and the security

concerns around such a situation.

PW1 and PW3, when giving evidence, had refreshed their memories by

referring to the Ship log and the Navigational Notes Book to substantiate

their evidence. At the commencement of the trial, copies of the same were

handed over to the defence Counsels by the prosecution. (Vide page 969 of

the brief). Additionally, PW17, an officer from the Surveyor General’s

Department was called to establish the route taken by the Navy ship

‘Suranimala’ to conduct this operation.

CA/HCC/0079-083/2024

9 | P a g e

Considering the strict and demanding work schedules as well as the

substantial responsibilities allocated to Navy officers, it is understood that

such a strenuous duty would take up long hours and thus result in the

limiting of sleep and rest for such officers. It is also important to note that

such workloads may differ from one officer to another, depending on factors

such as their rank and specialisation, and further will depend on whether

the ship is on a training exercise, deployment, or in port.

The Learned Counsel on behalf of the Appellants brought forward arguments

that there was a delay in recording statements of PW1 and PW3, namely a

delay of 22 days and 25 days respectively. The Learned Counsel argue that

such delays pose a serious doubt regarding the evidence. The delay, although

not being explained by the prosecution, was correctly considered by the

Learned High Court judge in his judgment, and he has notably, given

reasonable grounds as to why he accepted their evidence. (Vide page 1551

para 170 of the judgment).

Further, the Learned Counsel argued that PW1 had not mentioned the exact

location where the contraband had been detected. However, when giving

evidence, PW1 had clearly given evidence on where he had found the

contraband, while giving descriptions about this location as well. The

relevant portion is re-produced below:

Pages 1127-1128 of the brief.

m% ( oeka ;uqka lsõjd fï whsia lïmd¾ÜukaÜ tl hghs whsia hg ;uhs ;snqfKa lsh,d

fuu fyfrdhska @

W ( whsia lïmd¾ÜukaÜ tfla iajdñkS whsia od,d ;sfhk filaIka tfla ,E,sj, hg

;sífí iajdñkS'

m% (oeka ;uqka fmd,sishg lg W;a;rhla ÿkakfka' u;aøjH kdYl ld¾hdxYhg

lgW;a;rhla ÿkakd' tafla ;sfhkjd nyqosk hd;%dfõ bosrsmi we;s weKsh fldgfia

whsia l=Üáj,g háka ,E,a,la ;snqKq w;r" ud úiska tu fldgi bj;a lr mrSlaId

lsrSfï oS fmd,s;Ska nE.a lsysmhla ;snqKd lsh,d @ weKsh fldgfia whsiaj,g háka

CA/HCC/0079-083/2024

10 | P a g e

,E,a,la ;snqKd' tal bj;a lsrSfï oS ;uhs t;k ;uhs fï fyfrdhska ;snqfKa lsh,d

@ ;uqka fmd,sishg ÿka lg W;a;rfha ;sfhkjd' yrso @

W ( yrs iajdñkS'

m% ( ;uqka .re wêlrKfha l,ska lsõfõ whsia lïmd¾ÜukaÜ tfla whsia j,g háka

lsh,fka@

W ( yrs'

m% ( oeka ;uqka ms,s.kakj o whsia lïmd¾ÜukaÜ tfla whsiaj,g háka fkfï weKsh

lshk fldgfia whsiaj,g háka ;snqfKa lsh,d @

W ( iajdñkS hd;%djl wms fnok fldg fldgia fofylg fnfokjd weKsh iy wjrh

lsh,d' bosrsmi ;sfhk foaj,a ál weKsh fldgi ;uhs i,lkafka' msgqmi iajdñkS

wjrh' T;k uu iafmis*hsâ lr,d keye iajdñkS fudllao f,dflaIka tl lshk

tl' weKsh lshk fldg bosrsmi ta wms ys;uq thdf.a iag%lap¾ tl ;sfhkafka thd

bkak talg bosrsmi fldgi ;sfhk whsâhd tflka ;uhs i`oyka lf,a iajdñkS' ke;=j

weKsh lshk f,dflaIka tfla iajdñkS fndaÜgqjl whsia ;sfhkak neye' weKsfha

;shkak mq¿jka thdf.a ;sfhk ,Kq" ta jf.a foaj,a ;uhs tosfkod mdúÉÑ lrk

foaj,a' whsia lïmd¾ÜukaÜ tlla lshk fldg ta weKsh fldgig wh;a fjkjd fï

T;k ;sfhkafka iajdñkS g¾ïf,dcs tl ms<sn`o ud úiska lrk ,o m%ldYhla'

Furthermore, it must be noted that, in order to substantiate the

prosecution’s version, photographic evidence was also presented.

The Learned President’s Counsel, who appeared on behalf of the 3rd

Appellant and the Counsel appearing on behalf of the other Appellants,

argued that, at the time of detection, the productions were not sealed, and

that the productions were only sealed at the Police Narcotics Bureau on

04.11.2019. It is pertinent to note, that raiding officers are required to seal

the items at the place of recovery while in the presence of the Accused,

immediately after the seizure takes place. This must be done in order to

ensure the integrity and to prevent any tampering or alteration of the

production before reaching the point of judicial scrutiny.

CA/HCC/0079-083/2024

11 | P a g e

However, it is important to remember that, in this case, the detection of

drugs was done in the mid-sea. Further, the total gross weight of the

production was 225 kilograms, and such a massive production was packed

in 8 separate bags. This contraband then found in the ice compartment with

a load of fish. Therefore, it must be understood that it is practically

impossible to seal productions at such a crucial time. PW1 and his officers

were in the trawler throughout, until the contraband was handed over to

PW5. There is no evidence to show that any third party had entered the

trawler up until it had reached the harbour. Therefore, the claim that the

non-sealing of the production at the time of detection resulted in a prejudice

to the Appellant is not correct.

The detected packages of Heroin were marked through PW5 and PW16, the

Government Analyst. PW5 had received the Heroin bags from PW1, and the

field test was done while in the presence of the Appellants. The bags were

not opened at this time. No prejudice had been caused when marking the

empty covers as PW1 had given evidence on what he had witnessed at the

time of detection of the 8 bags with illegal substances. Thus, I conclude that

the learned High Court Judge has very correctly accepted the evidence

brought forward by PW1, PW2 and PW5 and was considered to be probable,

consistent and spontaneous.

Next, it was argued by the Learned Counsel that the Learned High Court

Judge had erred in law in failing to apply the principle of “Conscious

Exclusive Possession.”

The Elements of Conscious Possession and Exclusive Possession.

Consciousness, in such a context, refers to the knowledge of the accused in

respect of the offensive item. Furthermore, exclusive possession would refer

to personal and actual possession of an offensive item of the Accused. Under

both these categories, in order to establish criminal liability, proof of both

control and knowledge is absolutely necessary. Knowledge would refer to the

CA/HCC/0079-083/2024

12 | P a g e

knowledge an Accused would have of the existence and the nature of the

contraband. Whereas, control refers to the control an Accused may have had

over the substance in question, which the court ascertains by considering

elements such as exclusive control of a location, pattern of use or regular

access to such a substance.

In such an instance, it is of utmost importance to note that being physically

present in a location where substances are found would not be enough to

establish possession, rather, it is necessary to have actual, physical evidence

which links the contraband to the Accused along with circumstantial

evidence which demonstrates knowledge and control.

In Banda v Haramanis 21 NLR 141, it was held that:

“Possession to be criminal must be actual and exclusive, for criminal

liability does not attach to constructive possession… Where property is

found in a house in the possession of more than one inmate, none of them

could be said to be in possession of it for the purpose of this offence, unless

there is evidence of exclusive conscious control against them”.

This principle was further established in the case of Muttaiah Siriyalatha

Saraswathie vs. Attorney General (CA No. 212/95, decided on 30.06.1999)

where Justice F.N.D. Jayasuriya reiterated that:

“The criminal liability attaches only to possession on which is proved to be

actual, exclusive and conscious possession on the part of a person.”

Additionally, in the case of Sumanawathie Perera vs Attorney General

1998 (2) SLR 20, the principles set out by Lord Wilberforce in Warner v

Metropolitan Police Commissioner were considered:

“they must consider the manner and circumstances in which the

substance, or some thing which contains it, had been received, what

knowledge or means of knowledge or guilty knowledge as to the

presence of the substance, or as to the nature of what has been received,

CA/HCC/0079-083/2024

13 | P a g e

the accused had at the time of receipt or thereafter up to the moment

when he is found with it; his legal relation to the substance or package

(including his right of access to it). On such matters as these (not

exhaustively stated) they must make the decision whether, in addition

to physical control, he has, or ought to have imputed to him the intention

to possess, or knowledge that he does possess, what is in fact a

prohibited substance. If he has this intention or knowledge, it is not

additionally necessary that he should know the nature of the

substances"

At the time of the raid, and at the time the Heroin was recovered from the ice

compartment, all the Appellants were present and on board the ‘Buddhima’

trawler. By that point in time, the Appellants had been in the deep sea for

approximately 20 days prior to the arrest. The ‘Buddhima’ trawler had

started sailing from Dikovita on 12.10.2019. This trawler had been registered

and had an International Fisheries License to fish in the deep sea. In such

circumstances, while being in the deep sea, no others, except the Appellants

have access to the ice compartment of the trawler. Due to the fact that fish

and food items are being stored in the ice compartment, periodical

observations are required in order to ensure that sea water is not seeping

into the ice compartment. An additional requirement in such situations,

would be to clean fish waste and melted ice.

Thus, the Learned ASG has correctly argued that there can be no isolated

areas within such a trawler, due to its confined platform in the sea, and due

to the crew having access to all the areas within the ship. Moreover, 8 bags

which collectively make up for a weight of 225.166 kilograms of substances,

cannot, in a practical sense, be carried by one individual and loaded on to

the ice compartment by another. Thus, it is quite evident that this is a result

of a collective effort by the whole team.

CA/HCC/0079-083/2024

14 | P a g e

In Mohamed Iqbal Mohamed Sadath v Hon Attorney General SC Appeal

110/15, SC Minute of 14.12.2020 the court held that:

“Lord Wilberforce, stating that what must be answered is whether in the

circumstances the Accused should be held to have possession of the

substance rather than mere control, referred to R.S. Wright [Pollock and

Wright] “An Essay on Possession in Common Law” [1888 Part III Chapter

1 page 119] where writer had said “The ‘modes or events’ by which the

custody commences and the legal incident in which it is held. By these I

mean, relating them to typical situations, that they [the jury] must consider

the manner and circumstances in which the substance or something which

contains it, has been received, what knowledge or means of knowledge or

guilty knowledge as to the presence of the substance, or as to the nature

of what has been received, the accused had at the time of receipt or

thereafter up to the moment when he is found with it; his legal relation to

the substance or package (including his right of access to it) On such

matters as these (not exhaustively stated) they [the jury] must make the

decision whether, in addition to physical control, he has, or ought to have

imputed to him the intention to possess or knowledge that he does possess

what is in fact a prohibited substance. If he has this intention or

knowledge, it is not additionally necessary that he should know the nature

of the substance.”

This observation, in my view is consonant with the view expressed by Lord

Wilberforce in the case of Warner [supra] when his Lordship [Wilberforce]

stated; “By there, I mean, relating these to the circumstances in which the

substance or something which contained it, had been received” [by the

Accused] (the emphasis is mine). As such, consideration must be given as

to whether the Prosecution has discharged its burden in regard to

establishing mens rea presumptively, arising under the circumstances

peculiar to the instant case, and if that was so, whether the Accused had

discharged the evidentiary burden to negate the same. It must be stated

CA/HCC/0079-083/2024

15 | P a g e

that the evidentiary burden on the Accused is to create a reasonable doubt

as to the requisite knowledge.

As seen above, in the case of Sumanawathie Perera v. Attorney General

1998 2 SLR 20 this was clearly established:

“On such matters as these (not exhaustively stated) they must make the

decision whether, in addition to physical control, he has, or ought to have

imputed to him the intention to possess, or knowledge that he does

possess, what is in fact a prohibited substance. If he has this intention or

knowledge, it is not additionally necessary that he should know the nature

of the substances”

In this case, there is no contradiction or omission that was noticed by the

Learned High Court Judge at the time of the cross examination of the

evidence of PW1 and PW3 which challenges the claim of exclusive possession

of the contraband detected in the trawler ‘Buddhima’. Thus, taking into

consideration the relevant circumstances during the time of apprehension of

the Appellants, I conclude that the prosecution has adequately proved the

conscious exclusive possession of the Appellants in respect of the

contraband.

The next ground that the Learned Counsels strongly contended was that the

learned High Court had erroneously arrived at the conclusion that the chain

of custody of the contraband was intact.

The chain of custody remains an extremely significant process in cases of

drug detection. It is absolutely necessary to guarantee to the court of law

that the evidence presented is authentic, in other words, that the evidence

presented is the exact same contraband that was seized at the crime scene.

Such evidence would be in the custody of a person specially designated to

handle it, where such evidence must never be unaccounted for. Despite this

resulting in a lengthy process, the evidence must be relevant in court. The

chain of custody or chain of evidence refers to the continuous possession or

CA/HCC/0079-083/2024

16 | P a g e

custody of evidence and its movement from the place of discovery (the scene

of the crime or a from a person) to its transfer to the laboratory for

examination, up until the point at which such evidence is allowed and

admitted in the court.

As established above, the detection of drugs in this case was conducted in

the mid-sea. After such detection took place, the trawler was in the

continuous custody of the Sri Lanka Navy and no outsider had entered the

trawler until it had reached the jetty. In addition to this, as the trawler had

encountered an engine problem immediately after the arrest had taken place,

the Navy had taken steps to tow the trawler until it was repaired. Throughout

this period, at all times, the trawler was in the custody of the Sri Lanka Navy.

It is important to mention that during the trial, the evidence of PW1 and PW5

had not been challenged in respect of the identification of the production and

its chain of custody during the point of cross examination of PW1 and PW3.

It was correctly noticed by the ASG that the Counsel for the 3rd Appellant

had not even cross examined PW5. As mentioned above, not a single

contradiction or omission in respect of the evidence by PW1, PW3 and PW5

was brought to the court’s attention.

Next, the learned President’s Counsel strenuously argued that the learned

High Court Judge has erred in law in finding that there was evidence that

established the charge of conspiracy.

The definition of Conspiracy under Section 113A of the Penal Code states as

follows:

1) If two or more persons agree to commit or abet or act together with a

common purpose for or in committing or abetting an offence, whether

with or without any previous concert or deliberation, each of them is

guilty of the offence of Conspiracy to commit or abet that offence, as

the case may be.

CA/HCC/0079-083/2024

17 | P a g e

2) A person within Sri Lanka can be guilty of Conspiracy by agreeing with

another person who is beyond Sri Lanka for the commission or

abetment of any offence to be committed by them or either of them, or

by any other person, either within or beyond Sri Lanka; and, for the

purposes of this subsection as to an offence to be committed beyond

Sri Lanka offence means any act which if done within Sri Lanka would

be an offence under this Code or under any other law.

Exception

This section shall not exceed to the case in which the Conspiracy is between

a husband and his wife.”

In order to establish a conspiracy charge, the prosecution must establish an

agreement reached between two or more persons to commit or abet an

offence.

In Halsbury’s Law of England, the English Law as to the Conspiracy has

been states thus:

“Conspiracy consists in the agreement of two or more persons to do an

unlawful act, or to do a lawful act by unlawful means.”

There is no general form that an agreement must take in order to constitute

conspiracy. Many statutes now require an explicit or obvious act which could

act as proof of an agreement to commit a felony; however, circumstantial

evidence could be examined to deduce the existence of a conspiracy.

Therefore, it is not a requirement for the individual conspirators to even know

of the existence or identity of all the other conspirators. As such, two persons

can be found to have conspired with one another due to the simple act of

making separate agreements with a third party.

It was contended by the Learned President’s Counsel appearing on behalf of

the 3rd Appellant that where a conspiracy charge is alleged, it is absolutely

necessary for the prosecution to substantiate such a charge by adducing

CA/HCC/0079-083/2024

18 | P a g e

distinct and independent evidence which specifically supports the

conspiracy. This principle exists to confirm the validity of conspiracy

allegations; in other words, it ensures that such accusations of conspiracy

are not brought about on the basis of clear and persuasive evidence which

directly incriminates the conspirators, and not due to mere speculation or

conjecture.

In State of Maharashtra v Som Nath Thapa [1996] 4 SSC 659 the Supreme

Court of India held that:

“The afore said decisions, weighty as they are, lead us to conclude that

to establish a charge of conspiracy knowledge about indulgence in either

an illegal act or a legal act by illegal means is necessary. In some cases,

intent of unlawful use being made of the goods or services in question

may be inferred from the knowledge itself.”

In the case of The Attorney General Vs. Potta Naufer and Others (2007) 2

SLR 144, Shirani Thilakawardena, J. observed;

With respect to the degree of proof, it has been held in Queen Vs.

Liyanage (1965) 61 NLR 193 that the question is not whether the

inference of conspiracy can be drawn but whether the facts are such

that they cannot reasonably admit any other inference but that of

conspiracy. As the evidence in support of a charge of conspiracy is often

circumstantial, the actual facts of the conspiracy may be inferred from

the collateral circumstances of the case. A charge of conspiracy can often

be proved only by an inference of the subsequent conduct of the parties

in committing some overt acts, which tend so obviously towards the

alleged unlawful results as to suggest that they must have arisen from

an agreement to bring them about.”

In Kehar Singh vs State (Delhi Admin) AIR1988 SC1883 (Indira Gandhi

Assassination Case) the Supreme Court of India summarized the law on the

subject as follows;

CA/HCC/0079-083/2024

19 | P a g e

“Generally, a conspiracy is hatched in secrecy, and it may be difficult to

adduce direct evidence of the same. The prosecution will often rely on

evidence of acts of various parties to infer that they were done in

reference to their common intention. The prosecution will also more often

rely upon circumstantial evidence. The conspiracy can be undoubtedly

proved by such evidence direct or circumstantial. But the Court must

enquire whether the two persons are independently pursuing the same

end or they have come together to the pursuit of the unlawful object. The

former does not render them conspirators, but the latter does. It is,

however, essential that the offence of conspiracy requires some kind of

physical manifestation of agreement. The express agreement however,

need not be proved. No actual meeting of two persons is necessary, nor

it is necessary to prove that the actual words of communication. The

evidence as to transmission of thoughts sharing the unlawful design

may be sufficient.”

In the State of Tamil Nadu v Nalini [1999] (Rajiv Gandhi assassination

case) the Indian Supreme Court held that:

“Criminal Conspiracy is an exception to general law, where intent alone

does not constitute crime: Conspiracy is hatched in secrecy or in private,

it is rarely possible to establish a conspiracy by direct evidence: All the

conspirators need not agree to play active role: Criminal Conspiracy in

partnership in crime: Liability is joint and several. It is a continuing

offence: the existence and the object of conspiracy are to be inferred from

the circumstances and the conduct of the accused”.

In Liyanage v The Queen 67 NLR 203 the Supreme Court held that:

“There must be proof against each conspirator that he had knowledge

of the general purpose of the plot and the common design, though each

need not be equally well informed of the details”.

CA/HCC/0079-083/2024

20 | P a g e

In the case of Mulcahy v. R. the House of Lords stated:

“A conspiracy consists not merely in the intention of two or more but in

the agreement of two or more to do an unlawful act by unlawful means.

So long as such a design rests in intention only it is not indictable. When

two agree to carry it into effect, the very plot is an act in itself and the

act of each of the parties promise against promise actus contra actum

capable of being enforced if lawful, punishable if for a criminal object or

for the use of criminal means.”

In the case of Parveen v State of Haryana (2021), the Supreme Court held

that:

“It is fairly well settled, to prove the charge of conspiracy, within the

ambit of Section 120-B, it is necessary to establish that there was an

agreement between the parties for doing an unlawful act. At the same

time, it is to be noted that it is difficult to establish conspiracy by direct

evidence at all, but at the same time, in absence of any evidence to show

meeting of minds between the conspirators for the intended object of

committing an illegal act, it is not safe to hold a person guilty for offences

under Section 120-B of IPC. A few bits here and a few bits there on

which prosecution relies, cannot be held to be adequate for connecting

the accused with the commission of crime of criminal conspiracy.”

After taking into consideration the evidence presented at the trial, it is

evident that the prosecution has clearly established the existence of

conspiracy by adducing strong circumstantial evidence. The Learned High

Court Judge was not misdirected or mistaken in assessing the evidence and

finding the Appellants guilty of the charge of conspiracy.

As the 6th and 7th grounds in the common appeal grounds are

interconnected, the said grounds will be considered together herein after. In

the 6th ground the Learned President’s Counsel contended that the Learned

High Court Judge has erred in law by unjustly shifting the burden of proof

CA/HCC/0079-083/2024

21 | P a g e

onto the Appellant. In the 7th ground, the Learned Counsels contested that

the defence evidence has not been properly considered and therefore, the

conviction and sentence are bad in law.

In Sumanasena v The Attorney General (1999) 3 SLR 137 the court held

that:

“The prosecution has established a strong and incriminating cogent

evidence against the accused and the accused, in these circumstances,

was required in law to offer an explanation of the highly incriminating

circumstances established against him. The accused has failed to give

evidence or to make any statement from the dock. In these

circumstances, the learned trial Judge was entitled to draw certain

inferences which he deemed proper from the failure of the accused to

give evidence in explanation of such circumstances…Equally, the

principles laid down by Lord Ellenborough in Rex v. Cockraine and by

Justice Baron Pollock and Justice Abbott in Rex v. Burdett are applicable

to the facts of the instant case. These dicta have been followed with

approval and applied in Sri Lanka in King v. Seedar de Silva at 344;

Queen v. Seetin at 321 per Justice T. S. Fernando; Chandradasa v.

Queen at 162 per Justice Samarawickrema and in Attorney-General v.

Baddewitarane ; Republic v. lllangatileke ; Republic v. Gunawardena at

329 (per Justice Collin Thome); Rex v. Gunaratne; Arendtsz v. Wilfred

Pieris (per Justice Moseley).”

In Dissanayake Rallage Ranasinghe and Another v OIC Warakapola and

Another SC Appeal 39/2011 and 39A/2011 decided on 02.04.2014, His

Lordships of the Supreme Court held that:

“[Ellenborough’s dictum] could be applied in cases where there is a strong

prima facie case made out against the Accused and if he refrains from

explaining suspicious circumstances attached to him when it is in his own

CA/HCC/0079-083/2024

22 | P a g e

power to offer evidence. In such a situation an adverse inference can be

drown against him”.

Further, in the case of The Attorney General Vs. Potta Naufer and Others

(2007) 2 SLR 144, it was held:

“In terms of section 134 of the Evidence Ordinance, the criminal charges

against an accused can be proved by one witness alone, if the evidence is

cogent, convincing, accurate and credible and if on that evidence the

ingredients of the charge could be proved beyond a reasonable doubt.”

In this case, as there are no contradictions marked and as no omissions have

been brought to the attention of the Learned High Court Judge, the evidence

given by PW1, PW3, PW5 and other witnesses can be considered to be

consistent and probable.

Unchallenged evidence, in situations where the defence had the opportunity

to challenge and cross examine the evidence but refrains from doing so, it is

presumed that such evidence is admissible, credible and truthful.

His Lordship Sisra de Abrew, J. in the case of Pilippu Mandige Nalaka

Krishantha Thisera Vs. The Attorney General, CA 87/2005 decided on 17-

05-2007 held:

“…. I hold whenever evidence is given by a witness on a material point

is not challenged in cross-examination, it has to be concluded that such

evidence is not disputed and is accepted by the opponent subject of

course to the qualification that the witness is a reliable witness.”

In the case of Sarwan Singh Vs. State of Punjab 2002 AIR Supreme Court

iii 3652 at 3655,3656 it was stated thus;

“It is a rule of essential justice that whenever the opponent has declined

to avail himself of the opportunity to put his case in cross examination,

it must follow that the evidence tendered on that issue ought to be

accepted.”

CA/HCC/0079-083/2024

23 | P a g e

In the case of Himachal Pradesh v Thakur Dass at 1983 V.D. Misra CJ held:

"Whenever a statement of fact made by a witness is not challenged in cross

examination, it has to be concluded that the fact in question is not

disputed."

Further, in the case of Vide Motilal v State of Madya Pradesh, it was held

that:

"Absence of cross examination of prosecution witnesses of certain facts

leads to the inference of admission of that fact."

In this case, the High Court Judge has very correctly considered the evidence

presented by the Prosecution Witnesses. Therefore, I am of the view that the

Learned High Court Judge has very accurately applied the Ellenborough

dictum in this situation.

The defence evidence includes presenting evidence which challenges the

prosecution’s case, and includes evidence such as dock statements, witness

testimony, alibis, or forensic evidence, which would then have to be

evaluated by the judge or jury for its credibility along with the prosecution’s

evidence in order to ascertain guilt or innocence. Although the defence does

not bear the burden of proof, but bears the burden of providing evidence to

create reasonable doubt. It is then the court’s duty to assess such evidence

altogether, without prejudice towards the defence; in essence, the defence

must be treated the same way as the prosecution.

The Learned High Court Judge in his judgment at pages 1566-1581 had

correctly considered the evidence of the defence and presented reasons as to

why he recognized the evidence given by the prosecution and gave it

precedence over the evidence of the defence, and as a result, convicted the

Appellants as charged in the indictment.

CA/HCC/0079-083/2024

24 | P a g e

In this case the learned High Court Judge had considered the evidence

presented by both parties to arrive at his decision. He had properly analyzed

the evidence given by both sides in his judgment. As the evidence adduced

by the Appellants failed to create a doubt over the prosecution case, the

conclusion reached by the learned High Court Judge in this case cannot be

faulted.

As discussed under the grounds of appeal advanced by the Appellants, the

prosecution had adduced strong and incriminating evidence against the

Appellants. The learned High Court Judge had accurately analyzed all

evidence presented by all the parties and come to a correct finding that the

Appellants were guilty of the charges levelled against them. Therefore, I

dismiss the Appeal and affirm the conviction and the sentence imposed on

them on 27.09.2023 by the learned High Court Judge of Colombo.

The Registrar is directed to send this judgment to High Court of Colombo

along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL