Page 1 of 5

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for leave to appeal against

the order of the District Judge of Ratnapura dated

27.03.2001 in D.C. Ratnapura case No.176(P) in terms of

Section 754 (2) of the Civil Procedure Code.

Case No.CA.L.A/118/2001

D.C. Ratnapura Case No.176/P.

11. Felix Stanley Senanayake (deceased)

11A. Anton Joseph Reginald Senanayake

Good shed Road, Ratnapura.

Substituted 11th (A) Defendant-Petitioner-Petitioner

Vs.

1. Wengappuli Arachchige Rohana (deceased)

1A. Paliyaguruge Sunanda alias N.P.G. Sunanda Naottunna of

No.231/3, Colombo Road, Weralupa, Ratnapura.

Substituted 1st (A) Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent and others.

Before PRESANTHA DE SILVA, J. &

K.K.A.V. SWARNADHIPATHI, J.

Counsel Buddhika Gamage (A.A.L.) with Ranjanie Warnasinghe (A.A.L.)

(for the 11th (A) Defendant-Petitioner-Petitioner)

W. Dayarathna (P.C.) with R. Jayawardhana (A.A.L.)

(for the 37th and 86th Defendant-Respondent-Respondents)

Page 2 of 5

Argument By way of written submissions

Decided on 03.02.2022.

K.K.A.V. SWARNADHIPATHI, J.

JUDGMENT

The original Plaintiff filed a partition action at the District Court of Ratnapura to partition the land

described in the schedule to the Plaint. A preliminary survey was carried out, and the report and

the Plan were submitted to the court by M.W. Ratnayake - Commissioner who was appointed to

carry out the survey. He has produced his Plan No.1608 dated 07.11.1974. This Plan was accepted

as the preliminary Plan. However, a subsequent Plan was produced marked as [Y], and all parties

agreed to accept the Plan marked as [Y] as the preliminary Plan. The Plan marked [Y] was prepared

by the same surveyor, and its number was 3623, dated 22.10.1996.

As the parties agreed to accept, the land depicted in Plan marked [Y] judgment was entered, and

the amended interlocutory decree was entered on 27.08.1997. Up to this point, the parties were in

agreement as far as the judgment and the interlocutory decree were concerned. After that, a

commission was issued to prepare the final Plan. Commissioner G.M. Gunadasa, Licensed

Surveyor, submitted Plan No.2201 dated 22.08.2000.

Many Defendants filed their objections to the final scheme. The 11th (A) Defendant has filed his

objections. An inquiry was held under Section 36 of the Partition Act No.21 of 1977 as amended

by Act No.17 of 1997.

At this inquiry, the learned District Judge had recorded testimonies of the parties. Further, he had

a scene inspection and then delivered his order on the 27th of March 2001. Being aggrieved by the

said order, the 11th (A) Defendant had invoked the jurisdiction of this court. Having granted leave

to proceed, the parties agreed to abide by written submissions. Even though the 11th (A) Defendant-

Petitioner-Petitioner requested to file further written submissions in reply to the Defendant-

Page 3 of 5

Respondent-Respondent and the 1st (A) Substituted-Plaintiff-Respondent, he failed to file

submissions in reply. Since this case is over forty years from the inception date without further

delay, the judgment is prepared on written submissions already filed by parties as agreed on the

4th of August 2021.

The present appeal is regarding the order made on the 27th of March 2001. 11th (A) Defendant-

Petitioner-Petitioner had, among other prayers had, prayed to set aside the order dated 27.03.2000

and to order a fresh inquiry in terms of the interlocutory decree and seeking to allocate Lot No.22

of the Plan No.1608 to the Petitioner.

When studying the entire issue, it is evident that Lot No.22 is, in the extent of 01R:0.007P out of

that, according to the interlocutory decree 11th defended was given undivided 2380/30240 portion

and share of the building. Plaintiff was given lot 21B, which is six perchers. The 11th defended

object for giving lot 21B to Plaintiff and requesting 2.89 perchers from Lot21. His reason was that

by giving the entire lot 21B to Plaintiff, the view from the front of his property is damaged,

reducing his property's value.

However, in his order dated 27.03.2000, the learned District Jude had made some changes to the

Plan of G.M. Gunadasa, Licensed Surveyor. Regarding the facts forwarded by the 11th(A)

Defendant, the learned District Judge had rejected the request. The reasons given were if to

accommodate the 11th (A) Defendant's request, the Plaintiff will have to be given the land in two

portions which the Plaintiff had refused. On the other hand, even though the 11th(A) Defendant

claims that the value of his land will be affected. The learned District Judge had not observed such

a loss when he visited the land.

It is challenging to satisfy all parties' needs in a partition case. Here the parties have got land as

one unit without separating. Even the Appellant has got the land as a unit. Furthermore, he had got

an undivided 2380/3240 share with 3/4th share of the buildings marked as "A", "B", and "C" in Lot

No.22, which is according to the amended interlocutory decree entered on 27.08.1997. The

Appellant had not challenged the above. The Appellant's main grievance is that his front compound

is given to Plaintiff; therefore, the value of his land had diminished.

Page 4 of 5

When reading Section 31 of the Partition Act No.21 of 1977 as amended by Act No.17 of 1997, it

is clear that the court cannot allocate a portion of land less than the minimum extent required by

law regarding the sub-division of lands for development purposes. It is clear that if the Appellant's

request is complied with, it will leave a portion to Plaintiff, which will be against the provisions

discussed above. If 2.89 perches of Lot No.21B of the final Plan of G.M. Gunadasa is given to the

Appellant as prayed by him, it will leave only 3.2 perches to the Plaintiff, which is against the

requirement for development purposes.

Therefore, it is clear that the Appellant's request cannot be granted according to the requirement

of the written law, which requires a minimum of six perches.

Another important fact is that the Appellant had not invoked the proper jurisdiction from this court.

The Partition Law is a special law which had provided for appeals regarding inquiries under

Section 36 of the Partition Act No.21 of 1977 as amended Section 36A of the Partition Law reads

as "Any person dissatisfied with an order of court made under Section 36 may prefer an appeal

against such an order with the leave of the Court of Appeal first had and obtained."

The position was discussed in Munidasa Vs. Nandasena1. Therefore, it is settled law that since

partition law provides a specific remedy, the Appellant is not entitled to seek remedies under

Sections of the Civil Procedure Code. The Appellant had filed this case under Section 754(2) of

the Civil Procedure Code. Therefore, this court is not empowered to grant remedies prayed for by

the Appellant.

Sri Lankan courts held that law does not help lashers of parties many times. For over six years

after granting leave to proceed, the Appellant had failed to make the essential party, namely the

Substituted Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent, a party. The delay in finalizing the case was entirely

on the shoulder of the Appellant. Even if one considers that sections of the Civil Procedure Code

apply, bringing the necessary parties to court is essential. It becomes more severe when applied to

Partition Law. Since the judgment of a partition action is in rem, all necessary parties must be

named.

1 2001 (2) SLR page 224

Page 5 of 5

Finally, even if the Appellant had invoked the jurisdiction of this court according to partition law,

since the Appellant had not proved why this court should set aside the order made by the learned

District Judge is not explained. It is the duty of the contesting party to prove the reasons given by

the learned District Jude are against the law or unsatisfactory. Therefore, this court rejects the

appeal of the 11th (A) Defendant-Petitioner-Petitioner on two grounds. Firstly, the appeal is not

under the correct provisions of the law. Secondly, the Appellant had not proved sufficient reasons

to set aside the order of the learned District Judge. Therefore, the appeal is dismissed subject to

taxed costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

PRESANTHA DE SILVA, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal