==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

Orders in the nature of Writs of

Certiorari, Prohibition and Mandamus

under Article 140 of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Jayawardena Mudiyanselage Indika Pathmasiri Jayawardena, No. 224, Yaya 04, Dakunu Iwura, Pemaduwa.

CA (Writ) App. No. 651/2024

PETITIONER

Vs.

1. K.D. Bandula Jayasinghe

Land Commissioner General, Land Commissioner General's Department, " Mihikatha Mawatha" Land Secretariat, 1200/6, Rajamalwatta Road, Battaramulla.

1A. R.A. Chandana Saman Ranaweera

Arachchi,

Land Commissioner General, Land Commissioner General's Department, " Mihikatha Mawatha" Land Secretariat, 1200/6, Rajamalwatta Road, Battaramulla.

2

2. G.A. Kithsiri

Provincial Land Commissioner -North Central Province, Provincial Land Commissioner's Department - North Central Province, Provincial Council Complex, Dharmapala Mawatha, Anuradhapura.

3. E.P.G.C.K. Madugalla,

Divisional Secretary, Divisional Secretariat, Rambewa.

4. Navaratne Rajapakse

Mudiyanselage Saman Sujeewa, A3 Ward, Welikada Prison, Baseline Road, Colombo 09. 5. Registrar,

Land Registry, District Secretariat Office Complex, Anuradhapura.

RESPONDENTS

Before: Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Counsel:

Rasika Dissanayake with Cherag Nilgiriya for the Petitioner.

Sachitha Fernando, S.C., for 1st to 3rd Respondents.

Nisala Seniya Fernando for the 4th Respondent.

Argued on: 18.02.2026

Delivered on: 29.04.2026

3

Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Judgement

Introduction

The Petitioner claims that he has been transferred with the rights of the successor to a grant. The

transferor is said to be the second son of the original grantee who transferred his right of succession

by the document marked as P11.

The 1st Respondent to this Application is the Land Commissioner, the 2nd Respondent is the

Commissioner General of Lands, the 3rd Respondent is the Divisional Secretary, the 4th

Respondent is the brother of the Petitioner, and the 5th Respondent is the Registrar General. One

Nandasena happened to be the original grantee of the parcel of land in suit; it was granted in terms

of S. 19(4) of the Land Development Ordinance, and he died without nominating any successor.

After his death, his wife is said to have succeeded to the original grantee’s rights.

However, the Land Commissioner has decided that it was done by the 3rd Respondent, the

Divisional Secretary, and his predecessor-in-office erroneously. With the advice of the Honourable

Attorney General, the 1st Respondent (the Commissioner General of Lands) has taken the stand

that the 4th Respondent, who is eldest son of the original grantee, should succeed to the rights of

the land in suit. As such, the 3rd Respondent has been advised to take steps accordingly, by P18.

Accordingly, the Petitioner has challenged the same by this Application.

After issuance of formal notice, the 1st Respondent has filed his Objections. According to the 1st

Respondent’s Objections, initially, after the death of the original grantee, his spouse had succeeded

to the rights; however, she had married the second time, and therefore, her rights had been

4

renounced by reason of the second marriage. Accordingly, the succession by the said spouse of

the original grantee had to be cancelled, and therefore, the Land Commissioner had advised the 3rd

Respondent to do so. In the meantime, the 4th Respondent, who is the eldest son, had made an

application to succeed to the said rights, which was initially not granted since he was serving a

sentence; however, later on the advice of the Attorney General, the Land Commissioner had

decided to grant it, and accordingly, the 1st Respondent has moved for a dismissal of this

Application.

This was argued before me on 18.12.2025, and other than for the oral submissions, Written

Submissions were filed by the parties; hence, this judgement.

Arguments

The thrust of the main argument advanced by the Counsel for and on behalf of the Petitioner, Mr.

Rasika Dissanayake, is that the document marked as P18 is irrational, unreasonable, and illegal in

view of the fact that the 4th Respondent has now lost his civil rights and therefore, since the 3rd

Respondent had initially decided by P8(a) and P8(b) to accept the next of kin as the predecessor

of the Petitioner, who is a transferor to the document marked as P10, to be entitled to the rights to

succeed. Therefore, P18 is irrational and illegal.

On the other hand, Mr. Sachitha Fernando, S.C. argued that certain Respondents had taken some

of the decisions without even perusing the Land Development Ordinance, and had based their

decision on the assumption of the fact that a person (the 4th Respondent) loses their civil rights just

because there is a capital punishment hanging over the heads. However, on the advice of the

Honourable Attorney General, the 1st Respondent has taken the decision reflected in P18. As such,

P18 is justified, and therefore, it should stand and the 4th Respondent’s rights should not be affected.

5

Factual matrix

The Petitioner claims that he has purchased rights from the brother of the 4th Respondent who is

the next in line of succession to the rights of the original grantee, Nandasena. The original grantee,

Nandasena, had been issued with a grant in terms of Section 19(4) of the Land Development

Ordinance (hereinafter referred to as the “Ordinance”); the said document is marked as P1.

However, after his death, his spouse has been accepted as the successor as reflected in P3.

Thereafter, the said spouse of the original grantee transferred the rights and title to the property to

a third party, which is reflected in the document marked as P4. Thereafter, the transferee under P4

has re-transferred the property to another person by the document marked as P5.

In the meantime, the 4th Respondent, Saman Sujeewa (the eldest child of the original grantee), had

been convicted by the High Court for triple murder and sentenced to death, as evidenced by the

document marked as P6(a). The said conviction and sentence were further affirmed by the Court

of Appeal by P6(b), and subsequently by the Supreme Court, the said conviction was also affirmed

by P6(c).

Further, it is reflected in the document marked as P7, that the two documents marked as P4 and

P5 (the two transfers) have been duly registered in the Land Registry in the correct folio. In the

meantime, a dispute has arisen with regard to succession.

However, by P8(a), the Deputy Commissioner of Lands decided that, since Saman Sujeewa had

been convicted for triple murder and sentenced to death; therefore, he had lost his civil rights and

was therefore not entitled to succeed. Accordingly, by P8(b), the Commissioner of Lands decided

to grant the rights to the next in line of succession. The Commissioner General of Lands, by P9,

6

confirmed the same and recommended to the 3rd Respondent that the rights be granted to the next

in line.

Thereafter, by P10, the next in line (Pradeep Sampath) was accepted as the successor; accordingly,

the Deputy Registrar General, by letter dated 06.02.2023, informed the District Registrar of

Anuradhapura to re-register the succession in the Petitioner’s name instead of the 4th Respondent’s

name, on the basis that it had been erroneously registered in the 4th Respondent’s name as the

successor; the said letter is marked as P10.

Thereafter, the said Pradeep Sampath transferred his rights to the Petitioner on the basis that rights

had accrued to him. The said transfer had taken place by the document marked as P11, to the

Petitioner to this Application (a third party). The 3rd Respondent, the Divisional Secretary, had

approved the same, and it has been duly registered as per the extracts of the folios, which are

reflected in P11(a).

Thereafter, a letter dated 07.02.2024 has been sent on behalf of the Commissioner General to the

Divisional Secretary of Rambewa (3rd Respondent), informing that the real successor to the rights

of the original grantee should be the 4th Respondent, Saman Sujeewa.

However, by P13, the 3rd Respondent informed the Petitioner that the 4th Respondent had lost his

civil rights due to the conviction for triple murder. Accordingly, the 3rd Respondent sought advice

on transferring the rights to the brother of the 4th Respondent, Pradeep Sampath Kumara.

Thereafter, by P14, further advice was sought from the Commissioner General of Lands by the 3rd

Respondent, since Sunjeewa Sampath had executed a transfer in favour of the Petitioner in this

application, on the basis that the 4th Respondent had lost his civil rights.

7

However, in the meantime, it appears that the 4th Respondent had made an application to succeed,

even though he was serving a jail term on death row. In response thereto, the Commissioner of

Lands, by P12 dated 07.02.2024, informed the 3rd Respondent to accept the 4th Respondent, Saman

Sujeewa, as the correct successor and, in terms of the Third Schedule of the Ordinance, to

recognise him as the successor. For further clarity, the said letter is reproduced below;

“උක්ත කරුණ සම්බන්ධයෙන් වැලිකඩ බන්ධනාගාරෙ, ඒ 3 වාටිටුව, ම.ද.නි ෙන ලිපින දරණ

එන්. ආර්. එම්. සමන් සුජීව මහතා විසින් මා යවත යොමු කරන ලද ඉල්ලීම් ලිපිෙ හා බැයේ

(පිටපත අමුණා ඇත).

02. ඒ අනුව ලබා දී ඇති මුල්ල උරුමෙ 2015/08 චක්‍රයල්ලකෙ මගින් අවලංගු කර, III වන

උපයල්ලඛනගත උරුමකරු යවත මුල්ල උරුමෙ සහතික කරන යලස කාරුණිකව දන්වා සිටිමි.”

In response to that, by P13 dated 12.02.2024, the 3rd Respondent sought the advice of the

Commissioner General of Lands, since Saman Sujeewa was serving on death row and it was

necessary to determine whether his succession should be accepted or not. Further, in addition

thereto, the 3rd Respondent, by letter dated 27.02.2024 marked as P14, also informed the

Commissioner General that the next in line to Saman Sujeewa, namely his brother Pradeep

Sampath Kumara, had been accepted as the successor to the original grantee by document dated

06.02.2023. Thereafter, at his request, his rights had been transferred to the Petitioner to this

Application, Pathmasiri Jayawardena (the Petitioner to this Application), since a deed of transfer

had been executed in favour of the present Petitioner by the said Pradeep Sampath Kumara on

26.06.2023. The 3rd Respondent had permitted the said transfer; however, it is further stated that

the transferee (the Petitioner to the present Application) has not effected any improvement or

development on the land.

8

Thereafter, the Commissioner of Lands, by P15, wrote to the 3rd Respondent seeking certain

clarifications with regard to the succession. This included whether the spouse of the original

grantee had succeeded to the rights within six months of the death of the original grantee, or

whether she had entered into another marriage. It is further stated that the said clarification was

sought from the 3rd Respondent based on the request made by the Petitioner to this application to

the Commissioner of Land.

Further, a circular issued by the Commissioner General of Lands instructing all Divisional

Secretaries is marked as P17, and the relevant instructions pertaining to the issue in this

Application are also contained therein. Accordingly, the Provincial Commissioner of Lands has

forwarded P17 to the Petitioner in response to an application made by him, which is also marked

as P17.

Thereafter, by P18, the Commissioner General of Lands has informed the 3rd Respondent that, in

the event the original grantee’s spouse has not succeeded to the rights within six months from the

death of the original grantee, Saman Sujeewa should be accepted as the successor to the rights of

the original grantee, and appropriate steps should be taken to register the same, as advised by the

Attorney General, as reflected in P18.

Accordingly, the only question for me to decide in this case is whether the 4th Respondent has lost

his right to succeed in view of the pending death penalty, which may be carried out at any moment

as the Head of State decides.

Now I will consider the events that unfolded in chronology for the purpose of clarity, to decide the

main issue on whether the Petitioner is entitled to quash the decision of the Commissioner General

9

of Lands contained in P18, and in addition to that, as an ancillary matter, whether the 4th

Respondent has lost his rights.

The 4th Respondent’s mother, who is the spouse of the original grantee, without succeeding to the

rights of the original grantee has apparently sold her rights by P4, and later, the transferee to P4

has also transferred it to another person by P5. However, the wife of the original grantee appears

not to have succeeded to the rights of the original grantee within the period of six months as

stipulated in Section 49 of the Ordinance. In such a scenario, the person who should succeed is the

next of kin since there is no nomination made by the original grantee as in terms of Section 49,

read with Section 73 of the Ordinance. For the purpose of clarity, I will reproduce them below;

“49. Upon the death of a permit-holder who at the time of his or her death was paying an

annual instalment by virtue of the provisions of section 19, or of an owner of a holding,

without leaving behind his or her spouse, or, where such permit-holder or owner died

leaving behind his or her spouse, upon the failure of such spouse to succeed to the land

alienated to that permit-holder on the permit or holding or upon the death of such spouse,

a person nominated as successor by such permit- holder or owner shall succeed to that

land or holding.” [Emphasis is mine]

“73. Title to a land alienated on a permit or to a holding shall be deemed to have devolved

on any person entitled to succeed to the land or holding under the provisions of section

72 as from the date of the death of the permit-holder or owner of the holding if such

permit-holder or owner died without leaving behind his or her spouse, or, if such permit-

holder or owner died leaving behind his or her spouse, upon the failure of such spouse to

10

succeed or from the date of the death of such spouse, as the case may be.” [Emphasis is

mine]

As Section 73 stipulates, the eldest son should have been the successor because Act No. 11 of 2022

had not come into force. Therefore, it is very clear that the 4th Respondent should have been the

successor to the rights of the original grantee, which is clearly stated by the Commissioner General

of Lands by P12 as well as P18. These two documents (P12 and P18) have been written in

accordance with the Circular marked as P16.

The 3rd Respondent erred

However, in this case, the transfer effected by the wife of the original grantee has been approved

by the predecessor of the 3rd Respondent, and right throughout, the successors of the 3rd

Respondent as well as the 3rd Respondent himself have messed up the whole thing by granting

permission to various people, including the Petitioner, to succeed to the rights of the original

grantee when there is in fact a claim made by the 4th Respondent, who even at the time he made a

claim, was apparently serving in the death row pending his serving of the capital punishment.

However, his civil rights have not been extinguished by reason of that; therefore, as correctly stated

by the learned State Counsel, Mr. Sachitha Fernando, it is my view that the Commissioner General,

on the advice of the Attorney General, has taken the correct position of law, although inconsistent

with the 3rd Respondent and his predecessors-in-title, who should have consulted the

Commissioner General of Lands, or Attorney General in that case, which was not done.

Therefore, it is my view that the Petitioner’s Application does not have any merit and is liable to

be dismissed.

11

Correct interpretation of statute

Interpretation to a statute first must be given according to the ordinary meaning, which is given in

this case by the Honourable Attorney General, based on his advice P18 was issued. In support of

this view, I reproduce the following passage found in N.S. Bindra’s “Interpretation of Statutes”;

“6.2.1 Literal Rule of Interpretation

The first and primary rule of construction is that the intention of the legislature must be

found in the words used by the legislature itself. If the words used are capable of one

construction only, then it would not be open to the courts to adopt any other hypothetical

construction on the ground that such hypothetical construction is more consistent with the

alleged object and policy of the Act. The legislature must be deemed to have intended what

it has said. It is no part of the duty of the court to presume that the legislature meant

something other than what it said. If the words of the section are plain and unambiguous,

then there is no question of interpretation or construction.”1

However, the administrative officers may have their own interpretations; therefore, in this case,

they have written several letters taking up different stands accepting different successors to the

original grantee’s rights at different times, which should not have happened and should not be

condoned. Accordingly, the correct interpretation is given according to the plain reading of the

statute by the Hon Attorney General, which is quite correct and reflected in P18. Therefore, P18

is the only document that should be sustained.

1 N.S. Bindra (13th Edition, LexisNexis 2023) Interpretation of Statutes, Chapter 6, p. 328.

12

Conclusion

Accordingly, I dismiss this Application, subject to the cost of Rs. 10,500/- (Ten Thousand Five

Hundred Rupees) payable to the 4th Respondent.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL