==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

Orders in the nature of Writs of

Certiorari, Prohibition and Mandamus

under Article 140 of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Dandeniya Arachchige Piyasiri, No. T09D, 28th Lane, Family Quarters, Udawalawa. CA (Writ) App. No. 423/2024

PETITIONER

Vs.

1. Hon. Justice N.E. Dissanayake,

Chairman, Administrative Appeals Tribunal, No. 35, Silva Lane, Dharmapala Place, Rajagiriya. 2. Ganathasan P.C.,

Member, Administrative Appeals Tribunal, No. 35, Silva Lane, Dharmapala Place, Rajagiriya. 3. G.P. Abeykeerthi,

2

Member,

Administrative Appeals Tribunal, No. 35, Silva Lane, Dharmapala Place, Rajagiriya. 4. E.W.M. Lalith Ekanayake,

Chairman, National Police Commission, Building No. 9, Bandaranayake Memorial International Conference Hall, Bauddhaloka Mawatha, Colombo 07. 5. D.K. Renuka Ekanayake,

Member, National Police Commission, Building No. 9, Bandaranayake Memorial International Conference Hall, Bauddhaloka Mawatha, Colombo 07. 6. K. Karunaharan,

Member, National Police Commission, Building No. 9, Bandaranayake Memorial International Conference Hall, Bauddhaloka Mawatha, Colombo 07. 7. P.G.S. Gamini De Silva,

Member, National Police Commission, Building No. 9, Bandaranayake Memorial International Conference Hall, Bauddhaloka Mawatha,

3

Colombo 07. 8. A.A.M. Illiyas PC,

Member, National Police Commission, Building No. 9, Bandaranayake Memorial International Conference Hall, Bauddhaloka Mawatha, Colombo 07. 9. Dilshan Kapila Jayasuriya,

Member, National Police Commission, Building No. 9, Bandaranayake Memorial International Conference Hall, Bauddhaloka Mawatha, Colombo 07. 10. Member,

(yet to be appointed) National Police Commission, Building No. 9, Bandaranayake Memorial International Conference Hall, Bauddhaloka Mawatha, Colombo 07. 11. Thamara D. Perera,

Secretary, National Police Commission, Building No. 9, Bandaranayake Memorial International Conference Hall, Bauddhaloka Mawatha, Colombo 07. 12. Sanath J. Ediriweera,

Chairman,

4

Public Service Commission, No. 1200/9, Rajamalwatta Road, Battaramulla. 13. N.H.M. Chithrananda,

Member, Public Service Commission, No. 1200/9, Rajamalwatta Road, Battaramulla. 14. G.S.A. De Silva PC,

Member, Public Service Commission, No. 1200/9, Rajamalwatta Road, Battaramulla. 15. A.D.N. De Zoysa,

Member, Public Service Commission, No. 1200/9, Rajamalwatta Road, Battaramulla. 16. S.M. Mohamed,

Member, Public Service Commission, No. 1200/9, Rajamalwatta Road, Battaramulla. 17. Ranjani Nadarajapillai,

Member, Public Service Commission, No. 1200/9, Rajamalwatta Road, Battaramulla. 18. C. Pallegama,

Member, Public Service Commission, No. 1200/9, Rajamalwatta Road, Battaramulla.

5

19. M.B.R. Pushpakumara,

Member, Public Service Commission, No. 1200/9, Rajamalwatta Road, Battaramulla. 20. N. Selvakkumaran,

Member, Public Service Commission, No. 1200/9, Rajamalwatta Road, Battaramulla. 21. Inspector General of Police,

Police Head Quarters, Colombo 01. 22. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department, Hulfsdorp, Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

Before: Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Counsel:

Krishan Fernandopulle with Tharika Ruvanpura instructed by Legal Aid Commission for

the Petitioner.

Mihiri de Alwis, S.S.C for the Respondents.

Argued on: 27.11.2025

Delivered on: 27.03.2026

6

Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Judgement

Introduction

The Petitioner was a Sargeant attached to the Udawalwa Police Station. On the fatal night of

19.05.2010, the Petitioner, along with the Petitioner in Writ Application No. 422/24, had gone on

a surveillance patrolling and detected four hundred grams (400g) of cannabis in the possession of

a certain person named Chaminda Harshapriya. Having arrested the said person, they caused to

produce him before the learned Magistrate on the charge of having possession of cannabis.

However, the following day, the officer-in-charge of the police station had arrested the two

Petitioners in both applications, namely Writ Application Nos. 422/2024 and 423/2024, on the

charges of bribery as well as disposal of certain seized property, a quantity of ten kilograms of

cannabis, from two people and release of one of them, on accepting the bribe. However, thereafter,

they were interdicted, and later a disciplinary inquiry was held.

After the disciplinary inquiry, they were found guilty, and on appeal to the Police Commission,

their appeal was rejected, and later another appeal to the Public Service Commission (PSC) was

also dismissed; the appeal made to the Administrative Appeal Tribunal (AAT) was also rejected.

Based on that, they have come before this Court seeking relief under Article 140 of the Constitution

and obtained formal notice; thereafter, the Respondents have filed their Objections.

This was argued on 27.11.2025, and the following arguments were advanced by the Counsel; hence,

this judgement.

Arguments

7

The first argument by Mr. Fernandopulle, the Counsel for the Petitioner is that the charge sheet

framed against the two Petitioners in the two applications is flawed, as it was signed by a retired

Assistant Superintendent of Police (ASP) after his retirement; therefore, it bears no validity.

In addition to that, there are contradictions with regard to the investigations, whereas no alleged

quantity of cannabis, namely ten kilograms (10kg) of cannabis, was found anywhere, and there

was no production of 10kg of cannabis either in the Magistrate’s Court or disciplinary panel. In

addition to that, when it comes to the weightage of the cannabis, it is alleged before the disciplinary

panel that it is 10kg.

The third argument is that no statements were recorded from the original accused who was found

and arrested by the two Petitioners on suspicion with the four hundred grams (400g) of cannabis

and were charged, and who having pleaded guilty, paid the fine.

The fourth argument is that the bribery charges have not been proved in the evidence. Therefore,

P16, the order of the AAT, is irrational, and there are contradictions per se within it, whereas

according to the panel, the bribery charge was for soliciting Rs. 100,000/- (One Hundred Thousand

Rupees); the AAT’s decision was only Rs. 10,000/- (Ten Thousand Rupees).

On the other hand, Ms. Mihiri De Alwis, S.S.C, argues that the Petitioner has in fact challenged

the decision of the Public Service Commission marked as P14 which cannot be done in view of

Article 61A of the Constitution.

In addition to that, it is her argument that two lay witnesses have given evidence (who are husband

and wife), to the effect that the Petitioners had hidden a certain bag in their compound which they

believed was cannabis, establishes that they had disposed certain amount of cannabis. Therefore,

the dismissal of the appeal made by the Petitioner is justified.

8

Now, I will deal with the factual matrix.

Factual matrix

The Petitioner had joined the Department of Police on 05.05.1986 as evidenced by the document

marked as P1, and thereafter, the Petitioner had to undergo training in the Police Training College

of Kalutara; the certificate obtained by the said Training College is marked as P2 annexed to the

Petition. The Petitioner has been commended for his exemplary service by the documents marked

as P4 and P5 annexed to the Petition.

By May 2010, he was attached to the Udawalawa Police Station. He was assigned to go on a

surveillance patrol by his superior, the Officer-in-charge (OIC). In the course, he and another

Police Sargeant named Premarathna, who is the Petitioner in the connected Writ Application

bearing No. 422/2024, had gone on a surveillance patrol on the orders given by the OIC on the

fateful day of 19.05.2010. Since the relevant facts that I have mentioned in my judgement in the

connected Writ Application bearing No. 422/2024, will be applicable to this case as well, in

addition to the above-mentioned facts with regard to the Petitioner’s record of service.

In the course, he and the said Police Sargeant named Premarathna, had gone on about carrying out

their duty on a motorbike ridden by the Petitioner in this case. As they were on surveillance patrol,

on suspicion, they have searched a certain person named Chaminda Harshapriya, and they have

found 400 grams of cannabis in his possession, which is a punishable offence under the Poisons,

Opium, and Dangerous Drugs Ordinance. Accordingly, the said suspect had been arrested by the

Petitioner and his colleague, and was brought to the police station, and thereafter, weighed the

property seized and tagged as ‘production’, and then caused him to be produced before the

Magistrate.

9

However, following day, to their surprise, they were alleged by the OIC that they, having

solicitated a bribe, had taken a part thereof from the said suspect. Further, it was alleged that though

they had seized 10kg on the arrest of the said suspect and another, they had released one suspect

and a quantity of 9kg and 600 grams and only produced the balance of 400g of cannabis.

Consequently, steps were taken against them to charge them and pending that they were interdicted.

After the said disciplinary inquiry, the Petitioner and his said colleague were found guilty of

wilfully giving false statements and reports to the Police in producing certain accused in the said

case and was recommended to be terminated from the police service. On that, the Petitioner and

his colleague, appealed to the PSC, and the members thereof also affirmed the said conviction of

guilt by the Inquiring Panel. Thereafter, against the said order of the PSC, the Petitioner and his

colleague had appealed to the AAT; by their order, the members of the AAT had also affirmed the

findings, and no relief was granted to the Petitioner or his colleague.

In the circumstances, the Petitioner along with the other officer, has instituted the above-styled

Application seeking a Writ of Certiorari to quash the decision of the AAT which affirmed the

decision of the PSC, which confirmed the findings of the Inquiring Panel.

Now I will consider the evidence adduced before the Panel of Inquiry to ascertain whether the

Petitioner is guilty of misconduct.

Some relevant evidence in a nutshell as adduced before the panel of inquiry

The first witness called was the Officer-in-charge (OIC) of the Police Station of Udawalawa at the

time this alleged incident took place, Chief Inspector Karunasena. According to him, Sargeant

Premarathna and Sargeant Piyasiri (the Petitioners) were assigned certain duties of the evening of

19.05.2010, by him as the OIC of the Police Station of Udawalawa. They had been given oral

10

instructions by him to engage in surveillance patrol; accordingly, having entered the relevant

entries in the relevant information book, they had gone on their official duty. Later that night, they

had returned with a suspect with a certain production of four hundred grams (400g) of cannabis.

Having weighed the production, they caused the arrested suspects to be produced before the

Magistrate’s Court; his name was Chaminda Harshapriya.

However, according to him, by that time, he had received certain information that the Petitioners

had arrested two suspects in three-wheeler on their surveillance duty, and in that three-wheel, they

had found about ten kilograms (10kg) of cannabis in the possession of the two suspect; Asela

Sanjaya and Harshapriya; later, the Petitioners have released the three-wheeler and one suspect

(Asela Sanjaya) on the promise of a bribe of Rs. 100,000/- (One Hundred Thousand Rupees), and

they had gone to some other house (belonging to a man named Jayalath) and tried to hide the

production of the 10kg of cannabis that they had seized from the possession of the said Asela

Sanjaya there. However, since the wife of the owner of the house had resisted, they had hidden it

in a shrub. The said cannabis was inside a gunny bag, and they had later taken it and disposed of

the property without producing the same. The person from whose custody the said cannabis was

taken into along with the three-wheeler were released with the promise of accepting Rs 50,0000/-,

the half of the total sum of Rs. 100,000/- of the bribe.

The relevant part of the evidence is reproduced below;

“මෙෙ වැටලිමේ ස්ථානයට ඉදිරිපත් කර සිටි චමින්ද හර්ෂප්‍රිය නැෙති සැකකරු සේබන්දව ොහට

ලද ම ාරතුරු අනුව මෙෙ සැකකරු වැටලිෙට ලක්වන අවස්ථාමේදී ඉදිරිපත් කළ ගංජා ප්‍රවාහනයට

වඩා වැඩිපුර ත්‍රීමරෝද රථයකින් ගංජා ප්‍රවාහනය කරමින් සිටියදී වත් සැකකරුමවකු සෙඟ ඉහ

නිලධාරීන් හසුවූ බවත් මෙෙ නිලධාරින් මදමදනා විසින් එෙ සැකකරු ස්ථානයට ඉදිරිපත් මනාකර

මුදාහැර ඇති බවත්ය.

11

ඒ අනුව ො විසින් ප්‍රශ්න කර අත්අඩංගුවට මගන ඇති සැකකරුමගන් ොමේ නිමයෝග පරිදි මපාසැ

28997 ගාමිනි යන නිලධාරිතුො මයාදවා ප්‍රකාශයක් සටහන් කරවා ගත් ා. එෙ ප්‍රකාශය මූලික

විෙර්ශනය මගාමුමේ පිටු අංක 17 සිට 19 දක්වා පි 06 වශමයන් සලකුණු කර ඉදිරිපත් කිරීෙට

අවසර මදමි. එෙ සැකකරුමේ වැඩිදුර ප්‍රකාශයන් සටහන් කිරීමෙන් අනතුරුව ො මපාසැ 28997

ගාමිනි හා මපාසැ 40055 වසන් විසින් පදවන ලද අංක එඩිඩි 9308 දරන රථමයන් සැකකරුන්

රැමගන සැකකරුමේ ෙග මපන්ීෙ ඔස්මස් සැකකරුමේ ප්‍රකාශයක් අනාවරනය වූ වැටලීේ කළ

අවස්ථාමේදි අත්අඩංගුවට ගැනීමෙන් පසු ස්ථානයට ඉදිරිපත් මනාකර ගංජා ප්‍රොණයක් සඟවා ැබූ

ස්ථානයට ගෙන් කළා. එෙ ස්ථානය උඩවලව මපාලිස් වසමේ අංක 979/2 අමේ ගුනවර්ධන

සෙන් ජයලත් නැෙති උඩවලව උත් පර්මේෂණ ආය නමේ මස්වය කරන ැනැත් ාමේ නිවසයි.

එහිදි ො එෙ නිවමස් පදිංචි සෙන් ජයලත් යන අයමගන් ප්‍රශ්න කළා.

විනිශ්ෂය සභාමවන්: මොනවද ප්‍රශ්න කමළ්? මපරදිග 2010.05.19 වන දින සවස ගංජා වගයන්

පියසිරි සාජන් ෙහ ා මගනාවද කියලා ඇසුවා. ඒ අවස්ථාමේදි සෙන් ජයලත් කිේවා, 'ඔහු මහාඳින්

දන්නා හදුනන උඩවලව මපාලිසිමේ වැඩ කරන පියසිරි සාජන් ෙහත් යා වත් කිහිප මදමදකුත්

සෙඟ ගංජා වගයක් මගනවිත් ටික මේලාවකට කියලා ඒ ටික තියලා යන්න ඉල්ලලීෙක් කළ බව'.

ඉන්පසු ඔහුමේ බිරිඳ ගංජා ඔවුන්මේ වත්මත් බායාෙ සේබන්ධව විරුද්ධීෙ නිසා බිරිඳ ඒ

අවස්ථාමේදි කියා සිටියා,

'ඔවා මේ ඇතුලට ගන්න එපා' කියූ බවත් ඉන්පසු ඔහු එෙ ගංජා පාර්සල්ල නිවස පිහිටි වත්මත් ඉළුක්

ෙන්ඩියක සඟවා ැබූ බවත් ඉන්පසුව ඊට පැය බාගයකට පෙණ පසු මපර මෙෙ පියසිරි සාජන්

ෙහ ා පැමින මවනත් ත්‍රීමරෝද රථයකින් එෙ ගංජා දැමීෙට මපාමහාර උහරයක්ද ඉල්ලලාමගන ඒවා

පියසිරි සාජන් ෙහ ා විසින්ෙ රැමගන ගිය බව පියසිරි සාජන් ෙහ ා සෙඟ මපාලිසිමේ වත් අමයක්

සිටි සහ කිහිප මදමනක් සිටි බවත් කියා සිටියා.”1

1 Page 6-7 of P10.

12

In cross-examination, he admitted that when he had later seized the said three-wheeler, though

with his experience he smelled a strong scent of cannabis coming from a specially designed storage

unit inside the three-wheeler underneath the two subwoofers but, he could not find any cannabis.

The said three-wheeler had also not been sent to the Government analysts for any report. In

addition to that, it was also admitted that they could not find any amount of cannabis, other than

the 400g of cannabis that had already been produced before Court.

However, in addition to that, he failed to identify the name of the informant, and notably, the said

informant was never called to testify as a witness before court. Further, his pocket notebook was

not produced; according to his own evidence, it has been lost, and to date, he has failed to obtain

or maintain a new one.

According to his testimony, he was in prior possession of information relating to the seizure of 10

kilograms of cannabis from the suspect, the arrest of a three-wheeler, the release of one suspect,

and the alleged disposal of 9 kilograms and 600 grams of cannabis. Notwithstanding such prior

knowledge, and before signing the ‘B’ report, by which Harshapriya was produced before court

with only 400 grams of cannabis, he proceeded to sign the said report and caused the accused to

be produced before court. The following evidence, elicited in cross-examination, is reproduced

below:

“පිළිතුර- ෙට මපාලීසිමයන් ආරංචි වුමේ මේ සිද්ිය සිදුවූ දින ගංජා කිමලෝ 10ක් චුදි නිලධාරීන්

විසින් අත්අඩංගුවට මගන, ග්‍රෑේ 400ක් පෙණක් ඉදිරිපත් කළ බවයි. පුද්ගලික ඔත්තුකරු කවුද කියා

ෙට පැවසිය මනාහැක. ගංජා අඩුමවන් ඉදිරිපත් කළ බවට ලැබුණු ආරංචිය ෙමේ සටහන් මපාමත්

සටහන් කමළමි. එය අද ඉදිරිපත් කළ මනාහැක්මක්, එය අස්ථානග ී ඇති බැවිනි. එෙ කරුණ

13

පිළිබඳ ම ාරතුරු මපාමත් සටහන් කමළ්ද යන්න ෙට ෙ ක නැ . නව සක්ි සටහන් මපා ක්

ලබාමගන මනාෙැ . අද ෙට රාජකාරියක් සඳහා ආවට සක්ි සටහන් මපා ක් මගනාමේ නැහැ.

ප්‍රශ්නය – ඒ අනුව ෙෙ ඔබතුො විශ්වාස කළ මනාහැකි සක්ිකරුමවකු බව මයෝජනා කරමි.

පිළිතුර– එය ෙෙ රමේ ප්‍රතික්මෂ්ප කරමි. ගංජා ග්‍රෑේ 400ක් පෙණ මෙෙ චුදි නිලධාරීන් විසින්

අත්අඩංගුවට ගත් සැකකරුවන් මෙෙ අිකරණයට ඉදිරිපත් කළහ. ෙෙ එෙ ‘B’ වාර් ාව

අිකරණයට අත්සන් කර ඉදිරිපත් කමළමි. එමස් කිරීෙට මපර ෙට ආරංචි වූමේ ගංජා කිමලෝ 10ක්

අත්අඩංගුවට මගන, අඩුමවන් ඉදිරිපත් කළ බවයි. ඉන්පසුව අිකරණයට සැකකරුවන් හා සිද්ිය

වාර් ා කළත්, ගංජා කිමලෝ 10ක් අත්අඩංගුවට මගන අඩුමවන් ඉදිරිපත් කළ බව ෙෙ සඳහන් කමළ්

නැ .

ප්‍රශ්නය – ඔබ මුල්ල ‘B’ වාර් ාමේ එෙ සිද්ිය සඳහන් මනාකමළ් ඇයි?

පිළිතුර– එෙ අවස්ථාමේ විෙර්ශනය අවසන් ී මනාතිබූ නිසාය. එෙ ‘B’ වාර් ාව මෙෙ චුදි යන්ට

එමරහිව සක්ි සංපිේඩනයක් මලස මයාදාගත්මත්ද යන්න ෙට ෙ ක නැ .”

The next person called to give evidence was Jayalath, whose evidence in chief was not led before

the panel, and instead, what was recorded as a statement recorded on the directions of the OIC of

Udawalawa by an Officer named Gamini, was put to him. He admitted to signing it, having made

the statement. However, in cross-examination, he admitted that though the bag was brought to him,

he never saw or smelled any cannabis or anything like cannabis inside the said bag. As his wife

refused to accept the said bag, they had hidden it in a shrub area and later removed it.

The relevant part of the evidence is reproduced below;

“හරස් ප්‍රශ්න:

14

ෙහ අිකරණමයන් ඇප ලැබුණු පසු, දික්වැල්ලල මපාලිසියට වාර් ා කිරීෙ සඳහා ඇප මකාන්මද්සි

ලබාදුන්නා. ෙෙ ප්‍රියසිරි සජාන් ෙැතිතුොමගන් මගනදුන්නා පාර්සලය ලිහා බැලුමේ නැහැ. ඒ

පාර්සලය ඇතුමළ් මරදි ගංජා තිමේ කියලා ෙෙ දැක්මක් නැහැ. එදින රැ 12ට වි ර උඩවලමේ

ස්ථානිපතිතුො ෙගින් මගදරදී ප්‍රකාශයක් සටහන් කළා. ෙට එදින කිසිෙ අවස්ථාවක මපාලිසියට

ගිමේ නැහැ. පසුදා මපාලිස් ස්ථානිපතිතුො ෙමේ ආය නයට අවිලා එකරමගන ගියා.

ෙෙයි ෙමේ බබාලා මදන්නයි, මනෝනයි ෙමේ නිවමස් ඉද්දි වැරන්ඩා එමක් වාඩිමවලා ඉන්නමකාට

මේ සිද්ිය වුමේ. පාර්සල්ල වල මොනවාද තිබුමේ කියලා ෙෙ දැක්මක් නැහැ. සිමෙන්ති කවර්

වමේ ඒවාවල ො ඔ ලා තිබුමේ. පැය භාගයක් පෙණ ො තිබුමේ, ෙමේ වැට ොයිමේ.”2

The wife of the said Jayalath had also given similar evidence in the same line, and she had also

not seen what was inside the bag. She also had admitted that she resisted to have the bag inside

their house.

The relevant part of the evidence is reproduced below;

“හරස් ප්‍රශ්න:

ෙට චූදි පියසිරි සාජන් ෙහත් යා අමේ ගමේ පදිංචිකරුවන් නිසා, අසල්ලවැසියන් වමේ හඳුනනවා,

ෙට පියසිරි සාජන් ෙහත් යා, ෙමේ පුරුෂයාට යහළුවා වමේ ඇවිදින් ඉන්නවා, ෙස් කිමලෝ මදකක්

මහායලා මදන්න කියලා ඇසුණා, ගංජා වගයක් කියලා ඇසුමේ නැහැ ”

Thereafter, another police officer named Gamini was called to give evidence, and it was his

evidence that on 20.05.2010, on the orders of the OIC, he also accompanied the OIC to the said

house of the witness Jayalath where Sargeant Piyasiri was alleged to have hidden the nine

kilograms and six hundred grams (9kg 600g) of cannabis. However, he only admitted that he had

2 Page 12-13 of P10.

15

recorded the statements of the said Jayalath and his wife, and in addition to that, he had never

arrested anybody or saw any cannabis or found any evidence with regard to the allegations against

the Petitioners.

The relevant part of the evidence is reproduced below;

“මේ මචෝදනා පත්‍රමේ චූදි නිලධාරීන් ගංජා ග්‍රෑේ 400ක් චූදි යින් සෙඟ ඉදිරිපත් කර තිබුණා.

තිබුණ නිසා ො එය ගංජා ප්‍රොණමේ ග්‍රෑේ 100ක් ද කියලා ෙෙ විශ්වාස කළා. සාක්ිකරුවන්මේ

ප්‍රකාශය කියවා කිමලෝ 10ක් මගනාවා කියලා සාක්ිකරුවන්මේ ප්‍රකාශමේ තිමයනවා. ඒ

සාක්ිකරුමවෝ නේ මේ චූදි විත්තිකාරයන් ඉදිරිපත්, ෙට විශ්වාසයි ඒ විත්තිකාරයා කිේමේ ඇත්

කියලා. ෙට විශ්වාසයි චූදි යන් ඉදිරිපත් කර ගංජා ග්‍රෑේ 400ක් කියලා විශ්වාසයි.

ප්‍රශ්නය- ගංජා සෙඟ අත්අඩංගුවට මගන මෙෙ චූදි නිලධාරීන් මපාලිසියට ඉදිරිපත් කළ ගංජා

ප්‍රොණය නිවැරදිව ගත් ාද? ගංජා ළඟ ැබීමේ වරදට මහාඳින් කූඩුමේ සිටි විත්තිකාරයා දුන්

උත් රය විශ්වාසද?

උත් රය - ෙට ඒක කියන්න බැහැ, චූදි නිලධාරීන් මපාලිසියට ඉදිරිපත් මනාකළ ගංජා

ප්‍රොණයක් කිමලෝ 9යි ග්‍රෑේ 600ක් බව ෙෙ මකාමහ්වත් කියලා නැහැ. ෙෙ දැක්මක් නැති නිසා

කියන්න බැහැ. ත්‍රී මරෝද රථමේ තිබුණා කියන මකාච්චර මලාකුද කියලා ෙට බලුවත් ෙ ක

නැහැ. මෙහි ගංජා ද කළා දන්න පුළුවන්ද කියන්න පුළුවන් බව සි න්න බැහැ. ත්‍රී ීල්ල රථය

පරීක්ෂා කරලා, සීට් එක පිටුපස තිබූ කුටිමේ මහායාගත් ගංජා වලට ස්ථානාිපතිතුො මොකද

කමළ් කියා ෙෙ දන්මන් නැහැ. නඩු බඩු මස් ඇතුළත් කමළ් නැහැ”3

The next important witness called by the prosecution was the Assistant Superintendent of Police

(ASP), Mr. Samarasekara, who conducted the initial preliminary inquiry to prepare the charge-

3 Page 21 of P10.

16

sheet to serve on the Petitioners; and on whose orders that they were interdicted. According to him,

when he had received the information that the two Petitioners (Sargeant Piyasiri and Sargeant

Premarathna) were involved in the scandalous conduct of having arrested two suspects with 10kg

of cannabis being transported in a three-wheeler, accepted Rs. 50,000/- (Fifty Thousand Rupees)

as part of the bribe of Rs. 100,000/-, released one suspect with the three-wheeler and later taken

steps to dispose of the 9kg and 600g separately, without producing the same in courts, while

producing only one person (suspect) with 400g of cannabis, and thus, created a way for the said

suspect to escape with a minor punishment.

However, in cross examination, he admitted that he had never seen the cannabis nor found any

witness to say that the Petitioners had accepted such a bribe or solicited the bribe, except for the

information provided by the OIC and the statement of the two witnesses whom the OIC caused to

have recorded.

The relevant part of the evidence in the cross examination is reproduced below;

“ෙමේ පරීක්ෂණමේදී ගංජා කිමලෝ 10ක් ගත්මත් මකාමහන්ද, ගත්මත් කාමගන්ද කියලා

අනාවරණය වුමේ නැහැ. අනාවරණය වුමේ නැති කරුණක් සේබන්ධමයන් හරියටෙ ගංජා

කිමලෝ 10ක් කියලා කියන්න බැහැ. මෙෙ චූදි නිලධාරීන් කේඩායෙ ඉදිරිපත් කරලා

තිමයන්මන් ගංජා ග්‍රෑේ 400ක් බව අනාවරණය වුණා. ඒ ග්‍රෑේ 400ක් කියලා අනාවරණය කරලා

තිමයන්මන් මපාමත් සටහන් කරලා, මේ චූදි නිලධාරීන්ෙ ෙයි.

ඒ ගංජා 400 කිරලා බලලා ඉදිරිපත් කරලා තිමයන්මන් මේ චූදි නිලධාරීන් විසින් බවත්, ෙමේ

පරීක්ෂණමේ නිලධාරිමයක් ගංජා කිරලා නැති බවත්, සටහන් වල තිබුණ නිසා මෙෙ ගංජා ග්‍රෑේ

400ක් කියලා චූදි නිලධාරීන්මේ ප්‍රකාශ ෙඟින් හා සටහන් වලින් විශ්වාස කළා. අදටත් මෙෙ

කරුණු විශ්වාස කරනවා, චූදි යන් විසින් මයාදපු සටහන් මබාරුවක් මනමවයි. ඉන් පස්මස්

17

අත්අඩංගුවට ගත් ත්‍රීමරෝද රථමේ තිබිලා ගංජා ස්වල්ලපයක් මහෝ අත්අඩංගුවට ගත් බවක්

අනාවරණය වුමේ නැහැ”

Weak evidence regarding the seizure of cannabis

Now, I will consider the arguments in light of the evidence that has been mentioned above. The

petitioner in this application has been found guilty by the panel of inquiry based on the above-

mentioned evidence adduced before the said panel. Other than the Officer-in-Charge (OIC) of the

police station at that time, the two lay witnesses, Jayalath and his wife, who were called to give

evidence, have clearly stated that they did not see any cannabis or even detect the smell of cannabis

inside the bag. In fact, Jayalath and his wife have categorically mentioned during their cross-

examination that they did not see what was inside the bag, whether it was clothes or cannabis.

In addition to that, no other witness has been called to give evidence to establish that the Petitioner,

along with the other Petitioner in the connected matter, Sergeant Premarathna, had accepted Rs.

50,000 (Fifty Thousand Rupees) and, as part of the bribe, solicited Rs. 100,000 for the release of

the suspect and the three-wheeler. Further, no other witness has been called to give evidence to

that effect. Therefore, it is my view that, on such flimsy evidence, the petitioners in both

applications could not have been found guilty.

Contradictions on every material point

Further, the evidence of the Officer-in-Charge (OIC) of Chief Inspector Karunasena, is also very

vague. In fact, although he had received certain information by the time, the two Sergeants, Piyasiri

and Premaratne, brought the accused Harshapriya along with 400g of cannabis. According to him,

he had earlier received information from an informant that the two police officers, having arrested

two suspects along with the three-wheeler and 10 kg of cannabis, had released one accused with

18

9kg and 600 grams of cannabis, and had only allowed one person to be charged by pleading guilty

to a minor offence.

However, it is unbelievable for two reasons; one is that as to why the two officers had not released

both accused, Harshapriya and the other suspect, after allegedly accepting part of the bribe and

expecting the balance, instead of bringing one before the court and forcing him to plead guilty to

the charge. In fact, if such a bribe had been solicited and part of it was accepted, they could have

easily released both suspects.

In addition to that, the OIC himself admitted in his cross-examination that, having received

information about the disposal of the three-wheeler, which should have been produced, along with

9kg and 600 grams of cannabis with the other suspect, the two police officers, the sergeants, caused

the production to be weighed and produced, and only the accused Harshapriya before the

magistrate. Further, having received this information, the OIC himself signed the B-report

submitted to the Magistrate’s Court which stated that 400 grams of cannabis was seized from the

said accused. Therefore, without investigating further at that stage, the OIC had derelicted his duty

and effectively allowed the other suspect to escape. In fact, the OIC should also have been charge-

sheeted along with the two officers, if the allegations were in fact true. Therefore, the OIC,

Karunasena, on the question of whether 10kg of cannabis was seized, contradicted in his evidence

per se.

In the course of the evidence, the OIC attempted to maintain the position that the two officers,

Sergeants Piyasiri and Premaratne, had taken the 9 kg 600 grams of cannabis and hidden it in a

shrub near Jayalath’s house. In the same breath, he claimed that the two police officers had allowed

the other suspect to leave with his three-wheeler along with the said quantity of cannabis. However,

Jayalath and his wife had not seen the said cannabis, though the OIC Karunasena maintained that

19

they had seen the 10kg bag of cannabis. Therefore, with regard to the 10kg bag of cannabis which

was alleged to have been seized by the two police officers and taken to Jayalath’s house, the OIC

contradicted on that point with the evidence given by Jayalath and his wife inter-se.

However, there is another contradiction on this point, as neither the OIC nor the ASP are certain

whether the two officers actually allowed the other suspect to leave with the 9kg 600 grams of

cannabis after accepting part of the bribe, or whether the officers had taken the cannabis and

disposed of it in some other manner. Therefore, on this point, the two police officers’ contradicts

the evidence of the lay witnesses inter-se.

Additionally, the ASP, Mr. Samarasekara, stated in his evidence that it was not revealed whether

the Petitioner had seized the said 10kg of cannabis or not. Therefore, on that point, the two police

officers contradicted inter se.

Further, other than the two lay witnesses, no other person, including Harshapriya who had been

arrested by the two police officers and produced before the court, was called to give evidence.

Although the OIC stated in his evidence in chief that, based on Harshapriya’s statement, he

subsequently found the three-wheeler in which the other suspect was transporting the cannabis, he

did not send the three-wheeler to the government analysts to verify whether any traces or smell of

cannabis remained there. There again the OIC has derelicted his duty; therefore, he should have

been charge-sheeted.

In addition to that, in fact, the OIC who initially inquired into the matter, had lost his notebook and

appeared before the inquiry panel without a new one, and no new notebook was obtained or

produced. Therefore, these defects and weaknesses in the prosecution’s case could not be remedied

to establish or prove the Petitioners’ guilt.

20

Therefore, in view of the said evidence, it is my view that no reasonable person could believe that

the two officers were involved in such a scandalous act, or that they produced a false report to the

police, or disposed of production or evidence that should have been submitted to the court along

with the suspects. Further, it should also be noted that no other suspect was arrested or apprehended

by the OIC, or on the directions of the ASP, during their investigation. Therefore, this is one of the

defects in the prosecution’s case.

In fact, on the basis of this flimsy evidence, the ASP, Mr. Samarasekara, had recommended to

charge sheet the two Petitioners; consequently, they were charge sheeted after appointing a panel.

Therefore, based on this flimsy evidence, he should not have recommended such a course of action.

However, despite all these defects and weaknesses, the two suspects were found guilty by the

inquiry panel by P12. In addition, the same conviction was upheld by the Police Commission, PSC

by P14, and the AAT by P16. Therefore, the conclusion arrived at by the Panel of Inquiry is

irrational and illegal based on the evidence adduced. Therefore, the rejection of the appeals by the

PSC, including the AAT Appeal is also considered illegal, irrational, and against the evidence to

the standards as enunciated in the case of GCHQ case4 by Lord Diplock.

Failure of AAT to consider evidence

On a perusal of the order of the AAT, I found that the evidence that I have analysed above has not

been analysed at all. The Honourable Members thereof have merely relied on the evidence in chief

of the OIC, Director General Karunasena, of the Udawalawa Police Station at that time. In addition

4 Council of Civil Service Unions & Others v. Minister for the Civil Service (GCHQ case) [1985] 1 A.C 374.

21

to that, there are certain defects in the said order with regard to the alleged solicited amount of the

bribe; the Honourable Members have referred to it as Rs. 10,000/- (Ten Thousand Rupees).

Further, the mere reproduction of evidence in chief, without any analysis, particularly that of an

investigating officer who is also the Officer-in-Charge, cannot be taken as proper consideration of

evidence. In fact, although the civil rights of parties are determined in inquiries of this nature, the

effect of such decisions may sometimes be of a criminal nature. Thus, the imposition and piling of

punishment upon punishment would also amount to degrading and inhuman treatment5.

Such inhuman treatment has been meted out not only against the Petitioners, but also against their

family members who have lost their livelihood, as asserted by the Petitioners in their Petitions and

not denied by the Respondents.

As such, it is my view that the impugned order of the AAT has not met the required standards;

accordingly, it is liable to be set aside.

Accordingly, it is my view that their conviction or finding of guilt, based on the evidence referred

to above, is unsustainable. Therefore, I am compelled to issue the writs sought. In addition, I must

note that these two police officers have suffered greatly since 2010. They were interdicted from

the Police Department, denied their jobs, and their promotions were withheld. In my view, they

should be substantially compensated.

5 Supreme Court Determination on the Essential Public Services Bill 1978-1983, vol. I, 63 (SC Application No. 58/79).

22

Conclusion

Based on the reasons adumbrated above, it is my view that the Petitioner in this Application, as

well as the Petitioner in the connected Writ Application bearing No. 422/2024, are entitled to a

Writs of Certiorari quashing the decisions contained in documents P12, P14, and P16.

Further, since they have been deprived of their promotions and salary increments from the time

they were interdicted, they are entitled to the relief as prayed for in prayers (b), (c), (d), and (e) of

the Petition; and further order Rs. 21,000/- (Twenty-One Thousand Rupees) be paid as costs of

litigation in each case separately.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL