==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 14

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal in terms of Article 13(8) of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka and in terms of section 331 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979. Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka Complainant

Court of Appeal Case No. CA HCC 0248/2023 Vs. High Court of Matale Case No. HC 112/07 Ramaiya Kirishandan,

Dumbara Prison,

Pallekele Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN Ramaiya Kirishandan, Dumbara Prison, Pallekele

Accused-Appellant Vs. The Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12.

Complainant-Respondent

Page 2 of 14

Before: B. Sasi Mahendran, J. Amal Ranaraja, J.

Counsel: Sri Lal Dandeniya, AAL, for the Accused-Appellant. Janaka Bandara, D.S.G. for the Respondent.

Argued on: 22.01.2026 Judgment on: 16.02.2026

JUDGMENT

AMAL RANARAJA, J.

1. The Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the “Appellant”) has

been indicted in the High Court of Matale in High Court case number

HC 112/07.

2. The charges in the indictment are as follows;

Charge 01

That on or about July 16, 2003, at Matale, within the jurisdiction

of this Court, the appellant did commit the murder of one

Krishandan Devayani, and thereby committed an offence

punishable under section 296 of the Penal Code.

Page 3 of 14

Charge 02

During the same course of transaction as above, the appellant

did commit the murder of one Krishandan Divyana and thereby

committed an offence punishable under section 296 of the Penal

Code.

3. At the conclusion of the trial, the appellant has been convicted of the

charges and sentenced to death.

4. Aggrieved by the conviction, the disputed judgment, together with the

sentencing order, the appellant has preferred the instant appeal to this

Court.

Case of the prosecution

5. At the time of the incident, the appellant has been a married man and

a father of three children. Two of the children have resided with him

while the third has lived with the appellant’s estranged wife.

6. It has been alleged that the appellant’s wife was having an extra marital

affair with a man named Sugath which was stated as the reason for

their separation.

7. On the date of the incident, PW02 the appellant’s sister has lived in a

line room in the Western Estate in Matale. The appellant has also

resided in a room close to that of PW02’s.

Page 4 of 14

8. That night, PW02 has heard someone vomiting from the direction of the

appellant’s room and has gone to investigate. Upon entering the room,

she has observed the two children, who lived with the appellant, seated

on the bed and appearing drowsy. The appellant himself has been

vomiting in the area the kitchen was situated. When questioned a child

has stated that the appellant had prepared tea which the children

subsequently drank.

9. Consequently, the appellant has confessed to his sister, i.e. to PW02,

that he had given his children a poisonous substance and consumed it

himself.

10. Promptly, the group that had gathered at the room of the appellant by

that time have ensured that the appellant and his children were

hospitalised.

11. The children, identified as the “deceased" in the charges have

succumbed in hospital. Dr. K. G. R. V. Pathirana (PW24) has conducted

the post mortem examinations with the reports marked පැ-10 and පැ-

11. Dr. Pathirana has concluded that the deaths have resulted from

cardiac arrest caused by organophosphate poisoning.

Case of the appellant

12. The appellant has maintained that he did not force the children to

ingest a poison. He has claimed that others present in his room may

Page 5 of 14

have given the children various items to consume and that it is

plausible that one of these individuals would have inadvertently given

them the poisonous substance.

Grounds of appeal

13. When the matter was taken up for argument, the learned Counsel for

the appellant did not dispute, the learned High Court Judge’s findings

of the appellant being guilty. However, the learned Counsel contended

that the appellant should been convicted of culpable homicide not

amounting to murder and has implored the exception of cumulative

provocation in mitigation.

As such, the learned Counsel of the appellant urged the following

grounds of appeal;

i. That the learned High Court Judge has failed to consider

that the evidence of attendant circumstances warrant a

substitution for the murder, of a conviction of culpable

homicide on the basis of continuing and cumulative

provocation.

ii. That the learned High Court Judge has failed to consider

the evidence of attended circumstances to reduce the

culpability under the principle of the english law

Page 6 of 14

“diminished responsibility” and warrant a substitution for

the murder of a conviction of culpable homicide.

Evaluation

14. Cumulative provocation refers to a legal concept where a victim of long

term physical or psychological abuse reacts to a final, seemingly minor

act of provocation by killing his abuser. Unlike, grave and sudden –

provocation, this doctrine recognises that the cumulative effect of prior

abuse often can lead to a sudden loss of self-control, warranting a

reduction in a charge from murder to culpable homicide not amounting

to murder.

15. The legal concept of cumulative provocation in Sri Lanka has developed

through judicial interpretation of exception 1 to section 294 of the Penal

Code of Sri Lanka, which deals with grave and sudden provocation to

reduce murder to culpable homicide not amounting to murder. While

the statute emphasises a sudden act, recent superior court

jurisprudence has expanded this to include “continuing or cumulative”

provocation, recognising that a final, relatively minor act may break a

person’s self-control after a long history of abuse or provocation.

Page 7 of 14

16. For easy reference, the text of exception 1 to section 294 of the Penal

Code of Sri Lanka is reproduced below;

“Exception 1 - Culpable homicide is not murder if the offender

whilst deprived of the power of self- control by grave and

sudden provocation, cause the death of the person who gave

the provocation or causes the death of any other person by

mistake or accident.

Firstly - That the provocation is not sought or voluntarily

provoked by the offender as an excuse for killing or doing harm

to any person.

Secondly - That the provocation is not given by anything done

in obedience to the law, or by a public servant, in the lawful

exercise of the powers of such public servant.

Thirdly – that the provocation is not given by anything done in

the lawful exercise of the right of private defence.”

17. The legal concept of cumulative provocation addresses a significant

challenge to the traditional defence of grave and sudden provocation,

particularly in cases involving protracted abuse or harassment.

18. Historically, the law mandated that a loss of self-control due to

provocation had to be sudden. This requirement often fails to account

for situations where an individual, subjected to a prolonged course of

Page 8 of 14

abuse or demeaning conduct, eventually “snapped” in response to a

final, perhaps a minor trigger.

19. The evolution of case law has progressively broadened the

interpretation to encompass such scenarios.

(a) In Premalal vs. Attorney General [2000] 2 SLR 403, Kulathilaka,

J, has held that:

“Until the judgment of Chief Justice H.N.G. Fernando in

Samothamby v Queen (1) (de Krester, J-dissenting) our court

followed a strict view in applying Exception (1) set out in

section 294 of the Penal Code. Our judges following their

counterparts in England interpreted the phrase “sudden

provocation” to mean that provocation should consist of a

single act which occurred immediately before killing so that

there was no time for the anger to cool and the act must

have been such that it would have made a reasonable man

to react in the manner as the accused did. Our Courts were

reluctant to take into consideration any special

circumstances which manifested in the particular offender’s

case”.

Kulatilaka, J, has further held that,

“Of late we observe a development in other jurisdictions

where Courts and juries have taken a more pragmatic view

Page 9 of 14

of the mitigatory plea of provocation. In a series of cases in

applying the mitigatory plea of provocation Courts took into

consideration the prior course of relationship between the

accused and his victim”.

(b) In Wijesinghe Arachchige Gamini vs. Attorney General,

CA/142/2009 decided on August 30, 2016, M. M. A, Gaffoor,

J, has held that:

“…the chain of stressful events in the troubled

relationship of the accused and the deceased culminating

in the aforesaid unfortunate incident, are probable

reasonably sufficient to entertain a plea of continuing or

cumulative provocation because the accused retaliated at

the spur of the moment and that he could reasonably

show that he was deprived of his self-control”.

(c) In R.W.Nandana Senarathbandara vs. Attorney General

SC/Appeal/32/2015, decided on July 17,2020, Jayantha

Jayasuriya, C.J. has held that:

“Jurisprudence referred to above demonstrate that in

considering the plea of grave and sudden provocation an

accused is entitled to rely upon a series of prior events

that ultimately led to the incident at which the death was

caused. A court should not restrict its focus to an isolated

incident that resulted in the death, in considering a plea

Page 10 of 14

of grave and sudden provocation. The aforementioned

jurisprudence has widened the scope of this plea by

expanding the limitations recognized in its statutory form.

Thereby, the concept of “Continuing or Cumulative”

provocation has been recognized as a plea coming within

the purview of the plea of grave and sudden provocation

recognized under Exception-1, section 294 of the Penal

Code. Therefore, the proximity of time between the “actus

reus” of the accused and the “provocative act” of the

victim should be considered in the context of the nature

and circumstances in each case, in deciding whether an

accused is entitled to the benefit of the plea of Grave and

Sudden Provocation”.

20. As per the exception 1 to section 294 of the Penal Code, culpable

homicide is not murder when the offender deprived of self-control by

provocation also causes the death of a third person by mistake or

accident.

21. By ‘mistake’ or by ‘accident’ are largely interchangeable phrases in

english, both indicating that an action was unintentional, not planned

and often resulted in an unwanted outcome.

22. By mistake implies an error in judgment or action. Whereas, an

accident would imply a mishap, an unexpected event, or something that

Page 11 of 14

happened outside one’s control. Further, as per the provisions in

section 73 of the Penal Code, accident in the doing of a lawful act is a

general exception;

“Nothing is an offence which is done by accident or misfortune,

and without any criminal intention or knowledge in the doing of

a lawful act in a lawful manner, by lawful means and with

proper care and caution”.

23. The learned Counsel on behalf of the appellant has asserted that based

on the evidence adduced at the trial, the appellant’s wife was involved

in an extra marital affair with a person named Sugath and was living

separately from the appellant. These actions by the person named

Sugath particularly the breakdown of the marriage of the appellant due

to this affair, are argued to have created a persistent and significant

source of cumulative provocation for the appellant over an extended

period.

24. Adding to this enduring distress on the day of the tragic event and

shortly before the charged incident, the person named Sugath, has

aggressively confronted the appellant on his return from the shop, the

person named Sugath is alleged to have first spat directly into the

appellant’s face and subsequently kicked him.

Page 12 of 14

25. This direct physical and emotional assault, it is contended has further

inflamed the appellant’s already profoundly provoked state. It is as this

juncture, in the grip of extreme and compounded provocation, that the

appellant is further contended to have caused the death of his

daughters by administering poison.

26. It being as stated above, the appellant has caused the death of third

persons and not the person who gave the provocation. In those

circumstances, it is incumbent on the appellant to establish on a

balance of probability, that those deaths were caused by mistake or

accident.

27. Testimony also revealed that the appellant has confessed to his sister

(PW02) that he made the children named in the charges consume

poison after consuming it himself. These circumstances do not stem

from a mistake or accident.

[vide page 609 of the Appeal Brief]

28. Accordingly, the appellant is unable to implore the exception of

cumulative provocation in mitigation, based on exception 1 to section

294 of the Penal Code.

Page 13 of 14

29. “Diminished responsibility” is a partial defence in criminal law,

specifically for murder, allowing an accused to argue that an

“abnormality of mind” or “mental impairment” significantly reduce his

culpability at the time of the crime. If successful, it reduces a conviction

from murder to culpable homicide not amounting to murder. The

particular accused must show that he suffered from a recognised

mental condition, for example PTSD, severe depression. The mental

state must have significantly affected the accused’s ability to

understand his actions to form rationale judgments or exercise self-

control.

30. The burden rests on the accused, typically requiring expert psychiatric

or psychological evidence.

31. This defence applies when a mental disease or defect exists but it is not

severe enough to constitute a full ‘insanity’ defence. However, the

appellant has failed to establish that he suffered from the recognised

medical condition to significantly reduce his culpability at the time of

the offence.

32. In those circumstances the contention that the learned High Court

Judge has failed to consider the evidence, attendant circumstances to

reduce the culpability of the appellant under the, english law doctrine

of ‘diminished responsibility’ must fail.

Page 14 of 14

33. Due to the circumstances referred to above, I am not inclined to

interfere with the conviction and the disputed judgment, together with

the sentencing order and proceed to affirm the same.

34. I dismiss the appeal. However, make no order regarding costs.

Appeal dismissed.

35. The Registrar of this Court is directed to send a copy of this judgment

to the High Court of Matale for compliance.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

B. SASI MAHENDRAN, J.

I agree,

Judge of the Court of Appeal