==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0157/22

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979, read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal No: Devarajage Jayantha Perera alias

CA/HCC/0157/2024 Ajantha

High Court of Puttalam Case No. HC/44/2019 APPELLANT Vs

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

COUNSEL : Isuru Somadasa for the Appellant.

Shanaka Wijesinghe, PC, ASG for the

Respondent.

CA/HCC/0157/22

2 | P a g e

ARGUED ON : 09/12/2025 DECIDED ON : 18/02/2026 *******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Appellant was indicted by the Attorney General on the

following charge:

Between 27.04.2013 to 28.04.2013 the accused committed the murder of

Diddeniya Gamaralalage Wijeratne, which is an offence punishable under

Section 296 of the Penal Code.

As the Appellant opted for a non-jury trial, the trial commenced before a

judge and the prosecution had led five witnesses and marked productions

P1-P13 and closed the case. The Learned High Court Judge having been

satisfied that the evidence presented by the prosecution warrants a case to

answer, called for the defence and explained the rights of the accused.

The Appellant made a Dock Statement and closed his case.

After considering the evidence led by the prosecution and the defence, the

Learned High Court Judge has found the Appellant guilty of the charge and

sentenced him to death on 12/10/2022.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

CA/HCC/0157/22

3 | P a g e

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the Appellant

has given consent for the matter to be argued in his absence. Also, at the

time of argument the Appellant was connected via the Zoom platform from

prison.

The following appeal grounds have been raised on behalf of the Appellant.

1. The learned High Court Judge had failed to consider whether the

evidence led by the prosecution established that the incident had

happened due to a sudden fight.

2. The learned High Court Judge has compartmentalised the evidence

and has failed to consider the same in totality.

At the hearing, the learned Counsel strenuously argued that the evidence led

at the trial warrants the consideration of the plea of sudden fight, which had

not been adequately dealt with by the Learned High Court Judge in her

judgment.

Background of the Case albeit briefly is as follows:

According to PW2 the incident had happened in a fishermen hut called

‘Madel Wadiya’. Due to the commencement of the rough sea, fishing activities

had been stopped and the fishermen were in the process of removing their

hut and other utensils belonging to the owner of the Wadiya. The kitchen of

the Wadiya called ‘Pongal Wadiya’ was intact at that time. The Appellant had

worked as the cook of Wadiya and therefore, he had been called ‘Pongal Aiya’.

After attending the removal of the ‘Madel Wadiya,’ in the evening everyone

had started to consume illicit liquor and a fight had erupted between the

deceased and the Appellant. The deceased had started to assault the

Appellant with a pole. The Appellant in retaliation, grabbed the pole from the

deceased and assaulted the deceased. After the assault, the Appellant

directed the others to leave the Wadiya and slept with the others in another

Wadiya.

CA/HCC/0157/22

4 | P a g e

On the following day, the body of the deceased was recovered from a nearby

lagoon. The police had recovered the body upon some information proved by

an informant.

According to the JMO who held the post mortem on the deceased, it was

noted that there were 7 external injuries on the deceased’s body. Out of

which, injuries No. 4 and 5 and its corresponding internal injuries had

caused the death of the deceased. The JMO had opined that the cause of

death is due to multiple injuries caused to the thoracic cavity and abdominal

cavity by assault using a blunt weapon.

The Appellant had denied the incident and suggested the same to the

prosecution witnesses.

The Counsel for the Appellant takes up the position that the case against the

Appellant should have been considered under the plea of sudden fight and

that he should have been convicted not for murder but for culpable homicide

not amounting to murder under 297 of the Penal Code.

According to exception 4 of Section 294 of the Penal Code;

“Culpable homicide is not murder if it is committed without

premeditation in a sudden fight in the heat of passion upon a sudden

quarrel, and without the offender having taken undue advantage or acted

in a cruel or unusual manner”.

Explanation- It is immaterial in such cases which party offers the

provocation or commits the first assault”

The counsel for the Appellant seeks relief lessening the culpability by

application of the sudden fight. On perusal of the evidence led before the

High Court, although evidence of sudden fight was elicited from the evidence

of the prosecution, the same was not suggested during the cross

examination. According to Section 105 of the Evidence Ordinance, it is the

responsibility of the Appellant to prove the existence of a general or special

CA/HCC/0157/22

5 | P a g e

exception during the trial on a balance of probabilities. In the absence of

such proof, the Learned Trial Judge should direct his mind to the

circumstances and the fact that the Appellant is entitled to have the benefit

of the lesser verdict.

In The King v Bellana Vithanage Eddin 41 NLR 345 the court held that:

"In a charge of murder, it is the duty of the judge to put to the jury the

alternative of finding the accused guilty of culpable homicide not

amounting to murder when there is any basis for such a finding in the

evidence on record, although such defence was not raised nor relied upon

by the accused”.

In the case of King v. Albert Appuhamy 40 NLR 505 it was held:

“Failure on the part of a prisoner or his Counsel to take up a certain line of

defence does not relieve a Judge of the responsibility of putting to the jury

such defence if it arises on the evidence.”

In the case of King v. Withanalage Lanty 42 NLR 317 it was held:

“There was evidence in this case upon which it was open to the jury to say

that it came within exception 4 to section 294 of the Penal Code and that

the appellant was guilty of culpable homicide not amounting to murder. No

such plea, however, was put forward on his behalf. In the course of his

charge the presiding Judge referred to this evidence as part of the defence

story but not as evidence upon which a lesser verdict might possibly be

based. Held, that it was the duty of the presiding Judge to have so directed

the jury and that in the circumstances the appellant was entitled to have

the benefit of the lesser verdict.”

Section 297 of the Penal Code states as follows:

Whoever commits culpable homicide not amounting to murder shall be

punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may

extend to twenty years, and shall also be liable to fine, if the act by which

CA/HCC/0157/22

6 | P a g e

the death is caused is done with the intention of causing death, or of causing

such bodily injury as is likely to cause death; or with imprisonment of either

description for a term which may extend to ten years, or with fine, or with

both, if the act is done with the knowledge that it is likely to cause death,

but without any intention to cause death, or to cause such bodily injury as

is likely to cause death.

The learned Counsel drew our attention that the Appellant was only 22 years

when this unfortunate incident had happened. This position was conceded

by the learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General. Although the incident

happened in the year 2013, this matter was concluded in the year 2022, after

about 09 years.

The Learned Additional Solicitor General in keeping with the highest

traditions of the Attorney General’s Department informed that he is in

agreement with the Counsel for the Appellant and that this is an appropriate

case in which the fourth exception to Section 294 of the Penal Code should

be considered.

Analysing the evidence presented in this case, it clearly demonstrates that

the stressful events of the Appellant and the deceased had resulted in the

unfortunate incident. Although the Learned High Court Judge had briefly

discussed the concept of sudden fight, she had not awarded the benefit to

the Appellant under the said mitigatory plea.

Hence, considering all the circumstances of this case, I set aside the death

sentence imposed on the Appellant and substitute it with a term of 10 years

rigorous imprisonment. Further I impose a fine of Rs.10,000/- with a default

sentence of 06 months simple imprisonment. Additionally, I order a

compensation of Rs.300,000/- payable to the deceased’s family. In default,

one-year simple imprisonment is imposed.

CA/HCC/0157/22

7 | P a g e

As the Appellant is in prison since the date of conviction by the Learned High

Court Judge, I order the sentence imposed by this Court to be operative from

the date of conviction, i.e. 12/10/2022.

Subject to the above variation, the appeal is dismissed.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this judgment to the High

Court of Puttalam along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL