IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

C. Czarnikow Sugar Ltd.,

Paternoster House,

No.65. St. Pauls Churchyard,

London, EC4M 8AB.

Petitioner

CASE NO: CA/WRIT/144/2018

Vs.

1. P.S.M. Charles,

Director General of Customs,

Sri Lanka Customs,

No.40, Main Street,

Colombo 11.

1A. K.A. Vimalenthirajah,

Director General of Customs

(acting),

Sri Lanka Customs,

No.40, Main Street,

Colombo 11.

1B. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) G. Vijitha

Ravipriya,

Director General of Customs,

Sri Lanka Customs,

No.40, Main Street,

Colombo 11.

2

2. D.M.N. Dissanayake,

Director General of Customs

and Inquiring Officer,

Sri Lanka Customs,

No.40, Main Street,

Colombo 11.

Respondents

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J.

Counsel: Sanjeewa Jayawardena, P.C., with Charitha

Rupasinghe for the Petitioner.

Chaya Sri Nammuni, S.S.C., for the

Respondents.

Decided on: 16.10.2020

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Notwithstanding the Petitioner seeks several reliefs in the

lengthy petition, at the stage of the argument the Petitioner

confined its relief to paragraph (e) of the prayer to the petition,

which reads as follows:

Issue a mandate in the nature of a writ of mandamus,

directing the 1st and/or the 2nd Respondent to commence a

duly constituted and formal customs inquiry:-

(i) After first issuing the Petitioner a formal show

cause/charge sheet and

3

(ii) After permitting the Petitioner to tender a written

explanation in the first instance in response to such

show cause/charge sheet, and

(iii) To duly permit the Petitioner to lead both oral and

documentary evidence and of witnesses in support of

its position and in order to vindicate itself in respect

of the specific charges against; and

(iv) To only and only then determine the guilt or

innocence of the Petitioner in respect of each specific

charge if any that may be preferred against the

Petitioner.

Kala Traders Private Limited (a company incorporated in Sri

Lanka) imported 4,000 MT of white sugar from the Petitioner (a

company incorporated in England). The vessel MV Ever Bright

arrived in the Port of Colombo on 30.09.2004 and berthed for

discharge on 04.10.2004. Sri Lanka Customs sealed the

consignment of sugar to conduct an inquiry on the basis that

the shipping documents had been falsified by misdescription of

the goods (brown sugar described as white sugar) in order to pay

lesser custom duties.

Upon a case being filed by the consignee, Kala Traders, this

Court in CA/WRIT/2034/2004 directed the entire consignment

of sugar to be released to Kala Traders upon a Bank Guarantee

valued at Rs. 45 million.

4

From what I have stated so far and will state in the course of

this Judgment, Kala Traders is a necessary party to this

application although the Petitioner does not appear to think so.

An inquiry under section 8 of the Customs Ordinance was

initiated by the Director General of Customs to look into the

aforesaid matter.

During the course of the inquiry, the Director General of

Customs sent P16 dated 21.12.2006 to the Petitioner, requiring

the Petitioner to be present at the inquiry between 4th-26th

January 2007, stating There is an investigation being carried out

by this Department in order to ascertain whether you are

knowingly concerned in violating any provisions of the Customs

Ordinance in the importation of above mentioned consignments of

sugar.

This was replied by the Petitioner by P17 dated 23.01.2007. In

this detailed reply, the Petitioner informed the Director General

of Customs to Desist from summoning us for any investigation or

inquiry in respect of the shipment effected on 04.10.2004 on MV

Ever Bright inter alia on the basis that We were only the

shippers of the said consignment to Messers Kala Traders (Pvt)

Ltd as far as we are concerned the said consignment had been

delivered as far back as September 2004. The Petitioner took

up the firm position that it would be illegal and against the

provisions of the Customs Ordinance to summon us at this stage

of the inquiry.

It is most significant to note that nowhere in this five-page letter

P17 did the Petitioner take up the position that at the time of the

5

seizure, the Petitioner was the owner of the said consignment or

even part of it.

Thereafter, the Director General of Customs sent P18 dated

14.02.2007, again explaining why the presence of the Petitioner

would be helpful for the investigation. The Petitioner was

further informed in P18 if you are unable to present yourself as

requested, we will accommodate a date to suit your convenience.

The Petitioner remained unmoved. The customs inquiry

proceeded.

In the meantime, the Petitioner filed a case against Kala Traders

in the Commercial High Court, bearing case No. 263/2007/MR.

The Petitioner does not tender a copy of the plaint in the said

case, which would have been of great assistance to this Court to

understand the real grievance of the Petitioner in relation to this

transaction. In the said Commercial High Court case, the

Petitioner seems to have sought a declaration that the Petitioner

is the owner of 6000 MT of the 10,000 MT consignment of sugar

and to recover from Kala Traders the value of the said quantity

of sugar. It also appears by paragraph 73 of the petition that

the Petitioner secured Judgment in its favour, but at the time of

filing this application the said case is still pending for the

recovery of the said dues.

However, in a sudden turn of events, after filing the said

Commercial High Court case and more than one year after

correspondence by P17 and P18, an Attorney-at-Law on behalf

of the Petitioner sent P19 dated 11.03.2008 and P21 dated

02.04.2008 to the Director General of Customs, asking that the

6

Petitioner be made a party to the inquiry to stake a claim to the

goods seized, based on the facts stated therein. Thereafter, the

Director General of Customs sent P23 dated 12.05.2007,

requiring the said Attorney-at-Law to be present at the Customs

Department on 21.05.2008 to ascertain the truth of the matters

mentioned therein to consider your request duly. The Attorney-

at-Law flatly rejected this request by P24 dated 02.06.2008,

stating you have no right to summon me for any inquiry and I

will not comply with your request. The matter ended on that

note.

Upon conclusion of a long-drawn out inquiry, the Inquiring

Officer sent a common show cause notice P3 dated 10.08.2017

to nine persons, including Kala Traders and the Petitioners local

indenting agent, Mondial Impex (Pvt) Ltd. Kala Traders was

asked inter alia to show cause why the said consignment of

10,000 MT of sugar shall not be forfeited in terms of section 12

read with section 43, and sections 27, 47 and 50 of the Customs

Ordinance.

Thereafter, the Order dated 04.09.2017 marked P27 was

pronounced, by which inter alia the entire consignment of

10,000 MT of sugar was forfeited under section 12 read with

section 43, and sections 27, 47 and 50 of the Customs

Ordinance.

The Petitioner filed this application on 02.04.2018, mainly

seeking to quash P27 in respect of 6,000 MT of the 10,000 MT

consignment of sugar, on the basis that payment for the said

portion of sugar was on Document Against Payments (DAP)

7

terms (according to the Agreement entered into between the

Petitioner and Kala Traders marked P6).

This makes abundantly clear my earlier observation, i.e. that

Kala Traders is a necessary party to this application. For me,

hearing this application without Kala Traders is akin to playing

Hamlet without the Prince of Denmark! Failure to make

necessary parties petitioners or respondents, as the case may

be, warrants dismissal of the application in limine.

If Kala Traders failed to make due payments in violation of the

Agreement or if the ownership of the goods is in dispute, the

same shall be resolved in a different forum, perhaps by the said

Commercial High Court case, and not by insisting that the

Customs Department recommence the already concluded, long

drawn out inquiry.

It is in the alternative to the said main relief (quashing P27) that

the Petitioner asks this Court to direct the Director General of

Customs to hold a formal inquiry upon a formal charge

sheet/show cause notice issued on the Petitioner.

The contention of the Petitioner is that the section 8 inquiry

under the Customs Ordinance is a fact-finding inquiry, which is

a precursor to a formal inquiry, and any punishment meted out

after a section 8 inquiry is a nullity, as punishment can only be

meted out after a formal inquiry.

Let me consider the issue in light of this submission.

The Petitioner refused to participate in the section 8 inquiry.

After the section 8 inquiry, no show cause notice was served on

8

the Petitioner. The Petitioner was not made a suspect/accused

in any inquiry. No punishment was meted out on the Petitioner.

In the circumstances, how can the Petitioner find fault with the

procedure of the inquiry? As seen from P27, several

punishments were imposed on Kala Traders who had legal

representation at the inquiry. But Kala Traders or any other

party against whom punitive Orders were made do not complain

of procedural irregularities. It must be made clear that the

forfeitures by P27 were imposed not immediately after the

section 8 inquiry but upon show cause notices being served on

the parties identified at the section 8 inquiry.

It is noteworthy that having refused to participate in the section

8 inquiry, the Petitioner now finds fault with the Director

General of Customs for not serving a show cause notice on the

Petitioner and not holding a formal inquiry against it!

The Petitioner seeks to compel the Director General of Customs

by mandamus to issue a show cause notice on the Petitioner

and hold a formal inquiry against the Petitioner, in order for the

Petitioner to claim 6000 MT of sugar on the basis that the

Petitioner is the owner of the said portion of sugar.

The Petitioners application is, in my view, misconceived in law.

Writ is a discretionary relief. In the aforesaid facts and

circumstances of this case, the Petitioner is not in any way

entitled to discretionary relief. This Court previously ordered

that the whole consignment of sugar be released to Kala Traders

upon a Bank Guarantee (although final Judgment in that case

was entered against Kala Traders, as seen from the Judgment in

9

Kala Traders (Pvt) Ltd v. Director General of Customs [2006] 11

Sri LR 295). Kala Traders is not a party to this application. The

Petitioner filed a case in the Commercial High Court against

Kala Traders to recover payment on 6,000 MT of sugar on the

basis that the Petitioner is the owner of that portion of sugar,

presumably in terms of the Agreement P6. The Petitioners

redress lies elsewhere, not in the writ Court.

I dismiss the application of the Petitioner with costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal