IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Mohamed Cassim Sathik,

No. 160/2,

Jinna Road,

Akkaraipattu 17.

Petitioner

CASE NO: CA/WRIT/327/2015

Vs.

J.J. Ratnasiri,

Secretary to the Ministry of Home

Affairs,

Independent Square,

Colombo 7.

And 6 Others

Respondents

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Dr. U.L. Ali Zakky for the Petitioner.

Nirmalan Wigneswaran, S.C.C., for the

Respondents.

Decided on: 07.03.2019

2

Samayawardhena, J.

By the second amended petition, the petitioner seeks to issue a

writ of certiorari quashing the interdiction letters whereby he

was interdicted pending disciplinary inquiry, and also the

proceedings of the disciplinary inquiry conducted against him

up to that point; and to issue a writ of mandamus compelling

the 1st respondent Secretary to the Ministry of Home Affairs to

reinstate the petitioner in the post of Grama Niladhari.

Pending determination of this action, after the conclusion of the

disciplinary inquiry, the petitioner has been reinstated in the

post of Grama Niladhari by the 1st respondent by R10 dated

10.01.2016 subject to the transfer to a different Divisional

Secretariat within Ampara District and subject to the following:

(a) salary arrears will not be paid during the period of

interdiction (b) three salary increments will be differed (c)

Rs.30,000/= will be charged.

By paragraph 9 of the reply submissions dated 08.01.2019, the

petitioner has stated that as he has been reinstated, he is not

challenging the interdiction further.

The mandamus compelling reinstatement has also become

redundant.

Then the remaining matter is whether he can pursue the other

relief, i.e. the vague relief of quashing the proceedings of the

disciplinary inquiry conducted until the filing of this application.

In paragraph 14 of the counter affidavit, the petitioner has

stated that he appealed against the said order marked R10 to

3

the Public Service Commission. That goes to show that the

aforesaid remaining relief has no basis.

The contention of the petitioner seems to be that the disciplinary

inquiry was not concluded within one year as per the circular

marked P12. Nowhere in P12 does it state that the disciplinary

proceedings become null and void unless it is concluded exactly

within one year. It cannot be construed in that manner.

It is regrettable that the petitioner wanted to proceed with the

application even after he was reinstated. His application at least

from that point is baseless.

I dismiss the application with costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal