IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

MC Maligakanda Case No. 29570114 HC Colombo Case No. HCRA 237/14 CA (PRC) APN 77/2015

In the matter of an application for Revision in terms of Article 138 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Abdul Hafeel Ahamed Abbas, No. 573, Sudarma Mawatha, Wanawasala, Kelaniya.

Petitioner

Brown and Company PLC No. 481, T.B. Jaya Mawatha, Colombo 10.

Respondent

And

01. Qamardeen Ahamed Abbas, No. 03, Dematagoda Place, Colombo 09.

02. Mohamed Ibrahim Jawad, No. 334/2/1, Bopanna, I.D.H. road, Gothatuwa.

Intervenient Party

And

Brown and Company PLC No. 481, T.B. Jaya Mawatha, Colombo 10.

Respondent - Petitioner

1

i fIII

f

Abdul Hafeel Ahamed Abbas, No. 573, Sudarma Mawatha, Wanawasala, Kelaniya.

Petitioner - Respondent

01. Qamardeen Ahamed Abbas, No. 03, Dematagoda Place, Colombo 09.

02. Mohamed Ibrahim Jawad, No. 334/2/1, Bopanna, I.D.H. road, Gothatuwa.

Interyenient Party

Respondents - Respondents

Abdul Hafeel Ahamed Abbas, No. 573, Sudarma Mawatha, Wanawasala, Kelaniya.

Petitioner - Respondent - Petitioner

Vs.

Brown and Company PLC No. 481, T.B. Jaya Mawatha, Colombo 10.

Respondent - Petitioner -Respondent

01. Qamardeen Ahamed Abbas, No. 03, Dematagoda Place, Colombo 09.

02. Mohamed Ibrahim Jawad, No. 334/2/1, Bopanna, I.D.H. road, Gothatuwa.

Intervenient Party

2

I!!

~

!

,

Ii

II

It

i!t

Respondent - Respondent -Respondents

Before : W.M.M.Malinie Gunarathne, J

: P.R.Walgama, J

Counsel : Ashan Fernando for the Petitioner.

: M.V.M. Ali Shabry, PC with Erusha Kalidasa and H.Hameed for the Respondent -Petitioner -Respondent.

Argued on: 02.10.2015

Decided on: 03.03.2016

CASE - NO - CA (PHC) APN -77/2015 - JUDGMENT - 03.03.2016

P.R.Walgama, J

The question In this appeal is whether the Court below was

correct in its reasoning and conclusion.

The Petitioner, by his petition dated 10.07.2014 had reported to

the Learned Magistrate of a land dispute and claimed relief In

terms of Section 68( 1) of the Primary Court Procedure Code

Act.

It IS alleged by the Petitioner that on 16.05.2014, some

employees of the Respondent Company has forcibly entered the

land in suit, more fully described in the schedule thereto, and

had demolished the building standing thereon.

3

t! 1II

(-II ,

I!

~

Although the Petitioner had complained to the police, they had

not taken any action regarding his complaint. It is the contention

of the Petitioner that he had been in possession of the said

property two months prior to the dispossession and more fully

he was in possession over 30 years in the said land.

Following are the facts as tersely stated m the petition of the

Petitioner;

That by virtue of Deed bearing No. 1180, incorporated under

the name of Meera Mohideen & Company Ceylon Limited

became the owner of the subject land. The said property is

depicted in plan No. 966 dated 22.05.1990.

It is the categorical position of the Petitioner that he too has

been in possession of the building assessment No. 35/2 which is

within lot 1 of the plan marked as P 11.

As per averment 17 of the said petition a development has

taken place regarding the land m Issue.

There had been negotiations for the sale of the subject land to

the Respondent company, and pursuant to the above the

Respondent Company has paid and the Petitioner has accepted a

sum of Rs.l million as an advance by way of a cheque. Further

it is to be noted that as per document marked P42(A) the

Respondent Company has agreed to pay the balance Rs.I0

million, and the premises to be hand over by the Petitioner to

the Respondent.

It also contended by the Petitioner that as per document marked

P37, the Respondent agreed to pay a further sum of Rs.90

lacks as an advance for lot 4. But nevertheless the Respondent

4

Company without any response had forcibly entered the disputed

land and had demolished the building standing thereon

As a comprehensive response to the afore said the Respondent

Company has asserted thus;

That the demolition of the said building took place in pursuant

to the Petitioner agreemg to accept 100 lacks from the

Respondent and the said premIses were transferred to the

Respondent Company by Meera Mohideen (Ceylon) private

Company by Deed bearing No. 508, which is marked as I VI.

It is the categorical position of the Respondent Company that

the Petitioner never had any right to the said premIses m Issue

and the Respondent Company agreed to pay him a sum of

Rs.I0 million to give up his posseSSIOn over the dbputeJ

1 , laHU.

Therefore it IS contended by the Respondent that

17.03.2014 the Petitioner did

land m Issue. Therefore it

not have any posseSSIOn

is said that there IS no

dispossession of the Petitioner from the subject land.

after

of the

forcible

Magistrate after perusing the relevant documents and the affidavits

thereto had arrived at the determination that the Petitioner should

be placed in possession of the said suit land.

Being aggrieved by the said impugned order of the Learned

Magistrate the Respondent- Petitioner-Respondent has come by way

of Revision seeking to set aside the said order and as an

interim relief to stay the order the learned Magistrate d?ted

11.11.2014.

The Learned High Court Judge in dealing with the application

of the Respondent - Petitioner - Respondent has preliminary dealt

5

\ ,

j

with the Issuance of the stay order. In that it IS stated as

stated in the prayer to petition warrants a stay order to stay

the execution of the afore said order of the Learned Magistrate,

if not the purpose of the Petitioner - Respondent's application

will render nugatory.

Being aggrieved by the said order of the Learned High Court

Judge dated 24.11.2014 the Petitioner - Respondent - Petitioner

lodged the present application m Revision in this Court and

sought the relief inter alia;

For an issuance of a stay order to stay the execution of the

above order dated 24.11.2014 and the subsequent stay order

marked as C7(A).

This Court after hearing the arguments of both counsel, allowed

them to file written submission in respect of their case.

In the written submissions of the Respondent Company it IS

reiterated the following;

That the property m suit belongs to a Company where the

petitioner's father was the original owner.

Further the said Company has entered m to an agreement to

sell the property to the Respondent.

It is alleged that the Petitioner did not have title to the said

property, but was occupying a portion of the property and had

agreed with the Respondent to gIve up possessIOn on payment of

Sum of Rs.I0,000,000, by the Respondent.

The Respondent has paid a sum of Rs.l,OOO,OOOI out of

Rs.I0,000,0001.

6

II ,i!IK

rIIliIII

I

I I

1 I

I t is categorically stated by the Respondent that the Respondent

Company has already paid a sum of Rs.56 million to the

original owner to vit. Meera Mohideen Company.

The Respondent Company also gIve an undertaking to pay the

Petitioner the balance money of Rs.9 million.

The Respondent alleges that the Petitioner filed a private plaint in

terms of Section 66(1 )(b) of the Primary Court Procedure Act,

and the petitioner has not even averred that there is a breach

of peace or as to afore said dispute of that there is a likely

hood of a occurrence of the breach of the peace.

In the said backdrop it is asserted by the Respondent Company

that the Magistrate's afore said order is erroneous and should be

set aside.

The Respondent Company by way of preliminary objection has

raised the following;

That the Petitioner is guilty of laches

AND

The Petitioner has failed to disclose any exceptional circumstances

which warrants to exercise the revisionary jurisdiction of this

Court.

It is apparent that the Learned High Court Judge hand down

the said judgment on 24.11.2014, and the Petitioner has lodged

the present application on 17.07. 2015, which is 8 months later

without a reasonable explanation.

7

I !I

tItI! SI\ I!

f!

t1ff

1

Further the Respondent attacks the maintainability of this reVISIOn

application on the basis that the said application does not

disclose any exceptional circumstances which warrants the exercise

of the revisionary powers of this court.

The above rationale was embedded in many decided cases III the

Supreme Court. In all the cases cited by the Respondent Company

will fortifY the argument raised by the Respondent.

In response to the above objection, as to the undue delay in

making this reVISIOn application it is stated by the Petitioner the

said delay was due to the obtaining the certified copies of the

proceedings.

It IS the contention of the Petitioner, that the question of delay

IS a relative term and should be dealt according to the

circumstances of the case. The Petitioner has adverted Court to

the case of VANIK INCORPORATION .VS. JA YASEKARA

(1997)(2) SLR- 365- to justify the course of procedure adopted by

the Petitioner to set aside the said impugned order of the High

Court. In essence it is said that the Revisionary powers could

be exercised where there has . . mISCarrIage of been a positive

justice.

It IS alleged by the Petitioner that the Learned Magistrate has

gIven an order complying with the Section 72 of the Primary

Court Procedure Act, where as the Learned High Court Judge

has violated the above section III his determination as stated

above. In the above setting it is alleged that there will be a

serious miscarriage of justice if the effect is given to the order

of High Court Judge.

8

i II

~ r 1I iIt I II I! I

~ 1i !II !

~ !

!

, I

4

1

But it IS seen from the facts placed before Court that the

Respondent Company has already paid a sum of Rs.54 million

to the original owner of the said company and has agreed with

the Petitioner to pay 10 million, and out of the said amount the

Respondent paid 1 million to the Petitioner.

F or the reasons stated herein before this court IS of the VIew

that the Learned High Court Judge's impugned order is not

tainted with error.

In VIew of the conclusion I have reached it becomes necessary

to dismiss the Petitioner's application forthwith.

Application IS dismissed costs fixed at Rs.I0,000/.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

W.M.M.Malinie Gunarathne, J I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

9

t

f. ,!fI !