==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA/HCC/0281/2023

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979.

Court of Appeal Case No: Nagarasa Ketheeswaran alais

CA/HCC/0281/2023 Thileepan

High Court of Kilinochchi

Case No. NP/HC/KN/12/2022 ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Kumararatnam, J.

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

CA/HCC/0281/2023

2 | P a g e

COUNSEL : N. Srikantha with S. Panchadsaram

for the Appellant.

Sheshan Bahboob, SC for the

Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 02/06/2026

DECIDED ON : 16/07/2026

***************************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) was indicted in the High Court of Kilinochchi under Section 296

of the Penal Code for committing the murder of Ramalingam Raja Sulochana

on or about 12th April 2014.

The trial commenced before the High Court Judge of Jaffna as the Appellant

had opted for a non-jury trial, after pleading not guilty. After leading several

witnesses before the High Court of Jaffna, this case was transferred to the

newly established Kilinochchi High Court on 19.05.2022. Trial continued in

the High Court of Kilinochchi after adopting the proceedings already

recorded before the High Court of Jaffna.

CA/HCC/0281/2023

3 | P a g e

After the conclusion of the prosecution case, the Learned High Court Judge

had called for the defence and the Appellant gave evidence from witness box

and closed his case. After considering the evidence presented by both parties,

the Learned High Court Judge had convicted the Appellant under section

296 of Penal code and sentenced him to death on 09/11/2023.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the Appellant

has given consent to argue this matter in his absence. Also, at the time of

argument the Appellant was connected via the Zoom platform from prison.

Background of the Case

According to the evidence led in the trial, the deceased was expecting to

marry the Appellant as he is her cousin. The parents of the deceased had

been opposed to this, as the Appellant had no permanent employment.

According to PW2, Rasamma the mother of the deceased, three days before

the incident, the deceased had informed her that the Appellant had

requested her to come to meet her personally and that therefore, she wants

to go to Kilinochchi. She also requested her mother not to tell anyone in the

family about her departure to Kilinochchi. Accordingly, the deceased had left

for Kilinochchi on 12.04.2014 at about 10.00am from Pitakande Estate,

Matale despite the resistance of PW2. She had identified the hand bag which

was last carried by the deceased and her clothes that she had last worn.

PW1, Ramalingam is the father of the deceased. He too confirmed about the

relationship the deceased had with the Appellant and his disapproval due to

the fact that the Appellant was not having a permanent job. On 13.04.2014,

he had received a call from the Appellant, who pretended it was a wrong

CA/HCC/0281/2023

4 | P a g e

number. However, the name of the Appellant was displayed on his phone

and it was identified that it was the Appellant who had called him.

PW3 Mahendran and PW5 Ajith Kumar got alerted after seeing a dog barking

unusually in the land belonging to PW4 Sribalan. When they entered the

land, they had seen some blood marks and a blood-stained shawl there.

Upon passing this information to PW4, the owner of the land had arrived and

he too confirmed the evidence given by PW3 and PW5. Additionally, he had

said that the land in which the incident had happened contained several

trees, a well and a small house. Upon inspection of the house, he had found

a Shalwar top and a shalwar bottom on a bed. According to him, the said

clothes did not belong to them.

PW6 Jagath Kumara, PW8 Antony Newton, PW10 Chandra Kumara and

PW14 Viraj Fernando are officers attached to the Civil Defence Force Unit.

Upon receiving information, they had extended their fullest support to

discover the body from the well. PW13, Kantharooban confirmed that the

Appellant was attached to the Civil Defence Force Unit as a member of their

Karate team. He confirmed the presence of the Appellant in the said camp

on 12.04.2014 until he left the camp in the evening.

PW15, PC 81170 Sandakelum attached to the Police Cannel Division was

dispatched to the scene of crime with a sniffer dog on 13.04.2014 by the

Officer-in-Charge of the Kilinochchi Police Station. The sniffer dog was given

the blood-stained shawl recovered at the scene of crime to pick up the scent.

The dog had then headed towards the Civil Defence Force Unit Camp and

stopped near a room. The witness noted that the Civil Defence Force Unit

Camp is situated 200 meters away from the camp.

PW27, IP/Farooq was the Acting Officer-in-Charge of the Kilinochchi Police

Station. Upon receiving information, he had gone to the place of incident,

CA/HCC/0281/2023

5 | P a g e

recovered the production through PW24, SI Sudusingha and fished out the

deceased’s body from the well. The dead body was found with 2 bags attached

containing stones, preventing the body being floating. Upon examination, a

piece of paper with a phone number, name and address written on it, was

found inside the bag. With the help of that number, the identity of the

deceased was established and the information was passed to the deceased’s

family.

Upon information, the Appellant was arrested on 16.04.2014 at the

Paranthan Junction and a short statement was recovered inside the jeep at

11.50am. Upon his statement, a knife was recovered under a mango tree in

the land where the deceased’s body was recovered. Inside the Appellant’s

house, two mobile phones were recovered inside a tool box. PW1 had

identified one of the phones as belonging to the deceased. Inside his room, a

shirt and a trouser were recovered by the police. On the following day, the

Appellant was handed over to the officers attached to the Criminal

Investigation Department along with the production recovered for further

investigations.

IP/Jayasekera attached to the Homicide Division of the Criminal

Investigation Department conducted further investigation after the inquiry

was taken over by the CID. On 17.04.2014 a further statement was recorded

from the Appellant. Upon his second statement a handbag was recovered

from a toilet pit in the Appellant’s house. The said hand bag was identified

by PW1 and PW2 as belonging to the deceased. Several items were recovered

inside the said hand bag including a wool band with a strand of hair which

was sent for DNA analysis. Investigation further revealed that the deceased

had last received a call from the Appellant.

CA/HCC/0281/2023

6 | P a g e

PW19 Subramaniyam, a sanitary worker, had assisted to recover the hand

bag from the toilet pit. He confirmed that the Appellant was brought to his

house by the police and on his direction the hand bag was recovered.

PW23, Dr. Sivaroobaan, the JMO who held the post mortem observed 6 main

injuries on the deceased’s body. One stab injury was noted on the right side

of the neck of the deceased and the other injuries noted are abrasions. The

JMO had not noted any recent injuries in the genital area of the deceased.

According to him the cause of death is drowning as the lungs of the deceased

had been expanded.

Through Court, the strand of hair found in a wool band, the knife and the

trouser of the Appellant’s were sent for analysis. PW22, the deputy

Government Analyst who gave evidence on the report submitted confirmed

that the DNA profile of the items mentioned above matched with the DNA

profile of the deceased.

The Appellant gave evidence from the witness box and admitted that he

called the deceased on the day prior to the death of the deceased. He had

taken up the position that the deceased had come to meet another person.

Therefore, he denied the allegation. He admitted that his statement was

recorded but denied any recovery upon his statement.

The following appeal grounds were advanced by the Appellant.

1. Inadmissible evidence led through PW27 and PW30.

2. The evidence led at the trial is infected with infirmities and

therefore, not credible.

3. The items sent for DNA analysis were not recovered upon his

statement.

According to PW1 and PW2 the deceased was having a long-term affair with

the Appellant. Both PW1 and PW2 did not like it as the Appellant had no

CA/HCC/0281/2023

7 | P a g e

fixed job or income. The deceased went to Kilinochchi after receiving a call

from the Appellant. She was asked to come secretly without informing any

family member. But she had informed the same to her mother, PW2, before

she had left for Kilinochchi. The Appellant had not denied calling the

deceased. The deceased went missing after going to Kilinochchi. The sniffer

dog, after smelling the blood on the shawl, directly went to the Civil Defence

Force Unit and stopped near a room within the camp. PW13 confirmed that

the Appellant was member of the CDS Karate team during the relevant time.

No eye witnesses are available in this case. The case fully rests on

circumstantial evidence adduced by the prosecution.

In the case of C. Chenga Reddy and others v. State of A.P.(1996) 10 SCC

193 the court held that:

“In a case based on circumstantial evidence, the settled law is that the

circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is drawn should be

fully proved and such circumstances must be conclusive in nature.

Moreover, all the circumstances should be complete and there should be

no gap left in the chain of evidence. Further the proved circumstances

must be consistent only with the hypothesis of guilt of the accused and

totally inconsistent with his innocence”.

In the case of McGreevy v. Director of Public Prosecution [1973] 1

W.L.R.276 the court held that:

“There is no requirement, in cases in which the prosecution’s case is

based on circumstantial evidence that the judge direct the jury to acquit

unless they are sure of the facts proved are not only consistent with guilt

but also inconsistent with any other reasonable conclusion. The question

for the jury is whether the facts as they find them to be drive them to

the conclusion, so that they are sure, that the defendant is guilty”.

CA/HCC/0281/2023

8 | P a g e

In the case of Attorney General v. Potta Naufer & others [2007) 2 SLR 144

the court held that:

“When relying on circumstantial evidence to establish the charge of

conspiracy to commit murder and the charge of murder, the proved items

of circumstantial evidence when taken together must irresistibly point

towards the only inference that the accused committed the offence”.

In the case of Kusumadasa v. State [2011] 1 SLR 240 the court held that:

“The prosecution must prove that no one else other than the accused

had the opportunity of committing the offence. The accused can be found

guilty and only if the proved items of circumstantial evidence is

consistent with their guilt and inconsistent with their innocence”.

In Premawansha v. Attorney General [2009] 2 SLR 205 the court held that:

“In circumstantial evidence if an inference of guilt is to be drawn, such

an inference must be the one and only irresistible and inescapable

conclusion that the accused committed the offence”.

In this case in order to find the Appellant guilty of the charge, all the

circumstances must point at the Appellant, specifically, that he is the one

who committed the murder of the deceased and not anybody else. It is the

incumbent duty of the prosecution to prove the same beyond reasonable

doubt.

In this case, according to PW01 and PW2, the Appellant is the person who

had an affair with the deceased. This was a long-term affair which was not

CA/HCC/0281/2023

9 | P a g e

liked by PW1 and PW2. On the day of the incident the deceased had told PW2

that she was going to meet the Appellant as per his request.

In the first ground of appeal, the Learned Counsel contended that the

evidence led through PW27 and PW30 is inadmissible. He mainly argued that

the recovery done under Section 27 recovery is false.

Section 27 of the Evidence Ordinance states that,

“When any fact is deposed to as discovered in consequence of

information received from a person accused of any offence, in the

custody of a police officer, so much of such information, whether it

amounts to a confession or not, as relates distinctly to the fact thereby

discovered may be proved.”

In Somaratne Rajapakse and Others v. Hon. Attorney General (2010) 2

Sri L.R. 113 at 115 it is stated that:

“Vital limitation of the scope of sec. 27 Evidence Ordnance is that only

the facts which are distinctly related to what has been discovered would

be permitted in evidence. It is well settled law that there should be a

clear nexus between the information given by the accused and the

subsequent discovery of a relevant fact. A discovery, made in terms of

the Sec. 27 of Evidence Ordinance discloses that the information given

was true and that the accused had knowledge of the existence and the

whereabouts of the actual discovery.”

In the case of Nandasena v. Republic of Sri Lanka (1978–79) 2 SLR 235 it

was held:

“Section 27 is concerned with the proof of information whether it

amounts to a confession or not, which leads to discovery of facts, and

CA/HCC/0281/2023

10 | P a g e

only that much of the information is admissible as distinctly relates to

the fact discovered. Section 27 is based on the doctrine of confirmation

by subsequent facts.

Even though evidence relating to confessional or other statements made

by a person, whilst in the custody of a police officer, is tainted and

therefore inadmissible, if the truth of the information given by him is

assured by the discovery of a fact, it may be presumed to be untainted

and is, therefore, declared provable in so far as it distinctly relates to

the fact thereby discovered. Only that portion of the information can be

proved which relates distinctly to the facts discovered.”

In this case, the initial investigation was done by the Kilinochchi Police

headed by PW27, who was the acting Officer-in-Charge at that time. After

the apprehension of the Appellant, PW27 had recorded a short statement

while in the police jeep. Upon that statement, a blood-stained knife was

recovered under a tree which is 200 meters away from the well where the

deceased’s body was fished out. The deceased’s clothes were also recovered

at the scene of crime. The defence was not able to mark any contradiction or

omissions in respect of this.

The second detection was done by the CID headed by PW30. After recording

the second statement, a hand bag belonging to the deceased was recovered

from a toilet pit in the Appellant’s house. To recover the same, PW19 a

sanitary worker had assisted and also given evidence. As correctly argued by

the Learned State Counsel he is an independent witness. It is important to

note that his evidence was not challenged by the defence.

As the prosecution had adduced strong recovery evidence, the contention

raised by the learned Counsel is not strong enough to challenge Section 27(1)

recovery evidence.

In the second ground of appeal, it was contended by the Learned Counsel

that the evidence led at the trial is infected with infirmities, and would

CA/HCC/0281/2023

11 | P a g e

therefore not be credible. Such evidence with infirmities (such as major

contradictions, inconsistencies or differences in timelines) being led would

adversely affect the legal value of such evidence. Accordingly, such evidence

would most likely be rejected by the judge or the jury, thus resulting in the

acquittal of the accused due to reasonable doubt.

On the other hand, minor discrepancies in a witness’s story would not

destroy a case. The overall testimony will be assessed in order to assess

whether the core story is in fact credible and truthful, by the Courts. If so, a

conviction would be allowed.

In State of Uttar Pradesh v. M. K. Anthony [AIR 1985 SC 48] the court held

that:

“While appreciating the evidence of a witness, the approach must be

whether the evidence of the witness read as a whole appears to have a

ring of truth. Once that impression is formed, it is undoubtedly necessary

for the court to scrutinise the evidence more particularly keeping in view

the deficiencies, draw-backs and infirmities pointed out in the evidence as

a whole and evaluate them to find out whether it is against the general

tenor of the evidence given by the witness and whether the earlier

evaluation of the evidence is shaken as to render it unworthy of belief.”

In Iswari Prasad v. Mohamed Isa 1963 AIR (SC) 1728 at 1734 His Lordship

held that;

“In considering the question as to whether evidence given by the witness

should be accepted or not, the court has, no doubt, to examine whether

the witness is an interested witness and to enquire whether the story

deposed to by him is probable and whether it has been shaken in cross-

examination. That is - whether there is a ring of truth surrounding his

testimony.”

CA/HCC/0281/2023

12 | P a g e

In the case of Wickremasuriya v.Dedoleena and others [1996] 2 SLR 95

Jayasuriya J held that;

“If the contradiction is not of that character the Court ought to accept the

evidence of witnesses whose Evidence is otherwise cogent having

regard to the Test of Probability and Improbability and having regard to

his demeanour and deportment manifested by witnesses. Trivial

contradictions which do not touch the core of a party’s case should not

be given much significance, especially when the probabilities factor

echoes in favour of the version narrated by an applicant”

In the case of Joy Devaraj vs The State of Kerala 2024 INSC 473 it was

held:

“The threshold for disbelieving a witness is not mere discrepancy or

inconsistency but material discrepancy and inconsistency, which

renders the account narrated by the witnesses so highly improbable

that the same may safely be discarded altogether from consideration.”

Although PW27 in his evidence said that the Appellant had confessed about

the murder after he was arrested, no confessionary portion of evidence had

gone into the proceedings. The recovery of vital productions which connect

the Appellant directly to the crime was led under Section 27(1) of the

Evidence Ordinance which is permissible under the law. It is important to

note no contradictions or omissions were highlighted in this case.

The learned Counsel further contended that why the initial investigation

conducted by the local police fail to detect the handbag of the deceased. Due

to the serious nature of this crime, further investigation was entrusted with

the Homicide Unit of the Criminal Investigation Department. The handbag

was recovered separately by the CID upon further statement of the Appellant.

CA/HCC/0281/2023

13 | P a g e

As correctly argued by the Learned State Counsel, there is nothing unusual

or suspicious in the separate recoveries made pursuant to separate

statements. As no infirmities have been noted in the evidence given by the

prosecution witnesses, I conclude that the second ground raised by the

Appellant has no merit.

In the third ground of appeal, the learned Counsel for the Appellant

contended that the items sent for DNA analysis were not recovered upon his

statement.

As stated earlier, there is no irregularity or ambiguity noted in the recovery

evidence led by the prosecution. The use of DNA evidence in the criminal

justice system has been regarded by scholars as “probably the greatest

forensic advancement since the advent of fingerprinting”.

In The Attorney General v. M. N. Naufer alias Potta Naufer and Others

[2007] 2 SLR 144 the court held that:

“An individual’s genetic constitution is unique in so much as there are no

two individuals who have the same DNA. By analysing DNA of an

individual, it is possible to say that the chances of finding another person

with matching DNA is less than one in a trillion. This is analogous to

hand finger printing techniques and that is why DNA finger printing has

received the degree of acceptability which is similar to hand

fingerprinting in courts the world over”.

DNA evidence has now been accepted by our courts as a science upon which

expert evidence could be led in terms of Section 45 of the Evidence

Ordinance.

Section 45 of the Evidence Ordinance states:

“When the Court has to form an opinion as to foreign law, or of science, or

art, or as to identity or genuineness of handwriting or finger impressions,

palm impressions or foot impressions, the opinions upon that point of

CA/HCC/0281/2023

14 | P a g e

persons especially skilled in such foreign law, science, or art, or in questions

as to identity or genuineness of handwriting or finger impressions, palm

impressions or foot impressions, are relevant.”

The manner in which such expert evidence should be considered by a trial

judge is discussed in several decided cases in our criminal justice system.

In Mark Antony Fernando v. AG CA/84/97 decided on 08/10/1998 the

court held that:

“…the judge has to decide (…) whether there was a very great

antecedent probability of the injury resulting in death as opposed to a

mere likelihood. That function cannot be delegated to the expert. The

judge is expected to decide this issue assisted by the evidence of the

expert but independently of the opinion expressed by the expert.”

Dr. Ruwan J. Illeperuma, an expert in DNA Technology elaborates in his

article titled “DNA, THE BIOLOGICAL TOOL FOR CRIME INVESTIGATION

IN SRI LANKA” as follows:

“Because each person’s DNA is different from that of every other

individual (except for identical twins) examining variations in genetic

material among human individuals, by DNA technology is the most

powerful method for accurate human identification. DNA can be

isolated from a number of biological samples, such as hair, saliva,

blood, bone, teeth etc. The technology currently being applied is so

sensitive that even a miniscule amount of bodily fluid or tissue can yield

accurate DNA information. Therefore, this technology has a wide

application in identifying perpetrators of crime and in confirming

familial relationships of humans. (…..). The level of accuracy achievable

guarantees absolutely no risk of convicting the wrong person and

thereby establishing the innocence of those wrongly convicted.”

CA/HCC/0281/2023

15 | P a g e

In the case of Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or

Corruption v. Indiketiya Hewage Kusumdasa Mahanama and Another

SC TAB 1A & 1B/2020 decided on 11 January 2023 it was observed in detail:

“Additionally, admission of evidence of novel sciences for the purposes

of identification is not a foreign experience for Sri Lankan Courts. For

instance, the leading of evidence as to identification through DNA typing

and fingerprints in the Sajeewa Alias Ukkuwa and Others V. The

Attorney General (Hokandara Case) (2004) 2 SLR 263 as early as 1999

made history as the first case to consider DNA evidence in Sri Lanka.

Thereafter, the use of DNA evidence as corroborative evidence in the

case of The Attorney-General V. Potta Naufer and Others (Ambepitiya

Murder Case) (2007) 2 SLR 144, with extensive elaboration of the

methodology and science supporting the use of DNA typing, are both

instances of leading expert evidence for the purposes of identification.

Given the technological advancement, especially with the use of

personal devices as smartphones and personal computers, the outlook

on technological evidence must be altered significantly, making room for

modern realities which could not have been contemplated by legislators

at the time of the enactment of certain legislation effecting such

evidence. It is evident that the evolution of technology has outpaced the

parallel development of law, and oft it has been demonstrated in cases

as the above, that practical necessity being demonstrated in cases,

leads to the opinions of courts preceding and influencing eventual

legislative amendments encompassing such opinions.

The identification of individuals, earlier being a selected few methods

has undeniably advanced during the current millennia. For instance, the

development of biometric technology for identification, including

methods as facial and retinal recognition, have drastically increased in

accuracy.

CA/HCC/0281/2023

16 | P a g e

Therefore, an expert in DNA analysis plays a vital role in criminal cases. As

in this case, their expert knowledge might help prosecuting authorities to

identify the person against whom criminal charges should be filed. Their

opinions are also very helpful to the court in properly adjudicating of the

case.

The previous and subsequent conduct of the Appellant also gives rise to a

reasonable suspicion about the Appellant. Now I shall consider whether the

previous and subsequent conduct of the Appellant are relevant to this case.

Section 8(1) and 8(2) of Evidence Ordinance are read as follows:

8 (1) Any fact is relevant which shows or constitute a motive or

preparation for any fact in issue or relevant fact.

8 (2) The conduct of any party, or of any agent to any party, to any suit

or proceedings in reference to such suit or proceedings or in reference

to any fact in issue therein or relevant thereto, and the conduct of any

person an offence against whom is the subject of any proceeding, is

relevant, if such conduct influences or is influenced by any fact in

issue or relevant fact, and whether it was previous or subsequent

therein.

According to PW2, the deceased had gone to Kilinochchi upon the request

made by the Appellant over the phone. The Appellant had admitted calling

the deceased. Further, the Appellant had given a missed call to PW1 on

13.04.2014 and pretended that he was an unknown person who had called

PW1. The defence had not cross examined PW1 and PW2.

As discussed under the appeal grounds, the prosecution had adduced strong

and incriminating circumstantial evidence against the Appellant. The

CA/HCC/0281/2023

17 | P a g e

Learned High Court Judge had very correctly analyzed all the evidence

presented by both parties and arrived at the conclusion that all the

circumstances are consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the

Appellant and totally inconsistent with his innocence.

Therefore, I conclude that the prosecution had proven the case against the

Appellant beyond reasonable doubt. Hence, I affirm the conviction and

sentence imposed on him by the Learned High Court Judge of Kilinochchi.

Therefore, this Appeal is dismissed.

The Registrar of this court is directed to send this judgment to the High Court

of Kilinochchi along with the original case record.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

R. P. Hettiarachchi, J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL