IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Case No. CA(PHC) 12/2014

H.C. Kandy Case No. 31/2012 (Writ)

In the matter of an application made under Article

138 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka read with Article 154P (4)

against the judgment dated 20.01.2014 made in

Central Provincial High Court Case No. Writ 31/2012

Weegaswatta Dissanayaka

Mudiyanselage Lokubanda

Dissanayaka,

Hellarawa,

Idampitiya,

Padiyapalalla.

Vs.

01. G.Weerasekera

Petitioner-Appellant

Co-operative Development,

Commissioner and Registrar,

Co-operative Development Department,

Central Province,

P.O. Box No.2,

Ehelepola Kumarihami Mawatha,

Bogambara,

Kandy.

Page lof9

Before: K.K. Wickremasinghe J.

Janak De Silva J.

Counsel:

02. Assistant Co-operative Development

Com missioner,

Office of the Assistant Co-operative

Development Commissioner,

Nuwaraeliya

03. S.A.W.Samaraweera,

Rampukpitiya,

Nawalapitiya,

04. Rikillagaskada Multipurposes

Co-operative Society,

Rikillagaskada.

Respondents-Respondents

Gamini Hettiarachchi for Petitioner-Appellant

Nuwan Pieris S.c. for pt and 2nd Respondents-Respondents

Written Submissions tendered on:

Petitioner-Appellant on 23.07.2018

1st and 2nd Respondents-Respondents on 26.06.2018

Argued on: 02.08.2018

Decided on: 05.10.2018

Page 2 of9

Janak De Silva J.

This is an appeal against the order of the learned High Court Judge of the Central Province holden

in Kandy dated 20.01.2014.

The Petitioner-Appellant (Appellant) was at all times material to this application employed as a

store keeper by the 4th Respondent-Respondent (4th Respondent). The 4th Respondent demanded

a sum of Rs. 1,269,902.48 from the Appellant for shortage of stocks from his custody which

demand was rejected by the Appellant.

The 4th Respondent then referred the dispute to the 2nd Respondent-Respondent (2nd

Respondent) who then referred it to the 3rd Respondent-Respondent (3rd Respondent) as

arbitrator. After an inquiry, the 3rd Respondent made his award by which the Appellant was held

liable to pay the 4th Respondent a sum of Rs. 442,686.51.

The Appellant then submitted an appeal to the pt Respondent-Respondent (pt Respondent)

against the award and deposited Rs.50/=. However, he failed to deposit 10% of the value of the

award as required by Rule 49(xii)(a) of the Rules made under section 61 of the Co-operative

Societies Law NO.5 of 1972 [Rule 49(xii)(a)]. The pt Respondent then called upon the Appellant

to deposit the required amount of Rs. 44,218.65 within 14 days which the Appellant failed to do.

The pt Respondent by letter dated 04.02.2012 (@o.6) informed the Appellant that his appeal was

rejected as he failed to deposit the required amount.

The Appellant then made an application to the High Court of the Central Province holden in Kandy

seeking a writ of certiorari to quash the said decision of the pt Respondent. The learned High

Court Judge dismissed the application by following the decision of the Supreme Court in

Somaratne v. Premachandra, Commissioner of Co-operative Societies and others [S.c. Appeal

58/80; S.C.M. 28.07.1981] and hence this appeal.

The Appellant contends that Rule 49(xii)(a) is ultra vires to the rule making power of the Minister

under section 61 of the Co-operative Societies Law No.5 of 1972 and as such @o.6 must be

quashed.

Page 3 of9

The learned counsel for the Appellant relied strongly on the Supreme Court decision in Sebastian

Fernando v. Katana Multi-Purpose Co-operative Society Ltd., and others [(1990) 1 SrLL.R. 342]

and submitted that the Supreme Court had "analyzed the legality of Rule 49(xii)(a) exhaustively

and held said rule is ultra vires". It is true that the Supreme Court did make a detailed analysis of

Rule 49(xii)(a). However, the Supreme Court did not declare it to be ultra vires.

In Sebastian Fernando's case (supra) Fernando J. stated (at page 349):

"Thus a serious question arises as to the vires of Rule 49 (Xll) (a) that the requirement of

an appeal deposit is not authorised by sections 58 (3), 61 (1) or 61(2) (y). However, as that

question was not placed before the Court of Appeal for consideration, and as the

Respondents were not heard in that Court (nor in this Court, though duly noticed) it is

only proper that it should be determined by that Court, after such amendment of the

petition as that Court may permit in its discretion, and after hearing the Respondents."

Kulatunga J. echoed similar sentiments and held (at page 360):

"For the above reasons, I am of the view that a serious question arises as to the vires of

Rule 49 (XII) (a). This question was not raised in the appellant's application to the Court

of Appeal but only in this Court; leave was allowed on that ground and the question was

argued without the respondents being heard. As such, it is only proper that a

determination on that ground should be made by the Court of Appeal after such

amendment of the petition as that Court may permit in its discretion."

Clearly, the Supreme Court left the vires of Rule 49(xii)(a) to be considered by the Court of Appeal.

My research revealed that when the matter was sent back to the Court of Appeal, the State had

given an undertaking to court that the Registrar of Co-operative Development notwithstanding

the insufficiency of fees will entertain the petition of appeal dated 21.03.1983. In view of this

undertaking the petitioner withdrew his application and hence the Court of Appeal did not make

a finding on the vires of Rule 49(xii)(a) as directed by the Supreme Court.

Page 4 of9

The learned State Counsel in response to the attack on the vires of Rule 49(xii)(a) submitted that

the Appellant has not sought a quashing of it in the High Court and as such it is not possible for

him to raise the vires of Rule 49(xii)(a) in these proceedings. In effect it was his submission that

Rule 49(xii)(a) was not open to collateral attack.

It is not clear whether it is a similar issue that troubled the minds of their Lordships in Sebastian

Fernando's case (supra) when Fernando J. (at page 350) and Kulatunga J. (at page 360) stated

that the question of vires of Rule 49(xii)(a) was not placed before the Court of Appeal and

therefore directed the Court of Appeal to determine the issue after such amendment to the

petition as the court may permit in its discretion.

Article 140 of the Constitution states that the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal is "Subject to

the provisions of the Constitution" and in issuing any of the writs referred to therein, it must be

"according to law". Similarly, Article 154P (4) of the Constitution which gives jurisdiction to the

Provincial High Court to issue writs mandates that it must be "according to law". The phrase

"according to law" has been interpreted to mean English common law. [Wijesekera v. Assistant

Government Agent, Matara (44 NLR 533 at 538), Abdul Thassim v. Edmund Rodrigo (Controller of

Textiles) (48 NLR 121); Nakkuda Ali v. Jayaratne (Controller of Textiles) (51 NLR 457 at 461);

Colombo Commercial Co. Ltd. v. Shanmugalingam et al (66 NLR 26, 32); Mendis, Fowzie and

others v. Goonewardena, G.P.A Silva ((1978-79) 2 Sri.L.R. 322 at 356, 363); M.K Mohideen v.I.S. W

Goonawardene ((1986) 2 CALR 487; Sirisena Cooray v. Tissa Dias Bandaranaike (1999) 1 Sri. L. R.

1 at 14-15)].

The general principle in English common law is that any defect that could be treated as

jurisdictional in direct proceedings is equally available in collateral proceedings. In Chief

Adjudication Officer and another v. Foster [(1993) A.C. 754] it was held that Social Security

Commissioners hearing appeals under the Social Security Act 1975 had jurisdiction to determine

any challenge to the vires of a provision in regulations made by the Secretary of State, on the

ground that it was beyond the scope of the enabling power, whenever this was necessary in order

to decide whether a decision under appeal was erroneous in point of law. In Boddington v. British

Transport Police [(1999) 2 A.C. 143] the House of Lords held that it was open to a defendant in

Page 5 of9

criminal proceedings to challenge subordinate legislation, or an administrative decision made

thereunder, where the prosecution was premised on its validity, unless there was a clear

legislative intent to the contrary. However, court may interpret a particular statute to preclude

or limit collateral attack [The Queen v. Davey and others (1899) 2 Q.B. 301, Regina. v. Wicks (1998)

A.C. 92].

That being the general principle in English common law, the question is whether it can be

accepted without any reservations as part of our law. In my view one fundamental issue which

stands in the way of such a course of action is the constitutional limitation on the jurisdiction of

the Provincial High Court. Article 154P (4) of the Constitution gives jurisdiction to the Provincial

High Court to issue, according to law, writs specified writs specified therein against any person

exercising within the Province, any power under (i) any law or (ii) statutes made by a Provincial

Council established for that Province, in respect of any matter set out in the Provincial Council

List.

In applying these constitutional provisions, it important to bear in mind the interpretation the

Supreme Court made to these provisions in Wijesuriya v. Wanigasinghe and others [(2011) 2

SrLL.R. 231 at 240] where Tilakawardena J. held:

"If, in terms of the arguments presented, it were to be held that the High Court of

Hambantota had sole jurisdiction to pronounce upon the Commissioner General's order,

then it necessarily follows that an identical order in another Province would rest solely

under the purview of that Province's High Court, and so on. Judicial disparity in such a

scenario is inevitable with the passage of time, resulting in disparate rulings upon

otherwise identical orders. If the goal of the judicial system is to provide justice, such

judicial disparity cannot be permitted and was clearly not the intention of the legislature.

The Commissioner General's Order though acting upon a matter occurring in a Province

(as it must, since all matters arise in some Province or another), is merely an exercise of

Power in relation to such Province Such "island-wide" powers are appropriately the

domain of the jurisdiction of the Appellant Courts with "island-wide" jurisdiction."

Page 6of9

Rule 49(xii)(a) was made under the Co-operative Societies Law NO.5 of 1972 by the relevant

Minister of the central government. He was exercising a power given under a law in the whole

country and not only within the Central Province. Hence it could not have been the subject matter

of a direct attack as to its vires in the Provincial High Court of the Central Province by way of

judicial review. There is a general rule in the construction of Statutes that what a Court or

person is prohibited from doing directly, it may not do indirectly or in a circuitous manner

[Bandaranaike v. Weeraratne and Others (1981) 1 SrLL.R. 10 at page 16]. Therefore, I am of the

view that the vires of Rule 49(xii)(a) is not open for collateral attack in proceedings before the

Provincial High Court. This finding is sufficient to reject the argument made by the learned

counsel for the Appellant on the vires of Rule 49(xii)(a).

However, I wish to refer to the previous decision of the Supreme Court in Somaratne v.

Premachandra, Commissioner of Co-operative Societies and others (supra) where Ismail J. (with

Wanasundera J. and Ratwatte J. agreeing) held:

"I am therefore of the view that Rule 49(xii)(a) is the rule that has been framed under

Section 61(2)(y) by the Minister and does not circumscribe the right of appeal granted

under section 58(3) of the Law as the rule making powers of the Minister entitles the

Minister in terms of the law to prescribe forms, fees to be paid and procedure to be

observed./I

But in Sebastian Fernando's case (supra) Fernando J. (at page 346) and Kulatunga J. (at page 356)

appears to consider the ruling in Somaratne's case (supra) as to the vires of Rule 49(xii)(a) as

obiter.

In addressing this observation, it is important to bear in mind the distinction between the ratio

decidendi and the obiter dicta of a judgement.

Page 7 of9

Rupert Cross in Precedents in the English Law (3 rd Ed., 1977) offers the following formulations for

the two terms:

"The ratio decidendi of a case is any rule of law expressly or impliedly treated by the judge

as a necessary step in reaching his conclusion, having regard to the line of reasoning

adopted by him, or a necessary part of his direction to the jury" (page 76)

"Obiter dictum is a proposition of law which does not form part of the ratio decidendi"

(page 79)

Thamotheram J. in Walker Sons and Co. (UK) Ltd. v. Gunatilake and others [(1978-79-80) 1 Sri. L.

R. 231 at 232] explicitly held that the ratio decidendi of a Superior Court is binding for all inferior

Courts:

"The ratio decidendi of cases decided by the Court becomes a rule for the future binding

all courts which the courts of last resort are not whether it be under the same system or

under a different system."

Rupert Cross in Precedents in the English Law (Oxford University Press, 1961 at p. 75) states that

in order to discover what the ratio decidendi of a particular case is one must have regard to the

facts of that case, the issues raised by the pleadings and arguments and subsequent cases that

have considered the case under review.

In Somaratne's case (supra) although the petition of appeal was not sent to the Registrar of Co-

operative Development, the appeal deposit was also not paid and it is in this context that the

Court had the benefit of a full argument on the vires of Rule 49(xii)(a) and held that it to be intra

vires.

Page 8 of9

Rupert Cross in Precedents in the English Law (3rd Ed., 1977) observes that a distinction can be

drawn between different kinds of dicta. This would be:

(a) dicta which are irrelevant to the case in which they occur (which he identifies as obiter dicta)

and

(b) dicta which relate to some collateral issue in the case although not forming part of the ratio

decidendi (which he identifies as judicial dicta). (page 85) (emphasis added)

This classification seems to suggest that judicial dicta have a higher level of authority than mere

obiter dicta. I am of the view that the dicta in Somaratne's case (supra) amounts to judicial dicta.

Accordingly, if there was a need for a determination on the vires of Rule 49(xii)(a), I would have

followed the judicial dicta in Somaratne's case (supra) and held it to be intra vires.

For the forgoing reasons, I see no reason to interfere with the order of the learned High Court

Judge of the Central Province holden in Kandy dated 20.01.2014.

The appeal is dismissed with costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

K.K. Wickremasinghe J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Page 9 of 9