IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Rohinton Limjiboy Nilgiriya,

No. 19, Union Place,

Colombo 2.

2nd Party-Respondent-Petitioner

CA CASE NO: CA (PHC) APN 11/2015

HC COLOMBO CASE NO: HCRA/118/2013

PRIMARY COURT FORT: 75136/66/2013

Vs.

Officer in Charge,

Police Station,

Slave Island.

Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent

Pathiranage Dona Ajantha

Malkanthi,

Bodhirajagama,

Ingiriya Waththa,

Ingiriya.

1st Party-Respondent-Respondent

Rajapaksha Appuhamilage Don

Surendra Wasantha Perera,

No. 674/5, Cinnamon Garden

Residencies, Ward Place,

Colombo 7.

Intervenient 1st Party-Petitioner-

Respondent

2

Before: K.K. Wickramasinghe, J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: M.U.M. Ali Sabry, P.C., with Rasika

Dissanayaka the 2nd Party-Respondent-

Petitioner.

Asela Rekawa with Amila Perera for the

Intervenient 1st Party-Petitioner-Respondent.

Decided on: 17.09.2019

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The 2nd Party-Respondent-Petitioner, namely R.L. Nilgiriya

(Petitioner), filed this revision application seeking to revise the

Judgment of the High Court dated 30.01.2015 whereby the

order of the Magistrates Court dated 03.06.2013 made in the

case filed under section 66 of the Primary Courts Procedure Act

was set aside and the learned Magistrate was directed to put the

Intervenient Party-Petitioner-Respondent, namely R.A.D.S.

Wasantha Perera (Intervenient Party) back in possession.

In the facts and circumstances of this case, that Judgment of

the High Court is flawless.

The Police have filed the first information in the Magistrates

Court under section 66(1)(a) of the Primary Courts Procedure

Act regarding this dispute relating to a building on 06.03.2013.

According to the Notice to Quit dated 02.03.2013 sent by the

Attorney-at-Law of the Petitioner to the Intervenient Party (found

at page 277 of the Record marked X), by 02.03.2013, admittedly,

3

the Intervenient Party was in possession of the premises in suit.

By that Notice to Quit the Petitioner has asked the Intervenient

Party to handover the peaceful possession of that premises

immediately.

That itself shows that the case of the Petitioner as presented in

the petition that, on 10.02.2013 the Intervenient Party vacated

the leased premises in suit, and thereafter on 02.03.2013, i.e.

two days after the expiration of the Lease Agreement the

Intervenient Party attempted to re-enter the premises is

incorrect. Simply stated, if the Intervenient Party had vacated

the premises on 10.02.2013, there was no necessity for the

Petitioner to send a Notice to Quit on 02.03.2013 asking the

Intervenient Party to handover the possession of the premises

forthwith.

The fact that, by 02.03.2013, the Intervenient Party was in

possession is made clear by the complaint of the Petitioner made

to the Police on 02.03.2013 (found at page 278 of X). In that

Police complaint the Petitioner has inter alia admitted that (a)

the keys of the premises in suit are with the Intervenient Party

and (b) the Intervenient Party has employed a watcher to protect

that premises and (c) the Petitioner never tried to enter into the

said premises; (d) nevertheless, for his protection, he (the

Petitioner) padlocked the common gate, which gives access both

to the premises in suit and his house (which abuts the premises

in suit).

It is common ground that the Petitioner was in possession of the

premises in suit on the date the information was filed by the

Police in Court.

4

From the aforementioned Quit Notice and the complaint made to

the Police, it is abundantly clear that the Intervenient Party has

been dispossessed by the Petitioner within 4 days immediately

before filing the first information in Court.

The Intervenient Party may be in unlawful possession by

refusing to handover possession of the building after the lapse of

the Lease Agreement and upon termination of the lease by

sending not one, but several Notices to Quit.

But in section 66 proceedings, what is considered is possession

and not ownership. Until the substantive rights of the parties

are decided by a Civil Court, in these proceedings, the

Magistrate is expected to make a provisional order to prevent

breach of the peace. However, it must be stressed that the

Magistrate cannot make any order which he thinks appropriate

to prevent breach of the peace. He shall make the appropriate

order in accordance with law. In the instant case, what the

learned Magistrate has done is, without making a specific order

in terms of section 68 of the Primary Courts Procedure Act, the

parties have been directed to maintain status quo until a Civil

Court decides the matter thereby indirectly confirming the

possession of the Petitioner, which is not correct.

Under section 68(1) of the Primary Courts Procedure Act, the

Court shall confirm the possession of the Party who was in

possession of the land on the date of the filing of the first

information in Court. That is the general rule. This is subject to

an exception as provided for in section 68(3). That is, if the

opposite Party can prove that he was forcibly dispossessed by

his opponent who is now in possession of the land within two

5

months immediately before the filing of the first information, he

shall be restored in possession.

In the facts and circumstances of this case, the learned

Magistrate should have made an order restoring the Intervenient

Party in possession in terms of section 68(3) of the Primary

Courts Procedure Act although he may be in unlawful

possession. That has not been done by the learned Magistrate

by taking irrelevant matters into consideration.

Acting in revision, whilst setting aside the order of the

Magistrates Court, the learned High Court Judge was correct to

have ordered the learned Magistrate to restore the Intervenient

Party in possession.

Application of the Petitioner is dismissed. No costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

K.K. Wickremasinghe, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal