1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for mandates in the nature of Writs of Certiorari and Prohibition under Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. CA (Writ) Application No: 403/2016

1. Palitha Kumara Sirimegha Bandara,

New Ellakkattu Road, Anuradhapura. 2. Jayalath Mudiyanselage Wimal Jayalath,

New Ellakkattu Road, Yakada Gettuwawatta, Anuradhapura. 3. Nanda Hettiarachchi,

No. 287/2, New Ellakkattu Road, Anuradhapura. 4. Bambarundage Don Rupasinghe,

No.24/293, New Ellakkattu Road, Anuradhapura. 5. Bambarundage Don Wijesinghe,

No.293/24, New Ellakkattu Road, Anuradhapura. 6. Gunasinghe Arachchilage Dharmatissa,

Tisawewakumbura, Ellakkattu Road, Anuradhapura. PETITIONERS

Vs. 1. Hon. Gayantha Karunathilake,

Hon. Minister of Lands. 2. Dr. W.H. Karunaratne,

Secretary, Ministry of Lands.

2

1st and 2nd Respondents at Mihikatha Madura, No. 1200/6, Rajamalwatta Road, Sri Jayawardhanapura, Kotte. 3. Hon. P. Harrison,

Hon. Minister of Irrigation & Agriculture.

4. K.D.S. Ruwanchandra,

Secretary, Ministry of Irrigation & Agriculture, 3rd and 4th Respondents at 80/5, Govijana Mandiraya, Rajamalwatta Road, Battaramulla. 5. Hon. Rauff Hakeem,

Hon. Minister of Higher Education. 6. Mr. M.M.P.K. Mayadunne,

Secretary, Ministry of Higher Education. 5th and 6th Respondents at, No. 18, Ward Place, Colombo 7.

7. Dr. Jagath Munasinghe,

Director General, National Physical Planning Department, 5th Floor, Sethsiripaya, Battaramulla. 8. The Bhiksu University of Sri Lanka.

9. Ven Prof. Kanattegoda Saddarathana Thero,

Acting Vice Chanceller, The Bhiksu University of Sri Lanka. 8th and 9th Respodents at, Bhiksu University Mawatha, Puttalam Road, Anuradhapura.

3

10. Divisional Secretary,

Divisional Secretariat, Nuwaragam Palatha-Central, Pandulagama, Anuradhapura. 11. The Commissioner General,

Department of Agrarian Development, No. 42, Sir Marcus Fernando Mawatha, P.O. Box 537, Colombo 7. 12. The Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12. RESPONDENTS

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J Arjuna Obeyesekere, J Counsel: Ms. Raveendra Sumathipala for the Petitioners Ms. Chaya Sri Nammuni, Senior State Counsel for the Respondents Argued on: 11th September 2020 Written Tendered on behalf of the Petitioners on 1st October 2019 Submissions: Tendered on behalf of the Respondents on 15th September 2020 Decided on: 16th November 2020

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J

The Petitioners are residents of the village of Isurumuniya in Nuwaragam Palaatha in

the North Central Province. They are farmers by profession, and claim that they

cultivate paddy lands which are adjacent to a land in extent of approximately 13 acres

that has been acquired for the establishment of residential facilities for the 8th

Respondent, the Bhiksu University of Sri Lanka.

4

The Petitioners admit that the lands which are the subject matter of this application

were acquired in 1992 under the proposed Anuradhapura Sacred City Development

Plan. Although the Petitioners state that their paddy lands too were acquired in 2000,

the Petitioners have not adduced any proof to support the position that the said lands

belonged to them. The Respondents claim that compensation has been paid for all

lands that were acquired. The Petitioners state that even though their lands were

acquired, they have been in uninterrupted possession of the lands and continue to

cultivate paddy on the said lands. In 2006, a decision had been taken to divest those

lands that were not required.

The Petitioners claim that a feasibility study was undertaken in 2014 by the District

Land Use Planning Office in Anuradhapura. The report prepared pursuant to the said

study had recommended that several lands including the land that is the subject

matter of this application be maintained as paddy lands. The Respondents have

however disputed the authenticity of this report, and have claimed that this is a

document prepared at the instance of Indrani Atapattu, who had been the tenant

cultivator of the land in issue.

In 2016, possession of Lot No. 236 in Plan No. FVP 1400 containing an extent of 4.8044

Hectares (11A 2R 5P) had been handed over to the 8th Respondent for the purpose of

expanding the said University and constructing inter alia a four storey hostel.1 The 8th

Respondent has submitted that the said land comprises of high lands as well as paddy

lands, and that the said land has not been used for water retention, as claimed by the

Petitioners. It is admitted that a four storey building to be used as residential facilities

for the 8th Respondent has already been constructed on part of the land.

As noted earlier, the Petitioners state that their paddy lands are situated adjacent to

the above land that has been handed over to the 8th Respondent. According to the

Petitioners, during the rainy season, their paddy lands as well as the surrounding areas

1 Vide letters dated 2nd March 2016 and 29th June 2016 marked 9R1 and 9R2, respectively, issued by the 10th Respondent, Divisional Secretary, Nuwaragam Palatha Central.

5

where their paddy lands are situated are prone to flooding. The Petitioners state

further that this is in addition to the over flowing of the Malwatu Oya situated close by

during the rainy period. The Petitioners state that the land that has now been handed

over to the 8th Respondent acts as a buffer zone during such periods, and as the said

land absorbs the extra rain water, the effect on their paddy lands as a result of the

flooding is minimised.

The complaint of the Petitioners is that if the development and filling of the said land

by the 8th Respondent is permitted, their paddy lands will be inundated with water

during the rainy season and that it would be difficult to cultivate their lands thereafter.

It is in these circumstances that the Petitioners have filed this application seeking the

following relief:

(a) A Writ of Certiorari to quash the decision of the 5th, 6th, 8th and 9th Respondents

to fill the said land with earth;

(b) A Writ of Prohibition preventing the 5th, 6th, 8th and 9th Respondents from

developing the said land.

In Council of Civil Service Unions vs Minister for the Civil Service,2 Lord Diplock

identified 'illegality', 'irrationality' and 'procedural impropriety' as the three grounds

upon which administrative action is subject to control by judicial review. The

Petitioners have not complained of any specific illegality on the part of the

Respondents in carrying out the filling of the said land or that the Respondents have

not followed due procedure. As observed earlier, their complaint is that filling of the

said land would affect their cultivation rights, and their right to a livelihood. I must

state that while development activity must take place, it must be done in accordance

with the law, and in a manner that addresses to the maximum extent possible, the

concerns of those who may be affected by such development.

2 1985 AC 374.

6

Section 33(1) of the Agrarian Development Act No. 46 of 2000, as amended provides

that, No person shall fill any extent of paddy land or remove any soil from any extent

of paddy land or erect any structure on any extent of paddy land except with the

written permission of the Commissioner-General. Thus, it is noted that there is no

absolute prohibition on the filling of paddy lands, and that filling can take place with

the prior approval of the Commissioner General of Agrarian Development, the 11th

Respondent in this application.

The 8th Respondent admits that development of part of the said land by filling of earth

has taken place, but states that such development took place only after approval for

the said filling was obtained. In his affidavit filed before this Court, the 11th

Respondent has stated that the 9th Respondent, the Vice Chancellor of the 8th

Respondent University had made an application to the Department of Agrarian

Development to fill 135P of the said land. He states further that by letter dated 4th

August 2016 marked 11R1, approval was granted to fill and develop an extent of

135P of land for the purpose of residential halls for the 8th Respondent, subject to the

conditions specified therein, including the following:

1 wjir fokq ,enQ nsus m%udKh by; ioyka ldraHh ioyd mukla fhdod.; hq;=h3 11 bvus fldgfia lrkq ,nk ish,q ixjraOk lghq;= f.djsck ixjraOk osia;sla ;dlaIK ks,Odrsf.a wOslaIKh yd Wmfoia u; isoq l< hq;=h 111 jsIh.; bvfus fyda bvug udhsusj fyda hus jdrs moaO;shla mj;S kus f.djsck ixjraOk osia;sla ;dlaIKsl ks,Odrsf.a Wmfoia m%ldrj ta ioyd wjYHh rlaIs;h ;enSu jdrs udra. fomdra;fuSka;=j hgf;a md,kh jk jdrs we,j,a j,g lsisoq ydkshla fkdlsrSu l< hq;= w;r tlS rlaIs;h ;=, lsisoq boslsrSula isoq fkdl< hq;=h 1V wjir fokq ,nk ldraHh bgq lsrSfuSoS hdfha wfkl=;a l+Tqrej, c,dmjdyk moaO;shg fyda l+Tqrej,g c,h imhk jdrsudra. j,g ndOdjla fkdjsh hq;= w;r jraId c,h nei hdug we;s niakd we,j,a kshus; mrSos c,h nei hk f,ig yd wOsl jraId wjia:d j,oS ndOdjlska f;drj c,h tla reiajSulska f;drjo c,h nei hk mrsos kv;a;= lsrSus yd hdj;ald,Sk l, hq;= w;r mrsirhg fyda hdfha wfkla l+Tqrej,g fyda c, udra. j,g

ydks jk mrsos ixjraOk lghq;= boslsrSu wmojH neyer lsrSu fkdl< hq;=h

3 Approval has been granted only for the construction of residential facilities.

7

It is therefore clear that the 11th Respondent has laid down the above stringent

conditions in order to ensure that the filling of the said extent of 135P of land will not

obstruct the free flow of water as well as ensure that there is no water retention or

flooding as a result of the said development.

I must observe at this stage that the Petitioners have not complained that:

a) The approval granted by 1R11 is irregular;

b) The 11th Respondent has failed to take into consideration relevant factors when

granting the said approval;

c) The 8th Respondent has violated any of the above conditions specified in 1R11.

For that matter, I must observe that the Petitioners have not even filed a counter

affidavit contradicting the factual matters referred to in any of the affidavits filed by

the Respondents.4

The 8th Respondent states that even though they obtained approval to fill 135P of the

land, they have in fact developed only 84P out of that extent. As the Petitioners have

disputed this claim, the Survey Department at the request of the Respondents had

undertaken a survey of the said land which had revealed that only 88.3P out of the

extent for which approval has been granted has been developed vide letter dated

27th March 2018 issued by the Department of Agrarian Development marked 11R13.

Thus, the allegation of the Petitioners that the 8th Respondent has violated the

approval granted to it is unfounded.

In these circumstances, I am satisfied that the 8th Respondent has obtained approval

for the filling of 135P of land in terms of the law, and that there is no merit in the

application of the Petitioners for a Writ of Certiorari to quash the said decision.

4 Vide journal entry of 8th October 2019, where this Court has been informed that a Counter Affidavit will not be filed.

8

That brings me to the Writ of Prohibition sought by the Petitioners to prevent the 8th

and 9th Respondents from carrying out any further filling of the land. Such an

application is premature in view of the position of the 8th and 11th Respondents that

approval has only been sought and granted to fill 135P. In this regard too, I must state

that as a paddy land can be filled with the approval of the Commissioner General of

Agrarian Development, and in the absence of any material before this Court that the

Commissioner General of Agrarian Development would be acting illegally by granting

such approval, this Court cannot grant a Writ of Prohibition. However, I must say that

it would be open for any person aggrieved by any future decision to grant approval, to

seek legal redress from a court of competent jurisdiction at that stage.

Having said that, the 8th Respondent has made it clear that it intends to develop the

entirety of the 13 acres of land handed over to it. However, in view of the concerns

expressed by the Petitioners, the Respondents have engaged with the Petitioners after

the filing of this application to ensure that the concerns of the Petitioners are

addressed. I shall now consider the outcome of such engagement.

An inspection of the said land had taken place on 18th July 2017 with the participation

of the Petitioners. The following observations made by the 11th Respondent in his

letter dated 8th January 2018 marked 11R12 are relevant to any future development

of the balance areas of the said land:

VI. c, .e,Su ;;a;ajhkaysos idudfkHhka fuu l+Tqre bvu iusmQraKfhkau c,fhka hgjk

w;r jsYd, c, m%udKhla l=Uqr yryd .,d hhs. VII. oekg bvu jgd wXs 06la muK Wiska hq;=j boslr we;s ;dmamh fya;=fjka c, .e,Su

;;a;ajhkaysos nei hk c, l|g ndOdjla isoqjk nj;a, tu.ska wjg l=Uqre bvus j, tkus by, l=Uqre wlalr 50-75 l muK fj,a myq j;=r .,d nei hdug ;snQ tlu we< udrA.h (l=Kq we<) yriajS we;s nj;a ksrSlaIKh fjS. (PdhdrEm weuqKqu 5 f,i i<l=Kq lr bosrsm;a lrus.) tu ;;a;ajhg ms<shula jYfhka c,h .,d hdug yels jk mrsos ;dmamh my, fldgi ljq,q (Openings) iys;j ilia lr we;;a tu ljq,q (Openings) nei hk c,

l|g m%udKj;a fkdjk nj. VIII. c, .e,Su ;;a;ajhka ysos wjg l+Tqre bvu iusmQraKfhkau c,fhka hg jSfus ;;a;ajhla idudkHfhka oelsh yels w;r l+Tqre bvu jgd ne| we;s fuu ;dmamh

9

fya;=fjka c,h .,d hdug ndOd we;sjS wjg ish,qu bvu c,fhka hgjSfus wjOdkfuS jraOkhla isoqjSh yelsh. IX. wlalr 10 la jQ ;sidjej l+Tqr kus l+Tqre bvu iusmQraK jYfhkau Y%S ,xld yslaIq jsYaj jsoHd,fha boslsrSus i|yd fhdod .ekSug ie,iqus lr we;s w;r hus lsis fyhlska l+Tqre bvu iusmQraK jYfhka u f.dv l< fyd;a wjg l+Tqre bvus muKla fkdj wjg fkajdisl bvus fukau wkqrdOmqr k.rh o c,fhka hgjSfus wjOdkula mj;s.

X. c,h nei fkdhdu fya;=fjka wjg l+Tqre bvusj, wkjYH mrsos c,h r|d mej;Sfus ;;a;ajhla we;sjsh yelsh.

It is an admitted fact that a five foot high wall had been constructed around the entire

13 acre land that has been handed over to the 8th Respondent. In its letter dated 27th

March 2018 marked 11R13, the Department of Agrarian Development has reiterated

its concern that the said wall may obstruct the free flow of water, and had therefore

recommended that a grill fence be erected instead. The Department of Agrarian

Development had also recommended in 11R13 that the recommendation of the

Irrigation Department and the Central Environmental Authority be obtained for any

future development of the balance part of the land.

The National Physical Planning Department had inspected the said land on 19th

January 2018. By its report dated 15th February 2018 marked 9R8, it too had

recommended the erection of a grill fence if it is not possible to expand the openings

presently provided for in the said wall for the flow of water. The National Physical

Planning Department had also recommended that all future construction be carried

out on stilts without filling the land, thereby reducing the risk of flooding.

At the request of the 9th Respondent, Officers of the Irrigation Department too had

inspected this land on 23rd March 2018. By his report dated 25th March 2018 marked

9R9, the Director of Irrigation had made the following recommendations:

i. jdka c,h iy fj,a myq c,h .,d neiSug we;S iajdNdjsl we, udra.h ndOl bj;a

fldg wjYH bvlv iys;j ixjraOkh lsrSug fhdackd lrkafkuq. tysoS hdno udra.h yryd oekg oud we;s fndalal= jsjr j, m%udKho m%udKj;a fkdjk nejska udra.h

10

yryd c,h .,d neiaijSug m%udKj;a bvlv iys; kj ksraus;hla boslsrSugo fhdackd lrkafkuq. ii. by; lS iajdNdjsl we, udra.fha fldgila fkajdisld.dr bvu ;=,skao .uka lrk

w;r, tu m%foaYhg wod, wdrlaIs; ;dmamfha oekg fhdod we;s ljq,q j, bv lv

m%udKj;a fkdjk nj ksrSlaIKh jQ nejska, tu wdrlaIs; ;dmamfha ljq,q m%udKh jevs lr kej; boslsrSula l<yels kus .xj;=r wjodku wvqlsrSu ;j;a idra:lj isoqlr.; yels njo fhdackd lrkafkuq.

By his letter dated 10th April 2018 marked 9R10, the 9th Respondent has agreed to

implement the recommendations in 9R9 by expanding the openings kept in the

perimeter wall, in addition to the construction of a 5m wide canal to carry the water

from the North to the South of the said land, and a further 5m wide canal alongside

Lot Nos. 170, 182 and 242 of the Plan marked 9R10a, as depicted in the said Plan.

As the 8th Respondent was keen to proceed with further development of the said land,

a meeting had been held on 21st June 2018 with the participation of the Officials of the

Department of Irrigation, Department of Agrarian Development and the National

Physical Planning Department. Pursuant to the said meeting, the Director of Irrigation,

Anuradhapura by letter dated 12th September 2018, marked 9R16 had inter alia

recommended that canals situated within the land be cleared of all obstructions in

order to reduce the risk of flooding.

The cumulative effect of the above material is twofold.

The first is that, whether any future development takes place or not, the 8th

Respondent must put in place the safeguards that it has undertaken in 9R10. I

accordingly direct the 8th Respondent to implement within six months of today, items

1, 2 and 3 of the letter marked 9R10. In addition, the 11th Respondent shall carry out

periodic inspections of the land to ensure compliance by the 8th Respondent with the

conditions set out in 11R1.

The second is that due regard must be paid to the observations and views of the

Department of Irrigation and the National Physical Planning Department. Therefore, if

11

an application is made by the 8th Respondent to develop the balance area of land

handed over to the 8th Respondent (i.e. excluding the 135P of land for which approval

has already been granted), the Commissioner General of Agrarian Development shall

call for the views of the Department of Irrigation, the National Physical Planning

Department and the Central Environmental Authority, prior to arriving at a decision in

terms of Section 33(1) of the Agrarian Development Act.

Subject to the above, this application is dismissed. I make no order with regard to

costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal Mahinda Samayawardhena, J I agree

Judge of the Court of Appeal