IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

01. Mohommad Saheed Hajjiar Sitti

Raleena,

02- Mohammad Ahrlul CR.rlt='r Sitti

Nurul Kulub,

03. Mohommad Abdul Cader

Mohommad Ismath Basir,

all of No.4, Rasheek Fareed Avenue, Thotawatta, Panadura.

PETITIONERS

Provincial High Court of Western Province

Holden in Kalutara bearing case numbers

High Court Kalutara No: CERTI 30/07 and WP /HCCA/KAL/NO:

Certi/03/2007

Court of Appeal PHC Appeal Case No: 178/2008

Vs.

-.. ~. \ .. '

01. Minister of Lands,

Ministry of Lands,

Colombo. -

02. Divisional Secretary,

Divisional Secretariat,

Beruwala.

03.A.Y.S.D. Gunarathne,

No: -12, Asoka Place;~

1

,

I

1 I

t 1 I I 1 1

Katubedda,

Moratuwa.

04. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

Lokukankanamge Ramani

Priyanthi Peiris,

No. 20, Gunathilake Mawatha,

Atambagoda, Panadura.

ADDED RESPONDENT

AND NOW BET~EEN

In the matter of an appeal in terms

of Article 154(P)(6) of the

Constitution read with the Court of

Appeal (Procedure for Appeals from

..... ~ ~ -the High Courts established by

Article 154(P) of the Constitution)

Rules 1988 in respect of the order

dated 02.12.2008 made by the

Provindal High Court. of the

Western Province Holden in

Kalutara In case n urn bers High

Court Kalutara No:CERTI 30/07

and WP/HCCA/KAL/No:

Certi/03/200T.

2

,

1 I A.Y.S.D. Gunarathne,

No. 12, Asoka Place,

IKatubedda, Maratuwa.

3 RD TESPONDENT - APPELLANT

I Vs. ! I01. Mohommad Saheed Hajjiar Sitti I Raleena, ! , ! II

02. Mohommad Abdul Cader Sitti

Nurul Kulub, I! I I II 03. Mohommad Abdul Cader -.~. -'.

I

,Mohommad Ismath Basir, I

all of No.4, Rasheek Fareed I Avenue, I ! I, Thotawatta, Panadura. I ! I

......... ' I.. PETITIONER - RESPONDENTS l

I

04. Minister of Lands,

iIMinistry of Lands, fIColombo. I

~ .. -~. ,", 05. Divisional Secretary, tDivisional Secretariat, ItBeruwala. Ja06.Hon. Attorney General, I,iAttorney G~neral's D~p'artment, (

Colombo 12. r

RESPONDENT - RESPONDENTS t

3

!,

Before

Lokukankanamge Ramani

Priyanthi Peiris,

No. 20, Gunathilake Mawatha,

Atambagoda, Panadura.

ADDED RESPONDENT -RESPONDENT

: W.M.M. Malani Gunaratne, J

: P.R. Walgama, J

Counsel : Riad Ameen with by Indunil Bandara for a rd

Responder - Appellant.

: A. Hashim for the Added - Respondent.

--~ .. : A.L.M. Hidayathulla with S. Wijerathne

Argued on

Decided on

N. Jayasihgha for the 1st, 2 nd & ard Petitioner -Respondent.

: 12.11.2015

: 13.06.2016

CASE -NO- CA-(PHC)- 178/2008- ORDER- 13.06.2016 P.R. Walgama, J

The instant appeal lies sequel to the order made by

the Learned High Court Judge dated 02.12.2008, In the

case bearing No. CERTI- 30/07 in the High Court holden

at Kalutara.

Nevertheless the instant order concerns the application

made by the 3rd Respondent - Appellant as' . to the

4

jurisdiction of the Provincial High Court to deal with

the matters relating to the State Lands.

Before embarking on the above thresh hold Issue, it IS

salient to note the relevant facts which stemmed from

application by the Petitioner- Respondents, as to the

Issuance of a writ of Certiorari and Mandamus against

the 2nd Respondent accordingly.

The Petitioner - Respondents sought relief from the High

Court of KALUTARA for a mandate, in the nature of a

writ of Certiorari to quashed . the oTder of,.,-the 2nd

Respondent awarding compensation to the 3rd Respondent-

Appellant and six others.

It IS admitted by the Petitioner - Respondents that the

disputed land IS a State Land acquired by the Sate by

virtue of the Extraordinary Gazette, No. 776/18, dated

23.07.1993 which has been marked as PI.

Further it IS alleged by the Petitioner- Respondents that

by document marked P2 indicates the amount to be

paid to the 3rd Respondent - Appellant, but had :failed to

award any compensation to the Petitioner - Respondents

who are the owners of the lands deemed have acquired

by the State.

Although the Petitioner- Respondents had written:- to the

2nd Respondent as to title to the land which was

acquired and their entitlement to receIve compensation,

5

II

II

!III

; iIi :

I ; 1 . ,

~

~

1 1 I I

~ 1 1 ,

l J

1. ! I i j I i i

nevertheless the 2nd Respondent has rejected the said

request by his letter marked P2.

It IS the categorical position of the Petitioner that the

land described (without a specific extent) in the schedule

to the petition belongs to them, and the 3rd Respondent

- Appellant has no title to the suit land.

In the above setting the Petitioner - Respondents urged

from the High Court for a writ of Certiorari to quashed

the decision to award

Respondent- Appellant and

Mandamus to compel the

compensation

6 others, and

2nd Respondent,

to the 3rd

for writ of

to pay the

entire compensation to the Petitioner-~esponcJ~l1ts, which

to be has been already decided

Respondent - Appellant and 6 others.

paid to the 3rd

To refute the above, the 3rd Respondent- Appellant had

asserted the following;

That by the document marked PI, the 2nd Respondent

has informed the 3rd Respondent - Appellant in terms of

Section 38(b) that the subject will be acquired by the

State. Further In pursuant to the above notification by

gazette notification No. 1156/15" dated 31.10:2000 has

given notice to all parties to have a right to the land

In Issue to make their claim. Acrnrnino-lv thf> :~rd --.... '0 v

Respondent - Appellant had made her claim, and the

2nd Respondent acting under in terms of Section 17 of

the Land Acquisition Act, had awarded compensation to the

Appellant.

6

It contended by the 3 rd Respondent - Appellant that the

Petitioner- Respondents 1S not entitle to question the

compensation award as they have not acted in terms of

Section 7 and 9 of the said Act. In addition to the

above, the Petitioner - Respondents had moved for the

reliefs as stated above after a lapse of 14 years from

the date of the publication of the acquisition of the

land 1n 1ssue. The 3 rd Respondent - Appellant has

specifically stated 1n the averment 17 the devolution of

title and asserted that she 1S entitled to the

compensation that was awarded to her.

The Learned High Court Judge has adverted to the fact

the grievance placed by the Petitioner, that the 2nd

Respondent's failure to gIVe a hearing to the Petitioners

before rejecting their application 1n limine. Further he

was of the V1ew that the Petitioners had made the

application with an inordinate delay.

The Learned High Court Judge has also considered the

fact that a decision made by the 2nd Respondent 1n

terms of Section 17 cannot be challenged as it 1S a

final determination recognised by the said statue.

Further it was the opInIOn of the Judge as per

documents marked

entitled to some

PI to P7

land but

that the Petitioners

was confused as to

are

the

identity of the land 1n 1ssue and was of the V1ew that

the 2nd Respondent should hold an inquiry in terms of

Section 9 of the said Act, but it was observed by the

7

I

F

!

!!I,\

Learned High Court Judge, that at the instant of an

order of Court the 2nd Respondent could reopen the

claim of the Petitioner.

Besides the Learned High Court judge 1 1 1 , willI Ha::s UtCLiL

the document marked V3-1 that he 1S prepared to . . to the application of the Petitioner. Hence 1nqu1re 1n 1n

the said back drop the Learned High

of the V1ew that it 1S proper to

Court Judge was

1ssue a writ of

Mandamus on the 2nd Respondent only to inquire in to

the alleged rights of the petitioners who are claiming

compensation, in leave of the acquisition of their. land by

the State. Therefore it 1S abundantly clear that the

Learned High Court Judge has granted the said relief

purely on equitable grounds.

Being aggrieved by the said order of thp l,PRJ'"nen Hie;h

Court Judge the 3rd Respondent - Appellant appeal to

this Court to have the said order set aside or vacate.

It is intensely relevant to note that the High Court of

Province was vested with the jurisdiction as explicitly

stated 1n Article 154(p) of the Constitution thus;.'

Article 154(p)(4)(b) deals with the matter in hand;

4. every such High Court shall have jurisdiction to

issue, according to law,

a. orders 1n the nature of habeas corpus, 1n

respect of persons illegally retained

AND

within the nrovtn ce ..

8

b. order 1n the nature of writs of Certiorari,

prohibition, procedendo, mandamus, and quo warranto

against any person exerc1s1ng, within the prOV1nce any

power under-

(1) any law:

(2) any statutes made by the Provincial Council

established for that Province,

In respect of any matter set 1n the Provincial Council

List.

The said Provincial Council List 1S embodied In the

Ninth Schedule and deal with the subject LAND thus;

LAND-land that IS to say, rights iIi and -aver land,

land tenure, transfer, and alienation of land, land use,

land settlement and land improvement, to the extent set

out in Appendix 11.

Appendix ii deals with the matters relating teh land and

land settlement;

"State land shall continue to vest 1n the Republic and

may be disposed of in accordance with Article 33 (d)

and written law governing the matter"

Subject as aforesaid, land shall be a Provincial Council

Subject, subject to the following special provisions:-

1:1 State land required for the purposes of the

Government 1n a prov1nce , 1n respect of a _f,eserved or

9

I I I IIiI

f !(

~,tli! t

!f f,f

~tI

J,!

I!

1 1

I I I

concurrent subject may be utilized by the Government

1n accordance with the laws govern1ng the matter. The

Government shall consult the relevant Provincial Council

with regard to the utilisation of such land 1n respect

of such subject,

1:2 Government shall make available to every Provincial

Council State Land within the province required by such

Council for a Provincial Council subject. The Provincial

Council shall administer, control and utilise such State

Land, 1n accordance with the laws and statues

governing the matter.

1:3 Alienation or disposition of the State Land within a

Province to any citizen or to any organisation shall be

by President, on the advice of the relevant Provincial

Council, 1n accordance with the laws gov~rru.ng the

matter.

In the above context and the matters set out 1n the

afore said Articles it 1S abundantly clear that the

payment of compensation for lands acquired under the

Land Acquisition Act 1S not a matter set out 1n the

Provincial Council list.

The above exposition of the law 1n respect of the

above matter was recognised In the cases of

SOLIMUTTHU RASU .VS. SUPRINTENDENT OF' "STAFFORD

ESTATE (Sc Appeal No. 21/13) and MADDUMA BANDA

.VS. ASSISTENT COMMISSIONER AGRARIAN SERVICES

AND ANOTHER(2003) 2 SLR 80

10

I

I

I I

I

t

t

t

r;

i

~

ft

~

I

~\

~

The Counsel for the 3RD Respondent - Appellant has

adverted Court to another land mark judgment of

Fernando .J . . V1S a V1S

Weregama vs. Eksath Lanka Kamkaru Samithiya and

others (1994) 1 SLR 293 has opined thus;

"as to the intention of Parliament 1n adopting the

Thirteenth Amendment, this court cannot attribute an

intention except that which appears from the words

from the words used sued by Parliament. I find nothing

suggesting a general in ten tion of devolving power to the

Provinces; insofar as the three Lists are concerned, only

what was specifically mentioned was devolved -and "all , - -subjects and functions not specified in List i or ii were

reserved - thus contradicting any such general intention

There was nothing more than a re arrangement of

the jurisdiction of the judiciary" If powers relating to

Recovery, dispossession of State Lands; encroachment or

alienation of State Lands are not 1n the Provincial

Council List, matters relating to them cannot be gone

into by a High Court of the Province.

A key passage from the afore mentioned judgment of

Solimuttu Rasu .vs Superintendent of Stafered Estate 1S

reproduced herein below for the sake of conven1ence

and brevity

"According, I hold that the Court of Appe?l. erred in

holding that the Provincial High Court had had

jurisdiction issue a issue a writ of Certiorari, 1n respect

11

of a quit notice issued under the State Lands (Recovery

of Possession Act). The order made by the Court of

Appeal dated 08.08.2012 IS set aside and the order of

the Learned High Court Judge dated 25.10.2000 IS

affirmed."

When the facts and the law reviewed In the said back

drop I am of the view that the Provincial High Court

stands denuded of jurisdiction to Issue a Mandate In

the nature of a writ of Certiorari and a Mandamus

against any decision of a State officerwher . a State

land is involved.

Hence I set aside the impugned order of the Learned High

Court Judge and allow the appeal.

W.M.M. Malani Gunaratne, J

I agree,

JUnGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JUnGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

12

fIi 1t