==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA(PHC)0065/2017

Page 1 of 13

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

Upali Mahalekam, No. 44/B, Jasmine Watte, Peradeniya.

Petitioner Vs.

1. Viraj Perera,

Provincial Commissioner of Housing, Provincial Department of Housing of the Central Province, No. 109, Yatinuwara Weediya, Kandy. 2. M.M. Nazar,

No. 157, Peradeniya, Peradeniya. 3. Malani Dandeniya,

No. 27, Daulagala Road, Peradeniya.

Respondents AND NOW BETWEEN

M.M. Nazar, No. 157, Peradeniya, Peradeniya.

2nd Respondent-Appellant

Vs

Court of Appeal Case No: CA(PHC)0065/2017 PHC KANDY Case No: WRIT 02/2014

CA(PHC)0065/2017

Page 2 of 13

Upali Mahalekam, No. 44/B, Jasmine Watte, Peradeniya.(now deceased)

(Deceased)Petitioner-Respondent 1A. Chandramalee Muthuhewa Arachchi Mahalekam, 2A. Deshan Mahendra Mahalekam, 3A. Nadeesha Dushyanthi Mahalekam, All of: No. 44/B, Jasmine Watte, Peradeniya 1A, 2A, AND 3A Substituted Petitioners-Respondents Viraj Perera, Provincial Commissioner of Housing, Provincial Department of Housing of the Central Province, No. 109, Yatinuwara Weediya, Kandy.

1st Respondent- Respondent

Malani Dandeniya, No. 27, Daulagala Road, Peradeniya.

3rd Respondent- Respondent Before : D. THOTAWATTA, J. K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J. Counsel : Ikram Mohammed, PC with R.

CA(PHC)0065/2017

Page 3 of 13

Hettiarachchi and Harish Balakrishnan for the 2nd Respondent-Appellant.

Panchali Witharana, SC for the 1st Respondent-Respondent. Lal Wijenayake with P.D.A.J. Liyanage for the 1A, 2A and 3A Substituted-Petitioners-Respondents. 3rd Respondent-Respondent is absent and unrepresented. Written Submissions of the 2nd Respondent -Appellant tendered on : 22.02.2022 and 25.09.2025 Written Submissions of the Petitioner -Respondent tendered on : 12.12.2022 Written Submissions of the 1st Respondent-Respondent tendered on : 16.08.2022 Decided on : 11.02.2026 K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Instant appeal which was preferred to this Court by the 2nd Respondent-

Appellant (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the Appellant’) arises from an

order dated 31.03.2017 made by the learned High Court Judge of the Central

Province holden at Kandy(hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the Order’)

wherein, the learned High Court Judge had issued a mandate in the nature of a

CA(PHC)0065/2017

Page 4 of 13

writ of certiorari quashing a decision dated, 14.11.2013 made pursuant to an

application made to him by the Appellant under section 18A of the Rent Act as

amended, by the 1st Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter called and referred to

as ‘the 1st Respondent’) granting the Appellant the approval sought in the said

application to demolish the residential premises bearing assessment No. 27,

Daulagala Road, Panideniya Peradeniya (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the

residential premises’) and re-construct it in which the 3rd Respondent-

Respondent (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the 3rd Respondent’) had been

the tenant.

During the pendency of the instant appeal, Petitioner-Respondent had died and

substitution had been effected substituting 1A, 2A and 3A Substituted-

Petitioners-Respondents in the place of the deceased

When the instant appeal came on for hearing before us on 15.09.2025, learned

Counsel for the 1A, 2A and 3A Substituted-Petitioners-Respondents informed

Court that he has no instructions from them and this Court then, fixed this

matter for Judgement directing the parties to file further written submissions

within two weeks from that day in the registry if any. Hence, I would proceed to

the judgement on the strength of the written submissions furnished to Court by

the respective parties as enumerated above as urged and agreed by them.

It was inter-alia, contented by the learned President’s Counsel for the Appellant

at the hearing of this appeal before us in support thereof by way of written

submissions that, the learned High Court Judge had failed to appreciate that the

Court will issue a writ only if the major facts are not in dispute and the legal

result of the facts are not subject to controversy and therefore, order cannot

sustain in law and as such it ought to be set aside. In support thereof, the

learned President’s Counsel sought to rely on the decisions in Thajudeen v. Sri

Lanka Tea Board 1981 [2] Sri LR 471, Puvendran v. Premasiri 2009 [2] Sri

LR 1071, Sherlin v. Commissioner of Ayurvedic and Others [CA Writ

721/2009, decided on 12.12.2013, Javasooriva v. N.M. Gunawathie and

CA(PHC)0065/2017

Page 5 of 13

Others [CA Writ 63/2015, decided on 26.09.2019], Wickramasuriva v. Hon.

Tilak Marapana and Others [SC Appeal 26/2021, decided on 29.10.2021]

and Namunukula Plantations PLC v. Land Reform Commission and Others

[CA Writ 223/2020, decided on 05.04.2022).

Before, I venture to examine the contention so advanced by the learned

President’s Counsel for the Appellant, let me briefly, set out the facts relevant to

the instant appeal.

The Appellant had under and in terms of section 18A of the Rent Act, made an

application to the 1st Respondent-Provincial Commissioner of Housing of the

Central Province, seeking approval thereunder to demolish the residential

premises in which the 3rd Respondent had been the tenant; and that the 1st

Respondent had having held an inquiry thereto, made order granting approval

to demolish the residential premises in which the 3rd Respondent had been the

tenant; and that being aggrieved by the decision of the 1st Respondent, the

Petitioner-Respondent had preferred to the High Court of the Central Province

holden at Kandy an application seeking a mandate in the nature of a writ of

certiorari to quash the said order of the 1st Respondent; and that the learned

High Court judge had having inquired into the application, made order granting

a writ of certiorari to quash the decision of the 1st Respondent. It is this order

that the Appellant now, seeks to impugn before us in the instant appeal.

It is not in dispute, that the decision of the 1st Respondent is primarily, based

on the facts; and that the Petitioner-Respondent had by way of a writ of

certiorari, sought before the High Court to challenge the vires of the said decision

of the 1st Respondent primarily, based on the facts.

The principal relief sought in the High Court by the Petitioner-Respondent in his

application for a writ of certiorari was for the issuance of a writ of certiorari to

quash the decision of the 1st Respondent dated 14.11.2013 granting approval to

the Appellant to demolish the residential premises and re-construct it subject to

the terms and conditions stipulated therein, on the basis of the determination

CA(PHC)0065/2017

Page 6 of 13

made by him at the said inquiry into the application so made to him by the

Appellant under section 18A of the Rent Act as amended that a) the residential

premises-the subject matter of the inquiry before the 1st Respondent was the

residential premises bearing assessment No. 27, Daulagala Road, Panideniya

Peradeniya; and b) that the Appellant was the owner thereof.

It is thus, manifest that the Petitioner-Respondent had in his application in the

High Court, sought by way of a writ of certiorari, to quash the decision of the 1st

Respondent which was primarily, based on the facts adduced before him by the

Appellant at the inquiry into the application made by the Appellant under section

18A of the Rent Act as amended, that the Appellant was the owner thereof; on

the premise that the Appellant was not the owner of the residential premises as

determined by the 1st Respondent at the said inquiry but, the Petitioner-

Respondent in terms of the chain of title recited in paragraphs 18,19 and 20 of

the petition furnished by him to the High Court and therefore, the decision of

the 1st Respondent was arbitrary, against the weight of the evidence, capricious,

contrary to law and ultra vires.

Hence, the Petitioner-Respondent had in his application filed in the High Court,

sought to refute the decision of the 1st Respondent, which was primarily based

on the facts adduced before him by the Appellant that the Appellant was the

owner of the residential premises. [Emphasis is mine]

However, it is significant to observe that the position so adverted to by the

Petitioner-Respondent in his application before the High Court was not only,

vehemently, denied by the Appellant in paragraph 2 of his statement of

objections filed in the High Court that the Petitioner-Respondent is the owner of

the residential premises as claimed by him, but also he had therein, set up his

own title to the residential premises in terms of the chain of title recited in the

paragraphs 6(b),(c),(d),(e),(f),(g) and (h) of his statement of objections furnished

by him to the High Court, and the matters further pleaded therein, thereby

supporting the decision of the 1st Respondent.

CA(PHC)0065/2017

Page 7 of 13

The main argument advanced by the learned Counsel for the Petitioner

Respondent at the hearing before the High Court as observed by the learned High

Court Judge of Kandy is that the Appellant had failed to establish that he is the

owner of the residential premises for which the demolition order was made and

further that, the Petitioner-Respondent is the owner of the said premises. It is to

be observed that, the contention so advanced by the Petitioner-Respondent was

vehemently, controverted and refuted by the Appellant who in turn, argued that

he is the owner of the residential premises in terms of the chain of title so recited

in his statement of objections.

Hence, the major facts pertaining to the ownership of the residential premises

were substantially, in dispute before the High Court of Kandy. Nevertheless, the

learned High Court Judge of Kandy had endeavoured to consider and analyse

the major facts relating to the ownership of the residential premises which were

substantially, in dispute and held that the Petitioner-Respondent is the owner of

the residential premises and the determination of the 1st Respondent that the

owner of the residential premises is the Appellant is therefore, against the

evidence at the inquiry.

It is in this context I would think it appropriate and expedient at this juncture

to examine the law governing an application for a mandate in the nature of a writ

of certiorari where major facts are in dispute.

It is well settled principle of law as laid down by Court in a plethora of decisions

namely; Thajudeen v. Sri Lanka Tea Board 1981 [2] Sri LR 471, Puvendran

v. Premasiri 2009 [2] Sri LR 1071, Sherlin v. Commissioner of Ayurvedic

and Others [CA Writ 721/2009, decided on 12.12.2013, Javasooriva v. N.M.

Gunawathie and Others [CA Writ 63/2015, decided on 26.09.2019],

Wickramasuriva v. Hon. Tilak Marapana and Others [SC Appeal 26/2021,

decided on 29.10.2021], and Namunukula Plantations PLC v. Land Reform

Commission and Others [CA Writ 223/2020, decided on 05.04.2022), that

CA(PHC)0065/2017

Page 8 of 13

the Court will issue a writ only if the major facts are not in dispute and the

legal result of the facts are not subject to controversy.[Emphasis is mine]

A careful comparison of the respective positions so taken up by the Petitioner-

Respondent and the Appellant unmistakably, and unequivocally, shows that the

claim of the Petitioner-Respondent that he is the owner of the residential

premises in terms of the chain of title recited in his petition filed in the High

Court as enumerated above, is vehemently, denied by the Appellant who had in

turn, set up his own title to the residential premises in terms of the chain of title

recited in his statement of objections furnished by him to the High Court as

enumerated above; and that such denial is not at all, based only upon questions

of law alone.

Hence, the Appellant disputes the ownership of the Petitioner-Respondent to the

residential premises. The very foundation of fact which the Petitioner-

Respondent must establish to prove that he is the owner of the residential

premises, is totally, denied by the Appellant and therefore, not only not admitted

by the Appellant but also very strenuously, denied and disputed by him. The

basic and fundamental issues of fact the proof of which is essential to the claim

for the relief, that the Petitioner-Respondent seeks in proceedings before the High

Court, have in the first instance, to be established by the Petitioner. In the

absence of incontrovertible proof or an admission by the Appellant of such

matters of fact, the Petitioner-Respondent’s claim of the ownership to the

residential premises cannot be maintained in the proceedings before the High

Court. All such disputed matters of fact must be resolved before mandatory

order, such as is claimed by the Petitioner-Respondent in the proceedings before

the High Court of Kandy, goes out from the High Court of Kandy. The issuance

of such an order carries with it the implication that the High Court is satisfied

that the Petitioner-Respondent is indeed, the owner of the residential premises;

and that there is no question about the basic primary questions of fact upon

which the Petitioner-Respondent’s claim is founded. When, however, such

questions of fact are in dispute, they can and must only be settled by a regular

CA(PHC)0065/2017

Page 9 of 13

action between the disputants before a Court of competent civil jurisdiction.

Such questions, the decision of which calls for the leading of evidence, both oral

and documentary and the cross examination of witnesses are all questions which

can be best decided by way of regular procedure falling withing the ordinary

jurisdiction of the Courts of first instance as laid down by this Court in

Thajudeen v. Sri Lanka Tea Board (Supra).

Having regard to both the nature of the Petitioner-Respondent’s claim and the

position taken up by the Appellant as enumerated above, it clearly, appears to

me that the Petitioner-Respondent’s is a claim that can, not only be conveniently,

decided by way of a regular action in the District Court but also that, that is the

most appropriate form of action in which it should be decided for; where facts

are in dispute and in order to get at the truth, it is necessary that the questions

should be canvassed in a suit where parties would have ample opportunity of

examining their witnesses and the Court would be better able to judge which

version is correct, a writ will not issue, as stated by Choudri in his book on the

Law of Writs and Fundamental Rights (2nd Edition) Vol 2 at page 449.

That, the remedy by way of an application for a writ is not a proper substitute

for a remedy by way of a suit, specially, where facts are in dispute and in order

to get at the truth, it is necessary that the questions should be canvassed in a

suit where the parties would have ample opportunity to examine their witnesses

and the Court would be better able to judge which version is correct, has been

laid down in the Indian Cases of Ghosh V. Damodar Valley Corporation AIR.

1953 Cal 581 and Parraju Vs. General Manager B. N. Rly. AIR. 1952 Cal.

610.

In view of the above, it clearly, appears to me that, as the major questions of fact,

upon which the Petitioner-Respondent's claim for the ownership to the

residential premises are founded, are being disputed by the Appellant as

enumerated above, and, as the most appropriate procedure for the settlement of

such a dispute is an action by way of regular procedure before the appropriate

CA(PHC)0065/2017

Page 10 of 13

Court of First Instance, and such an action by way of regular procedure also

constitutes an “equally convenient, beneficial and effective” remedy, the learned

High Court Judge of the Central Province holden at Kandy ought to have in the

exercise of his discretion, refused the Petitioner-Respondent's application for a

mandate in the nature of a writ of certiorari to quash the determination of the 1st

Respondent, namely; that a) the residential premises-the subject matter of the

inquiry before the 1st Respondent was the residential premises bearing

assessment No. 27, Daulagala Road, Panideniya Peradeniya; and b) that the

Appellant was the owner thereof. as rightly, contended by the learned President’s

Counsel for the Appellant before us at the hearing of this appeal.

I would therefore, hold that the contention so advanced by the learned

President’s Counsel for the Appellant is entitled to succeed both in fact and law.

It was next, contented by the learned President’s Counsel for the Appellant at

the hearing of this appeal before us in support thereof by way of written

submissions that, the learned High Court Judge of Kandy was obliged in law to

have dismissed the application of the Petitioner-Respondent for; he had an

effective alternative remedy, and therefore, order cannot sustain in law and as

such it ought to be set aside. In support thereof, the learned President’s Counsel

sought to rely on the decisions in Ishak v. Lakshman Perera 2003 3 Sri LR 18

at 231, Tennakoon v. Director General Customs [2004 1 Sri LR 53 at 571.

N. Seelanatha Holdings (Pvt) Ltd v. Colombo Lotus Tower Management Co

(Pvt) Ltd and Others [CA Writ 85/2025, decided on 04.04.2025 wherein, it

was laid down that, “Where there is an alternative procedure which will provide

the applicant with a satisfactory remedy, the Courts will usually insist on an

applicant exhausting that remedy before seeking judicial review. In doing so, the

Court is coming to a discretionary decision.”…..…“Where there is a choice of

another separate process outside the Courts, a true question for the exercise of

discretion exists. For the Court to require the alternative procedure to be

exhausted prior to resorting to judicial review is in accord with judicial review

being properly regarded as being a remedy of last resort. It is important that the

CA(PHC)0065/2017

Page 11 of 13

process should not be clogged with unnecessary cases, which are perfectly

capable of being dealt with in another tribunal. It can also be the situation that

Parliament, by establishing an alternative procedure, indicated either expressly

or by implication-that it intends that procedure to be used. In exercising its

discretion the Court will attach importance to the indication of Parliament's

intention".

Applying the principle of law laid down by Court in the aforesaid decisions to the

facts of the instant action, having regard to both the nature of the Petitioner-

Respondent’s claim and the position adverted to by the Appellant in the High

Court of Kandy with regard to the question of the ownership of residential

premises, it clearly, appears to me that the Petitioner-Respondent’s is a claim

which can not only, be conveniently, decided by way of a regular action in the

District Court but also that, that is the most appropriate form of action in which

it should be decided.

In this view of the matter, it clearly, appears to me that, as the major questions

of fact, upon which the Petitioner-Respondent's claim for the ownership to the

residential premises are founded, are being disputed by the Appellant as

enumerated above, and, as the most appropriate procedure for the settlement of

such a dispute is an action by way of regular procedure before the appropriate

Court of First Instance, and such an action by way of regular procedure also

constitutes an “equally convenient, beneficial and effective” remedy, the learned

High Court Judge of the Central Province holden at Kandy ought to have in the

exercise of his discretion, refused the Petitioner-Respondent's application for a

mandate in the nature of a writ of certiorari to quash the determination of the 1st

Respondent, namely; that a) the residential premises-the subject matter of the

inquiry before the 1st Respondent was the residential premises bearing

assessment No. 27, Daulagala Road, Panideniya Peradeniya; and b) that the

Appellant was the owner thereof. as rightly, contended by the learned President’s

Counsel for the Appellant before us at the hearing of this appeal.

CA(PHC)0065/2017

Page 12 of 13

Hence, I would hold that the next contention so advanced by the learned

President’s Counsel for the Appellant is entitled to succeed both in fact and law.

With regard to the further contention advanced by the learned President’s

Counsel for the Appellant at the hearing of this appeal before us in relation to

the locus standi of the Petitioner-Respondent to invoke the writ jurisdiction of

the High Court of the Central Province holden at Kandy, in view of the position

adverted to, by the Petitioner-Respondent in the High Court that he is the owner

of the residential premises in terms of the chain of title recited in the Petition

tendered to the High Court along with his application for a mandate in the nature

of a writ of certiorari as enumerated above, that the Petitioner-Respondent has

I would think, sufficient interest in the matter in dispute as held by this Court

in a plethora of decisions, namely; Environmental Foundation Ltd. Vs.

Minister of Public Administration and Six Others 1997 [2] SLR 306,

Consumers Association of Sri Lanka Vs. Telecommunications Regulatory

Commission of Sri Lanka and Others 2006 [1] SLR 174 and Wanasinghe and

Others (Citizens Movement for Good Governance) Vs. University of Colombo

and Others 2006 [3] SLR 322 and therefore, the further contention so advanced

by the learned President’s Counsel for the Appellant is not entitled to succeed

both in fact and law and as such it should be rejected.

In view of my aforesaid findings, It is my considered view that it would not be

necessary to consider any further, the further contention so advanced by the

learned President’s Counsel for the Appellant in paragraph 34(D) of the written

submissions dated 25.09.2025.

In view of all the above circumstances, I would hold that the order cannot sustain

both in fact and law.

In the result, I would set aside the order.

I would therefore, hold that appeal is entitled to succeed both in fact and law.

CA(PHC)0065/2017

Page 13 of 13

I would thus, allow the appeal with costs of this Court and below payable to the

Appellant by the Substituted-Petitioner-Respondents only.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL