..

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Deniyegedara N andasena Aththanayakadawala, Paranagama

Defendant-Appellant C.A.No.638/96 (F) D.C.Polonnaruwa No.3367/L.

BEFORE

COUNSEL

S.M .Podinilame Aththanakadawala,

Paran agama , Konduruwawa.

Plaintiff-Respondent

M.M.A.Gaffoor,J. and

S. Devika de L. Tennekoon ,J.

W.Dayaratne P.C. with R.Jayawardena and N adeeka K.Arachchi for the Defendant-Appellant.

Rohana Deshapriya for the Plaintiff-Respondent

2

ARGUED ON 25.07.2017

WRITIEN SUBMISSIONS FILED ON 23.10.2017

DECIDED ON 22.01.2018

M.M.A. Gaffoor J.

This is an appeal preferred by the Defendant-Appellant in

respect of an order given by the District Court of Polonnaruwa.

The fact of this case unspools in the following manner.

The original Plaintiff instituted action in the District

Court of Polonnaruwa against the Defendant-Appellant

seeking for a declaration of title to the land described in the

schedule to the plaint, ejectment of the Defendant- Appellant

his agents, restoration of possession, damages and such other

relief.

3

The case proceeded to trial on 14.09.1988 on 6 issues,

3 issues by the Plaintiff and the Defendant respectively.

The case was fIxed for trial 25.11.1992 on which date the

Defendant-Appellant was absent and unrepresented(vide entry

29 appeal brief.)

Accordingly the case was fIxed for ex parte trial. PI and

P2 were marked and the trial was concluded.

The learned District Judge decided the case in favour of

the Substituted - Plaintiff- Respondent.

On receipt of the ex- parte decree Defendant-Appellant

filed an application dated 20.03.1994 with petition and

affidavit seeking to set aside the said ex- parte order and to re-

fix for trial inter parte. The said affidavit and petition stated

that the Defendant-Appellant was absent on the day of the

trial as he was not well and in order to substantiate this fact

the medical certificate V 1 was also filed. The case was

thereafter fIxed for inquiry for the vacation of the ex pate

order. The Defendant - Appellant and Ayuredic Doctor had

given evidence. The learned Trial Judge by order dated

4.9.1996 rejected the application of the Defendant-Appellant.

4

This Courts is referred to Section 86 (2) of the Civil

Procedure Code by parties.

According to Section 86 (2) the jurisdiction of the District

Court to set aside the default decree depends on three

conditions; namely

1. That the application is made within 14 days of the

service of the default decree.

2.The application must be made with notice to the other

party and

3.That the defaulting party must gIve satisfactory

grounds for his default to the satisfaction of the Court.

According to this Section and the facts of the case

the Defendant-Appellant has to satisfy Court during the

inquiry and give reasonable and satisfactory reasons for

the vacation of the ex pate decree. If the Court is not

5

satisfied with the reasons given the ex parte decree will

stand.

In the case in point the Defendant-Appellant has

given one reasons for his absence, that is that he was

mentally ill and was taking treatment from an Ayurvedict

Doctor. The said Doctor was called to give evidence.

The fact that the Defendant-Appellant was a

mentally ill person is another matter that has to be taken

into consideration by a Court in deciding the capacity of

a person who is a party to a case. The Civil Procedure

Code speaks of several provisions which deals with

mentally ill persons. Be that as it may, the trial Judge

has analyzed the evidence of the Defendant-Appellant

and had concluded that the Defendant-Appellant had not

given reasonable and satisfactory reasons to purge his

default.

In the case of David Appuhamy Vs. Yasassi

Thero 1987 (1) SLR 253 the Court observed thus,

6

" An ex parte order made in default of

appearance of a party will not be vacated if the affected

party fails to give a valid excuse for his default."

It is also to be noted that the new subsection 68 (2)

(A) which was introduced by Act No.53 of 1980 has not

been made use of by the Defendant-Appellant.

The fact that the trial Judge had the opportunity of

seeing the demeanor and the veracity of the evidence

adduced at the inquiry does not permit this Court to

interfere with the facts of the case adduced at the

lnqulry.

The Apex Courts have on varlOUS occaSlons cited

plethora of Judgments and had observed that

" It is well established that findings of primary facts

by a trial Judge who hears and sees witnesses are not to

be lightly disturbed on appeal"

7

In the light of the above this Court sees no valid

reason to interfere with the ex-parte judgment given by

the learned District Judge. Hence the appeal stands

dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

S.Devika de L. Tennekoon, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL