IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal

in terms of Section 15(b) of the

Judicature Act No. 02 of 1978

read with Section 331 of the Code

of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15

of 1979.

The Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

Court of Appeal Case No.

CA/HCC/0061/2018 Complainant

High Court of Avissawella Vs.

Case No. HC/160/2008

Hettiarachchige Sunil

Hettiarachchi.

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Complainant-Appellant

Vs.

Hettiarachchige Sunil

Hettiarachchi.

Accused-Respondent

Page 2 of 8

BEFORE : MENAKA WIJESUNDERA, J

WICKUM A. KALUARACHCHI, J

COUNSEL : Maheshika Silva, DSG for the Complainant-Appellant.

Sahan Kulatunga for the Accused-Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 25.06.2024

DECIDED ON : 24.07.2024

WICKUM A. KALUARACHCHI, J.

This appeal has been preferred by the Hon. Attorney General to set

aside the sentence imposed against the accused-respondent by the

order of the learned High Court Judge of Avissawella dated 09.02.2018

and substitute a lawful and an adequate sentence according to law.

The accused-respondent was indicted in the High Court on two charges

of rape against one Achini Almeda who is the daughter of the accuseds

sister and was below 16 years of age. The offence relating to the two

charges is punishable under Section 364(3) of the Penal Code as

amended by the Penal Code (Amendment) Act No. 22 of 1995. After trial,

the accused-respondent was convicted for both counts. The learned

High Court Judge imposed eight years of rigorous imprisonment and a

fine of Rs. 7500/- with a default sentence of one-year simple

imprisonment on each count and ordered the sentences of

imprisonments to run concurrently. In addition, a compensation of

Rs. 50,000/- was ordered and if defaulted to pay the said amount, the

amount was ordered to be recovered as a fine with a default sentence

of two years of rigorous imprisonment.

The accused has not appealed against the conviction or the sentence.

The Hon. Attorney General, being aggrieved by the said sentence,

preferred this appeal against the sentence. Prior to the hearing of the

Page 3 of 8

appeal, both parties filed written submissions. At the hearing, the

learned Deputy Solicitor General (DSG) for the appellant and the

learned Counsel for the accused-respondent made oral submissions.

The main contention of the learned DSG was that the sentence is illegal

because the minimum mandatory sentence prescribed by the Section

364(3) of the Penal Code is 15 years. The learned DSG contended that

the victim was 11 years of age at the time of the incident and the

accused was 33 years at that time. The learned DSG stated further that

the sexual intercourse had taken place without the consent of the

prosecutrix and she was raped by her uncle with whom she was living.

Therefore, the learned DSG submitted that there were only aggravating

factors in this case and when considering the gravity of the offence, the

learned High Court Judge had no reason to disregard the minimum

mandatory sentence of 15 years.

The learned Counsel for the accused-respondent contended that the

learned High Court Judge has not just disregarded the minimum

mandatory sentence. He submitted that the learned Judge considered

the mitigatory factors and aggravating factors correctly in making the

sentencing order. The learned Counsel pointed out that there are

Judgments in which it was held that the minimum mandatory sentence

is in conflict with some articles of the Constitution. He contended

further that the accused-appellant could not understand the gravity of

the offence because he was young at the time of committing the offence,

and thus, the eight years of imprisonment is reasonable.

When perusing the sentencing order dated 09.02.2018, the learned

High Court Judge considered the offence as serious because she stated

that when the victim was under the protection of her uncle, he

committed this offence. However, the learned Judge stated in her order

that the accused is a father of 45 years of age with a child and thus,

Page 4 of 8

she considers the harm that could be caused to the family of the

accused, if he is given a long-term imprisonment.

The learned High Court Judge has drawn her attention to the case of

Karunaratne V. The State reported in 78 NLR 413 in sentencing the

accused-appellant. In the aforesaid case, the accused-appellant was

charged for committing criminal breach of trust of a sum of

Rs. 9,450.84 entrusted to him between 25th May, 1965 and 29th May,

1965, in his capacity as a Cashier of the Co-operative Wholesale

Establishment, Minuwangoda, an offence punishable under Section

389 of the Penal Code.

It was held by Rajaratnam, J. and Ratwatte, J. (Vythialingam, J.

dissenting) that while the trial judge was right in sentencing the

accused to a term of two years rigorous imprisonment and to pay a fine

of Rs. 1000 and that even if the provisions relating to the suspension of

sentences were in operation at that time and the case was concluded in

due time, this was not a case where the sentence would have been

suspended, having regard to the gravity of the offence. But, on the other

hand, when a deserving conviction and sentence have to be confirmed

ten years after the proved offence, the judge cannot disregard the

serious consequences and disorganization that it can cause to the

accused's family.

It is to be stated that the learned High Court Judge has wrongly applied

the decision of Karunaratne V. The State in sentencing the accused in

the instant case because the offence relating to the said case has no

minimum mandatory sentence. The legislature has prescribed a

minimum mandatory sentence of 15 years for the offence relating to the

instant case. In addition, I regret to state that the learned judge has

seen only the harm that could be caused to the family of the accused,

but not the grave harm done by the accused to her own sisters 11 years

old daughter. The accused had forgotten his family and forgotten that

Page 5 of 8

he is also a father of a child, when raping his sisters child. The learned

Judge has not paid her attention about the message that she is giving

to the society by punishing the accused so leniently by imposing a

sentence of seven years less than the minimum mandatory sentence.

The harm that could be caused to the family of the accused by imposing

a long-term imprisonment cannot be considered as a mitigatory factor,

according to the circumstances of this case.

The learned High Court Judge has also stated in her sentencing order

that the accused-respondent had stated about his remorsefulness

about the incident. It must be noted that early guilty plea and the

accuseds remorse together are mitigatory factors to be considered. In

the instant action, the accused pleaded not guilty to both charges and

after full trial, the accused was convicted for both charges. If the

accused pleaded guilty without going for trial and stated that he is

remorseful about the offence that he committed, that can be taken into

consideration as a mitigatory factor. However, in the instant case, the

accused-respondent pleaded not guilty to both charges as stated

previously. When the accused said that he is remorseful, after he was

convicted for both charges, it is doubtful whether he is actually

remorseful or he states so only to get a reduction of the sentence.

The learned Judge has also considered twelve years period between the

offence and the conviction. The said period could be considered in

sentencing. However, lapse of twelve years from the date of the offence

and the conviction alone is not sufficient to disregard the minimum

mandatory sentence, especially as the accused-respondent was on bail

even before appearing in the High Court.

There were no other mitigatory factors submitted on behalf of the

accused-appellant. In considering the facts and circumstances of this

case, the offences committed by the accused are very serious. For the

reasons stated above, it is apparent that the learned High Court Judge

Page 6 of 8

had no reason to disregard the minimum mandatory sentence of 15

years and impose only eight years of imprisonment. In fact, the main

issue pertaining to the sentencing order is that the learned High Court

Judge has not even mentioned in her order that she imposes a lesser

sentence notwithstanding the minimum mandatory sentence. It is

apparent from the sentencing order that the learned Judge has

completely ignored the fact that there is a minimum mandatory

sentence prescribed by law for the offence that the accused-appellant

was convicted.

In the case of Rohana alias Loku V. Hon. Attorney General (2011)

2 Sri L.R. 174, it was held that the minimum mandatory sentence in

Section 362(2)(e) of the Penal Code is in conflict with Articles 4(c), 11

and 12(1) of the Constitution and that the High Court is not inhibited

from imposing a sentence that it deems appropriate in the exercise of

its judicial discretion notwithstanding the minimum mandatory

sentence.

According to the aforementioned decision, the High Court Judge can

impose a sentence less than the minimum mandatory sentence in

appropriate cases, exercising the judicial discretion. However, it must

be noted that just because the Judge has the discretion, the said

discretion cannot be exercised arbitrarily and an accused cannot be

sentenced without considering the relevant mitigatory and aggravating

factors. When the discretion is exercised, the said discretion must be

exercised judicially. Consideration of the issue whether the learned

Judge has exercised the said discretion judicially does not arise in the

instant case because the learned High Court Judge has never stated in

her sentencing order that she is exercising the said discretion to deviate

from the minimum mandatory sentence and impose a lesser sentence

than the minimum mandatory sentence. The learned Judge has not at

least mentioned about the minimum mandatory sentence in her

sentencing order. The learned Judge has completely overlooked or

Page 7 of 8

ignored the minimum mandatory sentence and has given eight years of

imprisonment to the accused-respondent. Imposing a sentence lesser

than the minimum mandatory sentence exercising the judicial

discretion is entirely different from completely ignoring the minimum

mandatory sentence for the offence and sentencing the accused. In the

case at hand, the learned Judge has never considered that there is a

minimum mandatory sentence of 15 years for an offence under Section

364(3) of the Penal Code. Therefore, the sentence imposed on the

accused-respondent is illegal and cannot be allowed to stand.

I must mention at this stage the following paragraph from the Judgment

of Asan Mohamad Rizwan V. Hon. Attorney General C.A. Revision

No. CA (PHC) APN 141/2013, decided on 25.03.2015.

The judges are to pass lawful and appropriate sentence upon the

accused being convicted. In doing so, judges are to address their minds

to the objective of sentencing particularly when exercising the

discretion given to them under the law. Then only a correct sentence

could be passed upon a convicted accused. If not, criticism on lack of

uniformity, consistency and transparency in imposing sentences are

bound to surface. Therefore, it is necessary for the judges to keep in

mind the objectives of sentencing and also the sentencing guidelines,

in order to arrive at the correct and appropriate decision.

Even though the learned High Court Judge has not considered the

minimum mandatory sentence, this Court considered whether this is a

fit and proper case to disregard the minimum mandatory sentence and

impose a lesser sentence. However, I find no reason in this case to

exercise the judicial discretion to impose a lesser sentence than the

minimum mandatory sentence specified by law as explained previously.

Considering the aforesaid twelve years period between the date of the

offence and the conviction, and considering the fact that eighteen years

have passed by now from the date of offence, I am of the opinion that it

Page 8 of 8

is appropriate to impose the minimum mandatory sentence of 15 years

rigorous imprisonment on each count although the conviction is after

the trial. Accordingly, sentences imposed by the learned High Court

Judge are enhanced to 15 years of rigorous imprisonment on each

count. The sentences of each count should run concurrently and the

sentences should be operative from the date of the conviction, which is

09.02.2018. The fine, compensation and default sentences imposed by

the learned High Court Judge should remain as it is.

The appeal of the complainant-appellant is allowed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Menaka Wijesundera, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL