IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

High Court of Hambantota Case No. 130/2006

Court of Appeal Case No. CA/232/2014

In the matter of an appeal under and in Terms of the Section 331 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.

The Attorney General of the Democratic Socialist Repu blic of Sri Lanka

Vs.

Dayasiri Edirisuriya

ACCUSED

And Now Between

Dayasiri Edirisuriya

APPELLANT

Vs.

1

Before : P.R. Walgama, J

The Attorney General of the Democratic Socialist Repu blic of Sri Lanka

RESPONDENT

: S. Devika de L. Tennekoon, J

Council : Sharon Senasinghe for the Accused - Appellant.

: Dileepa Peiris, sse for A.G.

Argued on

Decided on

: 27.06.2016

: 18.11.2016

CASE NO- CA- 232/2014 - JUDGMENT- 18. 11. 2016

P.R. Walgama, J

The Accused - Appellant was indicted for causIng death

of one Jayawardena Kankanamlage Pathmasiri ,on or

about 26th October 2003 at Pallemalala in the jurisdiction

of Hambantota.

The trial proceeded without a JUry and at the end of

the trial the Learned Trial Judge found the Accused-

Appellant guilty of murder and sentenced him to death.

It IS against the said conviction and sentence the

2

Accused - Appellant has appealed to this Court, for a

lesser culpability on the ground of sudden provocation.

The only eye witness to the above incident was the

daughter of the Accused - Appellant. Although the wife

of the Accused - Appellant was present at the scene, she

was not a compellable witness, as the husband stood

trial for having committed murder one Pathmasiri.

The eye witness Ishara in her testimony at the trial

has testified to the following;

That on the day In question she and her mother and

the brother was at home. The Accused- Appellant came

home at or about 7 p.m being drunk. The mother

has warned about the father's behaviour as he was

drunk. Just before the alleged incident the brother

(Prabath) was at their grandmother's house. But this

witness had gone to the grandmother's house to call

the brother and according to her the deceased who

was a friend of her brother had followed him.

Thereafter while the deceased was seated outside, the

Accused had stabbed once on his chest.

According the evidence of the JMO there had been

only one external injury caused by stabbing. In addition

to the afore said InjUry there had been internal

InJunes too.

In the cross examination too she was categorical about

the incident, and said, that the incident took place due

3 t

I I

to the abject drunkenness of the Accused - Appellant.

There 1S no evidence to the effect of

provocation.

a sudden

There were no infirmities 1n the evidence of the one

and only eye witness, therefore her evidence remained

unscathed and unassailable.

It 1S contended by the Counsel for the Accused-

Appellant that as there was only one stab 1nJury there

was no murderous intention but only knowledge as to

result of such 1nJury. Hence it 1S urged that Accused -

Appellant could be convicted for a lesser culpability,

and 1mpose a sentence for culpable homicide not

amounting to murder.

It is salient to note that the counsel for the Accused-

Appellant urges for a lesser culpability on two grounds;

That the alleged incident occurred due to a sudden

provocation

AND

That there was only one stab 1nJury which 1S an

indication that the Accused -Appellant did not have the

murderous intention but only the knowledge of the

consequence of the said act.

The counsel for the Accused- Appellant had buttressed

the above position by adverting this court, to the legal

4

pronouncement In the cases of WEERAPPAN .VS.

QUEEN- 71 NLR. 109, which held thus;

"although only one stab Injury was inflicted on

Ramalingam, the Learned Commissioner did not advise

the jury that these circumstances might indicate the

absence of the murderous intention. If the JUry had

been properly directed, a verdict of culpable homicide

not amoun ting to

returned.

For these reasons

sentence of death,

murder may well have been

we set aside the verdict and

and substitute a conviction for

culpable homicide not amounting to murder." (emphasis

added)

The same proposition was observed In the case of

ILLANDARI DEVAGE SOMARATNE .VS. AG. DECIDED ON

25/01/1999

It IS also relevant that the incident was a consequent

of a sudden chance meeting and therefore no pre-

meditation or preparation for the act could have been

imputed under the circumstances.

The medical evidence is also indicative of the fact that

only one fatal stab wound had been dealt and that

the other injuries were superficial InJunes

In these circumstances enumerated above it IS

impossible to allow the verdict to stand. We therefore

5

quash the conviction and set aside the death

sentence .... "(emphasis added)

The counsel for the Accused- Appellant thrust mainly on

the Issue of one InjUry caused, and that amounts to

the knowledge of the consequence but not the

murderous intention of the perpetrator.

It was the position of the counsel for the Accused-

Appellant that mere presence of the deceased had

provoked the accused. It IS abundantly clear that the

accused had lost control of him self as he was

drunk. But nevertheless did not have any murderous

intention to cause the death of the deceased.

It is also pertinent to note that the evidence surfaced

In this case do not reveal any verbal or act of the

deceased which provoked the accused.

For the sake of convenIence and brevity the section

applicable to the above is reproduce herein below;

Section 294 (Exception 4)

Culpable homicide not amounting to murder if it IS

committed without premeditation In a sudden fight In

the heat of paSSlOn upon a sudden quarrel, and

without the offender having taken undue advantage or

acted in a cruel or unusual manner.

Explanation - It is immaterial in such cases which party

offers the provocation or commits the first assault.

6

In the case of BANDARA .VS. AG 2011 SLR-55 the

Supreme Court has held thus;

That,

The offence of murder In terms of Section 294 of the

Penal Code IS reduced to culpable homicide not

amounting to murder under Section 293 of the Penal

Code if any of the five exception to Section 294

could be shown to apply.

The Exception 4 to Section 294, the plea of sudden

fight indicates that the basis for investigation

dependant on the facts that the murder

IS purely

that has

taken place In a sudden fight, which has

the heat of passlOn upon a sudden

occurred In

quarrel. An

important ingredient which IS necessary In such

instance would be that there was no malice or

vindictiveness.

Further it was observed In the above case that In

order to come within the exception 4 of Section 294

of the Penal Code, it IS necessary to satisfy the

specific requests referred to In Section 294 of the

Penal Code,

Viz,

That it was a sudden fight, that there was no

premeditation, the act was committed In heat of

paSSlOn, and the accused had not taken undue

advantage or acted In a cruel manner.

7

f I

tI tI

fI

f

.1

J i j t 1 I J ! J

Therefore In the said back drop we are of the VIew

that the murder alleged to have taken place due to a

sudden provocation, and the Accused -Appellant did not

have any animosity towards the deceased, or the said

act of stabbing was not premeditated.

We therefore quash the conviction and set aside the

death sentence. We direct that a conviction for culpable

homicide not amounting to under be entered. We also

substitute for death sentence, a sentence of 7 years

Rigorous Imprisonment. The sentence IS to run from

the date of this judgment.

Registrar

Authority

IS here by directed to inform

and to the relevant High Court.

the Prison

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

s. Devika de L. Tennekoon, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

8