IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

4A. Herbert Ranjith Kulasooriya

No.10, Mihira,

Main Road,

Passara.

4th Defendant-Petitioner

CA CASE NO: CA/LA/399/2006

DC BADULLA CASE NO: 10576/P

Vs.

Chandra Kulasooriya,

No.10, Mihira,

Main Road,

Passara.

Substituted Plaintiff-Respondent

1. Oboda Arachchige Baby Nona,

2A. Kamalawathie Fernando,

Bulugahakumburewatta,

Kanahena,

Pallegama,

Passara.

3A. S.A. Rupawathie Senanayake,

Hapuroda Road,

Passara.

Defendant-Respondents

2

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Faisz Musthapha, P.C., with Swadesh Randika De

Silva and Keerthi Tillekaratne for the 4A Defendant-

Appellant.

Chatura Dilhan for the 2A Defendant-Respondent.

Decided on: 09.11.2018

Samayawardhena, J.

This is a partition action. Upon the death of the 4th defendant,

his son has been substituted as the 4A defendant. The 4A

defendant has given evidence at the trial. During the course of

his evidence, when he moved to mark the Deed No.6959 dated

22.06.1943, the learned counsel for the 2A defendant has

objected to it on the basis that it is an unlisted document.

However, the learned District Judge of Badulla by order dated

19.09.2006, has refused permission to mark that Deed in

evidence on the premise that the said Deed is irrelevant to the

issues raised at the trial. It is against this order, the 4A

defendant has filed this appeal with leave obtained.

Let me first consider whether this Deed can be refused to be

marked in evidence on the ground that it is an unlisted

document.

According to section 23(1) of the Partition Law, No. 21 of 1977,

as amended, the List of Documents shall be filed thirty days

before the date of the trial. That section reads as follows:

3

Every party to a partition action shall, not less than thirty days

before the date of the trial of the action, file or cause to be filed in

court a list of documents on which he relies to prove his right,

share or interest to, of or in the land together with an abstract of

the contents of such documents. No party shall, except with the

leave of the court which may be granted on such terms as the

court may determine, be at liberty to put any document in

evidence on his behalf in the action if that document is not

specified in a list filed as aforesaid. Nothing in this subsection

shall apply to documents produced for cross-examination or

handed to a witness merely to refresh his memory.

The thirty-day period from the date of the trial, mentioned in

this section was interpreted liberally as opposed to restrictively

by the Supreme Court in Pushpa v. Leelawathie [2004] 3 Sri LR

162 to include not only the first date of trial but also any date to

which the trial is postponed. Chief Justice S.N. Silva at page

163 stated: When this provision is considered in the light of

section 25(1) it is clear that the date of trial is not necessarily the

first date on which the case is fixed for trial but would also

include any date to which the trial is postponed.

Section 25(1) of the Partition Law reads as follows:

On the date fixed for the trial of a partition action or on any other

date to which the trial may be postponed or adjourned, the court

shall examine the title of each party and shall hear and receive

evidence in support thereof and shall try and determine all

questions of law and fact arising in that action in regard to the

right, share, or interest of each party to, of, or in the land to which

the action relates, and shall consider and decide which of the

orders mentioned in section 26 should be made.

4

This section mandates the District Judge trying a partition

action to examine the title claimed by each party in relation to

the land to be partitioned, quite independently of what the

parties may or may not tell the Judge. That is because partition

actions are not actions in personam, where only the parties to

the action are bound by the Judgment, but actions in rem,

where not only the parties to the action, but also those who are

not parties to the action are also bound by the Judgment.

Therefore, a District Judge trying a partition action cannot be

found fault with for being too cautious, circumspectous and

jealous in investigating title to the land and looking beyond what

has been presented before the Court by way of pleadings or

otherwise to be absolutely satisfied inter alia that all the

necessary parties are before Court and there is no collusion

among the parties. He has every right even to call for evidence

after the parties have closed their cases. (Cynthia de Alwis v.

Majorie DAlwis [1997] 3 Sri LR 113 at 115) This paramount duty

of thorough investigation of title, independently of what parties

may or may not say, cast upon the District Judge in partition

actions has been repeatedly and overwhelmingly stressed by the

Superior Courts from time immemorial.

In Peris v. Perera decided more than 122 years ago, and reported

in (1896) 1 NLR 362, the Full Bench of the Supreme Court led

by Chief Justice Bonser held that: The Court should not regard a

partition suit as one to be decided merely on issues raised by and

between the parties, and it ought not to make a decree, unless it

is perfectly satisfied that the persons in whose favour the decree

is asked for are entitled to the property sought to be partitioned.

This has consistently been followed up to now. (Vide for

instance: Juliana Hamine v. Don Thomas (1957) 59 NLR 546,

5

Gnanapandithen v. Balanayagam [1998] 1 Sri LR 391,

Sumanawathie v. Andreas [2003] 3 Sri LR 324, Basnayake v.

Peter [2005] 3 Sri LR 197, Karunaratne Banda v. Dassanayake

[2006] 2 Sri LR 87, Silva v. Dayaratne [2008] BALR 284,

Abeysinghe v. Kumarasinghe [2008] BALR 300, Sopinona v.

Pitipanaarachchi [2010] 1 Sri LR 87)

There is no blanket prohibition for unlisted documents to be

marked in evidence in partition trials. Such unlisted documents

can, in terms of section 23(1) of the Partition Law, be marked

with the leave of the Court.

What is the purpose of listing documents before the trial? That

is to prevent an element of surprise and thereby causing

prejudice to the other party, and nothing else. The paramount

consideration in that regard is nothing but the ascertainment of

truth and not to place the objecting party at a distinct

advantageous position or the defaulting party at a distinct

disadvantageous position by reason of technicality. (Silva v. Silva

[2006] 2 Sri LR 80, Farose Ahmed v. Mohomed [2006] 2 Sri LR 66,

Arpico Finance Co Ltd v. Perera [2007] 1 Sri LR 208, Mashreq

Bank PSC v. Arunaselam [2007] BLR 20)

In the instant action, the 4th defendant has filed a statement of

claim on 08.11.1985 wherein, at paragraph 5, he has specifically

pleaded this Deed (which was disallowed to be marked) together

with three more Deeds. The 4A defendant moved to mark that

Deed on 06.06.2006, which means, more than twenty long years

after it was expressly pleaded in the statement of claim. Under

those circumstances, can the 2A defendant, who objected it

being marked in evidence on the basis that it was not listed

thirty days before the date of the trial, rightfully claim that he

6

was taken by surprise when the Deed was produced in

evidence? I would unreservedly answer it in the negative.

If a document is pleaded in the pleadings, such as the plaint,

answer, replication, statement of claim, statement of objections,

of which the opposing party had notice, the Court need not, as

the Supreme Court in Walker & Sons Co Ltd v. Masood [2004] 3

Sri LR 195 stated, reject the document to be received in evidence

on the ground that it is not listed. In such circumstances, the

Court shall exercise discretion to allow it to be marked in

evidence despite it being formally listed strictly in terms of the

law.

Hence, I take the view that there is no rational basis to reject the

Deed being marked on the basis that it is unlisted.

This leads me to consider the basis upon which the learned

District Judge, ex mero motu, decided to reject the Deed. The

learned District Judge has disallowed that Deed to be marked

because, according to the learned District Judge, no issue has

been raised by the 4A defendant at the trial.

When admissions were recorded and issues were raised, the 4A

defendant had been absent and unrepresented notwithstanding

a statement of claim had been tendered by the deceased 4th

defendant seeking exclusion of Lot 6 of the Preliminary Plan on

the basis of the four Deeds (including the one rejected) and long

possession. The learned District Judge states that as no issue

has been raised on that basis, it is irrelevant to allow that Deed

to be marked.

7

It is significant to note that, in the Partition Law, there is no

provision to raise issues. Section 25(1) of the Partition Law,

which deals with the stage of the commencement of the trial,

does not speak of raising issues prior to the trial as in a regular

action (as stated in section 146 of the Civil Procedure Code), but

speaks of straightaway recording evidence to examine title to the

land to which the action relates. Nevertheless, in partition

actions, not issues, but points of contest are recorded, as a

matter of practise, for convenience and to control the

proceedings.

There is no mandatory rule that such points of contest shall

necessarily be raised only at the commencement of the trial.

Such points of contest, can, depending on the facts and

circumstances of the case, be raised at any time during the

course of the trial, and, if I may add, even after the conclusion of

the trial, if the circumstances warrant such a course of action to

be followed.

Section 149 of the Civil Procedure Code, which is applicable to a

regular action, reads as follows: The court may, at any time

before passing a decree, amend the issues or frame additional

issues on such terms as it thinks fit. Section 79 of the Partition

Law allows the procedure laid down in the Civil Procedure Code

to be adopted in case of casus omissus.

In Hameed v. Cassim [1996] 2 Sri LR at 33 Justice Ranaraja held

that: The provisions of section 149certainly do not preclude a

District Judge from framing a new issue after the parties have

closed their respective cases and before the judgment is read out

in open Court. It is not necessary that the new issue should arise

on the pleadings. A new issue could be framed on the evidence

8

led by the parties orally or in the form of documents. The only

restriction is that the Judge in framing a new issue should act in

the interests of justice, which is primarily to ensure the correct

decision is given in the case.

It is the duty of the presiding Judge, and not that of the parties

or lawyers, to identify and record issues or points of contest on

which the right decision of the case appears to the Court to

depend.

Even though the learned District Judge on his own has stated

that no issue has been raised by the 4A defendant seeking

exclusion of Lot 6 and therefore marking Deeds which are

pleaded in the statement of claim of the 4th defendant is

irrelevant, when I go through the evidence of the plaintiffs

daughter, who gave evidence on behalf of the plaintiff mother, it

is seen that, she has, in her evidence, stated that Lot 6 shall be

excluded from the corpus. I am mindful of the fact that the

deceased 4th defendant was her father and the husband of the

plaintiff and 4A defendant is her brother. Then what, the

contesting 2A defendant also in her evidence has stated that,

not only Lot 6, but also the other Lots except Lot 4 shall be

excluded from the land to be partitioned. (vide page 136 of the

Brief marked X) That may be the reason why the learned counsel

for the 2A defendant did not object to that Deed on that basis

(although the learned District Judge thought it fit to do so).

According to the plaint, the 2nd defendant is entitled to an

undivided share of the land known as Bulugaha

Kumburewatta in extent of about five acres; and according to

the statement of claim of the 2nd defendant, the 2nd defendant is

entitled to an undivided share of the different land known as

9

Manikige Hena in extent of 1 Acre, 1 Rood and 4 Perches (not

five acres). It appears that the Preliminary Plan depicts the land

described in the schedule to the plaint. However, at the

beginning of the trial, when recoding admissions between the

plaintiff and the 2nd defendant, it has been recorded that the

land to be partitioned is depicted in the Preliminary Plan. In my

view, there are more serious, but fundamental matters, to be

looked into in this case by the learned District Judge.

That is why, the Full Bench of the Supreme Court headed by

Chief Justice Layard in the case of Mather v. Tamotharam Pillai

(1908) 6 NLR 246decided more than 110 years agoheld: A

partition suit is not a mere proceeding inter partes to be settled of

consent, or by the opinion of the Court upon such points as they

choose to submit to it in the shape of issues. It is a matter in

which the Court must satisfy itself that the plaintiff has made out

his title, and unless he makes out his title his suit for partition

must be dismissed. In partition proceedings the paramount duty

is cast by the Ordinance upon the District Judge himself to

ascertain who are the actual owners of the land. As collusion

between the parties is always possible, and as they get their title

from the decree of the Court, which is made good and conclusive

as against the world, no loopholes should be allowed for avoiding

the performance of the duty so cast upon the Judge.

On the other hand, if Lot 6 cannot be excluded and shall form

part of the corpus, the 4A defendant shall be allowed to claim

undivided rights from the land on those Deeds. The learned

District Judge cannot, in law, prevent the 4A defendant from

producing those Deeds at least for that purpose.

10

I unhesitatingly set aside the impugned order of the learned

District Judge and allow the appeal with costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal