-,

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA.

HC Panadura

Case No: 1737/2003

CA Appeal No: CA 232/2010

In the matter of an appeal made in terms of Section 331 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Code Act No: 15 of 1979.

The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Vs

1. Nammuni Kankanamge Nirantha Silva,

2. Mahadurage Catherin Nona.

3. Nammuni Kankanamge Titus Silva,

Accused.

And

Nammuni Kankanamge Nirantha Silva,

Thudugala Road,

Karaduruwa.

Dodamgoda.

1st Accused-Appellant.

Vs.

Hon. The Attorney General,

Attorney General Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondent.

Before

Counsel

Agued on

M.M.A Gaffoor, J &

K.K. Wickremasinghe, J.

Anuja Premaratne with Ironie Jayarathne and

Nayana Dissanayake for the Accused-Appellant.

Chethiya Goonesekara D.S.G for the Attorney-General.

29 th March 2016

Written Submissions by the Appellant filed on: 9th May 2016

Judgment on: 23rd June 2016

The Accused Appellant together with two others were indicted for committing Murder of one

K. Upul Nishantha de Silvaon the 3rd May 1996.

After trial the 2nd and the 3rd Accused who were father and mother of the 1st Accused were

acquitted. The Accused Appellant in this case was convicted for Culpable Homicide not

amounting to murder and sentenced for a term of 4 years Rigorous Imprisonment and a Fine of

Rupees 10,000 carrying default sentence of 6 months Simple Imprisonment. Thereafter the

Accused Appellant was enlarged on Bail pending Appeal.

When this appeal was taken up for argument, it was contended by the Counsel for the accused

appellant that the sentence imposed on the Accused Appellant was excessive. It was further

submitted that a suspended sentence would be more appropriate, having considered the

evidence in the case and the circumstances relevant to the accused appellant. Learned Deputy

Solicitor General conceded to the application made by the Counsel for the accused appellant.

The case for the prosecution was that the incident took place on the 3rd May 1996, which was

fallen on the Vesak Full Moon Poya Day. The eye witness (PW2) Karunamuni Jayaseeli had

testified that there had been an incident sometime prior to this incident where the accused

appellant and the deceased had a fight. Therefor the deceased had gone to the accused

appellant's house to confront the accused appellant with regard to that incident. According to the said witness, the accused appellant was making Vesak Lantterns. When the deceased came there, the accused appellant had brought a 'pofpiththa' and threw a blow to the deceased. .

The Medical evidence confirms this position and establishes that there was only one injury on

the head of the deceased which could have been caused by 'polpiththa'.lt is evident that the act of the Accused appel/ant was not a premeditated one caused with a murderous intention. The defence had marked 11 contradictions in the evidence of the sole eye witness.

PW7 had seen the deceased fallen.

The counsel for the appellant contended that he would confine his arguments only with regard

to bring down the sentence. He further submitted that the accused appellant was only 21yrs.of

age at the time of offence and he was waiting to begin his higher studies at the University of

Visual and Performing Arts. Thereafter he ended up as a driver and after the conviction; he has

lost his job and his pension. Presently it is 20 years after the incident and the accused appellant

is said to have been a father of four children bellow the age of 17 years.

According to the indictment this offence was committed on the 3rd March 1996.Therefor 20

years have lapsed after committing the offence.

In the case of Kamaradath De Soysa Siriwardena Vs the Attorney General CA 217/2003, the case

K.R.Karunaratne Vs The State SC 29/72-DC (Crim) Negambo 4687/1494278 NLR 413 was

followed.

It was held that "offence committed ten years ago- considerations applicable in suspending sentence"

Therefor conSidering above circumstances of the case we reduce the sentence to 2 years

Rigorous Imprisonment suspended for 10 years. We also make order to pay Rs. 50, 000 as

compensation to the victim of Crime (wife of the deceased). In the event the wife is no longer

living the legal heirs of the wife of the deceased would be entitled to above. In default of

compensation as above, a default sentence of 1 year rigorous imprisonment is imposed.

Subject to above variation of the sentence, this appeal stands dismissed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

M.M.A. Gaffoor J

I agree

Judge of the Court of Appeal