1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

CA Writ Application No:

255/2021

In the matter of an Application for mandates in

the nature of Writs of Certiorari and

Mandamus under and in terms of Article 140

of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

1. Hetti Arachchi Wickramage Aken

Thevnaka,

2. Galbokka Hewage Premani Dilani

Dilrukshi De Silva,

(both at No. 44/8, Rahula Road, Matara)

PETITIONERS

-Vs-

1. Francis Wellege,

The Principal of Rahula College (Matara)

and the Chairman of the Interview Board

to admit Students to Grade 1 for the year

2019.

1A. Sudath Samarawickrama,

The Principal, Rahula College (Matara).

1B. Samitha Kurukulasooriya,

The Principal, Rahula College (Matara).

2. S. S Rathnayaka,

The Vice Principal of Rahula College

(Matara) and a Member of the Interview

Board to admit Students to Grade 1 for the

year 2019.

2

2A. W. A. Wickramasinghe,

Deputy Principal of Rahula College

(Matara).

3. S. T Gunawardena,

Principal of Primary School of Rahula

College (Matara) and Member of the

Interview Board to admit Students to

Grade 1 for the year 2019.

3A. Pathmani Ganewatte,

Principal of Primary School of Rahula

College (Matara).

4. N. K Hettiarachchi,

Member of the School Development

Board of Rahula College Matara and a

Member of the Interview Board to admit

Students to Grade 1 for the year 2019.

5. Anura D. Kariyawasam,

Member of the Old Boy's Association of

Rahula College, Nupe, Matara and a

Member of the Interview Board to admit

Students to Grade 1 for the year 2019.

6. Sandya Pathiranawasam,

The Principal of Southland College

(Galle) and the Chairman of the Appeals

and Objections Board to admit Students

to Grade 1 for the year 2019.

7. Sarath Rubasinghe,

A teacher at Rahula College (Matara) and

a Member of the Appeals and Objections

Board to admit Students to Grade 1 for

the year 2019.

3

8. T. Hewawalgama,

Vice Principal of Sujatha College

(Matara) and a Member of the Appeals

and Objections Board to admit Students to

Grade 1 for the year 2019.

9. Lasitha Rajitha Walawage,

Member of the School Development

Board and a Member of the Appeals and

Objections Board to admit Students to

Grade 1 for the year 2019.

10. Vasika Nilan De Silva,

Member of the Old Boy's Association of

Rahula College, Nupe, Matara and a

Member of the Appeals and Objections

Board to admit Students to Grade 1 for the

year 2019.

All of the above 1st to 10th Respondents

are of Rahula College, Nupe, Matara.

11. Kithsiri Liyanagama,

Director - National Schools, Ministry of

Education.

11A. Prabath Nalaka

Director - National Schools, Ministry of

Education,

12. Prof. Kapila Perera,

The Secretary to the Ministry of

Education.

4

Before: M. T. Mohammed Laffar, J.

S. U. B. Karalliyadde, J.

Counsel: Asthika Devendra with A. Madushanka for the Petitioners.

S. Wimalasena, DSG with Ms. A. Weerakoon, SC for the Respondents.

Written submissions tendered on:

06.10.2023 by the Petitioners

27.10.2023 by the Respondents

Argued on: 02.08.2023

Decided on: 13.12.2023

12A. N. M. Ranasinghe,

The Secretary to the Ministry of

Education.

13. Prof. GL Peiris,

Minister of Education.

13A. Dinesh Gunawardena,

Minister of Education.

13B. Prof. G. L. Peiris,

Minister of Education.

13C. Hon. Susil Premajayantha,

Minister of Education.

All of the above 11th to 13th Respondents

are of Ministry of Education,

"Isurupaya", Battaramulla.

RESPONDENTS

5

S. U. B. Karalliyadde, J.

This Writ Application has been filed against the Respondents seeking relief regarding

the denial of the admission of the 1st Petitioner to Grade - 1 of the Rahula College,

Matara for the year 2019. The 2nd Petitioner is the mother of the 1st Petitioner and they

are residing at Rahula Road, Matara. The application for admission was preferred under

the category of children of residents within the proximity to the school mentioned in

Clause 3.1 of Circular No. 24/2018 marked as P-2 issued by the Ministry of Education

regarding the admission of children to Grade 1 in Government schools for the year

2019. At the interview held regarding the admission, the 2nd Petitioner was asked to

enter marks in the First Column of the Chart in the 2nd Schedule marked as P-6 which

the 1st Petitioner would be entitled to under that category according to her assessment.

When entering marks in P-6 for the proximity from the residence to the school in terms

of Clause 7.2.4 of P-2, the 2nd Petitioner had indicated only 32 marks out of 40. As

provided by Clause 7.2.4, if there are no other government schools with primary

sections located closer to the residence of the child than the school that applied for, the

child is entitled to full marks which is 40. If there are any other government schools

located closer to the residence of the child where he/she could be admitted other than

the school that is applied for, four marks should be deducted from the full marks in

respect of each such school. The 2nd Petitioner has put 32 marks after deducting 8 marks

from the full marks in P-6 on the footing that there are 3 schools which could be applied

for other than Rahula College. In terms of Clause 7.1.5 of P2, when deciding on

6

proximity to the desired school, straight distance ( ) from the residence of the

child to the school should be taken into consideration and marks would be deducted for

the schools located within a circle drawn taking into consideration the distance between

the main door of the childs residence and the main office of the desired school as a

radius. If it is difficult to have access to a school due to any natural obstruction such as

rivers, lagoons, marshy lands and forests, even though it is located within the circle

marks would not be deducted. The Petitioners assert that even though there are three

schools namely, D.S. Senanayake College, St. Thomas College and Presidents College

located within the area of the circle, only 8 marks should be deducted in respect of D.S.

Senanayake College and St. Thomas College and four marks should not be deducted in

respect of the Presidents College in terms of Clause 7.1.5 for the reason that Nilwala

River causes natural obstruction in accessing from the residence to that school.

Nevertheless, the Interview Board (1st to 5th Respondents) had deducted four marks in

respect of the Presidents College awarding 28 marks for the proximity from the

residence which resulted in the 1st Petitioner scoring only 88 marks in total at the

interview and being placed below the cut-off mark of 89. Even though the 2nd Petitioner

attempted to convince the Interview Board that the distance from their residence to the

Presidents College is double the distance from their residence to Rahula College across

Mahanama Bridge, the route which the Interview Board suggested, the 1st Petitioner

was not selected to the Rahula College.

7

Being aggrieved by the said decision of the 1st to 5th Respondents, the 2nd Petitioner

made an appeal dated 13.11.2018 marked as P7 to the Appeal and Objections Board

which consisted of 6th to 10th Respondents. However, the said Board was also of the

same view as the Interview Board and decided not to interfere with the marks allocated

to the 1st Petitioner by the Interview Board. Thereafter the 2nd Petitioner had complained

to the Human Rights Commission on 14.12.2018 (marked P8(a)) regarding the matter

and consequent to that, an Inquiry was held by the Human Rights Commission (the

Commission) and recommended to admit the 1st Petitioner to the Rahula College

Matara (P-9). However, by letter dated 16.03.2021 marked as P12(a), the Ministry of

Education intimidated the 2nd Petitioner that there was no possibility of implementing

the recommendation of the Commission.

By this Writ Application, the Petitioners seek the following substantive reliefs;

C. A mandate in the nature of Writ of Certiorari quashing the decision of the Interview

Board not to admit the 1st Petitioner to Rahula College Matara for the year 2019;

D. A mandate in the nature of Writ of Certiorari quashing the decision of the Appeal

and Objections Board not to admit the 1st Petitioner to Rahula College Matara for

the year 2019;

E. A mandate in the nature of Writ of Mandamus directing/compelling one or more or

all of the above Respondents to admit the 1st Petitioner to Grade - 3 or appropriate

Grade of Rahula College Matara;

8

F. In the alternative to the above prayers/mandates, a mandate in the nature of Writ of

Mandamus directing/compelling one or more or all of the above Respondents to

comply with the recommendation of the Human Rights Commission as reflected in

the document marked P9.

The position of the Petitioners is that even though the Presidents College is situated

within the circle drawn ( ) and the straight distance from their

residence to the President's College (across Nilwala river) is 862 Meters, the accessible

distance by road is about 2 Kilometres. The Petitioners state that from Rahula Road

they do not have access to public transportation and therefore to reach a road which has

public transportation, the 1st Petitioner has to come to either Hakmana Road, Galle Road

or Akurassa Road which has a distance of 700 Meters, 750 Meters and 1 Kilometer

from Rahula Road respectively. By public transportation, whichever road is used the

1st Petitioner has to cross the Mahanama Bridge and even then will only be able to reach

Matara Bus terminal resulting in travelling another 550 Meters on foot to reach the

Presidents College. When considering the straight distance, the applicants who reside

in the Kumarathunga Mawatha and Thotamuna areas are in closer proximity to the

Presidents College than the 1st Petitioner and those applicants have to travel only 350

Meters or 400 Meters to reach the Galle Road and by coming to Matara Bhodhiya

through Kumarathunga Mawatha they could easily reach the Presidents College.

Under the above-stated circumstances, the Petitioners argue that the 1st Petitioner is

9

entitled to the benefit of Clause 7.1.5 in P-2 and accordingly, the marks for the

proximity to the school should not be deducted in respect of Presidents College.

However, the position of the Respondents is that marks were deducted in respect of the

Presidents College as Nilwala River does not pose a natural obstruction to the

Petitioners. Since the Petitioners are residing close to Mahanama Bridge which they

could use to cross Nilwala River to reach Presidents College and they have access to

public transportation as per the Google map marked R1. Therefore, the Respondents

argue that the Petitioners cannot avail of the exception provided by Clause 7.1.5 of the

Circular marked as P-2 and they are attempting to take undue advantage of this Clause.

The position of the Respondents is that they have complied with the relevant Circular

and have acted within the law.

The central issue that the Court has to decide in the instant Application is whether

Nilwala River poses a natural obstruction in accessing the Presidents College from the

residence of the 1st Petitioners to be eligible for four marks which the Interview Board

had deducted. The Petitioners contend that Nilwala River is a natural obstruction but

the contention of the Respondents is that it is not. Therefore, it is abundantly clear that

both parties are at variance on a material fact that cannot be decided only on affidavit

evidence without considering the evidence of the parties. When material facts are in

dispute and the Court cannot make a decision only on the affidavit evidence, it refuses

to exercise the discretionary powers to issue Writs.

10

A.S. Choudri in his book titled Law of Writs and Fundamental Rights (2nd edn, Vol.2)

on page 449 states thus;

"Where facts are in dispute and in order to get at the truth, it is necessary that

the questions should be canvassed in a suit where parties would have ample

opportunity of examining their witnesses and the Court would be better able to

judge which version is correct, a writ will not issue."

Referring to the above-stated quoting, in the case of Thajudeen Vs. Sri Lanka Tea Board

and Another1, this Court has held thus;

That the remedy by way of an application for a Writ is not a proper substitute

for a remedy by way of a suit, especially where facts are in dispute and in order

to get at the truth, it is necessary that the questions should be canvassed in a

suit where the parties would have ample opportunity examining their witnesses

and the Court would be better able to judge which version is correct, has been

laid down in the Indian cases of Ghosh v. Damodar Valley Corporation,

Porraju v. General Manager B. N. Rly.

The Supreme Court in Francis Kulasooriya Vs. OIC-Police Station-Kirindiwela2

observed that,

1 (1981) 2 Sri LR 471 at page 474.

2 SC Appeal No. 52/2021, SC Minute of 14.07.2023.

11

Courts are reluctant to grant orders in the nature of writs when the matters

on which the relief is claimed are in dispute or in other words when the facts

are in dispute.

In Dr. Puvanendran and Another Vs. Premasiri and Two Others3 the Supreme Court

held that;

The writ of mandamus is principally a discretionary remedy - a legal tool for

the dispensation of justice when no other remedy is available. Given the power

of such a remedy, the Common Law surrounding this remedy requires multiple

conditions that must be met prior to the issuance of a writ by Court. The Court

will issue a writ only if (1) the major facts are not in dispute and the legal result

of the facts are not subject to controversy and

(2) the function that is to be compelled is a public duty with the power to perform

such duty.

Citing the above-stated decision, it was held in Wijenayake and others Vs. Minister of

Public Administration4 that disputed facts cannot be decided by a writ court.

In Administrative Law, by H. W. R. Wade and C.F. Forsyth, (9th edn, at page 260) it

has been stated that;

3 (2009) 2 SLR 107 at page 112.

4 (2011) 2 SLR 247.

12

"Although the contrast between questions which do and do not go to jurisdiction

was in principle clear-cut, it was softened by the court's unwillingness to enter

upon disputed questions of fact in proceedings for judicial review. Evidence of

facts is normally given on affidavit: and although the rules of the court made

provision for cross-examination, interrogatories, and discovery of documents,

and for the trial of issues of fact, the court did not often order them. The

procedure was well adapted for trying disputed facts. If the inferior tribunal

had to self-tried them, the court will not interfere except upon very strong

grounds. There has to be a clear excess of jurisdiction' without the trial of

disputed facts de novo. The questions of law and questions of facts were

therefore to be distinguished, as was explained by Devilin J. (R. v Fulham etc.

Rent Tribunal exp. Zerek).

Where the question of jurisdiction turns solely on a disputed point of law, it is

obviously convenient that the court should determine it then and there. But

where the dispute turns to a question of fact, about which there is a conflict of

evidence, the court will generally decline to interfere. Lord Wilberforce (R v

Home Secretary Zamir) similarly described the position of the court, which

hears applications for judicial review:

13

It considers the case on affidavit evidence, as to which cross-examination,

though allowable does not take place in practice. It is, as this case will

exemplify, not in a position to find out the truth between conflicting statements.

In case of conflict of evidence, the court will not interfere in the decision, where

there is evidence to justify a reasonable tribunal reaching the same

conclusion.

Since in the instant Application, dispute between the parties is whether Nilwala River

poses a natural obstruction for the 1st Petitioner to be entitled to the marks which were

not given by the members of the Interview Board in respect of the Presidents College

is a material fact which cannot be decided on the affidavit evidence alone, on the light

of the above-stated authorities and legal literature this Court decline to exercise its writ

jurisdiction.

The Petitioners have sought a mandate in the nature of Writ of Mandamus

directing/compelling Respondents to comply with the recommendation of the

Commission in the document marked as P-9. The learned Counsel appearing for the

Petitioners submitted to the Court that, in terms of the Human Rights Commission of

Sri Lanka Act, No. 21 of 1996 (the Act), the Respondents abide by to implement the

recommendations of the Commission. In terms of Section 14 of the Act, the

Commission can investigate an allegation of infringement of a fundamental right by

executive or administrative action. According to Section 15(3)(c) of the Act, if an

14

infringement is disclosed, the Commission can make such recommendations as it may

think fit, to the appropriate authority or person/s concerned, to prevent or remedy such

infringement. In terms of Section 15(7) of the Act, the Commission shall require any

authority or person/s to whom a recommendation is addressed to report to the

Commission/ action which such authority or person/s has taken to give effect to such

recommendation and it shall be the duty of every such authority or person/s to report to

the Commission accordingly. However, in terms of Section 15(8) of the Act, it is clear

that when any authority or person/s to whom a recommendation is addressed fails to

report to the Commission the action taken, the Commission can only report to His

Excellency the President who shall in return cause a copy of such report to be placed

before the Parliament.

In the case of Silva and Others Vs. Director of Health Services and Others5

Sriskandarajah J. held that, The recommendation of the Human Rights Commission

contained in P1 la and P12 does not take effect proprio vigour. There is no provision

in the said Act to enforce the recommendation of the said Commission. If the

Commission's recommendations are not complied with, the Commission can only

report to the President and in turn it can be placed in Parliament.

When considering the above-stated provisions of the Act and the authority, it is clear

that the recommendation of the Commission mentioned in P-12(a)/R4 does not take

5 (2010) 1 SLR 285 at page 290.

15

effect by its own force (proprio vigour) nor does the Act provide a mechanism to

implement its decision even though in the instant Application the Respondents had not

complied with the recommendation of the Commission.

Under the above-stated circumstances, I hold that the Petitioners are not entitled to the

Writs sought in the Petition to this Writ Application. Therefore, I dismiss the

Application without costs.

Application dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL M. T. Mohammed Laffar, J. I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL