IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

C. A. Case No. : 187/2013

H. C.Colombo Case No. : 3543/2006

In the matter of an Appeal

Against an order of the High

Court under Sec. 331 of the

Code of Criminal Procedure

Act No. 15 of 1979 and in terms of

the Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

Complainant

Vs

Suppiah Karupasamy

and now between

Suppiah Karupasamy,

Remand Prisons,

Welikada.

Accused

Accused-Appellant

Vs

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

Complainant Respondent

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

DECIDED ON

P. R. Walgama, J &

K. K. Wickramasinghe, J

AAL Priyantha Deniyaya for the Accused-Appellant.

Miss Anoopa de Silva S S C for the Attorney GeneraL

22nd February 2017

14th June 2017

K. K. WICKRAMASINGHE, J.

The Accused Appellant (herein after referred to as the Appellant) was indicted in the High Court

of Colombo on the following charge:-

On or between 28th September 2003 in Colombo 14, within the jurisdiction of this court the

accused committed rape on one Arsharathnam Subhashini who was under the age of 16 years

which is an offence punishable under section 364 (2)(e) of the Penal Code as amended by Act

No.22 of 1995.

The indictment was read over to the Accused Appellant and the trial was commenced before

the High Court Judge. After trial the Learned High Court Judge of Colombo found the Appellant

gUilty of the charge levelled against him. Accordingly, on osth June 2013 accused appellant was

convicted and sentenced to a term of 10 years rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 5,000.00

with a default sentence of 1 month imprisonment was imposed. Furthermore compensation

amounting to Rs. 50,000 was ordered to be paid to the prosecutrix (victim) and a default

sentence of one year simple imprisonment was also imposed.

Being aggrieved by the said conviction and sentence the Accused Appellant, made the instant

appeal to this court for the vacation of the same.

During the course of the argument counsel for the Accused Appellant raised following grounds

of Appeal:-

.. ' (l)The Learned High Court Judge failed to consider that the evidence of the prosecutrix does

not inspire credence and her story is highly improbable. The prosecutrix has mentioned that the

parents were not in good terms with the accused appellant and therefore this is a fabrication.

(2) The evidence of the prosecutrix and other witnesses contain lot of contradictions and

thereby the cr~dibility of the witnesses are challenged.

(3) The Learned High Court Judge has not considered the evidence of defence properly and it is

a violation of right to a fair trial.

Facts of the case:-

The prosecutrix in her evidence testified that the accused appellant was her neighbour and also

she referred to him as "seeya". On the day of the incident she had walked up to the tap that

was located within 20 feet from her house where it was close proximity to the accused

appellant's house. The appellant had called her and she had walked up to the appellant. He had

asked her to come inside the house. She was taken inside a room and raped her. Thereafter she

had rushed out of the house and had narrated this incident to a neighbour.

The neighbour and the mother of the prosecutrix have corroborated her evidence. The mother

of the prosecutrix, Kali Amma categorically taken up the position that she had no animosity

towards the accused appellant. Further testified that the appellant admitted his offence in front

of the villages.

The prosecutrix was produced before the JMO on the following day at 12.50 hrs. Iw was

revealed that there was a contusion on the hymen towards the right side of the hymen. The

doctor was of the view that there was a penile penetration. His finding was consistent with

Inter Labial Penetration and also the said injury was consistent with the history.

The investigation was conducted by the ole of Grandpass Police StatioI'). The appellant was

handed over to him by the villagers. He had observed, at that time the appellant's lip was

cracked and contused.

When perusing evidence it is abundantly clear that the credibility of the prosecutrix is

established without doubt. Therefore I do not see any merit in the argument of the learned

counsel for the appellant. Further the evidence of the prosecutrix is convincing.

It is pertinent to note that in the Bhoginbhai Hirjibhai Vs State of Gujarate (1983) AIR S.C.753

stated that "Corroboration is not a sine qua non for a conviction in a rape case. In the Indian setting, refusal to act on testimony of a victim of sexual assault in the absence of corroboration, as a rule is adding insult to injury ................ "

Further in the case of Sunil and others Vs AG 1986(1) S.L.R. Page 230 it is stated that "It is very dangerous to act on the uncorroborated testimony of a women victim of a sex offence, but if evidence is convincing such evidence could be acted on even in the absence of corroboration."

In the case of, Radhu Vs State of Madya Pradesh (2007) 12 se 57, Indian Supreme Court has

observed that lithe court should, at the same time, bear in mind that false charges of rape are nat uncommon. There have also been rare instances where a parent has persuaded a gullible or obedient daughter to make a false charge of a rape either to take revenge or extort money or to get rid of financial liability. Whether there was rape or not wQuld depend ultimately on the facts and circumstances of each case". Counsel for the appellant attempt to convince court that the

appellant was falsely implicated but in this instant case, prosecution has amply demonstrated

that it was not a false allegation.

Further, an Indian Supreme Court case Banti Vs State of Madhya Pradesh (2004) 1 see 414, it

was held that "It is true the evidence of the defence witness is not to be ignored by the courts. Like any other witness, his evidence has to be tested on the touchstone of reliability, credibility and trustworthiness, particularly when he attempts to resile from and speak against records and in derogation of his earlier conduct and behaviour. If after doing so, the Court finds it to be untruthful; there is no legal bar in deserting it", but when perusing judgement of the instant

case, it is evident that the learned high court judge has adequately considered the defence

evidence and he had not ignored the same as submitted by the counsel for the appellant.

When conSidering her age and background, the omissions pertaining to her statements are

reasonably justified.

The Learned High Court judge who had the opportunity of watching her giving evidence had

observed her credibility and he was satisfied that she was a credible witness.

Therefore when considering the above it is abundantly clear that omissions on the part of the

prosecution have been adequately explained. Medical evidence corroborates the version of the

prosecutrix. Therefore we have no reason to interfere with the findings of the learned High

Court Judge and thereby we affirm the conviction and the sentence.

Hereby the Appeal is dismissed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P.R.Walgama, J

I Agree

Judge of the Court of Appeal