1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

In the matter of an Application for Writs in the nature of Certiorari, Mandamus and Prohibition under Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. CA (Writ) Application No: 230/2018

Captain (Temporary) S.A.M.D. Seneviratne Parakumgama, Thambala, Polonnaruwa.

PETITIONER

Vs. 1. Lt. Gen. N.U.M.M.W. Senanayake, Commander of the Sri Lanka Army.

1A. Lt. Gen. Shavendra Silva,

Commander of the Sri Lanka Army, Army Headquarters, Sri Jayawardenapura, Kotte.

2. Maj. Gen. A.P. De. Z. Wickremarathne, Commander, Sri Lanka Army Volunteer Force.

2A. Maj. Gen. H.J.S. Gunawardena,

Commander, Sri Lanka Army Volunteer Force, Volunteer Force Headquarters, Salawa, Kosgama.

3. Maj. Gen. Ruwan Kulatunga, Colonel of the Regiment.

2

3A. Maj. Gen. H.M.J.K. Gunaratne,

Colonel of the Regiment, Sri Lanka Light Infantry, Regiment, Panagoda. 4. Major Weerasinghe, Commanding Officer 2nd Battalion, Sri Lanka Light Infantry Regiment. 4A. Major W.M.W.G.C.K.W. Bandara

Commanding Officer 2nd Battalion, Sri Lanka Light Infantry Regiment, Army Camp Thalawatta, Ariyali, Jaffna. 5. Maj. Gen. Ajith Wijesinghe, Military Secretary. 5A. Maj. Gen. P.J. Gamage,

Military Secretary. 6. Kapila Waidyaratne,P.C., Secretary, Ministry of Defence, 6A. Maj. Gen. G.D.H. Kamal Gunaratne,

Secretary, Ministry of Defence, No. 15/5, Baladaksha Mawatha, Colombo 3. 7. Maj. Gen. W.P.D.P. Fernando. 8. Maj. Gen. D.G.I. Karunarathne. 9. Brig. M.A.S.K. Muhandiram. 10. Brig. K.G.D. Perera. 11. Maj. Gen. W.A. Wanniarachchci.

5th, 5A, 7th 11th Respondents, at the Army Headquarters, Sri Jayawardenapura, Kotte.

RESPONDENTS

3

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J Arjuna Obeyesekere, J Counsel: Pasindu Silva for the Petitioner Ms. Nayomi Kahawita, Senior State Counsel for the Respondents Argued on: 8th June 2020 Written Submissions: Tendered on behalf of the Petitioner on 11th February 2020 and 15th June 2020. Tendered on behalf of the Respondents on 22nd June 2020 Decided on: 10th July 2020

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J

The Petitioner had joined the Volunteer Force of the Sri Lanka Army as an

Officer Cadet on 26th August 2008. Having completed his initial period of

training, the Petitioner had been commissioned as a Second Lieutenant on 2nd

January 2010. The Petitioner had thereafter been promoted as a Lieutenant on

2nd January 2013, and as a Captain (Temporary) on 1st June 2016.

The Petitioner states that in terms of Regulation 15(1) and 15(2) of the Sri

Lanka Army (Volunteer Force and Volunteer Reserve) Regulations, 19851 (the

the Volunteer Force Regulations), an Officer may be promoted to the

substantive rank of Captain on completion of three years efficient service in

the rank of Lieutenant on the active strength of the Volunteer Force, and

provided that:

1 Published in Extraordinary Gazette No. 476/26 dated 20th October 1987.

4

(a) The Officer has passed the examination for that rank;

(b) The Officer has regularly attended training camps, parades, mobilizations

and participated in other regimental activities to the satisfaction of the

Commanding Officer of his Regiment; and

(c) The Officer has been recommended by his Commanding Officer and

Commandant, Volunteer Force, as being suitable for promotion.

The Petitioner has no disciplinary orders made against him, except an incident

that had taken place in August 2010 where he had been absent without official

leave (AWOL) for a period of five days due to medical reasons. The Petitioner

states that a summary trial was held against him, and that he was reprimanded

over the incident, in addition to a penalty of six days salary being deducted

from his salary.

I must state at the outset that I am in agreement with the submission of the

learned Senior State Counsel that discipline is paramount in an institution such

as the Sri Lanka Army, and that the Commander, Sri Lanka Army, who has been

entrusted with the overall task of maintaining discipline, shall be entitled to

consider the disciplinary record of an Officer when deciding on the promotion

and retirement of an Officer.

The following passage of Justice Sripavan (as he then was) in Wikramaratne vs

Commander of the Army and Others2, sets out clearly the role of this Court

when considering issues such as the non-promotion and retirement of Officers

within the Armed Forces:

2 CA (Writ) Application No. 800/2006 CA Minutes of 07th January 2008.

5

in service matters, the 1st Respondent should be left with a free hand to

make decisions with regard to the internal administration of the Army in

the interest of efficiency, discipline, exigencies of service etc. The Court

cannot interfere with the appointment or promotion unless the first

respondent has acted unlawfully, arbitrarily, or guided by ulterior

considerations which are discriminatory or unfair.

The Petitioner states that while he was expecting to be confirmed in the rank

of Captain, he had been served with a letter dated 9th February 2018, annexed

to the petition marked P12 informing him as follows:

The Army Board No. 3 assembled on 19th December 2017 examined the

SLAVF Board proceedings and stipulated criteria with regard to the

Confirmation of the rank of T/Captain and determining their career

progression. The Board having perused your record on AWOL,

recommended you to be retired without further promotions, and be

confirmed in the temporary rank one day prior to your retirement based

on the directions at paragraph 1 a (1) of Army Head Quarters Policy Letter

on AWOL Officers Reference MSB/A/01 (29) dated 31st August 2016.

Annexed to the petition marked P13 is the Policy Letter referred to in P12

containing the Policy Decision on AWOL Officers issued by the Military

Secretary. The concurrence of the Commander of the Army has been granted

to implement the policy contained therein, in respect of Officers who had been

AWOL after 20th May 2009. I have examined P13 and observe that it contains

provisions relating to those who have been AWOL for less than 7 days, and

those who have been AWOL for a period of 8 21 days. Paragraph (1) of the

former category, which reads as follows, would apply to the Petitioner:

6

(a) Officers with a service of less than 10 years in the rank of Major or

below could be retained in the service until they complete 10 years of

reckonable service with due promotion in order to be eligible for the

service gratuity. Further, these Officers should not be considered for

any foreign courses / foreign visits / official visits and UN deployments.

They should not be considered for further command and instructor

appointments.

Aggrieved by the decision in P12, the Petitioner filed this application, seeking

inter alia the following relief:

a) A Writ of Certiorari to quash the decision reflected in P12;3

b) A Writ of Certiorari to quash the decision made against the Petitioner by

the Army Selection Board No. 3;4

c) A Writ of Certiorari to quash the application of the Policy decision in P13

in so far as it affects the Petitioner;5

d) A Writ of Mandamus directing the Respondents to confirm the Petitioner

in the rank of Captain with effect from 14th January 2018;

e) A Writ of Prohibition prohibiting the Respondents from retiring or

discharging the Petitioner from the Sri Lanka Army without confirming

him in the rank of Captain with effect from 14th January 2018.

I am of the view that the prayer for the Writ of Mandamus is misconceived in

view of the fact that the Petitioner is not entitled to be promoted to the rank

3 Paragraph (b) of the prayer to the petition. 4 Paragraph (c) of the prayer to the petition. 5 Paragraph (d) of the prayer to the petition.

7

of Captain as of right. The Writ of Prohibition cannot be considered for the

same reason i.e. that the promotion is at the discretion of the Sri Lanka

Army. I shall therefore only proceed to consider whether the Petitioner is

entitled to one or more of the above Writs of Certiorari.

When this application was taken up for argument, the learned Senior State

Counsel informed this Court that P13 has been rescinded, and replaced with

Army Order No. 11/2019. In paragraph 5 of the written submissions of the

Respondents, it has been submitted that with the repeal and replacement of

Policy Decision in P13 with a new Army Order, the Petitioners confirmation

application would have to be reconsidered in terms of the prevailing Army

Order, and thus, on that account both P12 and P13 have no force and avail at

present. However, in the absence of a formal withdrawal of P12, the learned

Counsel for the Petitioner submitted that he has no option, but to proceed

with this application.

It is agreed between the parties that confirmation of an Officer in the rank of

Captain takes place in the following manner:6

a) At the request of the Military Secretary, the Commanding Officer of the

2nd Battalion, Sri Lanka Light Infantry submits his recommendation on the

suitability of the promotion of the Petitioner, to the Colonel of the

Petitioners regiment;

b) The Colonel of the Regiment is required to submit the above

recommendation, together with his recommendation, to the Sri Lanka

Army Volunteer Force Headquarters;

6 Vide paragraph 10 of the petition, and paragraph 3 of the Statement of Objections.

8

c) The Commandant of the Sri Lanka Army Volunteer Force is required to

submit the above recommendations, together with his recommendation,

to the Military Secretary;

d) The Directorate of Training is required to send the results of the

Petitioners Physical Efficiency Test to the Military Secretary;

e) The Army Selection Board No. 3 shall consider the aforesaid

recommendations and submit its decision to the Commander, Sri Lanka

Army.

The promotion of the Petitioner has been recommended by the Commanding

Officer of the 2nd Battalion, Sri Lanka Light Infantry, the Colonel of the

Regiment, and the Commandant of the Sri Lanka Army Volunteer Force, as

borne out by the following documents annexed to the petition:

a) P8a The recommendation of the Commanding Officer of the 2nd

Battalion, Sri Lanka Light Infantry;

b) P7 - The recommendation of the Colonel of the Regiment, which reads

as follows: fuu ks,Odrs oekg tallfha jsOdhl wOsldrs jYfhka rdPldrs bgq

lrkq ,nhs' fkdjsioqk fpdaokdm;a jskh rfmdara;= iy jskh lv lsrSus lsisjla fkdue;s fudyq mjrkq ,nk rdPldrska b;d j.lSfuka hq;=j bgq lrkq ,nk ks<Odrsfhl= jk w;r" mq,aysusia ffjoH jdra:djo hym;a jYfhka we;' ta wkqj

;d$lms;dka ks,h ia:sr lsrSu i|yd ksrafoaY lrus'

c) P8b - The recommendation of the Commandant of the Sri Lanka Army

Volunteer Force.

The Petitioner has produced marked P9a P9f, the Annual Confidential

Reports submitted by his Commanding Officer. I have examined the said

documents and in particular P9f which is the Report for the year 2017, and

9

observe that the promotion of the Petitioner to the rank of Captain has been

recommended by the Initiating Officer as well as the Reviewing Officer.

The primary argument of the learned Counsel for the Petitioner was that the

automatic application of the above Policy in P13 on a retrospective basis is

arbitrary, irrational and unreasonable, and that the Army Selection Board No. 3

must take into consideration the aforementioned recommendations and

reports, in arriving at its decision.

Having examined the decision of the Army Selection Board No. 3 conveyed by

P12, it is clear that the decision to retire the Petitioner has been taken solely

in view of the policy decision in P13. There has not been a consideration of

the recommendations contained in P7, P8a and P8b, nor have the Annual

Confidential Reports on the Petitioner for the period 2013 2016 been

considered by the Army Selection Board No.3. This is contrary to the

aforementioned provisions of Regulations 15(1) and (2) of the Volunteer Force

Regulations.

While the considerations applicable for the promotion of an Officer to the rank

of Captain would be different to the criteria applied when considering the

promotion of a Second Lieutenant to the rank of Lieutenant, the fact of the

matter is that the aforementioned AWOL incident occurred at a time when the

Petitioner was a Second Lieutenant but yet, that had not prevented the

Petitioner from being promoted on two occasions after the AWOL incident.

In Colonel J.D.A Gunasekara vs Lt. Gen. N.U.M.M.W Senanayake, Commander

of the Sri Lanka Army and Others,7 this Court was called upon to consider a

Circular similar to P13, which was applicable to those holding the rank of

7 CA (Writ) Application No. 126/2018; CA Minutes of 9th June 2020.

10

Colonel and above. Having considered the legality of applying the AWOL policy

on an automatic basis with retrospective effect, this Court had held as follows:

This Court has examined P16 and observes that it does not contain the

rationale for applying on a retrospective basis a Policy of automatically

depriving Officers of their promotion on the basis that they have been

absent without leave. Nor has this Court been presented with any material

or explanation in the Statement of Objections as to the rationale behind

the retrospective application of such policy automatically.8 What is of

significance is that after pleading guilty to the charge of being absent

without leave in August 1995, the Petitioner has been promoted on three

occasions, and has served in operational areas for a significant period.

This demonstrates that the presence of the Petitioner who has been

absent without leave for three days has not been considered as being

detrimental to the objects of the Sri Lanka Army. While there could have

been a perfectly justified reason as to how such an incident can impact the

Sri Lanka Army when considering an Officer to the rank of Brigadier, the

fact of the matter is that no explanation has been offered in this regard.

Thus, while the fact that an Officer has been AWOL in the past can be one

of the factors that could be considered when considering an Officer for

promotion, it is the view of this Court that the automatic application of

such a policy on a retrospective basis, as contained in P16 is

unreasonable.

8 The policy in P16 was challenged in Major General Nirmal Ajith Dharmaratne vs Lieutenant General N.U.M. Mahesh W. Senanayake and Others [CA (Writ) Application No. 375/2018; CA Minutes of 30th April 2019], on the basis that it was illegal and irrational. The petitioner in that case had sought an interim order preventing the said Policy being applied to him. This Court, having considered the fact that the respondents had not provided any rationale for the introduction of the said policy and that too only in respect of those who had been absent without leave prior to 20th May 2009, issued an interim order staying the operation of P16 in so far as it related to the petitioner in that application.

11

The above decision would apply with equal force to the facts of this

application.

Taking into consideration all of the above factors, it is my view that the

decision to retire the Petitioner solely on the basis of P13 is unreasonable and

irrational, and that the decision of the Army Selection Board No. 3 as conveyed

to the Petitioner by P12 is liable to be quashed by a Writ of Certiorari.

There is one other matter that I wish to advert to. The learned Senior State

Counsel drew the attention of this Court to Regulation 10 of the Volunteer

Force Regulations which specifies that Regulations relating to Officers of the

Regular Force of the Sri Lanka Army for the time being in force shall apply to

Officers of the Volunteer Force, except where special provision has been made

in the said Regulations. The learned Senior State Counsel stated that Army

Order No. 11/2019 titled Promotion and Career Progression Criteria of the Sri

Lanka Army- Lieutenant, Colonel and below has been made applicable to

Officers of the Volunteer Force as well, unless the Volunteer Force Regulations

contain provisions which are contrary.

Paragraph 54 of the said Army Order specifies that Officers who are AWOL for

less than 21 days should be considered for promotion. Thus, it is clear that the

Petitioner shall not be disqualified from being confirmed in the rank of Captain,

based solely on the AWOL incident that occurred in 2010.

The learned Counsel for the Petitioner drew the attention of this Court to

paragraph 72 of the said Army Order which reads as follows:

12

The Officers, who have been AWOL, shall not be considered for

promotion to the rank of Temporary Major. Such officers are to retire

upon reaching the maximum permissible period in the substantive rank of

Captain. However, in the event an officer requests to continue his/ her

service, until completion of 20 years of reckonable service, he/she may be

granted to continue the service on extremely compassionate grounds, in

order to facilitate them to complete 20 years of service to be eligible for

service pension and gratuity under Section 1(8)(1) of the Army Pensions

and Gratuities Code, 1981.

The learned Counsel for the Petitioner submitted that an Officer in the Regular

Force of the Sri Lanka Army must retire from service upon completion of the

maximum period in a particular rank, unless promoted to the next rank during

that period. He submitted that a Captain in the Volunteer Force is entitled to

remain in active service until he reaches 50 years of age and is thereafter

eligible to be transferred to the Volunteer Reserve. He therefore submitted

that the considerations applicable to the retirement of an Officer in the

Regular Force upon reaching the maximum period in a particular rank does not

apply to the Petitioner and for that reason, paragraph 72 of the said Army

Order would not be applicable to the Petitioner.

The learned Senior State Counsel in response has submitted as follows:

It is further submitted that the option given to an officer who had failed

to gain a promotion to the next rank to continue in service in a substantive

rank, until such officer completes 20 years, is applicable to the officers

attached to the Regular Service, in order to give such officers the

opportunity to become entitled to service pension and gratuity under the

Army Pensions and Gratuity Code of 1981.

13

However, in the case of an officer attached to the Volunteer Force of the

Army Service, if any such officer becomes unsuccessful in getting a

promotion to the next rank such Volunteer Service Officer by virtue of the

provisions in Section 29(1) of the Volunteer Force Regulations can remain

in the substantive rank until such officer completes the maximum ages

stipulated there in for the respective ranks. Upon such officer completing

the maximum ages in such substantive rank, he/she shall be transferred to

the Volunteer Reserve and steps taken to retire from the said Reserve..

Thus, while paragraph 72 of the said Army Order would not apply to the

Petitioner, it is my view that the provisions contained in the Volunteer Force

Regulations, together with any other provisions applicable to Officers in the

Regular Force which are not contrary to the said Regulations, would have to be

followed when considering the retirement of the Petitioner from the Volunteer

Force of the Sri Lanka Army.

In the above circumstances, I issue the Writs of Certiorari prayed for in

paragraphs (b), (c) and (d) of the prayer to the petition. I make no order with

regard to costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal Mahinda Samayawardhena, J I agree

Judge of the Court of Appeal