==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA(PHC)41/2019

Page 1 of 11

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application under Article 154(P)(3)(b) of the Constitution for Revision of Order dated 14.02.2019 delivered in High Court Kegalle 4986/Rev.

IN THE MAGISTRATES COURT 1. Dissanayake Mudiyanselage Nilakshika

Gunawardena, 2. Ganihi Arachchilage Chatura Niroshana

Chandraratne,

Both of No.01, Winston Wickramasinghe Mawatha, Kagalle.

Petitioners Vs.

1. Padmini Dayanika Panabokke,

Molagoda, Alapitiyawatta, waligalla, Gampola.

Respondent 1. Aruni Ruwendrani Molagoda,

Alapitiyawatta, Waligalla. Gampola. Now residing at No. 29, St. Marys' Avenue, Collinwood, Middlesex, England. 2. Munasinghe Arachchige Preethi

Suminda Munasinghe,

Court of Appeal Case No: CA(PHC)41/2019 High Court of Kegalle Case No: 4986/Rev Magistrate Court of Kegalle Case No: 33532/15

CA(PHC)41/2019

Page 2 of 11

No. 1/1, Winston Wickramasighe Mawatha, Kegalle. 3. Marabelage Emaline Nona,

Winston Wickramasighe Mawatha, Kegalle. 4. Wiyannalage Renuka Tharangani,

Winston Wickramasighe Mawatha, Kegalle. 5. Duminda Nuwan Kumara,

Winston Wickramasighe Mawatha, Kegalle.

Intervenient-Respondent IN THE HIGH COURT OF KEGALLE

1. Padmini Dayanika Panabokke,

Molagoda, Alapitiyawatta, waligalla, Gampola.

Respondent – Petitioner

1. Aruni Ruwendrani Molagoda,

Alapitiyawatta, Waligalla. Gampola. Now residing at No. 29, St. Marys' Avenue, Collinwood, Middlesex, England.

1st Intervenient-Respondent-Petitioner Vs.

CA(PHC)41/2019

Page 3 of 11

1. Dissanayake Mudiyanselage Nilakshika

Gunawardena, 2. Ganihi Arachchilage Chatura Niroshana

Chandraratne,

Both of No.01, Winston Wickramasinghe Mawatha, Kagalle.

Petitioner-Respondents

2. Munasinghe Arachchige Preethi

Suminda Munasinghe, No. 1/1, Winston Wickramasighe Mawatha, Kegalle. 3. Marabelage Emaline Nona,

Winston Wickramasighe Mawatha, Kegalle. 4. Wiyannalage Renuka Tharangani,

Winston Wickramasighe Mawatha, Kegalle. 5. Duminda Nuwan Kumara,

Winston Wickramasighe Mawatha, Kegalle.

Intervenient-Respondent-Respondents

NOW IN THE COURT OF APPEAL

1. Padmini Dayanika Panabokke,

Molagoda, Alapitiyawatta, waligalla, Gampola

Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant

CA(PHC)41/2019

Page 4 of 11

2. Aruni Ruwendrani Molagoda,

Alapitiyawatta, Waligalla, Gampola. Now residing at No. 29, St. Marys' Avenue, Collinwood, Middlesex, England.

1st Intervenient Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant

Vs

1. Dissanayake Mudiyanselage Nilakshika

Gunawardena, 2. Ganihi Arachchilage Chatura Niroshana

Chandraratne, Both of No.01, Winston Wickramasinghe Mawatha, Kagalle.

Petitioner - Respondent - Respondents.

2. Munasinghe Arachchige Preethi Suminda

Munasinghe, No. 1/1, Winston Wickramasighe Mawatha, Kegalle. 3. Marabelage Emaline Nona,

Winston Wickramasighe Mawatha, Kegalle.

4. Wiyannalage Renuka Tharangani,

Winston Wickramasighe Mawatha, Kegalle. 5. Duminda Nuwan Kumara,

Winston Wickramasighe Mawatha, Kegalle.

Intervenient-Respondent-Respondent-Respondents

CA(PHC)41/2019

Page 5 of 11

Before : D. THOTAWATTA, J. K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J. Counsel : Dr. Sunil Cooray for the Appellant. Janaka Edirisinghe 1st and 2nd Petitioner-Respondent-Respondents and 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th Intervenient-Respondent-Respondent-Respondents. Preliminary Objection raised on : 16.09.2025 Written Submissions of the Respondent-Petitioner -Appellant and the 1st Intervenient -Respondent-Petitioner- Appellant tendered on (on the preliminary objection) : Not tendered. Written Submissions of the 1st and 2nd Petitioner- Respondent-Respondents And 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th Intervenient-Respondent- Respondent-Respondents tendered on (on the preliminary objection) : Not tendered.

Decided on (on the preliminary objection) : 11.02.2026

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

When this appeal came on for final hearing before us on 16.09.2025, the learned

Counsel for the 1st and 2nd Petitioner-Respondent-Respondents and the 2nd, 3rd,

CA(PHC)41/2019

Page 6 of 11

4th and 5th Intervenient-Respondent-Respondent-Respondents (hereinafter

called and referred to as ‘the Respondents’) had raised to Court a preliminary

legal objection as to the maintainability of the instant appeal on the premise that

appeal is out of time and as such appeal should be rejected in limine. Learned

President’s Counsel for the Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant and 1st

Intervenient-Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant (hereinafter called and referred to

as ‘the Appellants’) had while conceding the sustainability of the preliminary

objection so raised, by the Respondents that the appeal is out of time,

nevertheless, urged this Court to act in revision. Respective Counsel agreed to

abide by a decision of this Court on the preliminary objection on the strength of

the written submissions and both parties were thus, directed to file written

submissions in Court setting out their respective positions with regard to the

preliminary objection on or before the day appointed for that purpose by this

Court. However, it is to be observed that neither party had furnished written

submissions to this Court within the stipulated period of time as directed by this

Court. Hence, we will proceed to hear and determine the preliminary objection

on the strength of the material available on record.

Instant appeal arises from an order of the learned High Court Judge of the

Sabaragamuwa Province holden at Kegalle dated14.02.2019 (hereinafter called

and referred to as ‘the Order’) made in the exercise of the revisionary jurisdiction

vested in him under Article 154P(3)(b) of the Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka (hereinafter called and referred to as ‘the

Constitution) and Rule 2(I)(a) of the Court of Appeal (Procedure for Appeals from

CA(PHC)41/2019

Page 7 of 11

High Courts) Rules 1988 provides for the procedure in respect of the appeals

from orders made by a High Court in the exercise of its jurisdiction under Article

154P(3)(b) of the Constitution which enacts that, “By lodging within fourteen

days from the time of such judgement or order being passed or made with such

High Court, a petition of appeal addressed to the Court of Appeal” and Rule 3(I)

thereof, provides for the manner in which the computation of time should be

made which enacts that, “In computing the time within which an appeal shall be

preferred, the day on which the judgement or order complained of was

pronounced shall be included, but all Saturdays, Sundays and public holidays

shall be excluded.”.

A careful perusal of the record makes it manifest, that the order sought to be

impugned by the Appellants in the instant appeal had been pronounced by the

learned High Court Judge of the Sabaragamuwa Province holden at Kegalle on

14.02.2019 whereas the instant appeal had been preferred to this Court on

11.03.2019.

Applying Rule 3(I) of the Court of Appeal (Procedure for Appeals from High

Courts) Rules 1988 to the facts of the instant appeal, order sought to be

impugned by the Appellants in the instant appeal had been pronounced by the

High Court of Sabaragamuwa Province holden at Kegalle on 14.02.2019, and the

14th day thus, fell on 07.03.2019, which was a Thursday, when, the 14 day

period is computed this way; 10 days in February 2019, namely; 14, 15, 18, 20,

21, 22, 25, 26, 27 and 28 and 4 days in March 2019, namely; 1st ,5th ,6th and 7th

CA(PHC)41/2019

Page 8 of 11

exclusive of Saturdays (16th and 23rd), Sundays (17th and 24th) and Public

Holidays (19th) of the month of February 2019 and also, exclusive of Saturdays

(2nd), Sundays (3rd) and Public Holidays (4th) of the Month of March.

Hence, appeal is clearly, out of time as rightly, contended by the learned Counsel

for the Respondents and as rightly, admitted by the learned President’s Counsel

for the Appellants. In the result, appeal is bad in law and therefore, it should be

rejected in-limine.

The pivotal question that would then, arise for our consideration is whether this

is a fit and proper case for this Court to invoke its extra-ordinary revisionary

jurisdiction vested in it by Article 138 of the Constitution in revision of the order

sought to be impugned in the instant appeal as urged by the learned President’s

Counsel for the Appellants.

First and foremost, it is to be observed that, Appellants had not furnished to this

Court written submissions as directed by this Court and therefore, they had not

in any manner, substantiated nor elaborated the application made to this Court

urging the instant appeal be considered as an application in revision

notwithstanding it is out of time. Hence, it should be rejected in-limine for want

of substantiation and/or elaboration thereof.

Besides, upon a careful scrutiny of the judgement of the learned Magistrate of

Kegalle dated 15.10.2015, it becomes abundantly, clear that he had firstly, dealt

with the threshold question as to whether breach of peace was threatened or

likely, and then, come to a clear finding on it on the material available on record

CA(PHC)41/2019

Page 9 of 11

and thereafter, proceeded to hear and determine the application under section

69 of the Primary Courts Procedure Act No. 44 of 1979 and thus, come to a

definite finding as to whether the Petitioners before him had acquired a right in

the nature of servitude in and over the disputed right of way on the material

available on record as rightly, held by the learned High Court Judge of the

Sabaragamuwa Province holden at Kegalle in his order.

Hence, there appears no exceptional circumstances disclosed in their petition of

appeal furnished to this Court by the Appellants warranting this Court for the

invocation of the extra-ordinary revisionary jurisdiction vested in us in revision

of the impugned orders of both the learned High Court Judge of Kegalle and the

learned Magistrate of Kegalle; nor, had there been anything to show that

impugned orders would shock the conscience of this Court; nor had there been

anything to show that impugned orders are palpably wrong; nor, had there been

anything to show that impugned orders had caused any positive miscarriage of

justice to the Appellants in the instant appeal.

I would therefore, see no reason whatsoever, which would warrant this Court to

consider the instant appeal as an application in revision as urged by the learned

President’s Counsel notwithstanding the appeal is out of time.

Hence, I would see no merit in the application made to this Court by the learned

President’s Counsel for the Appellants and as such, it should be rejected in-

limine.

CA(PHC)41/2019

Page 10 of 11

Above all, there is a grave jurisdictional issue that would in my opinion, disentitle

the application so made to Court by the learned President’s Counsel for the

Appellants from succeeding and it may now, be examined.

Instant appeal has arisen from an order made by the learned High Court Judge

of Sabaragamuwa Province holden at Kegalle in the exercise of its concurrent

and/or mediate revisionary jurisdiction vested in him under and in terms of

Article 154P(3)(b) of the Constitution to be read with Article 138 thereof, and if

the instant application to consider the instant appeal as an application in

revision is to be allowed by this Court, it will have the effect of exercising the

concurrent and/or mediate revisionary jurisdiction by this Court vested in it by

Article 138 of the Constitution to be read with Article 154P(3)(b) thereof which

had already, been exercised by the learned High Court Judge of the

Sabaragamuwa Province holden at Kegalle in the exercise of the concurrent

and/or mediate revisionary jurisdiction vested in him by Article 154P(3)(b) of the

Constitution to be read with Article 138 thereof, for which this Court has no

jurisdiction under Article 138 of the Constitution to be read with Article

154P(3)(b) thereof as held by this Court in plethora of decisions including the

recent pronouncement of this Court in CA/CPA/0073/2025-CA Minutes-

31.10.2025.

In view of the foregoing, I would proceed to reject the application made to this

Court by the learned President’s Counsel for the Appellants urging the instant

CA(PHC)41/2019

Page 11 of 11

appeal to be considered as an application in revision notwithstanding the appeal

is out of time.

Hence, I would dismiss the instant application with costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL