Page 1 of 13

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of

section 331 (1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No- 15 of 1979, read with

Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Court of Appeal No: Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

CA/HCC/0080/2020 COMPLAINANT

Vs.

High Court of Panadura Weddikkarage Thusharika Priyadarshani

Case No: HC/3380/2016 Silva

ACCUSED

AND NOW BETWEEN

Weddikkarage Thusharika Priyadarshani

Silva

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

The Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12

RESPONDENT

Page 2 of 13

Before : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

: P. Kumararatnam, J.

Counsel : Neranjan Jayasinghe for the Accused Appellant

: Sudarshana De Silva, DSG for the Respondent

Argued on : 27-07-2022

Written Submissions : 19-03-2021 (By the Accused-Appellant)

: 04-05-2021 (By the Respondent)

Decided on : 05-09-2022

Sampath B Abayakoon, J.

This is an appeal by the accused-appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

appellant) on being aggrieved by her conviction and the sentence by the learned

High Court Judge of Panadura.

The appellant was indicted before the High Court of Panadura for having in her

possession 1.38 grams of Diacetylmorphine, commonly known as Heroin on 5th

August 2015, which is an offence punishable in terms of Poisons Opium and

Dangerous Drugs (Amendment) Ordinance No. 13 of 1984.

She was also charged with trafficking the said quantity of Heroin which was also

an offence punishable in terms of the same Ordinance.

After trial, the learned High Court Judge of Panadura found the appellant guilty

as charged by his judgement dated 11th June 2020. Accordingly, she was

sentenced to a 10-year rigorous imprisonment on each of the 2 counts, and on

count one, she was ordered to pay a fine of Rs. 100,000/- and in default, to serve

a rigorous imprisonment term of 1 year.

The 10-year prison term imposed on each of the counts was ordered to run

concurrently.

Page 3 of 13

Facts in brief.

PW-01 was the Officer-In-Charge (OIC) of the Angulana Police Station. Upon

receiving an information on 5th August 2015 that a female wearing an orange-

coloured skirt and a light green blouse would carry Heroin for the purpose of

trafficking and she would be walking from Kaldemulla area and come to pass

Dewata Road Bridge around round 7.30 in the morning. Accordingly, he has

organized a raid.

The witness has received the said information at 6.40 a.m., and after assembling

a team of four police officers in addition to himself, following the due procedure,

he has left the police station in 5 minutes time at 6.45 a.m. The mentioned place

of the trafficking was about 500-600 meters away from the police station. In his

evidence-in-chief on 12-10-2017, PW-01 has stated that he went past the

mentioned bridge and travelled about 150 meters in the gravel road, stopped the

police vehicle and asked the driver to take the police jeep further away and

walked back to a place near the bridge with the other officers and waited behind

two three-wheelers parked in order to confront the suspect.

The suspect as described by the informant has walked passing the place where

they were waiting around 7.35 a.m. After stopping and questioning her, the

witness has found a pink-coloured cellophane bag in her right hand. Upon

inspection, he has identified the contents of the bag as Heroin, and accordingly,

she was arrested and taken to police the station.

It was his evidence that he returned to the station at 8.40 a.m. and took the

necessary steps to weigh the Heroin found, and to seal the productions and also

to hand over the productions to the police reserve. When weighed, he has found

22450 milligrams of Heroin.

However, later in his evidence, the witness has stated that he and his team of

officers got down from their jeep near the location where they waited for the

suspect to arrive and he ordered the driver of the jeep to take it away. The witness

has identified the person arrested as the appellant. In his evidence the PW-01

Page 4 of 13

has admitted that he entered detailed notes at 5.20 p.m. on that day, and has

explained the delay, stating that since he had several other matters to attend as

the OIC of the station, he could only do it in the afternoon.

PW-04, WPC 7630 Kumudini Damayanthi was the officer who assisted the PW-

01 in the raid and the arrest of the appellant. It was her evidence that police

reserve officer Nandapala informed her at 6.30 in the morning to get ready for a

raid and report to the OIC, and she left the police station with the team of officers

at 6.45 am and got down from the vehicle near the location where the detection

was made. It was her evidence that when the OIC stopped the appellant and

questioned her, she had in her right hand, a pink colour grocery bag which she

was holding tightly in her palm and when inspected, Heroin was detected in the

parcel. It has been revealed during the cross examination of the witness that she

has entered the time she was informed to get ready as 6.20 in the morning in

her notes.

At the trial, the prosecution has led evidence to establish the chain of the custody

of productions and has led the evidence of the Government analyst to establish

that the quantity sent for their analysis had a pure quantity of 1.38 grams of

Heroin.

When called for a defence at the conclusion of the prosecution case, the appellant

has given a dock statement and has called two witnesses on her behalf. It was

her position that she was never arrested at the time and by the witnesses who

claimed that they arrested her with Heroin. It was her statement that she was

arrested around 2 p.m. on that day while walking past the location where witness

number one claims. It was her position that she was arrested by two other male

police officers and nothing was found in her possession, but was forcibly taken

to the police station and Heroin was introduced to her. This has been her position

when the prosecution witnesses gave evidence as well.

She has also explained that, when her son came home from school with an

injury, she needed money to take medicine for him and as she had no money,

Page 5 of 13

she went to meet a friend called Sanoja who lived about 3 km away from her

home to borrow some money, but she could not obtain money and while

returning home she was arrested by the police.

Sanoja mentioned by the appellant in her dock statement has given evidence

under oath in this case. It was her evidence that, the appellant was a friend of

her and she used to come and borrow money in her emergencies. On 5th August

2015, around 2 - 2.15 in the afternoon, she came to her house and requested

some money from her, but she could not provide any, and the appellant left her

house thereafter was her evidence. She has stated that around 3.30 pm,

appellants husband came looking for her and inquired whether his wife came

and met her, and left after being informed that she came and left her house. After

about 4 days, the witness had come to know that the appellant was arrested on

her way back from her house, and it was her evidence that she took down the

date on which the appellant came to her house in a book she maintains to record

her lending of money to others. She has admitted that she was in the habit of

lending money to others in order to earn an income.

The husband of the appellant has given evidence and has stated that since his

wife who left the house in order to borrow some money from her friend did not

return, he went and met the earlier mentioned Sanoja and he was informed that

she came and left. Later he has come to know that her wife was arrested and

taken to the Angulana police station where he found his wife.

The Grounds of Appeal

At the hearing of the appeal, the learned Counsel for the appellant formulated

the following grounds of appeal for the consideration of the Court.

(1) The learned High Court Judge had failed to consider vital

contradictions in the evidence of the prosecution witnesses and thereby

reached an erroneous conclusion that the prosecution witnesses are

credible.

Page 6 of 13

(2) The learned High Court Judge had come to a wrong finding that the

prosecution had proved the chain of productions.

(3) The learned High Court Judge failed to evaluate the dock statement

and had rejected the same by applying wrong principles of law and had

failed to give valid reasons for rejecting the evidence of the defence

witnesses.

Consideration of the Grounds of Appeal

Although the learned Counsel for the appellant formulated the second ground of

appeal in relation to the custody of the productions, it was later conceded by him

that he has no basis for the said ground of appeal. Hence, it is the 1st and the

3rd grounds of appeal that will be considered in this judgement.

It was the contention of the learned Counsel for the appellant, that the learned

High Court Judge failed to consider the vital inter se and per se contradictions

of the evidence of the two main witnesses, namely, PW-01, the officer who led

the raid, and PW-04 the female police officer who assisted him. He brings to the

notice of the Court, the discrepancies in the two witnesses evidence with regard

to the time PW-04 was ordered to get ready for the raid and PW-01s evidence in

relation to the time he received the information. He also points to the evidence

of PW-01 where he has stated in his initial evidence-in-chief that he and his team

went about 150 meters passing the location where the detection was made and

returned on foot and also the time alleged to have been taken by PW-01 and his

team to leave the police station after the receipt of the information. Another factor

contended by the learned Counsel was the alterations appeared to have been

made in the notes with regard to the mileage meter of the police jeep, to argue

that if the distance to the place of detection was about 500-600 meters away

from the police station, there was no reason for the police jeep to travel several

kilometers before it returned to the station. He formulated this argument based

on the appellants statement that she was not arrested by PW-01 nor was she

Page 7 of 13

taken in a jeep, but by two other male officers and taken to the station in a three-

wheeler and the arrest was made around 2 p.m. in the evening.

In his judgement, the learned High Court Judge has in fact considered the

differences of time mentioned by two main witnesses and the changes that has

been made to the notes with regard to the mileage meter of the jeep, and has

determined that those are minor deficiencies in the evidence and that has not

created any doubt as to the evidence of the prosecution.

It is the settled law that a trial judge has to consider the evidence of the

prosecution as well as that of the defence in its totality to find whether the

prosecution has proven the charges against the appellant beyond reasonable

doubt.

In the case of James Silva Vs. The Republic of Sr Lanka (1980) 2 SLR 167, it

was stated that,

A satisfactory way to arrive at a verdict of guilt or innocence is to consider

all the matters adduced before the Court whether by the prosecution or by

the defence in its totality without compartmentalizing and asking himself,

whether as a prudent man, in the circumstances of the particular case, he

believed the accused guilty of the charge or not guilty.

It is my view that the mentioned deficiencies in the evidence need to be

considered in the light of the defence taken up by the appellant to determine

whether the evidence was credible and truthful enough. In this regard, the

determination whether the story of the prosecution was probable is also a matter

that needs to be looked into.

The evidence of PW-01 was that he received an information at 6.40 in the

morning regarding the trafficking of Heroin in the area mentioned by the

informant. He was also informed of the dress that the trafficker would be wearing

and her features. It was his evidence that, after he received the information, he

entered the necessary notes, assembled a team of officers and collected the

Page 8 of 13

necessary equipment for a raid of this nature, and left the police station after

checking the other officers who took part in the raid and the police jeep to ensure

that nothing unwarranted is carried by any member of the raiding party. His

evidence was that all this took just 5 minutes and he and his team left the station

at 6.45 in the morning.

The question here is whether it is possible for a reasonably prudent person to do

all these things and leave in just 5 minutes after the information. When

questioned in this regard, PW-01 has explained, saying that since it was

important to take action immediately, he left the station within 5 minutes.

However, the information he received had been that the trafficker would come

around 7.30 in the morning to the location mentioned by the informant. That

means PW-01 had over 50 minutes he only had to travel about 500-600 meters

to reach the location. Therefore, it is not possible to believe the need for the PW-

01 to act immediately as claimed. If the information was that the trafficker would

come within 5-10 minutes, such an information can be treated as an information

that needs very fast action. In such a scenario, even an officer leaving the station

without following all the required procedures can be justified. Under the

circumstances, I am of the view that the evidence of the PW-01 that he and his

team after following all the due procedures, left the station within five minutes

is not a piece of evidence that can be considered probable.

When it comes to the evidence of PW-04 the female police officer who assisted

PW-01 in the detection, she has been informed by the officer who was in charge

of the police reserve to get ready to go for a raid at 6.30 in the morning. Contrary

to that, it has been brought to the notice of the Court that in her notes with

regard to the time, she has mentioned that she was asked to get ready at 6.20

am. Her evidence with regard to the time cut across the evidence of PW-01 who

says he received the information at 6.40 in the morning. If he received the

information at that time, it was not probable for the PW-04 to be informed to get

ready for the raid before the receiving of the information, which leads to the

question whose evidence is to be believed in this regard. I am of the view that

Page 9 of 13

such a doubt should be considered in favour of the appellant given her stand as

to her time of arrest.

Apart from the above deficiencies as to the time, PW-01 in his evidence-in-chief

has stated that he and his team travelled about 150 meters passing the location

where the detection was made, stopped the jeep, and after informing the driver

to take the jeep away, walked back to the place of detection where they waited

little over half an hour having taken cover behind two three-wheelers parked

there. However, later in his evidence, he has changed his position and has stated

that he and his team got down at the location where the detection was made and

the police jeep driver was asked to move on and stay away from the location. The

reason for this change in the story appears to be the realization that the notes of

the other officers do not match his earlier evidence in that regard.

It is my considered view that I am in no position to agree with learned High Court

Judges view that these are minor discrepancies and they do not create a doubt

in the evidence of the prosecution. I am of the view that it was important for the

learned High Court Judge to consider the evidence in its totality and come to a

firm finding whether the prosecution has proved its case beyond reasonable

doubt.

The third ground of appeal urged by the learned Counsel that the learned High

Court Judge failed to evaluate the dock statement and the evidence of the

defence witnesses in its correct perspective and rejected the same by applying

wrong principles of law becomes relevant under the above-mentioned

circumstances.

In this matter, the appellant has made a statement from the dock when she was

called upon for her defence and had called two witnesses in support of her stand.

Throughout the trial, her stand has been that she was not arrested in the

morning of that day in the manner stated by the witnesses but was arrested after

2 p.m. by two other male officers and no Heroin was found in her possession,

Page 10 of 13

but she was taken to the police station and charged for having Heroin in her

possession.

When called for a defence in a criminal case, our Courts have recognized the

right of an accused to give evidence under oath and subject himself or herself to

the test of cross-examination or elect to make an unsworn statement from the

dock. Any unsworn statement made by an accused from the dock too has

evidential value subjected to the infirmities that the said statement was not made

under oath and not subjected to the test of cross- examination.

In the case of Queen Vs. Kularatne (1968) 71 NLR 529, it was held that while

jurors must be informed that such a statement must be looked upon as evidence

subjected however, to the infirmities that the accuseds statement is not made

under oath and not subjected to cross-examination.

Held further;

1. If the dock statement is believed, it must be acted upon to.

2. If it raised a reasonable doubt in their minds about the case of the

prosecution, the defence must succeed. and;

3. It must not be used against another accused.

It was held in the case of Don Samantha Jude Anthony Jayamaha Vs. The

Attorney General, C.A. 303/2006, decided on 11-07-2012 that,

Whether the witness of the defence or the dock statement is sufficient to

create a doubt cannot be decided in vacuum or in isolation, because it needs

to be considered in the totality of evidence, that is in the light of the evidence

for the prosecution as well as the defence.

The learned High Court Judge in his judgment at page 14 (pages 303 and 304 of

the appeal brief) has reasoned the appellants dock statement in the following

manner.

Page 11 of 13

. .

.

.

.

Although the learned High Court Judge has commented that he considered the

dock statement in the above manner only to consider whether it creates a doubt

in the evidence of the prosecution, I am unable to agree with the said comment

considering the manner in which the learned High Court Judge has looked upon

the dock statement. Even at page 17 of the judgement, the learned High Court

Judge has commented that the appellant has avoided giving evidence and

thereby failed to establish that she took the same stand when making the police

statement.

It is therefore clear that the learned High Court Judge has failed to consider the

dock statement in its correct perspective as pointed out by the learned Counsel

for the appellant. I am not in a position to agree with the contention of the learned

Deputy Solicitor General (DSG) in this regard. I am of the view that the learned

High Court Judge has failed to consider whether the dock statement by the

appellant has created a reasonable doubt in the evidence of the prosecution. He

has dismissed the dock statement by applying the wrong principles of law which

cannot be considered correct.

It was the contention of the learned DSG that the out and the in entry entered

by the OIC in the Information Book clearly establishes the fact that the appellant

had been arrested in the morning and not in the manner claimed by the

appellant and her witnesses, and hence, there is no basis to interfere with the

judgment. This argument may be considered correct, if the learned High Court

Page 12 of 13

Judge evaluated the evidence in that manner, rather than brushing aside the

evidence of the appellant in the manner it was rejected.

Apart from the above, the learned High Court Judge has rejected the evidence of

the two witnesses called on behalf of the appellant on the basis that they are

partisan witnesses. It needs to be emphasized that evidence given by a party

cannot be considered partisan without a proper evaluation of the evidence. The

evidence of a witness or witnesses cannot be rejected merely because they are

relatives or close associates of an accused. The requirement is to evaluate the

evidence be it by the prosecution or the defence in its correct perspective and to

come to a finding whether the prosecution has proved the case beyond

reasonable doubt.

I am unable to agree with the learned High Court Judges conclusion that the

defence of the appellant was an attempt to create a fanciful doubt and thereby

rejection of the defence of the appellant without evaluating the dock statement

and the evidence to find whether it has created a reasonable doubt as to the

prosecution case.

Sisira De Abrew, J. in the case of Don Ranasuriya Arachchige Rohana Kithsiri

Vs. The Attorney General CA 214/2008, decided on 11-02-2014 expressed the

view that;

in evaluating evidence, a judge should not look at the evidence of an

accused person with a squint eye.

In the Indian Supreme Court Case of D.N. Panday Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh,

AIR 1981, Supreme Court 911 it was held thus;

Defence witnesses are entitled to equal treatment with those of the

prosecution, and Courts ought to overcome their traditional instinctive

disbelief in defence witnesses, quit often they tell lies but so do the

prosecution witnesses.

Page 13 of 13

At this juncture, I am also reminded of the judicial decision of Martin Singho

Vs. Queen 69 CLW 21 where it was held;

Even if the jury decline to believe the appellants version, he was yet

entitled to be acquitted on the charge if his version raised in their mind a

reasonable doubt as to the truth of the prosecution case.

In the instant appeal, I am of the view that the considered failure by the learned

High Court Judge has amounted to a denial of a fair trial towards the appellant,

and of the view that allowing the conviction and the sentence to stand is not safe.

Accordingly, I set aside the conviction and the sentence of the appellant. I find

no basis to order a retrial either, given the facts and the attendant

circumstances.

Therefore, the appellant is acquitted of the charges preferred against her.

Appeal allowed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

P. Kumararatnam, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal