IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

C. A. Case No. : 104/12

H. C. Kandy Case No. : 248/2004

In the matter of an Appeal

Against an order of the High

Court under Sec. 331 of the

Code of Criminal Procedure

Act No. 15 of 1979.

01) Bilingahawattegedera

Karunaratne alias Raja

Bogambara Prison

02) Bilingahawattegedera Ariyaratne,

Bogambara Prison

Accused

Vs

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

Complainant

And now

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

DECIDED ON

M. M. A. Gaffoor, J &

K. K. Wickramasinghe, J

02) Bilingahawattegedera

Karunaratne alias Raja,

Bogambara Prison

03) Bilingahawattegedera Ariyaratne,

Bogambara Prison

Accused-Appellants

Vs

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

Complainant Respondent

Dr Ranjith Fernando AAL for the Accused Appellants

DSG Haripriya Jayasundera for the Complainant Respondents

03/06/2016

16/02/2017

K. K. WICKRAMASINGHE, J.

Two Accused Appellants (herein after referred to as the 1st appellant(lA) and the 2nd Appellant

(2A) were indicted for committing murder in the High Court in the High Court of Kandy, for

having committed the murder of one Dewategedera Wimalasena on 07.09.2001.

After the conclusion of the trial, the learned trial judge convicted both appellants on the

23.02.2012 on the count of murder and sentenced them to death.

Facts of the case:-

The two appellants are brothers. The parents of the deceased are eye witnesses to this incident.

This has taken place at the compound near kadullal fence to the house of the deceased. Both

appellants were known to the deceased party previously. The incident has taken place around

7.45 in the evening. According to the mother of the deceased (PWI) eye witness Soma, the

appellants have called her from the road near their house. When she went to check on them, the

deceased has followed her and asked them "why aiya?" without any warning or any exchange of

words the two appellants have attacked the deceased, IA with an iron rod and the 2A with a

pestle. Upon receiving injuries the deceased has fallen on the ground and with the help of the

neighbours he has been rushed to the hospital where he later succumbed to his injuries.

In cross examination it has been suggested to her that the appellants too got injured at that time

but the witness has vehemently denied them being injured. At another point it has also been

suggested to the witness that the deceased went to the house of the appellants around 8 - 8.30pm

with two others and attacked the appellants. This too has been denied by the witness. It is

pertinent to note that the suggestions made to the witness show

I. An admission on the part of the appellants that there was an incident that happened at the

house of the deceased

2. That both appellants were present at the time of the said incident

3. The first suggestion cuts across the second suggestion which says that the appellants were

attacked at their own home

4. The second suggestion has been made on the basis that the deceased who received severe

injuries at the hands of the appellants was capable of going about with such injuries to the

house of the appellants to inflict injuries to the appellants.

Therefor It is apparent that the suggestions are baseless and made without any solid ground

The father of the deceased- Premadasa (PW2),is an eye witness to the murder in question and

has corroborated the version of Soma on all the important aspects in the case.

In cross examination he has stated that he saw the IA at the police station but did not observe

any injuries on him.

Jayaratne (PW3) who is a neighbor, on hearing cries and noises has rushed to the place of the

deceased and found the mother of the deceased crying out for help near the fallen deceased.

According to him the incident has taken place around 7.30pm.

His evidence confirms the fact

I. That the incident in question took place near the house of the deceased around

7.30pm

2. That the deceased was not in a position to get up even after receiving the injuries

ASP Hapuarachchi who visited the crime scene has observed patches of blood near the house

of the deceased.

According to SI Sunil Ekanayake, IA has only complained of an assault to the police around

9.50hrs on 07.09.2001 but has not made a statement. At the time he set off to conduct

investigations no complaint has been received by the police. Witness Soma - mother of the

deceased has been present at the crime scene. SI Sunil Ekanayake has observed blood stains near

the fence of the house of the deceased.

In the course of the investigations it has revealed that another incident has taken place nearly 1-

2 hours after the incident in which the deceased was injured.It has revealed that the IA has

received injuries in the second incident that has taken place at his house. In the course of the

investigation pertaining to the second incident, name of the deceased has not transpired as an

assailant, which is said to have happened nearly 1 Y2 hours after the first incident in which the

deceased was injured.

The witness has further confinned that names of three other persons transpired as assailants in

the second incident.

He has also stated that the name of the deceased did not come up as a suspect in any of the

incidents. In the course of the investigations a pole has been recovered on the statement of the

2A, which was identified and marked as P2. (Page 158)

PC Wijeratne has testified that the lA came to the police station around 9.50pm on the

07.09.2001 and he observed an injury on his mouth and he was dispatched to the hospital with a

MLEF.

According to the evidence of the Judicial Medical Officer (JMO} there have been 8 injuries on

the dead body including a surgical incision. He has observed blunt trauma injuries on the dead

body and has opined that heavy force has been used as the skull has been fractured into small

pieces and the brain matter has come out from the tom Dura through the skull fractures. He has

further stated that the injuries have been caused due to several blows.

This witness has further confinned that the pole marked P2 can cause the injuries observed by

him. This clearly shows that the observations made by the Doctor on the injuries and the weapon,

corroborate the evidence of eye witnesses Soma and Premadasa.

Defence case

Both appellants has made dock statements.

lA stated that while he was at home he heard someone uttering obscenities and when he

requested that person not to do so he assaulted him which broke his teeth. Thereafter he has gone

to the police station and then been dispatched to hospital where he received hospitalized

treatment.

It is noteworthy to observe that he has not denied the following instances:-

I. The allegation that he went to the house of the deceased with his brother and

assaulted him and nor has he given any reason for assaulting the deceased

2. Does not implicate the deceased as the person who assaulted him

The 2A stated that he went to the place of the brother (lA) upon hearing a commotion and then

he saw some people gathered in his compound. He has stated that his brother has been assaulted

and he was getting ready to go to the hospital.

This appellant too has not denied

I. The allegation that he went to the house of the deceased with his brother and

assaulted him and nor has he given any reason for assaulting the deceased

2. Does not implicate the deceased being present among the crowd in the compound of

his brother

3. the recovery of the club by the police on his statement (recovery under section 27 of

the evidence ordinance)

The defence called the wife of the IA - Seelawathi as a witness. She has stated that one

Sumanadasa, Piyal another called Ajith came to their hose and assaulted her husband - lA, and

her husband received injuries on his mouth. However it is important to note that nowhere in her

evidence, she has implicated the deceased as one of the assailants who came to her place that

night.

In analyzing the evidence the learned trial judge has held that none of the witnesses has said that

IA suffered injuries as a result of an attack launched by the deceased and his presence has not

been referred to by any of the witnesses at the time the I A received injuries. Hence the learned

judge has held the court cannot come to the conclusion it was the deceased who broke the teeth

of the IA.

The learned trial judge has quite correctly held that the accused had not taken up any exceptional

grounds in their defence and nor have they explained their position when a strong prima facie

case is established by the prosecution.

According to the evidence it does not show that this case comes under any of the exceptions.

Therefor the learned trial judge has rejected the Defence case and held that the appellants are

guilty of the offence of murder.

The learned counsel for the appellants neither in his submissions before court and nor in his

written submissions has raised any specific grounds of appeal, other than quoting various

portions from the judgment in his written submissions. His main contention is that the learned

trial judge has erred both in facts and law with regard to the applicability of the exception of

grave and sudden provocation.

Is there evidence before court that supports grave and sudden provocation?

The available evidence against the appellants can be itemized as follows:

1. The two appellants came to the place of the deceased that night around 7.30 pm'

2. the two appellants did not deny the said position in their dock statements

3. police observations confirm that the incident has happened near the 'kadulla' to the

house of the deceased2

4. A neighbour confirms that the deceased was found fallen on the ground at the time he

went to the place of the incident on hearing cries and noises. Thus it confirms that the

deceased was not in a position to get up and he was lying fallen near his 'kadulla,3

5. witness Soma has stated that she did not observe any injuries on the IA at the time he

came to attack the deceased with 2A

6. according to PC Wijeratne the IA has come to the police station around 21.50hrs that

night with a bleeding injury on his mouth

7. PC Wijeratne immediately dispatched the IA to the hospital with a MLEF

1 As per the evidence of the two eye witnesses

2 Vide evidence of ASP Hapuarachchi and SI Sunil Ekanayake

3 Vide evidence of Jayaratne

8. lA did not inform of any incident that resulted in the death of the deceased to the

police and nor did he make a complaint against the deceased

9. by that time no complaint has been received by the police which implicated the

deceased

10. three other persons have been implicated by the lA and Seelawathi4 as persons

responsible for assaulting and causing injuries to the lA

11. according to said Seelawathi, 1 A and the 2A, the incident which resulted in causing

injuries to lA happened in the compound of the lA

12. police observations confirmed that two separate incidents have happened at two

places within a gap of 1-2 hours5

13. according to the Seelawathi, lA and 2A, immediately after lA receiving the injuries

he has gone to the police station from where he was sent to the hospital6

14. this confirms that the deceased was injured prior to the incident in which lA was

injured

15. none of them had implicated the deceased as responsible or of being a member of the

group who assaulted the 1 A

16. thus it is clear from the evidence that the incident in which he 1 A was injured

happened much after the incident in which the deceased received injuries

17. from the facts of the case and the sequence it is clear that it was the deceased who

received injuries first

18. the deceased had nothing to do with the incident that caused injuries to the lA

19. in such circumstances the learned trial judge is correct in holding that there was no

evidence placed before court either by the prosecution or the defence that the murder

in question falls under any of the exceptions, namely grave and sudden provocation

4 Defence witness - wife of IA

5 Vide evidence of ASP Hapuarachchi and SI Sunil Ekanayake

6 Vide evidence of SI Sunil Ekanayake and PC Wijeratne

f

~ .! i !rI I i i t

I

r

According to section 105 of the Evidence Ordinance 'When a person is accused of any

offence, the burden of proving the existence of circumstances bringing the case within

any of general exceptions in the Penal Code, or within any special exception or proviso

contained in any part of the same Code, ... is upon him, and the court shall presume the

absence of such circumstances. '

In the instant case there is no evidence on record to show that the appellants were

provoked by any act done by the deceased. As per the eye witnesses the appellants have

launched an attack on the deceased, without any warning or any exchange of words. As

far as the eye witnesses were concerned they were taken up by surprise. There is absolute

no evidence on record to support the contention the deceased did any act to provoke the

appellants before they attacked him. In the circumstances the appellants are prevented

from taking refuge under the exception grave and sudden provocation as there is no

material to support the same. In the circumstances the learned trial judge cannot be

faulted for rejecting the defence of grave and sudden provocation.

In the case of The King v Seedar de Silva 41 NLR 337 the principle laid down in the

following dictum of Lord Ellenborough in the case of Rex. v. Lord Cochrane and others

[Gurney's Rep. 479.] was quoted

, No person accused of crime is bound to offer any explanation of his conduct or of

circumstances of suspicion which attach to him ; but, nevertheless if he refuses to do so

where a strong prima facie case has been made out, and when it is in his own power to

offer evidence, if such exist, in explanation of such suspicious circumstances which

would show them to be fallacious and explicable consistently with his innocence, it is a

reasonable and justifiable conclusion that he refrains from doing so only from the

conviction that the evidence so suppressed or not adduced would operate adversely to his

interest. '

This dictum applies in the present case. A strong prima facie case was made against the

appellants on evidence which was sufficient to exclude the reasonable possibility of

someone else having committed the crime. Without an explanation from the appellants

the learned trial judge was justified in coming to the conclusion that they were guilty.

F or the reasons mentioned above we affirm the convictions and the death sentences

imposed on the 1 st and the 2nd Accused Appellants.

Hereby we dismiss the appeal

Judge of the Court of Appeal

M.M.A. Gaffoor J

I agree