1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979.

Court of Appeal Case No.

CA/HCC/ 0404/2017

High Court of Gampaha

Case No. HC/171/2004

Dadayakkarage Rupawathi

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

P. Kumararatnam, J.

COUNSEL : Sumith Senanayake, P.C. with Damitha

Wickrama Arachchi for the Appellant.

Dileepa Peiris, SDSG for the Respondent.

2 | P a g e

ARGUED ON : 11/03/2022

DECIDED ON : 08/04/2022

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) was indicted under Section 308 (A) (2) of the Penal Code as

amended for committing an offence of Cruelty on Dona Jayana Udayangani

Vithana in the High Court of Gampaha between 2001/08/01 to 2002/07/31.

After the trial, the Appellant was convicted as charged and was sentenced to

three years rigorous imprisonment with a fine of Rs.1000/-. In default 02

weeks simple imprisonment was imposed. In addition, the Appellant was

ordered to pay Rs.100000/- as compensation to the victim. In default, 08

months simple imprisonment was imposed.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

The Learned Presidents Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that

the Appellant has given consent to argue this matter in her absence due to

the Covid 19 pandemic. It is further informed that the Appellant is on bail

and she is waiting outside the court due to Covid 19 pandemic restrictions.

The Appellant had filed the following grounds of appeal:

1. Adoption of evidence was not done properly under Section 48 of the

Judicature Act.

3 | P a g e

2. The Learned High Court Judge had failed to evaluate all the witnesses

properly.

3. The Learned High Court Judge had failed to consider the defence

version properly.

In this case the Appellant is the step mother of the victim. As the mother of

the victim suffered from a mental disorder, her father had contracted his

second marriage with the Appellant. The victim was about 7 years old at that

time. Due to her fathers second marriage she had to change her school.

Initially the Appellant had treated the victim in a good manner. Upon lapse

of time, the Appellant had started to ill-treat her by assaulting her with sticks

and broom sticks. Due to this her schooling had come to a standstill.

Although her father and her neighbours reported this to the police, the police

after inquiry, handed the victim back to the Appellant. The Appellant used

to beat the victim in the absence of her father. Due to this cruel treatment,

the victim had lost her education and her life had become miserable. As such

her father had lodged a complaint in the Peliyagoda Police.

W/IP Seelawathie had conducted the inquiry, arrested the Appellant and

produced her before the court.

PW2, Dr.Ratnayake who had examined the victim stated that 36 external

injuries had been noted on the victims body.

After the closure of the prosecution case, the defence was called and the

Appellant had elected to give evidence from the witness box and proceeded

to deny the charge.

According to the victim when she was 09 -10 years old the Appellant had

started to assault and ill-treat her. As she was a child when she underwent

the agony, her evidence needs to considered very carefully.

4 | P a g e

In Panchhi and Others v. The State of U.P and Others [1998] 7 SCC 177

it was held that:

Evidence of a child witness must be evaluated more carefully and with

greater circumspection because a child is susceptible to be swayed by

what others tell them and thus a child witness is an easy prey to

tutoring.

In Kumara De Silva and 2 Others v. Attorney General [2010] 2 SLR 169

the court held that:

Credibility is a question of fact, not of law. The acceptance or rejection

of evidence of witnesses is therefore a question of fact for the trial

judge.

Guided by above mentioned judgments, I will now proceed to consider the

appeal grounds advanced by the Appellant.

In the first ground of appeal the Appellant contends that the adoption of

evidence was not done properly under Section 48 of the Judicature Act.

Section 48 states:

In the case of death, sickness, resignation, removal from office,

absence from Sri Lanka, or other disability of any Judge before whom

any action, prosecution, proceeding or matter, whether on any inquiry

preliminary to committal for trial or otherwise, has been instituted or

is pending, such action, prosecution, proceeding or matter may be

continued before the successor of such Judge who shall have power to

act on the evidence already recorded by his predecessor, or partly

recorded by his predecessor and partly recorded by him or, if he thinks

fit, to re-summon the witness and commence the proceedings afresh :

Provided that where any criminal prosecution, proceeding or matter

(except on an inquiry preliminary to committal for trial) is continued

5 | P a g e

before the successor of any such judge, the accused may demand that

the witnesses be resummoned and reheard.

When the victim was under cross examination, the Learned High Court

Judge who heard the case up to that point was transferred. Hence a new

High Court Judge had resumed the trial on 15/05/2012 and continued the

trial after adopting the proceedings led up to that point.

When the case was proceeding, the second High Court Judge also got

transferred. Hence the trial was continued before a third judge on

10/05/2016 after adopting the proceedings led up to that point.

Finally, the case was concluded before the judge who wrote the judgment.

He too had properly adopted the proceedings on 21/07/2017 and continued

the trial.

Although it has been the practice of the judges of our courts to formally adopt

the proceedings of their predecessor, I find no such specific requirement in

Section 48 of the Judicature Act amended by the Amendment Act No. 27 of

1990. What is necessary in a criminal prosecution is to continue with the

case and it was up to the accused to demand that the witnesses be re-

summoned and reheard which has not happened in this case. Hence, I find

no merit in this ground of appeal.

In the second ground of appeal the Appellant contends that the Learned High

Court Judge had failed to evaluate all the witnesses properly.

The victim in her evidence stated that after the second marriage to the

Appellant by her father, she resided with them along with her elder sister.

As her sister could not get on well with the Appellant her sister had gone to

her aunts house. As she was 08 years and was schooling, she remained with

her father and the Appellant. Initially the Appellant had treated her properly

and the ill-treatment had started only after some time. At the age of 09 her

schooling also came to a standstill as the Appellant had entrusted her with

household chores. In the meantime, she was admitted to Gothatuwa Maha

6 | P a g e

Vidyalaya by the Appellant. Her ordeal has continued even after the change

of the school. When she complained to her father, very often, verbal

exchanges had been taken place between her father and the Appellant. After

such arguments, the Appellant had used to beat the victim using sticks and

broomsticks.

Several complaints had been lodged with the Wellampitiya and Peliyagoda

Police Stations. After inquiry, the police had handed her back to the

Appellant after issuing a warning. Despite that her ill-treatment had

continued to leave 36 scars on her body. She had been prevented from going

to her relations house and/or informing them about her predicament.

Further, she had been threatened that her house would be bombed if she

divulges the Appellants cruel treatment to her father.

When she was about 12 years old, her schooling had come to a permanent

standstill and she was used to do get the domestic work done by the

Appellant. Due to assault on her head and body with various objects, she

had received residential treatment at the General Hospital in Colombo and

at the Colombo Eye Hospital. Most of the time she was locked inside the

house when the Appellant leaves the house. She was not allowed to play with

the children in her neighbourhood.

When she was 14 years old, she was produced before the Juvenile Court, in

Bambalapitiya and was then sent to Ranmuthugala Childrens Home. Due

to fear, she did not tell the doctor as to how she sustained the scars that

were observed on her body. Until she was sent to the childrens home, the

victims father, the Appellant and the victim had lived together in the same

house.

In the cross examination, she reiterated that she did not divulge anything

against the Appellant due to fear psychosis created by the Appellant. As

such, she had not given true evidence before the Magistrate Court of

Bambalapitiya.

7 | P a g e

When the victim attained puberty, her father had gifted some jewelleries and

those jewelleries had been taken in to the custody of the Appellant. A chain

which she was wearing when she attended the court was also removed by

the Appellant at the courts premises itself.

PW3 IP/Seelawathi had given evidence and corroborated the evidence of the

victim at all material points. The ill-treatment of the victim had been revealed

when she gave her statement on 04/11/2002 when she was in Gangodawila

Childrens Home. The two statements given earlier did not contain any

information about the ill-treatment caused by the Appellant. The reason for

that is on both occasions she had given her statements while she was living

under the custody of the Appellant. This had been mentioned in the B/

Report filed in the Juvenile Court, Bambalapitiya.

PW4, the father of the victim too had corroborated the evidence of the victim.

After observing the plight of the victim under the custody of the Appellant,

he had made several attempts to take her under his custody, but all such

attempts had proved to be futile as the Appellant had instigated the victim

to state that she was willing to be with the Appellant. Further, he had

vehemently denied fabricating evidence against the Appellant.

PW3 the doctor who had examined the victim had noted about 36 wounds

all over the victims body. The Appellant had admitted a description of those

injuries under Section 420 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of

1979. According to the opinion of the doctor all such injuries are compatible

with blunt force trauma. Although the defence had asked several questions

based on the history given to the doctor, the victim in her evidence stated

that she gave history in such a manner due to fear of the Appellant.

Further the defence had suggested to the victim that the scars visible on her

body was due to Chickenpox. But the defence did not put any question

regarding this position either to the doctor or to her father. Although her

8 | P a g e

cross examination continued from 21/09/2010 to year 2012, she had not

changed her stance taken in this case.

The Learned High Court Judge had very correctly analysed the evidence

presented by the prosecution to come to his conclusions. Hence it is incorrect

to say that the Learned High Court Judge had not properly evaluated the

evidence in this case to consider whether the Appellant is guilty under

Section 308(A)(2) of the Penal Code as amended.

The Section 308(A) states:

Whoever, having the custody, charge or care of any person under

eighteen years of age, wilfully assaults, ill-treats, neglects, or

abandons such person or causes or procures such person to be

assaulted, ill-treated, neglected, or abandoned in a manner likely to

cause him suffering or injury to health (including injury to, or loss of,

sight or hearing, or limb or organ of the body or any mental

derangement) commits the offence of cruelty to children.

Hence, the second ground of appeal also has no merit.

Finally, the Appellant contends that the Learned High Court Judge had failed

to consider the defence version properly.

Learned High Court Judge had very extensively considered the evidence

adduced by the defence. The Appellant had given evidence from the witness

box and was subjected to cross examination. She had vehemently denied the

charge in her evidence. Further, the defence had called two witnesses but

that evidence too failed to create a doubt on the prosecution case.

In this case the victim was under the vicious clutches of the Appellant. She

had fallen victim to ill-treatment as her father contracted his second

marriage with the Appellant. She was suffering both physically and mentally

until she was able to come out with her story to the relevant authorities. She

was 07 years old when she started living with the Appellant and her ordeal

9 | P a g e

continued until she was 14 years old. Her schooling was stopped and her

childhood become miserable.

Considering the evidence presented by both parties, I conclude this is not a

fit and proper case to interfere with the judgment of the Learned High Court

of Gampaha. Hence, the appeal is dismissed.

The Learned High Court Judge of Gampaha is hereby directed to issue notice

on the Appellant to appear before the High Court, as she is on bail pending

appeal, and to comply with this judgement.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

SAMPATH B. ABAYAKOON, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL