CA-Writ / 0692-2024

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for

Mandates in the nature of Writs of

Certiorari and Mandamus under

and in terms of Article 140 of the

Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Court of Appeal Application No. LANWA SANSTHA CEMENT

CA/WRT/0692/24 CORPORATION(PRIVATE)

LIMITED,

Oruwala,

Athurugiriya.

PETITIONER

Vs.

1. CENTRAL ENVIRONMENTAL,

AUTHORITY,

No. 104, Denzil Kobbekaduwa

Mawatha,

Battaramulla.

2. P. B. HEMANTHA

JAYASINGHE,

Director - General,

Central Environmental

Authority,

No. 104, Denzil Kobbekaduwa

Mawatha,

Battaramulla.

CA-Writ / 0692-2024

2 | P a g e

3. BOARD OF INVESTMENT OF

SRI LANKA,

Level 24, West Tower,

World Trade Centre,

Colombo 01.

4. RENUKA WEERAKOON,

Director-General,

Board of Investment of Sri

Lanka,

Level 24, West Tower,

World Trade Centre,

Colombo 01.

5. HAMBANTOTA

INTERNATIONAL PORT

GROUP (PVT) LTD,

Hambantota Maritime Center,

Mirijjawila.

6. SIAM CITY CEMENT LANKA

LIMITED,

Level 25, Access Tower II,

No. 278/4, Union Place,

Colombo 02.

7. SECRETARY,

Ministry of Environment,

Sobadam Piyasa,

No. 416/C/1, Robert

Gunawardana Mawatha,

Battaramulla.

RESPONDENTS

CA-Writ / 0692-2024

3 | P a g e

BEFORE : Mohammed Laffar, J.

P. Kumararatnam, J.

COUNSEL : Harsha Amarasekera, P.C, with Suren

Gnanaraj and Sakuni Weeraratne

instructed by M/S Neelakandan and

Neelakandan for the Petitioner.

Nayomi Kahawita, S.S.C, for the 1st-4th

and 7th Respondents.

Avindra Rodrigo, P.C, with Kasuni

Jayaweera instructed by F.J. & G de

Saram for the 5th Respondent.

Dr.Kanag-Iswaran, P.C, with Uditha

Egalahewa, P.C, Laksman Jayakumar,

Miyuru Egalahewa and Shenal

Fernando instructed by Kanchan

Senanayake for the 6th Respondent.

INQUIRY ON : 04/12/2024.

DECIDED ON : 20/12/2024.

*****************************

CA-Writ / 0692-2024

4 | P a g e

ORDER

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The Petitioner instituted this Writ Application praying for the following

relief in the Petition dated 28.10.2024.

a) Issue notices on the Respondents;

b) Call for the record from the 1st to 4th Respondents in relation to the

operations of the 5th and 6th Respondents in the Hambantota

International Port;

c) Issue an order in the nature of a Writ of Mandamus directing the

1st to 4th Respondents to take all steps as are available in law to

compel the 5th Respondent to ensure that the 6th Respondent does

not unload, store and transport dust-emitting dry bulk cargo such

as clinker in or at or out of the Hambantota International Port

without the 5th Respondent and/or 6th Respondent having a valid

and operative Environmental Protection Licence;

d) Issue an order in the nature of a Writ of Mandamus directing the

1st to 4th Respondents to refrain from lifting the suspension

currently in force and/or not to issue an Environmental Protection

Licence to the 5th Respondent for port operations until corrective

measures have been implemented to prevent the unloading, storing

and transportation of dust emitting dry bulk cargo such as clinker

in or at or out of the Hambantota International Port except through

a ship unloader and closed conveyor belt, similar to that used by

the Petitioner;

e) Issue an order in the nature of a Writ of Mandamus compelling

the 1st to 4th Respondents to ensure that the 5th Respondent strictly

complies with the provisions of the National Environmental Act, its

CA-Writ / 0692-2024

5 | P a g e

Regulations and the directives including P12, P13, P16, P17 and

any other directives issued from time to time by the 1st and 3rd

Respondents;

f) Issue an order in the nature of a Writ of Mandamus directing the

1st to 4th Respondents to prosecute the 5th Respondent under the

National Environmental Act for permitting the 6th Respondent to

unload, store and transport hazardous and dust-emitting dry bulk

cargo such as clinker in or at or out of the Hambantota

International Port without a valid and operative Environmental

Protection Licence and in violation of the directives including P12,

P13, P16, P17 and any other directives issued from time to time

by the 1st and 3rd Respondents;

g) Issue an order in the nature of a Writ of Mandamus directing the

1st to 4th Respondents to prosecute the 6th Respondent under the

National Environmental Act for causing environmental pollution

and contravening the law;

h) Issue an order in the nature of Writ of Mandamus directing the 1st

to 4th Respondents to exercise their powers under the National

Environmental Act to prevent, suspend and prohibit any person

from unloading, storing and transporting hazardous or dust-

emitting cargo for cement manufacturing using trucks, in or at or

out of the Hambantota International Port except in accordance

with the law and due approvals obtained from the 1st and 3rd

Respondents;

i) Issue an order in the nature of a Writ of Mandamus compelling

the 1st to 4th Respondents to ensure that no environmentally

hazardous and or dust-emitting materials including clinker are

uploaded into and transported using trucks in or at or out of the

Hambantota International Port;

j) Issue an order in the nature of a Writ of Mandamus directing the

1st to 4th Respondents to prevent the 5th Respondent and/or 6th

Respondent from stockpiling clinker and other hazardous dust-

emitting material in the Hambantota International Port in

CA-Writ / 0692-2024

6 | P a g e

contravention of the law and without any environmental approvals

and environmental safety precautions being implemented;

k) Issue an order in the nature of a Writ of Mandamus directing the

1st to 4th Respondent to prevent the 5th and/or 6th Respondent from

operating the warehouse at Lot No A17 of the Port Industrial Park

Block A of the Hambantota International Port and storing any

environmentally harmful and hazardous substances including

steel slag and clinker in contravention of the law, without any

environmental approvals and environmental safety precautions

being implemented;

l) Issue an order in the nature of a Writ of Prohibition prohibiting

the 1st to 4th Respondents from allowing the 5th and or 6th

Respondents from carrying out unloading, storage and transport

of environmentally hazardous and or dust-emitting raw materials

for cement manufacturing, in or at or out of the Hambantota Port

using trucks, in violation of the law and the directives including

P12, P13, P16, P17 and any other directives issued from time to

time by the 1st Respondent and or 3rd Respondent;

m) Issue an order in the nature of a Writ of Prohibition prohibiting

the 1st to 4th Respondents from allowing the 5th and or 6th

Respondents from stockpiling clinker and other hazardous dust-

emitting material in the Hambantota International Port in

contravention of the law and without any environmental approvals

and environmental safety precautions being implemented;

n) Issue an order in the nature of a Writ of Prohibition prohibiting

the 1st to 4th Respondents from allowing the 5th and or 6th

Respondents from operating the warehouse at Lot No A17 of the

Port Industrial Park Block A of the Hambantota International Port

and storing any environmentally harmful and hazardous

substances including steel slag and clinker in contravention of the

law, without any environmental approvals and environmental

safety precautions being implemented;

CA-Writ / 0692-2024

7 | P a g e

INTERIM ORDERS

o) Grant an interim order directing the 1st, 2nd and/or 3rd, 4th

Respondents to immediately prevent the 5th and/or 6th

Respondents from engaging in the unloading storing and

transportation of hazardous or dust-emitting cargo for cement

manufacturing, in or at or out of the Hambantota International

Port other than in accordance with the law, pending the final

determination of this application;

p) Grant an interim order directing the 1st, 2nd and/or 3rd, 4th

Respondents to stop the 5th Respondent and/or the 6th Respondent

from in any way or manner permitting and/or authorising the

unloading and transportation of hazardous or dust-emitting cargo

for cement manufacturing in or at or out of the Hambantota Port

using trucks within its premises pending the final determination of

this application;

q) Grant and interim order directing the 1st, 2nd and/or 3rd, 4th

Respondent to prevent the 5th and/or 6th Respondent from

stockpiling clinker and other hazardous dust-emitting material in

the Hambantota International Port in contravention of the law and

without any environmental approvals and environmental safety

precautions being implemented, pending the final determination of

this application;

r) Grant an interim order directing the 1st, 2nd and/or 3rd, 4th

Respondents to seal and/or suspend the operation of the

warehouse at Lot No A17 of the Port Industrial Park Block A of the

Hambantota International Port used by and or operated by the 5th

Respondent and/or 6th Respondent to store imported steel slag in

contravention of the law, without any environmental approvals

form the 1st and 3rd Respondent and environmental safety

precautions being implemented;

s) Grant costs; and

CA-Writ / 0692-2024

8 | P a g e

t) Grant such other and further relief as to Your Lordships Court

shall seem fit and meet.

This matter was supported on 29.10.2024 and interim relief was issued

as prayed for in paragraphs o, p, q and r in the Petition.

The background of the case albeit as follows;

The Petitioner, being a registered company under Section 17 of the Board

of Investment Law (Hereinafter referred to as BOI) and driven by the

investment proposal of the Master Plan of Hambantota International

Port, has invested more than USD 151 Million to establish a cement

griding, blending and packing plant at Mirijjawila Export Processing Zone

of the BOI adjacent to the Port of Hambantota (Hereinafter referred to as

the Manufacturing Plant).

The Petitioner states that it has been issued an Environment Protection

Licence (Hereinafter referred to as EPL) in terms of the National

Environment Act (Hereinafter referred to as NEA) by the 3rd Respondent

with the concurrence of the 1st Respondent to operate its cement

manufacturing plant at the Export Processing Zone, Mirijjawila,

Hambantota and transport relevant raw materials from the Hambantota

International Port to its manufacturing plant through a conveyer belt.

The Petitioner has the EPL valid till 11th September 2025.

The Petitioner filing this Writ Application contends that the 1st and 3rd

Respondents had failed and neglected to enforce the law against the 5th

Respondent for failure to fulfill their statutory duty to protect the

environment. It is further alleged that the 5th Respondent had wrongfully

and unlawfully allowed the 6th Respondent and its agents to emit or

discharge dangerous and hazardous pollutants to the atmosphere within

the premises of the Hambantota International Port by unloading, storing

and transporting clinker and other similar dust-emanating raw materials

in contravention of the terms and conditions of its EPL and the directives

issued. It is further alleged that above mentioned activities have been

CA-Writ / 0692-2024

9 | P a g e

continued by the 6th Respondent after the suspension of their EPL on

15.07.2024.

Learned Presidents Counsel for the 6th Respondent moving this Court

not to extend the interim order submits to this Court that the Petitioner

filing this application not out of genuine legal necessity, but rather to

serve its collateral interest and gain an undue advantage in the cement

industry, where the 6th Respondent and the Petitioners are direct

competitors.

Although the Petitioner submitted that the EPL was suspended on

15.07.2024, the learned Presidents Counsel for the 6th Respondent

brought to the notice of this court that 1st Respondent by letter dated

19.09.2024, informed the 5th Respondent that until a new EPL is issued,

the 5th Respondent could continue its operations on the terms and

conditions contained in the previous license. Therefore, 6th Respondent

is not required to obtain a separate EPL for their raw material unloading

operations within the premises of the Hambantota International Port.

Further, the 6th Respondent is not transporting its raw materials through

the Industrial Park, Mirijjiwila and is instead transporting them to its

plant in Galle through the port access road. The raw material is

transported in trucks covered by a tarpaulin to minimize dust emission.

Additionally, dedusting hoppers are used for unloading raw material

(Clinker) and clinker yards are covered by a tarpaulin and the road to the

Clinker yard is routinely sprayed with water to suppress dust generation

from transporting clinker through unpaved road. Due to these

precautions, no any action was filed by anybody or a group against the

6th Respondent for environment pollution. Hence, the learned Presidents

Counsel contended that the only reason filling this Writ Application is the

business rivalry.

The learned Presidents Counsel for the 5th Respondent submitted that

this Writ Application is a result of a dispute between the Petitioner and

the 6th Respondent and the Petitioner had made several complaints

CA-Writ / 0692-2024

10 | P a g e

against the operations of the 6th Respondent, which led to the suspension

of the EPL issued to them. At the meeting held on 30.07.2024 the 3rd

Respondent had lifted the suspension for three months subject to

monitor the port activities, storage yards at port premises and material

unloading operations by the 6th Respondent as well as the Petitioner.

Until such time the 5th Respondent did not allow the 6th Respondent to

carry out any activities within the Port of Hambantota. On 22.10.2024,

unloading of the raw material was re-commenced and was inspected by

the officials of the 1st and 3rd Respondents.

It is the contention of the learned Presidents Counsel for the 5th

Respondent that dust emission is an inevitable byproduct of any raw

material unloading process. The 5th Respondent too agree with the test

report submitted by 6th Respondent which is marked as 5R-12.

The learned Senior State Counsel who appeared for the 3rd,4th and 7th

Respondents submits that as per the Court order the 3rd Respondent

(BOI) had conducted a site inspection at the industrial premises of 5th

Respondent on 13.11.2024 with the attendance of the representatives of

the 1st Respondent (CEA) and the joint inspection report marked 3R1

submitted to this Court.

Further, the 1st and 3rd Respondents had carried out joint inspections for

compliance monitoring purposes at the premises of the 5th Respondent

and at those of the Petitioners in their capacity as the Regulator and the

Facilitator, respectively. Thereafter, the suspension of EPL of 5th

Respondent was temporary lifted and the 5th Respondent was allowed to

carry out their operations subject to the recommendations given by the

3rd Respondent (BOI). The lifting was subjected to joint inspection of the

activities of 6th Respondent. This was informed to the 5th Respondent by

the 3rd Respondent (CEA) by letter dated 18.10.2024.

Although another cite inspection was carried out on 23.10.2024 by the

1st and 3rd Respondents at the premises of the 5th Respondent, loading

CA-Writ / 0692-2024

11 | P a g e

and unloading operations were observed to be suspended due to bad

weather condition.

The limited objections filed by 1st and 2nd Respondents also corroborate

the factors submitted by the 3rd, 4th, and 7th Respondents through the

learned Senior State Counsel.

At present stock filing operations are subject to compliance monitoring

and necessary recommendations by the 1st and 2nd Respondents. Further

lifting of suspension of EPL of 5th Respondent is subjected to further joint

site inspection to monitor of the operations of the 6th Respondent.

In Billimoria v Minister of Landas, Land Development and Mahaweli

Development and two Others [1978-79] 1 SLR 19 Samarakoon C.J.

held that:

In considering the question we must bear in mind that a stay order

is an incidental order made in the exercise of inherent or implied

powers of Court. Without such power the Courts final orders in most

cases would if the Petitioner is successful be rendered nugatory, and

the aggrieved party will be left holding an empty decree worthless

for all purpose.

In Weerasooriya v Sidambaram Chetty 8 CWR 238 Bertram C.J, held

that:

the interest of justice therefore required that a stay order be made

as an interim measure. It would not be correct to judge stay orders

in the same strict manner as final orders. Interim orders by their very

nature must depend a great deal on a judges opinion as to the

necessity for interim action.

In this case the Petitioner and the 6th Respondent are engage in cement

production in the country. The Petitioners cement manufacturing plant

is situated in Mirijjiwila, Hambantota. The 6th Respondents cement

manufacturing plant is located in Galle. The raw materials are

transported to its plant by way of trucks covered by a tarpaulin. It is

CA-Writ / 0692-2024

12 | P a g e

pertinent to note that up to now no single application is filed against the

6th Respondent by a third party.

In this case the learned Presidents Counsel for the 6th Respondent

submitted to this Court that due to this interim order the 6th Respondent

could not unload 450.88 MT of clinker which remains onboard the ship

and is valued at approximately Rs.7.3 million. As such his client has

suffered a loss of Rs. 900 million to date. This was endorsed by the

learned Presidents Counsel who appeared for the 5th Respondent as well.

After careful consideration of the submissions made by all parties, I

conclude that the 6th Respondent will suffer more harm than the

Petitioner if the interim order is extended.

Therefore, the interim order issued on 29.10.2024 against the

Respondents is hereby vacated.

JUDGE OF COURT OF APPEAL

M.T. Mohammed Laffar, J.

I Agree

JUDGE OF COURT OF APPEAL