1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made under

Section 331 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979

CA 164/2016

HC/ Kuliyapitiya/06/2008 Manchanayaka Appuhamilage

Chaminda Ranaweera

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo-12

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : Devika Abeyratne J

P. Kumararatnam J

COUNSEL : Ms.Indika Mallawarachchi for the Appellant

Mr.Sudarshana de Silva DSG for the

Respondent.

2 | P a g e

ARGUED ON : 03/08/2021

DECIDED ON : 27/10/2021

*******************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam J

The above-named Accused-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) was indicted for committing murder of Thammita Arachchilage

Chandrasena alias Sunil on 13/08/2006 which is an offence punishable

under Section 296 of the Penal Code.

After a non-jury trial, the Learned High Court Judge has found the

Appellant guilty of the charge and sentenced him to death on 14/09/2016.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence the Appellant

preferred this appeal to this court.

The Learned Counsel for the Appellant informed this court that the

Appellant has given consent to argue this matter in his absence due to the

Covid 19 pandemic. Also, at the time of argument the Appellant was

connected via zoom from prison.

On behalf of the Appellant only one Ground of Appeal is raised. According

to the counsel for the Appellant evidence led at the trial warrants the

consideration of the plea of cumulative provocation which had not been

adequately dealt by the learned High Court Judge in his judgment.

3 | P a g e

Background of the Case

According to PW01 Somawathi, the wife of the deceased the Appellant is

the nephew of the deceased. His father was killed when he was 15 years old

and the deceased was charged for the murder of the Appellants father. The

deceased was acquitted from the case after about 10 years of the incident.

As the Appellant and deceased lived opposite to each others house

constant quarrels ensued between them and the Appellant had at each

occasion accused that the deceased had murdered his father.

On the day in question around 5.00pm the Appellant had an altercation on

the road with the deceaseds elder brother Sumanaweera and the deceased

had intervened and asked both his brother and the Appellant to go home.

At this point an altercation erupted between the Appellant and the

deceased. After the altercation was over the elder brother of the deceased

had left the place. At about 6.45pm when the deceased was leaving the

place of incident on his motor bike the Appellant had attacked the

deceased with a club. Thereafter the deceased was taken to the

Dambadeniya hospital and he had succumbed to injuries upon admission.

PW2 son of the deceased, Madushanka had corroborated what his mother

narrated during the trial.

The counsel for the Appellant takes up the position that the case against

the Appellant should have been considered under the plea of cumulative

provocation and should have been convicted not for murder but for

culpable homicide not amounting to murder under 297 of the Penal Code.

4 | P a g e

According to exception 1 of Section 294 of the Penal Code Culpable

Homicide is not murder if the offender whilst deprived of the power of self-

control by grave and sudden provocation, causes the death of the person

who gave the provocation, or causes the death of any other person by

mistake or accident

The explanation under this exception read as that Whether the provocation

was grave and sudden enough to prevent the offence from amounting to

murder is a question of fact.

Although the counsel for the Appellant seeks relief for lesser culpability on

the plea of cumulative provocation, on perusal of the evidence led before

the High Court no evidence of sudden fight elicited either from the evidence

of the prosecution nor was the same suggested in the cross examination.

According to Section 105 of the Evidence Ordinance it is the responsibility

of the Appellant to prove the existence of a general or special exception

during the trial on a balance of probability. In the absence the Learned

trial Judge should direct his mind to the circumstances and the fact that

the Appellant is entitled to have the benefit of the lesser verdict.

In The King v Bellana Vithanage Eddin 41 NLR 345 the court held that:

"In a charge of murder, it is the duty of the judge to put to the

jury the alternative of finding the accused guilty of culpable

homicide not amounting to murder when there is any basis for

such a finding in the evidence on record, although such

defence was not raised nor relied upon by the accused.

It is very important at this stage to discuss the development of law

regarding the acceptance of cumulative provocation as a special exception

to a murder charge in our jurisdiction.

5 | P a g e

In Premalal v Attorney General [2000] 2 SLR 403 Kulatilaka,J held that:

Until the judgment of Chief Justice H.N.G Fernando in

Samithamby v Queen (1) (de Krester,J-dissenting) our court

followed a strict view in applying Exception (1) set out in

Section 294 of the Penal Code. Our judges following their

counterparts in England interpreted the phrase sudden

provocation to mean that provocation should consist of a

single act which occurred immediately before killing so that

there was no time for the anger to cool and the act must have

been such that it would have made a reasonable man to react

in the manner as the accused did. Our Courts were reluctant

to take into consideration any special circumstances which

manifested in the particular offenders case.

Kulatilaka, J. further held that:

Of late we observe a development in other jurisdictions where

Courts and juries have taken a more pragmatic view of the

mitigatory plea of provocation. In a series of cases in applying

the mitigatory plea of provocation Courts took into

consideration the prior course of relationship between the

accused and his victim.

In W.A. Gamini v Attorney General CA/142/2009 the court held that:

the chain of stressful events in the troubled relationship of the

accused and the deceased culminating in the aforesaid

unfortunate incident, are probable reasonably sufficient to

entertain a plea of continuing or cumulative provocation

because the accused retaliated at the spur of the moment and

that he could reasonably show that he was deprived of his self-

control.

6 | P a g e

Citing the above two judgments His Lordship Jayantha Jayasuriya C.J. in

R.W.M.Nandana Senarathbandara v Attorney General

SC/Appeal/32/2015 decided on 17/07/2020 has held that:

Jurisprudence referred to above demonstrate that in

considering the plea of grave and sudden provocation an

accused is entitled to rely upon a series of prior events that

ultimately led to the incident at which the death was caused. A

court should not restrict its focus to an isolated incident that

resulted in the death, in considering a plea of grave and

sudden provocation. The aforementioned jurisprudence has

widened the scope of this plea by expanding the limitations

recognized in its statutory form. Thereby, the concept of

Continuing or Cumulative provocation has been recognized

as a plea coming within the purview of the plea of grave and

sudden provocation recognized under Exception-1, section 294

of the Penal Code. Therefore, the proximity of time between the

actus reus of the accused and the provocative act of the

victim should be considered in the context of the nature and

circumstances in each case, in deciding whether an accused is

entitled to the benefit of the plea of Grave and Sudden

Provocation.

Further His Lordship in R.W.M.Nandana Senarathbandara v Attorney

General (Supra) has cited an Indian Judgment to explain how the concept

of Sustained Provocation has been recognised and developed by the Indian

superior courts.

In Poovammal v State 2012 (2) MLJ (Crl.) 482 the court held:

30. Under the English Criminal Law, the provocation must be

grave and also sudden. But, by way of judicial thinking, the

Indian Criminal Law has gone ahead. (K.M. NANAVATHI Vs

7 | P a g e

STATE OF MAHARASTRA [A.I.R.) 1962 S.C. 605). In our

system, there is the concept of Sustained Provocation. It is

concerned with the duration of the provocation. There may be

incidents/occurrences, which are such that they may not

make the offender suddenly to make his outburst by his overt

act. However, it may be lingering in his mind for quite some

time, torment continuously and at one point of time erupt,

make him to lose his self-control, make his mind to go astray,

the mind may not be under his control/command and results

in the offender committing the offence. The sustained

provocation/frustration nurtured in the mind of the accused

reached the end of breaking point, under that accused causes

the murder of the deceased.

.

34. In SUYAMBUKKANI Vs STATE OF TAMIL NADU [1989 LW

(Crl.) 86], it is held as under: - Though there has been here

and there attempts in those decisions to bring the sustained

provocation under Exception-1 to Section 300, I.P.C., there is a

cardinal difference between provocation as defined under

Exception-1 and sustained provocation. The only word which is

common is provocation. What Exception-1 contemplates is a

grave and sudden provocation, whereas the ingredient of

sustained provocation is a series of acts more or less grave

spread over a certain period of time, the last of which acting as

the last straw breaking the camels back may even be a very

trifling one. We are, therefore, far from grave and sudden

provocation contemplated under Exception-1 to Section 300,

I.P.C. Sustained provocation is undoubtedly an addition by

Courts, as anticipated by the architects of the Indian Penal

Code.

8 | P a g e

Considering the above cited judgments and the background of this case I

`now consider whether this is an appropriate case to consider the plea of

cumulative provocation under Exception-1 to Section 294 of Penal Code.

In this case the Appellant was only 15 years old when he lost his father.

The deceased was accused of his fathers murder but he was exonerated by

the court after ten years of lawsuit. Due to this incident the Appellant was

deprived of the love and care of his father.

Further even after the death of his father, the two families lived in opposite

houses and constant quarrel ensued as a result. Both PW1 and PW2

admitted this position. PW2 in his evidence stated that there had been

constant continued quarrels between the deceaseds party and the

Appellants party practically every two months. On the day of the incident

one hour before the unfortunate incident an altercation erupted between

the Appellant and the deceaseds brother Sumanaweera who was under the

influence of liquor at that time. The deceased had intervened and taken his

brother from the place of incident. At that time the Appellant had made an

utterance to the effect waren umba parata. Thereafter both the Appellant

and the deceased had a fight.PW1 admitted this position in her evidence.

Further depriving love and care of a father is an unbearable mental agony

to the family, especially to the children. The dependants have to undergo

untold hardship both financially and mentally as in most families the

father is the sole bread winner. Further losing a parent is grief-filled and

traumatic and affect children psychologically and may cause them to

remain in the denial and anger phases of the loss for extended periods of

time.

Ashworth in 1975 Criminal LR 558-559 opines as follows:

The significance of the deceaseds final act should be

considered by reference to the previous relations between the

parties, taking into account any previous incidents which add

9 | P a g e

colour to the final act . The point is that the significance of

the deceaseds final act and its effect upon the accused-and

indeed the relation of the retaliation to that act-can be neither

understood nor evaluated without reference to previous

dealings between the parties.

In R.W.M.Nandana Senarathbandara v Attorney General (Supra) His

Lordship further held that:

. In these cases, the accused have undergone through

severe mental agony or distress up to the point where the fatal

attack takes place, due to such series of events. Courts

therefore had held that the accused should receive the benefit

of the plea of grave and sudden provocation, even though a

time gap exists between the act of provocation and the fatal

attack. During the time between these two points there had not

been a cooling off of the mind, but a state of continued metal

stress and trauma due to the nature and the gravity of the

provocative conduct of the deceased did exist. Therefore, for an

accused to succeed in a plea of Grave and sudden provocation

on the basis of continuing or cumulative provocation, the court

on a balance of probability should be satisfied that the accused

had gone through a state of continued mental stress and agony

during the gap between the provocative conduct and the fatal

attack.

Analysing the evidence presented in this case it clearly demonstrates that

the stressful events and the strained relationship of the Appellant and the

deceased had resulted in the unfortunate incident. Although the Learned

High Court Judge had briefly discussed the concept of cumulative

provocation, had not awarded the benefit to the Appellant under the said

mitigatory plea.

10 | P a g e

Considering all the circumstances stressed before this court I conclude that

this is an appropriate case to consider for the Appellants benefit, his

entitlement for a plea of cumulative provocation under Exception-1 to

Section 294 of the Penal Code.

Hence, we set aside the death sentence and convict the Appellant for

culpable homicide not amounting to murder under Section 297 of the Penal

Code. We sentence the Appellant for 15 years rigorous imprisonment

commencing from date of conviction namely 14/09/2016.

Subject to above variation we dismiss the appeal.

The Registrar is directed to send a copy of this judgment to High Court of

Kuliyapitiya along with the original case record.

Appeal dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

DEVIKA ABEYRATNE, J

I agree

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL