',-----------------------------------------------------------------------,

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

C.A.No. HCC No.198-19912013

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of

Section 3310f the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.IS of 1979.

H.C. Monaragala No.HC 506/2008A

01. Raterala Mudiyanselage Gunawardene

alias Gunaratna

02. Raterala Mudiyanselage Piyasena

***********

Accused-Appellants

Vs.

Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo 12 .

Complainant- Respondent

BEFORE

COUNSEL

ARGUED ON

DECIDED ON

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

DEVIKA ABEYRATNE, J.

D. Karunaratne for the 1st Accused-Appellant.

Neranjan Jayasinghe with Sachitra Harshana and Anusha Ratnayake for the 2nd Accused-Appellant

Chethiya Goonesekera D.S.G. for the respondent

05.03. 2020 & 06.03.2020

03.07. 2020

****************

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

The 1st and 2nd accused-appellants (hereinafter referred to as the 1st and

2ndApellants) were initially indicted before the High Court of Badulla for

committing murders of Bandana Yaddessalage Siyadoris and Aluthgedara Susira on

or about 21.08.1997 at Etimale. After the establishment of the High Court of

Monaragala, the case was transferred to that Court, where the trial of the two

Appellants was commenced without a jury and concluded.

At the conclusion of the trial, during which the only eye witness to the

incident, Bandana Yaddessalage Gedara Tillakaratne and others gave evidence for

the prosecution while the 1st Appellant gave evidence under oath and the 2nd

2

Appellant making a statement from the dock, the trial Court convicted both the

Appellants for committing double murder and were sentenced to death.

Being aggrieved by the said conviction and the sentence, the Appellants

have preferred the instant appeal, in seeking to set them aside.

In support of his appeal, the lstAppellant has relied on a single ground of

appeal that the trial Court had erroneously concluded that the evidence of the

solitary eye witness was credible and it has failed to appreciate that the deceased

going on a fishing expedition is only a pretext.

The 2nd Appellant too has raised a similar ground of appeal that the trial

Court has fallen into error in accepting the purported eye witness's evidence in

relation to the presence of the 2nd Appellant at the scene of the incident. In

addition, the 2nd Appellant raised another ground of appeal on the basis that the

trial Court has erroneously rejected his statement from the dock.

In view of the common ground of appeal that revolves around the

credibility of the solitary eye witness to the incident, it is necessary that this

Court considers his evidence albeit briefly and the conclusion reached by the trial

Court on its assessment of the evidence for the prosecution for its truthfulness

and reliability.

3

Witness Tillakaratne was related to both deceased. The deceased siyadoris

is his father's brother and the other deceased too is related to the witness

through his mother's side. Tillakaratne used to visit the 1st deceased occasionally

and during the time of the incident, by which both deceased were killed, he

happens to be with the deceased, having arrived there on the previous day.

On 21.08.1997, in the morning siyadoris suggested to the witness and

Susira that they go fishing in the Etimale tank. The three of them were fishing on

a boat and after some time the 1st Appellant too had launched a boat and

paddled it near to the place where the three were fishing. When the three

returned to the dry land, the 1st Appellant told siyadoris not to clear his land.

siyadoris replied that he has obtained permission from the Grama Niladhari to

clear that plot of land. The 1st Appellant then went away after saying" oo@o

Ql@lG)". After this incident, the three returned to water and continued fishing till

midday and then decided to return.

They walked back to siyadoris's hut along a foot path in a single file. The

witness was walking in front followed by siyadoris and thereafter Sus ira. On

their way, they met the 2nd Appellant, a brother of the 1st Appellant, who advised

siyadoris not to clear the plot claimed by his brother and " <!Jell qciqlO(g QdJt:r!".

He also warned them since they knew the nature of the 1st Appellant. The 2nd

Appellant had a katty in his hand.

4

The party of three continued to walk towards Siyadoris's hut with the 2nd

Appellant following their trail with a distance of about 30 fathoms. As the party

was approaching a canal, the 1st Appellant emerged from his hiding place armed

with a gun and a kath;. He shouted at the witness not to run and addressed him

in filth. He then aimed his gun at Siyadoris and shot him. Siyadoris fell on the

ground receiving the shot. The 1 st Appellant was standing about 5 to 10 fathoms

away. The witness was chased after by the 1st Appellant when he ran away from

the scene, leaving the other deceased Susira at the scene.

The witness, in answering clearly a leading question by the learned

prosecutor, claimed that, while running away from the scene, he saw the 2nd

Appellant cutting the 2nd deceased Susira. The witness hid himself in the bush

and the 1st Appellant went back in the direction of the scene. He did not return to

the place where Siyadoris was shot immediately. When he returned to the scene

with the police he saw the bodies of Siyadoris and Susira.

During cross-examination by the 1st Appellant, the witness admitted he

made a statement to police on 22.08.1997 at 8.00 a.m. of an incident that took

place at about 11.15 a.m., the previous day. The witness said after the incident he

complained to Monaragala police. They visited the scene and directed the witness

to complain to Siyambalanduwa Police Station as the place of incident is located in

that police area.

5

There is no contradiction marked as VI. The contradiction V2 was marked

off his evidence on the basis that the witness told police that he visited Siyadoris

only in the 20th night. V3 was in relation to the fact that they agreed to fish in the

following morning. V4 was marked on the basis that the witness told police,

after watching TV he came to Siyadoris's house in that night. V5 is in relation to

his statement that the 1st Appellant asked Siyadoris using the pet name "Chutte"

why he cleared the former's land. V6 is in relation to the witness's claim that

Siyadoris was not referred to as "Chutte". V7 indicates the witness said in his

statement that Siyadoris replied to 1st Appellant that since it is a State land he

cleared it. V8 was marked on the basis that Siyadoris would clear the land until

Grama Niladhari stops him. V9 was marked when the witness denied that he

stated 2nd Appellant was waiting by the footpath and VI0 was marked when he

denied that the 2nd Appellant asked them whether they had a good catch. Vll

was marked on the reply by witness that they did not. V12 is on whether they

parted saying "q8 O.!Dell". Contradiction 13 is a long sentence indicating the

Appellant had sprung up suddenly after hiding behind a bush. V14 is in relation

to witness walking few feet after seeing the 1st Appellant with his gun. V15 is

Siyadoris fell on the ground screaming" qS@i".

The medical expert is of the opinion that Siyadoris died as a result of

gunshot and cut injury caused to his neck. He agrees the lead pieces recovered

from the body is indicative of a shot fired from a distance using a trap gun.

Death of Susira was caused due to multiple cut injuries which damaged some of

his vital organs, and were caused using a heavy sharp cutting weapon. The cut

injuries noted on Siyadoris also may have been caused by a similar type of

weapon.

6

Investigating officer was not available to give evidence before the trial

Court and his deposition was admitted under Section 33 of the Evidence

Ordinance. Deposition of SI Jayasinghe of Siyambalanduwa Police indicated that

when he visited the scene the two deceased were fallen 26 feet apart from each

other. He noted a flask, fishing gear in a bag which was found close to the body

of Siyadoris with fishing rods. Both the deceased had sustained deep cut injuries.

He also found a paper wadding and also a thin steel rod lying close to the

place where the witness had pointed out the place where the 1st Appellant was

standing. There was a foot path along which the two deceased have walked and

the area surrounded with jungle with shrubs closer to the foot path.

The 1st Appellant gave evidence on oath. He claims that he pleaded with

the deceased to vacate his land but on that day the three of them have attacked

him when he was alone. He had a gun in his hand and also had a katty. He fired

a shot in self-defence and also swung around the katty to ward off the attack by

the deceased who used clubs. He does not have a clear recollection of the

incident as he defended himself from frantically

It was urged before this Court by the learned Counsel for the 1st Appellant

that the trial Court had failed to properly evaluate the multiple contradictions

that were marked off the eye witness account and, in any event, the Court also

failed to consider lesser culpability of the 1st Appellant on the basis of sudden

fight.

7

Perusal of the judgment of the trial Court indicates that it had considered

all the contradictions and the two omissions marked off the eye witness's

evidence, in coming to the conclusion that the said witness is a truthful and

reliable witness. Having examined the extent to which the eye witness had

contradicted and over the material he had contradicted himself with his

statement made to Police, this Court concurs with the view of the trial Court that

none of these contradictions were on the vital aspects of his testimony. Although

a significant number had been marked, that did not affect the basic version of the

witness. He varied with his version only on trivialities which are clearly

attributable to failing human memory.

Whether the witness went to Siyadoris's house that night or during day

time, will not alter the witness's claim that he was with the two deceased on the

day of the incident. The unsuccessful fishing expedition, the brief encounter with

the 1st Appellant while fishing, he had a gun with him even at that time, the brief

conversation with the 2nd Appellant who also had a katty, and the 1 st Appellant's

ambush on the fishing party at a lonely spot, Siyadoris was shot first before the

2nd Appellant chased after the other deceased are consistently narrated by the

witness. The fact that not a single contradiction was marked off his deposition

and the witness had given evidence before the trial Court after a lapse of 14 years

since the incident should also be considered by a Court in considering the

testimonial trustworthiness of such a witness.

Since the 2nd Appellant too had made a similar complaint, it is appropriate

for this Court to deal with his contention along with that of the 1st Appellant.

8

The witness admits there is nothing unusual about his fellow villagers to

be armed with katties and even with guns, given the environment they lived in

surrounded by jungles and wild animals, as long as they do not pose a threat to

anyone. The 2nd Appellant talked to Siyadoris on an apparent reconciliatory tone.

It could well be that he also followed the fishing party along the foot path, going

on his own way.

The prosecution claims that, considering in the light of the fact that the 1st

Appellant indicated his displeasure to Siyadoris about clearing his land when

they met at the tank while fishing and mounting a surprised attack on the fishing

party when they took the foot path they usually take to return home, closely

followed by the 2nd Appellant, is indicative of a common meeting of minds of the

two siblings.

It is unfortunate that the learned prosecutor chose to put an obvious

leading question to the eye witness in relation to the role played by the 2nd

Appellant during the attack mounted by the 1st Appellant. During cross-

examination the witness admitted that he only saw the 2nd Appellant chasing

after Susira and he heard his scream thereafter is a clear indication that the

witness believed, even if he did not witness it, that it was the 2nd Appellant who

cut Susira. Even if one leaves the opinion of the witness on what he did not see,

it is nonetheless a justifiable inference since the two deceased were fallen apart 26

feet and Siyadoris too had suffered similar type of deep cut injuries, which are

consistent with the presence of two attackers instead of one, especially since the

9

firearm injury did not result in the instantaneous death of Siyadoris as the

medical witness opined.

The witness's claim seemed probable since he would have had a chance to

check on Susira although the 1st Appellant was chasing after him. This is because

the gun used by the 1st Appellant is only a trap gun and once its fires, it had to be

reloaded. The only weapon which posed a threat to the witness's life was the

katty in the hand of the 1st Appellant, but he was chasing after the witness who

had the advantage of having a head start no sooner the shot was fired. The 1st

Appellant had Siyadoris as his first target as he wasted no time in firing his gun

at him. Then only the 1st Appellant chased after the witness, while the 2nd

Appellant acted on his designated role by chasing after Susira.

The two brothers have evaded arrest after the incident and have

surrendered to Court through an Attorney-at-Law.

Judging by the number of deep cut injuries and their locations on the

bodies of the two deceased, it is clear whoever who inflicted them had acted with

clear murderous intention. The way the two Appellants have acted during the

ambush indicate that they shared that murderous intention and have acted

according to a plan, in mounting their surprise attack on the unarmed fishing

party returning to their house. The trial Court noted that the Police did not

observe any poles or clubs in the scene although the 1st Appellant in his evidence

said so, in addition to excluding the presence of his sibling from the scene. The

10

witness could not have removed any of these items since he did return to the

scene only with the Police.

As to the contention of the failure to consider lesser culpability on the lines

of sudden fight, this Court is of the view that the evidence does not support the

proposition that the 1st Appellant was suddenly dragged into the conflict. On the

contrary the evidence strongly indicative of the fact that it was a premeditated

murder. The 1st Appellant's claim of acting in self-defence was advance only at

the very end of the case and did not even suggest to the witness that they were

armed and had commenced attack on him. The land dispute, may have provoked

the 1st Appellant in causing death of Siyadoris but it was not a sudden loss of self-

control, since he had sufficient cooling off time after his mid-morning meeting

with the fishing party in the waters of Etimale tank.

The trial Court had correctly rejected the evidence of the 1st and 2nd

Appellants with valid reasons.

In these circumstances, this Court is of the view that there was

considerable body of credible evidence before the trial Court to reach the

conclusion that the two Appellants have acted with common murderous

intention in causing deaths of the two deceased.

11

The appeals of the 1st and 2nd Appellants are, for the reasons enumerated

in the preceding paragraphs, without merit. Therefore, this Court affirms the

conviction of the Appellants and the sentence of death imposed on them.

Appeals of the 1st and 2nd Appellants are accordingly dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

DEVIKA ABEYRATNE, I. I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

12