==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

Orders in the nature of Writs of

Certiorari, Prohibition and Mandamus

under Article 140 of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Softlogic Life Insurance PLC.,

Level 16, One Galle Face Tower,

Colombo 02.

CA (Writ) App. No. 507/2025

PETITIONER

Vs.

1. R.G.J.B. Gunathilaka,

Assistant Commissioner of Labour, Department of Labour, No. 41, Kirula Road, Colombo 05. 2. P.B.C. Pemabandu,

Deputy Commissioner of Labour, Zone 1, Western Province, Department of Labour, No. 41, Kirula Road, Colombo 05. 3. The Commissioner General of Labour,

Department of Labour, No. 41, Kirula Road,

2

Colombo 05. 4. Vikneshwaran Vijitharan,

No. T/3/P, Norris Canal Road, Colombo 10.

RESPONDENTS

Before: Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Counsel:

Nigel Hatch, P.C. with Siroshni Illangage instructed by Malaka Wickremasinghe for the

Petitioner.

Nayomi Kahawita, S.S.C. for the 1st to 3rd Respondents.

Argued on: 10.12.2025

Delivered on: 30.01.2026

3

Dr. D. F. H. Gunawardhana, J.

Judgement

Introduction

The Petitioner is a body cooperate, incorporated under the laws of Sri Lanka, and is capable of

suing and being sued in its corporate name. It has been duly registered and issued with a license to

carry out the business of life insurance, which in insurance terminology is referred to as a ‘long-

term insurance’ business within Sri Lanka.

In the course of its business, the Petitioner engages the services of insurance agents. The 4th

Respondent was once recruited as such an agent; however, after working for a few weeks, he

claimed a salary which the Petitioner refused to pay, giving rise to a dispute. Following a complaint

made by the 4th Respondent to the 1st to 3rd Respondents, an inquiry was held.

Without giving due notice to the Petitioner, the Respondents held the inquiry and ordered the

Petitioner to pay the salary claimed by the 4th Respondent. In addition to that the Respondents have

instituted proceedings in the Magistrate Court based on the said order.

In those circumstances, the Petitioner has instituted the above-styled Application in this Court, and

after the issuance of formal notice the Respondents have filed their respective Objections, except

the 4th Respondent, who did not appear despite notices duly issued. This was argued before me on

10.12.2025; hence, this judgement.

The following arguments were advanced by Counsel at the hearing.

Arguments

4

Mr. Hatch, learned P.C. contended that the 4th Respondent, being an insurance agent, cannot be

considered as an employee of the Petitioner. He heavily relies on the Regulation of Insurance

Industry Act, No. 43 of 2000 (hereinafter referred to as the “RII Act”), and the definition given

therein in support of his submissions. In addition to that, he brought to my notice by referring to

the application made by the 4th Respondent to the Commissioner, as he has not sought EPF or ETF,

except for the salary, which is marked as R1 annexed to the Petition.

Having referred to R2 and R3, it is his position that though the 4th Respondent has made an

application to the Commissioner of Labour, the Petitioner has never turned up for any inquiry as

the said documents had not been received by him.

In addition to that, he referred to R4, which is a part of the proceedings before the Commissioner,

and brought it to the notice that the 4th Respondent’s affidavit is not an affidavit. He further argued

that no shred of evidence is placed before the Commissioner to establish that he is an employee of

the Petitioner.

On the other hand, Ms. Nayomi Kahawita argued that the Petitioner has not represented or made

any representation to the Attorney General to make arrangements to expedite the matter without

any laborious inquiry.

In addition to that, Ms. Kahawita further argued that the Petitioner has not appeared before the

Commissioner to assist the Commission on behalf of the Petitioner.

Factual matrix

The Petitioner is a duly incorporated company and it is registered under the Regulation of

Insurance Industry Act, No. 43 of 2000 (as amended) (hereinafter referred to as the “RII Act”), to

carry on the business of ‘long term insurance’, popularly known as ‘life insurance’. To establish

5

those two facts, the Petitioner has filed P1 and P1(a) marked and annexed to the Petition, which

are undisputed by the Respondents.

The 4th Respondent, having submitted an application to the Nugegoda Metro Branch of the

Petitioner’s company, to be enrolled as an insurance agent, faced an examination on the technical

competency of the 4th Respondent. The application and the results of the said examination are

marked as P2 and P2(a) annexed to the Petition; thereafter, the 4th Respondent was conditionally

enrolled as an insurance agent. One such conditions is that within the first month of enrolment, the

4th Respondent has to introduce two prospective insurers to the Petitioner in order to enter into

policy of insurance.

In addition to that, from the second month, the 4th Respondent had to undergo a mandatory training

program to develop the professional competency. However, having introduced clients (prospective

insurers), the 4th Respondent has never turned up for the said training program, and thereby

defaulted.

In those circumstances, the Petitioner was compelled to treat the 4th Respondent as a defaulter of

his duties, and accordingly, the Petitioner, by letter dated 06.02.2024, has informed the 4th

Respondent with regards to the termination of his agency agreement; a copy of the said letter is

marked as P6 annexed to Petition. However, according to Petitioner, the 4th Respondent has not

replied to said letter P6, and thereafter, the Petitioner has received an intimation from the

Presidential Secretariat, requesting the Petitioner to grant the 4th Respondent’s salary.

Thereafter, the Petitioner received two letters, P7(a) and P8, from the Department of Labour. In

particular, P7(a) is a copy of the letter sent by the 4th Respondent to the Department of Labour,

and in return, they had inquired into the matter and determined by P8 that the 4th Respondent is

6

entitled to a salary and arrears of Rs. 120,000/- (One Hundred and Twenty Thousand Rupees) on

the basis that he is an employee. Thereafter, the Petitioner responded to the letter sent by the

Presidential Secretariat, by the document marked P9, which was directed to the 4th Respondent,

and denied any liability to pay.

Further, based on P8, the Labour Department has instituted proceedings in the Magistrate’s Court

against the Petitioner to recover the said amount, which was directed to be paid by the Petitioner

to the 4th Respondent through the 1st to 3rd Respondents.

The Petitioner states that he was never made aware of such an inquiry, and no notice was issued

by the 1st to 3rd Respondents or by the Department of Labour, regarding the inquiry initiated by

the 1st to 3rd Respondents on a complaint made by the 4th Respondent. Therefore, the rules of

natural justice were not followed in the first place. In addition to that, the determination made by

the Department is illegal, irrational, and contrary to law. Thereafter, the Petitioner has sought to

quash the said decision by this Application, as referred to in the document marked P8.

The 4th Respondent is an insurance agent

On a perusal of the application submitted by the 4th Respondent to the Petitioner, it is evident that

he applied to join as an insurance agent. The question that arises therefore, is whether an insurance

agent is considered a permanent employee of the Petitioner, or as argued by the Petitioner, whether

an insurance agent can be treated in law and in view of the principles of insurance as an employee

of the Petitioner.

Other than the concepts relating to insurance developed in the common law, which are accepted

in the jurisprudence of Sri Lanka as residuary law in matters concerning contracts of insurance,

7

the basic law applied within the insurance industry is the Regulation of Insurance Industry Act,

No. 43 of 2000 (as amended). In accordance with this Act, insurance agents can be appointed by

any insurer, and the qualifications of insurance agents are also stipulated either in the Act or in

regulations made thereunder.

As such, Section 114 of the RII Act defines insurance agents as such;

“114. ‘Insurance agent’ as a person registered as an Insurance Agent with an insurer or

broker under the provisions of this Act, and who in consideration of a commission solicits

or procures insurance business for such insurer or broker as the case may be;” (Emphasis

is mine)

In addition, as contended by the Learned President Counsel on behalf of the Petitioner, the

qualifications of insurance agents are set out in regulations contained in the Insurance Agent

Qualification Rules 2002, formulated under the RII Act, at Rule 2(g), which provides as thus;

“2. No person shall be registered as an insurance agent unless he - ...

(g) is not a salaried employee of a registered Insurer or Broker.”1

Accordingly, it is my view that an insurance agent or a broker is not a person who works for an

insurer for a permanent salary, drawing remuneration for services rendered, and whose work,

movements, and office hours are controlled by a master. Rather, such a person is an independent

entity operating out of the control of a master, whether juristic or natural, and whose emoluments

1 P11 of the Counter Affidavit filed by the Petitioner.

8

for services rendered are solely in the form of commission. Therefore, it is clear that such an agent

cannot be treated as an employee of the Petitioner, who is the insurer in this case.

Without any evidence, and without even considering the contract that existed between the

Petitioner and the 4th Respondent, as well as the law regulating the existence of the relationship

with insurance agents, it appears that the 1st to 3rd Respondents took a decision, as reflected in P8,

that the 4th Respondent must be treated as an employee entitled to a salary for services rendered to

the Petitioner on a monthly basis; this is erroneous, irrational and illegal. Accordingly, it is my

view that P8 must be quashed by the issuance of a Writ of Certiorari.

Conclusion

In the circumstances, for the reasons adumbrated above, I grant reliefs as prayed for in prayers (c),

(d), and (e) of the Petition, and further order Rs. 21,000/- (Twenty-One Thousand Rupees) as cost

of litigation payable by the Respondents jointly and severally to the Petitioner.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL