==== BLOCKS ==== 

CA(PHC)/0018/21

Page 1 of 8

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Government Agent/District

Secretary,

Anuradhapura.

PLAINTIFF VS Chandra P. Withana, No. 04, Harischandra Mawatha, Anuradhapura.

RESPONDENT AND BETWEEN Chandra P. Withana, No. 04, Harischandra Mawatha, Anuradhapura.

RESPONDENT-PETITIONER VS Government Agent/District

Secretary,

Anuradhapura.

PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT

Court Appeal Case No: CA(PHC) 0018/21 North Central Province High Court Case No: NCP/PHC/ANP/RV/04/2020 Anuradhapura Magistrate’s Court Case No: 24102

CA(PHC)/0018/21

Page 2 of 8

AND NOW BETWEEN

Chandra P. Withana, No. 04, Harischandra Mawatha Anuradhapura.

RESPONDENT-PETITIONER-

APPELLANT VS Government Agent/District

Secretary,

Anuradhapura.

PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT-

RESPONDENT

Before : D. THOTAWATTA, J.

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Counsel : Dr. Sunil Cooray with Gayashani Perera

for the Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant

S. Dunuwila SC. For the Plaintiff-

Respondent-Respondent.

Written Submissions

of the Respondent

-Petitioner-Appellant

tendered on : 28.06.2023

Written Submissions

of the Plaintiff

CA(PHC)/0018/21

Page 3 of 8

-Respondent-Respondent

tendered on : 08.09.2026

Decided on : 25.09.2026

K. M. S. DISSANAYAKE, J.

Instant appeal arises from an order dated 27.01.2021 (hereinafter called and

referred to as “the Order”) made by the learned High Court Judge of the North

Central Province holden in Anuradhapura (hereinafter called and referred to

as “the learned High Court Judge”) dismissing an application in revision

preferred to it by the Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant (hereinafter called and

referred to as “the Appellant”) praying inter-alia, for the setting aside of the

order dated 14.02.2020 made by the learned Magistrate of Anuradhapura

(hereinafter called and referred to as “the MC order”) in respect of an

application for ejectment made to it by the Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent-

Government Agent/District Secretary of Anuradhapura being the Competent

Authority (hereinafter called and referred to as “the Respondent”) under and

in terms of section 6 of the Government Quarters (Recovery of Possession) Act

No. 07 of 1969 as amended (hereinafter called and referred to as “the Act”),

on the grounds urged in paragraph 7(i) to (iv) of the petition dated 27.02.2020

furnished by the Appellant to the High Court of the North Central Province

holden in Anuradhapura (hereinafter called and referred to as “the High

Court”) along with her application in revision.

When this matter came on before us for hearing, Counsel desired this Court

to dispose of this matter on the strength of the written submissions and the

instant appeal will be disposed of, accordingly.

The facts relevant and material to the instant appeal as can be gathered from

the petition of appeal may be briefly, set out as follows;

The Respondent-Government Agent/District Secretary of Anuradhapura

being the Competent Authority had made an application for ejectment to the

Magistrate Court of Anuradhapura in case bearing No. 24102 under and in

terms of the provisions of Section 6 of the Act praying for the recovery of

CA(PHC)/0018/21

Page 4 of 8

possession of the Government Quarter as morefully, described in the

application for ejectment (hereinafter called and referred to as “the

Government Quarter”) and for the ejectment of the Appellant and his

dependents if any, therefrom. Even though Act contains no provision

whatsoever, which requires the issuance of notice of the application for

ejectment on the person sought to be ejected from a Government Quarter, the

learned Magistrate had nevertheless, proceeded to issue notices of the

application for ejectment on the Appellant on a significant number of

occasions but, the Appellant had failed to respond to the notices so issued on

him by Court, despite the fact that she had been served with notices by way

of substituted service as reported to Court by the Fiscal and in consequence,

the learned Magistrate of Anuradhapura had made order issuing a writ of

possession to the Fiscal requiring and authorizing him to deliver possession

of the Government Quarter to the competent authority and to eject the

Appellant and her dependents if any, therefrom. Being aggrieved by the MC

order, the Appellant had invoked the extra-ordinary revisionary jurisdiction

of the High Court seeking to revise and set aside it. The learned High Court

Judge had by the HC order, dismissed the application in revision for the

reasons explicitly, stated therein. Hence, the instant appeal therefrom.

As is discernible from a careful scrutiny of the grounds of appeal urged in

paragraph 6 (i) to (iv) of the petition of appeal, the contentions so advanced

by the Appellant in support of the instant appeal, are mainly, four-fold,

namely;

1) The Respondent is not the competent authority within the meaning

of section 9 of the Act;

2) The Quarter in question is not a Government Quarter within the

meaning of the Act but, a Quarter belonging to the North Central

Provincial Council in terms of the pedigree pleaded in his showing

cause;

3) The learned High Court Judge has violated the doctrine of ‘Audi

Alterm Partem’.

CA(PHC)/0018/21

Page 5 of 8

4) Consideration of extraneous and irrelevant facts in the HC order.

They may now, be examined separately for convenience and clarity.

1) The Respondent is not the competent authority within the meaning

of section 9 of the Act.

It may now, be examined.

Sections 6(4) of the Act enacts that, “Every application for ejectment shall be

conclusive evidence of the facts stated therein.”[Emphasis is mine]

What then, is conclusive evidence or conclusive proof as envisaged by section

6(4) of the Act?.

In terms of section 4(3) of the Evidence Ordinance, the phrase “conclusive

proof” is defined as follows;

“When one fact is declared by this Ordinance to be conclusive proof of

another, the court shall on proof of the one fact regard the other as

proved, and shall not allow evidence to be given for the purpose of

disproving it.”

The Respondent being the competent authority has stated in his application

for ejectment forwarded to the Magistrate Court of Anuradhapura that he is

the competent authority within the meaning of the Act.

Hence, it is conclusive evidence and/or conclusive proof within the meaning

of section 6(4) of the Act to be read with section 4(3) of the Evidence Ordinance

that the Respondent is the competent authority within the meaning of the Act

and that Court shall not allow evidence to be given for the purpose of

disproving it in terms of section 4(3) of the Evidence Ordinance.

Hence, the Appellant is not entitled to raise such a defence to the application

for ejectment made by the Respondent being competent authority to the

Magistrate Court of Anuradhapura that the Respondent is not the

competent authority within the meaning of section 9 of the Act as rightly,

held by the learned High Court Judge.

CA(PHC)/0018/21

Page 6 of 8

I would therefore, hold that the ground of appeal so urged by the Appellant in

support of the instant appeal cannot sustain in law and therefore, it ought to

be rejected as rightly, held by the learned High Court Judge.

2) The Quarter in question is not a Government Quarter within the

meaning of the Act but, a Quarter belonging to the North Central

Provincial Council.

It may now, be examined.

As enumerated above, sections 6(4) of the Act enacts that, “Every application

for ejectment shall be conclusive evidence of the facts stated

therein.”[Emphasis is mine]

As enumerated above, section 4(3) of the Evidence Ordinance defines the

phrase “conclusive proof” as follows;

“When one fact is declared by this Ordinance to be conclusive proof of

another, the court shall on proof of the one fact regard the other as

proved, and shall not allow evidence to be given for the purpose of

disproving it.”

The Respondent being the competent authority has stated in his application

for ejectment forwarded to the Magistrate Court of Anuradhapura that the

Quarter in question is a Government Quarter within the meaning of the Act.

Hence, it is conclusive evidence and/or conclusive proof within the meaning

of section 6(4) of the Act to be read with section 4(3) of the Evidence Ordinance

that the Quarter in question is a Government Quarter within the meaning of

the Act and that Court shall not allow evidence to be given for the purpose of

disproving it in terms of section 4(3) of the Evidence Ordinance.

Hence, the Appellant is not entitled to raise such a defence to the application

for ejectment made by the Respondent being competent authority to the

Magistrate Court of Anuradhapura that the Quarter in question is not a

Government Quarter within the meaning of the Act as rightly, held by the

learned High Court Judge.

CA(PHC)/0018/21

Page 7 of 8

I would therefore, hold that the ground of appeal so urged by the Appellant in

support of the instant appeal cannot sustain in law and therefore, it ought to

be rejected as rightly, held by the learned High Court Judge.

3) The learned High Court Judge has violated the doctrine of ‘Audi

Alterm Partem’.

A careful scrutiny of the Act clearly, shows that it contains no provision

whatsoever, requiring that a Respondent against whom an application for

ejectment is made should be heard in opposition to the application for

ejectment under section 6 of the Act.

However, as observed by me elsewhere in this judgement, the learned

Magistrate of Anuradhapura had nevertheless, proceeded to issue notices of

the application for ejectment on the Appellant on a significant number of

occasions but, the Appellant had failed to respond to the notices so issued on

him by Court, despite the fact that she had been served with notices by way

of substituted service as reported to Court by the Fiscal and in consequence,

the learned Magistrate of Anuradhapura had made order issuing a writ of

possession to the Fiscal requiring and authorizing him to deliver possession

of the Government Quarter to the competent authority and to eject the

Appellant and her dependents if any, therefrom.

Hence, the learned High Court Judge was entirely, right in his observations

made in the HC order that, the Appellant was not entitled to be heard against

the application for ejectment forwarded by the Respondent being the

competent authority to the Magistrate Court of Anuradhapura.

Besides, section 7(3) of the Act confers upon a person who claims to have been

unlawfully ejected from the Government Quarters under the provisions of the

Act, a right to institute an action for damages or other relief.

Hence, it is to be observed that the Act itself, embodies the principle of Natural

Justice and as such there is an alternative statutory remedy available to the

Appellant, if aggrieved by the order of the learned Magistrate of Anuradhapura

to institute an action for damages or other relief.

CA(PHC)/0018/21

Page 8 of 8

In the circumstances, it cannot be said that the learned High Court Judge

had violated the principles of Natural Justice by failing to appreciate that the

learned Magistrate of Anuradhapura had not given an opportunity to the

Appellant to be heard in opposition to the application for ejectment.

I would therefore, hold that the next ground of appeal so urged by the

Appellant in support of the instant appeal cannot sustain in law and

therefore, it ought to be rejected.

4) Consideration of extraneous and irrelevant facts in the HC order.

In view of my findings in relation to 1), 2) and 3) above, it cannot in any

manner, be said that the learned High Court Judge had considered

extraneous and irrelevant facts in coming to the HC order.

I would therefore, hold that the next ground of appeal so urged by the

Appellant in support of the instant appeal cannot sustain in law and

therefore, it ought to be rejected.

Hence, I would see no error whatsoever, in the HC order appealed from.

In view of all the above circumstances, I would hold that, appeal is not entitled

to succeed both in fact and law.

In the result, I would proceed to dismiss the instant appeal with costs fixed

at Rs. 50,000/-.

I would thus, affirm the HC order appealed from.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

D. THOTAWATTA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL