1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal in terms of Section

331 (1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act

No.15 of 1979, read with Article138 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Complainant

CA - HCC 77/2012 Vs. High Court of Tangalle 1) Rajapurage Sugath Weeraratne Case No: HC 08/2004 2) Rajamunige Nihal Chaminda alias Mahattaya Accused And Now Between 1) Rajapurage Sugath Weeraratne

2) Rajamunige Nihal Chaminda alias Mahattaya

Accused-Appellant

Vs.

The Honourable Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12

Complainant-Respondent

2

BEFORE : N. Bandula Karunarathna, J.

: R. Gurusinghe, J.

COUNSEL : A. Bandara

For the 1st Accused-Appellant

Yalith Wijesurendra

for the 2ndAccused-Appellant

Rohantha Abeysuriya, PC, ASG

for the Respondent

ARGUED ON : 09/05/2022

DECIDED ON : 09/06/2022

R. Gurusinghe, J.

The two appellants were indicted in the High Court of Tangalle for having

committed the murder of Vijayamunige Goonewardene, an offence punishable

under section 296 read with section 32 of the Penal Code. The appellants

pleaded not guilty to the charge and preferred to have the trial before the Judge

without a jury.

The prosecution called PW1, PW2, PW7(JMO), PW8, PW9, PW3, and the Court

Interpreter.

3

On behalf of the appellants, the first appellant gave evidence. The second

appellant made a dock statement. In addition, M. Amarawathi, Siri Baddanage

Nimal, the Court Interpreter and the Registrar of the High Court of Tangalle

were called as witnesses.

After trial, both appellants were found guilty of the charge and imposed death

sentences.

Being aggrieved by the said conviction and sentence, the appellants preferred

the appeal to this court.

Prosecution case

On the 13th of July 1996, the incident occurred at Kandabedda in the

Walasmulla police area. The deceased was a mason and constructed a house in

their own compound. After finishing his masonry work, he had gone to have a

shower and returned home at about 5.00 or 5.30 p.m. Around 7.00 p.m., he

left the house to find another mason to get assistance for his masonry work.

Between 9.00 and 9.30 p.m. PW1, the father of the deceased heard someone

was threatening his son (the deceased). PW1 then rushed towards the road

with a torch in his hand. When he was flashing the torch, he saw that the first

appellant stabbed the deceased while the second appellant was holding the

deceased to the ground. When PW1 rushed towards them shouting, the first

appellant tried to assault him too. At this juncture, the deceased managed to

creep through the fence of their compound. PW1, thinking that the deceased

would have managed to come home, went back to his house and told PW2 that

the appellants had stabbed the deceased and then heard a groaning sound; he

went to that place, followed by PW3 and saw the deceased fallen on the ground.

Then they brought him home, but the deceased succumbed to his injuries in a

few minutes.

4

The grounds of appeal

1) The learned Trial Judge has failed to duly analyse and evaluate the

evidence of the witnesses of the prosecution.

2) The learned Trial Judge has failed to give the Defence the benefit of the

doubt, created by the evidence of the Medical Officer called by the

prosecution to give evidence.

3) As per the evidence of PW1, the distance between the place of the

incident and the place where the deceased was found is approximately

45 feet. According to the evidence of the Medical Officer, the deceased

could not have travelled that far. The learned Trial Judge has not

correctly applied the test of probability when analysing the above facts.

4) The benefit of the doubt created by the evidence led by the prosecution,

with regard to the identification of the accused by the sound of the voice,

the identification of the accused at the crime scene, was not given to the

defence by the learned Trial Judge.

5) The inquest report was produced by the defence marked as VX1.

However, the learned Trial Judge disregarded the report and solely relied

on contradictory evidence given by the police inspector Kavisena. As a

result, the learned Trial Judge has failed to analyse the evidence

properly.

6) The conclusion drawn by the learned Trial Judge regarding the evidence

of defence witness Amarawathie indicates that, the learned Trial Judge

has failed to consider the said evidence duly.

7) The learned Trial Judge has failed to consider the fact that the

prosecution case must stand on its own. Failing to consider the

5

presumption of innocence in favour of the accused was adversely

affected.

8) The learned Trial Judge has failed to consider the acceptability of the

evidence of the defence properly.

PW1 giving evidence in court, clearly stated that he took an electric torch and

ran to the road upon hearing the shouting of his son. He said that he saw the

first appellant stabbed his son while the second appellant was holding his son

to the ground. He said that he recognised the voices of his son and the first

appellant. PW1 stated as follows:

On page 49 of the appeal brief;

: ?

:

: ?

: .

.

Page 51

: ?

: ?

:

6

: ?

:

It is to be noted that not a single contradiction was marked in the evidence of

PW1. PW1 had made the first complaint within a few hours of the incident. His

complaint was recorded at 2.20 a.m.on the 14th of July, 1996. He had given

evidence in the inquest. Then he had testified in the non-summary

proceedings. He had given evidence in the Hambantota High Court and was

cross-examined by the defence. As a result of establishing a new High Court at

Tangalle, within the Hambantota district, the case was re-allocated to the

Tangalle High Court. In the Tangalle High Court, before adopting the evidence

led upto then, the appellants were asked whether they were agreeable to

adopting the evidence or recalling the witnesses. The counsel for the appellant

wanted to recall PW1 and cross-examine him. This application was allowed,

and PW1 once again was cross-examined by the defence counsel. PW1 was

cross-examined twice in the High Court. Even so, there was no in-consistency

in his testimony. PW2 and PW3 also gave evidence. They have also stated that

they heard his brother's voice and the appellant's voice. The appellants argued

that the voice identification is not safe to rely on. It is true that voice

identification is considered as a weak piece of evidence. However, as PW1 is an

eyewitness and his evidence is convincing and compelling, the identification by

voice is not essential to prove this case.

The appellants next point is that, after receiving the fatal injury, described as

injury No. 1 in the post-mortem report, the deceased could not have run a

distance of 45 feet. However, the Judicial Medical Officer explained how it

might have happened. The doctor was of the opinion that, after receiving injury

No. 1, the deceased would have died in a few minutes. However, he explained

that the deceased could have lived upto half an hour if the wound had closed

for a while. The doctor said that the deceased could have walked a few meters,

7

but he could not run. PW1 never said that the deceased had run. PW1 stated

that the deceased had crept through the fence. There was a geographical

incline from the place of the incident on the road abutting the compound of the

deceased. The police observed that the distance between the two locations was

45 feet, and there was a geographical incline in which the gradient was 45

degrees. As such, it is not improbable that the deceased had crept into that

place.

The doctor stated in the cross-examination as follows:

(Page 130)

: (refer to injury No. 1)

?

: 10

. H

H .

.

Page 131 in cross examination

:

?

: . , .

: 08, 09 ?

: .

at page 132

8

: ?

:

: ?

: 05

: ?

:

As per the police observation, the gradient was the same upto the place where

the deceased was lying. In these circumstances, there is nothing to suspect the

evidence of PW1. PW2 and PW3, giving evidence, stated that they heard the

voice of their brother and the first accused. Counsel for the second accused

contended that PW1, PW2 and PW3 differed from what they have heard as

described by these witnesses. Some of the words were different, but the effect

of those words was the same. A person may not be able to echo the exact words

he heard as a tape recorder. The counsel for the respondent pointed out that

they may have heard different parts. However, the effect of the words spoken

was the same. This difference is not on the main issue, that is stabbing.

Therefore, this contention cannot be accepted to doubt the evidence of the

witnesses, especially the evidence of PW1, which stands consistent at all times.

One of the contentions of the appellant is that the defence had marked the

inquest report as V6 and the learned Trial Judge had disregarded the report

and relied on the evidence of PW1 Kavisena. As per the evidence of this

witness, he had gone to the scene at 3.10 a.m. He had recorded the observation

at that time. The police had reported the incident to the Magistrate at 9.30a.m.

on the 14th of July, 1996. No contradiction was marked in the evidence of

PW8. The inquest proceedings had not become a part of the evidence. As

9

pointed out, the above evidence of PW1 stands un-contradicted. Therefore, this

argument cannot be sustained.

The Judicial Medical Officer who conducted the post mortem found eleven stab

injuries on the body of the deceased. The injury No. l was a necessarily fatal

injury that penetrated the deceased's heart. No. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 injuries

were though not necessarily fatal, those injuries could have caused the death

in the ordinary cause of nature. Therefore, it is obvious that the intention of

the assailants was to kill the deceased.

The first and second appellants had actively participated in the murder of the

deceased which clearly proves the common intention of the appellants. The first

appellant had held a grudge against PW1, thinking that PW1 had given

information to the police during the 1988, 1989 insurrections. As per the

evidence of the first appellant, one of his brothers went missing at that time.

The learned High Court Judge observed that there were no contradictions in

the evidence of PW1. Two omissions marked were also considered. The two

omissions were regarding whether, PW1 had stated to the police that the

appellants had turned to the side of PW1 when he flashed the torch, and the

other one is whether he had told PW 2 and PW 3 that the first accused had

stabbed the deceased. The learned High Court Judge had considered the two

omissions and came to the conclusion that those were not vital omissions. In

this regard, the Judge had followed the guidance given in the cases of

Kularatne vs Queen 73 NLR and Keerthi Bandara vs Attorney General [2000] 1

Sri LR 245.

The learned High Court Judge has observed that it was not difficult to

understand the trauma that a father had to undergo when a son was killed

before him. This observation was not a mere surmise. PW1 had stated this in

his cross-examination on Page 73

10

: .

?

: . .

.

The two omissions should be considered inlight of this situation. The complaint

was not a delayed one. It was made within four hours of the incident.

The defence had the chance to cross-examine PW1 on three occasions. First at

the non-summary inquiry, the second and third in the High Court trial. In the

High Court, PW1 was cross-examined twice by the defence. The appellants

wanted to cross-examine PW1, before adopting the evidence of PW1. There were

four occasions where the defence could have contradicted PW1 if there was any

inconsistency. However, there was nothing to contradict the evidence of PW1.

The two omissions should be considered against this backdrop. Therefore, I

find no reason to disagree with the findings of the learned High Court Judge in

this regard.

PW3 had given a statement to the police on the 27th of July 1996, which was

a delayed statement. PW3 was only eighteen years old at that time. PW1, the

father, made a complaint without delay. The police officers came to the scene

and recorded a statement from PW2 on the same day as well. However, they

had not recorded a statement from PW3 at that time. Later he was asked to

come to the police station and recorded a statement. He explained that he was

asked to come to the police station on that day, which he did as he was

directed.

The learned Trial Judge had accepted the delay as reasonable. The prosecution

case rests mainly on the evidence of PW1. Even if PW3 had not given evidence,

11

the judgment could still be justified. Therefore the delay in making a statement

to the police by PW3, does not make any difference to the prosecution case.

One of the contentions of the appellant is that even if the prosecution version

was believed, the Judge should have considered the possibility of bringing

down the offence to culpable homicide not amounting to murder. There was no

suggestion by the appellants under any circumstances that warrant the

reduction of the culpability. The evidence reveals that there was an incident

between the appellants, including another person named Wijeratne and the

deceased, in the evening. However, the deceased was not willing to fight. The

first accused stated that the deceased admitted that he and his friend had

eaten the fowl belonging to Wijeratne. The deceased agreed to pay Wijerathne

for it. The stabbing took place around 9.00 - 9.30 p.m. At that time, the

witnesses heard the threatening voices of the accused. But the deceased only

said . No evidence to show that there was a

sudden fight.

Both appellants took up the defence of alibi and complete denial. There was no

reason for the Trial Judge to consider reducing the charge to a lesser offence in

these circumstances.

The next contention is that the Learned High Court Judge had not considered

the defence evidence. The learned Trial Judge considered the defence evidence,

referring to the relevant case laws. He has referred to King vs Tholis Silva

39NLR267, Karunadasa vs OIC, Nittambuwa Police station,[1981]Sri LR 155

Sunil Appuhamy vs The Republic CA 74/05. The first appellant gave evidence

and stated that the person named Wijeratne told him that his fowl had been

stolen. Then the first appellant said that the deceased could have done it. At

that time, the deceased came to the road on a motorcycle. They stopped his

motorcycle; the first appellant told the deceased to admit if he had eaten the

fowl. That matter was ended there, and he went to sleep at about 9.15 p.m. In

12

the morning, he went to gather his cattle and came home around 11.00 a.m.

Then his mother told him that the deceased had been murdered last night and

the police came searching for him. After that, the police constantly followed

him. He evaded the police for a few days but later, he surrendered to court

with the assistance of a lawyer.

The second appellant made a dock statement and stated that there was an

incident in the evening; however, he had nothing to do with the murder.

It is to be noted that the first appellant had evaded the police for about one

month. The police arrested the second appellant after seven months of the

incident. Both of them had enough time to prepare a story. Their subsequent

conduct is also relevant. The defence also called two witnesses. One was a

neighbour of the deceased. What she said was that around 9.00 to 10.00 p.m.

she heard somebody screaming " ". She went out to her

compound, but as it was dark outside, she could not see anybody. Then she

went to sleep. In the morning, she came to know that the deceased had been

killed the previous night.

This evidence does not help the version of the appellant. She also admitted that

she and the members of the deceased family were not on good terms. The

defence also called the witness listed as PW5. He said that he went with the

deceased on a motor bicycle to a place called "". After that, on their

way home, they saw there were few people near his home. The deceased

stopped the motorcycle for him to get down. At that time, Wijeratne asked the

deceased whether he had eaten his fowl, which the deceased denied. However,

later the deceased admitted his fault and agreed to pay for it. The first accused

told the deceased to pay for the fowl. The following morning, he came to know

that the deceased had been murdered the previous night. This evidence does

not support the defence case of alibi.

13

The defence of the first appellant in his evidence said that he was never

present at the scene of the murder. This was not put to PW1 or any other

witnesses. The second appellant in his dock statement took up the position

that he was at his home when this murder took place. The defence of alibi was

also not put to PW1 or to other witnesses by the defence.

In the case of Gunasiri and two others vs Republic of Sri Lanka 2009 1 SRI LR

39, Sisira de Abrew J held as follows:

"Although the 3rd accused-appellant raised an alibi in his dock statement, he

failed to suggest this position to prosecution witnesses. The learned Counsel

who appeared for the defence did not suggest to the prosecution witnesses the

alibi raised by the 3rd accused-appellant. What is the effect of such silence on

the part of the Counsel. In this connection, I would like to consider certain

judicial decisions. In the case of Sarwan Singh vs. State of Punjab at 3656

Indian Supreme Court held thus: "It is a rule of essential justice that whenever

the opponent has declined to avail himself of the opportunity to put his case in

cross examination it must follow that the evidence tendered on that issue

ought to be accepted. This judgment was cited with approval in Bobby Mathew

vs. State of Kamatakal 5) Applying the principles laid down in the above

judicial decision, I may express the following view. Failure to suggest the

defence of alibi to the prosecution witnesses who implicated the accused,

indicates that it was a false one. Considering all these matters I am of the

opinion that the defence of alibi raised by the 3rd accused-appellant is an after

thought."

In the instant case, the failure to suggest the defence of alibi to the prosecution

witnesses indicates that this is an afterthought.

The defence of alibi should cover the time of the alleged offence so as to exclude

the presence of the accused, at the crime scene at the relevant time.

14

The defence evidence does not indicate that the accused were so far away from

the place of occurrence and it is highly improbable that he would have

participated in the crime. The two accused lived in a very close neighbourhood.

They could reach the place of the deceased within a few minutes.

The learned High Court Judge has considered the defence evidence and come

to the conclusion that, the defence evidence did not create a reasonable doubt

in the prosecution case. The learned Trial Judge had carefully considered all

the defence evidence. He referred to the abovementioned case laws as well. The

defence evidence did not reveal anything more than that, there was an incident

between the two appellants, Wijeratne and the deceased, regarding the killing

of a fowl in the evening. The said Wijeratna had given evidence in the Non-

summary proceedings. That evidence does not create a reasonable doubt in the

prosecution case.

In the circumstances, the appeal of the appellants cannot be sustained. I affirm

the judgment of the learned High Court Judge dated 30/05/2012 and the

sentence imposed on the appellants.

Appeal dismissed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

N. Bandula Karunarathna, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal