Page 1 of 9

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal under and in

terms of the Article 138(1) of the

Constitution read with the Section 11(1) of

the High Court of the Provinces (Special

Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990 with the

Section 331 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka

Complainant

CA Case No: CA/HCC 63/19

HC of Rathnapura Case No:

HCR 113/2015

Vs.

Sandaradurayalage Siripala

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Sandaradurayalage Siripala

Accused-Appellant

Page 2 of 9

v.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department

Colombo 12

Complainant-Respondent.

Before: Menaka Wijesundera, J.

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

Counsel: I.B.S. Harshana for the Accused-Appellant

Riyaz Bary, DSG for the Respondent

Written 23.10.2019 (by the Accused-Appellant)

Submissions: 27.10.2021.(by the Respondent)

On

Argued On: 14.06.2023

Decided On: 09.08.2023

Sasi Mahendran, J.

The Accused Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Accused) was indicted

in the High Court of Ratnapura for having committed the offence of Grave Sexual

Abuse on Thusecoorey Mohotti Gunnaanselage Anusha Lakmali who was under

sixteen years of age, at three different times on or between 4th of July 2006 to 3rd

of July 2007, punishable under Section 365 B (2) of the Penal Code as amended by

Act, No. 22 of 1995, and as further amended by No. 29 of 1998 and No. 16 of 2006.

Page 3 of 9

The Prosecution led evidence through eight witnesses, marking productions

P1 and P2, and thereafter closed its case. The Accused, in his defense, made a dock

statement. At the conclusion of the trial, the Learned High Court Judge found the

Accused guilty. He was consequently convicted and sentenced to 12 years of

rigorous imprisonment, along with a fine of Rs. 25,000/-, with a default sentence

of six months of simple imprisonment. Furthermore, the Accused was ordered to

pay compensation worth Rs. 100,000/-, with a default sentence of two years of

rigorous imprisonment in case of failure to pay.

Being aggrieved by the aforementioned conviction and sentence, the

Accused preferred this appeal to this Court

The following grounds for appeal were set out in the written submission.

1. The Learned Trial Judge had failed to consider that the date of the alleged

offence had not been proved by the Prosecution and

2. The Learned Trial Judge had failed to consider that the prosecution failed to

exclude the possibility of the instant offence being committed by someone else

when the evidence of the prosecution itself leads to a reasonable inference that

either someone else could have done the same.

The facts and circumstances are that;

According to the testimony of PW1, Thusecoorey Mohotti Gunnaanselage

Anusha Lakmali, who was in grade 6 at school when she was victimized, she lived

at the Accused's house with her sister (PW2), her father, and the Accused's family.

During that time the Accused had engaged in sexually harassing and molesting

PW1 by removing her clothes and subsequently placing his male organ on top of

her genitalia. This act would transpire when no one is at home.

On page 70 of the brief;

: ?

: .

: ?

Page 4 of 9

: .

She states that these events happened in the Accuseds house on the bed

where he would lie on top of her and place his genitalia on top of her own. She

states that there had been no penetration and that she did not bleed during the

process. This had happened multiple times, exceedingly more than five times.

On page 71 of the brief;

: ?

:

...........

: ?

: .

: ?

: .

: ?

: .

and on Page 72 of the brief;

: ?

: .

: ?

: .

: ?

"She was threatened with her life by the Accused if she were to confess to

anyone about this. Ultimately, she reported this to her English teacher at her

school. After two weeks, the Police visited her school and took her to a doctor to

conduct a medical examination and inquired about the incident. However, even

Page 5 of 9

during that time, she was being abused by the Accused. Subsequently, she was

handed over to an Orphanage.

In her cross examination, she stated that she was sexually abused by the

Accused when they had moved from the house in Rajaweka to live at the Accuseds

house.

On Page 78 of the brief;

: .

.

The defence put forward a contradiction regarding the number of days

PW1 was living at the Accused's house; this particular portion of the statement

was marked as V1 She indicated that she told her English teacher that this had

happened to her when she was in grade six. It is very strange to note that there

was a suggestion made by the defence whether the Accused had harassed her after

the father had harassed her.

On Page 80 of the brief;

:

.?

: .

She further described how these events transpired.

: , ?

: .

Again, she reiterated that when this happened to her, she was in grade six.

On Page 81 of the brief;

: 06 ?

: .

Page 6 of 9

It is pertinent to note that PW1 was consistent throughout, and there were no

discrepancies marked in her cross-examination.

In her re-examination, when the question was posed by the prosecution as

to whether she was sexually abused by her father, she stated that she was sexually

abused by the Accused prior to being abused by her father when they were living

near the Grama Niladari office.

When we analyze the evidence in its entirety, it becomes apparent that she

was consistent regarding the atrocious events at that time and when they

happened. We are mindful of the fact that when the incident occurred, the

prosecutrix was of the tender age of 11 years. The evidence of the prosecutrix was

recorded on 3rd August 2007 by PW8, Lady Constable Nadika, which was 10 years

prior to her being questioned again about these unfortunate events. It is clear that

she harbored no knowledge in comprehending the fundamentals of sex, let alone

rape. We are mindful that she could not answer some questions raised by the

defense and prosecution regarding the time and other information.

We are mindful of the observation made by W.L. Ranjith Silva, J in the

case of D.Tikiribanda v. Attorney General, 2010 BLR 92, held that;

It is not surprising that there is an omission as distinct from a

contradiction (omissions on material points may amount to contradictions) in the

evidence of the victim as to the description/narration as to the offence and as to

how the preparation of the offence took place. A victim of sexual harassment is

more often than not compelled to make statements and give evidence in court. We

must realize that shes not doing so for the pleasure of it but because she is

compelled to do so. Even though such complaints may appear to be voluntary yet

they may not be voluntary in the true sense. This is what is called secondary

victimization. This is somewhat like adding insult to injury. Any victim of rape or

sexual harassment would like to avoid the embarrassment of talking about, let

alone repeating the narration of such a shameful incident, if she could, Naturally

it is reasonable and realistic to believe that a victim of sexual harassment would

be in a trauma before, soon after the incident and sometimes even thereafter. In

Page 7 of 9

most of the Child abuse and child rape cases the complainants are belated due to

a sense of shame, fear, embarrassment or ignorance. These incidents are brought

to light invariably after much questioning and persuasion. Mostly the victims of

sexual harassment prefer not to talk about the harrowing experience and would

like to forget about the incident as soon as possible (withdrawal symptom). The

offenders should not be allowed to capitalize or take mean advantage of these

natural and inherent weaknesses of small children. Under such circumstances it

is only a counsel who appears for an accused who cloud even suggest that such

trivial contradictions should be considered as decisive.

Therefore, it cannot be reasonably expected from a person in the prosecutrix's

circumstances to recall the horrendous turn of events she experienced as a child with

absolute precision. Furthermore, it is not uncommon for a victim of an unfortunate event

to feel diminished and remain silent rather than be vocal about it.

The counsel for the Accused submits that the prosecutrix had made some

contradictory statements regarding the duration when she lived with the Accused,

which was marked as V1. The question is whether this goes to the root of the case.

It is worth reiterating the words of His Lordship Thakkar J. in Bhoginbhai

Hirjibhai V. State of Gujarat AIR 1983 SC 753;

By and large a witness cannot be expected to possess a photo graphic

memory and to recall the details of an incident. It is not as if a video tape is

replayed on the mental screen.

The above observation was followed by His Lordship W.L Ranjith Silva J,

in the Case of Don Kuruppu Arachchige Indika Gayan v The Republic of Sri

Lanka, CA 205/2007, decided on 16th December 2010.

With the above dictums in mind, when we consider the prosecution evidence,

especially that of PW1, we find that the defense does not create any doubt regarding the

grave sexual abuse committed by the Accused. The learned High Court Judge has

Page 8 of 9

correctly considered the evidence of PW1 and has reached the conclusion that the said

witness is a truthful witness.

According to PW6, Upul Ajith Kumara Thennakoon, the Judicial Medical

Officer, it is pertinent to note that, following his forensic report, PW1 was neither

comfortable nor did she trust anyone to disclose any information, as she was

suffering from depression and mental discomfort following the horrific events. She

later stated that she had resisted her father's and the Accuseds advances toward

her and depicted how they conducted it. Upon thoroughly examining PW1, he

states that there had been no penetration identified. In his expert opinion, sexual

assault cannot be ruled out, as he did not expect any injuries inflicted on her

during the acts, and he cannot factor out any signs of hymen penetration.

According to him, injuries are not inevitable in such a case.

The Accused Version

When we consider the Accused's dock statement, he has stated as follows: The

Prosecutrix and her family lived at his house for 10 days before they moved out. He

indicated that his house consisted of a room and a kitchen, and that there was no space

to conduct such an act in his small house. He also stated that he had learned about PW1s

father sexually abusing her, and upon further inquiry, her father had tried to assault him.

Thereafter, he had reported this to a teacher at the school. He denies this allegation and

claims that he is innocent. It is pertinent to note that it was never proposed to the

Prosecutrix by the counsel of the Accused regarding the size of the room of the Accuseds

house, and further that the Accused had reported this incident to a teacher at the school,

during her cross-examination.

I am of the view that the evidence of the Accused is not capable of throwing

any doubt whatsoever, let alone a reasonable doubt, in the prosecutions case. We

hold that the Learned High Court Judge had correctly rejected the Accused's dock

statement.

During the argument, the counsel for the Accused brought to our notice

that the prosecution has failed to prove the date of this incident, which violates

the requirement stated in Section 165 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.

Page 9 of 9

They had heavily relied on the case of Warnakulasuriya Lakshman Thisera

alias Jayakody Don Lakshman Appuhamy v. Attorney General, CA 13/2015, Decided on

21.02.2018, S.Thurairaja Pc, J, held that;

The prosecutrix submits that this incident happened at her home, on a morning

hour of the day. Unfortunately, she gives different dates/periods. One occasion she said in

the examination in Chief that this incident happened in October 2002, after while she

said that this happened three months after her mother's demise. (That will take us to a

date three month from 29th September, i.e. December 2002), In the Cross examination

she claims she cannot remember the date, after a while she said it was 1 months after

her mother's funeral. (that will be Mid November 2002), After that she said it was after

alms giving, she gave two dates of alms giving one is 15th Day and the other one was after

three months. Subsequently said 25 days after her mother's death. When reading the

evidence of the Prosecutrix it reveals she is not certain of the date of the incident (offence).

She is certain about the date of her mother's demise, but unable to give the date of this

incident. Will this violate the requirements stated in section 165 of the CCPA.

But in the instant case, the prosecutrix was certain that when this incident

occurred, she was in grade six, and she remained consistent even during her cross-

examination. Therefore, we overrule the objection taken by the Accused with regard to

the date of the incident

After carefully considering all submissions, evidence, and materials we are of the

view that the prosecution has proved the case beyond reasonable doubt. Therefore, we

affirm the conviction and sentence. This appeal is dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Menaka Wijesundera, J.

I AGREE

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL