==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 11

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for a Writ of Certiorari in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialists Republic of Sri Lanka. Siam City Cement (Lanka) Limited

(Formally known as Holcim Lanka Limited), No. 413, R. A. De Mel Mawatha, Colombo 03. PETITIONER

Case No. CA (Writ) No: 163/18

Vs.

1. Hon. W. D. J. Seneviratna Minister of Labour, Labour Secretariat, Colombo 5. 1A. Hon. Nimal Siripala De Silva

Minister of Labour, Labour Secretariat, Colombo 5. 2. Mr. R. P. A. Wimalaweera Commissioner General of Labour, Labour Secretariat, Colombo 5. 2A. Mr. B. K. Prabath Chandrakeerthi

Commissioner General of Labour, Labour Secretariat,

Page 2 of 11

Colombo 5. 3. Mr. S. Kariyawasam No. 28, Abeyratne Mawatha, Boralesgamuwa. 4. Inter Companies Employees Union No. 12/2, Weera Mawatha, Sri Subuthi Pura, Battaramulla.

RESPONDENTS

Before : Dhammika Ganepola, J.

Adithya Patabendige, J.

Counsel : Uditha Egalahewa, P.C. with Amaranath

Fernando instructed by D.L. & F. de

Seram for the Petitioner.

Shantha Jayawardena with Azra Basheer

instructed by Dinesh De Silva for the 4th

Respondents.

Mihiri de Alwis, S.S.C. for the 1st and 2nd

Respondents.

Argued on : 10.10.2025

Written Submissions : Petitioner : 02.12.2025

tendered on 4th Respondent : 17.11.2025

Decided on : 14.01.2026

Page 3 of 11

Dhammika Ganepola, J.

In the instant application, the Petitioner challenges the Award of the Arbitrator dated 14.06.2017, marked P4, on the basis that the said Award is arbitrary, illegal, irrational, and contains errors on the face of the record. The Petitioner seeks a Writ of Certiorari quashing the aforesaid award marked P4.

The Petitioner contends that a dispute arose between the 4th Respondent and the Petitioner as a result of the transport allowance amounting to Rs. 10,000/-, which was paid to the employees of the Petitioner in Grade 14 and above. Accordingly, the dispute had been referred for arbitration for determination by the Minister of Labour. Said reference is as follows:

“Whether employees belonging to the lower grades of the Home and Supervisor category of Holcim (Lanka) Limited, who contribute in the production of work itself, have been caused unjust by not receiving the allowance of Rs. 15,000 paid to supervisors (Grade 14) of the Forman and Supervisor category of the company who engage in production supervision.”

At the end of the inquiry, the Arbitrator, the 3rd Respondent, had concluded that it is not reasonable to pay an additional amount of Rs. 10,000 (currently Rs. 18,000) solely for the contribution of the production work itself, to the employees of the Petitioner in Grade 14 and above. By his Award, the 3rd Respondent had determined that employees belonging to Grades 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, and 13 are also entitled to receive an allowance of Rs. 10,000/-, and it is also equitable that such payment be made with retrospective effect.

The Petitioner states that the Front Managerial Level Grade (FML) employees, i.e., Grade 14 and above, were paid the said transport allowance of Rs. 10,000/- instead of the withdrawn facility of motorbikes and fuel provided to them previously since the inception of the Petitioner Company by the Petitioner, but not as an additional or new payment. It is submitted that the Non-Managerial Level Grade (NML) employees who belong to the Grade 13 and below were provided with a transport facility daily, and they were never entitled to the benefit enjoyed by the FML

Page 4 of 11

employees and the allowance was not paid to them. It is claimed that despite such circumstances, the 4th Respondent had demanded a sum of Rs. 10,000/- to be paid to NML employees as well.

Nevertheless, the testimony of the 4th Respondent’s witness, Y.A. De Silva, clearly demonstrates that FML employees have consistently used the common transport facility provided by the Petitioner Company from the outset and had continued to rely on the said transport facility even after receiving motorbikes and following the withdrawal of such a facility for FML employees.

ප්ර : ඔබ ක ොකෙද ?

උ : මීගමුව

ප්ර : කේ ආයතනයට පැමිණීමට ප්ර වහෙන පෙුක ේ ිබකබනවහද?

උ : කපොදු ප්ර වහෙන පෙුක ේ ිබකබනවහ

ප්ර : ක ොකෙේ සිටද?

උ : ක ොළඹ සිට

ප්ර : කමො ක්ද වහෙනය

උ: වෑන් එ ක්

ප්ර : ඔබලහකේ ප්ර කශයක FML අය ඉන්නවහද?

උ: ඔව්

ප්ර :එයහල එන්කන් කමොකක්ද?

උ: ඒ වහෙකන්මයි

ප්ර : එකෙම එන්කන් මෑත සිටද

උ: එදහ ඉදන්ම ආවහ ඉෙල නිලධහරීන් පවහ අප සමඟ ආවහ

ප්ර : ඒ පුශගලයන්ට බයිසි ල් දුන් අවස්ථහකව්දී පවහ ආවහද?

උ: ඔව්

ප්ර : බයිසි ල් ිබයහකගන ඇයි වෑන් එකක් එන්කන් කියලහ ඇහුවද?

උ: සකෙෝදර කසේව යන් නිසහ ඇහුකව් නෑ

ප්ර : ඇයි එකෙමනේ ප්ර ය්නය?

උ: දීමනහව

Page 5 of 11

ප්ර : ඒ අයට බයිසි ල සෙ ඉන්ධන දීමනහව කදන අවස්ථහකව්දී ඒ අය වෑන් එකක් ආවහද?

උ: ඔව්.

ප්ර : පුක හලීනව ඉන්ධන බයිසි ල් අයින් ළහද?

උ: ඔව්

ප්ර : ඒ අරකගන වෑන් එකක් ආවහද?

උ: ඔව්

(evidence of Y.A. De Silva, pages 145, 147 of document marked ‘Y’, proceedings before 3rd Respondent) Further, the Human Resources Manager of the Petitioner Company, L.D.T.S. Balasooriya, who gave evidence at the inquiry, has also conceded that some of the FML employees have been using the common transport facility provided by the Petitioner Company.

ප්ර : දැන් සහක්ෂි රු එතක ොට ඔය 14 කේණියේක ඉන්න අය කබොකෙෝට ට ඔබකේ ආයතනය තුල සපයලහ ිබකබන කපොදු ප්ර වහෙන කසේවයන් ාහට තහ රලහ තමයි වැටට එන්කන් කන්ද?

උ : මම දන්නහ කිහිප කදකනක් එකෙම එනවහ. බහුතරය ට ඒ අයකේම ප්ර වහෙන කසේවකයන් තමයි එන්කන්. අතරින් පතර කසේව කයෝ කිහිප කදකනක් කපොදු ප්ර වහෙන කසේවහ වල ගමන් රනවහ.

ප්ර : අතරින් පතර කනොකව්. කබොකෙෝට ට 14 කේණියේක අය එන්කන් කේ කසේව කයෝ එන බස් එකක්ම තමයි කන්ද?

උ : ෙැකමෝම එකෙම එන්කන් නැෙැ. 14 කේණියේක ඉන්න ෙැම කසේව කයමම ආයතනකයන් සපයහ ිබකබන කපොදු කසේවහ වල එන්කන් නැෙැ. සමෙර අවස්ථහවලදී කිහිප කදකනක් එකසේ ගමන් රන බව මම දන්නවහ .

ප්ර : කපොදුකව් ගත්තහම කේ 14 කේණියේක අයත් 14 කේණියේකයන් පෙළ කේණියේ සේබන්ධකයන් සපයහ ිබකබන කපොදු ප්ර වහෙන කසේවක ම ගමන් බිමන් වල කයකදනවහ කන්ද?

උ: මම ලින් කිව්වහ වකේ 14 කේණියේක අය ෙැකමෝම කපොදු ප්ර වහෙන කසේවහ ාහට තහ රන්කන් නැෙැ. ඒ 14 කේණියේක සමස්ත කසේව ස්ය හවන් යේ රිරිසක්, ුකළු රිරිසක් බහුතරයක් කනකව් කපොදු ප්ර වහෙන කසේවහ අතරින් පතර පරිෙරයය රන බව මම දන්නවහ.

(evidence of L.D.T.S. Balasooriya, pages 379,381 of document marked ‘Y’, proceedings before 3rd Respondent) Additionally, the Human Resources Manager of the Petitioner Company, L.D.T.S. Balasooriya, who had given evidence at the inquiry, had conceded

Page 6 of 11

that although they were not provided with motorbikes or a fuel allowance, all Grade 14 employees in Galle also received a Rs. 10,000 allowance. One of the inferences that could be arrived at by the above-mentioned testimony is that the facility of motorbikes and fuel was not provided to all the FML employees of the Petitioner Company.

ප්ර : සහක්ෂි රු කේ රු. 10000.00 දීමනහව ගහල්කල් ඉන්න කේ කේණියේක අයටත් ලබහ දුන්නහ?

උ : ගහල්කල් අයටත් ලබහ දුන්නහ.

ප්ර : සහක්ෂි රු ඔබ සහක්ෂි කදමින් කිව්වහ ඒ 10000.00 ලබහ කදන්න කෙේතුව තමයි ඉන්ධන සඳෙහ ලබහ දුන්න දීමනහව පහ ෙැරීම ෙහ යතුරුපැදි ආපුක ආයතන කවත ලබහ ගැනීම කියලහ ?

උ: ෙරි

ප්ර : ඔබ දන්නවහද සහක්ෂි රු ගහල්කල් FML 14 කේණියේක කිසිම ක කනමට 2007 වර්ෂක දී යතුරු පැදි දීලහ ිබබුකයත් නෑ. ඉන්ධන දීමනහව ඔවුනට ලැබුකනත් නෑ කියලහ ?

උ : දන්නවහ

ප්ර : එතක ොට තමුන් මීට කපර කිව් හරයය බිද වැකටනවහ කන්ද අරි කේ 14 කේණියේක අයට කේ දීමනහව දුන්කන් ඉන්ධන සදෙහ යතුරු පැදි ආපුක ලබහ ගැනීම කවනුකවන් කියන එ ?

උ : බිද වැකටන්කන් නෑ

ප්ර : සහක්ෂි රු 14 කේණියේක ගහල්කල් කසේව යන්ට ඔය හලක දී එනේ කමම ප්ර ය්න පැන නගින 2007 වර්ෂක දී හටවත් ඉන්ධන දීමනහව දුන්කන් නෑ. කමො ද ඔවුනට එවැනි අවය තහවයක් පැන නැගලහ ිබබුක නෑ කන්ද?

උ: ඔව්

ප්ර : ඔවුන් හටවත් යතුරු පැදි දීලහ ිබබුකයත් නෑ.

උ: ඔව්

(evidence of L.D.T.S. Balasooriya, pages 345,346 of document marked ‘Y’, proceedings before 3rd Respondent) ….. ප්ර : දැන් සහක්ෂි රු ඔබ රිළිගත්තහ පුත්තලකේ කපොදු ප්ර වහෙන ්ර මයක් ිබබුනට ගහල්ලට යශදිත් ගහල්කල් හටවත් ප්ර වහෙන පෙුක ේ සපයලහ ිබබුක නැෙැ කියලහ 14 කේණියේක කෙෝ ට පෙළ අයට ?

උ: ඒ මම රිළි ගන්නවහ

Page 7 of 11

ප්ර : දැන් නමුත් ප්ර ය්නගත දීමනහව ගහල්කල් 14 කේණියේක අයටත් පුත්තලකේ 14 කේණියේක අයටත් ලබහ දුන්නහ කන්ද?

උ: මුලින්ම පුත්තලකේ ේෙලට ලබහ දුන්නහ. පුකව ගහල්ල ේෙලටත් ලබහ දුන්නහ ඒ අවය තහවය මතම.

(evidence of L.D.T.S. Balasooriya, pages 381,383 of document marked ‘Y’, proceedings before 3rd Respondent) In the above context, the testimony of the Petitioner’s own witness contradicts the stance taken up by the Petitioner that the said allowance was given to the FML employees for withdrawing the facility of motorbikes and fuel provided to them. Further, it cannot be considered that the impugned allowance of Rs. 10,000/- had been paid to all the FML employees of the Petitioner instead of the motorbike facility, and that it constitutes a special allowance introduced to all or some of the FML employees of Grade 14 who formed part of a selected category covered by the collective agreement entered into between the Petitioner and the 4th Respondent. The stance of the 1st and the 2nd Respondent is that the impugned allowance had been paid to the employees of Grade 14 and above of the Petitioner Company who contributed to the production operation works. The 3rd Respondent Arbitrator has concluded that the Petitioner had granted the impugned allowance to the employees of Grade 14 and above on the basis of their contribution to the production operation works. As such, the 3rd Respondent has decided that since all employees of Grades 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14 contribute to the production operation works, the impugned allowance should be paid to all such employees and the non-payment of the same to such employees is unreasonable.

“වගඋත්තර හර ආයතනක නිෂ්පහදන කමකෙයුේ ටයුතු ක කර් එම ආයතනක 10, 11, 12, 13 ෙහ 14 යන සියලුම කේණියේහි කසේව යින් දහය වන බැව් ට ාහගය පුරහවට පවත්වන ලද සහක්ෂිවලින් කෙළි වූ රුයක් වුවද 14 වන කේණියේයට පමයක් නිෂ්පහදන කමකෙයුේ ටයුතු වලට දහය ත්වය දැක්වීම යන පදනම මත රු. 10, 000/ (වර්තමහනක රු. 18,000 ) අිබකර් දීමනහවක් කගවීම සහධහරය කනොවන බැව් තීරයය රමි.”[ P4 ]

However, the 3rd Respondent has not given any reason nor has explained the basis upon which he came to the conclusion that the said allowance had been paid based upon the contribution of the production works done

Page 8 of 11

by the Grade 14 employees (vide the award marked P4/2R3). Further, no material has been placed before this Court to substantiate the position that the impugned allowance was paid in view of the contribution of the Grade 14 employees towards the productivity of the Petitioner.

It is the duty of the 3rd Respondent Arbitrator to clearly identify the rationale behind the payment of the allowance in issue and to determine whether such allowance is covered under the collective agreement before he determines whether any injustice was caused to the employees of the Petitioner. This is of much importance as the Minister has appointed the Arbitrator to determine the dispute in respect of “whether the employees belonging to the lower grades of the Foreman and Supervisor category of Holcim(Lanka)Ltd who contribute in the production work itself, have been caused unjust by not receiving the allowance of Rs.15,000/- paid to the supervisors (Grade 14) of the Foreman and Supervisors category of the Company, who engage in production supervision” (emphasis added).

“කෙොල්සිේ ල් හ ලිමිටඩ් ආයතනක නිෂ්පහදන කමකෙයුේ ටයුතු වල නියැකලන ක ෝමන් ෙහ ුකපර්වයිසර් යන කසේවහ හ ට වල ුකපරීක්ෂ (14 වන කේණියේක ) කසේව යන්ට ලබහ කදන රු. 15000/- දීමනහව නිෂ්පහදන කමකෙයුේ ටයුතු වලට දහය ත්වය දැක්වීම යන පදනම මතම එම කසේවහ හ ටවලට අයත් පෙළ කේණියේ වල කසේව යන්ට ලබහ කනොදීම සහධහරයද නැතකෙොත් ඔවුන්ට ලබහ දියයුතු සෙන වකර්ද? යන්න රිළිබඳව කව්.”

It is my view that the 3rd Respondent Arbitrator has failed to clearly identify the purpose of granting the impugned allowance. In the absence of such clear identification, the conclusion arrived by the Arbitrator in his Award P4 that the payment of Rs. 10,000/- to some of the employees (Grade 14) is unreasonable, shall be irrational and arbitrary.

Despite such, the 4th Respondent advanced the argument that the introduction of any new allowance or benefit by the employer to some of the employees (Grade 14) who are covered by the collective agreement is contrary to the principles of collective bargaining and fair labour practices, and also discriminatory. It is on common ground that the Petitioner and the 4th Respondent had entered into two collective agreements for the period between 01.01.2012 and 31.01.2012(X3), and for the period between 01.01.2016 and 31.12.2018(X6). In general, the

Page 9 of 11

Collective Agreement applies solely to the parties that are privy to it and is restricted to the specific scope outlined in the respective agreement.

Section 8 of the Industrial Dispute Act gives effect to the collective agreements and provides that every collective agreement which is for the time being in force shall be binding on the parties, trade unions, employers, and workmen referred to in that agreement. Said Section 8 is as follows.

“8(1) Every collective agreement which is for the time being in force shall, for the purposes of this Act, be binding on the parties, trade unions, employers and workmen referred to in that agreement in accordance with the provisions of section 5 (2); and the terms of the agreement shall be implied terms in the contract of employment between the employers and workmen bound by the agreement.

(2) Where there are any workmen in any industry who are bound by a collective agreement, the employer in that industry shall, unless there is a provision to the contrary in that agreement, observe in respect of all other workmen in that industry terms and conditions of employment which are not less favourable than the terms and conditions set out in that agreement.”

Accordingly, it appears that if the impugned allowance is covered under the applicable collective agreement, the grant or introduction of a new allowance or benefit by the employer to some of the employees covered under the collective agreement may have an adverse effect towards the employees who have not been granted with the allowance. Then the question arises as to whether the existing collective agreement under the instant application covers the allowance in dispute. It is also common ground that the collective agreement dealt with inter alia the following matters between the Petitioner and the 4th Respondent.

a. Salary b. Bonus payment c. Payment of gratuity d. Shift allowance

Page 10 of 11

e. Company contribution for annual trip f. Disciplinary procedure g. Dispute settlement procedure and h. Trade union actions.

Despite the failure of the 3rd Respondent to identify the rationale behind the payment of the impugned allowance, the 4th Respondent has not proved that the allowance in question is covered under the scope of the collective agreement. Unless such a connection is established, the violation of any collective bargaining cannot be determined. No material has been placed before this Court to establish that the allowance in question falls within the scope of the aforesaid Collective Agreement. In the context where the fact that the grant of the impugned allowance by Petitioner is not an obligation covered under the existing Collective Agreement has not been proven with evidence, there arise no issue of violation of principles and clauses of collective bargaining and fair labour practices.

Another position advanced by the 4th Respondent is that the unilateral introduction of a new allowance or benefit only to FML employees by the employer is discriminatory. It is on common ground that the aforesaid Collective Agreement covered permanent employees of the Petitioner Company who are also members of the 4th Respondent and who serve as Grades 14 and below employees. FML Grade and NML Grade are also encapsulated within the term ‘Grade 14 and below’. Grade 14 is considered a managerial grade. The 4th Respondent contends that there is no material difference in duties or responsibilities between employees in Grade 14 and lower grades, and therefore, the differentiation affected by the Petitioner in confining the allowance of Rs. 10,000/- to only one group of employees covered by the collective agreement is unlawful and discriminatory.

I am mindful of the fact that all parties to the collective agreement must be treated equally in respect of the specific terms and conditions outlined therein. However, in the instant application, sufficient materials have not been placed before this Court to conclude that the allowance in issue falls within the scope of the aforesaid Collective Agreement. The Collective

Page 11 of 11

Agreement itself speaks about the classification of the employees of the Petitioner Company into several grades. The above classification demonstrates that the employees belong to different categories, distinctively classified by grades. Ordinarily, a grade - wise classification accounts for numerous other factors (such as the years of service, performance, etc.) that go beyond the mere functional differences or similarities amongst employees. Therefore, although all employees belonging to Grades 14 and below entered into the collective agreement, all such employees cannot be treated equally circumstanced.

Hence, in my view, there is no hindrance for the Petitioner to provide benefits or allowances in addition to those specified under the Collective Agreement to the FML employees. Accordingly, the argument of the 4th Respondent that the NML employees were discriminated cannot sustain.

Further, it is observed that the impugned Award had been granted antedated by the 3rd Respondent, while no specific date has been mentioned commencing from which such allowance in issue should be paid to the NML employees.

Owing to the reasons specified above, I conclude that the Award of the 3rd Respondent Arbitrator cannot stand as it is illegal, irrational and lacking any legal basis. Accordingly, I am inclined to grant the Writ of Certiorari as prayed for in the prayer of the Amended Petition. I make no order as to costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Adithya Patabendige, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal