1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

CA Writ Application No: 450/19

In the matter of an Application for orders in the

nature of Writ of Certiorari and Mandamus

under and in terms of Article 140 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

Dinushan Sheranga Wijewardena,

No. 30/2,

Rolly Fernando Mawatha,

Katubadda, Moratuwa.

PETITIONER

-Vs-

1. Director General,

Department of Irrigation

PO Box 1138,

230, Bauddhaloka Mawatha,

Colombo 07.

2. National Housing Development Authority,

Sir Chittampalam A. Gardiner Mawatha,

Colombo 02.

3. Chairman,

Tissamaharama Pradeshiya Sabha,

Tissamaharama

4. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Hulftsdorp Street,

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

2

Before: M. T. Mohammed Laffar, J.

S. U. B. Karalliyadde, J.

Counsel:

Dr. Ravindranath Dabare with Ms. Savanthi Ponnamperuma instructed by Nimal Wickramasinghe for the Petitioner.

Ms. Maithree Amarasinghe, SSC for the Respondents.

Written submissions tendered on:

10.06.2024 by the Petitioners

Argued on: 29.05.2023 and 26.03.2024

Decided on: 11.07.2024

S. U. B. Karalliyadde, J.

The Petitioner to this Writ Application is the owner of the land depicted as Lot No. 51

in plan No. 5570 dated 12.07.2013 marked as P1 situated at Sandagirigama,

Tissamaharama, by virtue of Deed of Transfer No. 3264 dated 22.10.2016 marked as

P2. The said Lot is a subdivision of the land depicted as Lot No. 1974 in the Final Plan

No. 2 marked as P3 (a)-(b) in the extent of 16.282 hectares. It has been granted to the

National Housing Development Authority (the 2nd Respondent) by virtue of Grant

bearing No. 4/7/4925 dated 07.06.1989 marked as P4 issued under the State Land

Ordinance. Later the said Lot 1974 was sold to the residents of the area under the

Udakala Gammana concept by way of outright transfer deeds without any

encumbrances for development purposes.

The Petitioner submitted an application to Tissamaharama Pradeshiya Sabha (the 3rd

Respondent) bearing No. 2016/162 along with the Building Plan on or about 29.12.2016

3

to obtain the approval for the construction of a Villa on his land, and the approval for

the said project has been granted on or about 08.02.2017 as per the Development Permit

marked as P5 and Approved Plans marked as P6 (a) and (b) and after obtaining the

approval the Petitioner commenced the construction of the Villa. The Petitioner

obtained a Street Line Certificate and Non-Vesting Certificate as well from the 3rd

Respondent (marked as P7) for the construction. However, on or about 28.02.2017, the

Technical Officer of the Divisional Irrigation Engineers Office, Tissamaharama visited

the construction site and ordered the construction to be stopped claiming that the land

claimed by the Petitioner falls within the Reservation of Yodhawewa. Thereafter, on

the request made by the Director General of the Department of Irrigation (the 1st

Respondent) to take action to stop the construction, the 3rd Respondent by letter dated

28.02.2017 marked as P9 informed the Petitioner to stop the construction and

suspended the Development Permit issued by the letter marked as P10.

In this Writ Application, the Petitioner argues that in terms of Sections 71 and 73 of the

State Lands Ordinance, the 1st Respondent has no power to demarcate reservations

within private lands and the reservation which demarcated upon the Petitioners land

has not been gazetted under the Irrigation Ordinance to date. Further, according to

Clause 4.3 of the Irrigation Department Departmental Circular Nos: 10/1986 marked

as P15(a) and 08/2014 marked as P15(b), if the 1st Respondent requires private land to

be utilized as a reservation for Yodhawewa, first the land should be acquired under the

4

provisions of the Land Acquisition Act (as amended), and the owner must be paid

adequate compensation at the market rate.

The Petitioner argues that, in the above-mentioned circumstances, the 1st Respondent

has acted arbitrarily, capriciously, and ultra vires in demarcating a reservation over the

Petitioners land which is private land, and requesting the 3rd Respondent to suspend

the Development Permits abruptly. Further, the Petitioner argues that the suspension of

the Development Permits by the 1st and 3rd Respondents has breached the legitimate

expectations of the Petitioner.

In response to the submission of the Petitioner, the 1st Respondent has taken up the

position that the land claimed by the Petitioner is a part of the reservation of

Yodhawewa which is State land, and it falls within lot B in the Advanced Tracing

bearing No. H/TTS/2013/557 marked as 1R1 and the Tenement List marked as 1R1(a).

The Petitioner seeks the following substantive reliefs in the Petition,

a) Issue an order in the nature of a Writ of Certiorari to quash the order of the 1st

and 3rd Respondents suspending the Development Permits containing in the

letters marked a P9 and P10;

b) Issue an order in the nature of a Writ of Mandamus to compel the 1st and 3rd

Respondents to implement the decision referred to in P5 and P6 (a) and (b);

c) Issue an order in the nature of a Writ of Mandamus compelling the 1st and 3rd

Respondents to pay compensation to the Petitioner amounting to Rupees Two

5

Million (Rs. 2,000,000/-) in order to compensate for the damages incurred on

the Petitioner;

Analysis

The position of the learned Counsel appearing for the Petitioner is that the land in

question in this action is private land belonging to him. The position of the 1st

Respondent is that the land claimed by the Petitioner is the reservation of Yodhawewa

which belongs to the State, and it is shown in the Survey Generals plan marked as 1R1.

However, neither party has taken steps to prepare a superimposed plan. Therefore, the

Court is not in a position to decide whether the land in dispute is private land or State

land. Furthermore, to decide the said material fact whether it is private land or State

land, the Court requires oral and documentary evidence and on affidavit evidence alone

it cannot be decided. When the material facts are in dispute, Writ Courts are reluctant

to exercise its Writ jurisdiction1.

A.S. Choudri in his book titled Law of Writs and Fundamental Rights (2nd edn, Vol.2)

on page 449 states thus;

"Where facts are in dispute and in order to get at the truth, it is necessary that

the questions should be canvassed in a suit where parties would have ample

opportunity of examining their witnesses and the Court would be better able to

judge which version is correct, a writ will not issue."

1 Francis Kulasooriya Vs. OIC-Police Station-Kirindiwela, SC Appeal No. 52/2021, SC Minute of

14.07.2023.

6

Referring to the above-stated quoting, in the case of Thajudeen Vs. Sri Lanka Tea Board

and Another2, this Court has held thus,

That the remedy by way of an application for a Writ is not a proper substitute

for a remedy by way of a suit, especially where facts are in dispute and in order

to get at the truth, it is necessary that the questions should be canvassed in a

suit where the parties would have ample opportunity examining their witnesses

and the Court would be better able to judge which version is correct, has been

laid down in the Indian cases of Ghosh v. Damodar Valley Corporation3,

Porraju v. General Manager B. N. Rly4.

In Dr. Puvanendran and Another Vs. Premasiri and Two Others5 Supreme Court held

that;

The Writ of Mandamus is principally a discretionary remedy - a legal tool for

the dispensation of justice when no other remedy is available. Given the power

of such a remedy, the Common Law surrounding this remedy requires multiple

conditions that must be met prior to the issuance of a writ by the Court. The

Court will issue a writ only if (1) the major facts are not in dispute and the legal

result of the facts are not subject to controversy and (2) the function that is to

be compelled is a public duty with the power to perform such duty.

Citing the above-stated decision, it was held in Wijenayake and others Vs. Minister of

Public Administration6 that disputed facts cannot be decided by a Writ court.

Further, Laffar J. stated in the case of Unilever Sri Lanka Limited vs Commissioner

General of Labour and 35 Others7, it is not for a Writ Court to resolve the facts at hand

2 (1981) 2 Sri LR 471 at page 474

3 AIR 1953 CALCUTTA 581.

4 AIR 1952 CALCUTTA 610.

5 (2009) 2 SLR 107 at page 112

6 (2011) 2 SLR 247

7 CA (Writ) 0557/2021, CA Minutes of 15.12.2023

7

as that is the role of the Court of first instance, it is the duty of the Writ Court to

adjudicate on the law at hand. Under the above-stated circumstances, the Petitioner of

the instant Application is not entitled to the reliefs sought in the Petition.

The Petitioner further argues that the suspension of the Development Permit by the 3rd

Respondent upon the request of the 1st Respondent violates the legitimate expectation

of the Petitioner since the 1st and 3rd Respondents do not challenge the validity of the

Deed of Transfer in favour of him and the approval granted for the project for the

construction in the Petitioners land is not subject to any restriction, limitation or

impediment at the time of issuing the Development Permit. Furthermore, the Petitioner

argues that if the State wants to acquire his land or part thereof for the reservation, he

should be paid Rs. 2 million as compensation. However, as stated hereinbefore, since

the material facts are in dispute, and the Court is not in a position to decide whether the

subject matter of this action is private land or State land, the Court is not in a position

to decide whether the Petitioner is entitled to compensation. An expectation to be a

legitimate one, it must be found upon a promise or practice.

In the case of Ranasinghe Bandara vs. The Director, District Land Reform Commission

and Others8, Janak De Silva J. with reference to Clive Lewis, Judicial Remedies in

Public Law, 5th Ed,248 (South Asian Edition) states as follows;

"Such legitimate expectations may arise where a public authority has made a

clear, unqualified, and ambiguous representation to a particular individual that

it will act in a particular way. The burden is on the individual to demonstrate

that an unqualified and unambiguous representation was made."

Nevertheless, in the instant action, there is no evidence that the Respondents had made

such representations to the Petitioner.

8 CA. (Writ) 233/2017, CA Minutes of 17.06.2019.

8

Furthermore, this Court is of the view that the Petitioner has the alternative remedy of

filing a civil action in a competent court and resolving the land dispute and claim for

compensation.

In the case of Linus Silva Vs. The University Council of the Vidyodaya University9, it

was held that,

The remedy by way of certiorari is not available where an alternative remedy

is open to the petitioner subject to the limitation that the alternative remedy

must be an adequate remedy

It was held in the case of Tennakoon Vs. Director General of Customs10 that,

The petitioner has an alternative remedy, as the Customs Ordinance itself

provides for such a course of action under Section 154. In the circumstances,

the petitioner is not entitled to invoke writ jurisdiction

Shirani Thilakawardena J. in the case of Ishak Vs. Lakshman Perera Director of

Customs and Others11 held as follows;

Where there is an alternative procedure which will provide the applicant with

a satisfactory remedy the Courts will usually insist on an applicant exhausting

that remedy before seeking judicial review. In doing so the Court is coming to

a discretionary decision. Where there is a choice of another separate process

outside the Courts, a true question for the exercise of discretion exists. For the

Court to require the alternative procedure to be exhausted prior to resorting to

judicial review is in accord with the judicial review being properly regarded as

being a remedy of last resort. It is important that the process should not be

clogged with unnecessary cases, which are perfectly capable of being dealt with

in another tribunal. It can also be the situation that Parliament, by establishing

9 64 NLR 104.

10 (2004) 1 SLR 53.

11 (2003) 3 Sri LR 18.

9

an alternative procedure, indicated either expressly or by implication that it

intends that procedure to be used, in exercising its discretion the Court will

attach importance to the indication of Parliament intention.

Since the prerogative Writs are discretionary remedies, the Petitioner of the instant

Application is not entitled to invoke the Writ jurisdiction of this Court as there is equally

convenient alternative remedy available to him.

Considering all the above-stated facts and circumstances, I hold that the Petitioner is

not entitled to the Writs sought in the Petition. Therefore, the Court dismisses the Writ

Application. The Petitioner should pay Rs. 50,000/- each as the cost of this Application

to the 1st and 3rd Respondents.

Application dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

M.T. MOHAMMED LAFFAR, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL