IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA CA (Writ) Application 152/2016

Thushantha Mahindra Ratwatte The Basnayake Nilame, Kandy Maha Devale also known as Sri Vishnu Maha Devalaya, Kandy.

Petitioner Vs. 1. Hon. John Amaratunga Minister of Lands, No. 1200/6, 'Mihikatha Medura, Rajamalwatta Road, Battaramulla. 2. Divisional Secretary/Acquiring Officer Divisional Secretariat, Dehiowita. 3. Urban Development Authority 6th and 7th Floors, Sethsiripaya, Battaramulla. 4. National Gem and Jewellery Authority Galle Face Terrace, Colombo 01.

Respondents

1 1 i

CA Writ 152/2016

BEFORE: Vijith K. Malalgoda, P.C.J. (PICA) & P. Padman Surasena, J.

COUNSEL: H. Withananchchi with S. Karunadahar for the Petitioner.

Susantha Balapatabendi DSG for the 4th Respondent.

SUPPORTED ON: 27.06.2016.

Vijith K. Malalgoda, P.C. J. (PICA)

Heard Counsel in support of this application and also the learned

Deputy General representing the Attorney General . The Petitioner who is

the Basnayake Nilame of Kandy Mahadewalaya or also known as Sri

Vishnu Maha Devalaya had come before this court seeking writ of

certiorari and Mandamus in order to quash a decision of acquisition

made in the year 2006 with regard to a land in Avissawella area. We

observed during the submissions placed before this court that Kelani

Valley Sports Club which was in occupation of larger portion of the land

which was acquired had come before this court in the year 2007 and the

said writ application No: 87/2007 is still pending before this court. In

the said application the petitioner to the present application who had

intervened to the said application and nearly 100 other parties including

the petitioner to the said application have agreed to go before the District

Court under Section 10 of Land Acquisition Act to resolve their rights to

the claim they are going to make with regard to the acquisition. In the

I

!

~ t

meantime the Petitioner to the present application had gone before the

District Court in another application for a declaration of title and that

application too is pending before the District Court of Avissawella. The

Petitioner's complaint before this court is that the Respondents have now

deviated from the original purpose of constructing a sport complex in

the land in question and now they are advertised to lease out a portion of

the said land for gemming purposes through the Gems and Jewellery

Authority. However by going through the notices filed of record, we

observe that the said notices are very clear that the said lands are being

auctioned for a temporarily period of one year in order for gemming.

Petitioner has failed to establish before this court that the Respondents

abandoned the original purpose of this acquisition for a sports complex.

The learned Deputy Solicitor General representing the

respondents inform that the said plans have not been given up and the

present decision to lease out this land for gemming purpose is for a very

limited period of one year. Since the prayer in the earlier application that

is the application filed in 2007 also carries a similar prayer to quash

Section 38 notice issued by the Respondents, we observe that this is

only a repetition of action pending before this Court , if the parties are

interested in agitating the issues arisen later they should review the

application they have already filed instead of filing fresh application

before this Court.

2

When considering the submissions made by the Counsel, we

observe that there is no purpose in issuing notices in this case for

several reasons, one being the action has already been filed before this

Court which is pending and secondly the petitioner's failure to

establish before this Court that the respondents have given up the

original plan to construct a sports complex in this premises which has

been acquired .

For the above reasons, we see no merit in this application and we

therefore dismiss this application. No cost is ordered.

Application dismissed.

PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL.

P. Padman Surasena, J. I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL.

Mmj-.

3