IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal under

and in terms of Section 331 (1)

and (4) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 read

with Article 138 of the

Constitution.

The Democratic Socialist Republic

of Sri Lanka

Complainant

C.A. Case No. 048-19

High Court of Anuradhapura

Case No. 162/2009 Vs.

Rajapakse Subasinghe Pathiranage

Cyril Shantha

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Rajapakse Subasinghe Pathiranage

Cyril Shantha

Accused Appellant

Vs.

The Attorney General of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of

Sri Lanka

Complainant-Respondent

2

BEFORE : K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J (P/CA)

WICKUM A. KALUARACHCHI, J

COUNSEL : D. Weerasuriya, PC with Pasan Malinda for the Accused-Appellant

Riyaz Bary, SSC for the Respondent

WRITTEN SUBMISSION

TENDERED ON : 01.10.2019 by the Accused-Appellant

03.05.2021 by the ComplainantRespondent

ARGUED ON : 02.02.2022

DECIDED ON : 03.03.2022

WICKUM A. KALUARACHCHI, J.

The Accused-Appellant who was a Lance Corporal of the Sri Lanka

Army attached to the Palali Camp was charged for having shot and

caused the death of Serjeant Major U. V. Wickrmasekara on 21.01.2006

and thereby committed the offence of murder punishable under Section

296 of the Penal Code.

The appellant was tried without a Jury and after the trial, the learned

High Court Judge of Anuradhapura convicted the accused-appellant for

the charge of murder by his Judgment dated 12.02.2019. This appeal

has been preferred against the said judgment.

At the trial, eight witnesses have given evidence on behalf of the

prosecution. After the prosecution case was closed, defence was called

and the accused-appellant made a dock statement. Prosecution witness

No. 4 had been considered as an adverse witness and the learned High

3

Court Judge decided to disregard his evidence. Apart from that, the

learned High Court Judge did not consider the entirety of the evidence

of witness No. 5 in determining this case because of the confessionary

statement made by the appellant to the 5th witness.

There are no eyewitnesses in this case. Undisputedly, the prosecution

case is based on circumstantial evidence.

Prior to the hearing, written submissions have been filed on behalf of

the appellant as well as the respondent. At the hearing of the appeal,

the learned Presidents Counsel for the appellant advanced several

arguments. The said arguments could be summarized as follows:

I. The requirement of subsection 195(ee) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure act has not been sufficiently/adequately complied

with.

II. The requirements of the provision of Section 48 of the Judicature

Act have not been properly complied with.

III. Inadmissible and prejudicial/damaging evidence to the accused

of a confession has been permitted to be recorded and thus

denied a fair trial.

IV. The learned trial judge has misdirected himself by casting the

burden of creating a reasonable doubt on the evidence of the

prosecution upon the appellant.

V. The credibility of the prosecution witnesses has not been properly

assessed, dock statement has not been properly considered and

failed to evaluate the evidence properly.

VI. Vital rules pertaining to the circumstantial evidence have not

been followed by the learned high court judge.

Now, I proceed to deal with the aforesaid grounds of appeal.

The requirement of subsection 195(ee) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act has not been sufficiently/adequately complied with

4

What Section 195(ee) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act states is

that if the indictment relates to an offence triable by a jury, inquire

from the accused whether or not he elects to be tried by a jury. On

18.06.2015, jury option was given to the accused-appellant and the

learned High Court Judge recorded that

. Therefore, it is apparent that the jury

option had been given to the accused-appellant and he opted to have

the trial without a jury. Hence, I hold that the requirement of Section

195(ee) of the CCPA has been complied with.

The requirements of the provision of Section 48 of the Judicature Act

have not been properly complied with

I regret that I am unable to understand why the learned Presidents

Counsel advanced this argument. In his written submission, he pointed

out pages 105 and 127 of the appeal brief and states that section 48 of

the Judicature Act has not been properly complied with.

In perusing the High Court case record, it is apparent that the Learned

High Court Judge Dammika Ganepola (as he then was) had commenced

the trial of this case. When the Learned Judge Manjula Thilakarathne

heard this case first on 08.09.2016, it was recorded on page 105 of the

appeal brief as follows: "

. ."

Thereafter, the learned High Court Judge M. W. J. K. Weeraman heard

this case from 27.08.2018. On that day also, the learned High Court

Judge adopted the evidence so far led, as follows (at page 127 of the

appeal brief):

5

. .

Therefore, the Learned High Court Judges who heard this case had

expressly adopted the evidence and there had been no violation of

section 48 of the Judicature Act. Hence, there is no merit in that

argument.

Inadmissible and prejudicial/damaging evidence to the accused of a

confession has been permitted to be recorded and thus denied a fair

trial

The contention of the learned Presidents Counsel for the appellant was

that the judges mind would be prejudiced, as the inadmissible

confessionary items of evidence had gone into the case record. The

learned Presidents Counsel submitted the case of Appuhamy Vs. Palis

(1917) 4 CWR 355 in substantiating the aforesaid argument. However,

in the said case, the learned Magistrate had admitted in evidence a

statement in the nature of a confession made by the accused to, or in

the presence of a Police Constable. In such circumstances, the court

held; that evidence should not have been admitted, and must

necessarily have exercised an influence on the mind of the Magistrate.

The said judicial authority has no relevance to the case before us

because in the instant action, although the evidence in the nature of

the confession was recorded, the learned High Court Judge

categorically disregarded the entire evidence of prosecution witness

No.5.

I am of the view that recording inadmissible or prejudicial evidence is

not a reason to set aside a judgment because judges are trained to

disregard inadmissible evidence and rely only upon admissible evidence

in adjudicating cases. What is wrong is taking into consideration the

inadmissible or prejudicial evidence in determining the action.

6

On the other hand, if the argument of the learned Presidents Counsel

is accepted, whenever inadmissible or prejudicial evidence comes to the

case record, that particular Judge could not hear that case and the case

has to be transferred to some other Judge. This cannot be practically

done; this has never been done in our courts and there is no necessity

at all to do that according to my view.

In the instant action, the learned High Court Judge who delivered the

Judgment has clearly stated that he would not consider the entirety of

the evidence of witness No. 5 to whom a confessionary statement was

made by the appellant. The learned judge has not only stated so in his

judgment but also not considered any item of evidence of witness

No. 5. In perusing the impugned judgment, it is apparent that the

evidence of witness No. 5 has not been taken into consideration in any

manner when the learned High Court Judge came to his findings.

Hence, a fair trial has not been denied in any manner and there is no

substance in that argument.

The learned trial judge has misdirected himself by casting the burden

of creating a reasonable doubt on the evidence of the prosecution upon

the appellant

I accept this argument of the learned Presidents Counsel to a certain

extent because some of the observations of the learned High Court

Judge in his judgment are not accurate. The observation that it is

essential to create a reasonable doubt on the prosecution evidence by

the dock statement (page 214 of the appeal brief) is not correct in law.

Also, the learned judge has observed that the accused-appellant had

failed to challenge the prosecution case (page 218 of the appeal brief).

This observation is also not correct because the law presumes the

innocence of the accused until proved his guilt. Therefore, the accused

has no burden to challenge the prosecution case. If the prosecution

presents a strong case, creating a reasonable doubt on the prosecution

7

case, when the defence is called, is sufficient to come to the verdict of

not guilty.

Although these defects are in the impugned judgment, this court has to

examine whether these infirmities affected the findings of the learned

High Court Judge. If his conclusion could be substantiated by the

evidence adduced in the case, there is no reason for this court to

interfere with the judgment merely because of these infirmities. I would

consider in a while whether the findings of the learned High Court

Judge are correct in law.

Aforesaid other two grounds of appeal

Above mentioned last two grounds of appeal could be considered

together. These are the two most important grounds of appeal on which

the decision to convict the accused is challenged.

There is no dispute on the fact that when a charge is sought to be proved

by circumstantial evidence, the prosecution must prove that no one else

other than the accused had the opportunity of committing the offence.

There is a long line of judicial authorities such as Junaiden Mohamed

Haaris Vs. Hon. Attorney General SC Appeal 118/17, decided on

09.11.2017; King Vs. Abyewickrama 44 NLR 254; King Vs. Appuhamy

46 NLR 128; Podisingho Vs. King 53 NLR 49; Gunawardena Vs. The

Republic of Sri Lanka (1981) 2 Sri L.R. 315; Don Sunny Vs. Attorney

General (Amarapala murder case) (1998) 2 Sri L.R. 1 where it was held

that it is incumbent on the prosecution to establish that the

circumstances the prosecution relied on, are consistent only with the

guilt of the accused-appellant and inconsistent with any reasonable

hypothesis of his innocence.

Within this legal framework, I proceed to examine whether the guilt of

the accused-appellant has been established on the circumstantial

evidence of this case.

8

In this case, circumstances pertaining to the incident are disclosed from

the evidence of witnesses No. 1, Major Chathura Ranaweera (at the time

of the incident he was lieutenant) and witness No. 3 authorized officer,

K.V. Sarath Udawithana. According to their evidence, the appellant was

seen following the deceased into the area where the incident took place.

The deceased had gone behind a building which was an office from one

side and the appellant had gone behind the same building from the

other side. Soon after that, witnesses heard some gunshots and

shouting the phrase, . PW 3 says that when he looked

through the said office, he saw the deceased lying on the floor with blood

flowing from his chest and hand and the appellant was seen in the

position of firing a shot. PW 1 has also said in his evidence that he saw

the accused-appellant with a weapon and told him to place it on the

ground but the appellant went towards the military police barracks.

In addition, the PW 1 stated that

. The learned Senior

State Counsel for the respondent pointed out that the above item of

evidence is admissible in terms of Section 06 of the Evidence Ordinance

and the learned Presidents Counsel for the appellant did not disagree

with that argument. Section 06 illustration (a) states A is accused of

the murder of B by beating him. Whatever was said or done by A or B

or the by-standers at the beating or so shortly before or after it as to

form part of the transaction is a relevant fact. (Emphasis added)

Accordingly, I agree with the argument of the learned Senior State

Counsel that the aforesaid item of evidence is admissible.

However, three main arguments advanced by the learned Presidents

Counsel for the appellant have to be considered in evaluating

prosecution evidence. These are the crux of the contentions of the

learned Presidents Counsel.

9

I. Seven cartridges found at the scene have not been fired from the

gun handed over by the appellant according to the Government

Analyst.

II. The credibility of the prosecution witness No.3, Sarath

Kudawidane is in question.

III. Not excluding the possibility of any other persons involvement to

commit the murder.

The learned High Court Judge observed that there were many empty

cartridges in the area where this incident took place. In fact, this was

elicited from the evidence of witness No.7. Undoubtedly, the

Government Analysts report and his evidence do not support the

prosecution case. However, the Government Analysts opinion does not

create doubt in the prosecution case because the evidence adduced on

behalf of the prosecution that there were many other empty cartridges

in that place, was not challenged on behalf of the appellant. As an Army

officer, the appellant was very familiar with this place but he did not

challenge the fact that empty cartridges were scattered in that area. So,

there was a possibility of not collecting the cartridges fired from the gun

handed over by the appellant. However, in these circumstances, an

inference cannot be drawn based on the Government Analyst Report

that gunshots were fired from the gun possessed by the appellant.

Under these circumstances, the Government Analyst report is neither

favorable nor unfavorable to the prosecution or the defence. Hence, the

Government Analyst report and his evidence do not help to reach

conclusions in this case.

The learned Presidents Counsel for the appellant also challenged the

credibility of the PW 3. His contention was PW3s version that he saw

the part of the incident that he explained to the court could not be

believed. The learned Presidents Counsel pointed out that according to

the evidence of the PW 3 when he looked through the office, he had seen

the deceased falling crying and injuries on his chest and hands. The

10

learned Presidents Counsel raised the question if it is so, at what time

the fatal head injury was caused.

There is merit in this argument. If the witness saw the deceased falling

on the ground and his injuries on the chest and hands, there was no

time to cause the fatal head injury after falling. If the head injury had

been caused previously, he was unable to stand at the time of the chest

and hand injuries were being caused. In reply, the learned Senior State

Counsel pointed out that the said witness has also stated in his

evidence that he saw the deceased, after falling on the ground.

There is no doubt on the fact that the death occurred as a result of

gunshot injuries. According to the post-mortem report, the cause of

death is fatal brain laceration due to discharged from a rifled firearm.

It is to be noted that bullets can cause injuries in a matter of seconds.

PW 1 stated that he heard about six- or seven gunshots. Although

PW 3 has stated about hearing and the deceased being

fallen on the ground, when he was cross-examined, a clear question

was asked by the learned counsel for the appellant himself. The

question and answer are as follows:

:

?

: .

The above item of evidence clearly shows that the witness saw the

deceased after falling on the ground.

The 3rd witness saw injuries on the chest and the hand. He has not seen

the fatal head injury. It is manifest from the evidence that PW 3 or

PW 1 did not have a close look at the deceased. So, the PW 3 may have

seen only the injuries on the chest and hand. However, PW 1 says that

there was a head injury. Thus, these items of evidence are consistent

with the medical evidence.

11

Therefore, it is apparent that the gunshot injuries explained by the

Judicial Medical Officer could be caused by the appellant and the

incident the 3rd witness described as having seen is apparent to be true.

So, there could be no doubt regarding the credibility of the prosecution

witness No. 3.

The last matter to be considered is that the prosecution did not ask a

direct question whether any other person was there with a gun other

than the accused in order to exclude any other persons involvement in

shooting.

I have explained previously the legal position pertaining to the

circumstantial evidence. Accordingly, the prosecution must prove that

no one else other than the accused had the opportunity of committing

the offence as decided on Don Sunny Vs. Attorney General (1998) 2

Sri L.R. 1. Therefore, it is the duty of the prosecution to eliminate the

involvement of a third party. Now, the issue is to exclude the

involvement of any other person, is it essential to pause the specific

question whether any other person was there at that time?. In other

words, whether the accused-appellant cannot be convicted on the

circumstantial evidence without the aforesaid specific question being

asked.

The learned Senior State Counsel for the respondent contended that

when considering the totality of the evidence adduced by the

prosecution, in this case, the only inference that can be drawn is that

the accused-appellant and no one else has committed the offence.

It is my considered view that to establish the fact that the

circumstances are consistent only with the guilt of the accused-

appellant and inconsistent with the innocence of the accused, the

specific question of whether any other person was there need not be

12

essentially asked. Other circumstantial evidence could be led to come

to the only conclusion that no one else but the accused-appellant

committed the offence.

On the other hand, even though a specific question has been asked

whether any other person was there and the witness answers no,

involvement of a third person cannot be excluded on that question and

answer alone, if the evidence reveals that there was a possibility for the

involvement of a third person. Therefore, what is important is not mere

statement of exclusion of a third persons involvement but the

circumstantial evidence that sufficient to invite the court to come to the

only conclusion that no one else but the accused-appellant committed

the offence of murder. Hence, I hold that although there is no specific

question and answer to exclude the involvement of a third person,

entirety of the circumstantial evidence could exclude a third persons

involvement.

In the instant action, as explained previously, the appellant followed

the deceased into the area where the incident took place. Witnesses saw

the accused carrying a gun. Soon after the shouting and

gunshots, both witnesses say the appellant was in a standing position.

They explained further that he was in a firing position. On behalf of the

appellant not only the said items of the evidence had not been

challenged but also the appellant stated in his dock statement that they

were ordered to be in the standing position always. That clearly shows

even the appellant admits the fact that he was in a standing position at

that time.

In addition, PW 3 said explaining the situation moments before the

incident, suddenly after a while, we moved on. We thought something

was going to happen. They felt that something would happen, when he

saw the way, the appellant followed the deceased. Immediately they

heard the gunshots, the deceased was fallen in gunshot injuries and

13

the appellant was in firing position. Thereafter, the appellant handed

over his weapon to a higher officer of the Army.

I am of the view that the aforesaid chain of events is sufficient to exclude

the third persons involvement and come to the only conclusion that the

accused-appellant has committed this murder.

Evaluation of Dock Statement

It was a contention of the learned Presidents Counsel that the learned

High Court Judge has not analyzed the dock statement and merely

dismissed the same. He submitted the case of The Queen Vs. D.G. de

S. Kularatne and 2 others - 71 NLR 529 and contended that it was held

in the said case that the jury must be directed that if the dock

statement raises a reasonable doubt in their minds about the case for

the prosecution, the defence must succeed. There is no doubt that is

the correct legal position in dealing with a dock statement.

Therefore, at this juncture, I wish to analyze the dock statement as well.

While denying the shooting by him, the appellant said that he went to

barrack to inform about the shooting incident. At the same time, he

admits that he handed over his gun to the higher officer. This is a story

that does not match each other in any way. There is no reason for a

person who went to inform about the shooting incident to hand over his

gun. Apart from that, the appellant states in his dock statement that

they keep the weapon ready to fire at any moment and if they do not do

so, action would be taken against them. By making this statement, the

appellant corroborates the prosecution version that he was there in a

firing position. Another impossibility in his story is that according to

him, someone else has shot the deceased and he was the person who

went to inform about the shooting but it is strange to see that he was

also in the firing posture during this commotion. Under these

circumstances, it is obvious that the unbelievable dock statement does

14

not create any doubt in the prosecution case. Thus, the defence could

not succeed in this case.

Although the learned High Court Judge has not analyzed the dock

statement extensively, his decision not to believe the dock statement is

correct.

It is important to pay attention to the following observation made in the

case of Gunawardena Vs. The Republic of Sri Lanka reported in (1981)

2 Sri L.R. 315 in determining this action. In a case of circumstantial

evidence the facts given in evidence may, taken cumulatively be

sufficient to rebut the presumption of innocence, although each fact,

when taken separately may be a circumstance of suspicion. Each piece

of circumstantial evidence is not a link in a chain for if one link breaks

the chain would fail. Circumstantial evidence is more like a rope

composed of several cords. One strand of rope may be insufficient to

sustain the weight but three strands together may be quite sufficient.

In considering the entirety of the circumstantial evidence of this case

and the aforesaid legal position, I hold that the learned High Court

Judge is correct in holding that the only inference that could be drawn

is that no one else but the accused-appellant committed this murder.

For the foregoing reasons, I hold that there is no reason to interfere with

the Judgment of the Learned High Court Judge. Although there are

some questionable observations in the judgment, those observations

would not affect the conclusion of the learned High Court Judge.

Accordingly, the conviction and the sentence dated 12.02.2019 are

affirmed.

The appeal is dismissed.

15

The Registrar is directed to send a copy of this Judgment together with

the original case record to the High Court of Anuradhapura.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K. Priyantha Fernando, J (P/CA)

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL