1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRAIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

In the matter of an application for Revision in

terms of Article 138 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Court of Appeal case no. CAIPHCAPN/141116

H.C. Panadura case no. Rev. 10/2016

M.C. Panadura case no. 30696

Abdul Hassan Mohamed Kaleel

Party of the Second Part Petitioner

Petitioner

1. Mohamed Kaleed Mohamed Rifka

2. Mohamed Nizam Mohamed Rizvi

All of No. 11611, Horana Road, Eluvila,

Panadura

Intervenient Petitioners on behalf of the

Party of the Second Part.

Vs.

Mohamed Kaleel Mohamed Imthiyas

Party of the First Part Respondent -

Respondent

1. Mohamed Amir Fathima Fazeena

2. Mohamed Kaleel Fathima Muzail

All of No. 11611, Horana Road, Eluvila,

Panadura

Before

Counsel

2

Intervenient Petitioners on behalf of the

Party of the Second Part.

: H.C.J.Madawala J.

: L.T.B. Dehideniya 1.

: R.C.Gunarathene for the Party of the Second Part Petitioner

- Petioner.

: M. Farooj Thaheer for the Party of the First Part

Respondent - Respondent.

Supported on : 30.11.2016

Written submissions filed on 17.01.2017

Decided on : 25.01.2017

L.T.B. Dehideniya J.

This case originated by information filed by the Panadura police in

the Magistrate Court of Panadura on a land dispute likely or threatening

the breach of the peace. The Party of the First part Respondent

Respondent (the Respondent) including the intervenient parties of the

party of the first part complained that the 7 foot wide road way used by

them to come to their house was obstructed by the Party of the Second

Part Petitioner Petitioners (the Petitioners). After filing the relevant

affidavits and documents, the learned Magistrate inspected the disputed

road way and determined that the roadway used by the Respondents have

been obstructed by zinc sheets and ordered to remove the said

o bstructi on.

I

1 !

i

3

Being dissatisfied, the Petitioners moved in revision against the

said determination in the High Court of Panadura. The application was

dismissed on the basis that no exceptional circumstances. The petitioners

appealed against the said order of the learned High Court Judge and

moved in revision too.

The learned Counsel for the Respondents raised several

preliminary objections on the maintainability of this application, that is,

the prayer (b) of the petition refers to a non existing order because there is

no order made on the date referred in the prayer, that this Court cannot

intervene by way of revision while an appeal is pending challenging the

same order where there are no exceptional circumstances, and Court

cannot entertain a revision application against an order made on a

revision application, i.e., no revision over revision.

I will consider the availability of revision while pending an appeal.

It has been held in a series of authorities that the revisionary power

conferred on the appellate courts are very wide and the Court can exercise

that power whether an appeal is taken or not, but it can be exercised only

on exceptional circumstances, not as of a right.

In the case of Muttukrishna v. Hulugalle. 43 NLR 421 at 422

Howard C.J. considered the availability of revision in criminal and civil

cases referring to certain authorities and held that;

There remains for consideration the question as to whether an

order made by a District Judge under section 133 of the

Companies Ordinance, 1938, can be the subject of an application

to this Court by way of revision. In The King v. Noordeen[ 13

N.L.R 115.], it was stated by Wood-Renton J as follows:

4

Under section 357 (1) of the Criminal Procedure Code, the

Supreme Court is empowered, in any case, the record of the

proceedings of which has been called for by itself or which

otherwise comes to its knowledge, to exercise its revisionary

powers at its discretion. It appears to me that the language of that

section invests the Supreme Court with full powers of revision in

all criminal cases. "

Hence, the Supreme Court is empowered to act in revision in all

criminal cases, whether or not an appeal lies. Does the same

principle apply with regard to civil cases? In Atukorale v.

Samynathan[14 C. L. W. 109.], Soertsz J. stated asfollows:-

"The power of revision conferred on the Supreme Court of Ceylon

by sections 29 and 37 of the Courts Ordinance and by section 753

of the Civil Procedure Code are very wide indeed and clearly this

Court has the right to revise any order made by an original Court,

whether an appeal has been taken against that order or not. "

In the case of A. R. G. Fernando v. W. S. C. Fernando 72 NLR 549

availability of revision in Matrimonial actions where the appeal lies has

been considered and it was held that;

Where a right of appeal lies, an application in revision will not be

entertained unless there are exceptional circumstances which

require the intervention of the Court by way of revision.

In the case of Ameen v. Rasheed. 38 NLR 288 the reViSIOn

application has been dismissed for not having exceptional circumstances

in an appealable order.

5

It has been represented to us on the part of the petitioner that even if we find the order to be appealable, we still have a discretion to

act in revision. It has been said in this Court often enough that

revision of an appealable order is an exceptional proceeding, and

in the petition no reason is given why this method of rectification

has been sought rather than the ordinary method of appeal.

I can see no reason why the petitioner should expect us to exercise

our revisional powers in his favour when he might have appealed,

and I would allow the preliminary objection and dismiss the

application with costs.

It has been held in Rustom v. Hapangama [1978179] 2 Sri L R 225

that the revision is available whether an appeal is taken or not but the

power is available only on exceptional circumstances.

1) The powers by way of revision conferred on the Appellate Court

are very wide and can be exercised whether an appeal has been

taken against an order of the original Court or not. However, such

powers would be exercised only in exceptional circumstances

where an appeal lay and as to what such exceptional

circumstances are is dependent on the facts of each case.

In the case of Sunil Chandra Kumara v. Veloo [2001] 3 Sri L R 91

it has been held that the revision is available even where there is no right

of appeal, but not as of a right, only on the indulgence of Court to remedy

a miscarriage of justice.

Per Jayas inghe, J

"Revision is a discretionary remedy, it is not available as of right.

This power that flows from Art. 138 is exercised by the Court of

I

fI

6

Appeal, on application made by a party aggrieved or ex mero

motu, this power is available even where there is no right of

appeal.

The Petitioner in a Revision application only seeks the indulgence

of Court to remedy a miscarriage of justice. He does not assert it

as a right. Revision is available unless it is restricted by the

constitution or any other law. "

4. S. 753 of the Civil Procedure Code and S. 364 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure confer power on the Court of Appeal to call

for the records, these sections cannot be construed as provisions

which confer rights on parties to make Revision Applications. The

Supreme Court rules set out the procedure for making Revision

applications.

In the case of Dharmaratne and another v Palm Paradise Cabanas

Ltd and others [2003] 3 Sri L R 24 at page 29 Gamini Amarathunga 1.

after considering several authorities expressed the view that;

The requirement of exceptional circumstances for the exercise of

revisionary jurisdiction is not a requirement statutorily laid down

anywhere. As Gunawardana J, himself has referred to, Abrahams

CJ. in Ameen v Rashid (supra) has explained the rationale for

insisting on the existence of exceptional circumstances for the

exercise of revisionary jurisdiction. According to Abrahams CJ.

revision of an appealable order is an exceptional proceeding and a

person seeking this method of rectification must show why this

extra-ordinary method is sought rather than the ordinary method

of appeal. As Hutchinson CJ. has stated in Perera v Silva (supra) it

is not poss ible to contend that the power ought to be exercised or

!

j ! 1 I

j

7

that the legislature could have intended that it should be exercised

so as to give the right of appeal practically in every case. Thus the

existence of exceptional circumstances is the process by which the

Court selects the cases in respect of which this extra-ordinary

method of rectification should be adopted. If such a selection

process is not there revisionary jurisdiction of this Court will

become a gateway for every litigant to make a second appeal in the

garb of a revision application or to make an appeal in situations

where the legislature has not given right of appeal.

The practice of Court to insist on the existence of exceptional

circumstances for the exercise of revisionary powers has taken

deep root in our law and has got hardened into a rule which should

not be lightly disturbed. The words used by the legislature do not

indicate that it ever intended to interfere with this 'rule of practice '.

In the case of Milton Gunawardana v. The Commissioner of Co-

operative and others CA PHC APN 195/2006 CA Minutes dated

27.10.2009 Sisira de Abrew 1. held that the following tests should be

applied before exercising the discretionary remedy of revision;

a) The aggrieved party should not have any other remedy.

b) If there were another remedy available to the aggrieved party

then revision would be available if special circumstances be

shown to warrant it.

c) The aggrieved party must come to Court with clean hands and

should not have contributed to the current situation.

d) They should have complied with the law at the time.

e) There should have been prejudice of his substantial rights by

acts complained of

8

j) The acts or circumstances complained of have occasioned a

failure of justice.

Abrew J further held in the same case citing the case of Sirisena v.

Richard Arsala and others CA application 5366/84 decided on 24.10.90

that "the urgency of the matter and the likelihood of delay in hearing of

the appeal which are common to most actions are not by themselves

exceptional circumstances that warrant the invoking of the discretionary

remedy. "

When there is an appeal pending before this Court, the exceptional

circumstances have to be considered seriously to avoid a second appeal in

the guise of a revision application.

The only ground averred by the Petitioner in paragraph 16 of his

petition dated 08.11.2016 is that the learned Magistrate has exceeded the

jurisdiction in making the determination. The Petitioner's contention is

that the learned Magistrate ceases jurisdiction to make an order under

section 66 of the Primary Court Procedure Act once a party files an action

in the District Court on the same subject matter.

The section 68 (2) of the Primary Court Procedure Act provides

that when an order pronounced by the Primary Court on a land dispute

under section 68 (1) of the Act, he is entitled to the possession of the land

or the part in the manner specified in such order until such person or

persons are evicted there from under an order or decree of a competent

Court. In the same way if the dispute relates to a right and the order was

delivered under section 69 (1), section 69(2) provides that such person is

entitled to such right until such person is deprived of such right by virtue

of an order or decree of a competent Court.

{i

~

l

f

~

9

The two sections read thus;

68. (1) Where the dispute relates to the possession of any land or

part thereof it shall be the duty of the Judge of the Primary

Court holding the inquiry to determine as to who was in

possess ion of the land or the part on the date of the filing of the-

information under section 66 and make order as to who is

entitled to possess ion of such land or part thereof

(2) An order under subsection (1) shall declare anyone or more

persons therein specified to be entitled to the possession of the

land or the part in the manner specified in such order until such

person or persons are evicted therefrom under an order or

decree of a competent court, and prohibit all disturbance of

such possession otherwise than under the authority of such an

order or decree.

(3) ........ .

(4) ....... .

69. (1) Where the dispute relates to any right to any land or any

part of a land, other than the right to possession of such land or

part thereof, the Judge of the Primary Court shall determine as

to who is entitled to the right which is the subject of the dispute

and make an order under subsection (2).

(2) An order under this subsection may declare that any person

specified therein shall be entitled to any such right in or

respecting the land or in any part of the land as may be

specified in the order until such person is deprived of such right

by virtue of an order or decree of a competent court, and

10

prohibit all disturbance or interference with the exercise of such

right by such party other than under the authority of an order

or decree as aforesaid.

These two sections provide that the determination of the Judge of

the Primary Court is valid until the competent civil court pronounces a

decree or an order. Filing a civil action does not deprive the Primary

Court from making the determination. This is further cleared by the

section 74 (1) of the Act. It provides that an order under the Part VII of

the Primary Court Procedure Act shall not affect or prejudice any right or

interest in any land or part of a land which any person may be able to

establish in a civil suit. If the Legislature intended a civil action to be a

bar for a Primary Court to proceed under Part VII of the Act, it would not

have enacted that an order of a Primary Court shall not affect or prejudice

the civil action.

Under these circumstances, I hold that the Petitioner was unable to

present any exceptional circumstance to invoke the revisionary

jurisdiction of this Court.

The other objection of the Respondent is that the prayer (b) of the

petition is to set aside a non existing order and therefore this application

cannot be maintained. The prayer (b) of the petition is to set aside the

order of the Learned High Court dated 02.05.2016.

The High Court has not made any order on 02.05.2016. The order

was made on 24.05.2016. The Petitioner does not dispute this fact. The

Petitioner relies on the maxim that ''falsa demonstratio non nocet, cum de

corpora constat" which means that "mere false demonstration does not

vitiate if there be sufficient certainty as to the object" The learned

Counsel cited several authorities in support of his argument, but those

f1f I

11

authorities refer to false descriptions in the documents, not to a wrongly

pleaded prayer.

This revision application is against an order of the learned High

Court Judge of Panadura. Unless the Petitioner correctly pleads what is

the order that he is challenging, he cannot maintain this revision

application. The order that he is moving to set aside by this revision

application is a non existing order.

I uphold the said two preliminary objections raised by the

Respondent and dismiss the application.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

H.C.J.Madawala J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

rtl

iI

i

~ ,,,.