Page 1 of 4

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

Court of Appeal Case No:

CA / BAIL / 32/22

Magistrates Court of Galle Case

No: B 96862 /18

In the matter of an application for

bail under and in terms of Bail Act

read along with section 10 (1) (a)

of the Assistance to and

protection of Victims of Crime and

Witnesses Act No. 4 of 2015.

Ramasamy Yohan Jayantha

No 243/ B Wewagodawatte, Thalgampala,

Galle.

Suspect

AND NOW BETWEEN

Ramasamy Yohan Jayantha

No 243/ B Wewagodawatte, Thalgampala,

Galle.

Suspect Petitioner

Vs.

1. Officer in Charge

Police Station

Akmeemana.

Page 2 of 4

2. Hon. Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department

Colombo 12.

Respondent

Before: Menaka Wijesundera J.

Neil Iddawala J.

Counsel: Selvaraja Dushyanthan for the Suspect Petitioner.

Panchali Witharana SC for the State.

Argued on: 05.12.2022

Decided on: 18.01.2023

MENAKA WIJESUNDERA J.

The instant application has been filed to obtain bail to the suspect namely

Ramasamy Yohan Jayantha under the provisions of the Assistance to and

Protection of Victims of Crime and Witnesses act.

A girl by the name of Rashmi Lakshika had lodged a complaint against the

suspect for sexually abusing her on 1.9.2018. The suspect has been

produced before the Magistrate and upon considering the material in the B

report the Magistrate has granted bail on 2.10.2018. Thereafter the brother

of the suspect is alleged to have threatened the victims mother and for the

said complaint the Magistrate has cancelled the bail of the suspect on

20.10.2022

Page 3 of 4

The Counsel appearing for the respondents vehemently objected to the

instant application and stated that the victim in the substantive matter has

been only 7 years of age at the time of the alleged incident and further more

invited Court to consider the brutal manner in which the victims mother

had been threatened.

But we are unable to consider the facts of the case at this juncture.

The law pertaining to the instant matter is that a suspect produced under

the instant act can be enlarged on bail only upon exceptional circumstance

by the Court of Appeal.

The term exceptional has not been defined in the statute but in the recently

decided cases the exceptional circumstances has been defined to be varying

from case to case.

In the instant matter the exceptionality urged is the fact that the indictment

has not been filed in the instant matter.

But the Counsel for the respondents stated that the indictment is being

prepared.

But in view of the submissions of both parties the filling of the indictment is

not yet known hence the question arises whether it is a violation of the

personal liberty of the suspect to be kept in remand without due

administration of justice taking place.

But in view of the nature in which the principal offence has been committed

and the subsequent conduct of the brother of the suspect makes it only but

fair to refuse the instant application for bail.

Page 4 of 4

As such the instant application for bail is refused.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

I agree.

Neil Iddawala J.

Judge of the Court of Appeal