IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Samaraweera Mudalige Deeksha

Senika Wijegunarathna

Samaraweera,

No. 50/1/C,

Mayura Place,

Colombo 6.

Petitioner

CASE NO: CA/WRIT/117/2016

Vs.

1. Chairman,

Urban Development Authority,

Sethsiripaya,

Battaramulla.

2. Director General,

Urban Development Authority,

Sethsiripaya,

Battaramulla.

3. Urban Development Authority,

Sethsiripaya,

Battaramulla.

4. District Registrar,

Land Registry Colombo,

Sir Marcus Fernando Mawatha,

Colombo 7.

2

5. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondents

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Shavindra Fernando, P.C., with Ruchindra

Fernando for the Petitioner.

Anusha Fernando, D.S.G., for the Respondents.

Decided on: 28.01.2019

Samayawardhena, J.

The petitioner filed this application seeking to quash by

certiorari the Notice to Quit marked P9 issued by the competent

authority of the Urban Development Authority under the State

Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act, No. 7 of 1979, as amended,

to recover possession of the premises described in the said

Notice.

The basis of filing this application by the petitioner in short was

that the competent authority of the UDA had no legal basis to

form an opinion that the premises belonging to the petitioner is

State land.

The 1st-3rd respondents filed objections stating inter alia that

The petitioner is an unauthorized occupant of premises 50/1C

Mayura Place (the premises in question) which is a State Land

made out to the 3rd respondent (UDA) by way of a Grant (marked

2R1) dated 30th May 2000 (by Her Excellency the President) under

3

the State Lands Ordinance, No.8 of 1947 as amended read with

Plan CO/8021 (marked 2R2) dated 4th June 1999.

In the counter affidavit the petitioner takes up the position that

2R1 and 2R2 are absolute nullities since the President of the

Republic could not transfer a title that she did not possess to the

UDA.

According to the petitioner she is the owner of the premises by

Deed P1, which is an Executive Conveyance prepared after her

mothers testamentary case on the basis that the petitioners

deceased mother was the purported owner of the premises. That

cannot in my view confer clear title to the petitioner as anybody

can include any number of properties in the inventory in a

testamentary case as belonging to the deceased unknown to the

true owners.

The position of the petitioner that she is the owner of the

premises is belied by her own letters marked by the respondents

compendiously as 2R4 wherein she has admitted directly and/or

indirectly the ownership of the premises with the State or at

least that the petitioner is not the owner of the premises.

A party seeking a discretionary relief from Court such as writ

shall come with clean hands and act with uberrima fides.

The order delivered by the Magistrates Court marked P8 in

favour of the petitioner in proceedings instituted (by a different

party and not by the UDA) under Government Quarters

(Recovery of Possession) Act, No.7 of 1969, as amended, (and not

under State Lands Recovery of Possession Act) cannot operate as

res judicata as inter alia the parties are different and the causes

of action are different. In addition, the Grant 2R1 by HE the

4

President in favour of the UDA is after the said order of the

Magistrates Court.

Application of the petitioner is dismissed. No costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal