Page 1 of 16

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for a Mandate in the nature of Writ of Prohibition under and in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Blue Ocean Reality (Private) Limited No.32, 1st and 2nd Floor, Galle Road, Dehiwala, and, No.9A, De Fonseka Place, Bambalaitiya, Colombo 04.

Petitioner Vs. 1. People's Bank

Head Office, 10th Floor, No. 75, Chittampalam A Gardiner Mawatha, Colombo 02. 2. E. S. Ramanayake

Specialist Licensed Auctioneer, No.11/55, Bogahawatte, Kudabuthgamuwa, Angoda. 3. Sujeewa Rajapakse

Chairman 4. Kumar Gunawardana

Director

CA/WRIT/228/2022

Page 2 of 16

5. Isuru Balapatabendi

Director 6. Keerthi Goonatillake

Director 7. Manjula Wellalage

Director 8. Bhadranie Jayawardhana

Director 9. Visakha Amarasekere

Director All of Head Office, 10th Floor, No. 75, Chittampalam A Gardiner Mawatha, Colombo 02.

Respondents

Before : Sobhitha Rajakaruna J.

Dhammika Ganepola J.

Counsel : Faisz Musthapha, PC with Faisza Markar, Keerthi Thilekeratne and

Amarasiri Panditharathne for the Petitioner.

Jaliya Bodinagoda for the 1st Respondent.

Supported on : 23.06.2022

Decided on : 28.10.2022

Page 3 of 16

Sobhitha Rajakaruna J.

The Petitioner obtained a loan facility of Rs.225,000,000.00 from the 1st Respondent-Peoples

Bank (Bank) by mortgaging the allotment of land called Mahawelawatta bearing

Assessment No.35, Ramakrishna Road in Wellawatte (the property). The mortgage bond

No. 639 attested by M. A. D. Muditha Peiris on 27.09.2018 is marked as P3.

The Petitioner was unable to service the said loan facility and thereby the Board of Directors

of the Bank passed a Resolution on 24.01.2020, marked P5, under Section 29D of the

Peoples Bank Act (as amended by Act No. 32 of 1986) (the Act). The Bank thereafter

proceeded to issue the notice of sale and to auction the property. Due to certain payments

being made by the Petitioner before the date of sale, such auction has been postponed on

couple of occasions.

Upon the default of the Petitioner, the property was to be auctioned as per P19(a) on

23.06.2022 and such sale was also suspended due to the payment of another portion of the

default amount. The Petitioner filed this application after the Bank published the said latest

notice of sale P19(a) notifying the date, time and place of the sale of the property.

The Petitioners primary relief in this application is to seek for a writ of prohibition preventing

the 1st and 2nd Respondents taking steps to auction the premises bearing No. 35, Ramakrishna

Road, Wellawatte in pursuance to the Resolution of the Board of Directors of the 1st

Respondent Bank, marked P5.

The 1st Respondent Bank contends that the Petitioner is not entitled to seek a writ of

Prohibition preventing the execution of the Resolution, marked P5, without challenging the

validity of the said resolution by a writ of Certiorari; anyhow this Court has no jurisdiction to

quash the said Resolution P5 in terms of Section 29D of the Act.

Effect of Section 29D of the Peoples Bank Act.

The contention of the 1st Respondent is that the provisions of Section 29D of the Act oust the

jurisdiction of this Court to review the said Resolution, marked P5 and the Petitioner cannot

do indirectly, what it cannot do directly by seeking a writ of Prohibition to suspend the sale

of property which hinders the effect of the Resolution P5.

Page 4 of 16

The said Section 29D of the Act;

Subject to the provisions of section 29E, the Board may by resolution to be recorded

in writing authorize any person specified in the resolution to sell by public auction any

immovable or movable property mortgaged to the Bank as security for any loan in

respect of which default has been made in order to recover the whole of the unpaid

portion of such loan, and the interest due thereon up to the date of the sale together

with the moneys and costs recoverable under section 29L and thereafter it shall not

be competent for the borrower or any person claiming through or under any

disposition whatsoever of the right title or interest of the borrower to and in the

property made or registered subsequent to the date of the mortgage to the Bank, in any

court to move to invalidate the said resolution for any cause whatsoever, and no court

shall entertain any such application.

In the presence of the above statutory provisions, the Petitioner contends that the Petitioner

is not challenging the said Resolution P5 but only the steps taken by the 1st and 2nd

Respondents to auction the subject property are being challenged. The 1st Respondent

strenuously argues that it is abundantly clear under Section 29D of the Act that no Court has

jurisdiction to entertain any application by way of writ or otherwise that has the effect of

depriving the 1st Respondent proceeding with the said Resolution together with the sale of the

property. In support of this argument, the 1st Respondent has cited the cases of Yapa vs.

Peoples Bank and another (2006) 1 Sri. L.R. 60; Peoples Bank vs. Hewawasm (2000) 2 Sri. L.R.

29; Meragala vs. Peoples Bank and others (2006) 2 Sri. L.R. 101; Peoples Bank and seven others

vs Yasasiri Kasthuriarachchi (2010) 1 Sri. L.R. 225.

In Yapa vs. Peoples Bank and another (at p. 106) which was an application in revision from the

order of the Additional District judge of Colombo, the Court of Appeal has held the Petitioner

cannot challenge the resolution even indirectly by challenging the mortgage bonds on the

basis that they are not properly stamped.

The Court of Appeal in Peoples Bank vs. Hewawasm (at p. 37) has considered the effect of the

said Section 29D read together with Section 22 of the Interpretation Ordinance and held that;

Page 5 of 16

The above expression in Section 29(D) is of similar import as shall not be called in question in

any Court, contained in Section 22 of the Interpretation Ordinance. Hence, we agree with the

submissions made by the learned Presidents Counsel on behalf of the Defendant-Petitioner that

the said resolution (marked E) passed by the Board of Directors of the Peoples Bank, cannot be

invalidated or challenged in an action in the District Court. Therefore, in these circumstances,

the sale of the mortgaged property by public auction upon the said resolution marked E cannot

be restrained by an interim injunction.

It is observed that the said case of Peoples Bank vs. Hewawasm is also an application to revise

the order of the learned District judge of Colombo. The case of Meragala vs. Peoples Bank and

others was a writ application by which the writ jurisdiction has been invoked and the Court of

Appeal has taken a similar view as in the said Hewawasam case and has held that the validity

and/or legality of a resolution cannot be questioned. The Court has not examined the power

of the Court of Appeal under Article 140 of the Constitution in the said case. The Supreme

Court in Peoples Bank and seven others vs Yasasiri Kasthuriarachchi (a case relied on by the 1st

Respondent) has not directly examined the effect of Section 29D of the Peoples Bank Act

although the Court has observed the outcome of another writ application bearing No. CA

1268/98.

However, the view taken by Udalagama J. (P/CA) in Satchithanandasivam vs. People's Bank

(2004) 2 Sri. L.R. 63 (at p. 65-66) is that a resolution of a respondent-bank could be challenged

if it is ex facie apparent on the application that the body or Authority who made the direction

or order had acted ultra vires the powers that had been conferred upon such body or was

acting contrary to rules of natural justice or had not complied with the mandatory provisions

of law.

The Petitioner heavily relied on Harjani and another vs. Indian Overseas Bank and others (2005)

1 Sri. L.R. 167 by which the Indian Overseas Bank has sought to take advantage of the

provisions of the Recovery of Loans by Bank (Special Provisions) Act No. 4 of 1990 relating

to parate execution. Saleem Marsoof P.C. J. (P/CA) (as he then was) in the said case,

observing the fact that the powers in regard to parate execution have been conferred by Statute

Page 6 of 16

on any bank as defined in Section 22 of the said Recovery of Loans by Bank (Special

Provisions) Act, has held;

"I am of the opinion that this Court is bound to exercise supervisory jurisdiction over the exercise

of such powers despite the fact that some at least of these Banks are local or foreign Banking

Companies."

The 1st Respondent argues that the said Harjani case has no bearing on the instant application

as the said judgement only considered a resolution passed under the said Recovery of Loans

by Bank (Special Provisions) Act and not one adopted under Section 29D of the Act which

contains the ouster clause.

Sri Lankan Courts, in view of section 22 of the Interpretation Ordinance were used to

adopting a method of not interfering when there is an ouster clause. However, the 1978

Constitution of the Republic conferred power to Court of Appeal on writ jurisdiction by which

the effect of the said section 22, in my view, was redeemed.

This Court exercises its writ jurisdiction under Article 140 of the Constitution and proceedings

for writs are not suits or actions as the Court of Appeal exercises its supervisory functions

and it is not called upon to pronounce judgements on the merits of the dispute between the

parties who were before a court of first instance.

Anandacoomaraswamy J. in Wickremasinghe vs. The Monetary Board of the Central Bank of

Sri Lanka and another (1989) 2 Sri. L.R. 230 considering judgements in several other cases1 on

this point has drawn attention to the decision of Basanayake CJ. (in Silverline Bus Co. Ltd vs.

Kandy Omnibus Co. Ltd 58 NLR 193), who has held that proceedings in certiorari do not fall

within the category of proceedings known as suits or actions.

The statutory ouster clauses and Constitutional ouster clauses have been differentiated when

considering their application to the writ jurisdiction of the Court Appeal. The modern Sri

Lankan jurisprudence on ouster clauses has been enriched with the precedent laid down by

1 Government of Madras vs. Vasappa AIR 1965. Re Goonesinhe 44 NLR 75. Silverline Bus Co. Ltd. vs. Kandy Omnibus Co. Ltd. 58 NLR 193, 197, 203, 206. Kudakanpillai vs. Mudanayake 54 NLR 350. H.E. Tennakoon vs. P.K. Duraisamy 59 NLR 481. Colombo Apothecaries Ltd. vs. Wijesuriya 71 NLR 258. Maliban Biscuits Manufactories Ltd. vs. Subramaniam 74 NLR 76,78,79.

Page 7 of 16

Mark Fernando J. in agreement with Dheeraratne J. Wadugodapitiya J. in Atapattu and others

vs. People's Bank and others (1997) 1 Sri. L.R. 208. The Supreme Court held in that case;

There is an apparent conflict between the ouster clause (which is pre-Constitution legislation),

and Article 140. While generally a Constitutional provision, being the higher norm, must prevail

over statutory provision, there are some constitutional provisions which enable pre-Constitution

written law to continue to apply. The first is Article 16(1), which is inapplicable here, because

that deals only with inconsistency with fundamental rights. The second is Article 168(1), which

provides: 'Unless Parliament otherwise provides, all laws, written laws and unwritten laws, in

force immediately before the Constitution, shall, mutatls mutandis, and except as otherwise

expressly provided in the Constitution, continue in force." However, this would make the ouster

clause operative only except as otherwise expressly provided" in Article 140. (Emphasis

added)

But there is one difference between those Articles and Article 140. Article 140 (unlike Article

126) is subject to the provisions of the Constitution. Is that enough to reverse the position, so as

to make article 140 subject to the written laws which Article 168(1) keeps in force? Apart from

any other consideration, if it became necessary to decide which was to prevail - an ouster clause

in an ordinary law or a Constitutional provision conferring writ jurisdiction on a Superior Court,

"subject to the provisions of the Constitution - I would unhesitatingly hold that the latter

prevails, because the presumption must always be in favour of a jurisdiction which enhances

the protection of the Rule of Law, and against an ouster clause which tends to undermine it

(see also Jailabdeen v. Danina Umma (1962) 64 N.L.R. 419, 422). But no such presumption is

needed, because it is clear that the phrase "subject to the provisions of the Constitution was

necessary to avoid conflicts between Article 140 and other Constitutional provisions - such as

Article 80(3), 120, 124, 125, and 126(3), That phrase refers only to contrary provisions in the

Constitution itself, and does not extend to provisions of other written laws, which are kept alive

by Article 168(1), Where the Constitution contemplated that its provisions may be restricted by

the provisions of Article 138 which is subject to any law.

There is another reason why this particular ouster clause is of no avail in these appeals. It

purports to protect from review only a determination by the Bank whether any premises should

Page 8 of 16

or should not be acquired; it does not purport to apply to distinct preliminary or incidental

matters, such as the substitution of parties. (Emphasis added).

The Supreme Court has again upheld the dicta of the said Atapattu case (judgement by Mark

Fernando J.) in B. Sirisena Cooray vs. Tissa Dias Bandaranayake and two others (1999) 1 Sri.

L.R. 1 (at p. 12) (judgement by Dheeraratne J.) and Wijayapala Mendis vs. P. R. P. Perera and

others (1999) 2 Sri. L.R. 110 (at p. 119) (judgement by Mark Fernando J.). The eloquent words

of the erudite judges of the Supreme Court in those three cases have laid down a clear principle

that the writ jurisdiction exercised by the Supreme Court and the writ jurisdiction exercised

by the Court of Appeal under Article 140 is unfettered.

Denning LJ. in the case of R vs. Medical Appeal Tribunal ex. p. Gilmore [1957] 1 QB 574 (at p.

583) has declared that; I find it very well settled that the remedy by certiorari is never to be taken

away by any statute except by the most clear and explicit words. Atkin LJ. (in R vs. Electricity

Commissioners ex. p. London Electricity Joint Committee Co. (1920) Ltd. [1924] 1 KB 177 (at p.

206)) has said that he can see no difference in principle between certiorari and prohibition,

except that the later maybe invoked at an earlier stage.

I need to draw my attention at this stage to the Court of Appeal judgement of Shiranee

Tilakawardane J. (P/CA) (as her Ladyship then was) in Katugampola vs. Commissioner

General of Excise and others (2003) 3 Sri. L.R. 207 (p.210) where the Court has held with

reference to the above Atapattu case;

Therefore, the ouster clauses contained in ordinary legislation would not effectively restrict

or preclude the jurisdiction granted by Article 140 of the Constitution. Nevertheless, the

restriction contained in Article 55 (5) and the Amended Article 61 A as these are ouster clauses

stipulated in the Constitution itself, the powers of this Court would be restricted by these

provisions contained in the Constitution. It was held in the case of Atapattu v Peoples Bank

1997 1 Sri L.R. 208, Bandaranayake vs. Weeraratne 1981 1 Sri. L.R. 10 at 16, that the

ouster clauses contained in the Constitution would bar jurisdiction that has been granted within

the Constitution and would therefore such ouster clause adverted to above would be a bar to the

entertaining of writ applications to invoke the writ jurisdiction by this Court. (Emphasis

added).

Page 9 of 16

Even in the presence of a constitutional ouster as per in Article 61A, Shiranee Tilakawardane

J. (P/CA) has taken the view in Katugampola case that the Writ jurisdiction could be sought

under circumstances where the person who made the impugned decision did not have any

legal authority to make such a decision. In that sense it is not reasonable for any public power,

even in the presence of a Constitutional preclusive clause, to get drifted without being

reviewed, when required, by an appropriate Court of law at some stage during the process.

(See-the order of this Court-Mohamed Ismail Wahabdeen vs. His Lordship Justice Jayantha

Jayasuriya-Hon. Chief Justice and others, CA/WRIT/468/2021 decided on 08.08.2022).

In the circumstances, I am of the view that the statutory ouster mentioned in section 29D of

the Act cannot be used to undermine the judicial control of this Court against decision or a

determination made under the said Act, if it is ex-facie apparent that such act or decision

comes under any of the ground of judicial review. It cannot be assumed that the Board of

Directors of the Bank has an unfettered discretion under the said Act to take decisions without

proper legal authority and depriving access to justice through an application for a writ.

Anyhow, I agree to a great extent that the said statutory ouster contained in Section 29D of

the Act would be applicable to related actions filed in the District Court.

Contractual Relationship availability of Writs.

The other main argument of the 1st Respondent is that the relationship between the Petitioner

and the Bank was purely contractual as the Petitioner is the Debtor and the 1st Respondent

is the Creditor. The 1st Respondent contends that the Courts have consistently held in the

below mentioned cases that where the relationship between the parties was contractual, the

remedy by way of writ jurisdiction will not be available;

Podi Nona vs. Urban Council, Horana (1981) 2 Sri. L.R. 141; Jayaweera vs. Wijeratne

(1985) 2 Sri. L.R. 413; Meragala vs. Peoples Bank and others (2006) 2 Sri. L.R. 101.

I have already dealt with this question in Devendra Budalge Sudesh Lalitha Perera vs. Janatha

Estates Development Board and others, CA/WRIT/004/2022 decided on 06.10.2022 and W. G.

Chamila vs. Urban Development Authority and others, CA/WRIT/215/2022 decided on

26.10.2022. In those cases, this Court held;

Page 10 of 16

The general perception is that the contractual and commercial obligations are

enforceable by ordinary actions and not by judicial review. However, with the judicial

activism within the realm of judicial review, our Courts as well as English courts have

deviated in many occasions from the above general rule. As such many Judges have

shown a tendency to favour the inclusion of contractual obligations in judicial review

in order to disallow administrative power to be escaped from judicial control. The

below mentioned passage of His Lordship Mahinda Samayawardane J. in Kumudini

Madugalle vs. National Housing Development Authority, CA/Writ/540/2019 decided on

16.06.2020 is very much apt here;

I must make clear this Judgement shall not be taken to mean that violations

based on contracts by public bodies are totally outside writ jurisdiction. There

is no such blanket prohibition. Each case shall be treated separately. De Smith

in his treatise2 at page 148 states The existence of a possibility of a private law

claim does not by itself however, make judicial review inappropriate.

Moreover, it has been decided in R vs. British Coal Corporation ex parte Vardy (1993)

ICR 720 that if the dismissal was in breach of statutory restrictions, a quashing order

will lie to quash it. (Also see-Administrative Law by Wade and Forsyth, (11th Edition)

Oxford at page 537).

I take the view that in line with the precedent laid down by several related judgements3, the

current law should be that this Court has the discretionary power to exercise its writ

jurisdiction even on a question arising out of a relationship which is contractual in nature, if

the impugned order of the public authority was in breach of statutory restrictions/provisions

and also, if he has assumed a jurisdiction which he does not have or exceeded his jurisdiction;

or if it discloses the decision of the public authority is ex-facie bad in law violating, among

other, the Rules of Natural Justice including Rule of Law. Based upon all the circumstances

of this case, it is necessary to examine whether there are any merits in the application of the

Petitioner.

2 De Smiths Judicial Review (8th Edition) 3 See the judgements referred to in the above Devendra Budalge case & W. G. Chamila case and also Harjani and another vs. Indian Overseas Bank and others (2005) 1 Sri. L.R. 167

Page 11 of 16

The Argument No Default Made.

Now, I advert to the contention of the Petitioner who claims that there is no default made

by the Petitioner as a result of rescheduling the original loan by the 1st Respondent. The

Petitioner further claims that the publication of the auction notices marked, P8(a) [P10]

P12, and P19(a) [P17b], are wrongful and arbitrary. The Petitioner states; the purported

act of publishing auction notices in the above circumstances, was a most reckless purported

recovery tactic adopted by the officers of the 1st Respondent Bank and the said actions of the

1st Respondent Bank has caused immense damage to the Petitioner Company.

If the Petitioner attempts to argue that re-scheduling a loan by the Bank erodes the recovery

process of the loan, then certainly, such stand should be established by an appropriate legal

norm.

It is observed that the auction which was scheduled to be held earlier has been postponed

merely on the basis that the Petitioner had made intermittent payments in lieu of the total

default amount. On several occasions, the Bank has delayed auctioning the subject property

upon the re-scheduling the loans and on the assurance consistently given by the Petitioner to

settle such loans in full.

The Bank has the power by virtue of Section 5(1)(o) of the Act to take or agree to take all such

things and proceedings as may seem expedient for the purpose of upholding and supporting

the credit of the bank, and to obtain and justify public confidence and to avert or minimize

financial disturbances which might affect the bank. There is no much difference between the

terms restructuring and rescheduling as both deals with an existing loan and the bank in

such an event provides additional time or change the structure of the loan enabling the

borrower to improve his cash flow. Hence, re-scheduling a loan, in my view, is always for the

benefit of the borrower and for the best interest of the bank to recover the money lent to the

borrower. Any kind of interpretation that may be given contrary to this norm cannot be

accepted according to the law relating to Banking.

The 1st Respondent asserts that the Petitioner has not made any application to this Court to

restrain the notices of sale issued on previous occasions complaining that the Bank was not

empowered to auction the subject property in terms of the same Resolution, marked P5.

Page 12 of 16

The argument raised by the Petitioner is that the Resolution marked P5 will not be tenable

in law in view of the submissions made in reference to the aforesaid notices of sale. The view

point of the Petitioner in this regard is that the said notices of sale other than the one issued

immediately after P5, cannot be sustained based on the same Resolution P5 and the Bank

is not empowered to proceed with the subsequent notices of sale without a fresh Resolution

being passed by the Board of Directors of the Bank. The provisions contained in the

Resolution P5, to my mind, are very clear on this point, as the said Resolution recognizes

the norm of accepting payments even after passing the Resolution. The words; less payments

(if any) since received embodied in the said Resolution authorizes the Bank to proceed with

the same Resolution even when the Petitioner tenders any unpaid portion of the loan before

any date fixed for the sale. But this situation may vary subject to the conditions of an

agreement rescheduling the loan and in the existence of an eminent error in the recovery

process. The Petitioner of the instant application in the rescheduled agreements has

categorically given consent for the Bank to proceed with the same Resolution P5.

The Section 29H(1) of the Act stipulates the duty of the Board not to proceed with the sale if

the amount of the whole of the unpaid portion of the loan together with all interest is tendered

to the Board any time before the date fixed for the sale. However, when the borrower tenders

the amount of the instalment or equated payment or other payment in respect of which default

has been made, at any time before the date fixed for the sale, the Bank has no mandatory duty

in terms of Section 29H(2) of the Act to suspend the auction but its only the discretion of the

Board of Directors to do so. In this recovery process under Section 29M of the Act, the

borrower is privileged to be paid back any payment of excess.

Thus, I cannot agree with the Petitioners argument that no default has been made by the

Petitioner in order to execute the notice of sale, marked P19(a).

Novation.

The other facet of the Petitioners contention is that there has been novation of the original

loan (i.e., of Rs. 225,000,000.00) by subsequent agreements between the Petitioner and the

Bank and thus, the original loan is now comprised in two re-scheduled loans consisting of a

capital loan and an interest loan as per the offer letter, marked P6. As opposed to such

Page 13 of 16

assertions, the 1st Respondent submits that the agreement marked P6, has been entered into

as a consequence to the acknowledgement by the Petitioner that there was an outstanding

capital (Rs.225,000,000.00) and an outstanding interest (Rs.32,100,000.00 and

Rs.408,000,000.00) on one loan (Rs.225,000,000.00).

On a careful perusal of the contents of the said P6 and X12, I am compelled to accept the

submissions made on behalf of the 1st Respondent that no two new loans have been granted

by the Bank but the Petitioner has only been granted an extension of time to pay the

outstanding capital together with the interest. The Petitioner by way of the said re-scheduled

offer, marked P6, has expressly conceded that in an event of any three instalments and/or

the last instalment of the re-scheduled loans are in arrears, the Bank is entitled to enforce the

Board Resolution, marked P5. This clearly demonstrates that none of the elements to

espouse novation has been fulfilled as required in The Law of Contracts by C. G.

Weeramantry, Volume II, para. 751-753, the legal literature relied on by both parties in this

case on the point. It is important to note that the Petitioner is not challenging either the said

re-scheduled offer marked P6 (X12) or the Board Resolution marked P5.

Proportionality.

The Petitioner states in the event the subject property is sold by auction, the Petitioners

business will come to a grinding halt and in turn he would have to retrench the employees

attached to its business. Petitioner illustrates that a total sum of Rs.36,805,179.10 relating to

the period from December 2020 to February 2022 has been paid and again on 23.06.2022 a

sum of Rs.6,500,000.00 has been paid. There is no necessity for this Court to assess at this

stage the accuracy of the above figures but the material fact to be taken in to consideration is

that the Petitioner acknowledging his liability has repaid certain portions of the loan. The

Petitioner further states; the inability to pay the installments due to and owing to the Bank

has been occasioned by circumstances beyond his control and as such it offends the principles

of proportionality in the event the said resolution which is totally without jurisdiction is

enforced to sell its property by public auction.. (Emphasis added)

Wade and Forsyth (in Administrative Law, 11th Edition, Oxford, at pp. 306-307) have identified

the structured proportionality test emerged from several judgements in Britain for use when

Page 14 of 16

assessing whether a decision limiting a right protected under the Human Rights Act 1998

should be upheld or not. In European Union law, the orthodox approach is first a test of

suitability4 and then a test of necessity5. Further, it elaborates that it should also not be

supposed that proportionality is irrelevant to the unqualified Articles of the Convention (that

lack a limitations clause). Under the structured test, the decision maker, among other, must

address the question whether a fair balance has been struck between the rights of the

individual and the interests of the community.

I do not think it possible or desirable to attempt to define what facts or circumstances might

have caused the Petitioner not to settle the loans. The question arises is whether the Petitioner

is entitled to raise a claim in this case under the doctrine of proportionality when the

transactions and the relationship with the Bank are completely in the contractual nature and

also when the Petitioner has expressly and explicitly conceded for the repercussions in an

event of default. It is not only by the agreement set out in P6 but by the provisions in the

agreement entered in to between the Petitioner and the Bank on 17.11.2020, marked X12,

in my view, the Petitioners is precluded from taking refuge under the principle of

proportionality which has been emerged in public law arena prescribing that the

administrative measures must not be more drastic than it is necessary for attaining the desired

result.

Central Bank Circular.

The Petitioner points out that the Central Bank Circular No.05 of 2021, Circular No. 08 of

2021 and Circular No. 02 of 2022 offer concessions to business and individuals engaged in

various economic sectors who were subject to COVID-19 moratoriums. The Circular No. 02

of 2022 came in to operation after filling this application by the Petitioner and however, the

licensed banks are liable to suspend recovery action only in respect of credit facilities that have

been classified as non-performing on or after 01.01.2020. Similar provisions with different

dates are included in the other two circulars as well. It is noted that the Petitioner upon the

non-settlement of the loan that was granted in September 2018, has made the initial request

to the Bank on 08.01.2019 by P5 to reschedule the loan. Several facilities at numerous

4 (is the measure reasonably likely to achieve its objectives) 5 (weighing the adverse consequences against the importance of the objectives of the measure)

Page 15 of 16

occasions have been granted to the Petitioners by the Bank. Thus, I agree with the 1st

Respondents contention that those Circulars will have no bearing in determining the instant

application. Anyhow, there is no evidence tendered at all by the Petitioner for this Court to

deliberate whether the Petitioner was subject to COVID-19 moratorium which is one of the

main preconditions of such circulars.

Conclusion.

As mentioned earlier in this judgement, the Petitioner seeks only for a writ of Prohibition

restraining the 1st and 2nd Respondents from taking steps to auction the subject property. The

Petitioner to become successful in his plea in the instant application should reveal that the

execution of the decision taken by those Respondents to auction the property exceed their

jurisdiction. Similarly, it is required to demonstrate that such decision should be irrational,

guilty of illegality or vitiated by the principles of Natural Justice.

In light of my findings in this judgement, I take the view that the Petitioner, prima facie, has

failed to establish that it is entitled for a writ of Prohibition as prayed for in the prayer of the

Petition.

For the reasons set out above, I am not inclined to accept the contentions of the Petitioner

that the two agreements contained in P3 and P6 are distinct loans and that in the case of

default there must be separate Resolutions; and as such the 1st Respondent Bank cannot

enforce the said Resolution in terms of Clause 6.9 of P6 for the reasons that it is contrary to

Section 29D and Section 29K of the Act.

As per the crucial document P6 or the agreement, marked X12, in which the Petitioner has

waived his rights by conceding for the Respondents to proceed with the auction based on the

same Resolution, marked P5. The Petitioner has not challenged the authenticity of both

documents and also has not denied his signature etc., at any point of time. However, the

Petitioner has failed to establish illegality to render the above agreements null and void. When

analyzing the reliefs prayed for by the Petitioners, the Petitioner's conduct, particularly the

acquiescence during the recovery process should be taken into consideration.

Page 16 of 16

In Jayaweera vs. Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Services Ratnapura and Another (1996) 2

Sri. L.R. 70, in which F.N.D. Jayasuriya J. held;

"A Petitioner who is seeking relief in an application for the issue of a writ of certiorari is not

entitled to relief as a matter of course, as a matter of right or as a matter of routine. Even if he is

entitled to relief, still the Court has a discretion to deny him having regard to his conduct, delay,

laches, waiver, submission to jurisdiction- are all valid impediments which stand against the

grant of relief"

It is ex-facie not apparent on the application of the Petitioner that the Respondents who made

the decision to proceed with the sale of the subject property have acted ultra vires or acted

contrary to the rules of Natural Justice or have not complied with the statutory provisions. In

the circumstances there is no necessity to examine the other objections raised by the 1st

Respondent on laches and suppression & misrepresentation.

Thus, based on the arguability principles that should be adopted in respect of matters relating

to issuance of notice in a judicial review application, I arrive at the conclusion that the

Petitioner has failed to submit a prima facie case which warrants this Court to issue formal

notice of this application to the Respondents.

Therefore, I proceed to refuse this application.

Application is dismissed. I order no costs.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Dhammika Ganepola J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal