IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

C.A.(PHC) No. 74/2000

The Petition of Appeal against the order dated 22nd February 2000 of the learned High Court Judge of Vavuniya in Case No.HC/V /Rev /07/09 under the Provision of the Criminal Procedure Code and the High Court of Provinces (Special Provisions)Act No.19 of 1990

1. Ranasinghe Arachchilage Wilson, 2. Senerath Arachchilage Chandrasekera, 3. Mahadurage Jayantha Pathmalal 4. Bala Hamilage Ariyathunga 5. Ranasinghe Arachcilage Nelson Yasaratne 6. Hettiarachchilage Karunasekera, 7. Arachchilage Don Aronge Priyantha Kumara Seneviratne 8. Arachchilage Don Aronge Dharmapala Seneviratne. All of, No.19, Y.M.B.A. Shopping Complex, Kandy Road, Vavuniya. Petitioner-Appellants

H.C. Vavuniya Revision No. HCV/Rev/07/99

M. C. Vavuniya No. 2890

Vs. 1. Rajah Thanigasalam The Secretary, Urban Council, Vavuniya. Petitioner-l st Respondent-1st Respondent

1

BEFORE

COUNSEL

Welupillei Wasantha Kumar, The Secretary, Urban Council, Vavuniya Substituted Petitioner-1st Respondent-1 stRespondent 2. Rev. Siyambalagasweva Wimalasara Thero, President, Y.M.B.A. Kandy Road, Vavuniya. Respondent-2nd Respondent-2nd Respondent 2a. D.M.R.P. Dassanayake, President, Y.M.B.A. Kandy Road, Vavuniya. Substituted Respondent-2nd Respondent-2nd Respondent 2b. Madawalayalage Susitha Janaka, President, Y.M.B.A. Kandy Road, Vavuniya.

Substituted Respondent-2nd Respondent-2nd Respondent

********

JANAK DE SILVA, J. & ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

R. Chula Bandara for the 1st to 8th Petitioner-

Appellants.

ShiraI Lakthilaka instructed by N.J.P. Silva for

the Substituted Respondent-2nd Respondent-

2nd Respondent.

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS

TENDERED ON : 13th July,2018 (Both parties)

2

DECICEDON 24th July,2018

*************

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, I.

This is an appeal lodged by the 1st to 8th Petitioner-Appellants

(hereinafter referred to as the" Appellants") challenging the validity of the

order of the Provincial High Court holden in Vavunia by which their

application for revision has been dismissed.

At the hearing of this appeal on 22nd June 2018, the parties invited

this Court to pronounce judgment on the written submissions.

In instituting proceedings before the Magistrate's Court of Vavunia,

by the Applicant-1st Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the

"1st Respondent") under Section 28A(3)(a) of the Urban Development Law

No. 41 of 1978 as amended, against the substituted Respondent-2nd

Respondent-2nd Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the "2nd

Respondent"). Thereafter, upon an application for transfer, this Court has

transferred the said case to the Magistrate's Court of Anuradhapura.

After an inquiry, the Magistrate's Court, by its order dated

19.05.1999 directed the 2nd Respondent to cease development activities and

to eject all tenants (the 1st to 8th Appellants) from the premises described in

3

the schedule to the application. The Court further directed not to demolish

the building already erected.

It is against this order, the 1st to 8th Appellants have invoked

revisionary jurisdiction to the Provincial High Court. The Appellants

sought to revise the said order on several grounds including that the said

order was made against the Appellants without giving them an

opportunity to present their case.

In the impugned order of the Provincial High Court, the issue raised

by the Appellants concerning that they were not given an opportunity to

be heard before an adverse order was made against them, was extensively

dealt with. The Provincial High Court has concluded that it is the 2nd

Respondent "executed (put into effect) the development activity (the

change in the use of the land) or the 2nd Respondent has caused (induced

by giving the premises) the 1st to 8th Respondents to execute the

development activity. Therefore, according to law the notice is to be given

to the 2nd Respondent and not the tenants the 1st to 8th Respondents." The

Appellants were the Petitioners before the Provincial High Court, but was

mistakenly referred to as the Respondents.

In support of their appeal, the Appellants contended before this

Court that the Provincial High Court has held that the "person" to whom

the 1st Respondent should send notice is the 2nd Respondent and therefore

4

"in the absence of any interpretation in the UDA Law, the term "person"

contained therein warrants an interpretation to ascertain the class of

people that said provisions apply to."

In addition, the Appellants submit that the Provincial High Court, in

affirming the order of the Magistrate's Court to eject the Appellants

without giving a hearing to them, fallen into error.

The 2nd Respondent, in his submissions claimed that the Appellants

have no locus standi in respect of the matter before the Magistrate's Court

on the basis that under the UDA Law, primary responsibility lies on the

owner of the premises, who has to comply with the conditions of the

development permit and therefore, there is no provisions under Section

28A(1), for a third party to get notice. According to the 2nd Respondent, the

only person who should be noticed is the person who executed the

development permit.

In this context, it is appropriate for this Court to consider the factual

background as revealed from the proceedings, in order to satisfy itself as

to the legality of the impugned order of the Provincial High Court.

There is no dispute that the 1st Respondent has given a development

permit to the 2nd Respondent to construct a pilgrim's rest in the land

described in the application to the Magistrate's Court. Due to the situation 5

in the area, it was later decided to utilize the building as a shopping

complex and the Appellants were offered tenancy of the building upon

payment of certain amount of monies. Then the 1st Respondent initiated

the legal proceedings against the 2nd Respondent.

The contention of the Appellants is based on the provisions of

Section 28A(1) of the UDA Law. The relevant part of the said Section reads

thus;

"Where in a development area, any development activity

is commenced, continued, resumed or completed without a

permit or contrary to any term or condition set out in the

permit issued in respect of such development activity, the

Authority may, in addition to any other remedy available

to the Authority under this Law, by written notice require

the person who is executing or has executed such

development activity, or has caused it to be executed, on

or before such day as shall be specified in such notice, ... fl.

(emphasis added)

The UDA Law also has defined what it meant by "development

activity" in Section 29. According to the definition, the term development

activity" means the parcelling or sub division of any land, the erection or

re-erection of structures and the construction of works thereon, the

carrying out of building, engineering and other operations on, over or

under such land and any change in the use for which the land or any

structure thereof is used, other than the use of any land for purposes of

6

agriculture, horticulture and the use of any land within the curtilage of a

dwelling house, for any purpose incidental to the enjoyment of a

dwelling house, not involved in any building operation that would

require the submission of a new building plan; '" "

In effect, the word "person" should be construed with a view to

identify the natural or a corporate personality who could clearly be

attributed with responsibility for executing or has executed or has caused

such development activity to be executed. This construction of the term

"person" should be in line with the statutory provisions contained in

Section 28A(2). In this sub section, it is stated that "it shall be the duty of

such person on whom a notice is issued under subsection (1) to comply

with the time specified in such a notice or within such extended time ... ".

This is a clear indication of the Legislative intent that the notice should be

given to the person who has the capacity to comply with such notice.

He should have the necessary capacity to carry out the what has

been laid down in Section28A (a), (b) and (c) as the situation demands.

Section 28A(1)(c)(ii) involves a situation where the UDA would issue

written notice to "demolish or alter any building or work". Then, in such

an eventuality the "person" to whom the notice is issued should have the

capacity to comply with it. A party who has no capacity to comply with

such a notice, could therefore cannot be considered as a "person" who is

responsible of executing or has executed or has caused such development

activity to be executed. If that person could not be considered as the

7

\ I

I

"person" who is responsible of executing or has executed or has caused

such development activity to be executed, then serving notice on him to

comply with what he is incapable of would obviously be a futile exercise.

In the preamble of UDA Law, it is stated that the Authority is to

"promote integrated planning and implementation of economic, social

and physical development ... " in the designated areas. Thus, it is evident

from the examination of the statutory provisions of the UDA Law, that

the regulated environment under it, is meant for the common good of the

community and if the UDA to effectively implement its mandate, then the

word "person" in Section 28A had to be interpreted, to arrest any acts of

transgressions by individual members whether natural or corporate, of

such a community.

There is no contest that the Appellants are tenants of the 2nd

Respondent. As observed by the Provincial High Court in its order that

the " ... 2nd Respondent's Counsel submitted that the said premises was

constructed as a Pilgrims Rest, due to the situation prevailed at that time

in Vavunia there were no pilgrims to occupy the said building. Therefore,

the 2nd Respondent, the President of YM.B.A. Vavunia, rented out the

said premises which belonged to the Y.M.B.A.Vavunia to the 1st to 8th

Respondents. The Petitioners and Respondents admitted that the permit

is to build a pilgrims rest and the building that it built now used as a

shopping complex."This factual background was not contested by any

party before us.

8

I '

, ..

This portion of the order places each party to the appeal before us

in the correct perspective. Obviously the Appellants could not be

considered as the "person" on whom notice should be issued as their role

could not be identified with the activities specified in the phrase in

Section 28A(1). They became tenants only after the 2nd Respondent has

carried out the development activity. In these circumstances, the

Appellants are not " ... the person involved with the executing or has

executed or has caused such development activity to be executed, ... ",

In view of the foregoing reasons, we are of the firm view that the

appeal of the Appellant are devoid of merit and owing to that reason it

ought to be dismissed.

Therefore, we affirm the orders of the Magistrate's Court of

Anuradhapura on 19.05.1999 and Provincial High Court on 22.02.2000.

The appeal of the Appellants is accordingly dismissed. Considering

the circumstances of the Appellants, no cost is ordered.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

JANAK DE SILVA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

9