==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 6

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

In the matter of an application filed under in

terms of Article 138 of the Constitution of the

democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Read with Section 364 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No 15 of 1979.

CA CPA-020/25

HC of Anuradhapura Case No: The Attorney General

HC-98/2021 Attorney General’s Department

Colombo 12

Petitioner

Vs.

Lanthuwa Hanadige Suneetha Silva

D.S. Senanayake Mawatha, Katiyawa Road

Eppawala

Accused-Respondent

Before : B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

Amal Ranaraja, J

Counsel: Wishwa Wijesooriya, SC for the Petitioner

Argued On : 02.12.2025

Judgment On: 20.01.2026

Page 2 of 6

JUDGMENT

B. Sasi Mahendran, J.

This is a revisionary application filed by the Petitioner, Honourable Attorney

General, invoking the revisionary jurisdiction of this court, seeking the following

reliefs prayed in the petition dated 26th February 2025,

The Petitioner has inter alia prayed for the following reliefs;

1. Issue Notices to the Accused-Respondent;

2. Allow the Petition of the Petitioner;

3. Revise and set aside the Order dated 14-02-2024 delivered by the learned

High Court Judge sitting in Anuradhapura in the matter styled HC 98/21;

4. Grant costs and such further reliefs

The following facts are relevant to the Application

The Accused Respondent (herein after refers as the Accused) was indicted before

the High Court of Anuradhapura bearing case No. 98/21 for possession and

trafficking of 1.23 g of Heroin punishable under Section 54 (a) (d) and Section 54

(a) (b) of the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs Ordinance, No. 13 of 1984, as

amended.

The Accused initially entered a plea of not guilty to the charges contained in

Indictment which was marked as P2. Subsequently, he withdrew that plea and

pleaded guilty to both counts in the indictment before the High Court. Following

the plea of guilt, the Learned High Court Judge convicted the Accused of the

aforesaid offences and, by order dated 14.02.2024, imposed the following

punishments to run concurrently upon his conviction on the two charges:

1. 1st Charge - Fine of Rs. 150,000 and, upon nonpayment, 2 years simple

imprisonment and 5 years Rigorous Imprisonment suspended for 15 years

2. 2nd Charge - Fine of Rs. 100,000 and, upon nonpayment, 2 years simple

imprisonment and 5 years Rigorous Imprisonment suspended for 15 years

Page 3 of 6

The petitioner’s principal grievance was that the Learned High Court Judge

delivered the impugned order dated 14.02.2024 without considering section 303

(2)(a) and section 303 (2)(d) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act stating that a

judge of an original Court is barred from suspending a sentence where a minimum

mandatory sentence is prescribed by law for an offence and aggregate sentence for

the offences for which an accused is convicted exceeds two years. The petitioner

contends that the punishment imposed for both counts does not along with the law

stipulates a minimum mandatory sentence.

Section 303 (2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act reads as follows,

“303 (2) A court shall not make an order suspending a sentence of

imprisonment if,-

(a) a mandatory minimum sentence of imprisonment has been prescribed

by law for the offence in respect of which the sentence is imposed; or

...............

(d) the term of imprisonment imposed, or the aggregate terms of

imprisonment where the offender is convicted for more than one offence in

the same proceedings, exceeds two years."

We note that it is appropriate to consider the sentence prescribed by law for

possession and trafficking of drugs, which provides for a term of imprisonment of

not less than seven years and not exceeding twenty years, together with a fine

ranging from Rs. 100,000 to Rs. 500,000. Accordingly, we note that the law

stipulates a minimum mandatory sentence.

It is evident that a minimum sentence is prescribed by law. However, our courts

have recognized that a Trial Judge retains the discretion to determine an

appropriate sentence without being bound by the minimum mandatory sentence.

Nevertheless, if the Judge decides to impose a sentence below the statutory

minimum, such a departure must be supported by adequate and clearly stated

reasons.

Page 4 of 6

In the present case, we note that the Learned High Court Judge has failed to give

reasons why he has imposed such a sentence below the minimum sentence. It is

relevant to reproduce that portion of the order dated 14.02.2014.

“තවද මෙෙ ම ෝදනාවට අදාලව අනිවාර්ය අවෙ සිර දඩුවම් නියෙ ම ාට ඇතත්, මෙෙ නඩුමේ

දණ්ඩනය සම්බන්ධමයන් අධි රණමේ අභිෙතය භාවිතා කිරීෙට අදාලව සුදුසු නඩුවක් බව

තීරණය රමි. මෙෙ වූදිත අනිවාර්ය සිර දඩුවම් සඳහා මයාමු රන ලද මහාත් ඔහු විසින්

සොජමේ යහපත් පුරවැසිමයකු වශමයන් ටයුතු කිරීෙට ඇති අමේක්ෂාවත්, ඔහුමේ වියපත්

සහ මරෝගී ෙව බලා ගැනීමම් හැකියාව අහිමි වීෙද සහ ඔහුමේ ජීවිතමේ වටිනා ාලය

බන්ධනාගාරගත වීෙ ෙගින් ඔහුට වන අගතියද යන සියළු රුණු සළ ා බලමි. ඒ අනුව

අනිවාර්ය සිර දඩුවම් මනාවන දණ්ඩනයක් නියෙ කිරීෙ මයෝගය බව තීරණය රමි.”

The central question is whether the learned High Court Judge lawfully exercised

his discretion in awarding a sentence below the statutory minimum. The objective

of criminal justice is to safeguard society from offenders by imposing punishment

under the existing penal system. Such punishment is intended to serve as a

deterrent to others from committing criminal acts. In determining sentences,

courts have taken into account the nature of the offence and its impact on society.

I am mindful of the sentiments expressed by His Lordship Basnayake ACJ in The

Attorney General v. H.N. De Silva 57 NLR 121 at page 124 in the matter of

assessing the sentence to be imposed for an offence.

“In assessing the punishment that should be passed on an offender, a Judge

should consider the matter of sentence both from the point of view of the

public and the offender. Judges are too often prone to look at the question

only from the angle of the offender. A Judge should, in determining the

proper sentence, first consider the gravity of the offence as it appears from

the nature of the act itself and should have regard to the punishment

provided in the Penal Code or other statute under which the offender is

charged. He should also regard the effect of the punishment as a deterrent

and consider to what extent it will be effective.”

Page 5 of 6

This dictum was followed by His Lordship Gunasekara J in The Attorney General

v. Mendis 1995 1 SLR 138 and held that;

“In our view once an accused is found guilty and convicted on his own plea,

or after trial, the Trial Judge has a difficult function to perform. That is to

decide what sentence is to be imposed on the accused who has been

convicted. In doing so he has to consider the point of view of the accused on

the one hand and the interest of society on the other.”

Further held that;

“We are in agreement with the observations of Basnayake, A.C.J. that

whilst "the reformation of the criminal though no doubt is an important

consideration in assessing the punishment that should be passed on an

offender, where the public interest or the welfare of the state outweighs the

previous good character, antecedents and age of the offender, that public

interest must prevail." Having regard to the manner and the ingenuity with

which the crimes that the Accused Respondent has committed to which he

has pleaded guilty, we are of the view that the sentence imposed is grossly

inadequate. In our view the crimes to which the Accused-Respondent

pleaded guilty are of a very serious nature and have been committed with

much planning, deliberation and manipulation and called for an immediate

custodial sentence.”

In the instant case, the Accused was charged for possession and trafficking of 1.23

g of Heroin in 2020. We note that drug offences not only harm the individual

offender but also ripple through society, creating widespread social and economic

consequences. Most concerning is their impact on school children, who may be

exposed to addiction, crime, and disrupted education, threatening the future of the

community.

We note that the Learned High Court Judge has not considered this issue when

delivering the sentencing order dated 14.02.2024. We are mindful that the

Page 6 of 6

Learned High Court Judge did not properly discharge his judicial mind in

imposing the sentence in the above matter.

For the above-mentioned reasons, I am of the view that the Learned High Court

Judge has failed to consider the gravity of the offence. I am of the view that the

sentence imposed by the trial judge is in feris illegal and not in accordance with

the law.

We accordingly revise and set aside the sentence and the order of the Learned

High Court Judge dated 14.02.2024, which was marked as P4.

We direct the learned High Court judge to take into consideration the aggravating

and mitigating circumstances to be set out at the sentencing inquiry and make an

appropriate order.

Application Allowed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Amal Ranaraja, J.

I AGREE

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL