IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

C.A.(PHC)APN No. 25/2019

In the matter of an Application for Revision under and in terms of Article 138 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. Complainant

H.C. Colombo No. HC/PTB/02/2018

Vs. 01. Nandasena Gotabhaya Rajapakse 02. Liyanaarachchige Prasad Harshan De Silva 03. Gamaathi Arachchilage Badra Udulawathi Kamaladasa 04. Sudhammika Keminda Atigala 05. Saman Kumara Abraham Galapaththi 06. Maarukku Dewage Mahinda Saliya 07. Madamperuma Arachchilage Shrimathi Mallika Kumari Senadheera Accused

And now Between

01. Nandasena Gotabhaya Rajapakse 1st Accused-Petitioner

Vs.

Hon Attorney General, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12. Complainant-Respondent

BEFORE

COUNSEL

SUPPORTED ON :

02 Liyanaarachchige Prasad Harshan De Silva 03 Gamaathi Arachchilage Badra Udulawathi Kamaladasa 04 Sudhammika Keminda Atigala 05 Saman Kumara Abraham Galapaththi 06 Maarukku Dewage Mahinda Saliya 07 Madamperuma Arachchilage Shrimathi Mallika Kumari Senadheera 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th , 6th and 7th Accused-Respondents

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J. &

ARJUNA OBEYESEKERE, J.

Romesh de Silva P.C. with Ali Sabry P.C. , Sugath Caldera and Ruwantha Cooray for the Accused -Petitioner. Priyantha Nawana A.S.G.(P.C.) with, Dileepa Peeris D.S.G., Wasantha Perera S.S.C. and Udara Karunathilake S.C. for the Complainant-Respondent. 28th March 2019, 06th May 2019. 21st May 2019, 30th May 2019, 06th June 2019, 07th June 2019 and 14th June, 2019

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS TENDERED ON :

DECICEDON

30th April 2019 (by the Complainant-Respondent) 16th May,2019 (by the 1st Accused-Petitioner)

18th June 2019

*************

2

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, I.

The 1st Accused-Petitioner (hereinafter referred to as the

"Petitioner") with his petition addressed to this Court, has invoked the

revisionary jurisdiction of this Court under Article 138 of the Constitution

seeking its intervention to "set aside or vary" an order made by the

Permanent High Court at Bar in case No. HC/PTB/1/02/2018 on

11.02.2019, marked as P2. He also sought notice on the Respondents and

interim relief by way of an order of this Court staying further proceedings

of the said case.

It is stated by the Petitioner that he was indicted by the

Complainant-Respondent (hereinafter referred as the "Respondent") in the

said Permanent High Court at Bar along with several other Accused-

Respondents. He was served with an indictment by the said Court on

10.09.2018. On that day itself, the Petitioner took up an objection before the

Permanent High Court at Bar that it had no jurisdiction to hear and

determine the matter and reserved his right to make detailed submissions

in support of his objection.

On 22.01.2019, learned President's Counsel who represented the

Petitioner at the Permanent High Court at Bar made oral submissions in

support of his objection to jurisdiction on the following grounds;

a. the Court's jurisdiction is limited to hearing, trying and

determining prosecutions on indictments against persons in

3

"

respect of Financial and Economic Offences specified in the 6th

Schedule to the Act No.9 of 2018,

b. the indictment is not in respect of Financial and Economic

Offences specified in the 6th Schedule to the said Act.

Learned President's Counsel took up another preliminary objection

as to the validity of the indictment on the basis that the Petitioner is only

indicted for conspiracy, and/ or abetment of certain purported offences

and that abetment and conspiracy as set out in the said indictment is not

covered by the 6th Schedule.

The Permanent High Court at Bar pronounced its order on both

these preliminary objections that are raised by the Petitioner on 11.02.2019

by which the Court had overruled the said objections.

It is stated by the Petitioner that due to the grounds specified in

paragraph 11 of his Petition, addressed to this Court, which he claims

constitutes exceptional circumstances warranting this Court's intervention

to exercise its extraordinary power of revision, he is entitled to the reliefs

sought in the prayer.

When this matter was mentioned for support before us on

12.03.2019, Learned President's Counsel undertook to serve notice on the

Respondents as required by Rule 2(1) of the Court of Appeal (Appellate

Procedure) Rules 1990 since the Petitioner had prayed for interim relief.

4

On 28.03.2019, the Respondent was represented by the learned

Additional Solicitor General who raised an objection to the jurisdiction of

this Court to entertain the Petitioner's application for revision.

Parties have made oral submissions in support of their respective

positions and were afforded an opportunity to tender written submissions

along with the authorities that they rely on, in support of their respective

contentions that had been advanced before this Court during their oral

submissions.

Learned President's Counsel urged that he be heard in support of

his prayer for issuance of notice formally as well as for interim relief in

spite of the objection to the jurisdiction of the Respondent. This was

allowed and he made submissions in support of his application on

14.06.2019.

Learned President's Counsel, in support of his position that the

petition of the Petitioner discloses a prima facie easel serious matter to be

considered by this Court, submitted that;

a. the impugned order of the Permanent High Court at Bar is

palpably wrong as it erroneously decided that the issue whether

the allegation of the prosecution that the Petitioner committed

1/ financial and economic" offences, had already been decided by

the Chief Justice in nominating the three Judges of the High

Court of the Republic to the said Permanent High Court at Bar,

when in fact Section 12A(4)(a) of the Judicature (Amendment)

Act No 9 of 2018, had specified the applicable considerations in

5

making such nominations with no reference made in the said

Section to "financial and economic" offences,

b. the Permanent High Court at Bar had erroneously rejected the

Petitioner's contention that the only count against him in the

indictment is an allegation of abetment of an offence under the

Public Property Act No. 12 of 1982, and the 6th Schedule of the

Judicature (Amendment) Act No 9 of 2018 limits the scope of the

jurisdiction of a Permanent High Court at Bar to the offence of

abetment under the Penal Code in the offences that are specified

in the said schedule without making any reference to Section 102

of the Penal Code to the Offences Against Public Property Act

No. 12 of 1982, in the said schedule. However, the Permanent

High Court at Bar had accepted the validity of the same objection

in case No. HC/PTB/1/03/2018 on 07.03.2019 and therefore

when it rejected the Petitioner's objection it was "legally biased".

The objection to the jurisdiction of this Court in entertaining the

Petitioner's revision application by the Respondent was based on the

following grounds;

a. that the appellate jurisdiction over the Permanent High Court at

Bar "has been constitutionally taken away and given to the

Supreme Court with the enactment of special provisions to hear

and determine such appeals by the Supreme Court under the

Judicature Amendment Act",

6

b. /I any order made within jurisdiction by a court could be

challenged by way of an appeal by the designated appellate

tribunal and not otherwise. The extraordinary remedy of revision

cannot be used to challenge a decision when such challenge is

permitted by way of an appeal as explicitly provided by the

statute before the designated appellate forum, which, in this

instance, is the Supreme Court".

The Petitioner sought to counter this objection on the basis that

Article 138 vests this Court with powers of revision and since the "High

Court [also a Court of First Instance] has taken cognizance of this matter"

and therefore 1/... the Court of Appeal has power in revision to take

cognizance of this matter and to deal with it". It is also stressed by the

Petitioner that /I the powers of revision have never been transferred to the

Supreme Court". Therefore, the Petitioner contends that this Court has

jurisdiction to entertain his application for revision. He relied on the

judgments of Sirimavo Bandaranaike v Times of Ceylon (1995) 1 Sri L.R.

22, Rasheed Ali v Mohamed Ali and Others (1981) 1 Sri L.R. 262 to impress

upon this Court the extent to which the revisionary powers of the Court of

A ppeal extends to.

With the submissions made by the parties in mind, this Court would

now proceed to consider them in the light of the applicable legal

provisions .

The caption of the petition of the Petitioner in the instant application

reads as follows;

7

/I In the matter of an application for Revision

under and in terms of Article 138 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic

of Sri Lanka".

It is clear from the said citation that the Petitioner invokes the

revisionary jurisdiction that had been conferred upon this Court by virtue

of Article 138 of the Constitution, in seeking to have an order made by the

Permanent High Court at Bar in case No. HCjPTBj1j02j2018, in which

the Petitioner is named as the 1st Accused set aside. The impugned order

was pronounced by the said Permanent High Court at Bar in relation to a

preliminary objection to its jurisdiction to try the Petitioner upon the

indictment it had taken cognizance of. The Permanent High Court at Bar,

by the said order marked P2, had overruled the objection to its jurisdiction

by the Petitioner and thereafter proceeded to fix the matter for trial.

The objection to the jurisdiction raised by the learned Additional

Solicitor General against entertaining the Petitioner's application is

founded on the argument that the right of appeal conferred upon an

Accused against any Judgment, sentence or order made by a Permanent

High Court at Bar requires that such an appeal must be made to the

Supreme Court as per the statutory provisions contained in Section 12B (1)

of the Judicature (Amendment) Act No. 9 of 2018. Learned Additional

Solicitor General further argued that this Court therefore has no appellate

jurisdiction over any Judgment, sentence and order made by a Permanent

High Court at Bar that had been established under Section 12A (l)(a) of the

said amendment and this position applies to the power of revision of the

Court of Appeal, as well.

8

In VIew of the nature of the objection raised by the learned

Additional Solicitor General, this Court must therefore decide at the outset

whether it has been invested with appellate jurisdiction over the

Permanent High Court at Bar under Article 138 and whether it could

entertain an application for revision against an order of the said Court.

Article 138, in its original form in the 1978 Constitution, defined the

nature of the jurisdiction it had conferred upon the Court of Appeal as /I an

appellate jurisdiction for the correction of all errors in fact or in law which shall be

committed by any Court of First Instance, tribunal or other institution". The said

Article also stated that the Court of Appeal had the power of "sole and

exclusive cognizance, by way of appeal, revision ... of all prosecutions".

A Plain reading of the said Article indicates that the appellate

jurisdiction of this Court which could only be exercised over all errors in

fact or in law, in respect of 1/ any Court of First Instance, tribunal or other

institution". But the Constitution did not specify what those Courts of

First Instance, tribunal or other institutions are. This is significant in view

of Article 105 where the Constitution identified the institutions for the

administration of justice which protect, vindicate and enforce the right of

the People as;

(a) the Supreme Court of the Republic of Sri Lanka

(b) the Court of Appeal of the Republic of Sri Lanka

(c) the High Court of the Republic of Sri Lanka and such other

Courts of First Instance, Tribunals or such institutions as

Parliament may from time to time ordain and establish.

9

It is noted that the words "High Court of the Republic of Sri Lanka"

is not included in Article 138. However, Section 2 of the Judicature Act No.

2 of 1978 used the identical phrase as it reads thus;

liThe Courts of First Instance for the administration of justice

in the Republic of Sri Lanka shall be -

(a) the High Courts of the Republic of Sri Lanka;

(b) the District Courts;

(c) the small claims Courts;

(d) the Magistrate's Courts;

(e) the Primary Courts."

Section 14 of the Judicature Act conferred a right to appeal upon any

person "who stands convicted of any offence by the High Court" to the

Court of Appeal. Section 331(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.

15 of 1979 provided the manner in which such right to appeal could be

exercised.

The Court of Appeal was mandated to exercise the appellate

jurisdiction which Article 138 had conferred on it II subject to the provisions of

the Constitution or of any other law". In Martin v Wijewardena (1989) 2 Sri

L.R. 409, the Supreme Court demarcated the scope of Article 138 on

following terms;

II it is not possible to accept the contention that there

is implied in Article 138 an unfettered "RIGHT OF

APPEAL" to the Court of Appeal. Nor, is it possible to

10

accept the contention that this alleged "RIGHT OF

APPEAL" under this Article 138 is only fettered to

the extent provided for in the Constitution or other

Law. An Appeal is a Statutory Right and must be

expressly created and granted by statute. It cannot be

implied. Article 138 is only an enabling Article and it

confers the jurisdiction to hear and determine appeals

to the Court of Appeal. The right to avail of or take

advantage of that jurisdiction is governed by the

several statutory provisions in various Legislative

Enactments. That is to say, for appeals from the

regular courts, in the Judicature Act, and the

Procedural Laws pertaining to those courts"

Thus the Legislature by enacting these specific statutory provisions

that are contained in Sections 2 and 14 of the Judicature Act and Section

331 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, had enabled the Court of

Appeal to exercise its appellate jurisdiction over any Judgment, sentence

and order of the High Court of the Republic.

The order against which the Petitioner had invoked revisionary

powers of this Court is not an order made by the High Court of the

Republic, but by the Permanent High Court at Bar, established under

Section 4A of the Judicature (Amendment) Act No. 9 of 2018. The

Petitioner's position is that the Permanent High Court at Bar is created

from the High Court of the Provinces that is established under Article 154P

under the Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution.

11

In this context, it is helpful, if we devote some space in this

judgment to trace the transformation of the character of the High Court of

the Republic, after its creation by Article 105 and Section 2 of the

Judicature Act, with added Courts and expanded jurisdictions to it due to

several Constitutional and statutory provisions which were subsequently

enacted by the Parliament.

The Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution created the High

Court of the Province under Article 154P(1). The High Court of the

Province is clearly a Court which was also conferred with original criminal

jurisdiction and was empowered to exercise the said jurisdiction

concurrent to the original island -wide criminal jurisdiction of the High

Court of the Republic. A significant difference between the two Courts is

that the High Court of the Province was conferred with original criminal

jurisdiction in relation to the offences that are committed within that

particular province within which the High Court of the Province was

established as per Article 154P(3)(a). There is no such geographical

limitation that was imposed on the High Court of the Republic.

The High Court of the Province was also invested with appellate

and revisionary jurisdiction over convictions, sentences and orders of the

Magistrate's and Primary Courts which are situated within the Province,

by Article 154P(3)(b).

Article 154P(6) enabled a party to lodge an appeal to the Court of

Appeal against /I a final order, judgment or sentence" of a High Court of the

12

Province. The High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19

of 1990 laid down the applicable appellate procedure. However, any

judgment, sentence or order made by the High Court of the Province, in

exercising its original criminal jurisdiction under Article 154P(3)(a), is left

out from the Article 154P(6) which enabled an aggrieved party to lodge an

appeal to the Court of Appeal.

With the introduction of the High Court of the Provinces into the

judicial hierarchy by the Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution, the

Legislature had simultaneously made amendments to Article 138, which

laid down the jurisdiction of this Court, to include the newly established

High Court of the Province under its appellate jurisdiction by insertion of

the words "High Court, in the exercise of its appellate or original

jurisdiction". The Supreme Court considered this question in its judgment

of Wickramasekera v Officer-in-Charge, Police Station, Ampara (2004) 1

Sri L.R. 257, and reiterated the position that Article 138 is "not an entrenched

jurisdiction" and the statutory provisions contained therein are only

"enabling provisions" which had the character of permitting the omitted

details of importance to be carried out by means of subsequent provisions

provided for that purpose included High Court of the Province under the

appellate jurisdiction of this Court as it was observed by their Lordships in

the said judgment that;

"Article 138 of the Constitution was amended by the

Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution by the

substitution of the words II committed by any Court of

First Instance" of the words /I committed by the High

Court, in the exercise of its appellate or original

13

jurisdiction or by any Court of First Instance, /I thus

incorporating the decisions of the High Court in the

exercise of its appellate or original jurisdiction, being

amenable to the appellate jurisdiction of the Court of

Appeal. /I

The additional provisions, which were necessary for the effective

functioning of the newly conferred appellate jurisdiction of the High Court

of the Province were brought in by way of the High Court of the Provinces

(Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990.

Prior to the Thirteenth Amendment, only the Courts of First

Instance, tribunals and other institutions were subject to the appellate

jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal. There was no dispute that the Court of

Appeal was empowered to exercise its jurisdiction "by way of appeat

revision and restitutio in integrum" over such entities. Under the Thirteenth

Amendment the High Court of a Province is vested with powers of appeal

as well as revision, a jurisdiction that it exercised concurrent to the

jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal, and therefore the High Court of the

Provinces is not only a Court exercising original jurisdiction but also a

Court with appellate powers. Hence, by a consequential amendment to

Article 138(1), that Court also has been made subject to the appellate

jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal. The amendment provides inter alia that

"the Court of Appeal shall have and exercise ... an appellate jurisdiction for

the correction of all errors ... which shall be committed by the High Court,

in the exercise of its appellate or original jurisdiction".

14

Learned Additional Solicitor General's contention is that Article 138

made no specific reference to the Permanent High Court at Bar at all and

therefore, this Court clearly has no jurisdiction over it either by way of an

appeal addressed to it or by way of revision.

Learned President's Counsel sought to counter this position by

making reference to Section 12A(1)(a) of the Judicature (Amendment) Act

No.9 of 2018, in support of his position that the Permanent High Court at

Bar is only another division of the High Court of the Province, established

under Article 154P, and it had already been placed under appellate

jurisdiction of this Court by the judicial precedents of the Supreme Court.

He submitted that the Permanent High Court at Bar therefore is amenable

to the appellate jurisdiction of this Court.

In view of these submissions, the fundamental issue before this

Court is whether the reference to the /I High Court, ... /1 as found in

Article 138, is meant to include the Permanent High Court at Bar as well

among the already recognised group of inferior Courts which are subject

to the appellate jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal.

This Court has no power to provide an interpretation to the said

reference to "High Court" as found in Article 138, in view of the 1/ sole and

exclusive jurisdiction" conferred upon the Supreme Court by Article 125,

by which only the apex Court could hear and determine any question

related to the interpretation of the Constitution. Whether the said reference

includes the High Court of the Republic, the High Court of the Province

established under Article 154P, the High Court exercising jurisdiction

under Special Provisions Act Nos. 10 of 1996 and 54 of 2006 or the

15

Permanent High Court at Bar as the Petitioner contends, therefore lies

beyond the jurisdiction of this Court. Instead, it could only seek guidance

from the Superior Court in the form of its judicial pronouncements and

thereby venture to consider the question in the light of the general

statutory scheme.

The only statutory clue on this issue would be that the appeals

against the determinations of the Trial at Bar, the High Courts that exercise

jurisdiction under Act Nos. 10 of 1996 and 54 of 2006, should be made to

the Supreme Court. The appeals from the Permanent High Court at Bar

also should be made to the Supreme Court. Appeals from the High Court

of the Republic are made to the Court of Appeal through Section 14 of the

Judicature Act and Section 331 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act and

apparently not under Article 138.

When viewed in this perspective, it would appear that the term

"High Court" in Article 138, appears to be in relation to the High Court of

the Province established under Article 154P(1) when it exercises its

appellate jurisdiction.

Reverting to the primary issue before this Court whether the

reference to the /I... High Court, ... " found in Article 138, is meant to

include the Permanent High Court at Bar into the scope of the appellate

jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal it is noted that the Permanent High

Court at Bar is invested only with original jurisdiction. The High Court of

the Province had its original criminal jurisdiction restricted to the Province

in respect of which it had been set up as per Article 154P(3)(a). In contrast,

the Permanent High Court at Bar exercises not only island-wide original

16

criminal jurisdiction but also it could exercise jurisdiction in respect of

offences that were committed 1/ outside the territory of Sri Lanka" as

Section 12A(2)(a) of the Judicature (Amendment) Act No.9 of 2018 has

specifically provided for.

The indictment on which the Petitioner is named as the 1st Accused

by the Hon. Attorney General, was presented to 1/ Q)c3~)C=;O oG)o)Q)C; 000

Q)g~(3)<9 ~)Qtj)O@6)(.j" or the Permanent High Court at Bar of the Western

Province. There is no dispute that the said Court, by taking cognizance of

the indictment so presented, is exercising original jurisdiction when it

proceeds to try the Petitioner and other Accused-Respondents.

The Supreme Court, in its determination of the Bill on the Judicature

(Amendment), (reported in Decisions of the Supreme Court on

Parliamentary Bills, Volume XIV at p.26) having identified an

inconsistency with the provisions in the Constitution, in the proposed

wording in Section 12A, had recommended that;

II ... if a jurisdiction is conferred on the High Court of

Provinces under Article 154P(3)(c) like in Act No. 10

of 1996 and Act No. 54 of 2006 this inconsistency

could be removed."

Section 12A of the Judicature (Amendment) Act had incorporated

these recommendations. It could well be that the Supreme Court had

considered the Permanent High Court at Bar as another division of the

High Court of the Province established under Article 154P and therefore

the said Court could not be considered as a new Court and is merely

conferred with additional jurisdiction as the situations that are

17

contemplated in the Act Nos. 16 of 1996 and 54 of 2006. The Supreme

Court, in determining the Constitutionality of the Judicature (Amendment)

Bill was of the view (at p.24) that /I Act No. 10 of 1996 and Act No. 54 of

2006 conferred additional jurisdiction on the High Court of the Province

under Article 154P(3)(c) but did not create or establish new Courts."

In these circumstances, even if the contention of the learned

President's Counsel that the said Permanent High Court at Bar is another

division of the High Court of the Province and not a distinct Court, is

found to be legally correct, then the provisions contained in Article 154P

indicates a contrary position. As already noted Article 154P(3)(a) confers

original criminal jurisdiction to a High Court established under Article

154P. However, Article 154P(6) left out mentioning subsection (3)(a) when

it made provisions to the effect that 1/ any person aggrieved by a final

order, judgment or sentence of any such Court, in the exercise of its

jurisdiction under paragraphs (3)(b) or (3)(c) or (4) may appeal therefrom

to the Court of A ppeal" . This legislative gap is filled by the provisions of

Section 12B of the Judicature (Amendment) Act No. 9 of 2018, with the

conferment of a right to appeal to the Supreme Court.

In view of this clear statutory limitation, no appeal lies to the Court

of Appeal, when a High Court of the Provinces, established under Article

154P, exercises its original criminal jurisdiction.

Learned Additional Solicitor General also submitted that the

Petitioner should have addressed his grievance, to the Supreme Court

since Section 12B of the Judicature (Amendment) Act No.9 of 2018 states

that any appeal from any Judgment, sentence or order by the Permanent

18

High Court at Bar " ... shall be made within twenty-eight days from the

pronouncement of such Judgment, sentence or order to the Supreme Court

"

Not only in the said Judicature (Amendment) Act No.9 of 2018,

does one find similar statutory provisions which mandates that such right

of appeal should be exercised by the Supreme Court. In respect of any

Judgment, sentence or order of the High Court at Bar, the right to appeal is

conferred upon the Supreme Court by virtue of Section 451(3) of the Code

of Criminal Procedure Act No 15 of 1979 as amended. Similar provisions

are found in Section 5 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special

Provisions) Act No. 10 of 1996 and Section 5C of the High Court of the

Provinces (Special Provisions) (Amendment) Act No. 54 of 2006 as well.

Learned President's Counsel in answer to this submission

contended that the power of revision conferred upon the Court of

Appeal by Article 138 remain unaltered and it is that power he relies on

in seeking relief.

In view of this submission, we must consider the argument of

the learned President's Counsel that the powers of revision of the Court of

Appeal have never been transferred to the Supreme Court. He relied on

the judgments of Sirimavo Bandaranaike v Times of Ceylon (supra) and

Rasheed Ali v Mohamed Ali and Others (supra).

Both these judgments are indeed pronouncements on the

revisionary jurisdiction of this Court. However, they could be

distinguished from the instant matter on a fundamental point. In this

matter the Petitioner seeks to invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of this

19

Court in order to challenge an order of the Permanent High Court at Bar,

having already sought intervention of the Supreme Court in respect of the

same impugned order by lodging a petition of appeal in the Permanent

High Court and also by lodging another petition of appeal directly to the

Supreme Court under SC Misc No. 04/2019.

The two judgments relied on by the Petitioner refer to situations

where the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal was invoked

against determinations made by District Courts. The Appellants anyway

had to come before the Court of Appeal as they had no right of appeal

directly to the Supreme Court in these circumstances.

The reason for seeking relief by way of revision in Sirimavo

Bandaranaike v Times of Ceylon was identified by Fernando J as follows;

"Insofar as a remedy in the District Court is

concerned, the general rule would apply that the judge

is functus officio and cannot review its own judgment.

However, Section 86 makes an exception, by

conferring jurisdiction on the District Court to set

aside a default judgment if it was flawed in procedural

aspects - but not on the merits. The necessary

implication of the grant of that jurisdiction is that the

District Court is not competent to review a default

judgment on the merits."

There was no right of appeal in relation to the matter before the

Supreme Court in Sirimavo Bandaranaike v Times of Ceylon (supra) and

the only remedy was revision to the Court of Appeal. But in this instance,

20

the Petitioner was mandated to lodge an appeal to the Supreme Court

which he did. However, he seeks to invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of

the Court of Appeal when he had already addressed a petition of appeal to

the Supreme Court in compliance with Section 12B(1) of the Judicature

(Amendment) Act No.9 of 2018. The situation before this Court is totally

different to the situation that arose for determination in Sirimavo

Bandaranaike v Times of Cey Ion.

The judgment of Rasheed Ali v Mohamed Ali and Others is also

clearly distinguishable as the matter before the Supreme Court was

decided on the basis that in that particular instance the law does not give

a right of appeal but makes the order of the lower Court final, then the

Court of Appeal may nevertheless exercise its powers of revision.

Here, in this situation, the Petitioner had exercised his right of appeal

to the Supreme Court by lodging two appeals and in addition, seeks to

invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of this Court as well.

The Petitioner's contention that in spite of the right of appeal to the

Supreme Court lithe powers of revision [ of the Court of Appeal] have

never been transferred to the Supreme Court" must be considered next.

In Abeygunasekera v Setunga and Others (1997) 1 Sri L.R. 62, the

Supreme Court recognised that II conceptually, the expression "appellate

jurisdiction" includes powers in appeal and revision".

It is not legally possible to create an artificial division of the

appellate powers of appeal and revision over any Judgment, sentence or

order made by the Permanent High Court at Bar by splitting them among

the Supreme Court and Court of Appeal. When Section 12B of the

21

Judicature (Amendment) Act No. 9 of 2018 specifically made provisions

that an appeal against any Judgment, sentence or order of the Permanent

High Court at Bar, should be made within the stipulated time frame to the

Supreme Court, it is not possible even to consider the position that the

Legislature had limited the apex Court's appellate jurisdiction only to

entertain an appeal against such Judgment, sentence or order and thereby

leaving the power of revision with the Court of Appeal under Article 138

as a residual jurisdiction.

Such an approach to the provisions of Section 12B, as proposed by

the Petitioner, would create a situation where the Court of Appeal, an

inferior Court to the Supreme Court, is conferred with power of revision

over conviction, sentence, or orders by the Permanent High Court at Bar,

whilst the apex Court could only hear appeals from such High Court.

Irrespective of the remedy through which a party seeks relief from

this Court, Article 138 specifies its core jurisdiction as /I... an appellate

jurisdiction for the correction of all errors in fact or law ... /I. Article 127(1),

in specifying the appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court, states that it

is " ... for the correction of all errors in fact or law ... /I. One finds identical

wording has been used by the Parliament in describing the jurisdiction of

both Courts.

In the judgment of Albert v Veeriahpillai (1981) 1 Sri L.R. 110, the

Supreme Court expressed its determination on appellate jurisdiction of

that Court in the following terms;

"Article 118 of the Constitution provides that 'the

Supreme Court shall be the highest and final Court

22

of record in the Republic and shall, subject to the

provisions of the Constitution, exercise, inter alia

final appellate jurisdiction. "Appellate jurisdiction

may be exercised by way of appeal or revision.

Article 128 of the Constitution prescribes how the

appellate jurisdiction of this Court is invoked by

way of appeal. The leave of this Court or of the

Court of Appeal is a sine qua non for a party to

come to this Court by way of appeal. But once

leave is granted, on 'whatever ground it be, the

appeal is before this Court and this Court is seized

of the appeal. Its appellate jurisdiction extends to

the correction of all errors in fact or in law which

shall be committed by the Court of Appeal or any

Court of First Instance .(vide Art. 127 of the

Constitution). Therefore, it is competent for this

Court to permit parties to bring to its notice errors

of law or of fact and raise new contentions or new

points of law, or sue motu to raise them if there is

proper foundation for them in the record. Thus,

this Court will allow an appellant to urge before it

grounds of appeal not set out in the application for

leave if the material on record warrants the

determination of same. This Court is not '

hamstrung by the fact that the Court of Appeal had

not granted leave to appeal on the ground urged

before the Supreme Court. This Court however,

23

doing justice between the parties, may not permit a

party to raise a new point if the other party has

had no proper notice of the new ground, or would

suffer grave prejudice by the belated stage at which

it is raised. The appellate jurisdiction of this Court

is very wide in its amplitude, as it should be, it

being the final Court of Appeal. The narrow

construction contended for by Counsel erodes its

width and usefulness" (emphasis added)

The judgment of Wadigamangawa and Others v Wimalasuriya

(1981) 1 Sri L.R. 287 is a judgment where seven Justices of the Supreme

Court defined the appellate jurisdiction of the apex Court as follows;

" The Constitution has made the Supreme Court

the final Appellate Court (Article 11S(c)) and it is

the final Court of Civil and Criminal appellate

jurisdiction in the Republic (Article 127 (1)). It has

sole and exclusive cognizance by way of appeal

'from any order judgment, decree or sentence

made by the Court of Appeal" (Article 127(2))."

It was also held that:

"Article 127(2) grants a right of appeal, inter alia,

from any order. Interlocutory orders are therefore

appealable in terms of Article 127(2): There is

24

another fundamental and vital difference. Section

82A of the Order in Council grants a right of

appeal direct to the Supreme Court. The

Constitution has prescribed the converse - it is

indirect. An appeal lies from a final order,

judgment, decree or sentence of the Court of

Appeal only if that Court grants leave to appeal to

the Supreme Court (Article 128(1)), or else, where

the Court of Appeal has refused to grant such leave

the Supreme Court may grant special leave to

appeal (Article 128(2). Article 128(2) refers

expressly to an interlocutory order as well, a type

of order not referred to in Article 128(1). II

There are other reasons to hold that the Petitioner's contention is not

legally correct, in addition to the jurisdictional aspect of the Supreme

Court. One such reason is evident from the relevant provisions of Section

12B(1) of the Judicature (Amendment) Act No.9 of 2018. This section,

whilst investing a right of appeal on the Petitioner to the Supreme Court

from any Judgment, Sentence and Order, it also specifies that such an

appeal" ... shall be heard by a Bench of not less than five Judges of the said

Court, which was nominated by the Chief Justice."

The important feature to be noted in this Section is that there is no

right of appeal to the Court of Appeal. In effect, an accused who had been

tried by a Permanent High Court at Bar has only one right of appeal

whereas an accused who had been tried by the High Court of the Republic

25

has two, firstly to the Court of Appeal and therefrom to the Supreme

Court.

These legislative provisions make it clear that the Legislature had

consciously limited the right of appeal from a Permanent High Court at

Bar to only one instance. The divisional bench of the Supreme Court

nominated by the Chief Justice is placed under a duty in respect of such an

appeal as it 1/ shall be heard and disposed of, expeditiously."

If the Petitioner's contention is accepted, then, this Court in

exercising its revisionary powers under Article 138 could consider the

validity of a Judgment, Sentence and Order of a Permanent High Court

and make its own determination on it. Then, the Petitioner could appeal

against that determination of this Court to the Supreme Court. Thus,

conceding to the application of the Petitioner by which he invokes the

revisionary jurisdiction of this Court under Article 138, this Court, in

effect, creates another opportunity for him to have such a Judgment,

sentence or order of the Permanent High Court at Bar reviewed by an

appellate Court, circumventing the clear Legislative intent of restricting

the Petitioner's right of appeal only to the Supreme Court. When there is

clear and unambiguous expression of legislative intent in restricting the

right of appeal only to the Supreme Court, and thereby limiting the right

of appeal only to a single instance, this Court cannot and should not

recognise such an attempt for an indirect review by this Court without

clear statutory provisions indicating such a shift in the Legislative intent.

In the absence of any statutory provisions to that effect, recognizance of

such an indirect review would certainly undermine the clear and

unambiguous intention of the Parliament.

26

In addition, the Petitioner's contention is essentially flawed when

viewed from the perspective of administration of Justice in its hierarchical

setting. If the Petitioner's contention is legally correct then he is entitled to

a right of appeal to the Supreme Court and also to invoke revisionary

powers of this Court under Article 138. The Petitioner has already invoked

appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court. If this Court too entertains his

revision application and decides to interfere with the impugned order,

while the apex Court sees no merit in his appeal, then there exists two

conflicting pronouncements on the same judgment, sentence or order of

the Permanent High Court at Bar. It is obvious, by virtue of the superiority

of the Supreme Court divisional bench, its judgments prevails over, and

the determination by this Court is then left in a suspended state, having no

prospect of its enforcement until and unless it is set aside by the superior

Court. Even if an aggrieved party were to appeal against such

determination made by this Court to the Supreme Court, it had already

made a determination on the same matter when the Petitioner has

exercised his right to appeal under Section 12B(1) of the said Act.

Therefore, the contention of the Petitioner is clearly not legally

tenable, in view of the well defined appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme

Court.

Thus, it is clear that when the right of appeal is conferred on the

Supreme Court, the powers of revision could not be vested within an

inferior Court.

The Supreme Court in Martin v Wijewardena (supra) observed that

27

"The words ' Subject to the provIsIons of the

Constitution or of any Law' are a limitation on the

powers of the Court of Appeal. They do not constitute

a limitation on the Rights of an Appellan t. If

Hence, it is our considered view that Section 12B imposes a

limitation on the appellate jurisdiction of this Court, when the legislature

in its wisdom conferred such powers on the apex Court, limiting the

Petitioner's right of appeal only to that Court.

Somewhat a similar situation to the instant application of the

Petitioner arose for consideration before this Court in Senanayake and

Others v Kohen and Others (2002) 3 Sri L.R. 381.

In this situation, the Petitioner invoked the revisionary jurisdiction

of this Court against an order made by the "Commercial High Court". In

the said case the Petitioner had already filed an appeal addressed to the

Supreme Court under Section 5 of Act No. 10 of 1996 as the Petitioner did

in the matter before us. The reason the said Petitioner invoked revisionary

powers of this Court was " ... that there is no provision to obtain a stay

order from the Supreme Court in a situation where an appeal is made to

the Supreme Court from a judgment of the Commercial High Court and

therefore this Court should stay the operation of the judgment until the

Supreme Court decides the appeal."

Having raised the question "Whether this Court has revisionary

jurisdiction in respect of orders and judgments of the Commercial High

Court ?", their Lordships, however, decided the application before them

on the basis that since the Petitioner did not invite the Court of Appeal to

28

.

examine the validity of the order that had been challenged before the

Supreme Court, the Court of Appeal could not consider the question of the

validity of the impugned judgment.

In this situation Amaratunga J posed another question 1/ .is it the

function of this Court to examine the legality of the judgment of the

Commercial High Court to satisfy itself that the petitioner is entitled to the

relief prayed for 7", and thereafter proceeded to provide an answer as

follows;

"If this Court ventures into such an exercise it is an

indirect usurpation of the exclusive jurisdiction

conferred on the Supreme Court by the Legislature. It

is therefore, my considered view that it is not proper

for this Court to examine the legality of the judgment

of the Commercial High Court even for the limited

purpose of satisfying itself that the petitioner is

entitled to the relief prayed for."

In relation to the instant application by the Petitioner, it is our

considered view that this Court was not conferred with appellate

jurisdiction over the Permanent High Court at Bar that had been

established under Section 12A(1)(a) of the Judicature (Amendment) Act

No.9 of 2018.

The Supreme Court in Martin Vs. Wijewardena (supra) stated that;

II Article 138 is an enabling provision which creates

and grants jurisdiction to the Court of Appeal to hear

appeals from Courts of First Instance, Tribunals and

29

,

Other Institutions. It defines and delineates the

jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal. It does not, nor

indeed does it seek to, create or grant rights to

individuals viz-a-viz appeals. It only deals with the

jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal and its limits and

its imitations and nothing more. It does not expressly

nor by implication create or grant any rights in respect

of individuals. "

Therefore, the preliminary objection raised on behalf of the

Respondent by the learned Additional Solicitor General is entitled to

succeed. The petition of the Petitioner is hereby dismissed for want of

jurisdiction.

In view of this determination the issuance of formal notice on the

Respondent and the Petitioner's entitlement for interim relief does not

arise for consideration.

Considering the nature of the questions of law that were decided in

this application, we order no costs.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

ARIUNA OBEYESEKERE, I.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

30