IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal against an

order of the High court under Sec. 331

of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act

No. 15 of 1979.

HC: KALUTARA 134/02

B.K.C. RUWAN KUMARA

W.P.A. KUMARA WEERASINGHE

(Appellants)

CA NO: 206/2013

Before

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General's Department

Colombo 12.

(Respondent)

: P.R. Walgama, J

: S. Devika de L. Tennekoon, J

Counsel : Indika Mallawarachchi for the 1st Accused -

Appellant.

: Dr. Ranjith Fernando for the 2 nd Accused -

Appellant.

1

Argued on

Decided on

: 05.07.2016

: 17.03.2017

CASE NO- CA- 206 /2013- JUDGMENT- 17.03.2017

P.R. Walgama, J

The Appellants are before this Court aggrieved by the

judgment dated 11.06.2013, passed by the Learned High

Court Judge, in the Provincial High Court holden at

Kalutara.

A conspectus of the relevan t facts are stated here

under;

As per indictment the Accused - Appellants were indicted

on the following counts to vit;

That on or about the 26.03.2000, the both Accused

named In the indictment committed robbery of Rs.

37,579 from the Pelpola Co operative Bank, and thereby

had committed an offence punishable under Section 4 of

the Public Properties Act No. 12 of 1982 read with

Section 32 of the Penal Code.

That the 1st and the 2nd Accused along with one

Edirisinghe Aratchige Gemunu Ranjith who IS now

2

deceased, possessed a gun without a license had thereby

committed an offence punishable under Section 22(1) and

22(3) of the Firearms Ordinance No. 33 of 1916 as

amended by Act No. 22 of 1996.

That the Accused - Appellants along with the deceased

as stated above did possess a hand bomb and there

by had committed an offence punishable under Section

2(I)(b) of the Offensive Weapons Act No. 18 of 1966.

The Court below on a scrutiny of evidence adduced,

held the Accused - Appellants herein, to be guilty of the

charges levelled against them and imposed the following

sentence;

On count No.1, 20 years Rigorous Imprisonment and fine

of Rs. 112,737, with a default term of 6 months, and

on the count No.2 had imposed life Imprisonment, and

on the count No.3, 10 years Rigorous Imprisonment.

Being aggrieved by the sentence above the Accused-

Appellants had appealed to this court to have the

conviction and the sentence set aside. It IS contended

by the Counsel for the 1st Accused - Appellant that she

will not challenge the conviction and sentence in respect

3

of count Nos 1 and 3, but only challenge the conviction

and sentence imposed on the 2nd count.

The counsel for the 2nd Accused - Appellant, submits that

he will concur with the submissions of the Counsel

for the 1 st Accused - Appellant.

The principle ground of appeal raised by the Counsel

for the Accused - Appellants is that the pistol allegedly

used by the 1st Accused - Appellant was not produced

at the trial court below.

As per verSlOn of the prosecution and the evidence

elicited at the trial it was revealed that the police

recovered a pistol from the trouser pocket of the 1 st

Accused - Appellant at the time of arrest. Thereafter the

said pistol was handed over to the police which was

never produced at the said trial. It was the evidence

of the Officer In charge that the pistol was handed

over to the police reserve but had been misplaced and

that an inquiry was pending as to the missing item.

It IS also admitted by the prosecution that the said

gun was missing before it was sent to the Government

4

Analyst Department for examination, and hence there

was no report being produced at the trial.

Thus in the above setting it is the contention of the

counsel for the Accused - Appellants that without the

production 1n 1ssue the trial court should not have

convicted the Accused - Appellants of the 2nd count to

vito for possessing a firearm.

It is salient to note that the identity of the accused

and the fact that the Accused - Appellants used a pistol

to threaten the complainant to rob the Bank has been

established by cogent evidence.

Further it is intensely relevant to note that the Accused

- Appellants were attached to the Ganemulla Army Camp

and the alleged gun has been removed from the

armoury of the above camp.

To cap it all it is to be noted that the 2nd Accused-

Appellant was attached to the said armoury. It 1S

contended by the counsel for the Respondent, that the

end result of a non production of any item used in

the comm1SSlOn of the alleged cnme should not defeat

the case of the prosecution.

5

r,1t

fI

In dealing with the case of SUDUBANDA.VS.AG- (1998-

3SLR- 375) wherein it was held that if court may

requ1re the production of the material object for

inspection, and that nonproduction of a material object

is not necessarily fatal to a conviction.

The said principle has been recognised by His Lordship

F.N.D.Jayasuriya in the case of SUDUWELI KONDAGE

SARATH AND ANOTHER. VS. THE ATIORNEY GENERAL

-decided on 26.10.1998. His Lordship has opined that

the lay witnesses have described the instruments which

were in the hands of the accused, and held that the

conviction was well sustained.

The Learned DSG has adverted this Court to the case

of RATNAYAKE MUDUYANSELAGE RATNAPALA- decided on

27.05.1999 which stated thus;

"the best evidence rule and the rule enshrined 1n

Section 91 of the Evidence Ordinance excluding parol

evidence 1S only applicable to documents and not to

material objects." (emphasis added)

6

Hence it IS to be mentioned that the contentions

advanced by the counsel for the Accused - Appellant

are devoid of merit.

Thus analysed, this court IS of the VIew that the

submissions of the counsel for the Accused - Appellants

enter into the realm of total insignificance.

For the forgoing reasons we are of the view and are

persuaded to dismiss the appeal.

Accordingly appeal IS dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

s. Devika de L. Tennekoon, J I agree,

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

7