IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

An appeal filed in terms of

Section 331 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of

1979.

Hon. Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

C.A. Case No. HCC 080/21 Complainant

High Court of Monaragala Vs.

Case No. 018/16

1. Batahira Arachilage

Samarasiri alias Samare

Mama

2. Dissanayaka Mudiyanselage

Upul

Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

Batahira Arachilage Samarasiri

alias Samare Mama

1stAccused Appellant

Vs.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Complainant-Respondent

2

BEFORE : K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J (P/CA)

WICKUM A. KALUARACHCHI, J

COUNSEL : Kapila Waidyaratne, PC with Nipuna Jagodarachchi

and Akkila Jayasundara for the Accused-Appellant

Shaminda Wickrama, SC for the Respondent

WRITTEN SUBMISSION

TENDERED ON : 01.04.2022 (On behalf of the Accused-Appellant)

25.07.2022 (On behalf of the Respondent)

ARGUED ON : 28.07.2022

DECIDED ON : 31.08.2022

WICKUM A. KALUARACHCHI, J. The accused-appellant and the second accused were indicted in the

High Court of Monaragala on the following charges.

1. On or about 22-05-2012, the appellant caused the death of one

Ranjith Dharmasiri, thereby committed the offence of murder

punishable under section 296 of the penal Code.

2. In the course of the same transaction, the second accused aided

and abetted the appellant to commit the offence stated in (1) above,

and as a result, the offence stated in (1) above was committed, and

thereby committed an offence punishable under section 296 of the

Penal Code read with section 102.

3. In the course of the same transaction, the appellant attempted to

commit the murder of one Deepa Lalanthika, thereby committed

the offence of attempted murder punishable under section 300 of

the Penal Code.

3

4. In the course of the same transaction, the appellant caused hurt to

one Maliduwa Liyanage Wimalawathi thereby committed an offence

punishable under section 315 of the penal Code.

5. In the course of the same transaction, the appellant caused hurt to

one Hewapuwak Pitiyage Achini Iresha thereby committed an

offence punishable under section 315 of the Penal Code.

The second accused was acquitted in terms of section 200(1) of the

Code of Criminal Procedure Act after the prosecution case was closed.

After the trial, the learned High Court Judge convicted the 1st

accussed-appellant for 1st, 3rd, 4th and 5th counts. Accordingly, the 1st

accused-appellant (hereinafter referred to as the appellant) was

sentenced to death on the first count. Further, On the 3rd count, he

was sentenced to a term of 10 years rigorous imprisonment and to pay

a fine of Rs.10,000/- carrying a default sentence of 6 months simple

imprisonment and on the 4th count to a term of 1-year rigorous

imprisonment and to pay a fine of Rs.5000/- carrying a default

sentence of 6 months simple imprisonment. On the 5th count he was

sentenced to a term of 1-year rigorous imprisonment and to pay a fine

of Rs. 5000/- carrying a default sentence of 6 months simple

imprisonment.

This appeal is preferred against the said convictions and sentences.

Written submissions on behalf of both parties have been filed prior to

the hearing. At the hearing, the learned Presidents Counsel for the

appellant and the learned State Counsel for the respondent made oral

submissions.

The deceased, Ranjith Dharmasiri lived with his wife, Deepa

Lalanthika (PW1), his daughter, Achini Ishara (PW2) and his mother,

Wimalawathi (PW3). On the date of the incident, the deceased, PW1

and PW2 slept in separate rooms in the same house, while PW3 slept

4

on the sofa in the living room. As a result of the incident occurred on

that day, PW1 sustained a head injury that endangered her life, PW2

and PW3 sustained injuries caused by a blunt weapon. The deceased

died due to craniocerebral injuries caused by a weapon with a cutting

edge.

Grounds of Appeal

The learned Presidents Counsel for the appellant advanced his

arguments on the following grounds.

1. The Appellants presence and identification have not been

proved beyond a reasonable doubt.

2. The improbability of the prosecution evidence.

3. Not considering the inter-se and per-se contradictions.

4. Not considering the dock statement and the defence case.

The learned Presidents Counsel made oral submissions in length on

the aforesaid grounds indicating the relevant items of evidence.

In reply, the learned State Counsel for the respondent stated that the

following facts; outside lights were turned on, the inside lights were

turned off, the places where the deceased and the witnesses slept, and

that the witnesses knew the appellant for a considerable period were

not in dispute.

The learned State Counsel also contended that there was no time for

the witnesses to falsely implicate the accused or fabricate a story

because the witnesses have made their statements to the police

promptly. The learned State Counsel pointed out the relevant items of

evidence and contended that, despite a few discrepancies and

shortcomings, it appears that prosecution witnesses are truthful when

the entire evidence is considered. Therefore, he contended that no

reasonable doubt would be cast on the prosecution case.

5

Evaluation of the Dock Statement

In dealing with the grounds of appeal urged by the learned Presidents

Counsel for the appellant, I wish to consider first, the ground of not

considering the dock statement. It is to be noted, that the appellant

made a short unsworn statement from the dock and there was no

other evidence led on behalf of the defence. Therefore, the defence

case has been confined to the dock statement. Also, it is to be noted

that the learned Judge who delivered the judgment has heard only the

evidence of the last prosecution witness namely the court interpreters

evidence and the dock statement. All other evidence was led before his

predecessors.

Undisputedly, the learned High Court Judge has stated only one

sentence about the dock statement in his entire judgment. On page 6

of the judgment, the learned Judge stated that the appellant had

made a dock statement on 11.01.2021. Apart from that, nothing was

mentioned in the judgment about the dock statement or the defence

case. That is why the learned Presidents Counsel contended that the

dock statement has never been considered and for this reason alone

the impugned judgment should not be allowed to stand.

Submitting the case of Kumara De Silva and 2 Others v. Attorney

General (2010) 2 Sri L.R. 169 the learned State Counsel contended

that the learned High Court Judge has impliedly rejected the dock

statement. It is correct that in the aforesaid case, it was held that

Even though the learned trial Judge has not formally rejected the

above dock statements in so many words, a perusal of page 266 of the

original record would reveal that impliedly she has rejected the dock

statements. The contention of the learned State Counsel was that by

stating

(Last

page of the judgment) the learned High Court Judge has impliedly

6

rejected the dock statement and thus no prejudice has been caused to

the appellant.

Section 4(d) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political

Rights (ICCPR) Act No. 56 of 2007 states that A person charged of a

criminal offence under any written law shall be entitled to examine or

to have examined the witnesses against him and to obtain the

attendance of witnesses on his behalf, under the same conditions as

witnesses called against him. In the instant action, the appellant did

not call any witnesses on his behalf. He has chosen to present the

defence case by making a dock statement.

It was held in P. P. Jinadasa v. The Attorney General - C.A. 167/2009,

decided on 21.11.2011, that the Court must consider the dock

statement as evidence subject to the infirmities that the dock

statement is not under oath and the dock statement is not tested by

cross-examination.

In the case before us, the appellant denied his involvement in the

incident in his short dock statement which amounts to an alibi. The

said position taken up by the dock statement has been put to the PW1

and PW2 in cross-examination (see pages 139 and 185 of the appeal

brief). So, it appears that the appellant had maintained one position

throughtout the case. However, not a single word is stated in the

judgment in analyzing the dock statement. At least, there is no single

word in the impugned judgment whether the said dock statement is

accepted or rejected.

In the case of Karunadasa v. O.I.C. Motor Traffic Division, Police

Station, Nittambuwa (1987) 1 Sri L.R. 155 it was held that I accept

the evidence of the prosecution, I disbelieve the defence. is

insufficient to discharge the duty cast on the Judge. Section 283(1) of

7

the Code of Criminal Procedure Act makes it imperative to give

reasons in the judgment. In the instant action, with regard to the

defence version not only the reasons were not given to reject it, it was

not even mentioned whether the defence is believed or disbelieved.

In the circumstances, I regret that I am unable to accept the argument

of the learned State Counsel that the learned Judges statement that

facts were not disclosed in the trial to draw the inference that no

other person other than the accused had committed the offence is an

implied rejection of the dock statement. If the learned Judge has

stated in the judgment about the improbability of the defence version

or some other reason why the dock statement cannot be relied on but

did not specifically mention that he rejects the dock statement, it can

be assumed that the dock statement has been impliedly rejected. But

certainly, the aforesaid statement in the judgment pointed out by the

learned State Counsel does not imply a rejection of the dock

statement. The learned trial Judge has come to the said finding by

analyzing only the prosecution evidence. Therefore, this is a judgment

given without considering the defence version.

In Pantis v. The Attorney General - (1998) 2 Sri L.R.148, it was held

that The burden of proof is always on the prosecution to prove its

case beyond reasonable doubt and no such duty is cast on the

accused and it is sufficient for the accused to give an explanation

which satisfies courts or at least is sufficient to create a reasonable

doubt as to the guilt.

In the case before us, the appellant has given an explanation although

it is a mere denial. Accepting or rejecting the said explanation is

entirely up to the learned trial Judge. However, the learned Judge

should set out reasons for his decision and should state in his

judgment whether he accepts the defence version or not. So this is a

8

judgment that was delivered without considering the defence case. As

stated previously, the dock statement must also be considered as

evidence subject to the aforesaid two infirmities. Since this is a

judgment given without analyzing the evidence adduced by both

parties, this cannot be considered as a legally sustainable judgment.

However, this court decided to consider the entire evidence in this

case, to determine whether the learned High Court Judges findings

could be allowed to stand.

Main Issue in the Appeal

Apart from the evidence of the doctors and other official witnesses,

PW1, PW2 and PW3 have given evidence in respect of the incidents

pertaining to the charges against the appellant.

The main contention of the learned Presidents Counsel for the

appellant and the main issue to be decided in this appeal is the

identity of the first accused-appellant. In other words, this court has

to see whether it has been proved beyond a reasonable doubt that the

appellant and no one else has committed the offences described in

charges 1, 3, 4 and 5.

At this stage, attention has to be drawn to the fact that the

Honourable Attorney General has indicted the second accused with

aiding and abetting the first accused to commit the murder. It should

also be noted that the second accused has been brought in as an

accused in this case not on the basis that he aided and abetted

without participating in the incident but as a person who participated

in the incident. PW3 stated in the history given to the doctor that two

persons had come inside the house. In addition, the learned

Presidents Counsel for the appellant pointed out that 2nd accuseds

statement in terms of section 127 of the Code of Criminal Procedure

Act had also been recorded.

9

The Count No. 5

The simple hurt charge in count number 5 has been brought against

the appellant for causing hurt to PW2. She has not seen who

assaulted her, according to her evidence. She said when she was

sleeping at night, she felt something cold on her head. When she

touched her head she felt wetness. Therefore, she did not see who

assaulted her. Only after the injury had been caused, she felt wetness

on her head, according to her evidence. Thereafter, she heard

someone threatening to kill them and she said that she recognized

that voice as Samare Mamas voice. PW2 identified the appellant as

the Samare Mama.

Voice identification would be considered later in this judgment. At this

stage, it is important to consider what PW2 has stated to the doctor

who examined her. What she told the doctor has been recorded in the

short history given by patient in the medico-legal report pertaining to

her and the said history was confirmed by the doctor when the doctor

testified. Although it is not stated in her evidence, PW2 has stated to

the doctor that she could not remember whether one person came or

two persons came. In addition, she stated that there was a person

who covered his face with a black cloth. Hence, it is apparent that the

person she recalls had covered his face with a black cloth. Also, it is

vital to be noted, at least, she has not stated to the doctor that

Samare Mama or any other known person came. She told the doctor

somebody came and hit ( ). Anyhow, even according

to her evidence, Samare Mama shouted just after she was injured but

there was no evidence who caused the injury to her. In addition, as

pointed out by the learned Presidents Counsel for the appellant, it is

apparent by perusing her evidence that she has not stated anywhere

that the person or persons came had entered her room. Also, in cross-

examination, she stated that the said shouting was heard from the

living room. (page 179 of the appeal brief). In the absence of any other

10

witnesss evidence as to who caused the injury to PW2, there is no

evidence that the appellant caused the injury to PW2. Therefore, I hold

that the learned High Court Judges decision to convict the appellant

for the 5th count is wrong.

The Count No. 3

Now, I proceed to consider the conviction in respect of the 3rd count.

Its an attempted murder charge based on the injury caused to PW1.

There is no issue regarding the nature of the injury that resulted in

attempted murder. The issue is regarding the identity of the person

who caused the injury. According to PW1s evidence, after she went to

sleep, someone came to her room and demanded money. She said that

she does not have any. She was then hit on her head. PW1 stated that

she recognized the person who hit her as Samare Mama by his voice.

So, the appellant has been identified by the voice only because she

said that there was no sufficient light to see and identify a person. The

relevant question and answer appear as follows:

: ?

: .

(Page 128 and 129 of the appeal brief)

PW1 stated further that she knew Samare Mama very well. Although

she said that she identified the appellant by his voice, she also stated

in evidence in chief that somebody demanded money from her.

,

. . (Page 73 of the

appeal brief). If the person demanded money was the Samare mama,

she could have said so without saying, somebody demanded money.

When she said somebody, it appears that she stated about an

unknown person. PW1 has also stated that she couldn't remember

whether one or two persons came. She could be believed if she said

she didn't see whether two persons or one person came. If she said

11

she couldn't identify the people who came, she could be believed. Also,

on an occasion where several people came and couldnt remember

exactly how many people came, that also could be accepted. However,

when she says she can't remember whether one or two persons came,

this is a statement thats little hard to believe because whether it was

one person or two is not a matter that can be forgotten.

Apart from these issues, the short history given by PW1 to the doctor

who examined her, casts serious doubt on her voice identification

evidence. PW1 has told the doctor that she was "assaulted with a

weapon by a known person." It is obvious, that if she had identified

the appellant by voice, she could have stated that "Samare Mama"

assaulted her because "Samare Mama" was a well-known person to

her and the other two witnesses as well.

The gravity of the said doubt would be bolstered by the evidence of

PW16, the doctor who examined PW1. Marking the medico-legal report

as P3, the doctor stated specifically that PW1 told him that the

assailant was a known person but she did not know his name (page

229 of the appeal brief). It is precisely clear that if the assailant was

the first accused-appellant, whom she referred to as "Samare Mama,"

she would have mentioned his name to the doctor and would not say

the name of the person is unknown because she knew him and his

name very well. In the circumstances, there is a reasonable doubt

whether the mention of appellants name was an afterthought.

The learned State Counsel appeared for the respondent argued that

no such contradiction was marked and omission was brought to the

notice of the court by the defence. It should be noted that in criminal

cases, the accused is not required to prove, disclose or explain

anything. His innocence is presumed by law until proven guilty. As

the aforesaid improbabilities or doubts have arisen from the evidence

12

presented by the prosecution itself, the court must consider them

whether or not they were pointed out by the defence.

Evidentiary value of Voice Identification

Under the aforesaid circumstances, I proceed to consider whether

voice identification could be accepted in this case. Following some

appellate court judgments in Sri Lanka and India, the learned High

Court Judge acted upon the voice identification evidence adduced in

this case to convict the appellant on all four counts against him. At

this juncture, it is pertinent to examine the law governing voice

identification.

In the Indian case of Dalbir Singh v. State of Haryana, Criminal

Appeal No. 899 of 2008 decided on 15th May 2008, the accused was

the grandson of the witness. Therefore, the voice identification was

accepted.

In Kedar Singh and Others v. State of Bihar, 1999 Cri L. J. 601, Jt

1998(9) SC 398 decided on 18th September 1997 although it is

mentioned that Identification possible by voice too, the court relied

on eye witnesss evidence stating that there was sufficient light to see

the incident.

In the case of Kishnia and Others v. State of Rajasthan Case No:

Appeal (crl) 120 of 1998 decided on 10th September 2004, voice

identification has been accepted. In this case, witnesses had previous

acquaintance with the appellants as their properties were situated

close to the field of the deceased. In the case before us also, appellant

was residing close to the place where the witnesses were residing but

the incident occurred when the witnesses were sleeping at night.

13

In Sri Lankan judgment Hatangalage Ariyasena v. The Attorney General

CA 68/2011 decided on 21st February 2013, the witness Kalyani was

living in her ancestral house and the accused was living in the same land.

So, it was held that Kalyani could identify accuseds voice. In this case,

the decision of the Indian case Kirpal Singh v. The State of Uttar Pradesh

- AIR 1965, 712 has been cited as follows: Where the accused is

intimately known to the witness and for more than a fortnight before the

date of the offence, he had met the accused on several occasions in

connection with the dispute, it cannot be said that identification of the

assailant by the witness from what he heard and observed was so

improbable.

The decision of the Indian case Nilesh Dinkar Paradkar v. State of

Maharashtra - Supreme Court Criminal Appeal No.537 of 2009

decided on 9th March 2011 appears as follows: In our opinion, the

evidence of voice identification is at best suspect, if not, wholly

unreliable. Accurate voice identification is much more difficult than

visual identification. It is prone to such extensive and sophisticated

tampering, doctoring and editing that the reality can be completely

replaced by fiction. Therefore, the courts have to be extremely

cautious in basing a conviction purely on the evidence of voice

identification. This Court, in a number of judgments emphasized the

importance of the precautions, which are necessary to be taken in

placing any reliance on the evidence of voice identification.

Also, in this case, what is stated in chapter 14 of Archbold Criminal

Pleading, Evidence and Practice with regard to evidence of voice

identification has been discussed as follows: It is emphasized that

voice identification is more difficult than visual identification.

Therefore, the precautions to be observed should be even more

stringent than the precautions which ought to be taken in relation to

14

visual identification. Speaking of lay listeners (including police

officers), it enumerates the factors which would be relevant to Judge

the ability of such lay listener to correctly identify the voices.

In the case of Gajraj Singh v. The State of Madhya Pradesh, Criminal

Appeal No. 1645/2003, decided on 28th November 2014, an

observation of the case of Inspector of Police, T. N. vs. Palanisamy @

Selvan, (AIR 2009, SC 1012) has been cited as follows: where the

witnesses were not closely acquainted with the accused and claimed

to have identified the accused from short replies given by him,

evidence of identification by voice is not reliable.

In another Indian case Mohan @ Mohan Singh v. State of U.P. - High

Court of Judicature at Allahabad, Criminal Appeal No. 871 of 1996,

decided on 27th May 2020, it was held that The evidence led by the

prosecution must be cogent, positive, affirmative and assertive and

must establish beyond all reasonable doubts that the witness had

ability to identify voice and additionally there was sufficient

opportunity for the witness to identify the assailant by voice only.

The substance of all these judicial authorities in respect of voice

identification can be summarized as follows:

i. The court can act upon voice identification evidence but

the precautions to be observed in accepting voice

identification evidence should be even more stringent

than the precautions which ought to be taken in

relation to visual identification.

ii. If the witnesses were not closely acquainted with the

accused and claim to have identified the accused from

short replies given by his evidence of identification by

voice is not reliable.

iii. The evidence led by the prosecution must be cogent,

positive, affirmative, and assertive and must establish

15

beyond all reasonable doubts that the witness had the

ability to identify voice and additionally there was

sufficient opportunity for the witness to identify the

assailant by voice only.

In the case at hand, the prosecution evidence is not cogent and

assertive. The vital improbability in PW1's evidence is that if PW1 had

correctly identified the appellant as the assaulter, she should have

mentioned his name to the doctor, but instead, she said a known

person whose name is unknown. Because of this critical improbability

and the aforementioned major discrepancies, I hold that voice

identification, in this case, is unreliable. Accordingly, count 3 against

the appellant has not been proved beyond a reasonable doubt because

the appellant has not been properly identified. As a result, the

conviction on that count cannot stand.

The Count No. 4

Count 4 has been brought against the appellant for causing hurt to

PW3. Only PW3 has given evidence regarding the offence pertaining to

count 4. Regarding the 1st count of murder also, only PW3 has given

evidence. Therefore, establishing the offences specified in counts 1

and 4 is based on PW3s evidence.

In considering count 4, it is to be specifically stated at the outset that

when PW3 stated that a person caught her by the left hand and asked

where the money was, she did not state the name of the person. She

stated that he was in our houses at that time. (

. - Page 192 of the appeal brief) So, it is apparent, neither

the appellants nor anyone elses name was mentioned by PW3 in her

testimony. However, the learned State Counsel who prosecuted the

High Court case implicated the appellants name as Samare and the

very next question was asked. He posed the question in the following

manner:

16

:

?

(Page 192 of the appeal brief)

PW3 never mentioned the name "Samare." However, after the learned

State Counsel asked the aforementioned question, PW3 identified the

appellant as "Samare."

It is also very important to be noted that during the examination in

chief of the PW3, nowhere she has stated the name of the 1st accused-

appellant or the name Samare. In all occasions, the learned State

Counsel suggested the name Samare and asked questions. In

perusing the proceedings, it is clear that the name Samare appears

in the questions posed by the learned State Counsel during the

examination in chief but not in PW3s answers.

So, in this way, the learned State Counsel has presented the

prosecution case by implicating the appellant through PW3. To be fair

to the prosecution, I must state that thereafter PW3 has also given

evidence accepting the position suggested by the learned State

Counsel that the appellant was the one who asked for money and

assaulted her.

In the case of Junaiden Mohamed Haaris v. Hon. Attorney General -

SC Appeal 118/17, decided on 09.11.2018 the prosecution case was

that the murder was committed by three persons and not two. A

person called Salam had said

. At the trial, immediately after witness Vasudevan had referred

to this conversation, State Counsel had shot the question

? suggesting that the name of the deceased transpired during the

conversation which was not the case. The Supreme Court categorically

stated in this judgment that the learned State Counsel should never

have asked this question and on the other hand, ought not to have

been permitted by the learned High Court Judge as up to that point of

17

his evidence, Vasudevan had not referred to the identity of the dead

person.

When PW3 did not mention the appellant's name in the instant action,

the State Counsel referred to the appellant's name in framing the

question implicating the appellant in the offence. So, the question

posed by the learned State Counsel in this case is more detrimental

than the question posed by the learned State Counsel in the

aforementioned Supreme Court case because the identity of a

deceased person was referred to in that case. In this case, the State

Counsel directly mentioned the appellant's name when PW3 said

nothing about the accused-appellant. The Honourable Attorney

General indicted the appellant and another accused in this case. Even

though the question was not legally permitted, PW3 was not even

given an opportunity by the learned State Counsel to choose which of

the accused, first or second, caused the injury to PW3. Also, it was

held in the said Supreme Court judgment that the manner of

questioning not only diminishes the evidentiary value of the testimony

but also tarnishes the testimonial trustworthiness of the witness. So,

the said decision applies equally to the case at hand. Therefore, in this

case, PW3s testimonial trustworthiness has been tarnished.

Apart from the matters stated above with regard to the evidence of

PW3, the history given by PW3 to the doctor who examined her is

important in analyzing her evidence. PW15, the doctor, has confirmed

the history given by PW3 in his testimony. In the history given by her,

she stated that two persons entered the house and opened the door.

Hence, her evidence established the involvement of two persons in the

incident. One person among the said two persons is the appellant, she

said. But very strangely, when PW3 testified in the High Court trial,

she only mentioned the appellant's involvement, with no mention of

the other accused or the involvement of any other person.

18

Furthermore, PW3 stated in her history to the doctor that she was

assaulted with something like a knife. However, according to the

doctor, her injury was caused by a blunt weapon. Following that,

when she testified in court, she mentioned about a blunt weapon.

However, there is a contradiction regarding the blunt weapon also

because in evidence in chief she stated that she was assaulted with a

pole and in cross-examination, she stated that she was hit with the

handle of a mamoty.

In this form of assault, it is possible that the victim could not precisely

describe the weapon used. However, there could be no confusion as to

whether it is a knife or a pole. Undoubtedly, an incident has occurred

on that day. As a result PW3, as well as PW1 and PW2, were injured.

Another person was killed. However, when the aforesaid deficiencies,

discrepancies, and improbabilities of evidence are considered, a

reasonable doubt arises as to whether the PW3 in fact saw the

incident she described. Because of the discrepancy in describing the

weapon used in the assault and the fact that she saw two people enter

the house and speaks only about one person's involvement in her

evidence, as well as stating that the assailant was a person who was

in their houses without mentioning the name of the appellant, it

cannot be determined that count 4 has been proved beyond a

reasonable doubt.

The Count No. 1 - Murder

PW3 is the only witness who speaks about the murder. PW5, the

neighbour, stated the things happened after the main incidents

occurred. PW3 stated that she saw the appellant creeping into her

sons room. However, immediately afterwards she had fallen down and

lost consciousness. A vital piece of evidence to consider is that before

falling down, she shouted that someone had come to the house to kill

the child. The relevant answer given by her appears as follows:

. .

19

(Page 194 of the appeal brief) Now, a serious doubt would be cast,

because if the well-known "Samare" had entered, she would not have

shouted "someone had come to the house." Since she shouted,

"someone had come to the house," it appears that an unknown person

or a known person whose name is unknown had come to kill her son.

In addition, even if PW3's evidence that she saw the appellant

creeping into his son's room is accepted, the only inference that the

appellant murdered her son could not be drawn because, according to

the history given to the doctor by PW3, another person also entered

the house with the appellant. Not only the fact that another persons

involvement was disclosed by PW3 to the doctor, but the Honourable

Attorney General also indicted the 2nd accused in relation to the

offence of murder. So, when the PW3 fell unconsciously, there was a

possibility for another person to enter the room and commit the

murder.

Since no one witnessed the incident of murder, the 1st count has to be

proved on circumstantial evidence. As it was held in the cases of

Junaiden Mohamed Haaris v. Hon. Attorney General - SC Appeal

118/17, decided on 09.11.2018, King v. Abeywickrama - 44 NLR 254,

King v. Appuhamy - 46 NLR 128, Podisingho v. King - 53 NLR 49 and

Don Sunny v. Attorney General (Amarapala murder case) (1998) 2 Sri

L.R. 1, in proving a charge on circumstantial evidence, the

prosecution must prove that no one else other than the accused had

the opportunity of committing the offence, the accused can be found

guilty only and only if the proved items of circumstantial evidence is

consistent with their guilt and inconsistent with their innocence.

In the case before us, other than the 1st accused-appellant, the 2nd

accused or any other person who entered the room also had the

opportunity to commit the murder, and the prosecution has not

excluded the said possibility. Thus, the only inference of appellants

guilt could not be drawn in this case. Therefore, the 1st count of

20

murder against the appellant has not been proved beyond a

reasonable doubt.

PW14, the doctor who performed the autopsy on the deceased

expressed his opinion that the injuries that resulted the death of the

deceased could be caused by the mamoty marked and produced as a

production of this case. However, it is to be noted that the mamoty

has not been recovered in terms of section 27 of the Evidence

Ordinance upon a statement of the appellant. Hence, the prosecution

has failed to establish any connection between the appellant and this

mamoty.

The learned High Court Judge has made the following observation in

his judgment and has come to the conclusion that the appellant has

committed the murder using this mamoty. The learned Judges

observation is ..03

.

.................... ..01, ..02, ..03

............ (Page 31 of the judgment) the

learned Judge accepted PW3s evidence that she was assaulted by this

mamoty and drew the inference that the appellant had used the

mamoty and caused this fatal injury to the deceased as well. However,

as previously stated in this judgment, PW3 told the doctor who

examined her that she was assaulted with a knife. She stated in the

evidence in chief that she was assaulted by a pole. During cross-

examination, she stated that she was assaulted by a mamoty handle.

When there were three contradictory positions, the learned High Court

Judge chose to accept her final version without stating any reason

and concluded that the appellant was armed with a mamoty and

assaulted the deceased with it. I regret to say that this should not be

the approach upon which a judicial decision is reached.

21

According to the prosecution case, the deceaseds fatal injury should

have occurred inside his room. To conclude that the appellant hit the

head of the deceased by using a mamoty, there was no evidence at all

that the appellant was possessed with a mamoty when he entered the

room of the deceased. PW3 stated that she saw the appellant creeping

into her sons room but she did not state that the appellant was

armed with a mamoty or any other weapon when he entered the sons

room.

It should not be forgotten that the second accused was also indicted

in relation to the murder. The prosecution has not excluded the

possibility of causing fatal injuries to the deeased by the second

accused. No doubt this is a grave crime. One person was murdered,

and three women were injured. 76 years old Wimalawathi was one of

them. PW1s injury endangered her life. However, there are certain

requirements in law to prove criminal charges. A fundamental

principle is that the prosecution must prove its case beyond a

reasonable doubt. When considering the aforesaid circumstances,

prosecution evidence in respect of the murder is consistent not only

with the guilt of the appellant. There was a possibility for the

appellant to commit the murder, but at the same time the second

accused also had the opportunity to commit the murder and the said

possibility has not been excluded. In proving a charge on

circumstantial evidence, the evidence must be consistent only with

the guilt of the appellant and not with any other hypothesis.

Therefore, I hold that the 1st count of murder has not been proved

beyond a reasonable doubt against the appellant.

Before concluding, it is to be noted that the aforesaid discrepancies,

contradictions, and improbabilities have arisen in the prosecution

case even after their statements were read over to PW1, PW2, and

PW3 in the police station after receiving summons from the courts to

22

give evidence, which is not legally permitted. PW3 herself has

disclosed this in the following manner.

: ?

: , .

: ?

: .

: ?

: .

: ?

: .

: ?

: , . .

: ?

: , . ..........

(Page 203 and 204 of the appeal brief)

The learned High Court Judge did not take into account the

aforementioned contradictions, per-se, inter-se, improbabilities, and

unethical manner of presenting evidence. He has also failed to

consider the principles governing the proof of a charge based on

circumstantial evidence. For the reasons stated above, I hold that the

learned High Court Judge's decision to convict the first accused-

appellant on counts 1, 3, 4, and 5 is bad in law.

23

Accordingly, I allow the appeal and set aside the convictions and

sentences dated 13.09.2021 for the offences described in counts 1, 3,

4, and 5. The appellant is acquitted of all four charges against him.

The appeal is allowed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

K. Priyantha Fernando, J (P/CA)

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL