WRT/0249/21

Page 1 of 17

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Mandates

in the nature of Writs of Certiorari, Prohibition

and Mandamus under and in terms of Article

140 of the Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

C.A. CASE NO. WRT/0249/21

1. Sri Lanka Nidahas Sevaka Sangamaya,

No. 493/1,

T.B. Jayah Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

2. Jathika Sevaka Sangamaya,

No. 416,

Kotte Road,

Pita Kotte.

PETITIONERS

Vs.

1. Ceylon Steel Corporation Limited,

Oruwala,

Athuraliya.

2. Palitha Weerasekara,

Arbitrator,

Labour Secretariat,

Narahenpita,

Colombo 05.

3. Hon. Nimal Siripala De Silva,

Minister of Labour,

Labour Secretariat,

WRT/0249/21

Page 2 of 17

Narahenpita,

Colombo 05.

3A. Hon. Manusha Nanayakkara,

Minister of Labour and Foreign Employment,

6th Floor,

Mehewara Piyesa,

Narahenpita,

Colombo 05.

3B. Hon. Anil Jayantha Fernando,

Minister of Labour,

6th Floor,

Mehewara Piyesa,

Narahenpita,

Colombo 05.

4. Prabath Chandrakeerthi,

Commissioner General of Labour,

Labour Secretariat,

Narahenpita,

Colombo 05.

4A.H. K. K. A. Jayasundara,

Commissioner General of Labour,

Labour Secretariat,

Narahenpita,

Colombo 05.

RESPONDENTS

BEFORE : K. M. G. H. KULATUNGA, J.

COUNSEL : Farman Cassim, PC, with Charaka Jayarathne and Natasha

Jeyesekara, instructed by D. Priyadarshani for the Petitioners.

Prabashini Jayasekara, SC, for the 3rd and 4th Respondents.

WRT/0249/21

Page 3 of 17

ARGUED ON : 25.08.2025

DECIDED ON : 01.10.2025

JUDGEMENT

K. M. G. H. KULATUNGA, J.

1. The 1st and 2nd petitioners are two unions consisting of around 181

employees of the Ceylon Steel Corporation Ltd, the 1st respondent

company. There was a dispute pertaining to the payment of bonus

between the petitioners and the 1st respondent company. The Minister

of Labour referred this matter to compulsory arbitration under Section

4 of the Industrial Disputes Act, No. 43 of 1950, as amended

(hereinafter referred to as “the IDA”). The said arbitral award was made

and published in Gazette Notification No. 2208/05, dated 28.12.2020

(‘Y’). The arbitrator, the 2nd respondent, upon duly inquiring into the

same, dismissed the petitioners’ claim. The petitioners, being aggrieved

by the said award marked ‘Y’, have now preferred this application

seeking a writ of certiorari to quash the said award ‘Y’ and also for a writ

of mandamus for the 1st respondent to pay arrears of bonus to the

employees in terms of formula A-4(a) and A-4(b) as contained in

document marked ‘X’. These are the substantive relief sought by the

petitioners.

2. The matter referred for arbitration is in respect of the failure to pay

bonuses to 181 employees since 2009 in accordance with the formula

A-4(a) of agreement A-4. The arbitrator has rejected the application on

the basis that the 1st respondent company is not liable or bound to pay

bonus in accordance with the formula A-4(a) contained in the

agreement A-4.

WRT/0249/21

Page 4 of 17

Historical background of the company.

3. The 1st respondent company was originally a fully State-owned

company known as Ceylon Steel Corporation Ltd. However, in or

around 1997, Korean Ceylon Heavy Industries and Construction

Company Ltd acquired 90% of its shares, and a name change of the 1st

respondent company was effected on 23.04.1997. The original name

was changed to Ceylon Heavy Industries and Construction Company

Ltd. Thereafter, the share portfolio held by Korean Ceylon Heavy

Industries was acquired by Onyx Heavy Industries and Construction

Company Ltd., and the name of the 1st respondent company was once

again changed back to Ceylon Steel Corporation Ltd., with effect from

25.09.2009. It is common ground that the bonus payment to the

employees was based on the agreement dated 31.10.1996, marked X,

which also contained a formula of payment. The payment under this

agreement has continued until 2008. However, in 2009, with the

change of ownership and name, the payment of bonus as per the said

agreement A-4 did not continue and had ceased. The petitioners had

agitated and it is this non-payment that has been so referred to

arbitration.

4. Initially, this dispute had been referred to the Commissioner of Labour,

who had summoned the respective parties and had initially inquired

into the said dispute. The said inquiry notes and proceedings of Inquiry

No. 1911/2009 is annexed to the petition marked A-6. At the said

inquiry, the 1st respondent company had been represented by its

Attorney-at-Law. It is contended by the petitioners that the said

Attorney-at-Law informed the Commissioner that the benefits and

privileges enjoyed by the employees will not be denied even after the

change of ownership [A-6(a)].

5. At this point, Onyx Heavy Industries has acquired the share portfolio

held by Ceylon Heavy Industries with effect from 25.09.2009. The

petitioners thus claim that the said representation made by the

WRT/0249/21

Page 5 of 17

Attorney-at-Law created a legitimate expectation in the petitioners that

the bonus payment would continue to be paid in accordance with the

original formula A-4(a) and A-4(b). The petitioners base their legitimate

expectation on the representation and/or the holding out evidenced by

documents A-6, A-8, and A-9. To determine this appeal, there are

primarily two matters that require consideration and determination:

i. Is the 1st respondent company a party to the agreement marked

A-4?; and

ii. Do the representations evidenced by A-6, A-7, A-8, and A-9 create

a legitimate expectation?

6. The agreement marked A-4 is between the Government of Sri Lanka

(GOSL) and Korean Heavy Industries and Construction Company Ltd

(KHI&C). This agreement has been signed by the Secretary to the

Treasury and the Chairman of the Board of KHI&C. This has been

entered into on 31.10.1996. This agreement is between the then

majority shareholder and a prospective buyer of the said shares. What

is noteworthy and primarily relevant is that the 1st respondent company

is not a party to the said agreement. This agreement comes about due

to the historical change of a statutory corporation into a company. The

1st respondent company was formerly the “Ceylon Steel Corporation”,

established by the State Industrial Corporations Act, No. 49 of 1957. In

or about 1993, under the Conversion of Public Corporations or

Government-Owned Business Undertakings into Public Companies Act,

No. 23 of 1987, the 1st respondent company was formed, and the total

share portfolio was held by the Secretary to the Treasury. Having so

established the 1st respondent company, the GOSL at a particular point

in time resolved and decided to sell its share portfolio to a private

investor, who happened to be KHI&C. It is at that point, in respect of

the sale of the share portfolio, the said agreement A-4 was entered into.

Agreement A-4 appears to have Annexure (A), the 1st respondent

company profile, and as Exhibit 2.4 thereto, the basis of computation

of profit bonus from May 1994 onwards. The petitioners have based

WRT/0249/21

Page 6 of 17

their right and claim on the agreement A-4 and the annual bonus

appearing under paragraph 2.4.2 of the said profile. The said annual

bonus computation formula is marked and produced as A-4(a) and A-

4(b). On the face of it, the 1st respondent company is not a signatory or

a party to the said agreement A-4. The 1st respondent company, being

a distinct legal entity, has its own identity, different and distinct from

its shareholders.

7. The GOSL, acting through the Secretary to the Treasury, has been the

main shareholder. The GOSL qua shareholder has embarked upon a

process to alienate and sell its share portfolio to KHI&C, which happens

to be a different and distinct company. Any shareholder has the right

and is free to hold onto its shares or transact in the same in whatever

way and subject to whatever conditions such shareholder may enter

into with any prospective third-party purchaser. Such agreement,

unless the company was a party thereto, would not per se bind such

company; it is on this basic principle that the arbitrator has come to

the impugned finding of the absence of a valid contract, between the

petitioners and the 1st respondents. It is trite law that a contract cannot

ordinarily create rights or obligations in favour of third parties who are

not parties thereto. Under Roman-Dutch law governing the law of

contract in Sri Lanka, a third party may enforce a contractual

stipulation where there is a clear stipulatio alteri, i.e., a stipulation

made for the benefit of such third party, which has thereafter been

accepted by him. In Jinadasa vs. Silva [1932] 24 NLR 244, Garvin

S.P.J. (with Maartensz A.J. agreeing) held:

“The question which has been raised and argued before us is this: The stipulation being one which was made in favour of a third party, is it actionable by or at the instance of such third party? That such an agreement may be validly made between the parties to a contract such as this, is, I think, beyond question for the Roman-Dutch law authorities... It seems clear that whatever difference of opinion there may have been between the Dutch Jurists, they were all unanimously of

WRT/0249/21

Page 7 of 17

opinion that a stipulation in favour of a third party, once it has been accepted by the third party, gave to that party a right to obtain for himself the benefits of the stipulation by action.” [emphasis added]

More recently, Saleem Marsoof, J., in M. P. A. U. S. Fernando, The

Conservator General of Forests, and others vs. Timberlake

International Pvt. Ltd. (S.C. Appeal No. 06/2008, decided on

02.03.2010) held as follows:

“…the Conservator-General of Forests is entitled, under our common law principle of stipulatio alteri, to benefit from any stipulation contained in a contract between two other persons. As Keuneman, J. observed in De Silva vs. Margaret Nona 40 NLR 251 at page 253, ‘The plaintiff at any rate was entitled under the Roman-Dutch law to enforce by action the pact in his favour, although he was not one of the contracting parties (vide Perezius on Donations, Bk. VIII; tit. 55, s. 5). This position is not denied.’” [emphasis added].

Thus, while third parties may enforce contractual benefits in limited

circumstances, enforceability depends on the contract containing a

clear stipulation in their favour. In the present case, Agreement A-4,

being a contract between the Government and KHI&C, does not

constitute a stipulation in favour of the petitioners, and there is no

evidence that the petitioners accepted any such benefit. Accordingly, no

enforceable contractual right arises against the 1st respondent

company.

8. That being so, upon KHI&C purchasing the majority of the share

portfolio, it has entered into the management of the 1st respondent

company. During this process, there has been certain discussions,

decisions and dialogue between the employees and the new

management. The name of the 1st respondent company has then been

intermittently changed. Simultaneously, there had been the change of

WRT/0249/21

Page 8 of 17

the holding of the share portfolio by various investors. The change of

the name of the 1st respondent has taken place as follows. The company

was incorporated under the Companies Act on 01.01.1993 under the

name “Ceylon Steel Corporation Ltd”. On 04.03.1992 the name of the

company was changed to “Ceylon Heavy Industries and Construction

Company Ltd”. On 13.05.2008, the company had been re-registered

under new No. PB320, and subsequently, on 23.04.2010, the company

name had once again been changed back to “Ceylon Steel Corporation

Ltd” (vide A-5).

9. The legal personality of a company comes into existence with the due

incorporation and registration of such company in accordance with the

Companies Act, No. 07 of 2007. In Sri Lanka National Cooperative

Council Limited vs. Perera Ramanayake Don Vipula Perera and

Others (SC Appeal No. 34/2017, decided on 30.06.2021), Aluwihare

P.C., J., summarised this principle as follows:

“...in the case of Salomon v. Salomon & Co. Ltd. [1897] AC 22…the House of Lords laid down the universal principle that a company is a distinct legal person entirely different from its members. This principle of separate legal personality is referred to as the ‘veil of incorporation’. As a result of this case, the courts have generally considered themselves bound by the concept that a company is a separate legal person distinct from its members and would generally not go behind the veil of incorporation.” In that context, such registered companies will have a distinct and

different identification, being the name of such company so

incorporated. Section 8 of the Companies Act, No. 07 of 2007, provides

for the subsequent change of the name of such company. Section 8(4)

provides thus:

“(4) The change of name shall not affect any rights or obligations of the company or render ineffective any legal proceedings by or against the company. Any legal proceedings that might have been continued or commenced against it by its former name may be continued or commenced against it by its new name.”

WRT/0249/21

Page 9 of 17

As such, in law, the change of the name will not disrupt or disturb the

continuity of the existence of the legal personality that was created with

the initial establishment of such a company. It will only change or

amend a particular attribute or attendant fact of the incorporated body.

In this context, the change of name of a company is akin to the change

of name of any natural person. Therefore, the 1st respondent company,

initially incorporated in 1993, has continued up until today, subject to

the change of name.

10. That being so, it appears that there had been various issues time and

again, particularly on the payment of bonus. In this run-up, such

matters and disputes appear to have been referred to the Commissioner

of Labour, and certain representations have been made by the

representatives and/or Attorneys-at Law of the 1st respondent company,

such as A-6, A-7, A-8 and A-9. The petitioners claim a legitimate

expectation based on the said representations contained therein. The

said representations are as follows:

i. A-6 (a):

“මෙහිදී සොගමේ නීතීඥ තැන කියා සිටින්මන් මේ දක්වා භුක්ි විඳි වරප්‍රසාද අහිමි

මනාකරන බවයි. එය නීිෙය ලියවිල්ලක් වශමයන් බලාත්ෙක බවද මෙන්වා මදයි.”

ii. A-6 (b):

“සොගෙ මවනුමවන් ෙැමිණ සිටින නීතීඥ තැන කියා සිටින්මන් මේ ආයතනය රැමගන

ොස මදකක්වත් නැි අතර එහි මූලය තත්ත්වය ඉදිරිෙත් කරන බවත්, ඒ අනුව කටයුතු

කිරීෙ සිදුවන බවත්ය.”

iii. A-7: Does not contain any representation.

iv. A-8: “ප්‍රකාශයට ෙත් කර ඇි ආකාරයට විමශේෂ දීෙනාව ලබා ගැනීෙට ඒකාබද්ධ

වෘත්ිය සමිිය විසින් පියවර ගැනීෙ පිළිබඳ ොලනාධිකාරිමේ ෙැසසුෙ සමිිය මවත

හිමිවන අතර මෙමතක් ක්‍රියාත්ෙක වූ වාර්ෂික ප්‍රසාද දීෙනා මගවීමේ ක්‍රෙමේදයට අනුව,

අවසන් ගිණුේ වාර්ෂතා නිකුත් වීමෙන් අනතුරුව මෙකී දීෙනාව නැවත සොමලෝචනය

WRT/0249/21

Page 10 of 17

මකාට මගවිය යුතුවන යේ වාර්ෂික ප්‍රසාද දීෙනා ප්‍රොණ වන්මන් නේ එය මගවීෙට

ොලනාධිකාරිය කටයුතු කරනු ඇත.

මේ අනුව අදාල විමශේෂ දීෙනාව මගවීෙට ආයතනය කටයුතු කරනු ඇි බව

සලකන්න.”

v. A-9: This is a recommendation issued by the Commissioner of

Labour upon an inquiry. This is not a representation or holding

out made by the 1st respondent company.

Accordingly, a legitimate expectation, if at all, may only arise from A-6

and/or A-8.

11. The petitioners, when they went before the arbitrator, had advanced

and proceeded on the basis of a contractual obligation on the part of the

1st respondent to perform the terms of the contract A-4 in respect of the

bonus payments, reflected in A-4 (b). If a party bases a right or a claim

on a contract and such terms of the contract, it should be the

enforcement of a contractual obligation. Such party to a contract cannot

claim a legitimate expectation based on such term of the contract. In

Gawarammana vs. Tea Research Board and others (2003) 3 SLR

page 120, Sripavan, J. (as his Lordship then was), citing with approval

the decision of Jayaweera vs. Wijeratna (1985) 2 Sri LR 413, held that,

“The powers derived from contract are matters of private law. The fact that one of the parties to the contract is a public authority is not relevant since the decision sought to be quashed by way of certiorari is itself was not made in the exercise of any statutory power.

Accordingly, the petitioners cannot advance a right under the said

contract, and similarly, on the same issue, claim enforcement on the

basis of a legitimate expectation.

WRT/0249/21

Page 11 of 17

12. Assuming that the petitioners are abandoning the contractual right and

is now advancing a right based on legitimate expectation, I will now

endeavour to briefly consider the legal position and the principle of

legitimate expectation as is relevant to this application. Prof. Craig, in

Administrative Law, 7th ed., at p. 677, defines procedural and

substantive legitimate expectation as follows:

“The phrase ‘procedural legitimate expectation’ denotes the existence of some process right the applicant claims to possess as the result of a promise or behaviour by the public body that generates the expectation ….. The phrase ‘substantive legitimate expectation’ captures the situation in which the applicant seeks a particular benefit or commodity, such as a welfare benefit or a license, as the result of some promise, behaviour or representation made by the public body.” 13. The doctrine of ‘substantive legitimate expectation’ saw its origins in

landmark decision of R vs. Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries and

Food, ex parte Hamble (Offshore) Fisheries Ltd [1995] 2 All ER 714

where Sedley, J., held as follows:

“Legitimacy in this sense is not an absolute. It is a function of expectations induced by government and of policy considerations which militate against their fulfilment. The balance must in the first instance be for the policy maker to strike; but if the outcome is challenged by way of judicial review, I do not consider that the Court's criterion is the bare rationality of the policy maker's conclusion. While policy is for the policy-maker alone, the fairness of his or her decision not to accommodate reasonable expectations which the policy will thwart remains the Court's concern (as of course the lawfulness of the policy). To postulate this is not to place the judge in the seat of the Minister...but it is equally the court’s duty to protect the interests of those individuals whose expectation of different treatment has a legitimacy which in fairness outtops the policy choice which threatens to frustrate it.” [emphasis added].

In M. R. C. C. Ariyarathne and others vs. Inspector General of

Police and others (SC/FR/444/2012, decided on 30.07.2019),

Prasanna Jayawardena, PC, J., after citing the above decision inter alia

WRT/0249/21

Page 12 of 17

and making an extensive analysis on the doctrine of legitimate

expectation, cited with approval the following dictum of Dehideniya, J.,

in Zamrath vs. Sri Lanka Medical Council (SC/FR/119/2019,

decided on 23.07.2019), as the rationale underlying the doctrine of

legitimate expectation:

“The legitimate expectation of a person …. further ensures legal certainty which is imperative as the people ought to plan their lives, secure in the knowledge of the consequences of their actions. The perception of legal certainty deserves protection, as a basic tenet of the rule of law which this court attempts to uphold as the apex court of the country. The public perception of legal certainty becomes negative when the authorities by their own undertakings and assurances have generated legitimate expectations of people and subsequently by their own conduct, infringe the so generated expectations.”

14. In this instance, if at all, the legitimate expectation may arise from A-6

and A-8. A-8 clearly holds out that the bonus agreement that was in

force and granted up until then will be continued and be subject to

review upon the issue of the final accounts. It is clearly held out that the

payment of bonuses is contingent upon the consideration of the final

accounts, and if there be any bonus payable, the same will be paid upon

review. This, in no way, is an undertaking or holding out that a

particular payment based on any particular formula would be continued

with. This was on 04.01.2011. No doubt, prior to that, on 19.11.2009,

there had been a submission made by a lawyer, in general terms, that

the perks and privileges enjoyed by the employees will not be denied,

and it has also stated that such document is legally enforceable. In all

probabilities, the document referred to in A-4(a) of the initial agreement

is A-4. As held hereinabove, I find that the said agreement A-4 does not

bind and is not effective or enforceable as against the 1st respondent

company. The 1st respondent is not a party to the said agreement.

Accordingly, the said holding out, utterance or representation is based

on a wrong legal premise that such agreement is enforceable.

WRT/0249/21

Page 13 of 17

15. Murdu Fernando, J. (as her Ladyship then was), in Kaluarachchi vs.

Ceylon Petroleum Corporation (SC/Appeal/43/2013, decided on

19.06.2019) at pages 11 and 12, held that the petitioner could not

succeed with the claim that he had an enforceable substantive legitimate

expectation, as follows:

“The penultimate paragraph in P6 is unspecified, equivocal,

ambiguous, vague and not clear and thus will not create a

legitimate expectation. It does not fall into either of the two sub-

headings of legitimate expectation, procedural or substantive.

Therefore, the determination that the respondents had a

substantive legitimate expectation and the issuance of a writ of

mandamus to enforce such legitimate expectation by the Court of

Appeal in my view has no merit and is erroneous” [emphasis

added].

One cannot, therefore, claim a legitimate expectation based on an

assumed, legally non-existent enforceability. At this juncture I would

also advert to the following extracts from Wade & Forsyth on

Administrative Law (11th Ed.), (also cited by Fernando, J., in the

abovementioned case of Kaluarachchi), where the authors observe

thus:

“It is not enough that an expectation should exist: it must in addition be legitimate. But how is it to be determined whether a particular expectation is worthy of protection? This is a difficult area since an expectation reasonably entertained by a person may not be found to be legitimate because of some countervailing consideration of policy or law. A crucial requirement is that the assurance must itself be clear, unequivocal and unambiguous. Many claimants fail at this hurdle after close analysis of the assurance. The test is ‘how on a fair reading of the promise it would have been reasonably understood by those to whom it was made.” (at page 452). Applying the above principles, it is evident that not every expectation

qualifies or can be considered as legitimate, warranting judicial

protection or intervention. The expectation must be based on an

WRT/0249/21

Page 14 of 17

assurance or representation that is “clear, unequivocal and

unambiguous.” In the present case, even when documents A-6 to A-9

are considered collectively, there is no direct or clear representation by

the 1st respondent company that meets this standard. The statements

in A-6 and A-8 are either general assurances regarding the continuation

of employee benefits or contingent on future events, such as the final

accounts, and are therefore inherently uncertain. A-7 contains no

representation, and A-9 is merely a recommendation of the

Commissioner of Labour, not an undertaking by the company.

Consequently, on a fair reading, none of these documents conveys a

clear, unequivocal, and unambiguous assurance that the bonus formula

in A-4(a) would continue to apply. As such, the petitioners’ claim based

on legitimate expectation fails at the threshold, and accordingly, there

can be no legitimate expectation arising out of documents A-6, A-7, A-8

or A-9.

16. Finally, the petitioners argue that they are entitled to the bonus

payment in accordance with the formula in A-4(a) on the premise that

the said basis of paying bonus has now become an implied condition of

their contract. In support of this argument, the petitioners rely on the

following dicta of Palakidnar, J., P/CA (with Dr. A. De Z. Gunawardena,

J. agreeing) in Kundenmals Industries vs. Commissioner of Labour

(1994) 3 Sri L.R. 20:

“Bonus as the term implies is generally an ex gratia payment out of the bounty and goodwill at the pleasure of the employer and an employee has no claim on it as a matter of right Abdul Sather v. Bogstra 54 NLR 102. Exceptions to this rule have been recognized in Muir Mills Co. Ltd. v Suti Mills Mazdoor Union AIR 1955 SC 170 and Sree Meenakshi Mills Ltd. v. Their Workmen AIR 1958 SC 153. They are -

(1) If an employee passes an exam. (2) Where there is an express or implied agreement to pay a Bonus.

WRT/0249/21

Page 15 of 17

(3) Where wages fall short of the living standard and the employees make a profit. (4) By joint contribution of capital and labour the employer makes a profit. C.M.U. v. Millers and Cargills (Ceylon) Ltd. The facts that emerged in this case do not show that the payment of bonuses could be based on any one of these exceptions. An employer can be compelled to pay on the principles laid in these exceptional circumstances.”

According to the above decision, the entitlement to a bonus is clearly

held to be not a right, but a privilege. Bonus, by the connotation itself,

means something given over and above what an employee may be

entitled to as of right. This is primarily in appreciation and recognition

of the contribution made by the employees in achieving the profit or

success of such entity. The employer, in appreciation of the said

contribution, gratuitously making a payment is what is now known as

bonus payments. No doubt, the basis, formula, or the entitlement or the

basis of calculating of such bonus payments may be included in

contracts or collective agreements or may be a condition implied, as held

in the above decision of Kundenmals Industries vs. Commissioner of

Labour. In the present application, once again, the petitioners' attempt

is to establish such an implied condition based on the undertakings or

utterances as appearing in A-6, A-7, A-8, and A-9. I have already

considered this in detail and held that there is no binding contractual

obligation by which such formula of bonus payment becomes a binding

part of the contract of employment, either implied or otherwise.

17. It is apparent, according to the evidence led before the arbitrator, that

there had been several collective agreements between the employer and

its employees marked and produced as R-1, R-10, R-11 and R-29,

during the arbitration proceedings. It is also in evidence that the 1st

respondent company had not made any profit in 2009, 2010, and 2011.

During this period, notwithstanding the losses, the 1st respondent has

paid a special allowance (“විමශේෂ දීෙනාව”) and since 2009, there had not

WRT/0249/21

Page 16 of 17

been any particular agreement or formula followed in respect of payment

of bonus, and the management has in their discretion, on an ad hoc

basis made bonus payments.

18. The argument of the petitioners and their position, both at the

arbitration and before this Court, is that the 1st respondent company is

under an obligation as an implied condition of employment to make the

payments of bonus in accordance with the formula A-4(a), of the

agreement A-4. The evidence is to the effect that certain ex gratia

payments, such as special allowances, and when profit was made, bonus

payments have in fact been made. However, the said payments are not

in accordance with the formula A-4(a). Accordingly, A-4 is not an

agreement to which neither the petitioners nor the 1st respondent

company was a party, and there is a lack of evidence to establish that

the particular formula contained in A-4(a) had been adopted and

consistently applied since 2009.

19. That being so, A-8 clearly informs the petitioners, and the 1st

respondent company has placed on record, on 04.01.2011, that the

determination of the bonus entitlement will be subject to reconsideration

(“නැවත සොමලෝචනය”) upon the receipt of financial reports. This puts it

beyond doubt, that the 1st respondent and the present management has,

at no point of time, considered the formula at A-4(a) as being binding or

applicable, in quantification or payment or bonus. There is no direct,

unequivocal, unambiguous, clear, or specific utterance or

representation made to that effect either. Therefore there is no basis, in

fact or in law, to conclude that the formula as appearing at A-4(a) could

constitute an implied condition or confer a right to the petitioners.

20. In these circumstances, I find that the arbitrator’s findings and

conclusions in making the award ‘Y’ are lawful, correct, and reasonable.

Accordingly, the petitioners are not entitled to a writ of certiorari as

prayed for by prayer (c). Similarly, by prayers (d), (e), and (f), the

WRT/0249/21

Page 17 of 17

petitioners are seeking writs of mandamus against the 1st respondent to

pay the arrears of bonus and to submit certain information connected

to the formula A-4(b). In view of this Court not granting the substantive

relief as prayed for by prayer (c), the consideration of these prayers will

not arise. However, I observe that the petitioners are, in effect,

endeavouring and attempting by prayers (d), (e), and (f) to obtain a writ

to give effect to certain contractual rights against a private entity. In the

exercise of the writ jurisdiction of this Court, even if the substantive

relief of quashing ‘Y’ was granted, this Court would not endeavour in the

exercise of its writ jurisdiction to step into the shoes of such statutory

authority and determine contested issues of fact. It would be, if at all,

left to the relevant statutory authority to reconsider the same. Thus, I

hold that the petitioners have failed to establish any legal or other basis

which warrants the issuance of the writs as prayed for.

21. Accordingly, this application is dismissed. However, I make no order as

to costs.

Application dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL