\

j I I 1 I

(a) That an injunction be issued restraining the defendant from discharging

sewage and/or water containing sewage and/or other noxious matter, and/or

sending water and/or other matter in excess of the natural flow of the

defendant's upper land to the plaintiff's land,

(b) That an injunction be issued restraining the defendant from discharging water

to the plaintiff's land.

(c) For a declaration that the defendant is not entitled to discharge sewage

and/or water containing sewage and/or other noxious matter and/or water in

excess of the water flow in view of the natural drainage of the upper land to

the plaintiff's land,

(d) For damages in a sum of Rs.1,527,925/- together with interest thereon at 24%

from date of action till decree and on the aggregate amount till payment in

full;

(e) For costs; etc.

The Defendant filed answer on 15th August 1994 denying the averments in the plaint

and stating that:

(a) Due to the situation of the land and or premises in question and the gradient

thereof, the natural flow of rainwater of the defendant's land is through the

land of the plaintiff and that the defendant has the right to discharge the

rainwater through the plaintiff's land;

(b) The defendant has been discharging rainwater to the said land as far back as

from 1906 and the defendant has been permitted to do so since the year

1906 and that there had been no protest from the plaintiff and/or its

predecessors in respect of the flow of rainwater until the year 1991;

3

1

I j f I

(c) The defendant in any event has acquired by prescription the right by reason

of long use without protest to discharge rainwater to the land of the plaintiff,

In the premises the Defendant moved to have the Plaintiff's action dismissed with

costs.

At the trial six admissions were recorded, of which the 6th admission reads as

follows:-

6.(a). The defendant has been discharging rainwater to the land described in the

schedule to the plaint as far back as 1906 (paragraph 8(a) of the answer).

(b). The defendant has been permitted to do so from the year 1906 (Paragraph

8(b) of the answer).

(c). There has been no protest from the plaintiff and/or its predecessors, until

the year 1991, (paragraph 8(c) of the answer).

Both parties had tendered their issues in writing. The Plaintiff's issues were from

Issue No.1 to 6 whilst the Defendant's issues were 7 to 21. On 18th July 1996, the

trial Judge accepted these issues and commenced the trial. On behalf of the

Plaintiff, two witnesses namely; the factory Manager of the Plaintiff's company,

Balasingham Sundararaj and an officer from the Municipal Engineer's Department

Lionel Amarasinghe gave evidence. It has to be observed that whilst the Plaintiff

tendered documents P1 to P6 and closed its case, the Defendant did not summon

anyone to give evidence but closed its case having marked two documents, namely;

D1 and D2. The learned District Judge of Colombo by his judgment dated 31st July

1997, dismissed the Plaintiff's action with costs.

It is against this judgment dated 31st July 1997 that the Plaintiff has preferred this

appeal. Both parties filed their written submissions and submitted that this matter

4

ffII

\r

I

j I \

could be disposed of on those submissions. It is pertinent to observe that an

interesting issue arises in the instant appeal namely the right of an upper tenement

to discharge water into a lower tenement or ius fluminis or servitus fluminis

recipiendi as is known to the common law and both President's Counsel have ably

assisted Court in the consideration of the issues arising in the case. I must place on

record that the case record teems with comprehensive written submissions filed

before my predecessors as well.

It must be noted that the Plaintiff's Counsel in his written submission (at para 32)

whilst seeking to have the judgment of the District Court set aside, asserts that

judgment be entered in favour of the Plaintiff as prayed for in prayer (a) and (c) of

the plaint with costs. Therefore, it is necessary for this Court to see whether the

Plaintiff is entitled to obtain the reliefs which it has prayed for namely:-

a) an injunction restraining the defendant from discharging sewage and/or

water containing sewage and/or other noxious matter, and/or sending

water and/or other matter in excess of the natural flow of the defendant's

upper land to the plaintiff's land,

b) a declaration that the defendant is not entitled to discharge sewage

and/or water containing sewage and/or other noxious matter and/or

water in excess of the water flow in view of the natural drainage of the

upper land to the plaintiff's land,

This is an action in connection with the discharge of water by the owner of an upper

tenement on to a lower tenement which is adjacent to it. The law relating to the

exercise of this right is governed by the common law of this country-the Roman-

Dutch Law. The common law posits that the upper tenement has a right to discharge

5

,

\ I

its ordinary rainwater on to the lower tenement which abuts the upper tenement,

but subject to certain limitations, namely:(l) the two lands, namely, the dominant

tenement and the servient tenement must be contiguous, (2) the dominant

tenement must establish that it has a servitude over the servient tenement, (3) that

servitude is proved to be a servitude of ius jluminis. In this case the Defendant's

land, which is the dominant tenement, is situated adjoining the Plaintiff's land, the

servient tenement, which happens to be situated at a lower gradient. In the leading

South African case of Ludolph v Wegne,z de Villiers, c.J quite poignantly alluded to

two modes of creation of the right of the upper tenement to discharge water on to

the lower tenement:

"A right to discharge water upon a neighbour1s land may exist by virtue of a

duly created servitudel or by virtue of the natural situation of the locality."

In addition to the aforesaid two modes of acquisition of the right to discharge water

to the low-lying neighbour's land namely, agreement, ie servitude (lex) and creation

owing to natural location (natura loci), the learned Chief Justice of South Africa also

alluded to the other modes of acquiring a drainage right viz by prescription or

vetustas. He explained vetustas thus:

"Where water has flowed in an artificial channel for thirty years or more it

may be presumed, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, to have flowed

immemorially.,,2

In fact the learned authors of the book "Servitudes" C.G. Hall & E.A. Kellaway,3

explain the law relating to the servitude of discharging of water by an upper

tenement onto a lower tenement as follows:

1 (1888), 6 s.c 193

2 See Ludolph v Wegneribid; also see Servitudes by Hall and Kellaway

6

1I f I

f 1 f t i i

, j I

1 1 f \ 1 1 ! I 1

\

Drainage Rights: liThe liability of a lower-lying land to receive water draining

from the property above it, can originate in three different ways; viz:

(a) Owing to its natural situation (natura loci),

(b) By agreement, i.e., servitude (lex), and

(c) By prescription or vetustas.

With regard to enjoyment of this servitude by the owner of the upper tenement for

a long period of time, the above authors state4:

"If the upper owner has discharged his drainage water onto the lower

property by means of an artificial channel for the period of prescription and

he can prove that he has done so adversely to the rights of the lower owner,

he is entitled to continue to do so. If it is shown that water has been

discharged from the neighbouring land by means of an artificial water course

for thirty years and upwards, the Court may apply the doctrine of vetustas

and, in the absence of evidence to prove when it was originally constructed,

may find that it existed from time immemorial and that the upper owner is

entitled to continue to use it as if it were a natural water course". 5

Vetustas or Presumption of Prescription by Immemorial Usage

The Defendant's position is that since the year 1906 it has been discharging

rainwater from its land to the Plaintiff's land without any protest, and therefore the

Defendant has acquired prescriptive right thereto. In the premises the contention of

the Defendant has been that the long user without any protest since 1906 conferred

on it both a prescriptive right to discharge water and vetustas (presumption of

3c.G. Hall & E.A. Kellawe, "ServitudeH (3rd Edition) pp 98-99 Jute & Co. Johannesburg,

4ibid p99

5 Cited from Ludolph v Wegner, ibid.

7

\

IItt

1 I

1

J I

prescription by immemorial usage). In fact the court a quo the District Court of

Colombo specifically classified this as a case of vetustas.

I hold the view that the court a quo was in error when it held that the presumption

of vetustas applied having regard to the exercise of this right since 1906. The

argument of the Defendant that much water flowed down under the channel so to

speak from the year 1906 and such long user created vetustas does not hold water

in the teeth of the contrary evidence i.e water began to flow from 1906 only

because of an agreement between the parties. Thus admittedly the originating

terminal was fixed in the form of an agreement in 1906 and as I refer to it presently

in the judgment the parties admitted to the 1906 origin of the right in their

admissions at the trial. Inasmuch as it is not impossible to show when the right to

discharge water began the doctrine of vetustas or immemorial usage has no

application. It is nobody's contention that water began to flow from time

immemorial. So the learned District Judge misapplied the presumption when there

was good enough evidence before him to disapply it.

Having thus disposed of vetustas I would proceed to consider the next question

whether prescription of an incorporeal right such as is claimed by the Defendant in

the cases arises from the exercise and user of this right for ten years or upwards.

The defence of prescription must fail for the same reasons. I have to assert at the

inception that the Defendant has not adduced any evidence to establish that it

acquired a prescriptive right to discharge water since 1906. The admission made at

the trial puts paid to this defence.

8

Effect of Admission of parties

It was admitted by both parties at the trial that the defendant company commenced

to enjoy the right to let rainwater on to the plaintiff's land, as a "permissive right"

since 1906. This admission on the part of both parties to the suit connotes that the

grant of a servitude was agreed upon as far back as 1906 but the evidence led in the

case does not support the contention that this servitutal right to discharge water

turned adverse at some point of time to the detriment of the Plaintiff in such a way

as to confer a prescriptive right on the Defendant. If the commencement of the

servitutal right is referable to a consensual agreement as admitted by parties, it is

founded on sufferance. Such user cannot be construed as adverse to the interest of

the owner of the servient tenement-the Plaintiff in the case.

Basnayake c.J (with Pulle J. agreeing) succinctly elucidated the quantum of evidence

necessary in regard to proof of prescriptive user in de Soysa v Fonseka6

"Servitudes are onerous and the law does not favour theml and it is incumbent

on a person who claims a servitude to establish his claim by clear and

satisfactory evidence of the strongest kind. There is no evidence that the user

which commenced with the leave and licence of the owner was at any time

converted to an adverse user. When a user commences with leave and /icencel

the presumption is that its continuance rests on the permission originally

granted. Clear and unmistakable evidence of the commencement of an

adverse user thereafter for the prescribed period is necessary to entitle the

claimant to a decree in his favour."

6 (1957) 58 N.L.R 501

9

r

II I II

I

t I l ! l I I I1

J r ,

~

I I

\ I

r

f I )

~

I

1 I

I

If at all any semblance of adversity was displayed it manifested itself, as has been

spoken to by the Plaintiff's witness, in the form of an increased volume of water

which lashed on to the land of the Plaintiff, in 1991 when water flooded the servient

tenement and damaged the walls of the Plaintiff's stores. There were exchanges of

correspondence over this overflow and consequent damage between the parties as

evidenced by the marked documents P2, P3, P4 and PS and the evidence indicates

that after a site inspection, the Water Supply and Drainage Division of the Municipal

Engineers Department, Maligakanda also intervened to write to the chairman of the

Defendant on lSth January 1993 highlighting the fact that wastewater had been

discharged through the open rainwater drain and it was not intended for the

purpose (sic). This letter dated lSth January 1993 has been marked as P6. The

Defendant gave no evidence and there is nothing on record that admits of

prescriptive user.

On the other hand the documentary evidence in P2, P4 and PS marked and

produced on behalf of the Plaintiff establishes the fact that there had been

continuous flow of wastewater and consequent damage to the Plaintiff's premises.

The document marked as P2 dated 11th February 1992 which was written by the

Stores Manager of the Plaintiff to the Managing Director of the Defendant

addresses the discharge of waste water as a continuing process in the following

manner-

"We invite your attention to our letter of 21/5/1991 and regret to inform that

waste water from your premises continues to flow into our premises." (first

paragraph of the body of the letter).

10

I I

f I ! i

I I I If 1I

1 j

J i I i 1

! i I

Whilst the oral testimony referred to increased rainwater which caused damage, the

documentary evidence in the form of P2 and P6 highlighted the continuous

discharge of waste water. The document marked P3 which was a reply by the

Defendant to P2 is quite explicit in that it only refers to an arrangement in 1906 to

let rainwater drain into the Plaintiff's premises. There was no arrangement to drain

off waste water to the neighbor's land. Thus the story of discharge of waste water

as confirmed by P6 remains uncontradicted.

At this stage it has to be borne in mind that the servitude claimed if at all was in

respect of discharging rainwater through the premises of the Plaintiff. Does it

extend to the imposition of a more onerous burden of subjecting the land of the

Plaintiff to injury or occasioning a discharge of waste water? These are issues that

this case throws up but the learned District Judge does not seem to have

appreciated them.

Before I embark upon a survey of the law relating to the matters in issue, I deem it

apposite to refer to the oral testimony led in the case which goes towards

determining the rights of the parties. The important question in this type of cases

that arises for determination is in what circumstances the Defendant enjoys a right

of letting normal rainwater from his land on to the Plaintiff's land and whether the

Defendant caused any alterations for the natural flow of the water and thereby

increased the volume of water from his land on to the Plaintiff's land. Or regardless

of the question of human interference on the dominant tenement which would

cause an overflow, whether the overflow and consequent damage to the property

of the Plaintiff would be reasonable in the facts and circumstances of this case is

another issue that the Court has to engage with. If there was no evidence to indicate

that the increase of flow of water was owing to human interference, was the

11

I 1 II

I

I ! I i ! I! [

! t ! II

IiIIi

Il ,

flooding of the Plaintiff's land authorized within the servitude that the Defendant

enjoyed?

In the instant appeal before me, I have already commented as to how the Plaintiff

and his predecessors in title permitted the natural flow of rainwater from the

Defendant's land to the Plaintiff's land for a long time. To this right the Plaintiff has

had no objection. But in 1991, the Plaintiff began to protest against this right,

because the overflow of water was so substantial that it caused damage to the

Plaintiff's store.

The Plaintiff's witness Balasingham Sunderaraj in his evidence has stated that lithe

water coming from the Defendant's land goes to the drain and thereafter comes to

our land and thence it goes out". (pages 61, 62 and 66 of Appeal Brief). There is no

dispute that as a consequence of the overflow the Plaintiff sustained damage. From

the evidence of Sunderaraj, it is apparent that although the Defendant had been

letting its rainwater through the Plaintiff's land, the volume of water increased in

1991 causing damage to his property and this made the Plaintiff make a formal

complaint to the defendant company in 1991. It was followed up by P2, P4 and PS in

1992. In 1993 the Municipal Engineer wrote to the chairman of the Defendant.

Although before the institution of this action in 1994 both parties had

communicated with each other to settle this dispute with the help of the Municipal

Council Engineer's Department, these attempts proved abortive and were of no

avail. Even after the site inspection made by the officials of MuniCipal Council

Engineer's Department, the dispute appears not to have been settled. The

document marked P6, (which is not a document among the documents rejected by

the District Judge, see page 9 of the judgment and page 84 of the Appeal Brief), is a

letter sent by the Municipal Engineer to the Chairman of the defendant company,

12

I I I

after inspection of the place on lih January, 1993. The second paragraph of this

latter states as follows:

lilt is observed that you are discharging waste water through the open

rainwater drain which is not intended for the purpose. Hence, you are advised

to connect this waste water into your sewer system after obtaining approval

from this Division".

The evidence given on behalf of the Plaintiff demonstrates that the Defendant

exceeded the scope and extent of the right granted, in or about 1991, that finally

resulted in the Plaintiff sustaining damage. (See Sunderaraj's evidence at page 61).

These matters are clearly established by Plaintiff's witness Sunderaraj and the

documents marked P3 to P6. (See Sunderaraj's evidence at page 69 of Appeal brief).

Having examined the facts, let me now turn to the law concerning drainage rights

and as the natural flow of rainwater is in dispute it is pertinent to begin with the

rules of law which have evolved in this connection.

Natural flow of rainwater

It is axiomatic that at best for the upper owner, his right extends so far as to require

the lower neighbor to accept the IInatural flow.,,7 The term IInatural" is inherently

confusing for it has two distinct meanings. In its primary sense it signifies IIthat

which exists in or by nature and is not artificial". It also means, however, IIthat which

is ordinary and usual, even though it may be artificial". In the instant case before me

if there was no protest for a long time against the discharge of water from the

higher lying owner to the land of the low lying owner, parties must be taken to have

appreciated the quantum of water and its original pattern of flow. The dispute

7 See Williams v Harris 1998 (3) SA 970 (SCA)

13

I I

I

,

seems to have begun in 1991 when there was an excessive discharge that not only

flooded the land of the Plaintiff but also damaged its stores. It becomes incumbent

upon the learned District Judge in the circumstances to consider whether this

excessive burden could be imposed on the servient tenement over and above the

obligation which it admittedly took upon itself in 1906.

The Roman-Dutch law recognizes the natural flow of clean rainwater from the upper

tenement to the lower tenement, but it does not recognize letting of water with

stones and rubbish. The interest of the servient tenement was safeguarded by the

obligation being imposed on the dominant tenement to keep the sewer clean and

under repair-see Grotius. 8

Admittedly the Defendant's land is at a higher elevation than that of the Plaintiff's

land and therefore there would be a natural flow of water from the Defendant's

land to the Plaintiff's land. What has been relied upon as the source of the servitude

is the existence of the agreement in 1906 though I have already referred to the

judgment of de Villiers, c.J in Ludolph v Wegner wherein the other modes of

creation of drainage rights were elaborated in extensor thus:

{1} A right to discharge water upon a neighbour's land may exist by virtue

of a duly created servitude, or by virtue of the natural situation of the

locality.

{2} If it be difficult from the nature of the surface to ascertain what is the

natural channel, then the course in which the water has immemorially

flowed will be considered as having had a natural and legitimate origin.

8 1 Grotius, bk.11.,ch.34, sec24.

9 (1888), 6 S.C 193

14

I!f I 1 j

i I I I I

(3) Where water has flowed in an artificial channel for thirty years or

more, it may be presumed, in the absence of evidence to the contrary,

to have flowed thus immemorially.

(4) When once the right to discharge water into such a channel has been

established the person entitled to the right may increase the ordinary

flow to the prejudice of the lower proprietor, if such increase be

occasioned in the ordinary course of draining, ploughing, or irrigating

the upper land, and be not greater than is reasonable under

circumstances. If the channel becomes choked through neglect, he may

compel the lower proprietor to clean it himself or to allow him - the

upper proprietor - to do so" .10

All these elements were restated in the same tenor by Grenier J in the case of

Samuel Appu et al v. Lord Elphinstone et al.11

Natural Servitude

The Roman-Dutch law of the servitude, known as ius f/uminis, is also defined by

Maasdorp12 in the following terms:

II No action will lie either against an upper or lower proprietor for damage due

to an alteration in the natural drainage, if such alteration is due not to any

work expressly constructed with that object, but merely in consequence of the

enjoyment of his property and the cultivation of his land in a fair and

reasonable manner in the ordinary way. E.g., by making irrigation furrows

where there can be no cultivation without them, or by cutting ditches for the

10Nathan's Common Law of South Africa, Vol. 1, p. 484 et seq

11 12 N.L.R 321 at 328-329.

12 Institute of Cape Law, Vol. II, pp. 123 and 124

15

I1Il f t

f t I

\

drainage of his landl provided he does not collect the water into one united

stream and then discharge it on to his neighbourls land in a more forcible and

destructive manner than it would otherwise have got there naturallYI for every

one ought to improve his own land in such a way that he does not thereby

deteriorate the land of his neighbour. But where an upper proprietor is

entitled to use a particular channel for the discharge of his surplus or rain

water he will be entitled also to increase the ordinary flow into such channell

even to the prejudice of the lower proprietorl if such increase be occasioned in

the ordinary course of drainingl ploughingl or irrigating his landsl and be not

greater than is reasonable under the circumstances II.

Chief Justice Maasdorp further elaborated that,

"A natural servitude of this nature iSI of coursel limited in its extent. The lower

proprietor is obliged only to receive such water as flows in the ordinary course

of nature from the upper tenement. He is not bound to receive water which

the upper proprietor has discharged into his premises by any artificial means

which alters the natural drainage of the land, such as a ditch or channel". 13

Whilst setting out the qualifications attached to the servitude, the above passages

also demonstrate the scope and extent of the servitude.

Actio acquae pluviae arcendae (actio a.p.a)

Even though the Plaintiff pleaded in the alternative that the Defendant wrongfully

and unlawfully from about 1992 carried out alterations to the natural drainage to

the land and/or caused alterations to the land which increased the volume of water

and/or other matter to flow on to the Plaintiff's land, I must state that this act on

13 Maasdorp, Institute of Cape Law, Vol. II, p. 172

16

f i i , ! II!

f I lI f

t f [ ! I i I !

\

f I i f I i

I f

the part of the Defendant was not established having regard to the evidence. This

brings me to the form of action known as actio acquae pluviae arcendae (actio

a.p.a or the action 'for keeping off rainwater') which usually forms the foundation of

the action to compel an owner to remove any works erected on his land which

diverted the natural flow, and restore the land to its previous condition. 14 So the

essential requirement of the action was that by the work of man the natural flow of

the water had been diverted. Cicero pointed out that there were two species of

rainwater that had to be considered: "One which does damage because of a fault in

the land, and the other because of the work of man."1S Only in respect of this latter

species of harmful rainwater did liability arise under this action. Absent evidence of

human interference, Ulpian said that the action will "never lie where the nature of

the ground causes the damage." 16

In a nutshell the claim of the Plaintiff is not based on actio a.p.a. There is no positive

proof of a construction of a structure on the part of the Defendant and abatement

thereof. The following passage from the judgment of Solomon J A in Cape Town

Council v Benning17 brings out the point:

lilt would appearl thereforel according to these authoritiesl that the owner of

land upon which some work has been donel the effect of which was to divert

rainwater from its natural course and to discharge it onto the property of a

third personl was liable under the actio aquae pluviae arcendae at most to

abate the mischief and to make good any damage sustained after litis

contestatio; and further that the person who had actually done the workl

14 See 0.39.3.3.3.4. 15Topiza, 9.39

16 0.39.3.1.14

171917 AD 315 at 321

17

1 r It I f IIIf i !I i ! I

t I

f II, i !

t,

r

Jf , I

~

whether he was the owner himself or a tenant or other person, was liable for

the damage suffered before litis contestatio under an entirely different form of

action. "

If actio a.p.a is not the action that was instituted by the Plaintiff in the case, then

what form has it taken? Certainly the Plaintiff cannot be restricted to actio a.p.a.

The pleadings and issues No. l(a), 1 (b), 2 (a) and 2 (b) which go as follows

determine the form of action.

l(a). Did the defendant wrongfully and unlawfully, from about 1992

discharge sewage and/or water containing sewage and/or noxious matter

on to the plaintiff's land? (vide paragraph 6 of the plaint).

l(b)./f so, is the plaintiff entitled to judgment as prayed for in prayer (b) to the

plaint?

2(a). Did the defendant wrongfully and unlawfully from about 1992 cause

water to flow into the plaintiff's land?

2(b). If so, is the plaintiff entitled to judgment as prayed for in prayer (a) to the

plaint?

Issues call in question the discharge of sewage and water that would amount to

wrongful and unlawful invasion of the private rights of enjoyment of the Plaintiff's

property. I have referred to the evidence that consequent to the deluge that

submerged the Plaintiff's land, the original pattern of flow was disturbed and there

began a series of correspondence between the parties as reflected in both the oral

and documentary evidence.

This brings me to the issue of wrongfulness and unlawfulness that is alleged by the

Plaintiff. Is it wrongful and unlawful to discharge excess water over and above the

18

II ! Ii i i IJf

f i IIlr t tI I

II,

scope and extent of servitutal right enjoyed by the Defendant? Is it wrongful and

unlawful to discharge sewage or wastewater as P2, P4 and P6 allege? It is the

substantive law that has to regulate the right-duty relationship between the parties

and I will presently turn to it. In other words a consideration of these questions also

surfaces to the fore the question of whether in the process of permitting the natural

flow of rainwater to pass through his land the owner of the servient tenement is

limited in his duty to accept excessive water on to his land.

Limitations on the Lower Holder's Obligations

The Defendant has no right to let his excess water, other than the natural rainwater,

on to the Plaintiff's land, without the Plaintiff's consent. The Defendant has the right

to do so only to the same extent as he was permitted in the past. If the Defendant

has excess water, he must have other means to let it go without causing any

damage to the Plaintiff's land. He must make other channels or way out to drain the

water from his land without letting the excess water into the Plaintiff's land.

The Defendant could initiate this process in consultation with the Municipal

Engineers whose technical advice would be material. No evidence has been led as to

the steps the Defendant took in order to relieve the Plaintiff from the excessive

burden, more particularly since the inspection of the site of dispute by the

Municipal Engineers in 1993.

As to the obligation on the part of the Plaintiff-the owner of the servient tenement,

it is my respectful view that by the common law of drainage, the Plaintiff possesses

a jus nature as owner of land to demand that the natural drainage which served his

land, be not disturbed to his detriment. The onus would be strictly on the Defendant

19

I

f t I I It I t i I I

f i

\ i I I,I

;

t \

to justify such disturbance. In the South African case of Pappalardo v HaulS Hurt AJe

emphasized that 'natural flow' referred to the manner in which the water would

have flowed, both as to quantity and locality, from the one property to the other

over the land in its undisturbed state and I must state that the court a quo paid no

heed to what may be called the 'original pattern of flow' from the Defendant's to

the Plaintiff's land.

The pertinent holding in the case is worthy of repetition:

"Although the quantity of water thus discharged may equal the quantity of

water flowing down from undisturbed landl the lower owner could still be

called upon to cope with a pattern of flow which would not naturally have

occurredl but only if the higher lying owner had acquired an express

servitude to this effect by registration, prescription or by agreement. "

The learned District Judge in the court a quo did not bear in mind the all important

consideration that the Defendant had not acquired any express servitude by the

recognized modes to let in excessive water that went on to cause damage, quite

contrary to agreement which applied only to natural flow. It is also pertinent to

observe that the allegation of waste water had been continuing till 1992. In this

connection it is useful to recall the dicta that every occupier is bound to prevent filth

from his drain from filtering through the ground into neighbour's land. 19 That is to

say, every man should keep his own filth on his own ground. Tenant vs. Goldwin.2o

He is liable even when leaking drains were not known to be so. Humphries vs.

18 (2009) ZASCA 160

19 Addison on Torts, c. IV, s. 1 Nuisance pp. 156 and 333

20 1 Salk 21, 360

20

It ! ; I,

II

f!t

1I1 l I

I

I

1

I

Cousins;21 where moisture escapes - Alston vs. Grant;22 Billard vs. Toulvson;23 or

escape of water from a cellar. Show vs. Whiteheal. 24

The above principle was followed in the case of Siyadoris vs. Silva/5 where a large

quantity of silt was carried along the drains in the Defendant's land which he had

cleared and planted with rubber into a water channel in the Plaintiff's field, the

channel was blocked and eventually breached, and the silt overflowed into the field

and rendered it unfit for cultivation as a field. The Plaintiff sued the Defendant for

damages. The District Judge held that the Plaintiff should have kept the channel

clear as it was in his field, and that as he had failed to do so, he was not entitled to

damages. But Schneider J. in appeal, held that the Defendant was liable in damages

on the basis of the principle "sic utere tuo ut alienum non laedas".

So much for the substantive law on both the limitations on the sevitutal obligation

to receive natural flow and the duty on the part of a dominant tenement not to

dispatch sewage or waste.

The substantive law on both these aspects confirms that one need not put a label on

the Plaintiffs right of action but in my view the terms of the pleadings and the

declaration sought also embody the suit under the Roman Law actions based on

immissiones. The immissio of a corporeal thing on to another's property was

actionable under the Roman Law. This is referred to by Professor Schultens in his

1956 Annual Survey at page 133 in which he gives the translation of Digest 8.5.8.5 as

follows:-

21 (1877) 2 C.P.D. 239

22 (154) 3 E. 7. B. 128

23 (1885) 29 Ch. D 115 CA.

24 (1884) 27 Ch. D. 588

25 24 N.L.R.197

21

i I

I I I , t ,Ii ,I

~ III i

~ I

~ I

~ tIIIIi ;II[!

1

1 1

regard to this servitude. He has not borne in mind the limitations on the lower-lying

neighbor's obligations in regard to this right. In the circumstances I hold that the

judgment of the District Judge has failed to look into all aspects of law and facts

engulfed in the issues raised in this case.

In the circumstances, I set aside the judgment entered in this case and enter

judgment in favour of the Plaintiff as prayed for in the prayer (a) and (c) of the

plaint.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

23