==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of

Section 331 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka

Complainant

Court of Appeal Case No:

CA/HCC 0026/2026

High Court of Matale Vs,

Case No. MT/HC/130/2019

Walawwaththe Gedara Mahinda

Gunawansa alias Kiri Mama

Accused

And Now Between

Walawwaththe Gedara Mahinda

Gunawansa alias Kiri Mama

Accused-Appellant

Vs,

Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondent

2

Before: Amal Ranaraja, J.

Dr. Sumudu Premachandra, J.

Counsel: Mohan Weerakon, PC with Sandamali Pieris for the Accused-

Appellant.

Akila Dalpatadu, SC for the State.

Argued on: 10.07.2026

Judgment on: 31.08.2026

Judgment

Amal Ranaraja. J,

1. The accused appellant hereinafter referred to as appellant has been

indicted in the High Court of Matale in Case No. MT/HC/130/2019.

The charges in the indictment are as follows;

01. On or around the 01st of March, 2014, within the jurisdiction

of this Court in Ovilikanda, you, the above named accused,

have committed an act of sexual harassment or molestation

against one Epita Gedara Madhavi Nisansala Ratnasuriya, by

kissing such person’s face with your mouth; thereby you have

committed an offence of sexual harassment punishable under

Section 345 of the Penal Code as amended by the Amendment

Act No. 22 of 1995 and No. 16 of 2006.

3

02. In the time, location and course of action of the above first

charge, you, the above named accused, have committed an

act of sexual harassment or molestation against one Epita

Gedara Madhavi Nisansala Ratnasuriya, by kissing such

person’s breasts with your mouth; thereby you have

committed an offence of sexual harassment punishable under

Section 345 of the Penal Code of Sri Lanka as amended by the

Amendment Act No. 22 of 1995 and No. 16 of 2006.

03. In the time, location and course of action of the above first

charge, you, the above named accused, in order to gain some

sexual gratification, have used a certain part of your body, on

the certain body part of one Epita Gedara Madhavi Nisansala

Ratnasuriya, a person under 16 years of age, by licking her

female genitalia; thereby you have committed an offence of

“Grave Sexual Abuse” punishable under Section 365B (2)(b) of

the Penal Code of Sri Lanka as amended by Penal Code

(Amendment) Act No.22 of 1995 and No. 29 of 1998.

04. In the time, location and course of action of the above first

charge, you, the above named accused, in order to gain some

sexual gratification have used a certain part of your body, on

the certain body part of one Epita Gedara Madhavi Nisansala

Ratnasuriya, a person under 16 years of age, by inserting a

finger into her female genitalia; thereby you have committed

an offence of “Grave Sexual Abuse” punishable under Section

365B (2)(b) of the Penal Code of Sri Lanka as amended by

Penal Code (Amendment) Act No.22 of 1995 and No. 29 of

1998.

05. In the time, location and course of action of the above first

charge, you, the above named accused, have committed rape

against one Epita Gedara Madhavi Nisansala Ratnasuriya, a

minor, under the age of 16; thereby you have committed an

4

offence punishable under Section 364(2)(e) of the Penal Code

of Sri Lanka as amended by Penal Code (Amendment) Act No.

22 of 1995.

2. At the conclusion of the trial the learned High Court Judge has found

the appellant guilty of the second, fourth, and fifth charges, and also

proceeded to acquit the appellant of the first and third charges. Upon

the appellant being convicted of the second, fourth, and fifth charges,

he has been sentenced as follows;

i. Has imposed a fine of Rs. 5000.00, with a term of 6 months

simple imprisonment in default, together with a term of 6

months rigorous imprisonment, in respect of the second charge

ii. Has imposed a fine of Rs. 5000.00, with a term of 6 months

simple imprisonment in default together with a term of 8 years

rigorous imprisonment, in respect of the fourth charge

iii. Has imposed a fine of Rs.5000.00 together with a term of 14

years rigorous imprisonment, in respect of the fifth charge.

The appellant has also been directed to pay a sum of

Rs.500,000.00 as compensation to PW01 with a term of 24

months simple imprisonment, in default.

3. The learned High Court Judge has also directed that the substantial

terms of imprisonment shall run consecutively.

4. The appellant aggrieved by the conviction, disputed judgement together

with the sentencing order has preferred the instant appeal to this court

5

Case of the Prosecution

5. At the time referenced in the charges, PW01, a 13 year old girl, has been

residing with her father and grandparents. The appellant, a neighbour,

has been associating with PW01’s father. Consequently, the appellant

has regularly visited the residence to consume alcohol with PW01’s

father.

6. Additionally, the appellant has also visited the residence during

afternoons after PW01 has returned from school, and sexually abused

PW01 when she was alone in the house. On the day of the incident,

PW01 has returned from the school and had been at the residence with

her grandparents. Her grandparents have been in the kitchen cooking,

while PW01 has been in a separate room of the house.

7. The appellant has then entered the room where PW01 was, taken her

by her hand and lead her to a location near a door, by a veranda. There,

the appellant has undressed PW01, kissed her breasts, inserted a finger

into her vagina, and subsequently engaged in penile-vaginal

penetration with PW01 without her consent.

8. The grandfather of PW01 has witnessed the incident upon his arrival at

that part of the residence. He then has made accusations against the

appellant who has subsequently escaped. Following this, a complaint

has been made to the police and an investigation commenced. PW01

has been directed to undergo a medical examination, and the appellant

has been arrested.

9. Dr. D.L. Waidyaratne consultant Judicial Medical Officer has examined

PW01. The medicolegal report he prepared has been tendered as

evidence and marked පැ02.

6

Case of the Appellant

10. Appellant has maintained that he did not commit any of the acts

described by PW01.

11. When the matter was taken up for argument the learned President’s

Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant urged the following

grounds of appeal;

I. The learned High Court Judge has not analysed the evidence.

II. The judgement has been delivered without a proper assessment

of evidence.

III. PW01’s evidence is vague and is not cogent.

IV. Medical evidence does not support the charges.

12. The appellant has contended that the prosecution witnesses have failed

to properly identify him. However, PW01 has testified that the appellant

being a neighbour and a friend of her father, had frequently visited their

residence to consume liquor with her father.

ප්‍ර: නිසංසලා ඔය මාමා හිටියනේ උඩහ නෙදර? උ: ඔව්. ප්‍ර: ඒ මාමා ඇනරේන නෙන කව්ද ඒ නෙදර හිටිනේ? උ: කව්ුෙත් හිටිනේ නැහැ. ප්‍ර: මාමා නිසංසලා කියන විදිහට න ාේන එනහම නිතරම තමේනේ නෙදර හන හිේදා නිසංසලා මාමාෙ දේනො නම දේනේ නැතිවුනාට මාමානේ? උ: ඔව්. ප්‍ර: නමම නඩුනව් චූදිත කවුද? ඒ කියේනේ විත්තිකාරයා කවුද? නපේෙේන ලේන අත දිේෙරලා? උ: (සාක්ෂිකාරිය විසිේ විත්තිකූඩුනව් සිටින විත්තිකු නදසය අත දිගු කර හදුනා ෙනී)

Vide Page 62 of the Brief

7

13. PW01 has had numerous opportunities to observe the appellant on

those occasions and has been therefore, very familiar with his

appearance. Consequently, PW01 has identified the appellant in open

Court while he was in the dock.

14. Given PW01’s sufficient description of the appellant as the offender,

investigators have been able to directly attribute the accusation to the

appellant, thus, obviating the need for an identification parade.

Regarding the appellant’s name, PW01 has consistently referred to him

as ‘kiri mama’, indicating a lack of any apparent attempt by the

investigators to fabricate or improperly influence evidence concerning

his identification.

15. When describing the incidents stated in the charges in her testimony

and to Dr. Waidyaratne, PW01 has provided the following;

ප්‍ර: මාමා එයානේ චූ එක තමේනේ චූ එක ඇතුලට දැම්මා කියේනේ? උ: ඔව්. ප්‍ර: දාලා නමාකක්ෂ හරි ක්‍රියාෙක්ෂ කලාද? උ: කරදර කලා. ... ප්‍ර: නිසංසලා කැමැත්නතේද සිටිනේ ඔය නෙලානව්? උ: නැහැ. ප්‍ර: නිසංස්ලා එපා කිව්ොද? උ: ඔව්. ... ප්‍ර: ඉස්සරනෙලා කිව්ොනේ ඇගිල්ල දැම්මා කිව්ො නේද ඒත් ඒ නෙලානව්මද වුනේ නමාකක්ෂද ඒ සිද්ධිය? උ: නමයා ඇගිල්ල දානනකාට යට ඔක්ෂනකාම රිදුනා. ප්‍ර: කානෙ ඇගිල්ලද? උ: මාමානේ ප්‍ර: නකානහට්ද දැම්නම්? උ: චූ පැත්තට ...

8

ප්‍ර: කරදර කලා කිව්ො කරදර ජාති නදකක්ෂ කලානේ නිසංසලාට ඒ ෙනේ තෙ නමානෙද කනල් ඒ දෙනස්? උ: පපුෙ අත ෙෑො.

Vide pages 78-81 of the Brief

Vide page 07 of the Brief

16. In these descriptions PW01 has remained consistent regarding the

incident of penile-vaginal penetration involving the appellant. Dr.

Waidyaratne, following the examination of PW01 has opined as follows;

“features suggestive of chronic intra-labial penetration were present”.

17. Intra-labial penetration is legally and medically classified as rape.

Legally, penetration does not require deep entry or damage to internal

tissues, like the hymen, to constitute rape. Any non-consensual

penetration of the vulva, even if it is just between the labia (outer lips

of the vagina) or against the vaginal opening, it is recognised by Courts

and medical forensic guidelines as consummated rape.

18. In the case of Perera Vs. The Attorney General (2012) 1 SLR 69, Ranjith

Silva J, has held as follows,

“In the book entitled The Essentials of Forensic Medicine and

Toxicology, Dr. K.S. Narayana Reddy at page 308 states as follows:

“The slightest penetration of the penis within the vulva, such as

the minimal passage of glands between the labia or with or

without the emission of semen or rupture of hymen constitutes

9

rape. There need not be a completed act of intercourse. Rape can

be committed even when there is inability to produce a penile

erection. Rape can occur without causing any injury and as such

negative evidence does not exclude rape.”

In the same book, the author at page 313, in regard to the rape of

children opines,

“In young children there are few or no signs of general violence,

for the child usually has no idea of what is happening and also

incapable of resisting. The hymen is deeply situated, and as the

vagina is very small it is impossible for the penetration of the

adult organ to take place. Usually, the penis is placed within the

vulva or between the thighs. As such the hymen is usually intact

and there may be little redness and tenderness in the vulva.”

It is my view that one should analyse the evidence in this case in the

light of the above-mentioned expert medical opinion as the opinion

expressed above is the opinion of almost all the text writers on forensic

medicine and it has gained such notorious that any quote can take

judicial notice of the same.”

19. Hence, this opinion of Dr. Waidyaratne is consistent with the narrative

of PW01, which indicates that the appellant had indulged in penile-

vaginal penetration with her on the day in issue, and also on prior

occasions.

20. PW01 has testified that the initial complaint regarding the incidents

referenced in the charges was made to the police four days after these

events occurred. Subsequently, an investigator also has testified that

the first complaint had been made on October 5th, 2014. In these

circumstances, it is apparent that the incidents involving the appellant

must have occurred on or about October 1st, 2014. Therefore, the

10

prosecution must have been able to establish an approximate date on

which the appellant committed the offences for which he has been

convicted.

21. It is not generally essential for the prosecution to establish the exact

date stated in a charge. The law usually allows a reasonable margin of

variants, provided the core elements of the charge are proven, and the

defence is not prejudiced. For most offences, (e.g.; assault, theft and

sexual offences) the exact date is not an essential ingredient of the

offence. The prosecution is only required to prove that the offence

occurred generally within the time and before the charges were filed.

If the exact date is unknown, stating “on or about” a specific date is

legally valid.

22. However, the prosecution must establish the exact date or a precise

timeframe in specific situations;

i. If time is a material ingredient of the offence.

ii. If the defence raises a complete alibi for the exact time alleged,

the prosecution cannot arbitrarily shift the timeline to convict.

23. In the matter at hand, the precise timing of the alleged offence is not

considered an essential component of the charge the appellant faces.

Furthermore, the appellant has not raised an alibi.

24. Given these circumstances, it is not necessary for the prosecution to

establish an exact timeframe, in which the alleged offence was

committed.

25. In the case of Maarukku Kankanamalage Anura Kumarasiri Vs. The

Attorney General CA/0036/2020, decided on 11.06.2024, Sampath B.

Abeykoon J held as follows,

11

“Section 165(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of 1979,

which provides guidance on particulars as to time, place and the person

that should be mentioned in a charge reads as follows;

165(1). The charge shall contain such particulars as to the time

and place of the alleged offence and as to the person (if any)

against whom and as to the thing (if any) in respect of which it

was committed as are reasonably sufficient to give the accused

notice of the manner with which he is charged and to show that

the offence is not prescribed.

...

The above mentioned relevant statutory provisions clearly stipulate the

purpose of mentioning the date of an offence and other particulars is to

give sufficient notice to any accused person as to the charge against him

and for the purposes of showing the offence has not been prescribed.

Any omission or error in giving the required particulars in a charge

becomes material only if such error or omission has caused the accused

to be misled as to the charge or charges preferred against him.”

26. Further in the case of R. Vs. Dossi 12 Cr. App. R., 158, it was held as

follows;

“That a date specified in an indictment is not a material matter unless

it is an essential part of the alleged offence; the defendant maybe

convicted although the Jury find that the offence was committed on a

date other than that specified in the indictment. Amendment of the

indictment is unnecessary, although it will be a good practice to do so

(provided there is no prejudice) where it is clear on the evidence that if

the offence as committed at all, it was committed on the day other than

that specified.”

12

27. As for the alleged contradictions, they relate to peripheral factual

details, rather than the central issues in dispute. Specifically, they

concern whether PW01 attended school on the day of the incident, the

time the appellant came to PW01’s residence, namely whether he

arrived while PW01 was having lunch, or only after lunch, and certain

items the appellant had allegedly promised to buy or had already

bought for PW01.

28. In my view, these inconsistencies do not undermine the core of the

prosecution’s case. They do not go to the essential elements that must

be proved nor do they materially affect the credibility of the key account

of the incident itself. Minor discrepancies of timing and incidental

circumstances are common in witness testimony, particularly where

events are recalled from memory and described at different times. What

matters is whether the witness is consistent on the main narrative and

the material facts that establish the offence.

29. Accordingly, the contradictions identified are confined to collateral

matters and do not create a reasonable doubt as to the prosecution’s

principal version of events. The contradictions are therefore not

material

30. In the case of Mahathun and Others Vs. The Attorney General [2015] 1

SLR 74, H.N.J. Perera, J. (as he was then), has held:

“(1) When faced with contradictions in a witness testimonial, the Court

must bear in mind the nature and significance of the contradictions,

viewed in light of the whole of the evidence given by the witness.

(2) Too great a significance cannot be attached to minor discrepancies,

or contradictions.

13

(3) What is important is whether the witness is telling the truth on the

material matters concerned with the event.

(4) Where evidence is generally reliable much importance should not

be attached to the minor discrepancies and technical errors.

(5) The Court of Appeal will not lightly disturb the findings of a trial

judge with regard to the acceptance or rejection of testimony of a

witness unless it is manifestly wrong.”

31. Further, in the case of Best Footwear (Pvt) Ltd., and Two Others Vs.

Aboosally, Former Minister of Labour & Vocational Training and Others

(1997) 2 SLR 137, His Lordship Jayasuriya J held as follows;

“Witnesses should not be disbelieved on account of trivial discrepancies

and omissions and the Court should look at the entirety and totality of

the material placed before it in ascertaining whether the contradiction

is weighty or trivial”

32. PW02, the grandfather of PW01, despite his 85 years and associated

disabilities, has corroborated PW01’s account by witnessing the

appellant sexually abuse PW01. Though he has not been able to detail

what he witnessed, such a limitation, however, does not retract from

the central corroborative value of his evidence.

33. Further, the learned High Court Judge has not “predicted” anything.

The learned High Court Judge has considered the evidence of all

witnesses and arrived at his finding after careful evaluation of evidence.

He has examined the evidence in their entirety, refusing to

compartmentalize pieces of evidence in a vacuum. Having undertaken

this holistic approach, the learned High Court Judge has applied the

correct methodology and arrived at findings that are both cogent and

sustainable.

14

34. The appellant has been convicted of very serious offences. The learned

High Court Judge has carefully considered this fact. He has also

thoroughly evaluated the matters presented in mitigation (factors that

might lead to a lesser sentence), and the arguments advanced to have

the sentence increased.

35. Consequently, the reasons provided before the punishment was

imposed in the disputed sentencing order are clear logical and justified.

Hence, the substantive terms of imprisonment shall commence from

the date this judgement is read and explained to the appellant by the

High Court Judge in Matale.

36. In those circumstances, I am not inclined to interfere with the

conviction disputed judgement or the sentencing order and I proceed to

affirm the same and dismiss the appeal.

37. I make no order regarding costs.

Appeal dismissed.

38. The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this Judgement to the

High Court of Matale for compliance.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Dr. Sumudu Premachandra, J.

I agree

Judge of the Court of Appeal