IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRAIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

In the matter of an application in terms of Article 140

of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka seeking a mandate in the nature

of writ of certiorari and writ of mandamus read

together with section 07 of the High Court of the

Provinces (Special Provisions) Act N. 19 of 1999.

Court of Appeal case no. CAlPHC 123/2012

High Court case no. 277/2011

Kithsiri Pradeep Witharana,

No.19, Colombo Road, Padukka.

Petitioner Appellant

Vs.

1. P. Leka Geethanjalee Perera,

The Provincial Commissioner of Housing

of the Western Province,

The Department of the Provincial

Commissioner of Housing - Western

Province,

No. 204, Densil Kobbekaduwa Mawatha,

Battaramulla.

2. K.P.C. Malkanthi,

No. 553, Kumara Mawatha, Padukka.

, 3. The Attorney General,

Attorney General's Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondent Respomdent. II1

I

1 ! j

J 1

I f I

I

Before : H.C.J.Madawala J.

: L.T.B. Dehideniya J.

Counsel : Atheek Imam for the Petitioner Appellant.

: Chandrasiri Wanigapra for the 2nd Respondent..

Argued on : 27.10.2016

W ritt~n . } 1 st and 3 rd Respondents filed on 03.01.201 submIssIons: Appellant filed on 19.01.2017

Decided on : 02.03.2017

L.T.B. Dehideniya J.

The Petitioner Appellant was the tenant of the premises no. 19 of

Colombo Road, Padukka, under the 2nd Respondent Respondent. The 2nd

Respondent Respondent landlord (hereinafter called and referred to as the

landlord) made an application to the 1 st Respondent Respondent

Commissioner of National Housing (hereinafter called and referred to as

the 1 st Respondent) under section 18A of the Rent Act, as amended,

seeking pennission to demolish the building which is more than 40 years

old and to re-develop. After inquiry, the 1st Respondent allowed the

application subject to the conditions that the landlord shall pay Rs.

280,0001- as compensation to the tenant and the re-development shall be

concluded as per the approved plan within 24 months from the date of

tenant vacating the premises.

Being aggrieved by the said order of the 1 st Respondent, the tenant

instituted action in the High Court of Colombo seeking for mandate in the

nature of a writ of certiorari to quash the order of the 1 st Respondent and

a writ of mandamus compelling the 1 st Respondent to hold a fresh

inquiry. The learned High Court Judge dismissed the application. This

appeal is from the said dismissal.

t !f

1 I

!

I

Section 18A (1) of the Rent Act reads thus;

18A.

(1) The Commissioner for National Housing may-

(a) upon application made in that behalf by owner of any

building used for residential or business purposes and

constructed at least forty years prior to the date of the

application;

(b) after affording the occupants of such building an

opportunity of being heard, make order authorizing such

owner to demolish such building if the Commissioner is

satisfied that the re-development of the land on which

such building stands is necessary for the more efficient

utilization of such land.

Under this section the two requirements that are necessary is that

1. The building is more than 40 years old.

2. The Commissioner shall satisfy that the re-development IS

necessary for more efficient utilization of the land.

The learned Counsel for the 1 st and 3rd Respondents submitted that

the first requirement is objective and the second is subjective. The fact

that the building standing on the land is more than 40 years is not in issue.

The tenant did not contest that fact. Therefore it can be considered as an

admitted fact that the building is more than 40 years old. Whether the

land can be utilized more efficiently by re-developing, is a matter for the

Commissioner to decide.

The Act has not specified any condition other than the age of the

building. The Commissioner has to consider whether the commercial

building that has been constructed more that 40 years ago to suit the

I I

socio-economic environment prevailed during that time is good enough to

serve the present day requirements. The land area does not expand with

the expansion of the population and their requirements. Therefore the

only solution to fulfill the need of the society is to utilize the land more

effectively. Whether this can be done by just a renovation/modification or

whether the building needs a structural change is matter to be decided by

the Commissioner. Whether the building is in a dilapidated condition or

not is not material. What is material is that whether the re-development of

the land on which such building stands is necessary for the more efficient

utilization of such land.

In the present case the 1 st Respondent has come to the conclusion

that the re-development is necessary for the more efficient utilization of

the land.

The Counsel for the 1 st Respondent cited the case of Aboobucker v.

Wijesinghe [1990] 2 Sri L R 278 where it has been held that "When the

Legislature enacted Section 18A in the terms "if the Commissioner is

satisfied" the evident intention of the Legislature was to make the

Commissioner the sole judge of whether conditions existed to warrant

demolition."

The tenant's Counsel argue that the financial capacity of the

landlord to re-develop the building is a matter that has to be taken into

consideration by the 1 st Respondent but has failed to do so. I do not agree

with this submission. The Act does not provide that the financial capacity

of the landlord as a material fact in an inquiry under section 18A of the

Rent Act. Instead, the law provides that if the landlord fails to re-develop

the building within the specified period or periods, he is running at the

risk of acquiring the land by the state. Therefore it is for the landlord to

obtain necessary financial assistance and it is not for the 1 st Respondent to

satisfy that he has financial capacity to re develop.

, II{ II f

~ t ! II ! 1> r I! ! I

The learned Counsel for the landlord further argues that the 1st

Respondent has violated the principals of natural justice by not observing

the rule of "audi alteram partem". The 1 st Respondent at the beginning

offered an opportunity to the tenant to file objections to the application.

Thereafter at the inquiry the tenant was permitted to call witnesses on his

behalf. Finally the Counsel was allowed to make submissions. Therefore

it cannot be said that the tenant was not heard. The Counsel's contention

is that the 1 st Respondent has not considered the evidence led by the

tenant. It does not amount to audi alteram partem. On the other hand the

evidence in the nature of that the building is not in a dilapidated

condition, the effect to the adjoining buildings if this is demolished, the

financial capacity of the landlord are not material for this inquiry. The re-

development has been approved by the local authority concerned and it is

not for the 1 st Respondent to consider the effect to the other buildings. As

I pointed out earlier the financial capacity and the condition of the

building is also not material facts. Therefore it cannot be said that the 1 st

Respondent has not considered material evidence and thereby violated the

principals of natural justice.

In the case of Aboobucker v. Wijesinghe (supra) it has been held

that "Courts no doubt have jealously guarded its rights to review

administrative action, but it has now been well established that courts will

not interfere with the exercise of such administrative authority unless they

are satisfied that the administrative tribunal has acted mala fide or on no

evidence or unreasonably or has failed to follow the principle of natural

justice or has gone wrong in law."

There is no reason to interfere with the order of the 1 st Respondent

as well as the order of the High Court.

The Counsel for the tenant brought to the notice of the Court

certain factors that has taken place after the pronouncement of the order

I

1

J

1

of the 1 st Respondent, such as, landlord not completing the re-

development within the stipulated period, demolishing the building on the

strength of the decree entered in the District Court of A vissawella case

no. 265391RE, and advertising to sell the land. The events taken place

after the order of the 1 st Respondent will not vitiate the order. The order

made on the conditions prevailed at the time of making the application. It

is for the proper authorities to take action under law, if any, for any

violation of law.

The Counsel submits that the building was demolished on the

strength of a decree entered in the District Court. If a competent Court

has declared that the tenancy agreement between the tenant and the

landlord is duly terminated, it is questionable as to what right that the

former tenant has, to prevent the owner of the land, being dealing with his

property.

Under these circumstances I see no reason to interfere with the

findings of the learned High Court Judge.

The appeal is dismissed subject to costs fixed at Rs. 10,0001-

Judge of the Court of Appeal

H.C.J.Madawal J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal