CA /PHC/ APN 0133/23

1 | P a g e

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for revision

in terms of Article 138 of the Constitution

of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Court of Appeal The Director General

Application No: Commissioner to Investigate Allegations of

CA /PHC/ APN 0133/23 Bribery and Corruption,

Malalasekera Mawatha, Colombo-07.

High Court of Colombo Complainant

No.HCB/143/2022

Vs.

1. Hewa Gunaratne Bashvara Senaka alias

Bashvara Senaka Gunaratne

No. 6/4, Vidyala Road, Templers Road,

Mount Lavinia.

2. Mohamed Jauffer Irshad Rumy alias Rumy

Jauffer

No. 37/2, Attidiya Road, Kawdana,

Dehiwala.

Accused

CA /PHC/ APN 0133/23

2 | P a g e

AND NOW BETEEEN

Mohamed Jauffer Irshad Rumy alias Rumy

Jauffer

No. 37/2, Attidiya Road, Kawdana,

Dehiwala.

Presently at:

No.35, Dharmapala Mawatha,

Mount Lavinia.

Accused-Petitioner

Vs.

1. The Director General

Commissioner to Investigate Allegation of

Bribery and Corruption,

No. 36, Malalasekera Mawatha,

Colombo-07.

2. Hewa Gunaratne Bashvara Senaka alias

Bashvara Senaka Gunaratne

No. 6/4, Vidyala Road, Templers Road,

Mount Lavinia.

Respondents

BEFORE : Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

P. Kumararatnam, J.

CA /PHC/ APN 0133/23

3 | P a g e

COUNSEL : Kalinga Indatissa, PC, with Neranjan

Iriyagolla,Rashmini Indatissa,Razana

Salih, Gardiniya Jayasundara and

Ajith Wickramasingh for the

Petitioner.

Dilan Ratnayake, ASG, PC, with

A.Jayasinghe, ADG, for the 1st

Respondent.

Rienzie Arsekularatne, PC with Udara

Muhandiramge, Thilina Punchihewa,

Punsi Gamage and Himasha Silva for

the 2nd Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 05/06/2024.

DECIDED ON : 06/09/2024.

******************************

JUDGMENT

P. Kumararatnam, J.

The Accused-Petitioner (Hereinafter referred to as the Petitioner) was

indicted in the High Court of Colombo along with the 2nd Respondent

for committing conspiracy and three counts of aiding and abetting the

2nd Respondent under Section 70 the Bribery Act No. 11 of 1954 as

amended. The Petitioner was named as the 2nd Accused and the 2nd

Respondent was named as the 1st Accused in High Court of Colombo

case No. 143/2022.

CA /PHC/ APN 0133/23

4 | P a g e

According to the Petitioner, the offences with which he and the 2nd

Respondent were framed sequel to a Criminal Investigation conducted

by the Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption

(Hereinafter referred to as CIABOC).

When the indictment was served, the Petitioner pleaded not guilty to the

charges. When the matter was taken up on 1st September 2023 the

Petitioner and the 2nd Respondent had jointly raised a preliminary

objection regarding the maintainability of the indictment.

The preliminary objections raised are as follows:

i. That the provisions of Bribery (Amendment) Act No. 22 of 2018 do

not have retrospective effect and that therefore, the CIABOC

cannot commence a prosecution in the High Court for an offence

under section 70 of the Bribery Act for an offence committed prior

to enactment of the amendment as per section 6(3) of the

Interpretation Ordinance,

ii. That a plain reading of sections 3 and 4 of the CIABOC Act

together with judicial reasoning demonstrate that conduction

investigation is a function of the Commission and that therefore,

such function can only be exercised by the full complement of the

Commission requiring a valid directive/determination by all 3

members of the Commission and the absence of such a valid

direction makes the investigation in the present case ultra vires

and attracts the ground of illegality that goes to the root of the

case,

iii. That the Petitioner does not fall under the definition of a public

servant nor is the Sri Lanka Tourism Promotion Bureau a

scheduled institution as per the definitions in section 90 of the

Bribery Act and therefore, the Petitioner does not fall within

ambit of the Bribery Act and the 1st Respondent could not have

filed the indictment against the Petitioner.

CA /PHC/ APN 0133/23

5 | P a g e

It is noteworthy to mention that the preliminary objections raised by the

Petitioner and the 2nd Respondent in the High Court of Colombo were

related to jurisdiction of the Court.

At the hearing of this application both the Learned Presidents Counsel

for the Petitioner as well as the 2nd Respondent informed the Court that

they will not peruse the 2nd preliminary objection raised by them.

Rejecting the preliminary objection raised by the Petitioner, the Learned

High Court Judge delivered his order on 27.09.2023 on the following

grounds:

i. That the indictment once submitted to a High Court, is deemed to

be a valid indictment notwithstanding any issue and all legal

conditions are deemed to have been satisfied,

ii. The validity of an indictment once presented to Court cannot be

questioned,

iii. That the High Court cannot reject an indictment in the 1st

instance,

iv. That the legal position would be the same even in respect of

indictments forwarded by the Director General of Bribery

consequent to a direction given by the CIABOC.

The Learned High Court Judge of Colombo without addressing the

preliminary objections raised separately, stressing the importance of the

prosecutorial discretion of the prosecution and the legality of the

indictment forwarded to the High Court, dismissed the preliminary

objections. At this juncture it is very important to note that neither the

Petitioner nor the 2nd Respondent raised concerns regarding the validity

of the indictment as one of their Preliminary Objections.

Section 39 of the Judicature Act states:

Whenever any defendant or accused party shall have pleaded in

any action, proceeding or matter brought in any Court of First

Instance neither party shall afterwards be entitled to object to the

CA /PHC/ APN 0133/23

6 | P a g e

jurisdiction of such court, but such court shall be taken and held

to have jurisdiction over such action, proceeding or matter:

Provided that where it shall appear in the course of the

proceedings that the action, proceeding or matter was brought in

a court having no jurisdiction intentionally and with previous

knowledge of the want of jurisdiction of such court, the Judge

shall be entitled at his discretion to refuse to proceed further with

the same, and to declare the proceedings null and void.

The Petitioner submits that non consideration of the preliminary

objections with regards to patent lack of jurisdiction raised by them,

constitute exceptional Circumstances which warrant the exercise of

revisionary jurisdiction of this Court under Article 138 of the

Constitution the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

The decision whether to or not to prosecute is the most important step

in the prosecution process. In every case great care must be taken in

the interest of the affected party, the accused, and the community at

large to ensure that the right decision is made. Both the Presidents

Counsels informed this Court that neither of them had ever raised

question regarding the legality of the indictment as they are fully aware

that the High Court is not the forum to raise concerns regarding the

legality of the indictment.

Our Courts have repeatedly held that the revisionary power of Courts is

an extraordinary power and that the Courts must exercise it only in

exceptional circumstances. Exceptional circumstances are not defined

in the statute. Hence, what is exceptional circumstances must be

considered on its own facts and circumstances on a case by case.

In Ramu Thamodarampillai v. The Attorney General [2004] 3 SLR

180 the court held that:

the decision must in each case depend on its own peculiar facts and

circumstances.

CA /PHC/ APN 0133/23

7 | P a g e

In this case, as the Learned High Court Judge had failed to address the

preliminary objections raised by the Petitioner and the 2nd Respondent

in the High Court of Colombo. Therefore, this Court direct the Learned

High Court Judge of Colombo to consider the 1st and 3rd preliminary

objections raised by the Petitioner and the 2nd Respondent before the

commencement of the main trial.

Both the Petitioner and the 2nd Respondent had withdrawn the 2nd

ground of preliminary objection. As the Petitioner had established

sufficient exceptional grounds before this court, the revision application

is allowed.

The Learned High Court Judge is hereby directed to consider the 1st

and 3rd grounds of preliminary objections expeditiously, and pronounce

an order in that regard with clear reasoning.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to send this Judgment to the

High Court of Colombo for necessary action.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

SAMPATH B. ABAYAKOON, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL