Page 1 of 13

IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

1. Annalingam Annarasa

Vice President, Island North Kayts Division Fishermans Cooperative Societies Union, Main Street, Kayts, Jaffna District.

CA/WRIT/21/2022

2. Pathimarasa Leeliyankurus,

President, Delft Island Fishermans Cooperative Societies Union, Ward No. 1, Main Road, Delf, Jaffna District. 3. Kanthasamy Rajachandran,

President, Karainagar Ambal Division Fishermans Cooperative Societies Union, Vedeyarasan Veethi, Karainagar, Jaffna District. 4. Antanys Edward Kaitrgs,

Secretary, Munai Fishermans Cooperative Societies Union, Point Pedro, Jaffna District. 5. Nagarasam Varnakulasingham,

President, Vadamarachchi Norh Fishermans Cooperative Societies Union, Arasad Thondamaru, Jaffna District.

In the matter of an application for mandates, in the nature of Writs of Mandamus under and in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Page 2 of 13

6. Centre for Environmental Justice

(Guarantee) Limited, No. 20/A, Kuruppu Road, Colombo 08. 7. Withanage Don Hemanha Ranjith

Sisira Kumara, Director and Senior Advisor, Centre for Environmental Justice, No. 20A, Kuruppu Road, Colombo 08. 8. Pathragoda Kankanamge Dilena,

Executive Director, Centre for Environmental Justice, No. 20A, Kuruppu Road, Colombo 08.

Petitioners

Vs.

1. S. J. Kahawatta

Director General, Department of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources, 3rd Floor, New Secretariat, Maligawatta, Colombo 10. 1A. Director General

Department of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources, 3rd Floor, New Secretariat, Maligawatta, Colombo 10. 2. Hon. Douglas Devananda,

Minister of Fisheries, New Secretariat, Maligawatta, Colombo 10.

Page 3 of 13

2A. Minister of Fisheries

New Secretariat, Maligawatta, Colombo 10. 3. Rear Admiral,

Anura Ekanayake, Director General, Sri Lanka Coast Guard, Udupila, Mirissa, Matara. 3A. Director General

Sri Lanka Coast Guard, Udupila, Mirissa, Matara.

4. Vice Admiral.

Nishantha Ulegetenne, The Commander of the Sri Lankan Navy, Naval Headquarters, Colombo. 4A. The Commander of Sri Lanka Navy

Naval Headquarters, Colombo.

5. General G. D. H. Kamal Gunarathna

(Retd), Secretary, Ministry of Defence, Defence Headquarters Complex, Sri Jayawardanapura Kotte. 6. Chandana Sooriyabandara,

Director General of Wildlife Conservation, Department of Wildlife Conservation, No. 811A, Jayanthipura, Battaramulla. 6A. Director General of Wildlife Conservation

Department of Wildlife Conservation, No. 811A, Jayanthipura, Battaramulla.

Page 4 of 13

7. C. D. Wickramaratne,

Inspector General of Police, Police Headquarters, Colombo 01. 8. Hon. Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12.

Respondents

Before : Sobhitha Rajakaruna J.

Dhammika Ganepola J.

Counsel : Ravindranath Dabare with Savanthi Ponnamperuma, Nimal

Wickamasinghe and Thusini Jayasekara for the Petitioners.

Vickum de Abrew PC, ASG with Amasara Gajadeera SC and M.

Fernando SC for the Respondents.

Supported on :13.12.2022

Written Submissions: Petitioners -10.01.2023

Respondents- 03.02.2023

Decided on : 13.02.2023

Sobhitha Rajakaruna J.

The Petitioners plead in the instant Application that the Indian trawlers entering Sri

Lankan waters and operating illegally a.) without a licence b.) using illegal fishing

methods deprives the a.) the livelihoods of Sri Lankan fisherman

b.) national fish production

c.) export income of fishing

d.) and rich echo system of the Sri Lankan waters.

(vide-paragraph 94 of the Petition of the Petitioners)

Page 5 of 13

The Petitioners claim that it is the responsibility of the Respondents to ensure the safety

of Sri Lankan fisherman, their right to livelihood, the sovereign of the Sri Lankan and

the sustainability of the fishery resources in Sri Lankan waters and to protect and

preserve the natural resources for the present & future generations. The Petitioners

further plead that in order to deter illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing (IUU),

the Respondents must augment with regular patrols and arrests for which maritime

domain advertence and veracious real-time reporting is fundamental, essential and

mandatory under the law (vide- paragraph 95 & 96 of the Petition of the Petitioners).

I can identify the above averments of the Petition of the Petitioners as the crux of their

reason to file the instant Review Application before this Review Court. The reliefs

sought by the Petitioners are for orders in the nature of writs of Mandamus against the

Respondents. The Respondents by way of the motion dated 01.12.2022 have tendered to

Court the Indian Fishing boat arrest details from 2017 to 2022, marked X1 and the list

of vessels auctioned after arresting the vessels, marked X2. The learned Additional

Solicitor General (ASG) who appears for the Respondents stressed that the relevant

authorities including several Respondents have been taking effective steps to arrest the

problem on illegal fishing in territorial waters of Sri Lanka.

The learned ASG asserts that the Petitioners have filled this Application without taking

into account the enormous measures taken by the respective Authorities and the

Petitioners are not entitled to have and maintain the instant Application. Raising two

preliminary objections on the maintainability of the instant Application, the learned

ASG moves that this Application be dismissed in limine. He contends that the

Petitioners have failed to establish their entitlement to seek writs of Mandamus and also

that the reliefs sought by the Petitioners in the prayer of the Petition are vague.

Now, I need to examine the reliefs prayed for by the Petitioners in the prayer of the

Petition in order to ascertain as to whether there is merit in the said preliminary

objections and also whether the Petitioners have submitted a prima facie or an arguable

case warranting this Court to issue formal notice of this Application on the Respondents,

employing the basic principles governing judicial review.

The Prayer of the amended Petition dated 18.08.2022;

a) Issue notice of this application on the Respondents in the first instance

Page 6 of 13

b) Grant and issue an order in the nature of a Writ of Mandamus directing and/or

compelling the 1st, 3rd and 4th Respondents to give full effect to the Fisheries

(Regulation of Foreign Fishing) Act No. 15 of 1979 (Amendment) Act No. 1 of

2018;

c) Grant and issue an order in the nature of a Writ of Mandamus directing and/or

compelling the 1st, 3rd, 4th Respondents to perform their duties in terms of Section

10, 13, 15, 16 and 17 to the Fisheries (Regulation of Foreign Fishing) Act No. 15

of 1979 (Amendment) Act No. 1 of 2018 in order to prevent illegal bottom

trawling and to punish the offenders who have violated and/or is violating the

law;

d) Grant and issue an order in the nature of a Writ of Mandamus directing and/or

compelling the 1st, 3rd, 4th Respondents to arrest those who act in violation of the

provisions of Fisheries (Regulation of Foreign Fishing) Act No. 15 of 1979

(Amendment) Act No. 1 of 2018 and to take legal actions against such violation

as stipulated therein;

e) Grant and issue an order in the nature of a Writ of Mandamus directing and/or

compelling the 6th and 7th Respondents to perform their duties to protect the fishes

and amphibians protected under Section 31 and to prosecute the violators in

terms of Section 31B of the Fauna and Flora Protection Ordinance No. 02 of

1937 as amended;

f) Grant and issue an order in the nature of a Writ of Mandamus directing and/or

compelling the 3rd Respondent to perform his statutory duties under Section 4(a),

4(h) and 4(j), 5 and 8 of the Department of Coast Guard Act No. 41 of 2009;

g) Grant and issue an order in the nature of a Writ of Mandamus directing and/or

compelling the 2nd Respondent to adhere to the principles of international

convention which Sri Lanka has ratified and incorporate relevant provisions into

the domestic laws, to prevent illegal bottom trawling and destruction of the

marine ecology;

h) Grant and issue an order in the nature of a Writ of Mandamus directing and/or

compelling the 2nd Respondent to make regulations to give effect to the provisions

of Fisheries (Regulation of Foreign Fishing) Act No. 15 of 1979 (Amendment)

Act No. 1 of 2018 and in terms of Section 26 of the Fisheries (Regulation of

Page 7 of 13

Foreign Fishing) Act No. 15 of 1979 (Amendment) Act No. 1 of 2018 in

performing his statutory duties;

i) Grant and issue an order in the nature of a Writ of Mandamus directing and/or

compelling the 7th Respondent to take actions in terms of Fisheries (Regulation of

Foreign Fishing) Act No. 15 of 1979 (Amendment) Act No. 1 of 2018, Flora

Protection Ordinance No. 2 of 1937 as amended and the Police Ordinance.

The Petitioners argument is that the prayer of the Petition only seeks orders in the

nature of writs of Mandamus to create a positive duty against the inaction or failure of a

public body that ultimately resulted in an ultra vires action; and to either validly

exercise a power or to compel to perform relevant statutory duties vested upon a public

body as distinguished from acts in the law with a view to preserve the rule of law.

Hence, what needs consideration of this Court is whether such orders in the nature of

writs of Mandamus can be granted by twisting the elements required to issue a writ of

Mandamus with particular assertions upon ultra vires and also based on the existing

prayer of the Petition of the Petitioners.

The Review Courts have developed the scope of the jurisdiction to issue writs of

Mandamus to a greater extent but subject to certain limitations. The Supreme Court in

Weligamawa Multi-Purpose Cooperative Society Ltd. vs. Chandradasa Daluwatta (1984) 1

Sri. L.R. 195 confirmed that a writ of mandamus may be issued to secure the

performance of a public duty, in the performance of which the applicant has sufficient

legal interest. The public duty sought to be enforced must be of public nature stemming

from a statute, charter, the common law or custom and however, cannot be of a merely

private character.

Although the learned Counsel for the Petitioners argues that the reliefs sought in the

prayer are not directly for writs of Mandamus but for orders in the nature of writs of

Mandamus, the Petitioners are still bound to satisfy the basic legal requirements of a writ

of Mandamus. It seems that the Petitioner has misconceived the notion of orders in the

nature of writs of Mandamus. It is important to note that Mandamus will not be

available where there has been a valid exercise of power, merely because the Petitioner

believes that the discretion has been exercised erroneously by the Respondents. Sansoni

J. observed in Samaraweera vs. Balasuriya 58 NLR 118 (at p.120);

Page 8 of 13

It is trite law that Mandamus is only available to compel the doing of a duty not done,

and not on the ground that the duty had been done erroneously.

On the other hand, the Respondents rely on several important judgements where the

Court of Appeal was not inclined to issue formal notice at the threshold stage when the

prayer of the Petition was too wide and vague. In H. K. D. Amarasinghe and others vs.

Central Environmental Authority and others, CA/Writ/132/2018 decided on 03.06.2021,

His Lordship Justice Arjuna Obeysekere J., P/CA (as His Lordship then was)

considering the respondents submissions that the relief prayed for by the petitioners was

too wide and too vague has dismissed the relevant application in limine. The Court held

therein;

A petitioner invoking the jurisdiction of this Court must seek relief that would address their

grievance and must not refer to each and every section in an Act hoping and praying that

his case would come under at least one of the said sections. In other words, the relief that is

sought must be specific and should address the concerns of the petitioner. This would then

enable the respondents to respond to the averments of fact and law raised by the petitioner.

The fact that the relief is vague is an indication that the petitioner is unsure of the

allegations that he/she is making against the respondents and makes the task of Court to

mete out justice that much harder.

In the case of Rev. Battaramulle Seelarathana vs. Ceylon Electricity Board,

CA/Writ/213/2017 decided on 19.07.2017, L. T. B. Dehideniya J. (P/CA) (as he then

was) based on the manner in which the prayer of the petition has been formulated has

observed that;

...This is a vague application. The duty that he is directed to perform must be clearly

indicated because the writ of mandamus is always followed with a threat of punishing the

person for not obeying the Court order if he fails to perform the duty that he is directed to

perform. Therefore the Court cannot direct a person to "perform its duties with regard to the

Procurement Process" unless the duty is correctly specified.

The Court of Appeal in the above case of Rev. Battaramulle Seelarathana has dismissed

the respective application without issuing formal Notice on the Respondents. In Uttar

Page 9 of 13

Pradesh Urdu Development vs. State Election Commissioner 2006 (2) AWC 1302 18.01.2006,

the Allahabad High Court held;

The second prayer in the writ petition is vague. It vaguely seeks a Mandamus to the

respondents to implement the U.P. Official Language Act and its notification in the Local

Body elections. For this reason, we had required the petitioners to be more specific and to

give a list of documents relating to the said elections which the petitioners wanted to be

published in Urdu also. We have already referred above to such list and the reason why we

are not inclined to issue a mandamus for their publication in Urdu.

The precedent laid down by L. T. B. Dehideniya J. (P/CA) (as he then was) in

Wanninayaka Mudiyanselage Dhanapala vs. Mr. Nimal Kotawalagedara Commissioner of

Buddhist Affairs, CA/Writ/243/2017 decided on 07.11.2017 is pertinent to the core issue

in reference to the objections upon the vague prayer of the Petition of the Petitioners. In

the said case, the Court of Appeal has considered the aftermath of granting reliefs in writ

applications. This is a vital aspect to which serious attention should be drawn when

granting reliefs as prayed for in the prayer since the courts should avoid adverse effects

being caused to the Respondents or any other officials who are not a party to the

respective application upon granting such reliefs. The Court held;

In all these prayers, the Petitioners move this Court to issue writs of mandamus in general

against the 1st to 9th Respondents. Since there is a punishment for non compliance of the

Court order, I am of the view that the Petitioners cannot maintain an application for a writ

of mandamus in this nature. It has to be specific. Especially in the wide range of

activities that are being complained of in this case, it is essential to explain each and

every order directed to which Respondent and the statutory duty that has to be

complied with. Otherwise the 1st to 9th Respondents will have to face a situation that

they could be charged for Contempt of Court on unimaginable instances. In the case of

Samastha Lanka Nidahas Grama Niladhari Sangamaya v. Dissanayake and others 2011

(2) B.L.R. 467 Sathya Hettiga J cited with approval the decision in the case of P.S. Bus

Company V. Secretary of Ceylon Transport Board 61 NLR 491 at 496 where it was held

that "the Court held when considering granting a Writ the Court will consider the

probable consequences of granting a prerogative writ. (Emphasis added)

Page 10 of 13

In Dinesh Kumar vs. Moti Lal Nehru Medical College, Allahabad, AIR 1990 SC 2030 at

2052, 2032, 2033: (1990) 4 SCC 627, the Supreme Court of India has highlighted the

importance of complying with the court orders and has observed that default by anyone

in any part of the country would be viewed very seriously and drastically dealt with.

(Also see-Principles of Administrative Law by M. P. Jain & S. M. Jain (9th Edition) 2022,

p.2725). In light of the above, the orders of Court should be clear & firm and cannot be

based on vague facts and uncertain reliefs. The Court in the said case held;

The directions of this Court are not intended to be brushed aside and overlooked or ignored.

Meticulous compliance is the only way to respond to directions of this Court.

The constant approach taken by this Court is that merely laying down a sequence of

evidence in the body of the Petition would not be sufficient as the judgement of a case

should finally focus on the prayer of the Petition of the Petitioners. The reasons set out

by Court in support of a judgement in a case must be cogent and succinct. The reasons to

employ a certain law under which the Court exercises its powers should be reflected in

the impugned proceedings. Of course, it is no doubt when the Review Court exercises its

discretionary jurisdiction, it can alter the reliefs sought in the prayer to a certain extent

on exceptional circumstances in order to uphold the Rule of Law. But, judgements or

orders of Court cannot be issued on imaginations of the judge which will not be

satisfactory. A vague and a wide or uncertain prayer would pave way for Court to

conjecture as to what the Petitioner exactly expects.

On a careful perusal of the prayer of the instant Application, it implies that the intention

of the Petitioners is to get orders issued through Court in the nature of a writ of

Mandamus directing the relevant Respondents to perform their duties in terms of hand-

picked Sections of certain Statues passed by the Parliament. If by any chance the Court

decides to grant reliefs as prayed for in the prayer, eventually, a wide back door will be

opened for the Petitioners or any interested party to file contempt charges against these

Respondents. The manner in which the prayer of the Petition is formulated would create

a harmful right to instigate contempt charges on an alleged inaction or omission upon a

matter which the Respondents were not made aware of during the process of exercising

powers under the Sections of those Statutes. For an example, if the Court decides to

grant the reliefs contained in paragraph (d) of the prayer, then at any moment after

issuing such order, if anybody violates, without the knowledge of the Respondents the

Page 11 of 13

provisions of the Fisheries Act in anywhere in the island, the Petitioners will be able to

instigate at the outset contempt proceedings against any one or more Respondents.

That is all the more why the governmental administrative process or any other process

leading to litigation has prescribed initial steps to be followed. Allowing the reliefs as

prayed for by the Petitioners would circumvent such preliminary steps resulting unusual

contempt proceedings being instituted straight away against the Respondents based only

upon such order/judgement. Similarly, the prayer of the Petition lacks the basic

requirements as pointed out by me earlier.

Anyhow, taking judicial notice of a large-scale abuse of public power and granting

prerogative remedies is always available to this Court even in the presence of an ill-fated

prayer of the Petition. As the learned ASG has pointed out the document annexed as

X1 to the aforesaid motion contains details of the arrests carried out by the Sri Lankan

authorities from 2019-2022 to curb IUU fishing. The said X1 demonstrates;

-Ninety-Four (94) vessels suspected of having engaged in IUU fishing have been

arrested and detained by the authorities from 2019-2022;

-Over 550 fishermen on board these vessels have been arrested by the authorities

from 2019-2022.

Similarly, the document annexed as X2 to the said motion contains details of

arrested/detained vessels which have been auctioned pursuant to court processes. As per

the learned ASG, the statistics provide by X2 is significant, since it indicates the

following;

-the Arrested date information indicates that vessels suspected of having

engaged in IUU fishing have been consistently arrested and detained by the

authorities from the year 2015-2020;

-out of the vessels which have been arrested/detained during this time period, 150

of those vessels have already been auctioned, forfeited or destroyed by the

authorities pursuant to the initiation of proceedings before the relevant

Magistrates Court.

Page 12 of 13

Under general circumstances, this Court cannot intervene all the time in the governing

process of the Government to direct what appropriate administrative measures should be

taken. I have observed previously in a different case that the Court cannot be the judge of

giving directions to a Government, intervening to the role of ruling the country. (See-

Nagananda Kodithuwakku vs. Dinesh Gunawardena Minister of Education,

CA/WRIT/45/2022 decided on 03.02.2022). In a similar vein, the practice of having a

government by judges rather than a government by the people cannot be acceptable.1

The circumstances of this case do not provide this Court to go to an extent of interfering

with the governance of the government in reference to several averments of the Petition

of the Petitioners.

Thus, I take the view that this is a fit and proper case to accept the plea of the

Respondents based on the vague long-winded prayer of the Petitioner. The litigants will

have to endure hardships due to bad drafting of pleadings and the inability to express

cogently and succinctly what is exactly needed by a Petitioner. The pleadings and the

prayer in the instant Application will not facilitate this Court to protect and preserve the

environment and interests of the citizens of this country as pleaded by the Petitioners.

Further, this Court is unable to arrive at any conclusion as requested by the learned

Counsel for the Petitioners based on overall submissions made by the learned ASG in

open Court. Once the learned ASG submits by looking at the prayer that the relevant

officials are bound to follow the provisions of the Statutes mentioned in the prayer, what

more could this Court extract from the averments of the Petition to issue orders as

prayed for in the prayer?

The following passage in Administrative Law by H. W. R. Wade and C. F. Forsyth (11th

Edition) Oxford (at p. 575) is, in my view, very much relevant to the issues in respect of

an ill-fated prayer of a review application;

Cases of this kind, in which contract, office and regulations are mixed in uncertain quantities,

show well the snares that entrapped litigants2 before the case of a health service doctor, discussed

below, heralded a change3. Again and again claimants failed, not because their cases were

1 See-Lord Hoffman in The COMBAR Lecture 2001: Separation of Powers1 referred to by Jeffrey Jowell in Judicial deference: servility, civility or institutional capacity (P.L. 2003, Win, 592-601)

2 See (1991) 107 LQR 298, 1994 PL 69 (S. Freedman and G. Morris)

3 The Roy case (the reference is not given in the relevant footnote in the book)

Page 13 of 13

bad, but because they could not tell which procedure to follow. Again and again public

authorities pleaded, often with ill-deserved success, that the wrong avenue was chosen.

(Emphasis added)

Similarly, I am attracted by the following passage as well, where it is laid down under

the sub topic of Relief refused in discretion in the above Administrative Law by H. W.

R. Wade and C. F. Forsyth (p. 426);

Closely akin to the subject of the foregoing paragraphs and overlapping it in some cases, is the

question of the courts discretion. The remedies most used in natural justice cases -the quashing

order, the prohibiting order, the mandatory order, the injunction and the declaration-are

discretionary, so that the court has power to withhold them if it thinks fit; and from time to time

the court will do so for some special reason, even though there has been a clear violation of

natural justice4

In the circumstances, I refuse the application for issuance of notice upholding the

objections raised by the Respondents. Further, I am not satisfied that there is an arguable

ground for judicial review which has a realistic prospect of success. I am influenced by

The Administrative Court Judicial Review Guide 20215 of England and Wales, where

guidelines are laid down in order to refuse permission at the threshold stage of a judicial

review application.

Application is dismissed.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

Dhammika Ganepola J.

I agree.

Judge of the Court of Appeal

4 For a general statement see Hoffmann-La Roche vs. Secretary of State for Trade and Industry (1975) AC 295 at 320 (Lord Denning MR). 5 Sixth edition of the Judicial Review Guide- July 2021 which applies to cases heard in the Administrative Court wherever it is sitting and in the Administrative Court Offices (ACOs) across England and Wales.