IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRAIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

Court of Appeal Case No : CA HC/182/2013

Dematamulla Gamage Prasan

Mulanhena,

yakkalamulla

Petitioner

Vs.

Hon Attorney General.

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondents

CA. No.182-2013

BEFORE

COUNSEL

DECIDED ON

S. Thurairaja .. PC. J.

H.C. Galle No.3429/10 'A'

S.Devika de LTennekoon, J. &

S. Thurairaja, PC. J.

Tenny Fernando for the Accused-

Appellant.

Dilipa Pieris D.S.G. for the Respondent.

09.11.2017

Counsel for the Accused-Appellant Mr.Tenny Fernando submits as follows:

The indictment pertaining to this appeal consists of three charges of

statutory rape occurred in 2008. In this case when the trial

commenced the learned State Counsel and the Counsel for the

Accused indicated to Court since there is another connected matter

against the same accused both matters be amalgamated and taken up

for trial together. Thereafter trial continued on both indictments.

Pertaining to this particular appeal only the medical evidence was led.

However, after the trial there was one Judgment pronounced on behalf

of the both indictments thereafter two sentences were passed.

According to the brief given to the Accused-Appellant the High Court

number is 3429/10/ A the learned High Court Judge has imposed 13

years Rigorous Imprisonment for each count in the indictment. It is

1

II

very respectfully submitted your Lordships that there is a procedural

irregularity adopted by the learned High Court Judge contrary to the

Criminal Procedure Code. Therefore it is very respectfully urged to

consider sending this matter for re-trial a fresh on the same

indictment.

Learned Deputy Solicitor General Mr. Dileepa Pieris states as follows:

The Accused-Appellant in this matter was indicted as my learned

friend said for committing an offence of statutory rape dated between

01.01.2008 and 29.03.2008. The trial had commenced on the as per

the brief of CA. 182/13 trial had commenced on the 21.1.13 but the

journal entry under 10.10.12 indicates that another connected matter

S.C.3429 B will be taken up together for trial along with this matter.

Hence none of the lay witnesses' evidence or the evidence of

investigating officers testimonies are not included in the brief only the

Medical evidence is attached this brief. Therefore apart from that it is

the same accused and the same victim in both cases. The so-called

connected matter they prevails from offence of grave sexual abuse and

present matter is in respect of a statutory rape, so the ingredient of

the offence is also different when ruling the charges by the

prosecution and ironically the learned trial judge had written one

judgment dated 30.07.2013 pronouncing in 13 years Rigorous

Imprisonment in respect of all 3 counts and in the same judgment

concludes by stating it will be a total number of 20 years for both

cases. Which I concedes that the erroneous judgment enter the

2

learned trial Judge were sentencing as well as a procedure adopted by

the learned trial Judge when combining the victims evidence that was

already led in 3429/10 B in respect of this matter. Hence I move from

court to make an appropriate order.

Order

Heard the submissions of both counsels. When we peruse the court

record we find that the trial Judge had complicated the matter by combining

both cases together. We find the law especially the Criminal Procedure Code

and the Judicator Act does not permit combining of trials against the

accused persons at the High Court. In this case the matter is much worse

because there are two indictments, one trial, two sentences and one

Judgment. The Court after considering all pounced that this trial is patently

wrong and declare that there is no trial. Therefore, we return this case

record to the High Court of Galle to commence a fresh trial against the

Accused-Appellant. Since the incident as further indictment had occurred

somewhere in 2008.

The Registrar hereby directed to take steps to transmit the case record

to the High Court of Galle forthwith.

JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

S. Devika de L. Tennekoon. J.

I agree JUDGE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

CN/-

3